--- Sayfa 1 ---
S T R A T E G Y
Third Edition

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Third Edition
฀
W. W. NORTON & COMPANY
NEW YORK • LONDON
S TR A T E G Y
AN INTRODUCTION TO GAME THEORY
JOEL WATSON
University of California, San Diego

--- Sayfa 3 ---
W. W. Norton & Company has been independent since its founding in 1923, when William Warder Norton and Mary D. Herter
Norton first published lectures delivered at the People’s Institute, the adult education division of New York City’s Cooper Union.
The firm soon expanded its program beyond the Institute, publishing books by celebrated academics from America and abroad.
By midcentury, the two major pillars of Norton’s publishing program—trade books and college texts—were firmly established. In
the 1950s, the Norton family transferred control of the company to its employees, and today—with a staff of four hundred and a
comparable number of trade, college, and professional titles published each year—W. W. Norton & Company stands as the largest
and oldest publishing house owned wholly by its employees.
Editor: Jack Repcheck
Assistant Editor: Hannah Bachman
Manuscript Editor: Christopher Curioli
Project Editor: Rachel Mayer
Electronic Media Editor: Cassie del Pilar
Marketing Manager: John Kresse
Production Manager: Ashley Horna
Text Design: Joan Greenfield
Art Director: Rubina Yeh
Composition: cMPreparé
Manufacturing: Sheridan Books, Inc.
Copyright © 2013, 2008, 2002 by Joel Watson
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.
ISBN 978-0-393-91838-0
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110-0017
wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  0

--- Sayfa 4 ---
This book is dedicated, with thanks, to
Rosemary Watson.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
vii
  PREFACE
xiii
 1 INTRODUCTION
1
Noncooperative Game Theory
3
Contract and Cooperative Game Theory
4
The Meaning of “Game”
5
PART I: REPRESENTATIONS AND BASIC ASSUMPTIONS
7
 2 THE EXTENSIVE FORM
9
Other Examples and Conventions
15
Guided Exercise
17
Exercises
18
 3 STRATEGIES AND THE NORMAL FORM
22
Terminology and Notation for Strategies
23
The Normal Form
26
Classic Normal-Form Games
28
Interpretation of the Normal Form
30
Guided Exercise
31
Exercises
33
 4 BELIEFS, MIXED STRATEGIES, AND EXPECTED PAYOFFS
37
Guided Exercise
39
Exercises
40
CONTENTS*
* Chapters in italics are applications chapters.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
viii
Contents
 5 GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS AND METHODOLOGY
42
Rationality
43
Common Knowledge
44
Overview of Solution Concepts
45
The Issue of Realism
46
PART II: ANALYZING BEHAVIOR IN STATIC SETTINGS
47
 6 DOMINANCE AND BEST RESPONSE
49
Dominance
49
The First Strategic Tension and the Prisoners’ Dilemma
52
The Concept of Efﬁciency
53
Best Response
54
Dominance and Best Response Compared
57
Weak Dominance
60
Guided Exercise
61
Exercises
63
 7 RATIONALIZABILITY AND ITERATED DOMINANCE
67
The Second Strategic Tension
71
Guided Exercise
73
Exercises
74
 8 LOCATION, PARTNERSHIP, AND SOCIAL UNREST
78
A Location Game
78
A Partnership Game: Strategic Complementarities
81
Social Unrest
87
Guided Exercise
90
Exercises
91
 9 NASH EQUILIBRIUM
95
Nash Equilibrium
97
Equilibrium of the Partnership Game
100
Coordination and Social Welfare
101

--- Sayfa 8 ---
ix
Contents
The Third Strategic Tension
104
Congruous Sets
104
Aside: Experimental Game Theory
106
Guided Exercise
107
Exercises
108
 10 OLIGOPOLY, TARIFFS, CRIME, AND VOTING
113
Cournot Duopoly Model
113
Bertrand Duopoly Model
115
Tariff Setting by Two Countries
117
A Model of Crime and Police
118
The Median Voter Theorem
118
Strategic Voting
120
Guided Exercise
123
Exercises
124
 11 MIXED-STRATEGY NASH EQUILIBRIUM
132
Randomization in Sports
135
Technical Notes
136
Example: Duopoly with Capacity Constraints
137
Guided Exercise
140
Exercises
140
 12 STRICTLY COMPETITIVE GAMES AND
SECURITY STRATEGIES
148
Guided Exercise
151
Exercises
152
 13 CONTRACT, LAW, AND ENFORCEMENT
IN STATIC SETTINGS
154
Complete Contracting in Discretionary Environments
158
Contracting with Court-Imposed Breach Remedies
161
Guided Exercise
166
Exercises
167

--- Sayfa 9 ---
x
Contents
PART III: ANALYZING BEHAVIOR IN DYNAMIC SETTINGS
173
 14 DETAILS OF THE EXTENSIVE FORM
175
Recalling the Strategy Deﬁnition
179
Guided Exercise
180
Exercises
181
 15 SEQUENTIAL RATIONALITY AND SUBGAME PERFECTION
183
Incredible Threats in the Stackelberg Duopoly Game
184
Sequential Rationality
185
Backward Induction
186
Subgame Perfection
188
The SPE of the Stackelberg Duopoly Game
191
Technical Notes
192
Conditional Dominance and Forward Induction
195
Guided Exercise
198
Exercises
199
 16 TOPICS IN INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION
204
Advertising and Competition
204
A Model of Limit Capacity
206
Dynamic Monopoly
209
Price Guarantees as a Commitment to High Prices
213
Dynamic Price Competition with Capacity Constraints
215
Guided Exercise
217
Exercises
219
 17 PARLOR GAMES
224
Guided Exercise
226
Exercises
226
 18 BARGAINING PROBLEMS
230
Bargaining: Value Creation and Division
230
An Abstract Representation of Bargaining Problems
232
An Example
234
The Standard Bargaining Solution
236
A Note About Legal Default Rules
238
Guided Exercise
240
Exercises
241

--- Sayfa 10 ---
xi
Contents
 19 ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE BARGAINING GAMES
244
Ultimatum Games: Power to the Proposer
244
Two-Period, Alternating-Offer Games: Power to the Patient
246
Inﬁnite-Period, Alternating-Offer Game
250
Multilateral Bargaining
251
Guided Exercise
254
Exercises
255
 20 GAMES WITH JOINT DECISIONS;
NEGOTIATION EQUILIBRIUM
259
Joint Decisions
260
Negotiation Equilibrium
262
Example: Contracting for High-Powered Incentives
263
Guided Exercise
265
Exercises
267
 21 UNVERIFIABLE INVESTMENT, HOLD UP, OPTIONS,
AND OWNERSHIP
274
Hold-Up Example
275
Up-Front Contracting and Option Contracts
278
Asset Ownership
281
Guided Exercise
283
Exercises
285
 22 REPEATED GAMES AND REPUTATION
291
A Two-Period Repeated Game
292
An Inﬁnitely Repeated Game
297
The Equilibrium Payoff Set with Low Discounting
302
Guided Exercise
306
Exercises
307
 23 COLLUSION, TRADE AGREEMENTS, AND GOODWILL
311
Dynamic Oligopoly and Collusion
311
Enforcing International Trade Agreements
313
Goodwill and Trading a Reputation
314
Guided Exercise
317
Exercises
318

--- Sayfa 11 ---
xii
Contents
PART IV: INFORMATION
325
 24 RANDOM EVENTS AND INCOMPLETE INFORMATION
327
Guided Exercise
331
Exercises
332
 25 RISK AND INCENTIVES IN CONTRACTING
336
Risk Aversion
336
A Principal–Agent Game
340
Guided Exercise
345
Exercises
346
 26 BAYESIAN NASH EQUILIBRIUM AND RATIONALIZABILITY
350
Guided Exercise
353
Exercises
354
 27 LEMONS, AUCTIONS, AND INFORMATION AGGREGATION
360
Markets and Lemons
360
Auctions
363
Information Aggregation
368
Guided Exercise
373
Exercises
374
 28 PERFECT BAYESIAN EQUILIBRIUM
378
Conditional Beliefs about Types
379
Sequential Rationality
380
Consistency of Beliefs
381
Equilibrium Deﬁnition
382
Guided Exercise
384
Exercises
386
 29 JOB-MARKET SIGNALING AND REPUTATION
392
Jobs and School
392
Reputation and Incomplete Information
395
Guided Exercise
398
Exercises
400
APPENDICES
407
INDEX
477

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Game theory has become an enormously important ﬁeld of study. It is now
a vital methodology for researchers and teachers in many disciplines, includ-
ing economics, political science, biology, and law. This book provides a thor-
ough introduction to the subject and its applications, at the intermediate level
of instruction. It is designed for the upper-division game theory courses that are
offered in most undergraduate economics programs and also serves graduate
students in economics, political science, law, and business who seek a solid and
readable introduction to the theory. The book can be a primary or secondary
source for graduate courses that have a signiﬁcant game-theoretic component.
I have designed this book in pursuit of the following three ideals:
1. Coverage of the Essential Topics, without Excess. This book covers the
basic concepts and insights of game-theoretic reasoning, along with classic
examples and applications, without being overblown. The entire book can
be digested in a semester course. Thus, instructors will not have to worry
about having their students skipping or bouncing between chapters as much
as is the case with most other textbooks. In terms of content, the book’s
major innovation is that it integrates an analysis of contract in the devel-
opment of the theory. Research on contract has blossomed in the past few
decades and, in my experience, students are keenly interested in this impor-
tant game-theoretic topic. This book offers one of the ﬁrst substantive treat-
ments of contract at the intermediate level, without bending too far from
standard game theory coverage.
2. Proper Mathematics without Complication. This book does not skimp on
mathematical precision. However, each concept and application presented
here is developed using the simplest, most straightforward model that I
could ﬁnd. In other words, the book emphasizes mathematically rigorous
analysis of simple examples rather than complicated or incomplete analysis
of general models. This facilitates the reader’s understanding of key ideas
without getting bogged down in unnecessary mathematical formalism.
3. Relaxed Style. This book is written in a style that is lively and not overly
formal.
PREFACE

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xiv
Preface
The book is also class-tested. It grew out of the undergraduate game theory
course that I teach and has been developed and ﬁne-tuned over the past decade.
I used preliminary versions of the book for my game theory courses at the
University of California, San Diego, and at Yale University. It was class-tested
at Stanford University by Steven Tadelis, at the University of Michigan by Ennio
Stacchetti, and at New York University by Charles Wilson. The ﬁrst edition of
the book was adopted for courses at numerous universities. I also have made
it available as a supplemental textbook for my graduate game theory courses,
including courses in the core microeconomics sequence. The journey to ﬁnal,
published book was carefully guided by comments from professors, reviewers,
colleagues, and—to a signiﬁcant extent—students. I am proud to report that the
comments from students have been overwhelmingly positive.
The text is organized into four parts. Part I introduces the standard ways of
representing games and carefully deﬁnes and illustrates the concepts of strategy
and belief. Because the concept of strategy is so important, and because students
who fail to grasp it inevitably sink deeper into confusion later on, I begin the
formal part of the book with a nontechnical discussion of the extensive form.
The material in Part I can be covered in just a couple of lectures, and it is an
investment that pays great dividends later.
Part II presents the concepts used to analyze static settings. Part III surveys
the reﬁnements used to analyze dynamic settings, and Part IV looks at games
with nature and incomplete information. In each part, I illustrate the abstract
concepts and methodology with examples. I also discuss various “strategic
tensions,” and I remark on the institutions that may resolve them. Several
chapters—those whose titles appear italicized in the table of contents—are
devoted to applications; instructors will certainly want to supplement, emphasize,
or de-emphasize some of these in favor of their preferred ones. Applications
in the book may be skimmed or skipped without disruption. With a couple of
exceptions, each chapter contains a guided exercise with a complete solution,
followed by assorted exercises for the reader to complete.
Some instructors—especially those who teach on the quarter system— may
wish to skip a bit of the material in the book. In my own experience, I can usually
get through most of the book in a ten-week quarter, but I normally leave out a
few applications. I think most instructors faced with a ten-week time constraint
can easily do the same. As noted in the preceding paragraph, any application can
be skipped without danger of causing the students to miss an important point
that will later be needed. Instructors who do not want to cover contract can, for
example, skip Chapters 20, 21, and 25 For more suggestions on how to plan a
course, please see the Instructor’s Manual posted on the publisher’s Internet site
at www.wwnorton.com/college/econ/watson.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xv
Preface
I am grateful for the support of a great many people. I thank my theory
colleagues at the University of California, San Diego—especially Vincent Craw-
ford, Mark Machina, David Miller, Garey Ramey, and Joel Sobel. With regard to
the preparation of the original manuscript and second and third editions, I thank
the following people for suggestions, corrections, and material: Chris Avery,
Pierpaolo Battigalli, Jesse Bull, Kristy Buzard, Hongbin Cai, Gavin Cameron,
Vincent Crawford, Stephen Devadoss, Martin Dufwenberg, Françoise Forges,
Takako Fujiwara-Greve, Scott Gehlbach, Navin Kartik, Ola Kvaløy, Steve
Matthews, David Miller, James Peck, Ben Polak, Robert Powell, David Rein-
stein, Makoto Shimoji, Chris Snyder, Ennio Stacchetti, Steven Tadelis, Yannick
Viossat, Carina York, Rosemary Watson, Andrzej Wieczorek, Charles Wilson,
and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions. Jesse Bull,
David Miller, and Ben Polak also generously allowed me to use versions of
exercises that he wrote for his courses at Yale University.
I am grateful to Ed Parsons and Jack Repcheck, the past and current econom-
ics editors at W. W. Norton & Company, for their professionalism and care. I
thank the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford for
a wonderful work environment.
I also thank the following students and others who provided expert assis-
tance and comments: Mike Beauregard, Jim Brennan, Camille Briat, Jesse Bull,
Clement Chan, Chris Clayton, Andrew Coors, Mei Dan, Travis Emmel, Cindy
Feng, Lynn Fisher, Lauren Fogel, Shigeru Fujita, Alejandro Gaviria, Andreea
Gorbatai, Michael Herron, Oliver Kaplan, Emily Leppert, Peter Lim, Magnus
Lofstrom, Simone Manganelli, Andrew Mara, Barry Murphy, Herb Newhouse,
Luis Pinto, Sivan Ritz, Heather Rose, Augusto Schianchi, Makoto Shimoji, Nick
Turner, Aaron Varis, Bauke Visser, Ann Wachtler, Michael Whalen, and Wei
Zhao. Furthermore, I thank the fall 2001 Economics 109 class at the University
of California, San Diego; its students were the best and brightest that I have
taught anywhere.
Finally, for their inspiring ways, I am grateful to the few people in this
world who are both brilliant and modest.
Joel Watson
La Jolla, California
February 2013

--- Sayfa 16 ---
1
INTRODUCTION 1
I
n all societies, people interact constantly. Sometimes the interaction is coop-
erative, such as when business partners successfully collaborate on a project.
Other times the interaction is competitive, as exempliﬁed by two or more ﬁrms
ﬁghting for market share, by several workers vying for a promotion that can be
given to only one of them, or by rival politicians in an election. In either case,
the term interdependence applies—one person’s behavior affects another per-
son’s well-being, either positively or negatively. Situations of interdependence
are called strategic settings because, in order for a person to decide how best to
behave, he must consider how others around him choose their actions. If partners
want to complete a project successfully, they are well advised to coordinate their
efforts. If a ﬁrm wishes to maximize its proﬁt, it must estimate and analyze the
stance of its rivals. If a worker wants to secure a promotion, she ought to consider
the opposing efforts of her colleagues (so she can, for example, sabotage their
work to her own beneﬁt). If a politician wants to win an election, she should pick
a campaign strategy that competes favorably with her opponent’s strategy.
Even on a bad-cogitation day, we can easily discover the truth that strategy
is fundamental to the workings of society. But this realization is just the begin-
ning. For a greater challenge, we can try to develop an understanding of how
people actually behave, and how they should be advised to behave, in strategic
situations. A systematic study of this sort yields a theory of strategic interaction.
The theory is useful in many ways. First, it identiﬁes a language with which we
can converse and exchange ideas about human endeavor. Second, it provides
a framework that guides us in constructing models of strategic settings—a
process that engenders insights by challenging us to be clear and rigorous in our
thinking. Third, it helps us trace through the logical implications of assumptions
about behavior.
Logical thinking about human behavior has proved useful for millen-
nia. In ancient times, religious and civil codes spoke directly to the methods
and standards of negotiation, contract, and punishment, as they do today. The
Babylonian Talmud, for example, established rules for the division of a man’s
estate that foreshadow modern theories of apportionment. Hundreds of years
ago, mathematicians began studying parlor games in an attempt to formulate
optimal strategies. In 1713, James Waldegrave communicated a solution to a

--- Sayfa 17 ---
2
1: Introduction
particular card game to his colleagues Pierre-Remond de Montmort and Nico-
las Bernoulli; Waldegrave’s solution coincides with the conclusion of modern
theory. In the 1800s, Augustin Cournot explored equilibrium in models of
oligopoly, and Francis Ysidro Edgeworth tackled bargaining problems in the
context of exchange in an economy. In 1913, the ﬁrst formal theorem for games
(a result about chess) was proved by Ernest Zermelo. Emile Borel followed with
groundbreaking work on the concept of a strategy.1
Then, in the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, largely through the work of the bril-
liant scholar John von Neumann, a true, rigorous, general theory of strategic
situations was launched. It is called the theory of games. Von Neumann and
Oskar Morgenstern wrote the seminal game theory book, which proposed in
great detail how to represent games in a precise mathematical way and also
offered a general method of analyzing behavior.2 But their method of analyz-
ing behavior was quite limited in that it could only be applied to a small class
of strategic settings. Game theory became truly activated with the mid-century
work of John Nash, who made the key distinction between “noncooperative” and
“cooperative” theoretical models and created concepts of rational behavior—so
called “solution concepts”—for both branches.3
In the ensuing decades, mathematicians and economists enriched the foun-
dation, gradually building one of the most powerful and inﬂuential toolboxes of
modern social science. Currently, the theory is employed by practitioners from
a variety of ﬁelds, including economics, political science, law, biology, inter-
national relations, philosophy, and mathematics. Research into the foundations
and the proper application of game theory continues at a vigorous pace. Many
components of the theory have yet to be developed; important settings await
careful examination.
In this textbook, I introduce some of the building blocks of the theory
and present several applications. Foremost, I wish to demonstrate the value of
examining a strategic situation from the tight theoretical perspective. I believe
structured, logical thinking can help anyone who ﬁnds herself in a strategic
situation—and we all face strategic situations on a daily basis. More generally,
game theory can help us understand how the forces of strategy inﬂuence the
outcome of social—speciﬁcally economic—interaction. In other words, I hope
you will ﬁnd game theory useful in evaluating how the world works.
1A history of game theory appears on the Web site of Paul Walker at the University of Canterbury (www.econ
.canterbury.ac.nz/personal_pages/paul_walker/gt/hist.htm).
2J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1944).
3For more on von Neumann, Morgenstern, and Nash, see J. Watson, “John Forbes Nash, Jr.,” in The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2nd ed.), ed. L. Bloom and S. Durlauf (Hampshire, England: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2007).

--- Sayfa 18 ---
3
Noncooperative Game Theory
NONCOOPERATIVE GAME THEORY
Our tour will include a fairly complete presentation of “noncooperative game
theory,” which is a framework that treats strategic settings as games in the every-
day sense of the word. Because the term game generally connotes a situation in
which two or more adversaries match wits, games inherently entail interdepen-
dence in that one person’s optimal behavior depends on what he or she believes
the others will do. We also normally associate games with sets of rules that
must be followed by the players. Baseball, for example, features myriad codi-
ﬁed rules that govern play: how many players are on the ﬁeld and what they can
do; how runs are scored, outs recorded, and innings completed; what must be
done if a fan interferes with play; and so forth. As another example, the game
of Monopoly includes a formal speciﬁcation of the rules of play, from the order
of moves to the determination of a winner. Rules are synonymous with our abil-
ity to agree on exactly what game is actually being played, and thus the careful
speciﬁcation of rules is an important part of the formal theory.
One major feature distinguishes noncooperative game theory from other
frameworks for studying strategy: the noncooperative framework treats all of
the agents’ actions as individual actions. An individual action is something that
a person decides on his own, independently of the other people present in the
strategic environment. Thus, it is accurate to say that noncooperative theories
examine individual decision making in strategic settings. The framework does
not rule out the possibility that one person can limit the options of another; nor
is the theory incompatible with the prospect that players can make decisions in
groups. In regard to group decision making, noncooperative models require the
theorist to specify the procedure by which decisions get made. The procedure
includes a speciﬁcation of how agents negotiate options, which may include
offers and counteroffers (taken to be individual actions). Indeed, there is a sense
in which every decision that a person makes can be modeled as an individual
action.
Thinking of actions as individual actions is perhaps the most realistic way
of modeling the players’ options in a strategic setting. It also implies how one
must go about studying behavior. In a game, each player has to make his or her
own decisions. A player’s optimal decision depends on what he or she thinks
the others will do in the game. Thus, to develop solution concepts—which are
prescriptions or predictions about the outcomes of games—one must study how
individual players make decisions in the presence of “strategic uncertainty” (not
knowing for sure what other players will do).
One problem with noncooperative theory is that its tools are often very difﬁcult
to employ in applied settings. Creating a simple model necessarily entails leav-
ing quite a bit of strategic interaction outside of view. Further, even the analysis

--- Sayfa 19 ---
4
1: Introduction
of very simple games can be prohibitively complicated. There is an art to build-
ing game-theoretic models that are simple enough to analyze, yet rich enough
to capture intuition and serve as sources of new insights. In fact, the process of
devising interesting models is often the most rewarding and illuminating part of
working with theory. Not only do models provide an efﬁcient way of parceling
and cataloging our understanding, but also the struggle of ﬁtting a simple math-
ematical model to a tremendously complex, real-world scenario often hastens the
development of intuition. I try to gear the material in this book to highlight how
useful modeling can be, in addition to developing most of the important theoreti-
cal concepts without becoming bogged down in the mathematics.
CONTRACT AND COOPERATIVE GAME THEORY
In some cases, it is helpful to simplify the analysis by abstracting from the
idea that all decisions are treated as individual ones—that is, to depart from
the strict noncooperative game theory mold. For example, instead of describ-
ing the complicated offers, counteroffers, and gestures available to people in
a negotiation problem, one can sometimes ﬁnd it useful to avoid modeling the
negotiation procedure altogether and just think of the outcome of negotiation as
a joint action. Analyzing behavior in models with joint actions requires a differ-
ent set of concepts from those used for purely noncooperative environments;
this alternative theory is called “cooperative game theory.”
Cooperative game theory is often preferred for the study of contractual
relations, in which parties negotiate and jointly agree on the terms of their rela-
tionship. Contractual relations form a large fraction of all strategic situations. In
some cases, contracts are explicit and written, such as that between a worker and
a manager, between a homeowner and a building contractor, between countries
that have agreed on tariff levels, or between husband and wife. In other cases,
contracts are less formal, such as when fellow employees make a verbal agree-
ment to coordinate on a project. This book considers contract as an integral part
of strategic interaction. Contract selection and enforcement are therefore paid
special attention.
For the sake of studying contract, this book presents some basic elements
of cooperative game theory and provides a framework that generalizes non-
cooperative theory to incorporate joint actions.4 Remember that incorporating
4To some extent, a rift has developed between the cooperative and the noncooperative approaches to studying
games. As a result, “game theory” has developed somewhat independently of “contract theory,” despite that
the latter is, for the most part, an application of the former. (The study of contract also includes analysis of
institutions, including law and politics.)

--- Sayfa 20 ---
5
The Meaning of “Game”
joint actions into a strategic model is a shorthand device allowing one to
represent agents negotiating over certain things, without explicitly modeling
the negotiation process itself. The objects of negotiation are considered spot-
contractible in the sense that an agreement on a joint action commits the agents
to take this action.
THE MEANING OF “GAME”
Before we launch into the theory, a note on conﬂict and cooperation is in order.
Most sports and leisure games are considered adversarial contests (in which
someone wins and someone loses). However, as already noted, many settings
of interdependence do not ﬁt so neatly into this category. In fact, most situa-
tions contain elements of conﬂict as well as elements of potential cooperation or
coordination or both. Consider a ﬁrm in which two managers interact to develop
a new product. Their individual actions may affect each other’s return from the
project, so the setting involves interdependence. But must there be a winner and
a loser? One can certainly imagine outcomes in which both managers “win” or
“lose” to some degree. Perhaps if the managers cooperate with each other in
developing the product, both will be likely to gain from the project’s success.
On the other hand, each of the managers may have an incentive to provide less
effort than the other would prefer.
For another example having elements of both conﬂict and cooperation,
consider a contracting problem between a worker and his employer. They may
need to bargain over a wage contract prior to the production of an economic
good. Although the interests of the parties may conﬂict regarding the worker’s
wage, their interests may be more aligned on another dimension. For instance,
the parties may both prefer that the contract include a bonus for the worker to be
granted in the event of exceptional performance on the job, because the bonus
may give the worker the right incentive to generate proﬁt that they can share.
You may recognize this “concentrate on enlarging the pie” theme as the subject
of some ﬂuffy management-oriented books on bargaining. It is nonetheless a
good example of how issues of conﬂict and cooperation arise simultaneously in
many settings.
Keeping in mind that conﬂict and cooperation overlap, I take a broad view
of what constitutes a game. In short, games are formal descriptions of strategic
settings. Thus, game theory is a methodology of formally studying situations
of interdependence. By “formally” I mean using a mathematically precise and
logically consistent structure. With the right theoretical tools in place, we can
study behavior in a variety of contexts and come to better understand economic
and, more generally, social interaction.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
6
1: Introduction
This book is organized by conceptual topics, from the most basic (repre-
sentations of games and simple models of behavior), to the more structured
(equilibrium and institutions), to the most complicated (dynamic settings with
incomplete information). Most chapters introduce a concept that builds from
those developed in preceding chapters. In the ﬁrst half of the book, I emphasize
three major tensions of strategic interaction that are identiﬁed by the theory:
(1) the conﬂict between individual and group interests, (2) strategic uncertainty,
and (3) the specter of inefﬁcient coordination. I highlight the institutions that
help alleviate the tensions. I also attempt to cover a wide variety of applications
of the theory. In each case, my presentation of applications is geared toward
isolating their fundamental strategic and economic components. I always try to
ﬁnd the simplest model that brings out the essential intuition, rather than devel-
oping complicated and general applied models.
Some of the chapters are solely dedicated to applied examples of the
concepts developed previously; the titles of these chapters appear in italics in
the table of contents. There also are ﬁve appendices. The ﬁrst reviews some
basic mathematical concepts that are used throughout the book. Appendices
B–D elaborate on the material covered in Chapters 6, 7, 9, 11, 15, 18, and 19.
Appendix E contains solutions to exercises 1, 3, 5, and 9 from each chapter
(except where there are no such exercises).
You will have already noticed that I prefer a relaxed style of writing. My aim
is to engage you, rather than lecture to you. Thus, I use the pronouns “I,” “we,”
and “you,” with their standard meanings. I also toss in light-hearted comments
here and there; I apologize if they rub you the wrong way. Regarding references,
I cite relevant articles and books mainly to give credit to the originators of the
basic concepts and to note historical events. If, after reading this book, you wish
to probe the literature more deeply, I recommend consulting one of the ﬁne
graduate-level textbooks on game theory.5 I view most graduate textbooks as
good reference manuals; they are worth having nearby, but they are not much
fun to read. Finally, to those who disapprove of my style, I can’t resist taking
liberties with a quip of Michael Feldman to say “write your own books.” 6
With all of these introductory comments now out of the way, let the fun
begin.
5Three popular books are D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, Game Theory (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991);
R. B. Myerson, Game Theory (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991); and M. J. Osborne and
A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994).
6Michael Feldman hosts Whad’Ya Know?—a popular U.S. radio program produced by Wisconsin Public
Radio. He urges critics to “get your own shows.”

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Representations and
Basic Assumptions
P A R T I
There are several different ways of describing games
mathematically. The representations presented here have the
following formal elements in common:
1. a list of players,
2.  a complete description of what the players can do (their pos-
sible actions),
3. a description of what the players know when they act,
4.  a speciﬁcation of how the players’ actions lead to outcomes,
and
5. a speciﬁcation of the players’ preferences over outcomes.
At this level of abstraction, the mathematical representation
of a game is similar to the description of games of leisure. For
example, the rules of the board game chess specify elements
1 through 4 precisely: (1) there are two players; (2) the play-
ers alternate in moving pieces on the game board, subject to
rules about what moves can be made in any given conﬁguration
of the board; (3) players observe each other’s moves, so each
knows the entire history of play as the game progresses; (4) a
player who captures the other player’s king wins the game,
and otherwise, a draw is declared. Although element 5 is not
implied by the rules of chess, one generally can assume that
players prefer winning over a draw and a draw over losing.
There are two common forms in which noncooperative
games are represented mathematically: the extensive form
and the normal (strategic) form. I begin with a nontechnical
description of the extensive form.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
9
THE EXTENSIVE FORM 2
I
n the fall of 1998, moviegoers had a generous selection of animated feature
ﬁlms from which to choose. Curiously, two of the ﬁlms were about bugs: Dis-
ney Studio’s A Bug’s Life and DreamWorks SKG’s Antz. Audiences marveled
at the computer-generated, cuteness-enhanced critters, as many followed the
rivalry that brought the twin ﬁlms into head-to-head competition. Rumor has it
that Disney executives pondered the idea of an animated bug movie in the late
1980s, during Jeffrey Katzenberg’s term in charge of the company’s studios.1
However, A Bug’s Life was not conceived until after Katzenberg left Disney in
a huff (he was not given a promotion). Katzenberg resigned in August 1994;
shortly thereafter, Pixar Animation pitched A Bug’s Life to Disney, Michael
Eisner accepted the proposal, and the ﬁlm went into production.
At about the same time, Katzenberg joined with Steven Spielberg and
David Geffen to form DreamWorks SKG, a new studio with great expectations.
Shortly thereafter, SKG teamed with computer animation ﬁrm PDI to produce
Antz. The two studios may have learned about each other’s choices only after
they had already made their own decisions. Disney chose to release A Bug’s Life
in the 1998 Thanksgiving season, when SKG’s Prince of Egypt was originally
scheduled to open in theaters. In response, SKG decided to delay the release of
Prince of Egypt until the Christmas season and rushed to complete Antz so that it
could open before A Bug’s Life and claim the title of “ﬁrst animated bug movie.”
This story is intriguing because of the larger-than-life characters, the legal
issues (did Katzenberg steal the bug idea from Disney?), and the complicated
business strategy. In addition, there were bad feelings. Katzenberg sued Disney
for unpaid bonuses. Eisner was embarrassed to admit in court that he may have
said of Katzenberg, “I hate the little midget.” Word on the street was that Pixar
CEO Steve Jobs (also of Apple fame) believed Katzenberg stole the bug movie
concept. Someone ought to make a movie about this story.
Let us use a mathematical model to tell the story of the bug ﬁlms. To convert
it into the abstract language of mathematics, we will have to abbreviate and
1Katzenberg was a major force in reviving the Disney animation department after being wooed from Para-
mount by Disney’s boss, Michael Eisner. For a report on the events summarized here, see Time, September
28, 1998, p. 81.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
10
2: The Extensive Form
stylize the story quite a bit. Our goal is to isolate just one or two of the strate-
gic elements. This isolation will help us, as theorists, to understand the strate-
gic setting and, as game players (putting ourselves in Eisner’s or Katzenberg’s
shoes), to determine the best decisions. I expect that Eisner and Katzenberg
have done this, as I expect have most successful business people.
I suggest that we focus on the competition between the two movies and,
to keep things simple, concentrate on just some of the major decisions that
inﬂuenced the market outcome. Think of it as a game between Katzenberg and
Eisner, who are the players in our model. We can use a tree to graphically repre-
sent the strategic interaction between these two people. The tree is deﬁned by
nodes and branches. Nodes represent places where something happens in the
game (such as a decision by one of the players), and branches indicate the vari-
ous actions that players can choose. We represent nodes by solid circles and
branches by arrows connecting the nodes. A properly constructed tree is called
an extensive-form representation.2
To design the tree for the Katzenberg–Eisner game, it is useful to think
about the chronological sequence of events as described in the story. (You will
see, however, that not every extensive form represents the chronology of a stra-
tegic situation.) Let the game begin with Katzenberg’s decision about whether
to leave Disney. Node a in Figure 2.1 signiﬁes where this decision is made.
Because this decision is the start of the game, a is called the initial node. Every
extensive-form game has exactly one initial node. Katzenberg’s two options—
stay and leave—correspond to the two branches, which are graphed as arrows
from node a. Note that the branches are named, and node a is labeled with
Katzenberg’s initial, signifying that it is his move at this point in the game.
These branches lead from node a to two other nodes.
2The extensive form was detailed in J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944). Some of the material originally appeared in von
Neumann, “Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele,” Mathematische Annalen 100(1928):295–320, translated as
“On the Theory of Games of Strategy,” in Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. IV (Annals of Math-
ematics Studies, 40), ed. A. W. Tucker and R. D. Luce (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959), pp.
13–42. More modern deﬁnitions have been provided by H. W. Kuhn, “Extensive Games and the Problem of
Information,” in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Vol. II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28), ed. H. W.
Kuhn and A. W. Tucker (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1953), pp. 193–216.
FIGURE 2.1
Katzenberg’s ﬁrst move.
Leave
Stay
K
Initial node
a

--- Sayfa 26 ---
11
The Extensive Form
If Katzenberg decides to stay at Disney (the lower branch from node a),
assume that the game is over. On the other hand, if Katzenberg decides to leave,
then other decisions have to be made. First, Eisner must decide whether to
produce A Bug’s Life. Figure 2.2 shows how the tree is expanded to include
Eisner’s choice. Note that, because Eisner has to make this decision only if
Katzenberg has left Disney, Eisner’s move occurs at node b. Eisner’s two
options—produce A Bug’s Life or not—are represented by the two branches
leading from node b to two other nodes, c and d.
After Eisner decides whether to produce A Bug’s Life, Katzenberg must
choose whether to produce Antz. Katzenberg’s decision takes place at either
node c or node d, depending on whether Eisner selected produce or not, as
depicted in Figure 2.2. Note that there are two branches from node c and two
from node d. Observe that Katzenberg’s initial is placed next to c and d, because
he is on the move at these nodes.
At this point, we have to address a critical matter: information. Speciﬁcally,
does the tree speciﬁed so far properly capture the information that players have
when they make decisions? With the extensive form, we can represent the play-
ers’ information by describing whether they know where they are in the tree as
the game progresses. For example, when Katzenberg decides whether to stay or
leave, he knows that he is making the ﬁrst move in the game. In other words, at
node a Katzenberg knows that he is at node a. Further, because Eisner observes
whether Katzenberg stays or leaves, when Eisner has to decide whether to
produce A Bug’s Life he knows that he is at node b.
However, as the story indicates, each player has to select between produc-
ing or not producing without knowing whether the other player has decided to
produce. In particular, Katzenberg must choose whether to produce Antz before
learning whether Eisner is producing A Bug’s Life. The players learn about each
other’s choices only after both are made. Referring again to the tree in Figure
2.2, we represent Katzenberg’s lack of information by specifying that, during
FIGURE 2.2
Adding the production
decisions.
Leave
Produce
Produce
Produce
K
K
K
E
Not
Not
Not
Stay
a
b
c
d
Antz
A Bug’s
Life
Antz

--- Sayfa 27 ---
12
2: The Extensive Form
the game, he cannot distinguish between nodes c and d. In other words, when
Katzenberg is on the move at either c or d, he knows that he is at one of these
nodes but he does not know which one. Figure 2.3 captures this lack of informa-
tion with a dashed line connecting nodes c and d. Because these two nodes are
connected with the dashed line, we need to label only one of them with Katzen-
berg’s initial.
Assume that, if either or both players chose not to produce his ﬁlm proposal,
then the game ends. If both players opted to produce, then one more decision
has to be made by Katzenberg: whether to release Antz early (so it beats A Bug’s
Life to the theaters). Adding this decision to the tree yields Figure 2.4. Katzen-
berg makes this choice at node e, after learning that Eisner decided to produce
A Bug’s Life.
Figure 2.4 describes all of the players’ actions and information in the game.
Nodes a, b, c, d, and e are called decision nodes, because players make deci-
sions at these places in the game. The other nodes ( f, g, h, l, m, and n) are called
terminal nodes; they represent outcomes of the game—places where the game
ends. Each terminal node also corresponds to a unique path through the tree,
which is a way of getting from the initial node through the tree by following
branches in the direction of the arrows. In an extensive form, there is a one-to-
one relation between paths and terminal nodes.3
It is common to use the term information set to specify the players’ informa-
tion at decision nodes in the game. An information set describes which decision
nodes are connected to each other by dashed lines (meaning that a player cannot
distinguish between them). Every decision node is contained in an information
set; some information sets consist of only one node. For example, the informa-
tion set for node a comprises just this node because Katzenberg can distinguish
3I provide the technical details in Chapter 14.
FIGURE 2.3
Capturing lack of information.
Leave
K
Stay
a
Produce
Produce
Produce
K
E
Not
Not
Not
b
c
d
Antz
A Bug’s
Life
Antz

--- Sayfa 28 ---
13
The Extensive Form
this node from his other decision nodes. Nodes b and e also are their own sepa-
rate information sets. Nodes c and d, however, are in the same information set.
The information sets in a game precisely describe the different decisions
that players have to make. For example, Katzenberg has three decisions to make
in the game at hand: one at the information set given by node a, another at the
information set containing nodes c and d, and a third at the information set
given by node e. Eisner has one decision to make—at node b. Remember that
only one decision is made at each information set. For example, because nodes c
and d are in the same information set, Katzenberg makes the same choice at c as
he does at d (produce or not). We always assume that all nodes in an information
set are decision nodes for the same player.
You should check that the tree in Figure 2.4 delineates game elements
1 through 4 noted in the introduction to this part of the book (see page 7).
We have just one more element to address: the players’ preferences over the
outcomes. To understand preferences, we must ask questions such as: Would
Katzenberg prefer that the game end at terminal node f rather than at terminal
node l? To answer such questions, we have to know what the players care about.
We can then rank the terminal nodes in order of preference for each player.
For example, Eisner may have the ranking h, g, f, n, l, m; in words, his favorite
outcome is h, followed by g, and so on. It is usually most convenient to represent
the players’ preference rankings with numbers, which are called payoffs or utili-
ties. Larger payoff numbers signify more preferred outcomes.
For many economic games, it is reasonable to suppose that the players care
about their monetary rewards (proﬁt). Katzenberg and Eisner probably want to
maximize their individual monetary gains. Therefore, let us deﬁne the payoff
numbers as the proﬁts that each obtains in the various outcomes. (The proﬁts
Leave
K
Stay
a
Produce
Produce
Produce
K
E
Not
Not
Not
b
Initial node
n
c
d
h
l
f
g
m
Terminal
nodes
Antz
A Bug’s
Life
Antz
Release
early
K
Not
e
FIGURE 2.4
The full tree.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
14
2: The Extensive Form
in this example are purely ﬁctional. Who knows what a ﬁlm’s true proﬁt is?)
For example, in the event that Katzenberg stays at Disney, suppose he gets $35
million and Eisner gets $100 million. Then we can say that node n yields a payoff
vector of (35, 100). This payoff vector, as well as payoffs for the other terminal
nodes, is recorded in Figure 2.5. Note that, relative to Figure 2.4, the terminal
nodes are replaced by the payoff vectors. In addition, we use the convention that
one player’s payoff is always listed ﬁrst. Because Katzenberg is the ﬁrst player
to move in this game, I have listed his payoff ﬁrst.4
Figure 2.5 depicts the full extensive form of the Katzenberg–Eisner game; it
represents all of the strategic elements. A more compact representation (with all
actions abbreviated to single letters) appears in Figure 2.6. This compact repre-
sentation is the style in which I will typically present extensive forms to you.
Observe that I have labeled one of Katzenberg’s action choices N9 to differenti-
ate it from the other “Not” action earlier in the tree. Then I can simply give you
the name of a player and the name of an action, and you will be able to ﬁgure
out where I am referring to on the tree. It will be important that you differentiate
actions in this way whenever you draw an extensive-form game. Incidentally,
you should always maintain conformity in labeling branches from nodes in the
same information set. For example, Katzenberg’s choices regarding whether to
produce Antz are represented by actions P and N in Figure 2.6. The labels P and
N are each used for two branches—from nodes c and d, which are in the same
information set (refer to Figure 2.5). When Katzenberg ﬁnds himself at either
4We might also think that the players care about other things in addition to money, such as revenge. Although
I have left them out of the current model, these considerations can be easily included in the speciﬁcation of
preferences.
Leave
K
Stay
a
Produce
Produce
Produce
K
E
Not
Not
Not
b
35, 100
0, 0
80, 0
0, 140
40, 110
13, 120
c
d
Antz
A Bug’s
Life
Antz
Release
early
K
Not
e
FIGURE 2.5
The extensive form
of the bug game.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
15
Other Examples and Conventions
node c or node d in the game, he knows only that he is at one of these two nodes
and has to choose between P and N. In other words, this information set deﬁnes
a single place where Katzenberg has to make a decision.
In the end, Antz produced a bit more than $90 million in revenue for Dream-
Works SKG, whereas A Bug’s Life secured more than $160 million. I guess
these ﬁlms each cost about $50 million to produce and market, meaning that
Katzenberg and Eisner faired pretty well. But did they make the “right” deci-
sions? We will probably not be able to answer this question fully by using the
simple game tree just developed, but analysis of our extensive form will yield
some insights that are useful for instructing Katzenberg, Eisner, and other game
players in how best to play. Indeed, designing and analyzing game models will
help you understand a wide range of strategic issues. Do not ignore the possibil-
ity that you may be advising the likes of Katzenberg and Eisner someday. One
thing is obvious to me: I will not get $160 million in revenue from this textbook.
OTHER EXAMPLES AND CONVENTIONS
So that you get a bit more exposure to the extensive form, and so that I can regis-
ter some technical notes, consider a few abstract examples of games. Figure
2.7(a) depicts a simple market game, where two ﬁrms compete by each select-
ing either a high (H) or low (L) price for a product that they both produce. Note
that I have labeled the decision nodes with the player numbers; that is, ﬁrm 1
moves ﬁrst, followed by ﬁrm 2. It is often useful to refer to players by number.
Then, when we wish to speak of a generic player, we can use the phrase “player
i,” where i stands for any one of the player numbers; that is, in a game with n
players, i = 1, 2, c, n. Remember to use the convention of listing the players’
L
K
S
P
P
P
K
E
N
N
N
35, 100
0, 0
80, 0
0, 140
40, 110
13, 120
R
K
N
FIGURE 2.6
The bug game extensive
form again.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
16
2: The Extensive Form
payoffs in the order of the players’ identifying numbers. In general, player 1’s
payoff is written ﬁrst, followed by player 2’s payoff, and so on.
Observe that in Figure 2.7(a) I have used different action labels to describe
ﬁrm 2’s high and low price options in this ﬁrm’s two information sets (the top
and bottom nodes). This helps us avoid ambiguous statements such as, “Firm
2 chose a high price.” In fact, ﬁrm 2 has two decisions to make in this game,
one at its top node and another at its bottom node. By following the labeling
convention, we are correctly forced to say, “Firm 2 chose a high price at its top
information set” (action H) or “Firm 2 chose a high price at its bottom informa-
tion set” (action H9).
Figure 2.7(b) depicts a game in which the ﬁrms select their prices simul-
taneously and independently, so neither ﬁrm observes the other’s move before
making its choice. In an extensive form, we must draw one player’s decision
before that of the other, but it is important to realize that this does not neces-
sarily correspond to the actual timing of the strategic setting. In this example,
the moves are simultaneous. The key to modeling simultaneous choice in the
FIGURE 2.7
A price-competition game.
(b)
(a)
(c)
1/2, 1/2
10, 1
0, 2
2, 0
1, 1
9, 1/2
11, 0
8, 2
H
H
In millions
L
L
1/2, 1/2
2, 0
0, 2
1, 1
2
1
2
H
L
H
H
L
L
2
1
H
L
H
H
L
L
2
1
2
H
L

--- Sayfa 32 ---
17
Guided Exercise
extensive form is to get the information sets right. Because ﬁrm 2 moves at the
same time as does ﬁrm 1, ﬁrm 2 does not get to observe ﬁrm l’s selection before
making its own choice. Thus, ﬁrm 2 cannot distinguish between its two deci-
sion nodes—they are in the same information set and therefore connected with
a dashed line. To check your understanding, you might see how one can draw
the extensive form in Figure 2.7(b) so that ﬁrm 2’s action occurs at the initial
node, followed by ﬁrm 1’s decision. However the game is drawn, each ﬁrm has
just one decision to make.
For games with monetary rewards, such as the Katzenberg–Eisner game and
the one in Figure 2.7, it is convenient to use the monetary amounts as the payoffs
themselves—as long as the players prefer more money to less. In nonrandom
settings, in fact, any utility numbers will work as long as they preserve the play-
ers’ preference ranking. For example, the extensive form in Figure 2.7(c) is
the same as the extensive form in Figure 2.7(a), except that player l’s payoff
numbers are different. Because the numbers follow the same ranking in these
games, both correctly represent the preferences of player 1. Player 1 prefers
the top terminal node to the bottom terminal node in both extensive forms, he
prefers the top terminal node to the second terminal node, and so on. For now,
either extensive form can be used. I say “for now” because, as noted earlier,
these comments apply only to nonrandom outcomes. Later you will see that
more than the order matters when players are uncertain of others’ behavior
or randomize in the selection of their own actions (this is brieﬂy addressed in
Chapter 4 and more thoroughly discussed in Chapter 25).
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Represent the following game in extensive form. Firm A decides
whether to enter ﬁrm B’s industry. Firm B observes this decision. If ﬁrm A
enters, then the two ﬁrms simultaneously decide whether to advertise. Other-
wise, ﬁrm B alone decides whether to advertise. With two ﬁrms in the market,
the ﬁrms earn proﬁts of $3 million each if they both advertise and $5 million if
they both do not advertise. If only one ﬁrm advertises, then it earns $6 million
and the other earns $1 million. When ﬁrm B is solely in the industry, it earns
$4 million if it advertises and $3.5 million if it does not advertise. Firm A earns
nothing if it does not enter.
Solution: Let E and D denote ﬁrm A’s initial alternatives of entering and not
entering B’s industry. Let a and n stand for “advertise” and “not advertise,”
respectively. Then the following extensive-form diagram represents the strate-
gic setting.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
18
2: The Extensive Form
a
n
5, 5
1, 6
6, 1
3, 3
B
E
A
D
0, 3.5
0, 4
a
n
A
a
n
a
n
B
Note that simultaneous advertising decisions are captured by assuming that, at
ﬁrm A’s second information set, ﬁrm A does not know whether ﬁrm B chose a
or n. Also note that primes are used in the action labels at ﬁrm B’s lower informa-
tion set to differentiate them from the actions taken at B’s top information set.
EXERCISES
1. Represent the following strategic situation as an extensive-form game.  Janet
is a contestant on a popular game show, and her task is to guess behind
which door Liz, another contestant, is standing. With Janet out of the room,
Liz chooses a door behind which to stand—either door A or door B. The
host, Monty, observes this choice. Janet, not having observed Liz’s choice,
then enters the room. Monty says to Janet either “Red” or “Green” (which
sounds silly, of course, but it is a silly game show). After hearing Monty’s
statement, Janet picks a door (she says either “A” or “B”). If she picks the
correct door, then she wins $100. If she picks the wrong door, then she wins
nothing. Liz wins $100 if Janet picks the wrong door and nothing if she
picks the correct door. (Thus, Liz would like to hide from Janet, and Janet
would like to ﬁnd Liz.) Monty likes the letter A. If Janet selects door A, then
this selection makes Monty happy to the tune of 10 units of utility. If she
selects door B, then Monty receives 0 utility units.
2. Consider the following strategic situation concerning the owner of a ﬁrm
(O), the manager of the ﬁrm (M), and a potential worker (W). The owner
ﬁrst decides whether to hire the worker, to refuse to hire the worker, or to
let the manager make the decision. If the owner lets the manager make the
decision, then the manager must choose between hiring the worker or not
hiring the worker. If the worker is hired, then he or she chooses between
working diligently and shirking. Assume that the worker does not know

--- Sayfa 34 ---
19
Exercises
whether he or she was hired by the manager or the owner when he or she
makes this decision. If the worker is not hired, then all three players get
a payoff of 0. If the worker is hired and shirks, then the owner and man-
ager each get a payoff of −1, whereas the worker gets 1. If the worker is
hired by the owner and works diligently, then the owner gets a payoff of
1, the manager gets 0, and the worker gets 0. If the worker is hired by the
manager and works diligently, then the owner gets 0, the manager gets 1,
and the worker gets 1. Represent this game in the extensive form (draw the
game tree).
3. Draw the extensive form for the following game (invent your own payoff
vectors, because I give you no payoff information). There is an industry in
which two ﬁrms compete as follows: First, ﬁrm 1 decides whether to set a
high price (H) or a low price (L). After seeing ﬁrm 1’s price, ﬁrm 2 decides
whether to set a high price (H) or a low price (L). If both ﬁrms selected the
low price, then the game ends with no further interaction. If either or both
ﬁrms selected the high price, then the attorney general decides whether to
prosecute (P) or not (N) for anticompetitive behavior. In this case, the attor-
ney general does not observe which ﬁrm selected the high price (or if both
ﬁrms selected the high price).
4. The following game is routinely played by youngsters—and adults as
well—throughout the world. Two players simultaneously throw their right
arms up and down to the count of “one, two, three.” (Nothing strategic hap-
pens as they do this.) On the count of three, each player quickly forms his
or her hand into the shape of either a rock, a piece of paper, or a pair of scis-
sors. Abbreviate these shapes as R, P, and S, respectively. The players make
this choice at the same time. If the players pick the same shape, then the
game ends in a tie. Otherwise, one of the players wins and the other loses.
The winner is determined by the following rule: rock beats scissors, scissors
beats paper, and paper beats rock. Each player obtains a payoff of 1 if he or
she wins, −1 if he or she loses, and 0 if he or she ties. Represent this game
in the extensive form. Also discuss the relevance of the order of play (which
of the players has the move at the initial node) in the extensive form.
5. Consider the following strategic setting. There are three people: Amy, Bart,
and Chris. Amy and Bart have hats. These three people are arranged in
a room so that Bart can see everything that Amy does, Chris can see ev-
erything that Bart does, but the players can see nothing else. In particular,
Chris cannot see what Amy does. First, Amy chooses either to put her hat
on her head (abbreviated by H) or on the ﬂoor (F). After observing Amy’s

--- Sayfa 35 ---
20
2: The Extensive Form
move, Bart chooses between putting his hat on his head or on the ﬂoor. If
Bart puts his hat on his head, the game ends and everyone gets a payoff of
0. If Bart puts his hat on the ﬂoor, then Chris must guess whether Amy’s hat
is on her head by saying either “yes” or “no.” This ends the game. If Chris
guesses correctly, then he gets a payoff of 1 and Amy gets a payoff of −1.
If he guesses incorrectly, then these payoffs are reversed. Bart’s payoff is
0, regardless of what happens. Represent this game in the extensive form
(draw the game tree).
6. Represent the following game in the extensive form. There are three play-
ers, numbered 1, 2, and 3. At the beginning of the game, players 1 and
2 simultaneously make decisions, each choosing between “X” and “Y.”
If they both choose “X,” then the game ends and the payoff vector is
(1, 0, 0); that is, player 1 gets 1, player 2 gets 0, and player 3 gets 0. If
they both choose “Y,” then the game ends and the payoff vector is (0, 1, 0);
that is, player 2 gets 1 and the other players get 0. If one player chooses
“X” while the other chooses “Y,” then player 3 must guess which of the
players selected “X”; that is, player 3 must choose between “1” and “2.”
Player 3 makes his selection knowing only that the game did not end after
the choices of players 1 and 2. If player 3 guesses correctly, then he and
the player who selected “X” each obtains a payoff of 2, and the player who
selected “Y” gets 0. If player 3 guesses incorrectly, then everyone gets a
payoff of 0.
7. Draw the extensive-form diagram for the following strategic setting. There
are three people: Amy, Bart, and Chris. Amy and Bart each have two cards,
one of which has “K” (for King) written on it and the other has “Q” (for
Queen) written on it; that is, Amy and Bart both have a King and a Queen.
At the beginning of the game, Amy must place one of her cards (either K
or Q) into an envelope and then give the envelope to Bart. Bart sees the
card that Amy placed into the envelope, and then he places one of his cards
(either K or Q) into the envelope as well. The envelope is then given to
Chris, who has not observed the moves of Amy and Bart. Chris opens the
envelope. Chris sees the two cards inside, but she does not know which card
was placed there by Amy and which card was deposited by Bart. After ob-
serving the contents of the envelope, Chris selects “yes” (Y) or “no” (N). If
Chris selects Y and Amy had put a King in the envelope, then Amy and Bart
each get a payoff of 0 and Chris gets 1. If Chris selects N and Amy had put
a Queen in the envelope, then, again, Amy and Bart each get a payoff of 0
and Chris gets 1. In all other outcomes, Amy and Bart each get a payoff of
1 and Chris gets 0.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
21
Exercises
8. Consider the following strategic setting. There are three players, numbered
1, 2, and 3. Player 1 has two cards, labeled King and Ace. At the beginning
of the game, player 1 deals one of the cards to player 2 and the other card
to player 3; that is, player 1 either gives the Ace to player 3 and the King to
player 2 (call this the action A) or the King to player 3 and the Ace to player
2 (action K). Player 2 observes the card dealt to him; player 3 does not get to
see the card dealt to her. Player 2 then must decide between switching cards
with player 3 (S) or not (N). Player 3 observes whether player 2 made the
switch, but does not see her card. Finally, player 3 responds to the question
“Is your card the Ace?” by saying either “yes” (Y) or “no” (N). If player 3
correctly states whether her card is the Ace, then she obtains a payoff of 1
and the other players get 0; otherwise, players 1 and 2 both get a payoff of
1 and player 3 obtains 0. Represent this game in the extensive form.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
22
3
STRATEGIES AND THE NORMAL FORM
T
he most important concept in the theory of games is the notion of a strategy.
The formal deﬁnition is simple:
A strategy is a complete contingent plan for a player in the game.
The “complete contingent” part of this deﬁnition is what makes it powerful
and, to some people, a bit confusing. By complete contingent plan I mean a full
speciﬁcation of a player’s behavior, which describes the actions that the player
would take at each of his possible decision points. Because information sets
represent places in the game at which players make decisions, a player’s strat-
egy describes what he will do at each of his information sets.
Consider the Katzenberg–Eisner game depicted in Figure 2.5, and put your-
self in Katzenberg’s shoes. Your strategy must include what to do at the infor-
mation set given by node a, what action you would pick at the c–d information
set, and what your choice would be at the information set given by node e. Your
strategy must specify all of these things even if you plan to select “Stay” at
node a. (This point is elaborated later in this chapter.) As another example, in
the game depicted in Figure 2.7(a), player 2’s strategy tells us what this player
will do at his top node (an information set) and at his bottom node (another
information set). In words, in this game, a strategy for player 2 speciﬁes what
price to pick in response to H selected by player 1 as well as what price to pick
in response to player l’s selection of L.
The easiest way of writing strategies is to put together the labels corre-
sponding to the actions to be chosen at each information set. For example, for
the game shown in Figure 2.7(a), one strategy for player 2 is to select the high
price (H) in the top information set and the low price (L9) in the bottom infor-
mation set; this strategy can be written HL9. Note that there are four strate-
gies for player 2 in this game: HH9, HL9, LH9, and LL9. Also note that writing
strategies in this way would be difﬁcult if we did not use different labels for a
player’s various information sets. For example, if I wrote H and L instead of H9
and L9in the bottom information set of player 2, “HL” would be ambiguous (is
it H in the top information set and L in the bottom one, or vice versa?).

--- Sayfa 38 ---
23
Terminology and Notation for Strategies
TERMINOLOGY AND NOTATION FOR STRATEGIES
It is now time to get acquainted with some standard notation. If you need help
understanding the basic mathematical symbols and concepts used here, please
consult Appendix A. We must be formal and precise going forward.
Given a game, we let Si denote the strategy space (also called the strat-
egy set) of player i. That is, Si is a set comprising each of the possible strat-
egies of player i in the game. For the game shown in Figure 2.7(a), the
strategy space of player 1 is S1 = {H, L}, and the strategy space of player 2 is
S2 = {HH9, HL9, LH9, LL9}. We use lowercase letters to denote single strate-
gies (generic members of these sets). Thus, si ∈Si  is a strategy for player i in the
game. We could thus have s1 = L and s2 = LH9, for instance.
A strategy proﬁle is a vector of strategies, one for each player. In other
words, a strategy proﬁle describes strategies for all of the players in the game.
For example, suppose we are studying a game with n players. A typical strategy
proﬁle then is a vector s = (s1, s2, c, sn), where Si is the strategy of player i,
for i = 1, 2, c, n. Let S denote the set of strategy proﬁles. Mathematically, we
write S = S1 × S2 × c× Sn. Note that the symbol “×” denotes the Cartesian
product.1
Given a single player i, we often need to speak of the strategies chosen by
all of the other players in the game. As a matter of notation, it will be convenient
to use the term −i to refer to these players. Thus, s−i is a strategy proﬁle for
everyone except player i:
s−i = (s1, s2, c, si−1, si+1, c, sn).
Separating a strategy proﬁle s into the strategy of player i and the strategies of
the other players, we write s = (si, s−i
 ). For example, in a three-player game
with the strategy proﬁle s = (B, X, Y), we have s−2 = (B, Y).2 Incidentally,
sometimes I refer to the “−i ” players as player i’s opponents, but note that this
expression is not literally descriptive for all strategic situations because many
games have cooperative elements.
Consider the examples pictured in Figures 3.1 and 3.2. The game in Figure
3.1(a) models a setting in which a ﬁrm may or may not exit a competitive indus-
try. Firm 1 decides whether to be aggressive in the market (A), to be passive in
the market (P), or to leave the market (O). If ﬁrm 1 leaves, then ﬁrm 2 enjoys
a monopoly. Otherwise the ﬁrms compete and ﬁrm 2 selects whether or not to
assume an aggressive stance. Furthermore, when ﬁrm 2 makes its decision, it
1For example, if S1 = {A, B} and S2 = {X, Y}, then S = S1 × S2 = {(A, X), (A, Y), (B, X), (B, Y)}.
2Note that expressions such as s = (s2, s−2) can create some ambiguity because they reorder the players’
individual components; the ambiguity can usually be avoided with clarifying remarks.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
24
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
A
P
2, 2
0, 4
2, 2
1, 3
3, 4
4, 2
4, 2
S1 = {OA, OB, IA, IB}
S2 = {O, I}
2, 4
3, 3
1
(a)
(b)
2
1
2
A
P
A
P
O
O
O
B
1
A
I
I
knows only whether ﬁrm 1 is in or out of the market; ﬁrm 2 does not observe
ﬁrm l’s competitive stance before taking its action. In this game, there is one
information set for ﬁrm 1 (the initial node) and one for ﬁrm 2. The strategy sets
are S1 = {A, P, O} and S2 = {A, P}.
In the game in Figure 3.1(b), player 1 decides between “out” (O) and “in”
(I). If he chooses O, then the game ends with a payoff vector of (2, 2). If he
selects I, then player 2 is faced with the same two choices. If player 2 then
chooses O, the game ends with the payoff vector (1, 3). If she picks I, then
player 1 has another choice to make, between A and B (ending the game with
payoffs (4, 2) and (3, 4), respectively). Player 1 has two information sets, and
player 2 has one information set. Note that in this game, player l’s strategy must
specify what he will do at the beginning of the game (O or I) and what action he
would take at his second information set (A or B). There are four combinations
of the two actions at each information set, and so there are four different strate-
gies for player 1: OA, OB, IA, and IB.
At this point, you can see that “complete contingent plan” means more than
just a “plan” for how to play the game. Indeed, why, you might wonder, should
player 1 in the game shown in Figure 3.1(b) need a plan for his second infor-
mation set if he selects O at the ﬁrst? Can’t we just say that player 1 has three
different strategies, O, IA, and IB? In fact, no. The deﬁnition of a strategy (a
complete contingent plan) requires a speciﬁcation of player l’s choice at his
second information set even in the situation in which he plans to select O at his
FIGURE 3.1 Some
extensive-form games I.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
25
Terminology and Notation for Strategies
A
U
D
B
3, 0, 0
2, 4, 4
0, 5, 4
9, 2, 5
2
1
(a)
(b)
3
3
R
T
P
Q
C
E
2
1, 2, 2
6, 3, 2
2, 2, 2
P
Q
2, 5
5, 2
5, 2
2, 5
2
1
X
Y
X
Y
3, 3
2, 2
W
Z
S1 = {U, D}
S2 = {AC, AE, BC, BE}
S3 = {RP, RQ, TP, TQ}
S1 =  {AW, BW, CW, AZ, BZ, CZ}
S2 =  {X, Y}
A
B
C
1
FIGURE 3.2
Some extensive-form games II.
ﬁrst information set. Furthermore, we really will need to keep track of behavior
at all information sets—even those that would be unreached if players follow
their strategies—to fully analyze any game. That is, stating that player l’s plan is
“O” does not provide enough information for us to conduct a thorough analysis.
One reason for this is that our study of rationality will explicitly require the
evaluation of players’ optimal moves starting from arbitrary points in a game.
This evaluation is connected to the beliefs that players have about each other.
For example, in the game depicted in Figure 3.1(b), player l’s optimal choice at
his ﬁrst information set depends on what he thinks player 2 would do if put on
the move. Furthermore, to select the best course of action, perspicacious player
2 must consider what player 1 would do at his second information set. Thus,
player 2 must form a belief about player l’s action at the third node. A belief is
a conjecture about what strategy the other player is using; therefore, player l’s
strategy must include a prescription for his second information set, regardless of
what this strategy prescribes for his ﬁrst information set.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
26
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
Another reason why it is important to specify a complete contingent plan
is that players may make mistakes in the course of play. For example, suppose
that you are player 1 in the game shown in Figure 3.1(b). Further suppose that
I am instructing you on how to play this game. I might write instructions on
a piece of paper, hand the paper to you, and then leave town before the game
begins. I could write “select O,” but, even though that instruction seems to be
enough information in advance, it does not give you sufﬁcient guidance. You
might make a mistake and select I instead of O at the beginning of the game.
What if player 2 then picks I? There you are, red faced and indignant, yelling at
the sky, “Now what am I supposed to do?”
Examine the other examples in Figure 3.2 to solidify your understanding
of strategy. Note that, as required, I have used different labels to describe the
actions that can be taken at different information sets.
For another example to help you grasp the notion of complete contingent
plan, consider a setting in which two players have to decide how much to
contribute to a charitable project. Suppose it is known that the project will be
successful if and only if the sum of the players’ contributions is at least $900.
Further, the players know that they each have $600 available to contribute. The
players make contributions sequentially. In the ﬁrst stage, player 1 selects her
contribution x ∈[0, 600], and player 2 observes this choice. Then, in the second
stage, player 2 selects his contribution y ∈[0, 600]. If the project is successful,
player l’s payoff is 800 −x and player 2’s payoff is 800 −y. Here, 800 is the
beneﬁt each player derives from the successful project. If the project is unsuc-
cessful, then player 1 gets −x and player 2 gets −y.
Note how many information sets each player has in this contribution game.
Player 1 has just one information set (the initial node), and this player’s strat-
egy is simply a number between 0 and 600. Thus, S1 = [0, 600]. Player 2,
on the other hand, has an inﬁnite number of information sets, each associated
with a different value of x selected by player 1. At each of these information
sets (each one a singleton node), player 2 must choose a contribution level.
For instance, player 2’s strategy must describe the amount he would contrib-
ute conditional on player 1 choosing x = 500, the amount he would contribute
conditional on x = 400, and so on—for every value of x between 0 and 600.
There is a simple mathematical way of expressing player 2’s strategy. It is a function
s2: [0, 600] S [0, 600], such that, for any given x, player 2 selects y = s2(x).
THE NORMAL FORM
The extensive form is one straightforward way of representing a game. Another
way of formally describing games is based on the idea of strategies. It is called
the normal form (or strategic form) representation of a game. This alternative

--- Sayfa 42 ---
27
The Normal Form
representation is more compact than the extensive form in some settings. As we
develop concepts of rationality for games, you will notice the subtle differences
between the two representations.
For any game in extensive form, we can describe the strategy spaces
of the players. Furthermore, notice that each strategy proﬁle fully describes
how the game is played. That is, a strategy proﬁle tells us exactly what path
through the tree is followed and, equivalently, which terminal node is reached
to end the game. Associated with each terminal node (which we may call an
outcome) is a payoff vector for the players. Therefore, each strategy proﬁle
implies a speciﬁc payoff vector.
For each player i, we can deﬁne a function ui: S S R (a function whose
domain is the set of strategy proﬁles and whose range is the real numbers) so
that, for each strategy proﬁle s ∈S that the players could choose, ui (s) is player
i’s payoff in the game. This function ui is called player i’s payoff function. As
an example, take the game pictured in Figure 3.1(b). The set of strategy proﬁles
in this game is
S = {(OA, O), (OA, I), (OB, O), (OB, I), (IA, O), (IA, I), (IB, O), (IB, I)}.
The players’ payoff functions are deﬁned over S. To determine ui (s) for any
strategy proﬁle s, simply start at the initial node and trace through the tree
according to the actions speciﬁed by this strategy proﬁle. For instance,
u1(OA, O) = 2, u1(IA, I) = 4, u2(IA, O) = 3, and so forth.3
A convenient way of describing the strategy spaces of the players and their
payoff functions for two-player games in which each player has a ﬁnite number
of strategies is to draw a matrix. Each row of the matrix corresponds to a strategy
of player 1, and each column corresponds to a strategy of player 2. Thus each
cell of the matrix (which designates a single row and column) corresponds to a
strategy proﬁle. Inside a given cell, we write the payoff vector associated with
the strategy proﬁle. For example, the game shown in Figure 3.1(b) is described
by the matrix in Figure 3.3. In the matrix representation, we maintain the prac-
tice of putting player l’s payoff ﬁrst.
The strategy sets and payoff functions of the players fully describe a strate-
gic situation, without reference to an extensive form. In other words, strategies
and payoffs can be taken as a fundamental representation of a game.4 Here is
the formal deﬁnition of this representation: A game in normal form (also called
strategic form) consists of a set of players, {1, 2, c, n}, strategy spaces for the
3Because we use notational conventions such as s = (s1, s2), it is more proper to write ui(s) = ui ((s1, s2))
than to write ui (s) = ui (s1, s2). However, the latter is completely standard in mathematical discourse, so 1
refrain from using the double parentheses except where it helps prevent confusion. You will see their use a
few times in the textbook.
4In fact, it is often easier to analyze a game without having to consider a tree structure.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
28
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
players, S1 , S2 , c, Sn , and payoff functions for the players, u1 , u2 , c, un .5 As
noted earlier, two-player normal-form games with ﬁnite strategy spaces can be
described by matrices. Thus, such games are sometimes called “matrix games.”6
CLASSIC NORMAL-FORM GAMES
Some classic normal-form games are depicted in Figure 3.4. In the game of
matching pennies, two players simultaneously and independently select “heads”
or “tails” by each uncovering a penny in his hand. If their selections match, then
player 2 must give his penny to player 1; otherwise, player 1 gives his penny to
player 2.
In the coordination game, both players obtain a positive payoff if they select
the same strategy; otherwise they get nothing. The “Pareto coordination” game
has the added feature that both players prefer to coordinate on strategy A rather
than on strategy B.7
The prisoners’ dilemma is a well-known example and is motivated by the
following story. The authorities have captured two criminals who they know are
guilty of a certain crime. However, the authorities have only enough evidence
to convict them of a minor offense. If neither crook admits to the crime, then
both will be charged with the minor offense and will pay a moderate ﬁne. The
authorities have put the prisoners into separate rooms, where each prisoner is
asked to squeal on the other. Squealing corresponds to strategy D (defect), and
not squealing corresponds to strategy C (cooperate with the other prisoner).
5The normal form was ﬁrst denned by J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944). Incidentally, one can also look at games with an
inﬁnite number of players, in which case the players are in some general set N.
6Games with an inﬁnite number of strategies are difﬁcult to represent with a diagram, even in the extensive
form. A recommendation appears in Chapter 14.
7Outcome (A, A) is said to “Pareto dominate” (B, B). This criterion is deﬁned in Chapter 6.
FIGURE 3.3
A game in normal form.
I
O
OA
OB
IA
IB
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
4, 2
1, 3
3, 4
1, 3
2
1

--- Sayfa 44 ---
29
Classic Normal-Form Games
Each is told that if he squeals and the other prisoner does not, then he will
be granted immunity and be released; his testimony, however, will be used to
convict the other prisoner of the crime. If each squeals on the other, then they
both get sent to jail, but their term is reduced because of their cooperation. The
best outcome for a prisoner is to defect while the other cooperates (payoff 3);
the next-best outcome occurs when neither defects (payoff 2); then comes the
outcome in which both defect (payoff 1); the worst outcome for a prisoner is
when he cooperates while the other defects.8
The ill-titled “battle of the sexes” is a game in which two friends have to
decide whether to see a movie or go to the opera. Unfortunately, they work
8Those who ﬁrst described this game called it the “prisoner’s dilemma.” I prefer the plural form to highlight
that it is a strategic situation. For an early account of this game and the battle of the sexes, see R. D. Luce and
H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions (New York: Wiley, 1957).
FIGURE 3.4 Classic normal-form games.
H
T
H
T
Matching Pennies
1, -1
-1, 1
-1, 1
1, -1
2
1
C
D
C
D
Prisoners’ Dilemma
2, 2
0, 3
3, 0
1, 1
2
1
Opera
Opera
Movie
Movie
Battle of the Sexes
2, 1
0, 0
0, 0
1, 2
2
1
H
D
H
D
Hawk-Dove/Chicken
0, 0
3, 1
1, 3
2, 2
2
1
A
B
A
B
Coordination
1, 1
0, 0
0, 0
1, 1
2
1
A
B
A
B
Pareto Coordination
2, 2
0, 0
0, 0
1, 1
2
1
P
D
P
D
Pigs
4, 2
2, 3
6, -1
0, 0
S
D

--- Sayfa 45 ---
30
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
in different parts of the city and, owing to a massive outage of the telephone
system, ﬁnd themselves incommunicado. They must simultaneously and inde-
pendently select an event to attend. There is only one movie theater and only
one opera venue, so the friends will meet each other if they manage to coordi-
nate their decisions. Both prefer to be together, regardless of which event they
attend. However, player 1 prefers the opera and player 2 prefers the movie.
The game of chicken you will recognize from several movies, in particular
the 1955 James Dean ﬁlm Rebel Without a Cause. Two players drive automo-
biles toward each other at top speed. Just before they reach each other, each
chooses between maintaining course (H) and swerving (D). If both swerve, they
both save face and are satisﬁed. If only one swerves, then he is proved to be a
wimp, whereas the other is lauded as a tough guy with steely nerves. If both
maintain course, they crash and are each horribly disﬁgured (and, needless to
say, their girlfriends dump them).9
The pigs game refers to a situation in which a dominant and a submissive pig
share a pen. On one side of the pen is a large button, which if pushed releases food
into a dish at the other side of the pen. Each pig has the option of pushing the button
(P) or not (D). If neither pushes, the pigs go hungry. If the submissive pig pushes
the button and the dominant one does not, the released food is eaten entirely by
the dominant pig because it gets to the food ﬁrst. (Here the submissive pig is even
worse off than if neither played P, because it expended the effort to push the button
but got no food.) If the dominant pig pushes the button, then the submissive pig can
enjoy some of the food before the dominant one reaches the dish.10
INTERPRETATION OF THE NORMAL FORM
One way of viewing the normal form is that it models a situation in which
players simultaneously and independently select complete contingent plans for
an extensive-form game. Theorists sometimes view selection of strategies in
this fashion as equivalent to real-time play of the extensive form, but there are
some subtleties to consider, which we will do in the third part of this book. On
a more tangible level, because you have seen how to convert an extensive-form
game into the normal form, you may ask if there is a procedure for converting
normal-form games into the extensive form. To see why this conversion is not
so straightforward, consider the normal form and extensive forms contained in
Figure 3.5. Both extensive forms yield the same normal form (a fact that you
9In Rebel Without a Cause, the players actually drive toward a cliff. My description of the chicken game more
accurately describes the chicken scene in the 1984 Kevin Bacon ﬁlm Footloose.
10The pigs game is inspired by B. A. Baldwin and G. B. Meese, “Social Behaviour in Pigs Studied by Means
of Operant Conditioning,” Animal Behaviour 27(1979):947–957.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
31
Guided Exercise
should check). This demonstrates that, although there may be only one way
of going from the extensive form to the normal form, the reverse is not true.
Furthermore, the extensive forms in Figure 3.5 have different informational
structures. In one, player 2 knows that player 1 did not select A when player 2
has to decide between C and D. In the other, player 2 has no such information.
Game theorists have debated whether the normal form contains all of the
relevant information about strategic settings. Without reviewing the arguments,
you should realize that there is no discrepancy between the normal and exten-
sive forms in settings in which the players make all of their decisions before
observing what other players do, as is the case with simultaneous and indepen-
dent moves. Such games are called “one-shot” or “static” games, and they are
obviously well modeled in the normal form.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Describe the strategy spaces for the Katzenberg–Eisner game
discussed in Chapter 2. Also draw the normal-form representation.
Solution: Recall that a strategy for player i must describe the action to be taken
at each of player i’s information sets. Examining Figure 2.6, which displays
the extensive form of the Katzenberg–Eisner game, we see that Katzenberg
(player K) has three information sets. At his ﬁrst information set (the initial
node), player K selects between actions L and S. At his second information set,
FIGURE 3.5 Corresponding extensive and normal forms.
C
D
A
B
1, 2
1, 2
3, 1
2, 4
2
1
A
B
2, 4
1, 2
3, 1
1, 2
1
2
2
C
D
C
D
A
B
2, 4
3, 1
1, 2
1
C
D

--- Sayfa 47 ---
32
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
he chooses between P and N. At his third information set, he chooses between
R and N9. Thus, a strategy for player K is a combination of three actions, one
for each of his information sets. An example of a strategy is LNR, which is a
useful strategy to consider because it illustrates that even if player K is to select
N at his second information set (which precludes his third information set from
being reached), his strategy still must describe what he would do at his third
information set. Because player K has two alternatives at each of three infor-
mation sets, there are 2 # 2 # 2 = 8 different combinations—thus eight different
strategies. Player K’s strategy space is
SK = {LPR, LPN9, LNR, LNN9, SPR, SPN9, SNR, SNN9}.
Observe that player E has just one information set. His strategy space is
SE = {P, N}.
To draw the normal-form matrix, you should ﬁrst note that it must have
eight rows (for the eight different strategies of player K) and two columns (for
the two strategies of player E). Looking at each individual strategy proﬁle, you
can trace through the extensive form to ﬁnd the associated payoff vector. For
example, consider strategy proﬁle (LNN9, P). With this strategy proﬁle, play
proceeds from the initial node to node b, then node c (see Figure 2.5), and ends
at the terminal node with payoff vector (0, 140). The complete normal-form
matrix is
P
N
LPR
LPN
LNR
LNN
SPN
SNR
SNN
SPR
40, 110
80, 0
13, 120
80, 0
0, 140
0, 0
0, 140
0, 0
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
35, 100
E
K

--- Sayfa 48 ---
33
Exercises
EXERCISES
1.  Describe the strategy spaces of the players for the extensive-form games in
Exercises 1 and 4 of Chapter 2. Also, draw the normal-form matrices.
2.  Suppose a manager and a worker interact as follows. The manager decides
whether to hire or not hire the worker. If the manager does not hire the
worker, then the game ends. When hired, the worker chooses to exert either
high effort or low effort. On observing the worker’s effort, the manager
chooses to retain or ﬁre the worker. In this game, does “not hire” describe a
strategy for the manager? Explain.
3.  Draw the normal-form matrix of each of the following extensive-form
games.
A
B
3, 4
1, 1
2, 2
0, 0
1
2
2
C
D
E
F
(a)
1, 1
-1, -1
3, 2
4, 0
(b)
1
2
O
O
D
1
U
I
I
A
U
D
B
3, 3
5, 4
2
1
(c)
C
D
2
1
2, 6
2, 2
6, 2
E
F

--- Sayfa 49 ---
34
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
A
U
D
B
3, 3
2
1
(d)
A
B
1
9, 0
2, 2
4, 2
W
Z
1
3, 6
5, 1
X
Y
A
C
B
4, 3
1, 2
6, 8
2, 1
1
(e)
U
D
U
D
8, 7
2, 1
U
D
2
A
U
D
B
2, 1
8, 1
1, 2
3, 8
2
1
(f)
1
1
X
Y
X
Y
A
B
0, 0
5, 5
6, 6
P
Q
4.  In the extensive-form game that follows, how many strategies does player
2 have?

--- Sayfa 50 ---
35
Exercises
c
d
0, 3
8, 0
2
1
c
d
0, 2
f
g
1, 2
4, 1
2
a
b
5.  Consider a version of the Cournot duopoly game, which will be thoroughly
analyzed in Chapter 10. Two ﬁrms (1 and 2) compete in a homogeneous
goods market, where the ﬁrms produce exactly the same good. The ﬁrms
simultaneously and independently select quantities to produce. The quantity
selected by ﬁrm i is denoted qi and must be greater than or equal to zero, for
i = 1, 2. The market price is given by p = 2 −q1 −q2. For simplicity, as-
sume that the cost to ﬁrm i of producing any quantity is zero. Further, assume
that each ﬁrm’s payoff is deﬁned as its proﬁt. That is, ﬁrm i’s payoff is pqi ,
where j denotes ﬁrm i’s opponent in the game. Describe the normal form of
this game by expressing the strategy spaces and writing the payoffs as func-
tions of the strategies.
6.  Consider a variation of the Cournot duopoly game in which the ﬁrms move
sequentially rather than simultaneously. Suppose that ﬁrm 1 selects its quan-
tity ﬁrst. After observing ﬁrm l’s selection, ﬁrm 2 chooses its quantity. This
is called the von Stackelberg duopoly model. For this game, describe what a
strategy of ﬁrm 2 must specify. An exercise in Chapter 16 asks you to analyze
this game.
7.  Consider the normal-form games pictured here. Draw an extensive-form
representation of each game. Can you think of other extensive forms that
correspond to these normal-form games?
HC
HD
LC
LD
H
L
3, 3
3, 3
4, 0
1, 1
0, 4
0, 4
4, 0
1, 1
2
1
C
D
AY
AN
BY
BN
0, 3
0, 0
2, 0
0, 1
1, 1
0, 1
1, 1
2
1
-1, 0
(a)
(b)

--- Sayfa 51 ---
36
3: Strategies and the Normal Form
8.  Consider the following strategic setting involving a cat named Baker, a
mouse named Cheezy, and a dog named Spike. Baker’s objective is to catch
Cheezy while avoiding Spike; Cheezy wants to tease Baker but avoid get-
ting caught; Spike wants to rest and is unhappy when he is disturbed.
In the morning, Baker and Cheezy simultaneously decide what activity
to engage in. Baker can either nap (N) or hunt (H), where hunting involves
moving Spike’s bone. Cheezy can either hide (h) or play (p). If nap and
hide are chosen, then the game ends. The game also will end immediately
if hunt and play are chosen, in which case Baker captures Cheezy. On the
other hand, if nap and play are chosen, then Cheezy observes that Baker is
napping and must decide whether to move Spike’s bone (m) or not (n). If he
chooses to not move the bone, then the game ends. Finally, in the event that
Spike’s bone was moved (either by Baker choosing to hunt or by Cheezy
moving it later), then Spike learns that his bone was moved but does not
observe who moved it; in this contingency, Spike must choose whether to
punish Baker (B) or punish Cheezy (J). After Spike moves, the game ends.
In this game, how many information sets are there for Cheezy? How
many strategy proﬁles are there in this game?

--- Sayfa 52 ---
37
BELIEFS, MIXED STRATEGIES, AND
EXPECTED PAYOFFS 4
I
t is important for players to think about each other’s strategic choices. We use
the term belief for a player’s assessment about the strategies of the others in
the game. For example, consider the prisoners’ dilemma game, in which each
player chooses between strategies C and D. Player 1 may say to himself, “I
think the other guy is likely to play strategy D” or “I think the other guy will
surely play strategy C.” These are two alternative beliefs that player 1 could
have. Unfortunately, a statement such as “I think the other guy is likely to play
strategy D” is somewhat ambiguous. Because we aim to model decision making
mathematically, we need a precise way of representing a player’s beliefs. The
key is to use probabilities.
Here is an illustration. Continuing with the prisoners’ dilemma example,
suppose we let p represent the likelihood that player 1 thinks the other player
will select strategy C in the game. Formally, p is a probability—a number
between zero and one—where p = 1 means that player 1 is certain that player
2 will select strategy C, and p = 0 means that player 1 is sure player 2 will not
choose C. The probability that player 1 believes the other player will select D is
1 −p. Thus, if p = 1>2, then player 1 believes that the other player is equally
likely to select C and D. The numbers p and 1 −p constitute a probability
distribution over the set {C, D}. For a more detailed review of the basic deﬁni-
tions of probability, please read Appendix A.
Note that if p ∈(0, 1), then player 1 thinks it is possible that player 2 will
play strategy C and also thinks it is possible that player 2 will play D. Under-
stand that player 1 might not believe that player 2 actually randomizes (by, say,
ﬂipping a coin). It’s just that player 1 may be uncertain about what strategy
player 2 will choose, and so he associates probabilities with player 2’s strate-
gies. Furthermore, player l’s belief may not be accurate; he could be certain that
player 2 will select C when in fact player 2 selects D.
I next formally deﬁne beliefs for general normal-form games. Mathemati-
cally, a belief of player i is a probability distribution over the strategies of
the other players. Let us denote such a probability distribution u−i and write
u−i ∈S−i, where S−i is the set of probability distributions over the strategies
of all the players except player i. (We often use Greek letters, such as theta,
here, to represent probability distributions.)

--- Sayfa 53 ---
38
4: Beliefs, Mixed Strategies, and Expected Payoffs
For example, take a two-player game (so that −i = j) and suppose each
player has a ﬁnite number of strategies. The belief of player i about the behavior
of player j is a function uj ∈Sj such that, for each strategy sj ∈Sj of player
j, uj(sj) is interpreted as the probability that player i thinks player j will play sj .
As a probability distribution, uj has the property that uj(sj) Ú 0 for each sj ∈Sj,
and g sj∈Sjuj(sj) = 1.
Related to a belief is the notion of a mixed strategy. A mixed strategy for a
player is the act of selecting a strategy according to a probability distribution.
For example, if a player can choose between strategies U and D, we can imagine
her selecting U with some probability and D with some probability. She might
ﬂip a coin and select U if the coin lands with the head up and D if the coin lands
with the tail up. Formally, a mixed strategy is just like a belief in that they are
both probability distributions. We will denote a generic mixed strategy of player
i by si ∈Si. To prevent confusion, we sometimes call a regular strategy a pure
strategy to distinguish it from a mixed strategy. Notice that the set of mixed
strategies includes the set of pure strategies (each of which is a mixed strategy
that assigns all probability to one pure strategy).
If a player uses a mixed strategy and/or assigns positive probability to multi-
ple strategies of the other player, then this player cannot expect to get a particu-
lar payoff for sure. We can extend the deﬁnition of a payoff function to mixed
strategies and beliefs by using the concept of expected value. When player i,
for example, has a belief u−i about the strategies of the others and plans to
select strategy si , then her expected payoff is the “weighted average” payoff that
she would get if she played strategy si and the others played according to u−i.
Mathematically,
ui(si, u−i) =
a
s−i∈S−i
u−i(s−i)ui(si, s−i).
Take the game in Figure 4.1 and suppose that player 1 believes with probability
1>2 that player 2 will play strategy L, with probability 1>4 that she will play M,
and with probability 1>4 that she will play R. That is, her belief u2 is such that
FIGURE 4.1
Expected payoffs.
L
M
R
U
C
D
8, 1
0, 2
3, 3
1, 2
5, 0
2, 3
4, 0
0, 0
8, 1
2
1

--- Sayfa 54 ---
39
Guided Exercise
u2(L) = 1>2, u2(M) = 1>4, and u2(R) = 1>4. An often used, shorthand way of
writing this belief is (1>2, 1>4, 1>4). If player 1 selects U, then she expects to
get 8 with probability 1>2, 0 with probability 1>4, and 4 with probability 1>4.
Thus, her expected payoff is
u1(U, u2) = (1>2)8 + (1>4)0 + (1>4)4 = 5.
When I began to formulate games in Chapter 2, payoff numbers were meant
to describe the players’ preferences over outcomes. I noted that any numbers
can be used as long as they preserve the order describing the players’ pref-
erences over outcomes. At this point, we must observe that more is required.
Payoff numbers also represent the players’ preferences over probability distri-
butions over outcomes. As an example, take the game in Figure 4.1. According
to the payoff numbers in the matrix, player 1 is indifferent between the outcome
in which he plays U and his opponent plays the mixed strategy (1>2, 1>4, 1>4)
and the outcome of the strategy proﬁle (D, L). Both yield an expected payoff
of 5. If we raise or lower player l’s payoff from (D, L) to, say, 5.5 or 4.5, player
l’s preferences over individual cells of the matrix do not change. But his pref-
erences over uncertain outcomes do indeed change. Thus, there is more to the
payoff numbers than simple order.1
For games with monetary outcomes, we will generally assume that the play-
ers seek to maximize their expected monetary gain. We can thus use the mone-
tary amounts as the utility numbers themselves. Note that we can also multiply
all of a player’s payoffs by a positive number or add a number to all of them
without affecting the player’s preferences over certain or uncertain outcomes.
We will take a closer look at various payoff functions when we get to the subject
of risk in Chapter 25.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the game in Figure 4.1. Suppose that player 2 believes that
player 1 will select U with probability 1>2, C with probability 1>4, and D with
probability 1>4. Also suppose that player 2 plans to randomize by picking M
and R each with probability 1>2. What is player 2’s expected payoff?
Solution: To calculate player 2’s expected payoff, note that, according to player
2’s belief, six strategy proﬁles occur with positive probability: (U, M), (U, R),
1Two books that established this area of study are J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944), and L. Savage, The Foundations
of Statistics (New York: Wiley, 1954; revised and enlarged edition, New York: Dover Publications, 1972).

--- Sayfa 55 ---
40
4: Beliefs, Mixed Strategies, and Expected Payoffs
(C, M), (C, R), (D, M), and (D, R). Proﬁle (U, M) occurs with probability 1>4
(that is, 1>2 probability that player 1 selects U, times 1>2 probability that player
2 selects M). Proﬁle (U, R) also occurs with probability 1>4. Each of the other
four proﬁles occurs with probability 1>8. Note that the six probability numbers
sum to one. Multiplying the individual probabilities by player 2’s payoff in each
case, we get a sum of
1
4 # 2 + 1
4 # 0 + 1
8 # 2 + 1
8 # 0 + 1
8 # 3 + 1
8 # 1 = 10
8 = 1.25.
Therefore, player 2’s expected payoff is 1.25.
EXERCISES
1.  Evaluate the following payoffs for the game given by the normal form pic-
tured here. [Remember, a mixed strategy for player 1 is s1 ∈{U, M, D},
where s1(U) is the probability that player 1 plays strategy U, and so forth. For
simplicity, we write s1 as (s1(U), s1(M), s1(D)), and similarly for player 2.]
L
C
R
U
M
D
10, 0
0, 10
2, 10
10, 2
3, 3
4, 6
3, 3
6, 4
6, 6
2
1
(a) u1(U, C)
(b) u2(M, R)
(c) u2(D, C)
(d) u1(s1, C) for s1 = (1>3, 2>3, 0)
(e) u1(s1, R) for s1 = (1>4, 1>2, 1>4)
(f) u1(s1, L) for s1 = (0, 1, 0)
(g) u2(s1, R) for s1 = (1>3, 2>3, 0)
(h) u2(s1, s2) for s1 = (1>2, 1>2, 0) and s2 = (1>4, 1>4, 1>2).
2.  Suppose we have a game where S1 = {H, L} and S2 = {X, Y}. If player
1 plays H, then her payoff is z regardless of player 2’s choice of strategy;
player 1’s other payoff numbers are u1(L, X) = 0 and u1(L, Y) = 10. You
may choose any payoff numbers you like for player 2 because we will only
be concerned with player l’s payoff.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
41
Exercises
(a) Draw the normal form of this game.
(b)  If player 1’s belief is u2 = (1>2, 1>2), what is player 1’s expected payoff of
playing H? What is his expected payoff of playing L? For what value of z
is player 1 indifferent between playing H and L?
(c) Suppose u2 = (1>3, 2>3). Find player l’s expected payoff of playing L.
3. Evaluate the following payoffs for the game pictured here:
(a) u1(s1, I) for s1 = (1>4, 1>4, 1>4, 1>4)
(b) u2(s1, O) for s1 = (1>8, 1>4, 1>4, 3>8)
(c) u1(s1, s2) for s1 = (1>4, 1>4, 1>4, 1>4), s2 = (1>3, 2>3)
(d) u1(s1, s2) for s1 = (0, 1>3, 1>6, 1>2), s2 = (2>3, 1>3)
I
O
OA
OB
IA
IB
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
4, 2
1, 3
3, 4
1, 3
2
1
4.  For each of the classic normal-form games (see Figure 3.4), ﬁnd u1(s1, s2)
and u2(s1, s2) for s1 = (1>2, 1>2) and s2 = (1>2, 1>2).
5.  Consider a version of the Cournot duopoly game, where ﬁrms 1 and 2 simul-
taneously and independently select quantities to produce in a market. The
quantity selected by ﬁrm i is denoted qi and must be greater than or equal
to zero, for i = 1, 2. The market price is given by p = 100 −2q1 −2q2.
Suppose that each ﬁrm produces at a cost of 20 per unit. Further, assume
that each ﬁrm’s payoff is deﬁned as its proﬁt. (If you completed Exercise 5
of Chapter 3, then you have already dealt with this type of game.) Suppose
that player 1 has the belief that player 2 is equally likely to select each of
the quantities 6, 11, and 13. What is player l’s expected payoff of choosing
a quantity of 14?
6.  Suppose you know that ui(si, u−i) = 5 for a particular mixed strategy
si ∈Si and belief u−i ∈S −i. Must it be true that there is a pure strategy
si ∈Si such that ui(si, u−i) Ú 5? Prove this or ﬁnd an example showing that
the statement is false.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
42
5
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
AND METHODOLOGY
T
he objective of game-theoretic modeling is to precisely sort through the
logic of strategic situations—to explain why people behave in certain ways
and to predict and prescribe future behavior. Game theory also gives us a lan-
guage for recording and communicating ideas. You are now familiar with part
of the language—that which is used to describe games.
In formulating an extensive form or normal form, we must balance the
goal of realism with the need for manageable mathematics (as the Katzenberg–
Eisner game illustrated; see Chapter 2). A simple model is more easily analyzed,
whereas a complex model has room to incorporate more realistic features. The
best theoretical models isolate a few key strategic elements and, by exploring
their relation, develop new insights that can be broadly applied. Model develop-
ment is often the most important part of game-theoretic analysis; sometimes it
is a trial-and-error process.
Here is an example of the kind of trade-offs that we face in designing games.
Suppose you are interested in modeling the interaction between my wife and
me regarding how we will divide evening chores. You might think of this as a
negotiation problem that you can describe with an extensive form. At the initial
node, you might specify several branches to represent various verbal offers that
I can make, such as, “Why don’t you bathe the kids while I clean the kitchen?”
or “I’ll bathe the kids if you’ll clean the kitchen and tidy the living room.” In
the extensive form, my offer would be followed by various alternative actions
for my wife, such as saying “okay” or making a counteroffer. Because there are
many such alternatives, you have a choice as to which to include in the extensive
form and how precisely to describe them.
A coarse description of my wife’s feasible responses would be simply
“okay” or “no, you take care of everything.” A more reﬁned description might
include whether my wife smiles or gives me the evil eye as she speaks. Whether
you should adopt the more reﬁned description in your model depends on your
assessment of its strategic importance and how complicated it is to analyze. For
instance, if you viewed my wife’s countenance as something of no meaning that
could be ignored, it would seem unnecessary to include it in your description of
my wife’s alternatives. On the other hand, you might rightly think that my wife
communicates mainly by facial expression rather than with words. Further, you

--- Sayfa 58 ---
43
Rationality
might know that my payoff depends on her affect and that I am terriﬁed of the
evil eye. Then perhaps you ought to use the reﬁned description of her response
in your model. I am starting to realize who has the upper hand in my marriage.
This book contains many examples of simple games that capture useful
insights. Each example involves an abstraction from reality, but each also retains
important realistic features that are illuminated with careful study. The exam-
ples will give you a taste of, and appreciation for, the exercise of modeling.
RATIONALITY
Once we have speciﬁed a game, our task becomes studying the players’ behav-
ior. Game-theoretic analysis generally rests on the assumption that each player
behaves according to his preferences. More precisely, we can assume that, if a
player’s action will determine which of several outcomes will occur in a game,
then this player will select the action that leads to the outcome he most prefers.
This is the mathematical deﬁnition of rationality. The nice thing about payoff
numbers is that, because they represent preferences (with larger numbers asso-
ciated with more preferred outcomes), rationality simply means maximizing
one’s expected payoff. Thus, we should assume that each player acts to maxi-
mize his own expected payoff.
Rationality is a weak assumption in the sense that any coherent preferences
can be accommodated by the theory. For instance, rationality does not necessar-
ily imply that the players seek to maximize their own monetary gains. Consider,
for example, an altruistic player who prefers to increase the amount of money
that the other players get. The appropriate representation of this player’s prefer-
ences calls for a payoff that is increasing in the others’ money. Then rationality,
in terms of payoff maximization, means acting to increase the other players’
monetary gains.1
Throughout much of the history of game theory, practitioners used fairly
simple assumptions about preferences and reserved their scarce energy for the
complex analysis of behavior in games. For instance, for settings with mone-
tary rewards, it is common to assume that players care about only their own
monetary gains. The same approach has been taken in the economics discipline
where, for example, researchers typically assume that people care about only
their own consumption of goods and services. In many applications, these kinds
of assumptions are valid, at least as reasonable approximations of people’s true
preferences. Thus, for most of the examples with monetary rewards in this book,
1The phrase “coherent preferences” is not a formal term. The key property for preferences to have a meaning-
ful mathematical representation is transitivity, which means that if a player prefers outcome A to outcome
B and also prefers outcome B to outcome C, then this player must further prefer outcome A to outcome C.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
44
5: General Assumptions and Methodology
I take the simple route of assuming that players care only about their own mone-
tary gains. Furthermore, I often deﬁne players’ payoffs as their monetary gains,
at least until Chapter 26 where I incorporate risk aversion.
In some settings, however, players are highly motivated by other factors.
They may care about each other’s money and consumption. They may be driven
by altruism, a sense of fairness, envy, greed, or other psychological consider-
ations. In these cases, it is important to accurately describe their preferences
by including the nontraditional elements in the description of payoffs. I give a
few examples in this book but generally leave the topic for you to study after-
ward. The ﬁeld of behavioral economics, which studies the nontraditional
aspects of preferences, is very active—essentially blossoming in the past two
decades. Behavioral economics rests on the foundation of game theory, which
provides all of the analytical tools. Behavioral economics is also closely linked
to the important ﬁelds of experimental economics and experimental psychology,
which seek to determine what people’s preferences and cognitive limitations
really are, at least in the laboratory.
The key point to remember is that game theory can accommodate any
preferences that have a mathematical representation. So, if you aspire to take
your game-theory studies further than this book, you might explore alterna-
tive assumptions about preferences as you work through some of the examples
presented here.
COMMON KNOWLEDGE
As you have already seen from the development of the extensive-form represen-
tation, it is critical that we precisely model the players’ information throughout
the game being played. In particular, players may have different information at
various points in the game. But conventional analysis of behavior requires that
players have a shared understanding of the entire game. In other words, the
players know the extensive-form (or normal-form) game that they are playing,
which includes the recognition that, in the course of play, individual players will
not be able to distinguish between nodes in the same information set.
To express the idea that the players have a shared understanding of the game
being played, we can take advantage of the notion of common knowledge, which
can be deﬁned as follows:
A particular fact F is said to be common knowledge between the play-
ers if each player knows F, each player knows that the others know F,
each player knows that every other player knows that each player knows
F, and so on.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
45
Overview of Solution Concepts
A simpler way of stating this is that the players gather around a table where F is
displayed, so that each player can verify that the others observe F and also can
verify the same about everyone else.
Putting the notion of common knowledge to work, the assumption that under-
lies conventional analysis of games—an assumption that I maintain throughout
this book—is that the game is common knowledge between the players. In other
words, each player knows the game being played, each player knows that the
others know this, each player knows that every other player knows that each
player knows the game being played, and so on. It is as if, before the game is
played, the players gather around a table on which the game has been depicted
(in extensive or normal form, whichever is relevant).
Keep in mind that common knowledge of the game does not imply that,
during the play of the game, players have common knowledge of where they
are in the extensive form. There will still generally be asymmetric information
between the players as represented by nontrivial information sets (that is, infor-
mation sets comprising multiple nodes).
OVERVIEW OF SOLUTION CONCEPTS
The rest of this book is dedicated to the analysis of rational behavior in games.
This endeavor separates roughly into two components that are interwoven
throughout the book. The ﬁrst component entails precisely deﬁning concepts of
rational behavior, which leads to theories of how games are or should be played.
The standard term for these theories is solution concepts. The second compo-
nent involves applying the concepts to study speciﬁc examples and applications.
Part II focuses on a deﬁnition of rationality that operates on the normal
form of a game. A player is thought to be rational if (1) through some cognitive
process, he forms a belief about the strategies of the others, and (2) given this
belief, he selects a strategy to maximize his expected payoff. The rationalizabil-
ity solution concept combines this deﬁnition of rationality with the assumption
that the game and the players’ rationality are common knowledge. The Nash
equilibrium solution concept adds the assumption that a social institution helps
to coordinate the players so that their beliefs and actual behavior are consistent.
Part III presents reﬁnements of the rationality concept that are sensitive to
individual information sets in the extensive-form representation of the game:
backward induction, subgame-perfect equilibrium, and a variant for games
with a negotiation component. Part IV expands the analysis to look at games
with exogenous random events (moves of nature), where the solution concepts
are called Bayesian rationalizability, Bayesian Nash equilibrium, and perfect
Bayesian equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
46
5: General Assumptions and Methodology
THE ISSUE OF REALISM
Rational decision making may require complex calculations and a sophisticated
understanding of the other players’ motivations. Standard game theory assumes
that the players are sophisticated and that they can handle whatever difﬁcult
calculations are needed for payoff maximization. But in reality, behavior some-
times diverges from this rationality ideal and it does so in systematic ways.
Sometimes real players do not have a shared understanding of the game they
are playing. Sometimes a cognitive bias warps how they develop beliefs about
each other. Sometimes real players are unable to perform all of the complicated
calculations that would be required to determine an optimal strategy. Sometimes
players do not fully understand each other’s rationality or lack thereof.
For these reasons, we do not expect the outcome of our theoretical models
to be perfect indicators of the real world. Thus, the relevant question is how
closely the theory approximates reality. Where the approximation is poor, there
might be an opportunity for the theory, in a normative sense, to play an instruc-
tive role in helping people to better understand the strategic settings they face
(and to select better strategies). Alternatively, in a descriptive sense, there may
be a need to enrich the theory to incorporate real bounds on rationality. Econ-
omists and game theorists have studied many theoretical enrichments in the
category of cognitive biases, bounded rationality, and bounds on the degree to
which players understand and internalize each other’s rationality. Although this
book concentrates on the conventional notion of full rationality, hints of how
one might depart from this notion can be found here and there.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
Analyzing Behavior
in Static Settings
P A R T I I
This part of the text introduces the basic tools for studying
rational behavior. The tools treat strategies and payoffs
as fundamental; that is, they address the normal-form
speciﬁcation of a game. Because extensive-form games can be
easily translated into the normal form, the analysis developed
here applies equally well to extensive-form representations.
The theory presented in this part is most appropriately
applied to games in which all of the players’ actions are
taken simultaneously and independently—so-called one-shot,
or static, games. Most of the examples covered in this part
are one-shot strategic settings. As noted earlier, normal and
extensive forms model these games equally well.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
49
DOMINANCE AND BEST RESPONSE 6
T
his chapter covers the two most basic concepts in the theory of strategic
interaction: dominance and best response. These concepts form the founda-
tion of most theories of rational behavior, so it is important to understand them
well.1
DOMINANCE
Examine the game shown in Figure 6.1(a), and suppose that you are player 1.
Regardless of your decision-making process, player 2 selects a strategy inde-
pendently of your choice. She will pick either L or R, and you cannot affect
which she will choose. Of course, player 2 may base her choice on an assess-
ment of what strategy you are likely to pick, but this is a matter of reason in the
mind of player 2. Her decision-making process is independent of yours.2 A good
way of thinking about this is to imagine that player 2 has already chosen her
strategy but you have not observed it. You must select your own strategy.
In the game shown in Figure 6.1(a), strategy U has an interesting property.
Regardless of player 2’s choice, U gives you a strictly higher payoff than does
D. If player 2 plays L, then you obtain 2 from playing U and 1 from playing
D. Obviously, U is better in this case. Furthermore, if player 2 selects R, then
you obtain 5 by playing U and 4 by playing D. Again, U is better. Technically,
we say that strategy D is dominated by strategy U, and thus D should never be
played by a rational player 1. Note that neither of player 2’s strategies is domi-
nated. Strategy L is better than R if player 1 selects U, but the reverse is true if
player 1 selects D.
1These concepts were introduced by John Nash in “Non-Cooperative Games,” Annals of Mathematics 54
(1951): 286–295; building from J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behav-
ior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1944).
2There are some wacky theories of decision making that do not assume that players’ decision-making
processes are independent. To be precise, the wacky theories presume some metaphysical correlation between
one’s own decision and the decisions of others. For example, player 2 may think, “If I am the kind of person
who would select R, then the world must be a kind place and, in such a world, there are only people who select
D as player 1.” We will not study such theories.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
50
6: Dominance and Best Response
Take another example, the game depicted in Figure 6.1(b). In this game,
player 1’s strategy D is dominated by strategy M. Regardless of what player 2
does, M yields a higher payoff for player 1 than does D. Strategy U is not domi-
nated by M, however, because, if player 2 were to play L, then U would give
player 1 a higher payoff than would M.
Finally, examine the game shown in Figure 6.1(c). This game has a more
complicated dominance relation. Note that for player 1 no pure strategy is domi-
nated by another pure strategy. Obviously, neither U nor M dominates the other,
and D does not dominate these strategies. In addition, neither U nor M domi-
nates D. For instance, although U is better than D when player 2 selects L, D
performs better than U when player 2 selects R. However, a mixed strategy
dominates D. Consider player 1’s mixed strategy of selecting U with probability
1>2, M with probability 1>2, and D with probability zero. We represent this
mixed strategy as (1>2, 1>2, 0). If player 2 selects L, then this mixed strategy
yields an expected payoff of 2 to player 1; that is,
2 = 4(1>2) + 0(1>2) + 1(0).
Player 1 does worse by playing D. The same is true when player 2 selects R.
Therefore, strategy D is dominated by the mixed strategy (1>2, 1>2, 0).
The formal deﬁnition of dominance is as follows:
A pure strategy si of player i is dominated if there is a strategy (pure
or mixed) si ∈Si such that ui
 (si, s−i) > ui
 (si, s−i), for all strategy
proﬁles s−i ∈S−i of the other players.
The best method for checking whether a strategy is dominated is ﬁrst to decide
whether it is dominated by another pure strategy. This procedure can be easily
FIGURE 6.1
Examples of dominance.
1
2
L
(a)
(b)
(c)
U
D
2, 3
1, 0
5, 0
4, 3
R
1
2
1
2
L
U
M
D
U
M
D
8, 3
4, 2
0, 4
1, 5
4, 4
5, 3
3, 7
0, 1
2, 0
4, 1
0, 0
0, 2
4, 0
1, 3
1, 2
C
R
L
R

--- Sayfa 66 ---
51
Dominance
performed if the game is represented as a matrix. For example, to check if one
of player 1’s strategies dominates another, just scan across the two rows of the
payoff matrix, column by column. You do not have to compare the payoffs of
player 1 across columns. If the payoff in one row is greater than the payoff in
another, and this is true for all columns, then the former strategy dominates the
latter. If a strategy is not dominated by another pure strategy, you then must
determine whether it is dominated by a mixed strategy.
Checking for dominance can be tricky where mixed strategies are concerned,
but a few guidelines will help. First, note that there are many different mixed
strategies to try. For example, in the game shown in Figure 6.1(c), (1>2, 1>2, 0),
(3>5, 2>5, 0), (2>5, 3>5, 0), and (1>3, 1>3, 1>3) are four of the inﬁnite number
of mixed strategies for player 1. In fact, all four dominate strategy D. (Check
this yourself for practice.) Second, when you are looking for a mixed strategy
that dominates a pure strategy, look for alternating patterns of large and small
numbers in the payoff matrix. This will help you ﬁnd strategies that may be
assigned positive probability by a dominating mixed strategy. Third, to demon-
strate that a strategy is dominated, remember that you need to ﬁnd only one
strategy (pure or mixed) that dominates it. If, for example, you ﬁnd that strategy
X is dominated by pure strategy Y, your job is done; you do not need to check
for mixed-strategy dominance. Finally, make sure that you check the correct
payoff numbers. When evaluating the strategies of player i, you must look at
player i ’s payoffs and no others.
An important component of the deﬁnition of dominance is the “strict” inequal-
ity. That is, in mathematical terms, we have the expression ui
 (si, s−i
 ) > ui
 (si, s−i
 )
rather than ui
 (si, s−i
 ) Ú ui
 (si, s−i
 ). Thus, for one strategy to dominate another,
the former must deliver strictly more than does the latter. One strategy does
not dominate another if they yield the same payoff against some strategy of the
other players. As an example, take the game shown in Figure 6.1(b). We have
already seen that D is dominated by M for player 1. Examine player 2’s strate-
gies and payoffs. Is R dominated by C? The answer is “no.” For player 2, C
yields a strictly higher payoff than does R against strategies M and D of player
1. However, against U, these strategies yield the same payoff. Because of this
“tie,” C does not dominate R. To emphasize the strict inequality in the deﬁni-
tion, we sometimes use the expression “strict dominance.”3
The most simple and compelling theory of behavior is that players do not
play dominated strategies. As noted earlier, playing a dominated strategy is not
rational in the sense that one’s payoff can be increased by using another strategy,
regardless of what the other players do in the game.
3By associating the term “dominance” with the strict inequality condition, I am utilizing John Nash’s original
terminology, which is common. But some people insist on saying “strict dominance.”

--- Sayfa 67 ---
52
6: Dominance and Best Response
THE FIRST STRATEGIC TENSION AND THE PRISONERS’ DILEMMA
Before enriching the theory, let’s use the concept of dominance to identify ratio-
nal play in a simple application. Consider the prisoners’ dilemma game pictured
in Figure 3.4 on page 29. For both players, strategy C is dominated by strategy
D. We would therefore predict that neither player would select C. However, both
players would be better off if they each selected C.
The prisoners’ dilemma illustrates one of the major tensions in strategic
settings: the clash between individual and group interests. The players realize
that they are jointly better off if they each select C rather than D. However, each
has the individual incentive to defect by choosing D. Because the players select
their strategies simultaneously and independently, individual incentives win.
One can even imagine the players discussing at length the virtues of the (C, C)
strategy proﬁle, and they might even reach an oral agreement to play in accord
with that proﬁle. But when the players go their separate ways and submit their
strategies individually, neither has the incentive to follow through on the agree-
ment. Strong individual incentives can lead to group loss.
While we’re on the subject of conﬂicting interests, brieﬂy consider two
related issues. First, remember the meaning of payoff numbers. We take them
to be utilities, as used generally in economics. As utilities, these numbers iden-
tify the players’ preferences. They do not necessarily signify proﬁt or money.
For example, all we mean by the payoff numbers 2 and 5 is that the player in
question prefers the outcome yielding the payoff 5 to the outcome yielding the
payoff 2.4
In the prisoners’ dilemma, a player might be deterred from selecting D
by the threat of his partner chastising him after play occurs. Certainly such
considerations enter the minds of decision makers. As game theorists, we must
insist that all such considerations be manifest in the payoffs. Suppose we have a
setting like that portrayed by the prisoners’ dilemma, except that the payoffs are
in dollar terms. Further suppose that player 1 prefers not to play D for fear of
retribution by his opponent after the game ends. If we were to draw the “actual”
matrix describing this game, player 1’s payoffs from selecting D should be less
than those from selecting C (against each of player 2’s strategies). The actual
game, in this case, is not a prisoners’ dilemma. Indeed, if retribution were possi-
ble after the players choose between C and D, then we ought to model the option
for retribution formally as a part of the game.5
4Remember that we are also assuming that the utility numbers represent preferences over random outcomes
via expected payoff calculations.
5Remember that modeling strategic situations by using game theory is an art. The best models capture the
essence of the strategic environment without bowing so much to reality as to make analysis impossible.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
53
The Concept of Efficiency
The second issue to recognize is that, in the real world, the players some-
times have the opportunity to form legally binding contracts. For example, in
a prisoners’ dilemma-like situation, the players may have the option of writ-
ing a contract that binds them to select strategy C. As noted in the preceding
paragraph, if such options are a critical part of the strategic setting, we should
include them in our models. Theorists do in fact pursue this angle; we shall pick
up the topic in Chapter 13. At this point, we can at least identify where binding
contracts might be most valuable. Speciﬁcally, they are helpful when individual
incentives interfere with group incentives.
The prisoners’ dilemma is a widely discussed game and has proved to be a
source of insight in the ﬁelds of economics, sociology, political science, inter-
national relations, and philosophy. In economics, it is ubiquitous. Settings in
which workers interact to produce in a ﬁrm often have the same ﬂavor, although
the models are richer and more complicated. In the same vein are some models
of international trade. So, too, are settings of industrial organization. You will
recognize the Cournot model (analyzed later in Chapter 10) as having the basic
prisoners’ dilemma form. Firms have an individual incentive to “overproduce,”
but proﬁts are low when all ﬁrms do so. When ﬁrms compete by selecting prices,
the same kind of tension surfaces. Check your understanding by looking again
at the game shown in Figure 2.7(b) on page 16, which is just another prisoners’
dilemma.
THE CONCEPT OF EFFICIENCY
The ﬁrst strategic tension relates to the economic concept of efﬁciency, which is
an important welfare criterion by which to judge behavior in a game. Suppose
we wish to compare the outcomes induced by two strategy proﬁles, s and s9.
We say that s is more efﬁcient than s9 if all of the players prefer the outcome
of s to the outcome of s9 and if the preference is strict for at least one player. In
mathematical terms, s is more efﬁcient than s9 if ui
 (s) Ú ui
 (s9) for each player i
and if the inequality is strict for at least one player.6
A strategy proﬁle s is called efﬁcient if there is no other strategy proﬁle
that is more efﬁcient; that is, there is no other strategy proﬁle s9 such that
ui
 (s9) Ú ui
 (s) for every player i and uj
 (s9) > uj
 (s) for some player j. The
expression Pareto efﬁcient is used to mean the same thing. Note that, in
the prisoners’ dilemma, (C, C) is more efﬁcient than (D, D). Furthermore,
6In this case, we can also say that strategy s9 is Pareto dominated, invoking the name of Wilfredo Pareto (who
ﬁrst introduced this concept of efﬁciency). I shall avoid using the expression “Pareto dominated” because I do
not want it to be confused with the individual dominance criterion deﬁned in this chapter.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
54
6: Dominance and Best Response
(C, C), (C, D), and (D, C) are all efﬁcient strategy proﬁles. In the game pictured
in Figure 6.1(c), (D, R) is more efﬁcient than both (M, L) and (U, R). In this
game, (U, L) and (D, L) are the only efﬁcient strategy proﬁles.
BEST RESPONSE
It seems reasonable that rational people refrain from using dominated strate-
gies. Dominance is a good descriptive and prescriptive concept. But it is just the
beginning of our development of a theory of behavior. Indeed, in most games,
players have more than one undominated strategy. Take, as an example, some of
the simple games in Figure 3.4. Matching pennies, the battle of the sexes, and
the coordination games have no dominated strategies, so one cannot predict how
people should or will play these games on the basis of the dominance criterion.
We must move on to explore the process by which players actually select their
strategies, at least among those that are not dominated.
Rational folks think about the actions that the other players might take; that
is, people form beliefs about one another’s behavior. In games, it is wise to form
an opinion about the other players’ behavior before deciding your own strategy.
For example, if you were to play the coordination game pictured in Figure 3.4
and you thought that the other player would deﬁnitely play strategy B, it would
be prudent for you to play B as well. If you thought he would select A, then you
should follow suit. To maximize the payoff that you expect to obtain—which
we assume is the mark of rational behavior—you should select the strategy that
yields the greatest expected payoff against your belief. Such a strategy is called
a best response (or best reply). Formally,
Suppose player i has a belief u−i ∈S−i about the strategies played
by the other players. Player i ’s strategy si ∈Si is a best response if
ui
 (si, u−i
 ) Ú ui
 (s=
i, u−i
 ) for every s=
i ∈Si.
As the example described next shows, there may be more than one best response
to a given belief. It is not difﬁcult to show that, in a ﬁnite game, every belief has
at least one best response. For any belief u−i of player i, we denote the set of best
responses by BRi
 (u−i
 ).
As an example, take the game in Figure 6.2. Suppose player 1, on delibera-
tion, believes with probability 1>3 that player 2 will play L, with probability
1>2 that player 2 will play C, and with probability 1>6 that player 2 will play R.
Recall that we can write this belief as (1>3, 1>2, 1>6). Then if player 1 selects
strategy U, he expects a payoff of
(1>3)2 + (1>2)0 + (1>6)4 = 8>6.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
55
Best Response
If he plays M, he expects
(1>3)3 + (1>2)0 + (1>6)1 = 7>6.
If he plays D, he obtains
(1>3)1 + (1>2)3 + (1>6)2 = 13>6.
Thus, his best response is strategy D, the strategy that yields the greatest expected
payoff given his belief. Strategy D is his only best response. We thus have
BR1
 (1>3, 1>2, 1>6) = {D}.
Remember that, because BRi is a set of strategies, we enclose its elements in
brackets, even if it has only one element.7
To continue with the game of Figure 6.2, suppose that player 2 has the belief
(1>2, 1>4, 1>4) regarding the strategy that player 1 employs. That is, player 2
believes with probability 1>2 that player 1 will select U and that player 1’s other
two strategies are equally likely. Player 2 then expects
(1>2)6 + (1>4)3 + (1>4)1 = 4
from playing L. He expects
(1>2)4 + (1>4)0 + (1>4)5 = 13>4
from playing C. He expects
(1>2)4 + (1>4)5 + (1>4)3 = 4
from playing R. With this belief, player 2 has two best responses, strategies L
and R. Thus,
BR2
 (1>2, 1>4, 1>4) = {L, R}.
7We will depart from this rule for a few examples in which it is useful to think of BRi as a function from strate-
gies to strategies.
FIGURE 6.2
An example of best response.
1
2
L
U
M
D
2, 6
3, 3
0, 4
0, 0
4, 4
1, 5
1, 1
3, 5
2, 3
C
R

--- Sayfa 71 ---
56
6: Dominance and Best Response
Understand that playing a best response to one’s belief about the moves
of others is not in itself a strategic act. One can think of it as merely a compu-
tational exercise associated with rationality. Forming one’s belief is the more
important component of strategy. For example, suppose you are to play the
game pictured in Figure 6.3 as player 2 and you are discussing your intentions
with a friend. You might explain to your friend that, on the basis of your knowl-
edge of player 1, you think that player 1 will certainly choose strategy B in the
game. Therefore you plan to select B as well. Upset with your statement, he
criticizes you for “giving in.” You should demand the best outcome for yourself
by playing A, he asserts. Should you follow the advice of your friend?
In fact, you should not. Tell your friend he is just plain crazy, moonstruck
perhaps. Your actual choice in the game has no direct effect on the other
player’s thought process or action. Remember, players select their strategies
simultaneously and independently. You cannot directly inﬂuence how the other
player will act in a game such as this one. The best you can do is to form a well-
reasoned opinion about what strategy he will take and then play a best response
to this belief. The rules of the game do not allow you to signal your intentions
to the other player by your choice of strategy.8 So perform whatever mental
gymnastics are necessary for you to settle on a belief about player 1’s behavior
and then play a best response. Of course, if your friend has information about
player 1’s tendencies, then you might incorporate your friend’s information
into your belief; but, when your belief has been set, then a best response is in
order. Incidentally, don’t be too hard on your friend; he is just trying to lend
some support.
I am trying to convince you that the most substantive component of behavior
is the formation of beliefs. Indeed, herein lies the real science of game theory.
Success in games often hinges on whether you understand your opponent better
than he understands you. We often speak of someone “outfoxing” others, after
all. In fact, beliefs are subject to scientiﬁc study as well. The bulk of our work
in the remainder of this text deals with determining what beliefs are rational in
games. With the important concepts of dominance and best response under our
8If such a signal were physically possible, it would have to be formally included in the speciﬁcation of the
game (yielding a game that is different from that pictured in Figure 6.3).
FIGURE 6.3
A battle of the sexes game.
1
2
A
A
B
1, 3
0, 0
0, 0
3, 1
B

--- Sayfa 72 ---
57
Dominance and Best Response Compared
belts, we can continue our study of strategic behavior by placing the beliefs of
players at the center of attention. Before doing so, however, it is important to
understand the relation between dominance and best response.
DOMINANCE AND BEST RESPONSE COMPARED
There is a precise relation between dominance and best response, the latter of
which underpins the theories of behavior to come. For a given game, let UDi be
the set of strategies for player i that are not strictly dominated. Let Bi be the set
of strategies for player i that are best responses, over all of the possible beliefs
of player i. Mathematically,
Bi = {sithere is a belief u−i ∈S−i such that si ∈BRi
 (u−i
 )}.
That is, if a strategy si is a best response to some possible belief of player i,
then si is contained in Bi . As heretofore noted, the notion of best response will
be of primary importance. Unfortunately, determining the set Bi is sometimes a
greater chore than determining UDi . Fortunately, the two sets are closely related.
To build your intuition, examine the game in Figure 6.4. Note ﬁrst that R
is dominated for player 2.9 Thus, UD2 = {L} in this game. Also note that strat-
egy R can never be a best response for player 2, because L yields a strictly
higher payoff regardless of what player 1 does. In other words, for any belief of
player 2 about player 1’s behavior, player 2’s only best response is to select L.
Therefore B2 = {L}. Obviously, B2 = UD2 and, for this game, dominance and
best response yield the same conclusion about rational behavior for player 2.
9Remember that when evaluating player 2’s strategies you should look at player 2’s payoffs.
1
2
U
M
D
6, 3
2, 1
0, 1
3
6
M
U
D
1
p
u1
5, 0
3, 2
3, 1
L
(p)
(1 – p)
R
FIGURE 6.4
Dominance and best response.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
58
6: Dominance and Best Response
To continue with the example, consider player 1’s strategies. Obviously
neither U nor M is dominated. Furthermore, strategy D is dominated by neither
U nor M. But is D dominated by a mixed strategy? The answer is “yes”; D is
dominated by the mixed strategy that puts probability 1>3 on U, 2>3 on M, and
0 on D.10 Thus the set of undominated strategies for player 1 is UD1 = {U, M}.
To ﬁnd the set of best responses, examine the diagram at the right of the matrix
in Figure 6.4, where the expected payoffs of player 1’s three pure strategies
are graphed as functions of the probability that player 1 believes player 2 will
select L. That is, with player 1’s belief (p, 1 −p), the upward sloping line is
6p + 0(1 −p), the expected payoff of playing strategy U. The downward slop-
ing line, 2p + 5(1 −p), is the expected payoff from selecting M, and the ﬂat
line is the payoff from choosing D. There are values of p making U and M best
responses, but for no value of p is D a best response. Thus B1 = {U, M} and we
have B1 = UD1 in this game.
You may have concluded by now that strategies are best responses if and
only if they are not strictly dominated. For two-player games, this is true.11
Result: In a ﬁnite two-player game, B1 = UD1 and B2 = UD2.
Appendix B provides more details on this result and its generalization to
games with more than two players, where the relation between dominance and
best response is a bit more subtle and requires a better understanding of the
kinds of beliefs that players may hold. The key to the analysis has to do with
whether a given player’s belief is thought to exhibit correlation between the
strategies of this player’s multiple opponents. One can deﬁne Bi so that corre-
lated conjectures are not allowed. Then one can let Bc
i be the version in which
correlation is allowed. The general result is
Result:  For any ﬁnite game, Bi ⊂UDi and Bc
i = UDi for i = 1, 2,c, n.
That is, if one imagines that players hold only uncorrelated beliefs, then strictly
dominated strategies are never best responses. If players are thought to possi-
bly hold correlated beliefs, then a strategy is undominated if and only if it is
a best response to some belief. Thus, to ﬁnd the set of strategies that a player
10The mixed strategy (1>2, 1>2, 0) does not dominate D, demonstrating that you sometimes have to search a
bit harder to ﬁnd a dominance relation. Of course, to show that D is dominated, you need to ﬁnd only one pure
or mixed strategy that does the job.
11The results reported here are from the work of D. Pearce, “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Prob-
lem of Perfection,” Econometrica 52 (1984): 1029–1050. Closely related results are in E. van Damme, Reﬁne-
ments of the Nash Equilibrium Concept (Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1983).

--- Sayfa 74 ---
59
Dominance and Best Response Compared
may adopt as a rational response to his belief, you can simply ﬁnd the set of
undominated strategies. Because correlation in a player’s belief is not an issue
when the player has just one opponent, the preceding result is a special case of
this result. I provide a partial proof of the result in Appendix B, which techni-
cally oriented readers having more than one competitor or more than one friend
should deﬁnitely read.
The relation between dominance and best response comes in handy when
calculating the sets Bi and UDi. For two-player matrix games, where Bi = UDi,
you can most easily compute this set by using the following procedure.
Procedure for calculating Bi UDi
 :
1. Look for strategies that are best responses to the simplest beliefs—those
beliefs that put all probability on just one of the other player’s strategies.
These best responses are obviously in the set Bi so they are also in UDi.
2. Look for strategies that are dominated by other pure strategies; these domi-
nated strategies are not in UDi and thus they are also not in Bi.
3. Test each remaining strategy to see if it is dominated by a mixed strategy.
This ﬁnal step is the most difﬁcult, but if you are lucky, then you will rarely
have to perform it.
For an illustration of the procedure, consider the game in Figure 6.5. Let us
calculate the set B1 = UD1. The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the strategies that are best
responses to the simplest beliefs. Note that, against L player 1’s best response
is Y. Against R, X is the best response. Thus, we know that X ∈B1 and Y ∈B1.
The second step is to check whether any strategy is dominated by another pure
strategy. You can quickly see that W is dominated by Z. Therefore, we know
that W F B1.
One question remains: Is strategy Z an element of B1? This question is
answered by the third step of the procedure. Note that if a mixed strategy were
FIGURE 6.5
The procedure for calculating
B1 and UD1 .
1
2
W
X
Y
Z
2, 4
2, 0
2, 5
7, 1
6, 5
1, 2
5, 6
3, 0
L
R
(3/5)
(2/5)
(p)
(1 – p)

--- Sayfa 75 ---
60
6: Dominance and Best Response
to dominate Z, then this strategy would be a mixture of X and Y. Let us assume
that X is played with probability p and Y is played with probability 1 −p. In
order for this mixed strategy to dominate Z, it must deliver a strictly higher
expected payoff for player 1 than does Z. Against player 2’s strategy L, this
comparison requires
2p + 6(1 −p) > 5.
Against R, it must be that
7p + 1(1 −p) > 3.
The ﬁrst inequality simpliﬁes to p < 1>4, whereas the second inequality simpli-
ﬁes to p > 1>3. Because there is no value of p that simultaneously satisﬁes
p < 1>4 and p > 1>3, we know that Z is not dominated. Therefore, Z ∈B1. In
fact, you can verify that Z is a best response to the belief u2 = (3>5, 2>5).
WEAK DOMINANCE
Recall that a key aspect of the dominance deﬁnition is the strict inequal-
ity, so that a mixed strategy si is said to dominate a pure strategy si if and only
if ui (si, s−i
 ) > u i (si, s−i
 ) for all s−i ∈S−i. One can also consider a version of
dominance based on a weaker condition: We say that mixed strategy si weakly
dominates pure strategy si if ui
 (si, s−i
 ) Ú ui
 (si, s−i
 ) for all s−i ∈S−i and
ui
 (si, s=
−i
 ) > ui
 (si, s=
−i
 ) for at least one strategy s=
−i ∈S−i of the other players. In
other words, si performs at least as well as does strategy si , and it performs strictly
better against at least one way in which the other players may play the game.
Figure 6.6 provides an illustration of weak dominance. In the game pictured,
if player 1 were to select Y, then player 2’s strategy M delivers a strictly higher
payoff than does L. If player 1 selects X, then strategies L and M yield the
same payoff for player 2. Thus, player 2 always weakly prefers M to L, and she
strictly prefers M in the event that player 1 picks Y. This means that M weakly
dominates L.
In relation to best-response behavior, weak dominance embodies a form
of cautiousness, as though the players cannot be too sure about each other’s
FIGURE 6.6
Example of weak dominance.
L
M
X
Y
3, 5
3, 5
7, 0
1, 1
2
1

--- Sayfa 76 ---
61
Guided Exercise
strategies. In the example of Figure 6.6, player 2 might reasonably select L if
she is certain that player 1 will choose X. On the other hand, if she entertains the
slightest doubt—putting any small, strictly positive probability on Y—then M is
her only best response. The example suggests a general relation between weak
dominance and best responses to “cautious” beliefs. To make this formal, for
any game let WUDi be the set of strategies for player i that are not weakly domi-
nated. Call a belief u−i   fully mixed if u−i
 (s−i
 ) > 0 for all s−i ∈S−i. This simply
means that u−i puts positive probability on every strategy proﬁle of the other
players. Then let Bcf
i be the set of strategies for player i that are best responses to
fully mixed beliefs. In the superscript, c denotes that correlated conjectures are
allowed, and f denotes that beliefs are fully mixed.
Result:  For any ﬁnite game, Bcf
i = WUDi for each player i = 1, 2,c, n.
Although weak dominance is handy in some games, it is not the best foun-
dation for a theory of rational behavior. There are two reasons why weak domi-
nance can be problematic. First, it may not be appropriate to assume that the
players hold fully mixed beliefs. It can then be rational for a player to select
a weakly dominated strategy as a best response. Second, weak dominance
introduces some thorny technical issues that complicate formation of a general
theory of behavior. I’ll allude to one of these issues later.
We shall concentrate on the concept of dominance (with the strict inequality)
for the vast majority of examples and applications. Incidentally, I use the terms
“dominance” and “strict dominance” interchangeably. Apart from Exercise 10
at the end of this chapter, this is the last you will hear of weak dominance until
it is put to use in an auction example in Chapter 27.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Suppose that two people decide to form a partnership ﬁrm. The reve-
nue of the ﬁrm depends on the amount of effort expended on the job by each
person and is given by:
r (e1, e2) = a1
 e1 + a2
 e2,
where e1 is the effort level of person 1 and e2 is the effort level of person 2.
The numbers a1 and a2 are positive constants. The contract that was signed
by the partners stipulates that person 1 receives a fraction t (between 0 and
1) of the ﬁrm’s revenue, and person 2 receives a 1 −t fraction. That is,
person 1 receives the amount tr (e1, e2), and person 2 receives (1 −t)r (e1, e2).
Each person dislikes effort, which is measured by a personal cost of e2
1 for
person 1 and e2
2 for person 2. Person i ’s utility in this endeavor is the amount
of revenue that this person receives, minus the effort cost e2
i . The effort

--- Sayfa 77 ---
62
6: Dominance and Best Response
levels (assumed nonnegative) are chosen by the people simultaneously and
independently.
(a)  Deﬁne the normal form of this game (by describing the strategy spaces and
payoff functions).
(b)  Using dominance, compute the strategies that the players rationally select
(as a function of t, a1 and a2 ).
(c)  Suppose that you could set t before the players interact. How would you set
t to maximize the revenue of the ﬁrm?
Solution:
(a)  The game has two players. Each player selects an effort level, which is
greater than or equal to zero. Thus, Si = [0, ) for i = 1, 2. As described,
each player’s payoff is the amount of revenue he receives, minus his effort
cost. Thus, the payoff functions are
u1(e1, e2) = t [a1
 e1 + a2
 e2] −e2
1
and
u2(e1, e2) = (1 −t)[a1
 e1 + a2
 e2] −e2
2.
(b)  In this game, each player has a strategy that dominates all others. To see
this, observe how player 1’s payoff changes as e1 is varied. Taking the deriv-
ative of u1 with respect to e1 , we get ta1 −2e1. Setting this equal to zero
and solving for e1 reveals that player 1 maximizes his payoff by selecting
e*1 = ta1>2. Similar analysis for player 2 yields e*2 = (1 −t) a2
 >2. Note that
although each player’s payoff depends on the strategy of the other player, a
player’s optimal strategy does not depend on the other’s strategy. The set of
undominated strategies is therefore
UD1 = {ta1
 >2}
and  UD2 = {(1 −t) a2
  >2}.
(c)  Because they depend on a1, a2, and t, let us write the optimal strategies e*1 and
e*2 as functions of these parameters. The revenue of the ﬁrm is then given by
a1
 e*1
 (a1, a2, t) + a2
 e*2
 (a1, a2, t).
 Plugging in the values e*1 and e*2 from part (b), the revenue is
a1 # ta1
2 + a2 # (1 −t)a2
2
= t a2
1
2 + (1 −t) a2
2
2 .

--- Sayfa 78 ---
63
Exercises
 Note that the objective function is linear in t. Thus, maximization occurs
at a “corner,” where either t = 0 or t = 1. If a1 > a2, then it is best to set
t = 1; otherwise, it is best to set t = 0.

Incidentally, one can also consider the problem of maximizing the ﬁrm’s
revenue minus the partners’ effort costs. Then the problem is to maximize
a1 # ta1
2 + a2 # (1 −t)a2
2
−a ta1
2 b
2
−a (1 −t)a2
2
b
2
 and, using calculus, the solution is to set t = a2
1>(a2
1 + a2
2).
EXERCISES
1. Determine which strategies are dominated in the following normal-form games.
1
2
L
A
B
3, 3
4, 1
2, 0
8, –1
R
1
2
L
U
M
D
5, 9
3, 2
0, 1
0, 9
4, 3
1, 1
2, 8
0, 1
8, 4
C
R
1
2
L
U
D
1, 1
0, 0
0, 0
5, 5
R
1
2
W
U
M
D
3, 6
2, 6
4, 10
3, 3
5, 0
4, 10
1, 5
2, 9
3, 0
0, 8
1, 1
4, 6
X
Y
Z
(b)
(c)
(a)
(d)
2. For the game in Exercise 1 of Chapter 4, determine the following sets of
best responses.
(a) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>3, 1>3, 1>3)
(b) BR2
 (u1
 ) for u1 = (0, 1>3, 2>3)
(c) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (5>9, 4>9, 0)
(d) BR2
 (u1
 ) for u1 = (1>3, 1>6, 1>2)

--- Sayfa 79 ---
64
6: Dominance and Best Response
3. Consider a version of the Cournot doupoly game (described in earlier exer-
cises), where ﬁrms 1 and 2 simultaneously and independently select quanti-
ties to produce in a market. The quantity selected by ﬁrm i is denoted qi and
must be greater than or equal to zero, for i = 1, 2. The market price is given
by p = 100 −2q1 −2q2. Suppose that each ﬁrm produces at a cost of 20
per unit. Further, assume that each ﬁrm’s payoff is deﬁned as its proﬁt. Is it
ever a best response for player 1 to choose q1 = 25? Suppose that player 1
has the belief that player 2 is equally likely to select each of the quantities
6, 11, and 13. What is player 1’s best response?
4. For the game of Figure 6.2, determine the following best-response sets.
(a) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>6, 1>3, 1>2)
(b) BR2
 (u1
 ) for u1 = (1>6, 1>3, 1>2)
(c) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>4, 1>8, 5>8)
(d) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>3, 1>3, 1>3)
(e) BR2
 (u1
 ) for u1 = (1>2, 1>2, 0)
5. Represent in the normal form the rock–paper–scissors game (see Exercise
4 of Chapter 2 to refresh your memory) and determine the following best-
response sets.
(a) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1, 0, 0)
(b) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>6, 1>3, 1>2)
(c) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>2, 1>4, 1>4)
(d) BR1
 (u2
 ) for u2 = (1>3, 1>3, 1>3)
6. In the game pictured here, is it ever rational for player 1 to select strategy
C? Why?
0, 3
3, 0
0, 3
3, 0
A
X
X
1
2
B
C
1, 1
Y
Y

--- Sayfa 80 ---
65
Exercises
7. In the normal-form game pictured below, is player 1’s strategy M domi-
nated? If so, describe a strategy that dominates it. If not, describe a belief to
which M is a best response.
1
2
K
L
M
9, 2
1, 0
1, 0
6, 1
3, 2
4, 2
X
Y
8. For the Cournot game described in Exercise 3, calculate UD1 .
9. Two medieval city-states, Simancas and Toro, are located near each other.
Each city-state is controlled by a totalitarian prince, so each can be repre-
sented as a single player. Call the prince of Simancas player 1, and let the
prince of Toro be called player 2. The land surrounding each city-state can
be divided among two uses: forested land for deer hunting, and cleared land
for growing wheat. Each city-state has ﬁve units of land. At the outset, all
of the land is forested.

Each city-state i (where i = 1, 2) must make two decisions: how much
land to clear for growing wheat, gi ∈[0, 5], and how many hounds to raise
for hunting deer, hi ∈[0, ). All decisions are made simultaneously.

Payoffs depend on the total quantity of forested land in both city-states
(deer roam freely across borders) and the number of hounds raised in both
city-states. The deer harvest for city-state i is increasing in its own number
of hounds but decreasing in the other city-state’s number of hounds. Specif-
ically, the deer harvest in city-state i is max{0, 2hi −hj
 }(10 −gi −gj
 ),
where j denotes the other city-state. Here, the “maximum” operator is
needed to ensure that the harvest is never negative. The wheat-growing
results for each city-state, on the other hand, depend only on its own quan-
tity of cleared land. Speciﬁcally, the wheat harvest in city-state i is 6gi.
Raising hounds and clearing land are both costly. Suppose the cost to city-
state i is g2
i + 2h2
i . Summing up, the payoff for city-state 1 is
u1
 (g1, h1, g2, h2
 ) = max{0, 2h1 −h2
 }(10 −g1 −g2
 ) + 6g1 −g2
1 −2h2
1,
and the payoff for city-state 2 is
u2
 (g1, h1, g2, h2
 ) = max{0, 2h2 −h1
 }(10 −g2 −g1
 ) + 6g2 −g2
2 −2h2
2.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
66
6: Dominance and Best Response
(a) Show that the strategy (gi, hi
 ) = (0, 0) is dominated for each city-state i.
(b) Show that any strategy with hi > 5 is dominated for each city-state i.
(c) Show that (g1, h1
 ) = (g2, h2
 ) = (1, 4) is not efﬁcient.
10. Consider the game pictured here:
Offer H
1
M
0, 0
0, 2
AH
2
RH
0, 0
1, 1
AM
2
RM
0, 0
2, 0
AL
2
RL
L
In this simpliﬁed “ultimatum-offer” bargaining game, the players negoti-
ate over how to divide two dollars. Player 1 chooses whether to offer all of
the money (action H), half of the money (M), or none of the money (L) to
player 2. Player 2 observes the offer and then decides whether to accept it.
If the offer is rejected, then the players both get zero. For this game, can you
ﬁnd any strategies that are weakly dominated but not dominated?

--- Sayfa 82 ---
67
RATIONALIZABILITY AND
ITERATED DOMINANCE 7
T
he concepts of dominance and best response are the basis of theories of
rational behavior. We must recognize, however, that rational behavior may
consist of more than avoiding dominated strategies. Indeed, sophisticated play-
ers understand the fundamental notion of a game—that the actions of one player
may affect the payoff of another—and can shrewdly estimate the other players’
actions by putting themselves in the others’ shoes. In other words, mind games
can be the art of game playing. At this point, we must take our analysis to an-
other level. Please continue to breathe normally.
Suppose you are player 1 in the game pictured in Figure 7.1. You will notice
that neither of your strategies is dominated. Therefore, you can rationally play
either A or B, depending on your belief about the action of your opponent. Let
us perform the mathematics behind this statement. Let p denote the probability
that you think the opponent will play X, and let q be the probability that you
think she will play Y. Obviously, 1 −p −q is the probability that she will play
strategy Z, and these numbers make sense only if p Ú 0, q Ú 0, and p + q … 1.
Given your belief, your expected payoff from playing A is
3p + 0q + 0(1 −p −q) = 3p.
Your expected payoff from playing B is
0p + 3q + 1(1 −p −q) = 1 −p + 2q.
Thus, your best response is to play A if 3p > 1 −p + 2q (which simpliﬁes to
4p > 1 + 2q) and to play B if 4p < 1 + 2q. Both A and B are best responses
if 4p = 1 + 2q.
FIGURE 7.1
Playing mind games.
X
Y
Z
A
B
3, 3
0, 5
0, 0
3, 1
0, 4
1, 2
2
1

--- Sayfa 83 ---
68
7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
Are we ﬁnished with the analysis? Not by a long shot. Suppose it is common
knowledge between you and your opponent that both of you are rational and
understand exactly the game that is being played. That is, you and she both
know the matrix that describes the game; she knows that you know this; you
know that she knows this; she knows that you know that she knows this; and so
forth.1 Can you rationalize playing strategy A against a rational opponent?
To answer this question, ﬁrst put yourself in the position of player 2. Her
strategy X is strictly dominated by Y. Therefore, she will not play X; there is no
belief that she could have about your strategy that would cause her to play X.
Knowing this, you should assign zero probability to her strategy X (your belief
should have p = 0).
In fact, you might as well strike the column of the matrix corresponding to
strategy X, as demonstrated in Figure 7.2(a). Striking X leads to a new “game”
in which you choose between A and B and your opponent chooses between Y
and Z. In this reduced game, your strategy A is strictly dominated by B. That
is, knowing that your opponent will not play X, your only rational strategy is to
play B. To see this in terms of beliefs, note that if p = 0, it is not possible that
4p Ú 1 + 2q and so, regardless of your belief about whether your opponent will
play Y or Z, the only best response is to play B. Thus, as in Figure 7.2(b), we
can strike strategy A from consideration.
1Recall the deﬁnition of common knowledge from Chapter 5.
FIGURE 7.2
Iterative removal of strictly dominated strategies.
X
Y
Z
A
B
3, 3
0, 5
0, 0
3, 1
0, 4
1, 2
2
1
X
Y
Z
A
B
(b)
(a)
(c)
3, 3
0, 5
0, 0
3, 1
0, 4
1, 2
2
1
X
Y
Z
A
B
3, 3
0, 5
0, 0
3, 1
0, 4
1, 2
2
1

--- Sayfa 84 ---
69
 Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
Interestingly enough, we can take this logic one step further in this game.
Your opponent knows that you know that she will not play X. Thus, recognizing
that you are rational, she deduces that you will not play A. Putting probability
1 on the event that you will play B, her only best response is to play Z. That is,
in the reduced game where you play only B, strategy Y is dominated, as repre-
sented in Figure 7.2(c), where Y is stricken.
Simple logic led to a unique prediction in the example. With rational play-
ers, the only outcome that can arise is the strategy proﬁle (B, Z), yielding the
payoff vector (1,2). Note that as in the prisoners’ dilemma, our prediction here is a
decidedly inefﬁcient outcome. Both players could fare better if the strategy proﬁle
(A, X) were played, but neither player ﬁnds it in his or her interest to do so.
The procedure just illustrated is called iterative removal of (strictly) domi-
nated strategies (or iterated dominance, for short). We can apply the procedure
to any normal-form game as follows. First, delete all of the dominated strate-
gies for each player, because a rational player would never use one of these.
Then deﬁne R1 to be the strategy proﬁles that remain. Common knowledge of
rationality therefore implies that it is common knowledge that a strategy proﬁle
in R1 will be played. In other words, essentially the players are interacting in a
“reduced” game in which R1 is the set of strategy proﬁles. The next step is to
remove any strategies that are dominated in this reduced game and deﬁne R2 as
the strategy proﬁles that remain. As before, it is then common knowledge that
a strategy proﬁle in R2 will be played. Continue this process to identify smaller
and smaller sets of strategy proﬁles, R3, R4, c, until no more strategies can be
deleted. Let R denote the resulting set of strategy proﬁles—those that survive
this iterated dominance procedure.
Remember that, at least in two-player games, dominance and best response
imply the same restrictions. Therefore, iterated dominance is identical with the
procedure in which strategies that are never best responses are removed at each
round. Thus, the procedure identiﬁes strategies for each player that can be ratio-
nalized in the following way. Player 1 selects a strategy that is a best response
to his belief about the behavior of player 2. Furthermore, his belief is consistent
with the rationality of player 2 in that every strategy to which he assigns positive
probability is a best response for player 2 to some belief of hers. For instance,
suppose player 1’s belief assigns positive probability to some strategy s2 of
player 2. That is, u2

 (s2 ) > 0. Then there must be a belief u1 of player 2 over the
strategies of player 1 to which s2 is a best response. Furthermore, each strategy
assigned positive probability by u1 must be a best response to some belief about
the strategy of player 2. The logic continues endlessly.
Your ﬁrst impression of these mind games may be negative, but a very simple
and precise theory of behavior is represented. Each player should play a best
response to her belief. In this way, the belief rationalizes playing the strategy.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
70
7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
Furthermore, each player should assign positive probability only to strategies
of the other players that can be similarly rationalized. The set of strategies that
survive iterated dominance is therefore called the rationalizable strategies.2 In
practical terms, rationalizability refers to strategies that remain after one itera-
tively removes those that are never best responses. But, because this process is
equivalent to iterated dominance, we can just perform the latter.3
The foregoing account of iterated dominance and rationalizability is
completely sound for ﬁnite games but requires elaboration for inﬁnite games
(where some players have an inﬁnite number of strategies or there is an inﬁnite
number of players). I provide more information in Appendix B, which I am sure
you will be thrilled to read. For now, there is one key item to note: In some games,
iterated dominance requires an inﬁnite number of rounds to complete. Yikes! It is
actually not awful, as you will see from an example in the next chapter.
Remember that the logic of rationalizability depends on common knowl-
edge of rationality and the game. If the players have this information, then we
shall predict that the strategy proﬁle is rationalizable. Understand, though, that
it may be a stretch to assume that players have this kind of information in some
settings. For instance, you can certainly imagine situations in which one agent
does not know whether the other players want to maximize anything in particu-
lar or what the payoffs of the others are or both. In such a case, this person may
not be able to put himself in the other players’ shoes with conﬁdence, and ratio-
nalizability may be too strong a behavioral concept.
To further illustrate the concept of rationalizability, examine the game in
Figure 7.3. Realize ﬁrst that player 2’s strategy X is dominated, so we can strike
it from consideration. If you do not see this right away, note that strategy X is
2Rationalizability was invented, and its relationship to iterated dominance characterized, by D. G. Pearce,
“Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem of Perfection,” Econometrica 52 (1984): 1029–1050, and
D. Bernheim, “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior,” Econometrica 52 (1984): 1007–1028.
3Recall that in games with more than two players, best response and dominance are not exact complements.
Thus, in these games, the set of rationalizable strategies may be different from the set of strategies that survive
iterated dominance. The difference has to do with whether correlated conjectures are allowed, as brieﬂy
discussed in Appendix B, but is not important for our study. Thus, the terms iterated dominance and rational-
izability are used interchangeably.
FIGURE 7.3
Another example of
rationalizability/iterated
dominance.
X
Y
Z
U
M
D
5, 1
0, 4
3, 1
0, 0
1, 0
3, 5
3, 3
4, 4
2, 5
2
1

--- Sayfa 86 ---
71
The Second Strategic Tension
dominated by the mixed strategy (0, 1>2, 1>2), the strategy that puts probability
1>2 on both Y and Z. No other strategies are dominated at this stage, so we
have R1 = {U, M, D} × {Y, Z}. In the reduced game (after striking X), player
1’s strategy U is dominated by D. Therefore, we can strike U and we have
R2 = {M, D} × {Y, Z}. Then player 2’s strategy Y is dominated by Z, leaving
R3 = {M, D} × {Z}. Finally, once it is clear that player 2 will choose Z, player
1’s strategy D is dominated by M. The set of rationalizable strategy proﬁles thus
consists of only strategy M for player 1 and only strategy Z for player 2; it is the
set R = {(M, Z)}.4
THE SECOND STRATEGIC TENSION
Observe that rationalizability does not always lead to a unique strategy proﬁle.
In fact, it often has little bite in games. For example, neither player has a domi-
nated strategy in the battle of the sexes game (in Figure 6.3). Player 1 might
rationally believe that player 2 will select A and thus play A in response. But
player 2 may believe that player 1 will select B and therefore will play B herself.
Rationalizability merely requires that the players’ beliefs and behavior be consis-
tent with common knowledge of rationality. It does not require that their beliefs
be correct. We have thus identiﬁed another tension in games, which is called
strategic uncertainty. One manifestation of strategic uncertainty is the coordina-
tion problem, which players often face in games such as the battle of the sexes.
Indeed, lack of strategic coordination seems entirely reasonable and an
accurate description of some actual events. You might have had the experience
of losing a friend or family member at Disneyland and being without a cell
phone to contact this person. Seeking to ﬁnd each other, you and your friend
each decided to stand near a prominent site at the theme park. You thought it
obvious to meet at Cinderella’s Castle. Your friend thought it equally obvious to
meet at the foot of Main Street. You each behaved in a rational way in response
to rational conjectures about the other. But your beliefs in the end were not
consistent. Perhaps you ﬁnally caught up to her at the car at the end of the day,
at which point you were both fuming.
In some games, there is also a direct tension between strategic uncertainty
and efﬁciency. Consider a version of the stag hunt game discussed by French
philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau and pictured in Figure 7.4.5 As the story
goes, two players go on a hunt. Simultaneously and independently, they each
decide whether to hunt stag or hare. If a player hunts for hare, he will deﬁnitely
4One can deﬁne a procedure using weak dominance rather than dominance, but it is subject to the concerns I
mentioned before. See Appendix B for more on this topic.
5J.-J. Rousseau, A Discourse on Inequality (New York: Penguin, 1984; originally published in 1755).

--- Sayfa 87 ---
72
7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
catch one (worth 4 units of utility), regardless of whether the other player joins
him in the hunt for this kind of animal. On the other hand, two people are required
to catch a stag (which yields 5 to both players). Thus, if only one player hunts
for stag, then he will get nothing. Note that both players would like to coordi-
nate on the efﬁcient (stag, stag) strategy proﬁle. But suppose player i has some
doubt about whether the other player will hunt stag. If player i is sufﬁciently
uncertain about the other player’s strategy—in particular if player i ﬁgures that
the other player will hunt stag with a probability less than 4>5—then player i
should hunt for hare. In other words, strategic uncertainty sometimes hinders
attainment of an efﬁcient outcome. To vegetarians, I apologize.
Strategic uncertainty is a part of life, but there are devices in the world that
help us coordinate our behavior and avoid inefﬁciency. Institutions, rules, norms
of behavior, and, in general, culture often facilitate coordination in society.
Examples are ubiquitous. Disneyland, and most other places of dense tourism,
have lost-and-found centers. These centers act as a “focal point” for people in
search of lost items or lost people; that is, they are prominent in the minds of
those in need.6 Security on our motorways is buoyed by trafﬁc laws and conven-
tions, which keep drivers on one side of the road. (If you thought the drivers of
oncoming cars would “drive on the left,” then you should as well.) Furthermore,
we empower our governments to police the roads because drivers often have the
incentive to bend the rules.
Communication provides a simple way of coordinating behavior as well.
For example, suppose Louise and Wayne are planning a trip to a theme park.
Before entering the grounds, they might agree on a suitable meeting place in
the event that they become separated and cannot contact each other by phone.
This agreement will save them from the undesired outcome in which they meet
in the parking lot at the end of the day. However, this miscoordinated outcome
might be the most preferred by Louise’s boyfriend Chris. Perhaps it is Louise
and Chris who ought to communicate better. As therapists say, communication
is essential to maintaining a healthy relationship.
Communication and many social institutions serve to coordinate beliefs and
behavior. They create durable systems of beliefs in which economic agents can
6Nobel laureate Thomas Schelling discussed the idea of a focal point in his inﬂuential book titled The Strategy
of Conﬂict (London: Oxford University Press, 1960).
FIGURE 7.4
Stag hunt.
Stag
Hare
Stag
Hare
5, 5
0, 4
4, 0
4, 4
2
1

--- Sayfa 88 ---
73
Guided Exercise
have conﬁdence. They align our expectations and give us the security of know-
ing that what we expect will actually take place. I pick up the analysis of coor-
dinating institutions in Chapter 9.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: The normal-form game pictured below represents a situation in
tennis, whereby the server (player 1) decides whether to serve to the opponent’s
forehand (F), center (C), or backhand (B) side. Simultaneously, the receiver
(player 2) decides whether to favor the forehand, center, or backhand side.
Calculate the set of rationalizable strategies for this game.
F
C
B
F
C
B
0, 5
2, 3
2, 3
0, 5
2, 3
3, 2
5, 0
3, 2
2, 3
2
1
Solution: First note that player 1’s strategy F is dominated by a mixture of C
and B. You can get a sense of this by noticing that
(a)  if player 2 selects F, both C and B yield a strictly higher payoff than does F
for player 1;
(b)  if player 2 selects B, then a mixture of C and B yields a higher payoff for
player 1 than does F, as long as player 1 puts strictly positive probability on C;
(c)  if player 2 selects C, then a mixture of C and B yields a higher payoff for
player 1 than does F, as long as player 1 puts high enough probability on B.
To quantify (c), consider the mixed strategy in which player 1 puts probability q
on B and 1 −q on C. Then, in the event that player 2 selects C, player 1’s mixed
strategy yields an expected payoff of 3q, whereas strategy F yields the payoff 2.
The mixed strategy is better if q > 2>3. Note that (b) requires q < 1. Thus, for
any q ∈(2>3, 1), the mixed strategy dominates F.
After removing player 1’s strategy F from consideration, we see that player
2’s strategy F is dominated by C, and so F is removed from player 2’s strategy
set in the second round of the iterated-dominance procedure. This leaves C and
B for both players. You can quickly conﬁrm that no further deletion of strategies
can occur, which means the set of rationalizable strategy proﬁles is
R = {C, B} × {C, B}.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
74
7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
EXERCISES
1. Determine the set of rationalizable strategies for each of the following games.
X
Y
U
M
D
0, 4
4, 0
3, 3
3, 3
4, 0
0, 4
2
1
X
Y
Z
U
M
D
2, 0
1, 1
3, 4
1, 2
4, 2
2, 3
1, 3
0, 2
3, 0
2
1
(a)
(b)
X
Y
Z
U
M
D
8, 6
0, 1
1, 0
2, 6
8, 2
5, 1
0, 8
1, 0
4, 4
2
1
(d)
X
Y
Z
U
M
D
6, 3
5, 1
0, 1
4, 6
0, 2
6, 0
2, 1
3, 5
2, 8
2
1
(c)
X
Y
A
B
2, 2
0, 0
0, 0
3, 3
2
1
(e)
X
Y
A
B
8, 10
4, 1
6, 4
8, 5
2
1
(f)
X
Y
U
D
3, 10
4, 1
6, 4
8, 5
2
1
(g)
2. Suppose that you manage a ﬁrm and are engaged in a dispute with one of
your employees. The process of dispute resolution is modeled by the follow-
ing game, where your employee chooses either to “settle” or to “be tough
in negotiation,” and you choose either to “hire an attorney” or to “give in.”
Give in
Hire attorney
Settle
Be tough
1, 2
0, 1
3, 0
x, 1
You
Employee

--- Sayfa 90 ---
75
Exercises
In the cells of the matrix, your payoff is listed second; x is a number that
both you and the employee know. Under what conditions can you rationalize
selection of “give in”? Explain what you must believe for this to be the case.
3. Find the set of rationalizable strategies for the following game.
a
b
c
d
w
x
y
z
5, 4
4, 4
3, 7
8, 7
4, 5
5, 8
2, 10
7, 6
4, 6
4, 4
5, 9
4, 10
12, 2
10, 6
9, 5
10, 9
2
1
Note that each player has more than one dominated strategy. Discuss why,
in the iterative process of deleting dominated strategies, the order in which
dominated strategies are deleted does not matter.
4. Imagine that there are three major network-afﬁliate television stations in
Turlock, California: RBC, CBC, and MBC. All three stations have the op-
tion of airing the evening network news program live at 6:00 p.m. or in a
delayed broadcast at 7:00 p.m. Each station’s objective is to maximize its
viewing audience in order to maximize its advertising revenue. The fol-
lowing normal-form representation describes the share of Turlock’s total
population that is “captured” by each station as a function of the times at
which the news programs are aired. The stations make their choices simul-
taneously. The payoffs are listed according to the order RBC, CBC, MBC.
Find the set of rationalizable strategies in this game.
6: 00
7: 00
6: 00
7: 00
14, 24, 32
8, 30, 27
30, 16, 24
13, 12, 50
CBC
RBC
6:00
7:00
6:00
7:00
6:00
7:00
16, 24, 30
30, 16, 24
30, 23, 14
14, 24, 32
CBC
RBC
MBC

--- Sayfa 91 ---
76
7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
5. Suppose that in some two-player game, s1 is a rationalizable strategy for
player 1. If s2 is a best response to s1, is s2 a rationalizable strategy for player
2? Explain.
6. Suppose that in some two-player game, s1 is a rationalizable strategy for
player 1. If, in addition, you know that s1 is a best response to s2, can you
conclude that s2 is a rationalizable strategy for player 2? Explain.
7. Consider a guessing game with ten players, numbered 1 through 10.
Simultaneously and independently, the players select integers between 0 and
10. Thus player i ’s strategy space is Si = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, for
i = 1, 2, c, 10. The payoffs are determined as follows: First, the average
of the players’ selections is calculated and denoted a. That is,
a = s1 + s2 + g + s10
10
,
where si denotes player i ’s selection, for i = 1, 2, c, 10. Then, player
i ’s payoff is given by ui = (a −i −1) si. What is the set of rationalizable
strategies for each player in this game?
8. Consider the following game played between 100 people. Each person i
chooses a number si between 20 and 60 (inclusive). Let a−i be deﬁned as the
average selection of the players other than player i ; that is, a−i = (j  i
  sj )>99.
Person i ’s payoff is ui
 (s) = 100 −(si −3
2a−i
 )2. For instance, if the
average of the −i players’ choices is 40 and player i chose 56, then player i
would receive a payoff of 100 −(56 −3
2 # 40)2 = 100 −42 = 84.
(a)  Find an expression for player i ’s best response to her belief about the
other players’ strategies as a function of the expected value of a−i,
which we can denote a−i. What is the best response to a−i = 40?
(b)  Use your answer to part (a) to determine the set of undominated strate-
gies for each player. Note that dominated strategies are those that are
not best responses (across all beliefs).
(c)  Find the set of rationalizable strategies. Show what strategies are
removed in each round of the deletion procedure.
(d)  If there were just two players rather than 100, but the deﬁnition of
payoffs remained the same, would your answers to parts (a) and (b)
change?
(e)  Suppose that instead of picking numbers between 20 and 60, the play-
ers can select numbers between y and 60, where y is a ﬁxed parameter
between 0 and 20. Calculate the set of rationalizable strategies for any
ﬁxed y. Note how the result depends on whether y > 0 or y = 0.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
77
Exercises
9. Consider a two-player simultaneous move game with S1 = S2 = [0, 1].
Suppose that, for i = 1, 2, player i ’s best response can be represented
as a function of sj, the expected value of sj according to player i ’s belief
(where j = −i ). Speciﬁcally, player 1’s best response function is given by
BR1 (s2 ) = s2, and player 2’s best response function is given by
BR2 (s1 ) = minb 1
4 + s1, 1 r.
To be clear about this functional form, if 1
4 + s1 < 1, then player 2’s best
response is 1
4 + s1. Otherwise, player 2’s best response is 1.
(a) Graph the best response functions for each player.
(b)  Find B1 and B2. Calculate the rationalizable strategy set and explain
which strategies are removed in each round of the iterated dominance
procedure.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
78
LOCATION, PARTNERSHIP,
AND SOCIAL UNREST
Y
ou have seen in some abstract examples how the concepts of iterated domi-
nance and rationalizability constrain behavior. Our next step is to analyze
some models that more closely represent real economic situations. As always,
we have to keep our models simple; otherwise they can become unwieldy. Good
models capture some of the important features of real-world settings while
maintaining tractability; they represent and enrich our intuition in digestible
doses of analytics.
A LOCATION GAME
Where ﬁrms locate in a city is a matter of strategy. Often a ﬁrm’s proximity
to its customers and its competitors determines how proﬁtably it can operate.
Consider a very simple model of location choice by competitors.1 Suppose two
people—call them Pat and Chris (P and C)—work for the same large soft drink
company. Their job is to sell cans of the company’s soda at a popular beach.
They will be working at the same beach and, by company policy, must charge
the same price. The company has committed to give each salesperson a commis-
sion of 25 cents per can sold. Because of the quantity of drinks that will be sold,
as well as the coolers and refrigeration needed, each salesperson must work
from a booth that is stationary on the beach. The only decision that each person
has to make is where on the beach to set his booth at the beginning of the day.
Pat and Chris select the locations for their booths independently and simultane-
ously. (Assume that salespeople have to call the city in the morning to obtain a
permit, at which point they must commit to a location.)
The beach is divided into nine regions of equal size, as pictured in Figure 8.1.
Booths may be located in any one of these regions (and it is possible for the
salespeople to locate in the same region). On any given day, ﬁfty people in
each region will each wish to purchase a soda. Thus, if a salesperson serves
all of the customers in a single region, he will earn $12.50. Assume that ﬁfty
1The model analyzed here is of the type ﬁrst studied by H. Hotelling, “Stability in Competition,” The Economic
Journal 39 (1929): 41–57.
8

--- Sayfa 94 ---
79
A Location Game
customers in every region each purchase a drink, regardless of where Pat and
Chris locate their booths. However, customers walk to the nearest booth to make
their purchases. For example, if Pat locates in region 3 and Chris locates in
region 8, then Pat sells drinks to all of the customers in regions 1 through 5 and
Chris sells to all of those in regions 6 through 9. If the customers of a given
region are indifferent between the two booths, assume that half go to one booth
and half go to the other. Pat and Chris seek to maximize their incomes.
What should Pat and Chris rationally do? To analyze this game formally,
ﬁrst represent the game in normal form. Each player’s strategy is a description
of where this player locates on the beach. Thus, there are nine different strate-
gies, and player i ’s strategy space is Si = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, for i = C, P.
We could draw a matrix to neatly describe the payoff functions for this game; I
leave it to you to do so and instead just note a few of the payoff numbers. When
describing strategy proﬁles, put Chris’s strategy ﬁrst and Pat’s second; that is,
(x, y) is the strategy proﬁle in which Chris selects x and Pat selects y. If Chris chose
2 and Pat selected 5, Chris’s payoff would be uC
 (2, 5) = 3 × 12.50 = 37.50
and Pat would earn uP
 (2, 5) = 6 × 12.50 = 75.00. If Chris chose 1 and Pat
selected 9, then the payoffs would be uC
 (1, 9) = 56.25 and uP
 (1, 9) = 56.25. In
this case, Chris sells to regions 1 through 4, Pat to regions 6 through 9, and they
split region 5.
To compute the set of rationalizable strategies, we need to perform iter-
ated dominance. Begin by evaluating strategies 1 and 2 against all of the oppo-
nent’s strategies. If Chris plays 1 and Pat plays 1, then Chris gets 56.25; they
split all of the regions. If Chris plays 2 when Pat chooses 1, then Chris obtains
100; she captures regions 2 through 9 in this case. Thus, when Pat plays 1,
Chris’s strategy 2 yields a greater payoff than does strategy 1. Comparing these
two strategies for Chris against Pat’s strategy 2 yields the same conclusion:
uC
 (2, 2) = 56.25 > uC
 (1, 2) = 12.50. Continuing, we ﬁnd that strategy 2 yields
a greater payoff than does strategy 1 against all of Pat’s strategies. That is,
uC
 (2, y) > uC
 (1, y) for y = 1, 2, c, 9. You should verify this.
We have demonstrated that strategy 2 strictly dominates strategy 1, and it is
obviously true for both players. By the same reasoning, strategy 9 is dominated
for both players. In fact, strategies 1 and 9 are the only dominated strategies in the
game. To see this, note that 2 is a best response to the opponent selecting 1, 3 is a
FIGURE 8.1
A location game.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1

--- Sayfa 95 ---
80
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
best response to the opponent selecting 2, and so on. By deleting strategies 1 and 9
for the players, we have reduced the strategy space Si = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}
to the set of undominated strategies R1
i = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. And we can go
further by iterating the dominance criterion.
Given that the opponent’s strategy is contained in {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8},
strategies 2 and 8 are now strictly dominated. That is, ui
 (3, sj ) > ui
 (2, sj
 ) and
ui
 (7, sj
 ) > ui
 (8, sj ) for sj = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, where sj is the strategy of player
i ’s opponent. If it is not obvious, you should check this. In the second round of
deleting strictly dominated strategies, we thus remove 2 and 8, forming the set
R2
i = {3, 4, 5, 6, 7} for each player. The same analysis requires us to remove 3
and 7 in the third round, yielding R3
i = {4, 5, 6}, and we remove 4 and 6 in the
fourth. We are left with only one rational strategy for each player: 5. Thus, the
set of rationalizable strategy proﬁles is the singleton R = R5 = {(5, 5)}.
In this game, rationalizability implies that the players, in their quest for a
large share of the market, both locate in the same region at the center of the
beach. The model solidiﬁes some intuition that can be applied more generally.
For example, in a community with two supermarkets, we should expect them
to be located close together and in the geographical center of the population.
Furthermore, “location” can be more broadly interpreted, allowing the model to
address, among other things, product variety and politics. In the ﬁrst case, think
of consumers differing in their taste for sweet cereal. A producer can “locate”
its cereal anywhere in the sweetness spectrum by choosing how much sugar to
include. Our model suggests that, in a small market, ﬁrms produce cereals of
similar ﬂavor that appeal to the average taste.
Regarding politics, note that the voters in a country are generally a diverse
bunch. Some desire an open trade policy, whereas others prefer isolation-
ism. Some people want government regulation in certain industries, whereas
other people oppose any government intervention. One can categorize citizens
according to their preferences. In the United States and in other countries, this
categorization often takes the form of a one-dimensional political spectrum,
with liberal-minded people on the left and conservatives on the right. Candi-
dates for public ofﬁce may try to appease certain groups of people to get elected.
We suspect that an individual citizen votes for the candidate who is “closest” to
him or her in regard to policy.
The location model suggests that candidates will try to locate themselves
toward the center of the spectrum—that is, they will try to argue that they are in
the mainstream, that they are moderate, and so forth. Lo and behold, candidates
actually behave this way. The model also explains why candidates’ positions
shift over time (such as between a primary election, when a candidate wants to
appeal to the party faithful, and a general election). I further discuss voting in
Chapter 10.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
81
A Partnership Game: Strategic Complementarities
The simple location model is clearly limited. Among others, there are
four obvious criticisms. First, in the context of market competition, it does not
include the ﬁrms’ speciﬁcation of prices. Firms might be able to charge higher
prices when they are separated, and it is not clear how the predictions of our
model would change with this extension. Second, agents may not have to move
simultaneously in the real world. Firms can delay the construction of stores to
observe where their competitors locate. Firms may even be able to relocate in
response to their rivals’ positions. Third, our model does not apply to larger
markets where there are more than two ﬁrms or more than two products. Fourth,
our model is one-dimensional, whereas interesting applications have more than
one dimension.
The cereal industry illustrates a more elaborate economic setting. There are
many cereal producers (although the market is dominated by General Mills,
Kellogg’s, and Post) and, more important, ﬁrms produce more than one kind of
cereal. In fact, the dominant ﬁrms produce many different varieties, which, in
reference to our model, is like locating at several different points on the spec-
trum. Firms simultaneously offer various cereals to suit different tastes. The
technology of cereal production offers one explanation for the plethora of vari-
eties on the market. Different varieties of cereal can be produced in the same
plant, and companies can change from one variety to another at relatively low
cost. If there are large segments of the taste spectrum at which no variety is
located, a ﬁrm can easily locate a cereal in this region and earn a proﬁt. Thus, we
expect all such opportunities to be exhausted, leading to a market with a large
number of varieties positioned at regular intervals along the spectrum of tastes.
As with the topic of ﬁrm competition, the analysis of politics can bene-
ﬁt from an enriched location model. In fact, intuition garnered from the basic
model can guide us in extending the model and developing an understanding
of complicated political processes. You might think about what happens if the
citizens are not uniformly arranged on the political spectrum but, instead, are
distributed in a different way. What if there are more than two candidates? What
if the candidates cannot so easily remake themselves (locate freely)? What if
there is more than one dimension to policy decisions? Why are there only two
strong parties in the United States? These and many other questions can be
addressed by using extensions of the basic model.
A PARTNERSHIP GAME: STRATEGIC COMPLEMENTARITIES
Most jobs entail interaction between different people. Whether in a small ﬁrm
with two partners or in a major conglomerate, the success of the enterprise
requires cooperation and shared responsibility. Because one person’s effort

--- Sayfa 97 ---
82
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
affects another person’s prosperity—perhaps through the proﬁt that they gener-
ate together—people may not always have the incentive to work in the most efﬁ-
cient way. In other words, the nature of the workplace can create “distortions”
whereby self-interested behavior spoils the cause of joint productivity. Games
are played between friends and colleagues just as they are played between
adversaries.2
To construct an extremely simple model of such distortions, think of a part-
nership between two people. The ﬁrm’s proﬁt, which the partners share, depends
on the effort that each person expends on the job. Suppose that the proﬁt is
p = 4(x + y + cxy), where x is the amount of effort expended by partner 1 and
y is the amount expended by partner 2. The value c is a positive constant, which
is assumed to be between 0 and 1>4; it measures how complementary the tasks
of the partners are. Partner 1 incurs a personal cost x2 of expending effort, which
is measured in monetary terms. Partner 2’s cost of effort is y2. Assume that x and
y have to be set between 0 and 4.
The business environment is such that the partners cannot write a contract
that dictates how much effort each must expend. The reason could be that the
courts have no way of verifying effort on the job and so cannot enforce such
contracts. Therefore partner 1 selects x and partner 2 selects y independently.
Assume that they do so simultaneously as well. The partners seek to maximize
their individual share of the ﬁrm’s proﬁt net of the cost of effort. In mathematical
terms, partner 1 cares about ( p>2) −x2 and partner 2 cares about ( p>2) −y 2.
To be complete, let us translate this model into the terminology of game
theory using the normal form. The strategy space for player 1 is the set of numbers
between zero and four, because he selects an effort level in this range. Player 2
has the same strategy space. Mathematically, S1 = [0, 4] and S2 = [0, 4]. The
payoff function for player 1 is 2(x + y + cxy) −x2 and the payoff function for
player 2 is 2(x + y + cxy) −y 2. Note that because the players have an inﬁnite
number of strategies, we cannot represent this game with a matrix.
In the partnership game, the distortion in the interaction between the two
partners arises in that each partner does not fully “internalize” the value of his
effort. A partner knows that, if he works to increase the ﬁrm’s proﬁt by one
dollar, he obtains only one-half of this amount. He is therefore less willing to
provide effort. The ﬁrm suffers here because the partner does not incorporate the
beneﬁt of his labor to the rest of the ﬁrm.
Let us analyze the game and see whether this intuition is captured by the
theory of rationalizability. Because the game has an inﬁnite strategy space,
looking for dominated strategies is a bit of a challenge. Rather than trying for
a complete mathematical analysis, we can construct the set of rationalizable
2Remember that game theory is the study of interdependence, not necessarily pure conﬂict.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
83
A Partnership Game: Strategic Complementarities
strategies by examining a graph of the players’ best-response functions. This
type of graph provides a great deal of intuition and will be useful later as well.
Player 1 constructs a belief about the strategy of player 2, which is a prob-
ability distribution over y, player 2’s effort level. Player 1 then selects a best
response to her conjecture, which maximizes her expected payoff in the game.
Let us compute this best response. Given her belief, if player 1 selects effort level
x, then her share of the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is the expected value of 2(x + y + cxy).
This expected value is 2(x + y + cxy), where y is the mean (or “average”) of
her belief about y.3 Player 1’s expected payoff is thus 2(x + y + cxy) −x2. To
compute player 1’s best response, take the derivative of this expression with
respect to x and set the derivative equal to zero (to ﬁnd where the slope of this
function of x is zero). This yields
2 + 2cy −2x = 0.
Solving for x, we have x = 1 + cy. We thus have computed player 1’s best
response as a function of y. In terms of the notation introduced earlier,
BR1
 (y) = 1 + cy. Player 2’s best-response function is computed in the same
way and is BR2 (x) = 1 + cx.
To be consistent with earlier deﬁnitions, we should actually write
BR1
 (y) = {1 + cy} and BR2
 (x) = {1 + cx}, because BRi is a set of strategies
(which, in this case, consists of a single strategy). However, I will be a bit loose
with the nature of BRi for games in which BRi contains a single strategy for
each belief. For such games, we can treat BRi as a function. Thus, I will write
x = BR1
 (y) instead of x ∈BR1
 (y).
Figure 8.2 depicts the best-response functions of the two players. The strat-
egy of player 1 is on the x-axis, and the strategy of player 2 is on the y-axis.
The best-response function of player 2 is a function of x. Observe that, at
x = 0, BR2
 (0) = 1; at x = 4, BR2
 (4) = 1 + 4c. The best-response function for
player 1 has the same properties, although it is a function of player 2’s strategy y.
To compute the set of rationalizable strategies, ﬁrst observe that, regard-
less of player 2’s belief about player 1, player 2’s best response is a number
between 1 and 1 + 4c. To see this, remember that player 1 selects an effort level
between 0 and 4, which means that x must be between these numbers as well.
Thus, the greatest that 1 + cx can be is 1 + 4c, and the least that it can be is 1.
Strategies of player 2 below 1 or above 1 + 4c can never be best responses; they
are dominated. The same argument establishes that these same strategies are
3For example, maybe she believes that, with probability 1>4, player 2 will select y = 1>2 and, with probabil-
ity 3>4, player 2 will select y = 2. Then the mean of her conjecture is y = (1>4)(1>2) + (3>4)2 = 13>8. The
expected value expression is valid because, holding ﬁxed x, the variable y enters player 1’s payoff in a linear
fashion. That is, the expectation of a constant times y is the constant times the expectation of y.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
84
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
dominated for player 1 as well. Thus, if we start with the strategy space [0, 4]
for each player, the undominated strategies are in the set R1
i = [1, 1 + 4c]. Note
that because c < 1>4, we know that 1 + 4c < 2.
On to the next level of dominance. Understand that player 1 knows that
player 2’s strategy will be contained in the set [1, 1 + 4c], and so player 1’s
average expectation about player 2’s strategy has the same bounds. That is,
y ∈[1, 1 + 4c], which implies that player 1’s best response to his belief must
be a strategy in the set [ 1 + c, 1 + c(1 + 4c)]. We get this set by plugging
the extreme values 1 and 1 + 4c into player 1’s best-response function, which
corresponds to the two vertical dashed lines in the center of Figure 8.2. Observe
that 1 + c > 1 and 1 + c(1 + 4c) < 1 + 4c; so this new set of undominated
strategies is “smaller” than the one described in the preceding paragraph. Again,
the same argument can be used to narrow the set of rational strategies for player
2. Thus, after two rounds of the rationalizability procedure, we have the set of
strategies R2
i = [1 + c, 1 + c(1 + 4c)] for each player.
We obtain the set of rationalizable strategies by continuing to delete domi-
nated strategies in stages, disregarding strategies that we have deleted in prior
stages. You can tell from the preceding analysis that at each stage there will be
an upper and a lower bound on the set of strategies that have survived so far. To
get the upper bound for the next stage, plug the upper bound of the current stage
into a player’s best-response function. To get the lower bound for the next stage,
plug in the current lower bound. From looking at the graph, it is not difﬁcult to
see where this process leads: as we remove dominated strategies, both the lower
and upper bounds converge to the point at which the players’ best-response
1 + c
x
4
1 + c(1 + 4c)
4
1
1
y
1 + 4c
BR2(x)
BR1(y)
         (x*, y*)
n   n
         (x , y)
FIGURE 8.2
Partnership game
best-response functions.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
85
A Partnership Game: Strategic Complementarities
functions cross. They cross at the point where
x =
1
1 −c and y =
1
1 −c,
which jointly solve the equations x = 1 + cy and y = 1 + cx. There-
fore, x* = 1>(1 −c) is the only rationalizable strategy for player 1, and
y * = 1>(1 −c) is the only rationalizable strategy for player 2. That is, the set of
rationalizable strategy proﬁles is the singleton set R = {( 1
1−c, 1
1−c)}. Although
it may not be obvious from the picture, the rationalizability procedure requires
an inﬁnite number of rounds to reach this conclusion.4
Given that the players select their only rationalizable strategies, the ﬁrm’s
proﬁt is
4c
1
1 −c +
1
1 −c +
c
(1 −c)2 d,
which simpliﬁes to (8 −4c)>(1 −c)2. Splitting the proﬁt and including the
effort cost, each partner gets a payoff of (3 −2c)>(1 −c)2.
Rationalizability yields a unique prediction in this model of a partnership,
and, as we have seen before, the outcome is not the one that the players like best.
To ﬁnd the efﬁcient outcome, maximize the total net proﬁt of the ﬁrm,
4(x + y + cxy) −x2 −y 2,
by choosing x and y. Taking the derivatives of this expression with respect to
x and y and setting these derivatives equal to zero, we get 4 + 4cy = 2x and
4 + 4cx = 2y. Solving these equalities simultaneously yields the jointly opti-
mal effort levels:
xn =
2
1 −2c and yn =
2
1 −2c.
Note that
1
1 −c <
2
1 −2c.
4For the beneﬁt of those who are mathematically inclined, the convergence property can be proved in the
following way: Take any number z and deﬁne w = z −1>(1 −c). The number w measures the distance
between z and 1>(1 −c). Plugging z into the best-response function yields 1 + cz = 1 + c[w + 1>(1 −c)]
= cw + 1>(1 −c). In words, if |w| is the distance between z and 1>(1 −c), then c|w| is the distance
between BRi (z) and 1>(1 −c). Because 0 < c < 1, the distance shrinks every time the number is plugged
into the best-response function. One can slow that the set of strategies that survive after k rounds of iterated
dominance is Rk
i = [ 1
1−c −( 1
1−c)ck, 1
1−c + (3−4c
1−c )ck].

--- Sayfa 101 ---
86
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
By playing their rationalizable strategies, the partners provide less effort than
they jointly prefer. The jointly optimal strategy proﬁle is denoted (xn, yn) in
Figure 8.2.5
We have seen such a conclusion before, the prisoners’ dilemma being the
standard example of how individual incentives can interfere with group gain.
But here the process of iteratively deleting strictly dominated strategies is about
as complicated as the title of the procedure. There is also a bit more economics
at work in the partnership example. As already noted, the reason our predicted
outcome differs from the joint-optimum strategy is that the partners’ individ-
ual costs and beneﬁts differ from joint costs and beneﬁts. The joint optimum
balances joint beneﬁts (the ﬁrm’s gross proﬁt) with joint costs (the sum of the
partners’ effort costs). Because each partner cares only about his own cost and
beneﬁt and because his individual beneﬁt is only a fraction of the joint beneﬁt,
his calculations understate the value of his effort. Thus, he expends less effort
than is best from the social point of view. Because both players do so, they both
end up worse off.
The term cxy was included in the partners’ proﬁt function for two reasons.
First, it makes iterated dominance more interesting than if the term were absent,
which allows us to build intuition that will be useful later. Incidentally, you will
notice that one of the problems at the end of this chapter is a simpliﬁed version
of the game heretofore presented; it is much easier to solve.
The second reason for including the cxy term is that it represents an impor-
tant feature of many economic settings—a feature called complementarity. In
the partnership game, increases in effort by one of the partners is beneﬁcial
to him, up to a point. For example, raising x from 0 to 1>2 will increase part-
ner 1’s payoff. Furthermore, increasing a partner’s effort is more valuable the
greater is the other partner’s effort level. To see this, note that the ﬁrst deriva-
tive of player 1’s payoff function with respect to his own effort, x, increases as
y increases. The same is true for player 2’s payoff. The relation between the
partners’ strategies is complementary here; in formal terms, the game is one of
strategic complementarities. In general, strategic complementarity is easy to
detect in games with continuous strategy spaces. It exists if 02
 ui
 (s)>0si
  0sj Ú 0 for
all s ∈S, each player i, and each other player j. That is, the cross partial deriva-
tive of player i ’s payoff function with respect to player i ’s strategy and any other
player’s strategy is not negative.6
5The term joint refers to the “total” welfare of all agents in the model—in this case, the two partners. Sometimes
the expression social optimal is used, although it can be ambiguous if we consider people outside the game.
6Strategic complementarity was discussed by J. Bulow, J. Geanakoplos, and P. Klemperer, “Multimarket
Oligopoly: Strategic Substitutes and Complements,” The Journal of Political Economy 93 (1985): 488–511.
The concept was analyzed more generally by P. Milgrom and J. Roberts, “Rationalizability, Learning, and
Equilibrium in Games with Strategic Complementarities,” Econometrica 58 (1990): 1255–1277.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
87
Social Unrest
Because of the strategic complementarity, each player’s best-response func-
tion is increasing in the mean belief about the partner’s strategy. That is, as y
increases, so does the optimal x in response. In terms of the graph in Figure 8.2,
the players’ best-response functions are positively sloped. In the partnership
game, as c increases, so does the slope of the best-response functions. (Because
player 1’s best response is a function of y, this means the graph in Figure 8.2
ﬂattens.) As a result, the rationalizable effort levels increase, too. Intuitively,
they do so because each player’s optimal strategy depends “more” on the effort
of the other.
Rationalizability does not always lead to a unique prediction in games such
as this one, even when there are strategic complementarities. The force of iter-
ated dominance depends on the relative slopes of the best-response functions.
To develop your understanding, it might be helpful to draw a few pictures like
Figure 8.2 with various different best-response functions. A best-response func-
tion for player 1 must assign a value for every y, so it must stretch from the
bottom of the picture to the top. A best-response function for player 2 must
stretch from the left to the right. One result of which you may convince your-
self is that rationalizability leads to a unique prediction in two-player games
with three properties: (1) the strategy spaces are intervals with lower and upper
bounds, (2) there are strategic complementarities, and (3) the slope of the best-
response functions is less than one. These conditions are not required for ratio-
nalizability to yield a unique strategy proﬁle, but they are sufﬁcient. You should
verify that they hold in the partnership game.
SOCIAL UNREST
Recall the year 2011: A wave of rebellion ﬂows across North Africa and the
Middle East as thousands, perhaps millions, of people take to the streets to
demonstrate against repressive government regimes and in favor of human
rights and democracy. The ﬁrst protest occurs in Tunisia in December 2010.
Under intense pressure from the populace, the Tunisian president is driven from
power within a month. Unrest spreads to Algeria and Egypt and eventually to
more than a dozen other countries in what becomes known as the “Arab Spring.”
By the end of 2011, governments are overthrown in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, and
Libya. Thousands die.
Given the living conditions and political culture of the affected countries,
one can understand why people in these countries rose in revolt. But why did
it happen in 2011? Conditions were awful for years before; repressive regimes
had long been in control. Furthermore, why did it happen in so many countries
at the same time? Game theoretic analysis can provide some insight.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
88
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
The key idea is that one takes a risk by participating in a protest. Further,
the risk depends on how many others decide to protest. A successful protest
requires that enough people actually participate. A protester who acts alone or in
a small group will likely be defeated—and possibly harmed. Thus, it is impor-
tant to understand what the prospective protesters know about each other and
their intended strategies.
Consider a simple model in which many players (the citizens) simultaneously
choose whether to protest (strategy P) or stay home (strategy H). Assume that
there is an inﬁnite number of players, with each player represented by a point on
the interval [0, 1], and suppose the players are uniformly distributed on this inter-
val. (See Appendix A for the deﬁnition of uniform distribution.) We can therefore
write “player i ∈[0, 1].” Although it may not appear so, this speciﬁcation leads to
a simpler model than would be the case with a ﬁnite number of players. Suppose
that the players differ in terms of their dedication to the cause of protest; speciﬁ-
cally, dedication is measured by the index i. A player with i close to zero is not
very dedicated to the cause, whereas a player with i close to 1 is perhaps a zealot.
Suppose the payoff of player i depends on the fraction x of players who choose
to protest. Player i ’s payoff is the sum of two terms: First, regardless of player i ’s
choice, this player gets a beneﬁt of 4x −2 from the protest movement. This term
represents the idea that an increase in the fraction of protesters will translate into
better outcomes. For instance, an increase in x implies more concessions from
the government or a greater likelihood that the government will be overthrown.
Second, if player i chooses to protest, then this player gets an additional amount
4x −2 + ai, where a is a ﬁxed parameter that is nonnegative. Here, the addi-
tional 4x −2 represents that the beneﬁt of the protest movement is ampliﬁed for
those who directly participate. The latter part, ai, represents that players with
higher values of i are more dedicated to the protest movement, in that they get
a bonus from protesting. In a nutshell, if player i stays home, then her payoff is
ui
 (H, x) = 4x −2,
whereas if she protests, then her payoff is
ui
 (P, x) = 8x −4 + ai,
Note that I am writing the payoff as function of player i ’s strategy and x, as the
payoff depends on the other players’ strategies only through the proportion x
who select P.
The ﬁrst step in analyzing this game is to compare the payoffs of P and H
for any player i and to determine the conditions under which this player has
the incentive to protest. Note that by writing ui
 (P, x) Ú ui
 (H, x) and rearranging

--- Sayfa 104 ---
89
Social Unrest
terms, we ﬁnd that player i prefers to protest if and only if i Ú (2 −4x)>a.
Thus, players with higher values of i are more interested in protesting, and the
attractiveness of strategy P increases in x for all players. In other words, if a
large enough fraction of the other players will protest, then player i will want to
join. Furthermore, the “cutoff ” value of x is smaller for more dedicated players.
So, is it rational for players to protest? Under what conditions will a protest
occur? We can address these questions by calculating the set of rationalizable
strategy proﬁles. It turns out that the rationalizable set depends critically on
whether the most dedicated player (with i = 1) strictly prefers to protest, condi-
tional on believing that no one else will choose to protest (so x = 0). That is, we
need to evaluate whether u1
 (P, 0) > u1
 (H, 0). Note that this inequality simpli-
ﬁes to a > 2. I’ll proceed by examining two speciﬁc cases, one in which a = 1
and one in which a = 3. An exercise at the end of this chapter asks you to
generalize the analysis.
Consider ﬁrst the case in which a = 1. Here, the most dedicated player
(i = 1) is only moderately so, and it can be rational for him to stay home or
protest depending on his belief about the others. More precisely, if he were to
believe that most other players will stay home, so that x … 1>4, then staying
home is a best response. Likewise, if he believes that x Ú 1>4, then protesting is
a best response. We have the same conclusion for the other players: both protest-
ing and staying home are rational strategies depending on beliefs. This means
that all strategy proﬁles are rationalizable, so we do not have a ﬁrm prediction.
In this case, strategic uncertainty may lead the players to stay home even
though they would all be better off if they all chose to protest. Such an outcome,
no doubt frustrating to the players, has been observed in many instances in the
world. Successful protests often rely on the occurrence of events that help the
players coordinate on the protest strategy. Examples of coordinating events
include public declarations by opposition leaders, provocative statements and
the initiation of harsh policies by government leaders, or prominent geopolitical
events. For instance, one could argue that the successful protests in Tunisia trig-
gered an expectation that the people would similarly rise up in nearby countries.
Next consider the case in which a = 3. Here, the most dedicated player
(i = 1) is quite motivated to protest. In fact, regardless of his belief about the
others, this player’s only rational strategy is to protest; that is, H is dominated
for this player. We reach the same conclusion for every player i > 2>3, which
you can check by evaluating ui
 (P, x) > ui
 (H, x) as shown above. On the other
hand, every player i … 2>3 can rationally choose to protest or stay home; such a
player wants to stay home if she believes that x is likely to be small.
This analysis shows that in the ﬁrst round of the iterated dominance proce-
dure, strategy H is removed for each player i for which i > 2>3. Thus, at least a
third of the players must protest, so all of the players know that x Ú 1>3. Recall

--- Sayfa 105 ---
90
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
that player i strictly prefers to protest if and only if i > (2 −4x)>a. Plugging
in a = 3 and noting that x Ú 1>3, we see that (2 −4x)>a … 2>9, which means
that protesting becomes the dominant strategy for every player i > 2>9. We
conclude that in the second round of the iterated dominance procedure, strategy
H is removed for each player i > 2>9. By common knowledge of rationality,
therefore all of the players know that x Ú 7>9.
The procedure terminates in the third round of iterated dominance. Recall
again that player i strictly prefers to protest if and only if i > (2 −4x)>a. Plug-
ging in a = 3 and noting that x Ú 7>9, we calculate that (2 −4x)>a … −10>27.
In other words, because x is sure to be large, the inequality i > (2 −4x)>a
holds for every player i. As a result, no one can rationally select strategy H. The
unique rationalizable strategy proﬁle has everyone protesting.
This result is interesting because it doesn’t take many extremely dedi-
cated players to induce a mass protest. To see this, consider the inequality
ui
 (P, 0) > ui
 (H, 0), which means that player i strictly prefers to protest even if
no one else does. This inequality simpliﬁes to i > 2>a. For the sake of discus-
sion, let’s call players who satisfy this inequality zealots. For them, protest is
the only rational strategy. In the case of a = 3, one-third of the population are
zealots. The other two-thirds could rationally stay home if they thought that x
would be close to zero. But knowing that the zealots will protest, so x Ú 1>3,
the moderately dedicated players in the interval (2>9, 2>3] will also take to the
streets. For them, the assured presence of the zealots cuts the risk of protest-
ing. Furthermore, knowing that the zealots and moderately dedicated will both
protest, the more neutral players with i close to zero will also join in the protest.
It takes only a slight change in the parameter a to switch from the case in
which players can rationally stay home to the case in which we predict a mass
protest for sure. In fact, 2 is the cutoff value of a. For any a … 2, every strategy
proﬁle is rationalizable. For any a > 2, the only rationalizable proﬁle is for all
players to protest.
This example shows the power that an extreme fringe has in terms of moti-
vating a disaffected population. In the Arab Spring uprisings, zealots played an
important role. Many took to the streets and challenged the military establish-
ment, at great personal risk. Some set themselves on ﬁre. The horriﬁc scenes of
protest and rebellion marked a major international crisis, with repercussions that
will extend for decades.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the location game analyzed in this chapter, but with differ-
ent preferences for the players. Instead of each player seeking to sell as many

--- Sayfa 106 ---
91
Exercises
cans of soda as possible, suppose that each wants to sell as few cans as possible.
To motivate such preferences, think of the players being paid a ﬁxed wage for
their work, and imagine that sales entail effort that they would rather not exert.
In this new game, are there any dominated strategies for the players? Compute
the rationalizable strategies for the players, and explain the difference between
this game and the original game.
Solution: Intuitively, players in this game want to do the opposite of what
was shown to be rational in the standard location game. Whereas in the stan-
dard game a player beneﬁts from being closer to the middle location than is her
opponent, in this game the players gain (that is, sell fewer sodas) by moving
away from the middle. Indeed, you can easily check that the strategy of locat-
ing in region 1 dominates each of the strategies 2 through 5, because locating
in region 1 yields strictly lower sales regardless of where the opponent locates.
Furthermore, the strategy of locating in region 9 dominates each of the strate-
gies 5 through 8. Thus, strategies 2 through 8 for both players are removed in the
ﬁrst round of the iterated-dominance procedure. In the second round, we ﬁnd
that neither strategy 1 nor strategy 9 dominates the other. Therefore, the set of
rationalizable strategies for each player i is Ri = {1, 9}, for i = 1, 2.
EXERCISES
1. Consider a location game like the one discussed in this chapter. Suppose
that instead of the nine regions located in a straight line, the nine regions
form a box with three rows and three columns. Two vendors simultaneously
and independently select on which of the nine regions to locate. Suppose
that there are two consumers in each region; each consumer will walk to
the nearest vendor and purchase a soda, generating a $1.00 proﬁt for the
vendor. Consumers cannot walk diagonally. For example, to get from the
top-left region to the middle region, a consumer has to walk through either
the top-center region or the middle-left region. (This means that the middle
region is the same distance from top-left as top-right is from top-left.) As-
sume that if some consumers are the same distance from the two vendors,
then these consumers are split equally between the vendors. Determine the
set of rationalizable strategies for the vendors.
2. Consider a location game with nine regions like the one discussed in this
chapter. But instead of having the customers distributed uniformly across
the nine regions, suppose that region 1 has a different number of customers
than the other regions. Speciﬁcally, suppose that regions 2 though 9 each

--- Sayfa 107 ---
92
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
has ten customers, whereas region 1 has x customers. For what values of x
does the strategy of locating in region 2 dominate locating in region 1?
3. Consider our nine-region location game to be a model of competition be-
tween two political candidates. Fifty voters are located in each of the nine
regions of the political spectrum; each voter will vote for the closest candi-
date. Voters in regions equidistant from the two candidates will split evenly
between them.
(a)  Assume that each candidate wants to maximize the number of votes
he or she receives. Are the candidates’ preferences the same as those
modeled in the basic location game? Discuss how this setting differs
from the setting in which candidates want to maximize the probability
of winning (with the rule that the candidate with the most votes wins the
election and, in case of a tie, each candidate is awarded the ofﬁce with
probability 1>2).
(b)  Suppose, contrary to the basic location model, that voters are not
uniformly distributed across the nine regions. Instead, whereas regions
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, and 9 each contains ﬁfty voters, regions 6 and 7 each
contains x voters. Analyze the candidate location game for the case in
which x = 75. In a rationalizable outcome, can one of the candidates
win with probability 1?
(c) What happens if x > 75 or x < 75?
4. Consider the partnership game analyzed in this chapter, but assume that
c < 0. Graph the players’ best-response functions for this case, and explain
how they differ from those in the original model. If you can, ﬁnd the ratio-
nalizable strategies for the players. Use the graph to ﬁnd them. Repeat the
analysis under the assumption that c > 1>4.
5. Consider a duopoly game in which two ﬁrms simultaneously and indepen-
dently select prices. Assume that the prices are required to be greater than or
equal to zero. Denote ﬁrm 1’s price as p1 and ﬁrm 2’s price as p2 . The ﬁrms’
products are differentiated. After the prices are set, consumers demand
10 −p1 + p2 units of the good that ﬁrm 1 produces. Consumers demand
10 −p2 + p1 units of the good that ﬁrm 2 produces. Assume that each ﬁrm
must supply the number of units demanded. Also assume that each ﬁrm
produces at zero cost. The payoff for each ﬁrm is equal to the ﬁrm’s proﬁt.
(a)  Write the payoff functions of the ﬁrms (as a function of their strategies
p1 and p2).
(b) Compute ﬁrm 2’s best-response function (as a function of p1).

--- Sayfa 108 ---
93
Exercises
(c)  Can you determine the rationalizable strategies in this game by inspect-
ing the graph of the best-response functions? What are the rationalizable
strategies?
6. Consider a location game with ﬁve regions on the beach in which a ven-
dor can locate. The regions are arranged on a straight line, as in the origi-
nal game discussed in the text. Instead of there being two vendors, as with
the original game, suppose there are three vendors who simultaneously
and independently select on which of the ﬁve regions to locate. There are
thirty consumers in each of the ﬁve regions; each consumer will walk to
the nearest vendor and purchase a soda, generating a $1.00 proﬁt for the
vendor. Assume that if some consumers are the same distance from the two
or three nearest vendors, then these consumers are split equally between
these vendors.
(a) Can you rationalize the strategy of locating in region 1?
(b)  If your answer to part (a) is “yes,” describe a belief that makes locating
at region 1 a best response. If your answer is “no,” ﬁnd a strategy that
strictly dominates playing strategy 1.
7. Consider a game in which, simultaneously, player 1 selects a number
x ∈[2, 8] and player 2 selects a number y ∈[2, 8]. The payoffs are given by:
u1
 (x, y) = 2xy −x2
u2
 (x, y) = 4xy −y2.
Calculate the rationalizable strategy proﬁles for this game.
8. Finish the analysis of the “social unrest” model by showing that for any
a > 2, the only rationalizable strategy proﬁle is for all players to protest.
Here is a helpful general step: Suppose that is it common knowledge that
all players above y will protest, so x Ú 1 −y. Find a cutoff player number
f (y) with the property that given x Ú 1 −y, every player above f (y) strictly
prefers to protest.
9. Consider an industry in which two ﬁrms compete by simultaneously and
independently selecting prices for their goods. Firm 1’s product and ﬁrm 2’s
product are imperfect substitutes, so that an increase in one ﬁrm’s price will
lead to an increase in the quantity demanded of the other ﬁrm’s product. In
particular, each ﬁrm i faces the following demand curve:
qi = max{0, 24 −2pi + pj},

--- Sayfa 109 ---
94
8: Location, Partnership, and Social Unrest
 where qi is the quantity that ﬁrm i sells, pi is ﬁrm i ’s price, and pj is the other
ﬁrm’s price. (The “maximum” operator is needed to ensure that quantity
demanded is never negative.)

Suppose that the maximum possible price is 20 and the minimum price
is zero, so the strategy space for each ﬁrm i is Si = [0, 20]. Both ﬁrms
produce with no costs.
(a)  What is ﬁrm i ’s proﬁt as a function of the strategy proﬁle ( p1, p2)? Let
each ﬁrm’s payoff be deﬁned as its proﬁt.
(b)  Show that for each ﬁrm i , prices less than 6 and prices greater than 11
are dominated strategies, whereas prices from 6 to 11 are not domi-
nated, so Bi = [6, 11].
(c)  Consider a reduced game in which ﬁrms select prices between x and
y, where x < y. What strategies are undominated in such a game? Use
your answer to compute the set of rationalizable strategies in the origi-
nal game.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
95
NASH EQUILIBRIUM 9
T
he concept of rationalizability embodies just a few simple assumptions
about what players know about each other and how players respond to their
own beliefs. The assumptions are that (1) people form beliefs about others’ be-
havior, (2) people best respond to their beliefs, and (3) these facts are common
knowledge among the players. The concept is quite weak in that no additional
assumptions about behavior are made. In particular, we do not assume that each
player’s beliefs are consistent with the strategies actually used by the other play-
ers. We saw at the end of Chapter 7 how strategic uncertainty can lead to very
uncoordinated outcomes; in the battle of the sexes, for example, both players
may receive their lowest possible payoffs if the expectation of one player is not
synchronized with the behavior of the other.
There are many settings in which rationalizability is the appropriate behav-
ioral concept. In particular, it is justiﬁed in studying situations in which people
have little history in common on which to coordinate their beliefs. Locating a
friend on your ﬁrst trip to Disneyland may ﬁt into this category, as long as you
have not communicated extensively with your friend (presumably because you
lost your cell phone or the battery ran down) and you have not agreed in advance
on places to meet under certain contingencies. In a more traditional economic
vein, bargaining between the buyer and the seller of a house or car often takes
place with strategic uncertainty. The parties may not have met each other previ-
ously and do not know what strategies each will adopt in the negotiation. They
may understand that they are both rational and sophisticated thinkers, which can
restrict how they act, but there is strategic uncertainty nonetheless.
In other settings, strategic uncertainty is resolved through a variety of social
institutions, such as norms, rules, or communication between the players. For
instance, if people can communicate before playing a game, they may discuss what
strategies each will take, and they may even agree on how the game will be played.
Communication therefore can reduce strategic uncertainty by bringing beliefs into
harmony with actual behavior. We can imagine how this is accomplished in coordi-
nation games, where the players can all beneﬁt from agreeing to a course of play. In
more adversarial settings, communication may not be quite as effective. In general,
communication that aligns the players’ expectations should be considered a form
of agreement, or contract. This interpretation is elaborated in later chapters.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
96
9: Nash Equilibrium
Historical factors also may coordinate beliefs and behavior. For example,
consider the game of deciding how to pass someone who is walking toward you
on the sidewalk. If neither of you changes direction, you will collide. At least one
of you must alter your path to prevent a collision. But if you both move toward
the street or you both move away from the street, then you will also collide and
be embarrassed to boot. You are better off if one person moves a bit toward the
street and the other moves a bit away from the street. You need to coordinate your
actions. One way of doing so is to yell to each other commands such as “move to
your right please,” but yelling seems as embarrassing as colliding.
In fact, the “avoiding people on the street” game is played every day in
society, and historical precedent has served to align our beliefs and behavior. At
some point in the United States, people began to favor the practice of organiz-
ing the sidewalk in much the same way as streets are organized for automobile
travel. People generally move to their right to avoid others. How this transpired
may not be known; perhaps it was the result of random behavior. Regardless
of its origins, people have come to expect that others will prevent collisions
by moving to their right. It is a social convention, one reinforced every day as
people conform to it.
History, rules, and communication are just as effective in coordinating
beliefs and behavior in economic settings as they are in walking games. Firms
that compete over time often settle into a routine in which the manager of each
ﬁrm has learned to accurately predict the strategies employed by his rivals each
week. Business partners who work together on similar projects over and over
again learn what to expect from each other. They can also communicate to coor-
dinate their actions. Bargaining over the price of a house can be moderated by
social norms, even when the parties have little personal experience with the
market. The parties’ beliefs and behavior are often guided by how others have
played the game in the past.
The point of this chapter is to begin to explore rational behavior when
actions and beliefs are coordinated by social institutions. The underlying idea
is that through some social force (such as those just discussed) behavior in a
game is coordinated, or congruous. Congruity can refer to consistent and regu-
lar behavior in a game that is played over and over in society or by the same
parties who interact repeatedly. Congruity can also refer to behavior in a one-
shot game in which communication or social history has aligned the beliefs
of each player with the strategies of the others. Here are three versions of the
congruity concept, geared toward different settings:
1. A game is repeatedly played in society or by a group of agents. The behav-
ior of the players “settles down” in that the same strategies are used each
time the game is played.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
97
Nash Equilibrium
2. The players meet before playing a game and reach an agreement on the
strategy that each will use. Subsequently, the players individually honor the
agreement.
3. An outside mediator recommends to the players that they adopt a speciﬁc
strategy proﬁle in a game. Each player, expecting that the others will follow
the mediator’s suggestion, has the incentive to follow the mediator as well.
Instead of studying these interpretations separately, we shall examine their
common element—the combination of best-response behavior and reduced stra-
tegic uncertainty.
NASH EQUILIBRIUM
The simplest notion of congruity is that the players are best responding in a setting
of strategic certainty. In other words, the players coordinate on a single strategy
proﬁle. In such a case, the players’ beliefs and behavior are consistent, with each
player’s belief about another player’s strategy concentrated on the actual strategy
that the other player uses. Because of these accurate beliefs, the players are best
responding to each others’ strategies. To say it differently, the players’ strategies
are “mutual best responses.”
The idea of mutual best response is one of the many contributions of Nobel
laureate John Nash to the ﬁeld of game theory. It is a simple, but extremely
powerful, theory of behavior. Nash used the term equilibrium for this concept;
we now call it Nash equilibrium.1 Here is the formal deﬁnition:
A strategy proﬁle s ∈S is a Nash equilibrium if and only if si ∈BRi
 (s−i
 )
for each player i. That is, ui
 (si, s−i
 ) Ú ui
 (s=
i, s−i
 ) for every s=
i ∈Si and each
player i.
For example, consider a game that is repeated in society, and suppose that over
time behavior settles to the point that it conforms to a single strategy proﬁle, s. If
player i believes that the behavior of the others today will correspond to histori-
cal behavior, then player i should play a best response to s−i. If st is not a best
response to s−i, then s is not a good description of what will happen today. That
is, s can be stable over time only if si is a best response to s−i for each player i.
As another example, consider the setting in which the players meet before
playing a game and agree on a strategy proﬁle s that should be played. The
1Nash reported his equilibrium concept in “Non-Cooperative Games,” Annals of Mathematics 51 (1951):
286–295.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
98
9: Nash Equilibrium
players each have an individual incentive to abide by the agreement only if each
player’s prescribed strategy is a best response to the prescription for the others.
If the agreement is to play strategy proﬁle s and si F BRi
 (s−i
 ) for some player i,
then this player has no incentive to abide by the agreement and will choose a
strategy that is different from si .
To illustrate the concept of a Nash equilibrium, consider the classic normal-
form games pictured in Figure 3.4. The games are redrawn in Figure 9.1, and
the Nash equilibria are designated by circles around the relevant cells of the
matrices. The set of rationalizable strategies also is indicated for each game (in
that strategies removed by the iterated dominance procedure are stricken). Note
that all strategies are rationalizable for every game except the pigs game and the
prisoners’ dilemma.
In the prisoners’ dilemma, regardless of the other player’s strategy, the
only best response is to play strategy D. We have D ∈BRi
 (D) = {D} for both
FIGURE 9.1
Equilibrium and rationalizability
in the classic normal forms.
H
T
H
T
1, -1
-1, 1
-1, 1
1, -1
2
1
Matching Pennies
C
D
C
D
2, 2
0, 3
3, 0
1, 1
2
1
Prisoners’ Dilemma
Opera
Movie
Opera
Movie
0, 0
0, 0
2
1
Battle of the Sexes
2, 1
1, 2
H
D
H
D
0, 0
3, 1
1, 3
2, 2
2
1
Hawk-Dove/Chicken
A
B
A
B
0, 0
0, 0
2
1
Coordination
1, 1
1, 1
A
B
A
B
2, 2
0, 0
0, 0
1, 1
2
1
Pareto Coordination
P
D
P
D
2, 3
6, -1
S
D
Pigs
4, 2
0, 0

--- Sayfa 114 ---
99
Nash Equilibrium
players, and so the strategy proﬁle (D, D) is the Nash equilibrium of the pris-
oners’ dilemma. The battle of the sexes has two equilibria, one in which the
couple coordinates on the opera and one in which both players go to the movie.
That is, (O, O) and (M, M) are both Nash equilibria of the battle of the sexes.
If one’s friend selects O, then O is the only best response; if the friend chooses
M, one must do the same. Note that even though it might appear that the payoffs
are circled in Figure 9.1, the circles designate the cells (strategy proﬁles). Nash
equilibria are strategy proﬁles, not payoffs. Thus, if you had to report the Nash
equilibria of the pigs game, you should write “(P, D),” not “(2, 3).”
A more stringent version of the equilibrium concept is called strict Nash
equilibrium. A strategy proﬁle s is called a strict Nash equilibrium if and only if
{si } = BRi
 (s−i
 ) for each player i. In words, player i ’s strategy si is the only best
response to s−i. You should verify that in the games of Figure 9.1, all of the Nash
equilibria are also strict Nash equilibria.
In general, Nash equilibria are not difﬁcult to locate in matrix games. Just
look for proﬁles such that each player’s strategy is a best response to the strategy
of the other. You can check all of the strategy proﬁles (each cell of the matrix)
one at a time. Alternatively, you can ﬁnd the best responses of player 1 to each
of the strategies of player 2 and then ﬁnd the best responses of player 2 to each
of the strategies of player 1. For an illustration of the second method, exam-
ine the game in Figure 9.2(a). Let us ﬁnd player 1’s best responses to each of
player 2’s strategies. By scanning player 1’s payoffs in the ﬁrst column of the
matrix, you can see that the greatest payoff for player 1 appears in the second
row. Therefore, K is player 1’s best response to X. In Figure 9.2(b), I have indi-
cated this best response by underlining player 1’s payoff of 8 in the (K, X) cell
of the matrix. Proceeding to the second column, we ﬁnd that M is player 1’s
FIGURE 9.2
Determining Nash equilibria.
X
Y
Z
(a)
J
K
L
M
5, 6
3, 7
8, 3
3, 1
0, 4
5, 2
7, 5
4, 4
5, 6
3, 4
7, 5
3, 3
2
1
X
Y
Z
(b)
J
K
L
M
5, 6
3, 7
8, 3
3, 1
0, 4
5, 2
7, 5
4, 4
5, 6
3, 5
7, 5
3, 3
2
1

--- Sayfa 115 ---
100
9: Nash Equilibrium
best response to Y, which is indicated in Figure 9.2(b) by the payoff of 7 that is
underlined. Examination of the third column reveals that both K and L are best
responses to Z; thus, both of the 5s in this column are underlined.
Our analysis of the game in Figure 9.2(a) continues with the evaluation of
player 2’s best responses. To ﬁnd player 2’s best response to J, we scan across
the ﬁrst row of the matrix and look at player 2’s payoff numbers. The largest is
7, which I have underlined in Figure 9.2(b). In other words, Y is player 2’s best
response to J. Moving ahead to the second through fourth rows of the matrix, we
ﬁnd that X is player 2’s best response to K, Z is player 2’s best response to L,
and both X and Y are best responses to M. These best responses are designated
with the appropriately underlined numbers in Figure 9.2(b).
Having located the players’ best responses, we can easily ﬁnd the Nash
equilibria of the game in Figure 9.2(a). There is a Nash equilibrium at each cell
in which the payoff numbers for both players are underlined in Figure 9.2(b).
For example, (K, X) is a Nash equilibrium—K is player 1’s best response to X,
and X is player 2’s best response to K. The game has two other Nash equilibria:
(L, Z) and (M, Y). Observe that (K, X) is a strict Nash equilibrium because K
and X are the only best responses to one another. Neither (L, Z) nor (M, Y) is a
strict Nash equilibrium.
There are a few things you should keep in mind at this point. First, each
Nash equilibrium is a rationalizable strategy. (Incidentally, this is not difﬁcult
to prove; you might give it a try.) Because of this relation, you can restrict your
search for equilibria to rationalizable strategies. Second, as Figure 9.1 indicates,
some games have more than one Nash equilibrium. I will address the economic
consequences of this later, but for now this should at least be taken as a caveat
not to conclude your search for equilibria after ﬁnding just one. Third, some
games have no equilibrium. Matching pennies is a good example. It is a game
of pure conﬂict, where players can only win or lose. A player who loses under
a given strategy proﬁle will want to change her strategy so that she wins and
the other loses; but then the other will want to change her strategy, and so forth.
EQUILIBRIUM OF THE PARTNERSHIP GAME
As you have seen, it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd Nash equilibria in matrix games. In
fact, computing equilibria of games with inﬁnite strategy spaces also is not difﬁ-
cult. One need only compute the best-response mappings for each player and
then determine which strategy proﬁles, if any, satisfy them all simultaneously.
This usually amounts to solving a system of equations.
To illustrate the computation of a Nash equilibrium, let us consider the part-
nership game discussed in Chapter 8. The best-response functions for this game

--- Sayfa 116 ---
101
Coordination and Social Welfare
are pictured in Figure 8.2. Player 1’s best response function is
BR1
 (y) = 1 + cy,
where y is the expected value of player 1’s belief about player 2’s strategy.
Player 2’s best-response function is
BR2
 (x) = 1 + cx,
where x is the mean of player 2’s belief.
A Nash equilibrium for this game is a strategy proﬁle (x*, y*) with the
property that
x* ∈BR1
 (y*) and y* ∈BR2
 (x*).
Because we consider BR1 and BR2 to be functions in this example, this property
can be expressed as
x* = BR1
 (y*) and y* = BR2
 (x*).
That is, the point (x*, y*) should lie on the best-response functions of both
players. There is one such point and it is obviously located where the two best-
response functions cross. We can compute this point by solving the following
system of equations:
x* = 1 + cy* and y* = 1 + cx*.
Substituting the second equation into the ﬁrst yields x* = 1 + c(1 + cx*),
which simpliﬁes to x*(1 −c2) = 1 + c. Noting that 1 −c2 = (1 + c)(1 −c),
we therefore have x* = 1>(1 −c). Substituting this equation into the second
equation yields y* = 1>(1 −c). Observe that this strategy proﬁle is the same as
that computed in Chapter 8. In this game, rationalizability and Nash equilibrium
predict the same, single strategy proﬁle.
COORDINATION AND SOCIAL WELFARE
We observed earlier that rationalizability does not necessarily imply coordi-
nated behavior by the players. Nash equilibrium, on the other hand, implies
some coordination because it embodies a notion of congruity for a single strat-
egy proﬁle. However, Nash equilibria do not always entail strategies that are
preferred by the players as a group. For instance, the only Nash equilibrium of
the prisoners’ dilemma is inefﬁcient, in that both players would be better off if
they played differently. Thus, we note the prisoners’ dilemma as an example of
individual incentives interfering with the interests of the group.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
102
9: Nash Equilibrium
Sometimes a socially inefﬁcient outcome prevails not because of conﬂict
between individual incentives but because there is more than one way to coor-
dinate. Consider the Pareto coordination game in Figure 9.1. This game has two
Nash equilibria on which the players may coordinate. The equilibrium (B, B)
is inefﬁcient; both players would rather be in the (A, A) equilibrium than in
the (B, B) one. But (B, B) is an equilibrium nonetheless. Given that the other
chooses strategy B, each player’s only rational move is to select B as well.
Lest you think that inefﬁcient equilibria should be ruled out in practice,
consider some examples of inefﬁcient equilibria in the world—which, one
might argue, are more the rule than the exception. The most well-known
historical example is the layout of most computer keyboards and typewriters
in the English-speaking world. The standard arrangement of keys (starting with
QWERTY in the third row) was devised many years ago by the founder of
the typewriter to minimize “jamming” of the keys. On mechanical typewrit-
ers, this problem is created when adjacent keys are pushed at nearby points of
time, causing the associated arms that strike the ribbon to tangle. The inventor
arranged the keys so that those that are likely to be used in close proximity (such
as “a” and “n”) are not adjacent on the keyboard.
Unfortunately, many people believe the QWERTY keyboard is not the most
efﬁcient layout for speedy typing. Furthermore, “jamming” is not a problem
with modern typewriters and computers. In the 1930s, August Dvorak and
William Dealey, through a careful study of word usage in the English language,
devised another keyboard layout that is commonly referred to as the Dvorak
keyboard. Some people assert that those who learn to type with this keyboard
can do so at rates substantially higher than is possible with QWERTY.2 We thus
must ask the economic question: Why is the QWERTY keyboard still the norm?
The answer is that QWERTY is entrenched and few people have the incen-
tive to switch to a new format, given that most others in the world use QWERTY.
In the Pareto coordination game of Figure 9.1, think of player 1 as the typical
computer owner and player 2 as the typical computer manufacturer. Strategy
A is to buy or produce a Dvorak keyboard, and strategy B is to buy or produce
the QWERTY keyboard. If most people in the world are trained to use only the
QWERTY design—that is, they have adopted strategy B—it is obviously best
for a computer maker to build QWERTY keyboards. Furthermore, because most
computer keyboards in existence are QWERTY, the typical youngster will be
advised to practice on QWERTY rather than Dvorak, and the next generation
2A woman named Barbara Blackburn has been cited in the Guinness Book of World Records as the fastest
typist in the world. She typed at a comfortable 170 words per minute by using the Dvorak system, with a
top speed of 212. You can, too, by converting your computer keyboard to the Dvorak layout, which merely
requires a minor alteration of software. Of late, some have argued that the advantage of the Dvorak keyboard
is actually quite minor, but it still makes for a good example.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
103
Coordination and Social Welfare
of computer buyers will demand QWERTY keyboards. Given that the English-
speaking world began typing with QWERTY, the Dvorak keyboard has little
chance of widespread success. Besides, computerized speech recognition may
make the keyboard obsolete, at which time the QWERTY-Dvorak debate will be
relegated to history books. I am proud to note that part subs this textbook were
gem elated using speech recognition software.
The competition between VHS and Betamax videotape formats during the
1980s is another good example. Many people regarded the Betamax format
as superior in the quality of reproduction, yet this format died out. Its demise
may be the simple result of random factors in the early VCR market or shrewd
marketing by VHS producers. There was a time in which both formats were
popular, although it was obvious that efﬁciency would be enhanced if every-
one used the same format. Gradually, VHS gained a greater market share. At
some point, the VHS movement picked up steam and decisively moved toward
domination, as new video buyers rationally ﬂocked to the format that appeared
to be taking hold. A similar competition brieﬂy occurred in the market for high-
deﬁnition video storage between Blu-Ray and HD-DVD discs. However, in this
case the manufacturers quickly recognized the looming inefﬁciency of a failure
to coordinate, and they agreed to retire the HD-DVD standard in favor of Blu-
Ray. The question of which is the better technology is probably not relevant at
this point, for the world is rapidly moving to solid-state and cloud data storage.
As a ﬁnal example, consider cigarette lighters in automobiles. Years ago,
when there were no cell phones or automobile refrigerator units, auto manu-
facturers installed round cigarette lighters in dashboards. Many people smoked
while driving and they appreciated the little device that, when pressed, allowed
the ﬂow of electricity to pass through a resistant wire coil, creating heat sufﬁ-
cient to light a cigarette. Then came the electronic age and the ﬂow of electronic
gadgets to market. Manufacturers of cell phones—and other devices—realized
that folks would like to use their phones while driving (which is ill advised
because cell phone use while driving is on a par with drunkenness in its contri-
bution to trafﬁc accidents and is illegal in some states). These manufacturers
discovered that they could power the phones by using an adapter that ﬁts into a
cigarette lighter, and so they included the adapter in their designs.
Unfortunately, automobile cigarette lighters do not provide the most secure
electrical connection. The ﬂow of electricity is easily disrupted by bumps in the
road, as my wife and I discovered on a long camping trip for which we brought
a portable refrigerator—okay, we should have been “roughing it” anyway. There
are better, more reliable ways of getting electricity to devices; more secure plug
and socket connections can easily be implemented. But the auto producers and
the device manufacturers are in an inefﬁciently coordinated outcome, from
which neither side has a unilateral incentive to deviate. Automobile companies

--- Sayfa 119 ---
104
9: Nash Equilibrium
could, at a reasonable cost, design and install more secure electrical sockets
in their cars, but they have no incentive to do so if the device manufacturers
are using cigarette lighter adapters. Further, the device manufacturers have no
incentive to adopt a different plug if automobile companies do not install the
new sockets. Perhaps USB ports will rescue society from this inefﬁcient coordi-
nation, at least for the use of low-power devices.
THE THIRD STRATEGIC TENSION
The QWERTY, VHS–Betamax, and auto examples are just a few of the ways
in which our world has coordinated inefﬁciently. It might be helpful for you to
look for more examples. On a thematic level, note that inefﬁcient coordination
poses a problem even if the players have the same preferences over outcomes
and there is no strategic uncertainty—that is, even if the players entirely eschew
the ﬁrst and second strategic tensions.3 Thus, the specter of inefﬁcient coordina-
tion is called the third strategic tension. You might start to contemplate whether
speciﬁc social or economic institutions can alleviate this tension as they might
alleviate strategic uncertainty (the second tension) in the real world. Further-
more, you can ruminate over how institutions help select between equilibria
in games such as the battle of the sexes, where players disagree about which
equilibrium is preferred.
Because the terms “joint” and “social” come up frequently in the context
of optimality and efﬁciency, some clariﬁcation is in order. When using these
terms, we should always make clear which set of people we are focusing on. For
example, we might say that two ﬁrms realize their joint optimal strategy proﬁle;
in this case, we are addressing only the ﬁrms’ welfare, not the utility of other
agents in the world (such as the ﬁrms’ customers). In fact, an outcome that is
jointly efﬁcient from the ﬁrms’ standpoint may be quite inefﬁcient with respect
to a larger set of actors. Generally, when I use the terms “joint” and “social,”
either (1) I will have speciﬁed the group or society of interest or (2) I will be
referring to the entire set of players in the game at hand.
CONGRUOUS SETS
Remember that the Nash equilibrium concept represents the extreme version of
congruity in which the players coordinate on a single strategy proﬁle. In some
settings, it may not be reasonable to expect such an extreme form of coordi-
nation. One reason is that there may not be a social institution that serves to
3Recall that the ﬁrst two tensions are (1) the clash between individual and group incentives and (2) strategic
uncertainty and its implications for joint optimality.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
105
Congruous Sets
coordinate beliefs and behavior. Another reason is that coordination on a single
strategy proﬁle may be inconsistent with best-response behavior in some games.
For an interesting example, consider the game shown in Figure 9.3. Suppose
the players can communicate before the game to discuss how to coordinate their
play. Would they coordinate on the Nash equilibrium strategy proﬁle (z, m)?
Perhaps, but it would be a shame, for the players would get higher payoffs if
they could coordinate on not playing strategies z and m. Unfortunately, this kind
of coordination cannot be captured by the equilibrium notion, as (z, m) is the
only Nash equilibrium of the game.
One can deﬁne a more general notion of congruity that lies between ratio-
nalizability and Nash equilibrium, in which strategic uncertainty is reduced but
not always eliminated. The key is to associate the congruity idea with sets of
strategy proﬁles. For instance, for the game shown in Figure 9.3, consider the
set of strategy proﬁles X K {w, y} × {k, 1}. Notice that if player 1 is convinced
that player 2 will select either k or 1 (but not m), then player 1’s best response
must be w or y. Likewise, if player 2 thinks player 1 will select either w or y,
then player 2’s best responses are only strategies k and 1. We can say that the
set X is a congruous set because coordinating on X is consistent with common
knowledge of best-response behavior. Here is a precise and general deﬁnition:
Consider a set of strategy proﬁles X = X1 × X2 × g× Xn, where
Xi ⊂Si for each player i. The set X is called congruous if, for each player
i, a strategy si is included in Xi if and only if there is a belief u−i ∈X−i
(putting probability only on strategies in X−i
 ) such that si ∈BRi
 (u−i
 ).
The set X is called weakly congruous if, for each player i and each
strategy si ∈Xi, there is a belief u−i ∈X−i such that si ∈BRi
 (u−i
 ).
In words, X is weakly congruous if each of the strategies in Xi can be ratio-
nalized with respect to X−i. It is congruous if Xi contains exactly those strategies
that can be so rationalized.4 Note that a strategy proﬁle s is a Nash equilibrium
4Note that in the formal deﬁnitions, “X−i” denotes the set of probability distributions on S−i that put positive
probability only on strategies in X−i.
FIGURE 9.3
A congruous set.
k
l
m
w
y
z
8, 6
6, 8
6, 8
8, 6
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
5, 5
2
1

--- Sayfa 121 ---
106
9: Nash Equilibrium
if and only if {s} is weakly congruous. Also, s is a strict Nash equilibrium if and
only if {s} is congruous.5 See Appendix B for more notes on congruence and
rationalizability.
ASIDE: EXPERIMENTAL GAME THEORY
At this point in our tour of game theory, it is worthwhile to pause and reﬂect
on the purpose and practicality of the theory. As I have already emphasized
(and will continue to emphasize) in this book, game theory helps us to organize
our thinking about strategic situations. It provides discipline for our analysis
of the relation between the outcome of strategic interaction and our underly-
ing assumptions about technology and behavior. Furthermore, the theory gives
us tools for prescribing how people ought to behave—or, at least, what things
people ought to consider—in strategic settings.
You might start to ask, however, whether the theory accurately describes and
predicts real behavior. The answer is not so straightforward. There are two ways
of evaluating whether game theory is successful in this regard. First, you might
gather data about how people behave in real strategic situations. For example,
you can observe where competing ﬁrms locate in a city, how team members
interact within a ﬁrm, how managers contract with workers, and so forth. Then
you can construct game-theoretic models in an attempt to make sense of the
data. You can even perform statistical tests of the models. In fact, many empiri-
cal economists dedicate themselves to this line of work. These economists are
constantly challenged by how to reconcile the complexities of the real world
with necessarily abstract and unadorned theoretical models.
The second way of evaluating game theory’s predictive power is to bring
the real world closer to the simple models. You can, for example, run labora-
tory experiments in which subjects are asked to play some simple matrix games.
In fact, this sort of research—which is called experimental game theory—has
become a little industry in itself. In many universities throughout the world, exper-
imental economists herd students into laboratories that are ﬁlled with computer
stations, attracting the students with the prospect of winning signiﬁcant amounts
of money. In comparison with experimental work done by researchers in other
disciplines, the economists certainly have gotten one thing right: they pay well.
By paying the subjects according to their performance in games, experimenters
give them a strong incentive to think about how best to play.6
5Relative to weak congruity, a congruous set X has the additional property of being best-response complete,
meaning that for each player i and each belief u−i ∈X−i, BRi
 (u−i
 ) ⊂Xi. More common terminology is that X
is a “curb (closed under best response) set.” These sets were analyzed by K. Basu and J.W. Weibull, “Strategy
Subsets Closed Under Rational Behavior,” Economics Letters 36 (1991): 141–146.
6Experiments in the classroom also are popular, and instructive to boot. If you are enrolled in a game-theory
course and your professor does not run any classroom experiments, I dare say that you are being shortchanged.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
107
Guided Exercise
The downside of experimental research is that the games people play in the
laboratory are often far removed from the sort of real strategic settings we dearly
care about. On the plus side, however, the laboratory affords the experimenter
considerable control over the strategic environment. The experimenter can, in
essence, put the subjects into any game of interest. There is an important restric-
tion, however: in some settings, the experimenter cannot completely control the
subjects’ payoffs. In particular, the subjects may care about more than just their
monetary rewards. People are often motivated in ways the simple theoretical
models fail to capture: spite, envy, fairness, schadenfreude, to name a few.
Experiments help us identify people’s motivations (and not just when the
people are dramatic actors). Experiments also help us determine people’s degree
of strategic sophistication, which concerns whether they are really thinking and
behaving in the way that our hyper-rationality-based theories predict. To the
extent that behavior deviates from theory in a systematic way, experiments can
guide us in improving our models.
A good example of high-quality experimental research is the work of Miguel
Costa-Gomes, Vincent Crawford, and Bruno Broseta. These economists evalu-
ated strategic sophistication by having subjects play matrix games and by track-
ing, through a clever computer interface, the way subjects gather and use infor-
mation. The research attempts to reveal whether subjects are actively thinking
about each other’s preferences in the way rationalizability and equilibrium theory
predict.7 The researchers ﬁnd considerable heterogeneity in subjects’ strategic
thinking, ranging from unsophisticated to moderately sophisticated, “boundedly
rational” behavior. Many subjects appeared to follow rules that respect one or
two rounds of iterated dominance, leading to equilibrium play in some simple
games but deviating systematically from equilibrium in more complex games.
This theme is consistent with the greater experimental literature.8
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the duopoly game from Exercise 5 of Chapter 8, in which
two ﬁrms simultaneously and independently select prices that are greater than or
equal to zero. Denote ﬁrm 1’s price as p1 and ﬁrm 2’s price as p2 . After the prices
are set, consumers demand 10 −p1 + p2 units of the good that ﬁrm 1 produces,
7See M. Costa-Gomes, V. Crawford, and B. Broseta, “Cognition and Behavior in Normal-Form Games: An
Experimental Study,” Econometrica 69 (2001): 1193–1235.
8The behavioral game-theory literature is extensive. If you are interested in the subject, you can browse through
some of the books and papers that survey the literature. Two sources are V. Crawford, “Theory and Experi-
ment in the Analysis of Strategic Interaction,” in D. Kreps and K. Wallis, eds., Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Theory and Applications (Seventh World Congress, vol. I, Econometric Society Monograph
No. 27) (Cambridge, UK, and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997), pp. 206–242; and J. Kagel and
A. Roth, eds., The Handbook of Experimental Economics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).

--- Sayfa 123 ---
108
9: Nash Equilibrium
and they demand 10 −p2 + p1 units of the good that ﬁrm 2 produces. Assume
that each ﬁrm produces at zero cost, so ﬁrm i ’s payoff (proﬁt) is
(10 −pi + pj
 ) pi = 10pi −p2
i + pi pj,
where pi is ﬁrm i ’s price and pj is the other ﬁrm’s price. Find the Nash equilib-
rium of this game.
Solution: A Nash equilibrium in this game is a proﬁle of prices for the two
ﬁrms, p*1 and p*2, such that p*1 is a best response to p*2 for ﬁrm 1 and p*2 is a
best response to p*1 for ﬁrm 2. We begin by calculating the ﬁrms’ best-response
functions. Letting i denote one of the ﬁrms, we ﬁnd i ’s best-response function
by taking the derivative of this ﬁrm’s payoff function with respect to pi , setting
it equal to zero, and solving for pi . The derivative condition is
10 −2pi + pj = 0,
which, solving for pi , yields pi = 5 + (pj>2). Thus, ﬁrm i ’s best response, writ-
ten as a function, is
BRi
 (pj) = 5 +
pj
2 .
Thus, we have the following system of equations:
p1 = 5 + p2
2 and
p2 = 5 + p1
2 ,
which is solved by p*1 = p*2 = 10. That is, the Nash equilibrium is (10, 10).
By the way, a shortcut to the solution involves guessing that, because the
game is symmetric, the Nash equilibrium might be symmetric as well. That
is, p*1 = p*2 = k for some number k. Using this to substitute for the prices in
the best-response equation pi = 5 + (pj
 >2) (imposing the symmetry), we have
k = 5 + (k>2), which simpliﬁes to k = 10. This shortcut maneuver is worth
trying when examining other symmetric games, but it does not always work
because some symmetric games do not have symmetric equilibria.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the normal-form game pictured here.
a
b
c
w
x
y
5, 2
3, 4
6, 2
2, 3
8, 4
8, 8
1, 1
0, 1
9, 2
2
1

--- Sayfa 124 ---
109
Exercises
(a) What are the Nash equilibria of this game?
(b) Which of these equilibria are efﬁcient?
(c) Is the set X = {w, x} × {b, c} weakly congruent?
2.  Find the Nash equilibria of and the set of rationalizable strategies for the
games in Exercise 1 at the end of Chapter 6.
3. Find the Nash equilibria of the games in Exercise 1 of Chapter 7.
4.  Compute the Nash equilibria of the following location game. There are two
people who simultaneously select numbers between zero and one. Suppose
player 1 chooses s1 and player 2 chooses s2. If si < sj, then player i gets a
payoff of (si + sj
 )>2 and player j obtains 1 −(si + sj
 )>2, for i = 1, 2. If
s1 = s2, then both players get a payoff of 1>2.
5.  Find the Nash equilibrium of the following normal-form game:
S1 = [0, 1], S2 = [0, 1], u1
 (s1, s2
 ) = 3s1 −2s1s2 −2s2
1, and u2
 (s1, s2) =
s2 + 2s1s2 −2s2
2. (The solution is interior, so you can use calculus.)
6.  Consider a game in which, simultaneously, player 1 selects any real number
x and player 2 selects any real number y. The payoffs are given by:
u1
 (x, y) = 2x −x2 + 2xy
u2
 (x, y) = 10y −2xy −y2.
(a)  Calculate and graph each player’s best-response function as a function
of the opposing player’s pure strategy.
(b) Find and report the Nash equilibria of the game.
(c) Determine the rationalizable strategy proﬁles for this game.
7. Consider the normal-form game pictured here:
X
Y
Z
A
B
2, 0
1, 3
5, 4
1, 3
5, x
6, 2
2
1
All of the payoff numbers are speciﬁed, with the exception of that denoted
by x. Find a number for x such that the following three statements are all true:
(B, X) is a Nash equilibrium, (A, Z) is an efﬁcient strategy proﬁle, and, for
the belief u1 = (1
2, 1
2), Y is a best response for player 2; that is, Y ∈BR2
 (u1
 ).

--- Sayfa 125 ---
110
9: Nash Equilibrium
8.  Consider the nine-region location game presented in Chapter 8, where two
vendors simultaneously choose locations and then customers walk to the
nearest vendor to purchase a single unit. That is, the strategy space for each
player i is Si = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. Assume that there are ten custom-
ers in each region. Suppose that, unlike in the standard model, each custom-
er is only willing to walk up to two regions away. For example, customers
in region 1 are willing to walk to regions 2 or 3 to purchase a unit, but they
will not travel to any higher-numbered regions. Thus, each player’s payoff
is the number of customers up to two regions away who are closer to this
player’s location than to the other player’s location, with the customers who
are indifferent dividing evenly.
(a)  Describe the strategies that are eliminated in the ﬁrst two rounds of the
rationalizability procedure.
(b) This game has exactly two Nash equilibria. Find them.
9.  Consider a two-player game with the following strategy spaces: S1 = [0, 5]
and S2 = [0, 5]. Suppose the players’ best-response functions, s1 = BR1
 (s2
 )
and s2 = BR2
 (s1), are as pictured here.
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
BR2
BR1
s1
s2
(a) Does this game have any Nash equilibria? If so, what are they?
(b) What is the set of rationalizable strategy proﬁles for this game?
10.  Is the following statement true or false? If it is true, explain why. If it is
false, provide a game that illustrates that it is false. “If a Nash equilibrium is
not strict, then it is not efﬁcient.”

--- Sayfa 126 ---
111
Exercises
11.  This exercise asks you to consider what happens when players choose their
actions by a simple rule of thumb instead of by reasoning. Suppose that
two players play a speciﬁc ﬁnite simultaneous-move game many times. The
ﬁrst time the game is played, each player selects a pure strategy at random.
If player i has mi strategies, then she plays each strategy si with probability
1>mi. At all subsequent times at which the game is played, however, each
player i plays a best response to the pure strategy actually chosen by the
other player the previous time the game was played. If player i has k strate-
gies that are best responses, then she randomizes among them, playing each
strategy with probability 1>k.
(a)  Suppose that the game being played is a prisoners’ dilemma. Explain
what will happen over time.
(b)  Next suppose that the game being played is the battle of the sexes. In the
long run, as the game is played over and over, does play always settle
down to a Nash equilibrium? Explain.
(c)  What if, by chance, the players happen to play a strict Nash equilibrium
the ﬁrst time they play the game? What will be played in the future?
Explain how the assumption of a strict Nash equilibrium, rather than a
nonstrict Nash equilibrium, makes a difference here.
(d)  Suppose that, for the game being played, a particular strategy si is not
rationalizable. Is it possible that this strategy would be played in the
long run? Explain carefully.
12.  Consider a two-player game and suppose that s* and t* are Nash equilibri-
um strategy proﬁles in the game. Must it be the case that {s*1 , t*1} × {s*2 , t*2}
is a weakly congruous strategy set? Explain why or why not.
13.  Consider the following n-player game. Simultaneously and independently,
the players each select either X, Y, or Z. The payoffs are deﬁned as follows.
Each player who selects X obtains a payoff equal to g, where g is the num-
ber of players who select Z. Each player who selects Y obtains a payoff of
2a, where a is the number of players who select X. Each player who selects
Z obtains a payoff of 3b, where b is the number of players who select Y.
Note that a + b + g = n.
(a)  Suppose n = 2. Represent this game in the normal form by drawing the
appropriate matrix.
(b)  In the case of n = 2, does this game have a Nash equilibrium? If so,
describe it.
(c)  Suppose n = 11. Does this game have a Nash equilibrium? If so, describe
an equilibrium and explain how many Nash equilibria there are.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
112
9: Nash Equilibrium
14.  Heather and David (players 1 and 2) are partners in a handmade postcard
business. They each put costly effort into the business, which then deter-
mines their proﬁts. However, unless they each exert at least 1 unit of effort,
there are no revenues at all. In particular, each player i chooses an effort
level ei Ú 0. Player i ’s payoff is
ui
 (ei, ej) = c
−ei
if ej < 1,
ei
 (ej −1)2 + ei −1
2e2
i
if ej Ú 1.
where j denotes the other player.
(a) Prove that (0,0) is a Nash equilibrium.
(b)  Graph the players’ best responses as a function of each other’s
strategies.
(c) Find all of the other Nash equilibria.
15.  Suppose you know the following for a particular three-player game: The
space of strategy proﬁles S is ﬁnite. Also, for every s ∈S, it is the case that
u2
 (s) = 3u1
 (s), u3
 (s) = [u1
 (s)]2, and u1
 (s) ∈[0, 1].
(a) Must this game have a Nash equilibrium? Explain your answer.
(b)  Must this game have an efﬁcient Nash equilibrium? Explain your
answer.
(c)  Suppose that in addition to the information given above, you know that
s* is a Nash equilibrium of the game. Must s* be an efﬁcient strat-
egy proﬁle? Explain your answer; if you answer “no,” then provide a
counterexample.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
113
OLIGOPOLY, TARIFFS, CRIME, AND VOTING 10
T
he Nash equilibrium concept is widely applied by practitioners of game
theory. Almost every modern social scientist who has dabbled with formal
models has called on, or at least argued about, the concept. Nash equilibrium
also lies at the heart of more sophisticated concepts of congruity, including most
of those discussed in the remainder of this book. This chapter surveys just a few
of the classic games to which Nash’s concept is routinely applied; more are pre-
sented as exercises at the end of this chapter. The examples will give you some
practice in computation of equilibria. The examples also demonstrate some of
the earliest applications of the theory to the subjects of industrial organization
and international relations.
COURNOT DUOPOLY MODEL
In the early 1800s, Augustin Cournot constructed a model of the interac-
tion between two ﬁrms, whereby the ﬁrms compete by choosing how much
to produce.1 Here is a version of his model. Suppose ﬁrms 1 and 2 produce
exactly the same good—that is, there is no product differentiation in the
market, so consumers do not care from which ﬁrm they purchase the good.
To be concrete, suppose the product is red brick. Simultaneously and inde-
pendently, the ﬁrms select the number of bricks to produce. Let q1 denote
ﬁrm 1’s quantity and q2 denote ﬁrm 2’s quantity, in thousands. Assume that
q1, q2 Ú 0. The total output in the industry is then q1 + q2. Assume that all of
the brick is sold, but the price that consumers are willing to pay depends on
the number of bricks produced.2 The demand for bricks is given by an inverse
relation between quantity and price—an inverse relation is the norm in most
markets (when price drops, consumers buy more). Suppose the price is given
by the simple function p = 1000 −q1 −q2. Also suppose each ﬁrm must pay
1Cournot’s analysis is contained in his book titled Recherches sur les Principes Mathématiques de la Théorie
des Richesses, published in 1838. A translation is Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory
of Wealth (New York: Macmillan, 1897).
2Indeed, if the price were close enough to zero, I would be motivated to build a brick walkway in my backyard.
If the price were close to inﬁnity, I would be motivated to change professions.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
114
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
a production cost of $100 per thousand bricks. Firms wish to maximize their
proﬁts.
To compute the equilibrium of this market game, we start by specifying the
normal form. Because each ﬁrm selects a quantity, we have S1 = [0, ) and
S2 = [0, ). Each ﬁrm’s payoff is its proﬁt, which is revenue (price times quan-
tity) minus cost. Thus, ﬁrm 1’s payoff is
u1
 (q1, q2
 ) = (1000 −q1 −q2
 ) q1 −100q1
and ﬁrm 2’s payoff is
u2
 (q1, q2
 ) = (1000 −q1 −q2
 ) q2 −100q2.
Next, we calculate the best-response functions for the ﬁrms. Because we
will be looking for a Nash equilibrium strategy proﬁle, we can think of each
ﬁrm’s best response as a function of the other ﬁrm’s quantity (rather than a
belief about this quantity). Observe that ﬁrm 1’s payoff function is a downward
parabola, as a function of q1 . To ﬁnd ﬁrm 1’s optimal strategy, we use calculus
to determine the quantity that maximizes this proﬁt. Taking the partial derivative
of u1 with respect to q1 and setting this equal to zero yields
1000 −2q1 −q2 −100 = 0.
Solving for q1, we get q1 = 450 −q2
 >2. Thus, ﬁrm 1’s best-response function
is BR1
 (q2) = 450 −q2
 >2. The game is symmetric, so the same analysis reveals
ﬁrm 2’s best-response function to be BR2
 (q1) = 450 −q1
 >2.
Finally, we determine the quantities that satisfy both best-response functions.
That is, we look for q*1 and q*2 such that BR1
 (q*2
 ) = q*1 and BR2(q*1
 ) = q*2. You can
easily check that these equalities are solved by q*1 = 300 and q*2 = 300. This is
the Nash equilibrium strategy proﬁle: each ﬁrm produces 300,000 red bricks.3
The Nash equilibrium in the Cournot game is inefﬁcient from the ﬁrms’ point
of view. In this sense, the Cournot game is like the prisoners’ dilemma. To see this,
note that both ﬁrms would be better off if they each produced 225,000 bricks—you
should convince yourself of this by demonstrating that these quantities actually
maximize the sum of the ﬁrms’ proﬁts. Firms overproduce relative to their joint
optimal production levels. Overproduction results because each ﬁrm does not value
the proﬁt of the other. Consider a marginal increase in the quantity selected by a
ﬁrm. This increase in quantity expands the ﬁrm’s sales quantity, but it decreases
3Although the modern rudiments of game theory had not been invented until many years after Cournot’s work,
his theory predicted the Nash equilibrium outcome as the stable outcome of a dynamic process, whereby ﬁrms
alternate in playing a best response to each other’s strategies. Nash’s special contribution (along with those
of contemporaries, such as von Neumann) was to build the game theory apparatus and deﬁne the equilibrium
concept for general games.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
115
Bertrand Duopoly Model
the market price relative to production (marginal) cost. The ﬁrm balances these
opposing effects to maximize proﬁt. However, the ﬁrm’s private costs and beneﬁts
of raising quantity do not equal joint costs and beneﬁts. In particular, raising quan-
tity has a detrimental effect on the other ﬁrm’s payoff through the price change.
Because each ﬁrm’s price effect understates the joint price effect, the ﬁrms have the
incentive to overproduce relative to their joint optimal levels.
BERTRAND DUOPOLY MODEL
The Cournot model may seem a bit unreasonable because it has ﬁrms selecting
quantities rather than prices. In reality, ﬁrms select both prices and quantities.
But consumer demand implies a deﬁnite relation between these two variables,
so ﬁrms can be thought of selecting one ﬁrst (quantity or price) and then setting
the other to whatever the market will bear.
The technology of production typically dictates whether the ﬁrm effectively
commits to quantity or price. For example, in industries with long production
cycles (such as automobiles, pharmaceuticals, and agricultural products), ﬁrms
have to establish production targets well in advance of sales; later, prices adjust
as the quantity supplied meets demand. Thus, the Cournot model is well suited
to industries with long production cycles and/or short consumption cycles.
At the other extreme are industries in which ﬁrms can produce on short
notice. For instance, once a piece of software is designed, it can be freely and
instantaneously copied and transmitted to consumers in any quantity. In these
markets, ﬁrms set prices and then produce to accommodate demand. We can
analyze price-based competition using a variant of the Cournot model presented
in the previous section. Suppose that the two ﬁrms simultaneously and inde-
pendently set prices and then are forced to produce exactly the number of
bricks demanded by customers at these prices. As before, industry demand is
given by p = 1000 −q1 −q2, which can be written as Q = 1000 −p, where
Q = q1 + q2. That is, facing price p, consumers demand 1000 −p thousand
units of brick. Let us assume that consumers purchase brick from the ﬁrm that
charges the lower price. If the ﬁrms set equal prices, then suppose the demand is
split evenly—that is, each ﬁrm sells (1000 −p)>2 thousand units. Assume the
cost of production is 100 per thousand bricks, as before. A model like this one
was analyzed by Joseph Bertrand in the late 1800s.4
4The source is J. Bertrand, “Théorie Mathematique de la Richesse Sociale,” Journal des Savants 68 (1883):
499–508. Cournot also proposed a price-selection model for the case of “differentiated-product oligopoly,”
where a ﬁrm can charge a higher price than others and still expect some share of the market. Economists
generally regard Cournot as the founder of theories of quantity selection and differentiated-product price
selection. Bertrand is given credit for the pricing game with homogeneous products. Later, you will see how
Bertrand’s game has the ﬂavor of a particular auction environment.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
116
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
To specify the normal form of this game, note that the ﬁrms make one deci-
sion each (simultaneously and independently). Because each ﬁrm selects a
price, we have S1 = [0, ) and S2 = [0, ) under the assumption that negative
prices are not allowed. As before, each ﬁrm’s payoff is given by revenue (price
times quantity) minus cost. However, in this game, a ﬁrm will sell no brick if
it charges a price that is higher than the opponent’s price. Let p1 and p2 be the
prices set by the ﬁrms; further, given ﬁrm i, let j denote the other ﬁrm. Firm i ’s
payoff ui
 (p1, p2
 ) is then equal to
(1000 −pi
 ) pi −100(1000 −pi
 ) = (1000 −pi
 )(pi −100)
if pi < pj, whereas i ’s payoff equals 0 if pi > pj. In the event that pi = pj, ﬁrm
i ’s proﬁt is
(1000 −pi
 ) pi
2
−100(1000 −pi
 )
2
= (1000 −pi
 )( pi −100)
2
.
The Bertrand game requires a different analytical technique from that used
for the Cournot game because best-response functions are not well deﬁned in
the Bertrand model. To see this, note that if ﬁrm 2’s price is 200, then ﬁrm 1’s
optimal response is to select “the largest number that is less than 200.” There
is no such number, because one can always get closer and closer to 200 from
below (199, 199.99, 199.9999, etc.). However, ﬁnding the Nash equilibrium is
not difﬁcult. Remember that we are looking for a strategy proﬁle (p1 , p2) such
that p1 is a best response to p2 for ﬁrm 1 and p2 is a best response to p1 for ﬁrm 2.
First note that neither ﬁrm can be pricing below 100 in an equilibrium
because in this case at least one of the ﬁrms earns a negative proﬁt, and each
ﬁrm can guarantee itself a proﬁt of 0 by pricing at 100. Second, observe that
pi > pj Ú 100 cannot be the case in equilibrium for i = 1 or i = 2. Here, if
pj > 100, then ﬁrm i can raise its proﬁt (from 0) by changing its price to be
between 100 and pj . Further, if pj = 100, then ﬁrm j can increase its proﬁt by
raising its price while still undercutting the price charged by ﬁrm i. Third,
note that pi = pj > 100 is not possible in equilibrium because then each ﬁrm
gets half of the market demand but could grab all of the quantity demanded by
dropping its price by a tiny amount. These facts imply that the only possible
equilibrium prices are p1 = p2 = 100; that is, price equals marginal cost. We
verify that this is an equilibrium strategy proﬁle by noting that neither ﬁrm can
gain by raising or lowering its price.
Interestingly, the equilibrium of the Bertrand game yields zero proﬁt for
the ﬁrms, whereas the equilibrium of the Cournot game gives the ﬁrms positive
proﬁts. In addition, prices are lower and quantities are higher in the Bertrand
case. For intuition, note that in the Bertrand model, ﬁrms always have the

--- Sayfa 132 ---
117
Tariff Setting by Two Countries
incentive to undercut each other’s prices as long as price exceeds the marginal
cost of production because a ﬁrm can grab the entire market by doing so. But
in the Cournot model, ﬁrms have to raise output more than just a little to grab
signiﬁcant market share. In addition, large quantity increases cause large price
decreases, which have a negative effect on proﬁt. There is thus a sense in which
price-setting environments are more competitive than quantity-setting environ-
ments in markets with homogeneous products.
TARIFF SETTING BY TWO COUNTRIES
National governments can inﬂuence international trade (trade between consum-
ers and ﬁrms of different countries) by imposing barriers that restrict trade. The
most common of these barriers are taxes on the importation of foreign commod-
ities, commonly referred to as tariffs. A large country (or union of countries)
usually beneﬁts by setting a small import tariff, assuming that other countries
do not raise their tariffs, too. Consider, for example, the European Union (EU)
as an importer of bananas. Because the EU is a large economy in regard to its
share of world trade, an increase in the EU’s banana tariff causes the world’s
quantity demand for bananas to decrease and the international price of bananas
to fall. Simultaneously, the tariff drives up the price of bananas in the EU. Thus,
the tariff creates a wedge between the international price of bananas and the
price of bananas in the EU. When this wedge is large enough, the tariff revenue
may be larger than the loss in consumer welfare incurred by Europeans due to
the higher prices for bananas in the EU. Similar reasoning holds for the United
States as an importer of European cheese.
Thus, the United States and the EU have unilateral incentives to impose tariffs
(the United States sets a tariff on the importation of cheese, and the EU sets a tariff
on bananas). Unfortunately, the United States and the EU are both worse off when
tariffs are uniformly high, relative to uniformly low tariffs. Thus, the tariff-setting
game is a form of the prisoners’ dilemma. The two economies would beneﬁt by
cooperating to keep tariffs low, instead of narrowly pursuing their individual inter-
ests. In other words, they would beneﬁt by ﬁnding a way to enforce free trade.
A game-theoretic model can be used to illustrate the strategic aspects of
tariffs. Suppose there are two countries that are labeled 1 and 2. Let xi be the tariff
level of country i (in percent), for i = 1, 2. If country i picks xi and the other coun-
try j selects xj, then country i gets a payoff of 2000 + 60 xi + xi xj −x2
i −90xj
(measured in billions of dollars). Assume that x1 and x2 must be between 0 and
100 and that the countries set tariff levels simultaneously and independently.5
5You can read more about tariff games in J. McMillan, Game Theory in International Economics (New York:
Harwood Academic Publishers, 1986).

--- Sayfa 133 ---
118
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
Exercise 3 at the end of this chapter asks you to compute the Nash equilibrium
of this game.
A MODEL OF CRIME AND POLICE
Game theory and the Nash equilibrium concept can be used to study the interac-
tion between criminals and law-enforcement agencies. Gary Becker, a Nobel
Prize-winning economist, led the way on this kind of research and showed
that economic analysis is extremely useful in this policy arena. According to
Becker’s theory, “The optimal amount of enforcement is shown to depend on,
among other things, the cost of catching and convicting offenders, the nature
of punishments—for example, whether they are ﬁnes or prison terms—and the
response of offenders to changes in enforcement.”6 Becker also argued that,
with the optimal enforcement system, crime does occur.
Here is a game that illustrates how the government balances the social cost of
crime with law-enforcement costs and how criminals balance the value of illegal
activity with the probability of arrest. The game has two players: a criminal (C)
and the government (G). The government selects a level of law enforcement,
which is a number x Ú 0. The criminal selects a level of crime, y Ú 0. These
choices are made simultaneously and independently. The government’s payoff is
given by uG = −xc4 −y 2>x with the interpretation that −y 2>x is the negative
effect of crime on society (moderated by law enforcement) and c4 is the cost of
law enforcement, per unit of enforcement. The number c is a positive constant.
The criminal’s payoff is given by uC = y 1>2>(1 + xy), with the interpretation that
y 1>2 is the value of criminal activity when the criminal is not caught, whereas
1>(1 + xy) is the probability that the criminal evades capture. Exercise 4 of this
chapter asks you to compute the Nash equilibrium of this game.
THE MEDIAN VOTER THEOREM
Consider an expanded version of the location-choice model from Chapter 8,
where two political candidates (players 1 and 2) decide where to locate on the
political spectrum. Suppose the policy space is given by the interval [0, 1], with
the location 0 denoting extreme liberal and 1 denoting extreme conservative.
Citizens (the voters) are distributed across the political spectrum, not necessar-
ily uniformly as was the case in the basic location game described in Chapter 8.
6G. Becker, “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy 76 (1968):
169–217, at p. 170.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
119
The Median Voter Theorem
Each citizen has an ideal point (a favorite policy) on the interval [0, 1]. Let
function F describe the distribution of the citizens. Speciﬁcally, for any location
x ∈[0, 1], F(x) is the fraction of the citizens whose ideal point is less than or
equal to x. Assume that F is a continuous function, with F(0) = 0 and F(1) = 1.
Technically, this means that there is a “continuum” of citizens—an inﬁnite
number, smoothly distributed across the political spectrum.
Voting takes place after the candidates simultaneously and independently
select their policy locations. Each citizen is assumed to vote for the candidate
who is located closest to the citizen’s ideal point. A candidate wins by obtaining
more votes than the other candidate does. Assume that if the candidates select
exactly the same policy position, then the voters split evenly between them and
they tie in the election, with the eventual winner determined by an unmodeled
Supreme Court decision. Each candidate wants to win the election, so let us
assume that a candidate obtains a payoff of 1 if he wins, 0 if he loses, and 1>2
if there is a tie.7
Let us analyze the game by looking for a Nash equilibrium. Suppose that
player 1 selects location s1 and player 2 selects s2 . Guided by the intuition devel-
oped from the location model in Chapter 8, we can guess that the players will
choose the same policy location in equilibrium—that is, s1 = s2. To see why
this is so, consider the case in which s1 < s2. Could this arise in equilibrium?
In fact, no. If the players were to tie with these strategies, then an individual
player would fare strictly better—that is, he would get more votes and win—by
moving closer to the position of the other player. Similarly, if one of the players
were to win with strategy proﬁle (s1 , s2 ), then the other player could improve
from a loss to a tie by matching the ﬁrst player’s policy position. Thus, in equi-
librium it must be that s1 = s2 = x, for some number x ∈[0, 1].
The question then becomes: What is the equilibrium policy location x that
both players choose? Our intuition from Chapter 8 is that the players will locate
in the center, but the deﬁnition of “center” surely depends on the distribution
of voters. Let x* be the number satisfying F(x*) = 1>2. Then x* is the median
voter—that is, the voter who is more conservative than exactly half of the citi-
zens and who is more liberal than exactly half of the citizens.
The Nash equilibrium of the location is game is for both players to select
x*, which induces a tie in the election. To see this, note what would happen if
candidate i were to deviate from locating at x*. Then candidate i would obtain
strictly fewer votes than would candidate j and, as a result, candidate i would
lose the election. Furthermore, at no other number x is there a Nash equilibrium.
This is because if there were, there would be strictly more voters on the side of
7Recall that this is not exactly the same as wanting to maximize the number of votes; nothing changes if we
assume vote maximization in the example studied here, however.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
120
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
x containing x* than there are on the other side and so, from such a position,
a candidate would be able to guarantee victory by moving toward x*. That the
equilibrium occurs at x* is Anthony Downs’s celebrated median voter theo-
rem, which is a cornerstone of political science theory.8
STRATEGIC VOTING
An underlying assumption of the analysis of candidates’ policy choices in the
previous section is that each citizen votes for the candidate whose policy is clos-
est to the citizen’s ideal point. Is it, however, safe to say that voters behave in
this way? Would a sophisticated citizen always vote for her favorite candidate,
even if this candidate were sure to lose the election? A story and numerical
example will shed light on this issue.
On October 7, 2003, in a historic recall election, Gray Davis was removed
from ofﬁce as the governor of California. Popular conﬁdence in Davis had been
eroded in the preceding years by revelations of a severe imbalance in the state’s
budget, a crisis in the electricity market, declining trust in government ofﬁcials
in general, and a growing sense that Davis lacked the gumption to lead. In fact,
Davis’s approval ratings had been falling well before his reelection in Novem-
ber 2002, but his shrewd and disciplined political machine was able to orches-
trate his reelection anyway.
The recall election was highly unusual; many people considered its rules
to be ill suited to modern political decision making. On the same ballot, voters
were asked whether to remove Davis from ofﬁce and then, conditional on the
recall passing, they were asked to select among the—get this—135 registered
replacement candidates. Among the ﬁeld of replacement candidates were
dozens of people who entered the race for publicity or just on a whim. Candi-
dates included a star of pornographic movies, a former child star from a televi-
sion series, and many others with colorful histories. The election was won by
Arnold Schwarzenegger, a movie star and former bodybuilder, who had little
political experience but excellent name recognition and was himself a savvy
enough politician to later get reelected.9
Gray Davis’s journey through reelection and disgraceful fall from the
governorship provides two examples of strategic behavior in elections. The
8The location-choice model was developed for analysis of oligopoly by H. Hotelling, “Stability in Competi-
tion,” The Economic Journal 39 (1929): 41–57, and for analysis of politics by A. Downs, An Economic Theory
of Democracy (New York: Harper & Row, 1957). The median voter theorem extends to sequential candidate
choices.
9The recall election, and events leading to it and from it, have been extensively recorded and discussed in the
media. A brief newspaper account of the election is J. Marelius, “Schwarzenegger Wins: Decisive Support for
Dramatic Change Ends Historic Race,” San Diego Union-Tribune, October 8, 2003.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
121
Strategic Voting
ﬁrst took place in the regular election of 2002, in which Davis was campaign-
ing for reelection. Facing no serious opposition for nomination in the Demo-
cratic primary, Davis’s campaign allocated part of its war chest to manipulate
the contest between Bill Simon and Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan, who
were sparring in the Republican primary for the right to oppose Davis in the
general election.
Riordan, a moderate Republican, was widely viewed as a greater threat to
Davis than was the right-wing Simon. In other words, Riordan was closer to
Davis on the political spectrum and thus, as we know from the basic location
model, in a more competitive stance against Davis than was Simon. In fact,
polls suggested that Riordan could have beaten Davis in the general election.
So Davis did something consistent with our location model: he funded adver-
tisements that questioned Riordan’s credentials (even from the right) and thus
helped Simon to defeat Riordan in the primary. Davis then defeated Simon in
the general election.10
The second noteworthy example concerns Davis’s recall election, in which
the leading Republican candidates to replace him were Schwarzenegger and
State Senator Tom McClintock. It was another example of a moderate (Schwar-
zenegger) versus a right-wing (McClintock) Republican. Conservative and
die-hard Republican voters favored McClintock. However, much of the Repub-
lican party feared that a Republican vote split between Schwarzenegger and
McClintock would propel Lieutenant Governor Cruz Bustamante, the focal
liberal candidate, into the governorship. As the recall election neared, the state
Republican Party’s board of directors took the unprecedented step of endorsing
one of the Republican candidates, Schwarzenegger, who was viewed as more
moderate than Bustamante. In essence, the Republican leadership asked conser-
vative Republicans to vote for their second-favorite candidate as their only hope
of securing a Republican governor.11
Here is a simple voting game that illustrates the story. Suppose that Davis is
recalled and that there are three candidates to replace him: Bustamante, Schwar-
zenegger, and McClintock. The candidates have no actions in the game. Suppose
there are three voting blocks: liberals (L), moderates (M), and conservatives (C).
For simplicity, assume that each voting block behaves as a single player, so we
have a three-player game. Simultaneously and independently, players L, M, and
C select single candidates. The candidate who obtains the most votes wins the
election.
10A summary appears in J. Marelius, “Davis Weighs In with Anti-Riordan Ad,” San Diego Union-Tribune,
January 26, 2002; and J. Marelius, “Simon Storms Past Riordan: Rookie Politician to Face Incumbent Davis,”
San Diego Union-Tribune, March 6, 2002.
11See J. Marelius and P. J. LaVelle, “State GOP Taps Schwarzenegger: Party Chairman Calls on McClintock
Backers Not to ‘Waste’ Votes,” San Diego Union-Tribune, September 30, 2003.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
122
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
Suppose that the voting blocks contain roughly the same number of voters,
but that the liberal voting block is slightly bigger than the other two. Thus, if L
votes for Bustamante, M votes for Schwarzenegger, and C votes for McClintock,
then Bustamante wins. If two or three of the players vote for the same candidate,
then this candidate wins.
The general preferences of the voters are shown in Figure 10.1. For exam-
ple, L favors Bustamante over Schwarzenegger, and Schwarzenegger over
McClintock. Suppose that each voter cares both about whom she votes for and
about who wins the election. Speciﬁcally, assume that a voter’s payoff is the
sum of an amount determined directly by her voting action and an amount deter-
mined by who wins. On the ﬁrst component, the voter gets 2 if she votes for
her most preferred candidate, 1 if she votes for her second choice, and 0 if she
votes for her least preferred candidate. On the second component, the voter gets
4 if her most preferred candidate wins, 2 if her second choice wins, and 0 if her
least preferred candidate wins the election. For example, if player M votes for
Schwarzenegger yet Bustamante wins, then player M gets a payoff of 4 (that is,
2 from voting for her favorite candidate, plus 2 for her second favorite winning
the election).
In the voting game, it is not rational for each player to vote for his most
preferred candidate. In particular, the strategy proﬁle (Bustamante, Schwar-
zenegger, McClintock) is not a Nash equilibrium of the game. From this proﬁle,
which implies victory for Bustamante, player C can strictly gain by deviating to
vote for Schwarzenegger. The switch to Schwarzenegger changes the outcome
of the race (now won by Schwarzenegger), and player C gains more from the
outcome change (from 0 to 2) than she loses by voting for her second choice
(from 2 to 1). Thus, this example shows that it is not always rational for citizens
to vote “truthfully,” as we assumed in the basic election model.
The example also substantiates the logic behind the Republican Party’s
endorsement of Schwarzenegger at the eleventh hour in the recall election.
The endorsement helped convince conservatives to vote for Schwarzenegger
FIGURE 10.1
Voter Preferences.
Most preferred
Sceond choice
Least preferred
Player L
Player M
Player C
Bustamante
Schwarzenegger
McClintock
Schwarzenegger
Bustamante
McClintock
McClintock
Schwarzenegger
Bustamante

--- Sayfa 138 ---
123
Guided Exercise
if they didn’t want to see their least favorite candidate elected. Note that the
strategy proﬁle (Bustamante, Schwarzenegger, Schwarzenegger) is a Nash
equilibrium of the game. With this strategy proﬁle, player M is voting for and
getting her most preferred candidate and therefore has no incentive to deviate.
Player L cannot change the outcome of the election by switching his vote, so
he rationally selects Bustamante. Finally, if player C switched to Bustamante,
then Bustamante would be elected and player C would get zero; alternatively,
if player C switched to McClintock, then Bustamante would win and player C
would obtain a payoff of just 2. By voting for Schwarzenegger, player C obtains
3, and this is the best player C can do.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider a market with ten ﬁrms. Simultaneously and independently,
the ﬁrms choose between locating downtown and locating in the suburbs. The
proﬁt of each ﬁrm is inﬂuenced by the number of other ﬁrms that locate in
the same area. Speciﬁcally, the proﬁt of a ﬁrm that locates downtown is given
by 5n −n2 + 50, where n denotes the number of ﬁrms that locate downtown.
Similarly, the proﬁt of a ﬁrm that locates in the suburbs is given by 48 −m,
where m denotes the number of ﬁrms that locate in the suburbs. In equilibrium,
how many ﬁrms locate in each region and what is the proﬁt of each?
Solution: Note that there is a negative congestion effect for the suburban region
in that a ﬁrm’s value of locating there decreases in the number of other ﬁrms
that locate in the same region. The same is true for the downtown region when
the number of ﬁrms locating there exceeds three. Thus, intuition suggests that
equilibrium will not feature the vast majority of ﬁrms congregating in one or the
other region, but instead will have the ﬁrms dividing between the regions.
Another way to think about this is that in equilibrium, the value of locating
downtown will be roughly the same as the value of locating in the suburbs. If, for
instance, the value of locating in the suburbs were much higher than that of locat-
ing downtown, then a ﬁrm that was planning to locate downtown would strictly
gain by switching to the strategy of locating in the suburbs. Let us determine the
number of ﬁrms in each location that would be required to equate the values of
the two locations. Noting that m = 10 −n, equating the values implies
5n −n2 + 50 = 48 −(10 −n),
which simpliﬁes to
(n −6)(n + 2) = 0.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
124
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
The solution n = −2 is not meaningful. The equilibrium therefore has n = 6
and m = 4. That is, six ﬁrms locate downtown and four locate in the suburbs.
Each ﬁrm earns a proﬁt of 44. You should verify that no ﬁrm would gain by
switching locations unilaterally.
EXERCISES
1. Consider a more general Cournot model than the one presented in this chap-
ter. Suppose there are n ﬁrms. The ﬁrms simultaneously and  independently
select quantities to bring to the market. Firm i ’s quantity is denoted qi,
which is constrained to be greater than or equal to zero. All of the units
of the good are sold, but the prevailing market price depends on the total
quantity in the industry, which is Q = g
n
i=1qi. Suppose the price is given by
p = a −bQ and suppose each ﬁrm produces with marginal cost c. There
is no ﬁxed cost for the ﬁrms. Assume a > c > 0 and b > 0. Note that ﬁrm
i ’s proﬁt is given by ui = p(Q)qi −cqi = (a −bQ)qi −cqi. Deﬁning Q−i
as the sum of the quantities produced by all ﬁrms except ﬁrm i, we have
ui = (a −bqi −bQ−i
 )qi −cqi. Each ﬁrm maximizes its own proﬁt.
(a)  Represent this game in the normal form by describing the strategy
spaces and payoff functions.
(b)  Find ﬁrm i ’s best-response function as a function of Q−i. Graph this
function.
(c)  Compute the Nash equilibrium of this game. Report the equilibrium
quantities, price, and total output. (Hint: Summing the best-response
functions over the different players will help.) What happens to the
equilibrium price and the ﬁrm’s proﬁts as n becomes large?
(d)  Show that for the Cournot duopoly game (n = 2), the set of rationaliz-
able strategies coincides with the Nash equilibrium.
2. Consider a more general Bertrand model than the one presented in this
chapter. Suppose there are n ﬁrms that simultaneously and  independently
select their prices, p1, p2, c, pn in a market. These prices are greater
than or equal to zero. The lowest price offered in the market is deﬁned
as p = min{p1, p2, c, pn}. Consumers observe these prices and purchase
only from the ﬁrm (or ﬁrms) charging p, according to the demand curve
Q = a − p. That is, the ﬁrm with the lowest price gets all of the sales. If
the lowest price is offered by more than one ﬁrm, then these ﬁrms equally
share the quantity demanded. Assume that ﬁrms must supply the quantities
demanded of them and that production takes place at a cost of c per unit.
That is, a ﬁrm producing qi units pays a cost cqi . Assume a > c > 0.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
125
Exercises
(a)  Represent this game in the normal form by describing the strategy
spaces and payoff (proﬁt) functions.
(b) Find the Nash equilibrium of this market game.
(c)  Is the notion of a best response well deﬁned for every belief that a ﬁrm
could hold? Explain.
3. Consider the tariff game described in this chapter.
(a) Find the best-response functions for the countries.
(b) Compute the Nash equilibrium.
(c)  Show that the countries would be better off if they made a binding
agreement to set lower tariffs (than in equilibrium). You do not need to
speculate how such an agreement could be enforced.
(d)  Using the graph of the best-response functions, determine the set of
rationalizable strategies in the tariff game.
4. Consider the game between a criminal and the government described in this
chapter.
(a)  Write the ﬁrst-order conditions that deﬁne the players’ best-response
functions and solve them to ﬁnd the best-response functions. Graph the
best-response functions.
(b)  Compute the Nash equilibrium of this game.
(c)  Explain how the equilibrium levels of crime and enforcement change as
c increases.
5. In the years 2000 and 2001, the bubble burst for many Internet and computer
ﬁrms. As they closed shop, some of the ﬁrms had to liquidate sizable assets,
such as inventories of products. Suppose eToys is going out of business and
the company seeks a buyer for a truckload of Elmo dolls in its warehouse.
Imagine that eToys holds an auction on eBay to sell the dolls and that two
retailers (players 1 and 2) will bid for them. The rules of the auction are as
follows: the retailers simultaneously and independently submit sealed bids
and then eToys gives the merchandise to the highest bidder, who must pay
his bid. It is common knowledge that the retailer who obtains the load of
dolls can resell the load for a total of $15,000. Thus, if player i wins the auc-
tion with bid bi , then player i ’s payoff is $15,000 −bi. The losing retailer
gets a payoff of $0. If the retailers make the same bids (b1 = b2
 ), then eToys
declares each player the winner with probability 1>2, in which case player i
obtains an expected payoff of (1>2)(15,000 −bi
 ). What will be the winning
bid in the Nash equilibrium of this auction game? If you can, describe the
equilibrium strategies and brieﬂy explain why this is an equilibrium. (Hint:
This is similar to the Bertrand game.)

--- Sayfa 141 ---
126
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
6. Imagine that a zealous prosecutor (P) has accused a defendant (D) of com-
mitting a crime. Suppose that the trial involves evidence production by both
parties and that by producing evidence, a litigant increases the probability
of winning the trial. Speciﬁcally, suppose that the probability that the defen-
dant wins is given by eD>(eD + eP), where eD is the expenditure on evidence
production by the defendant and eP is the expenditure on evidence produc-
tion by the prosecutor. Assume that eD and eP are greater than or equal to
0. The defendant must pay 8 if he is found guilty, whereas he pays 0 if he
is found innocent. The prosecutor receives 8 if she wins and 0 if she loses
the case.
(a)  Represent this game in normal form.
(b)  Write the ﬁrst-order condition and derive the best-response function for
each player.
(c)  Find the Nash equilibrium of this game. What is the probability that the
defendant wins in equilibrium.
(d) Is this outcome efﬁcient? Why?
7. Consider an asymmetric Cournot duopoly game, where the two ﬁrms
have different costs of production. Firm 1 selects quantity q1 at a pro-
duction cost of 2q1 . Firm 2 selects quantity q2 and pays the produc-
tion cost 4q2 . The market price is given by p = 12 −q1 −q2. Thus,
the payoff functions are u1
 (q1, q2
 ) = (12 −q1 −q2
 ) q1 −2q1 and
u2
 (q1, q2
 ) = (12 −q1 −q2
 ) q2 −4q2. Calculate the ﬁrms’ best-response
functions BR1 (q2 ) and BR2 (q1 ), and ﬁnd the Nash equilibrium of this game.
8. Recall the candidate location game discussed in this chapter, whose analysis
led to the median voter theorem. Consider a variant of the game in which
some of the voters have to be motivated to vote. In particular, suppose that the
policy space [0, 1] is divided into three regions: [0, 1
2 −a], (1
2 −a, 1
2 + a),
and [1
2 + a, 1], where a is a ﬁxed parameter that is smaller than 1>2. Mod-
erate citizens, whose ideal points are in the interval (1
2 −a, 1
2 + a), always
go to the polls and vote as described in the basic model; that is, each moder-
ate citizen votes for the closest candidate. Liberals, whose ideal points are in
the interval [0, 1
2 −a], go to the polls only if there is a liberal candidate—that
is, someone who locates at or to the left of the point 1
2 −a. Conditional on
voting, each liberal votes for the closest candidate. Likewise, conservatives,
whose ideal points are in the interval [1
2 + a, 1], will vote only if there is a
conservative candidate—someone who locates at or to the right of 1
2 + a.

For example, suppose one of the candidates locates at 1>2 and the
other candidate locates at 1. Then the candidate at 1 received votes from

--- Sayfa 142 ---
127
Exercises
the citizens between 3>4 and 1, whereas the candidate at 1>2 receives votes
from only the citizens between 1
2 −a and 3>4 because the liberal citizens
are not motivated to vote. Assume that the citizens are uniformly distributed
over the policy space. Thus, if F describes the distribution, then F(x) = x
for every x ∈[0, 1].
(a)  For what values of a is there an equilibrium of the candidate location-
choice game in which both candidates locate at 1>2 (in the center, at the
median voter)?
(b)  Show that for some values of a, there is an equilibrium in which one of
the candidates locates at 1
2 −a and the other locates at 1
2 + a. For what
values of a does such an equilibrium exist? Comment on the reason
why the median-voter result fails.
9. Consider the strategic voting example discussed at the end of this chap-
ter, where we saw that the strategy proﬁle (Bustamante, Schwarzenegger,
Schwarzenegger) is a Nash equilibrium of the game. Show that (Busta-
mante, Schwarzenegger, Schwarzenegger) is, in fact, the only rationaliz-
able strategy proﬁle. Do this by ﬁrst considering the dominated strategies
of player L.
10. Consider a game that has a continuum of players. In particular, the players
are uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 1]. (See Appendix A for the
deﬁnition of uniform distribution.) Each x ∈[0, 1] represents an  individual
player; that is, we can identify a player by her location on the interval [0, 1].
In the game, the players simultaneously and independently select either F or
G. The story is that each player is choosing a type of music software to buy,
where F and G are the competing brands. The players have different values
of the two brands; they also have a preference for buying what other people
are buying (either because they want to be in fashion or they ﬁnd it easier
to exchange music with others who use the same software). The following
payoff function represents these preferences. If player x selects G, then her
payoff is the constant g. If player x selects F, then her payoff is 2m −cx,
where c is a constant and m is the fraction of players who select F. Note that
m is between 0 and 1.
(a)  Consider the case in which g = 1 and c = 0. What are the rationaliz-
able strategies for the players? Is there a symmetric Nash equilibrium,
in which all of the players play the same strategy? If so, describe such
an equilibrium.
(b)  Next, consider the case in which g = 1 and c = 2. Calculate the ratio-
nalizable strategy proﬁles and show your steps. (Hint: Let m denote an

--- Sayfa 143 ---
128
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
upper bound on the fraction of players who rationally select F. Use this
variable in your analysis.)
(c)  Describe the rationalizable strategy proﬁles for the case in which
g = −1 and c = 4. (Hint: Let m denote an upper bound on the fraction
of players who rationally select F and let m denote a lower bound on the
fraction of players who rationally select F.)
11. Suppose that the speed limit is 70 miles per hour on the freeway and that
n drivers simultaneously and independently choose speeds from 70 to 100.
Everyone prefers to go as fast as possible, other things equal, but the police
ticket any driver whose speed is strictly faster than the speeds of a frac-
tion x of the other drivers, where x is a parameter such that 0 … x … 1.
More precisely, for a given driver, let m denote the number of drivers that
choose strictly lower speeds; then, such a driver is ticketed if and only if
m>(n −1) > x. Note that by driving 70, a driver can be sure that he will
not be ticketed. Suppose the cost of being ticketed outweighs any beneﬁt of
going faster.
(a)  Model this situation as a noncooperative game by describing the strat-
egy space and payoff function of an individual player.
(b)  Identify the Nash equilibria as best you can. Are there any equilibria in
which the drivers choose the same speed? Are there any equilibria in
which the drivers choose different speeds? How does the set of Nash
equilibria depend on x?
(c)  What are the Nash equilibria under the assumption that the police do
not ticket anyone?
(d)  What are the Nash equilibria under the assumption that the police ticket
everyone who travels more than 70?
(e)  If the same drivers play this game repeatedly, observing the outcome
after each play, and there is some noisiness in their choices of speed,
how would you expect their speeds to change over time as they learn
to predict each other’s speeds when x is near 100 and when x is near 0?
Explain your intuition.
12. Consider a strategic setting in which two geographically distinct ﬁrms
(players 1 and 2) compete by setting prices. Suppose that consumers are
uniformly distributed across the interval [0,1], and each will buy either one
unit or nothing. Firm 1 is located at 0 and ﬁrm 2 is located at 1. Assume that
the ﬁrms cannot change their locations; they can only select prices. Simul-
taneously and independently, ﬁrm 1 chooses a price p1 and ﬁrm 2 chooses a
price p2 . Suppose that the ﬁrms produce at zero cost and that due to a gov-
ernment regulation, they must set prices between 0 and 6.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
129
Exercises

As in the standard location game, consumers are sensitive to the
distance they have to travel in order to purchase. But they are also sensitive
to price. Consumers get a beneﬁt of 6 from the good that is purchased, but
they also pay a personal cost of c times the distance they have to travel to
make the purchase. Assume that c is a positive constant. If the consumer
at location x ∈[0, 1] purchases from ﬁrm 1, then this consumer’s utility is
6 −cx −p1. If this consumer instead purchases from ﬁrm 2, then her util-
ity is 6 −c(1 −x) −p2. If this consumer does not purchase the good, her
utility is 0.
(a)  Suppose that for given prices p1 and p2, every consumer purchases the
good. That is, ignore the case in which prices are so high that some
consumers prefer not to purchase. Find an expression for the “marginal
consumer” who is indifferent between purchasing from ﬁrm 1 or ﬁrm 2.
Denote this consumer’s location as x*( p1, p2 ).
(b)  Continue to assume that all consumers purchase at the prices you are
analyzing. Note that ﬁrm 1’s payoff (proﬁt) is p1 x*( p1, p2 ) and ﬁrm
2’s payoff is p2[1 −x*( p1, p2
 )]. Calculate each ﬁrm’s best response as
a function of the other player’s strategy. Also graph the best-response
functions for the case of c = 2.
(c)  Find and report the Nash equilibrium of this game for the case in which
c = 2.
(d) As c converges to 0, what happens to the ﬁrms’ equilibrium proﬁts?
(e)  What are the rationalizable strategies of this game for the case in which
c = 2?
(f) Find the Nash equilibrium of this game for the case in which c = 8.
13. Consider a game in which, simultaneously, player 1 selects a number x ∈[0, 6]
and player 2 selects a number y ∈[0, 6]. The payoffs are given by:
u1
 (x, y) = 16x
y + 2 −x2
u2
 (x, y) = 16y
x + 2 −y 2.
(a)  Calculate each player’s best-response function as a function of the
opposing player’s pure strategy.
(b) Find and report the Nash equilibrium of the game.
(c)  Suppose that there is no social institution to coordinate the players on
an equilibrium. Suppose that each player knows that the other player is
rational, but this is not common knowledge. What is the largest set of
strategies for player 1 that is consistent with this assumption?

--- Sayfa 145 ---
130
10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
14. Suppose n students are on a committee to decide the fraction of student fees
to spend on student activities. The minimum fraction they can select is 0,
and the maximum fraction is 1. Any amount they do not spend will go back
into the university’s general ﬁnancial aid budget.

Each committee member i has an ideal policy xi ∈(0, 1) that repre-
sents the fraction member i wants to spend on student activities. Member
i ’s utility is ui
 (xi, d) = −0
 d −xi
 0 , where d ∈[0, 1] is the fraction that the
committee ultimately decides on. For example, if the committee chooses
d = 0.5 and member i ’s ideal policy is xi = 0.7, then member i ’s utility is
−0.2. The committee members have common knowledge of one another’s
preferred policies.
(a)  Suppose that n = 3 and that the committee’s choice is determined
by a “median voter” rule. Simultaneously, each committee member
i announces a policy position (i.e., “votes”) yi ∈[0, 1], and then the
committee’s decision d (y1, y2, y3) is the median of {y1, y2, y3}. Show that
under the median voter rule, it is a Nash equilibrium for each committee
member i to vote truthfully, so that yi = xi.
(b)  Suppose that n = 2 and that the committee’s choice is determined by
a “phantom median voter” rule. The committee members simultane-
ously vote as in part (a), but now the committee’s decision d (y1, y2)
is the median of {y1, y2, 0.5}. Show that under the phantom median
voter rule, it is a Nash equilibrium for each committee member i to vote
yi = xi.
(c)  Suppose again that n = 3, but now assume the committee’s decision is
determined by an “average vote” rule, where d (y1, y2, y3) is the average
of {y1, y2, y3}. Show that under the average vote rule, if the committee
members have different ideal policies, then it is not a Nash equilib-
rium for the players to vote truthfully. Finally, ﬁnd the unique Nash
equilibrium of this game for the case in which x1 = 0.3, x2 = 0.6, and
x3 = 0.9. Can you prove that it is the unique Nash equilibrium?
15. An island has two reefs that are suitable for ﬁshing, and there are twenty
ﬁshers who simultaneously and independently choose at which of the two
reefs (1 or 2) to ﬁsh. Each ﬁsher can ﬁsh at only one reef. The total num-
ber of ﬁsh harvested at a single reef depends on the number of ﬁshers who
choose to ﬁsh there. The total catch is equally divided between the ﬁshers
at the reef. At reef 1, the total harvest is given by f1
 (r1
 ) = 8r1 −r 2
1
2 , where
r1 is the number of ﬁshers who select reef 1. For reef 2, the total catch is
f2
 (r2
 ) = 4r2, where r2 is the number of ﬁshers who choose reef 2. Assume
that each ﬁsher wants to maximize the number of ﬁsh that he or she catches.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
131
Exercises
(a)  Find the Nash equilibrium of this game. In equilibrium, what is the total
number of ﬁsh caught?
(b)  The chief of the island asks his economics advisor whether this arrange-
ment is efﬁcient (i.e., whether the equilibrium allocation of ﬁshers
among reefs maximizes the number of ﬁsh caught). What is the answer
to the chief’s question? What is the efﬁcient number of ﬁshers at each
reef?
(c)  The chief decides to require a ﬁshing license for reef 1, which would
require each ﬁsher who ﬁshes there to pay the chief x ﬁsh. Find the
Nash equilibrium of the resulting location-choice game between the
ﬁshers. Is there a value of x such that the equilibrium choices of the
ﬁshers results in an efﬁcient outcome? If so, what is this value of x?

--- Sayfa 147 ---
132
11
MIXED-STRATEGY NASH EQUILIBRIUM
R
ecall that some games do not have a Nash equilibrium. Consider, for ex-
ample, the matching pennies game shown in Figure 9.2. In this game, no
strategy proﬁle is stable because each one has a “winner” and a “loser”—a sta-
tus that is ﬂipped if either player alters his or her strategy. In matching pennies,
players actually have an interest in deceiving each other. Suppose that you and
I are playing the game and I, as player 1, have privately decided to select strat-
egy H. This would be rational if I thought that you would select H as well, but
your selection of H relies on a belief that I am likely to play T. In other words,
I would like you to believe that I will choose T while, in fact, I plan to select H.
Coordination of beliefs and behavior is, in this example, seemingly at odds with
best-response behavior.
Yet, let us think a bit further. If you can accurately predict my strategy,
as would be the case in equilibrium, then you can take advantage of me (for
example, by selecting T while I choose H). Clearly, then, it is not in my interest
for you to know what strategy I will play. Perhaps the best I can do is to random-
ize between H and T, so you cannot be sure of what I will do. This logic begs
the question: Is there a mixed-strategy proﬁle that has the equilibrium property?
Notice that if each player randomizes with probability 1>2 on both strate-
gies, then neither player has a strict incentive to play H or T; in fact, all strat-
egies—H, T, and every mixed strategy—are best responses to the opponent
randomizing with equal probability. To see this, observe that if you play H and
T with equal probabilities, then I will get an expected payoff of zero—that is,
(1>2)(1) + (1>2)(−1)—regardless of whether I choose H or T. Furthermore, if
I mix between H and T, I will still expect zero.
The point here is that if we extend the notions of best response and equilib-
rium to the consideration of mixed strategies, we ﬁnd that the mixed-strategy
proﬁle ((1>2, 1>2), (1>2, 1>2)), where both players randomize equally between
their pure strategies, has the Nash equilibrium property in the matching pennies
game. With this mixed-strategy proﬁle, each player is best responding to the
other. We then can say that ((1>2, 1>2), (1>2, 1>2)) is a mixed-strategy Nash
equilibrium of the matching pennies game.
Formally, then, the Nash equilibrium concept extends to mixed strategies.
For general games, the deﬁnition of a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium is a

--- Sayfa 148 ---
133
Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
mixed-strategy proﬁle having the property that no player could increase his or
her payoff by switching to any other strategy, given the other player’s strategy:
Consider a strategy proﬁle s = (s1, s2, c, sn
 ), where si
 ∈Si for
each player i. Proﬁle s is a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium if and
only if ui
 (si, s−i
 ) Ú ui
 (s=
i, s−i
 ) for each s=
i
 ∈Si and each player i. That
is, si is a best response to s−i for every player i.
For a mixed strategy to be a best response (as required in the deﬁnition), it must
put positive probability only on pure strategies that are best responses. This
demonstrates how to calculate a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium.1
For another example, consider a lobbying game between two ﬁrms. Each
ﬁrm may lobby the government in hopes of persuading the government to make
a decision that is favorable to the ﬁrm. The two ﬁrms, X and Y, independently
and simultaneously decide whether to lobby (L) or not (N). Lobbying entails
a cost of 15. Not lobbying costs nothing. If both ﬁrms lobby or neither ﬁrm
lobbies, then the government takes a neutral decision, which yields 10 to both
ﬁrms. A ﬁrm’s payoff is this value minus the lobbying cost if it lobbied. If ﬁrm
Y lobbies and ﬁrm X does not lobby, then the government makes a decision that
favors ﬁrm Y, yielding zero to ﬁrm X and 30 to ﬁrm Y. Thus, ﬁrm Y’s payoff
in this case is 30 −15 = 15. If ﬁrm X lobbies and ﬁrm Y does not lobby, then
the government makes a decision that favors ﬁrm X, yielding 40 to ﬁrm X (so
X’s payoff is 40 −15 = 25) and zero to ﬁrm Y. The normal form of this game
is pictured in Figure 11.1.
You can quickly verify that there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria for
this game: (N, L) and (L, N). Check this by evaluating each cell of the matrix and
asking whether at least one of the players would want to make a unilateral devia-
tion. In addition to these pure-strategy equilibria, there is also a mixed-strategy
equilibrium. To ﬁnd it, recall what must hold in a mixed-strategy equilibrium: a
player must achieve a best response by selecting a mixed strategy. For example,
1Note that in the deﬁnition, si is compared against each pure strategy s=
i rather than against all mixed strategies.
This is sufﬁcient because, if another mixed strategy were to deliver a higher payoff than does si, then such
would be the case for some pure strategy s=
i. Thus, checking the pure-strategy deviations is enough.
FIGURE 11.1
A lobbying game.
L
Y
X
N
L
N
-5, -5
25, 0
0, 15
10, 10

--- Sayfa 149 ---
134
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
let’s guess that ﬁrm X mixes between L and N. If this strategy is optimal for
ﬁrm X (in response to the other ﬁrm’s strategy), then it must be that the expected
payoff from playing L equals the expected payoff from playing N; otherwise,
ﬁrm X would strictly prefer to pick either L or N.
But how can ﬁrm X’s strategies L and N yield the same expected payoff?
It must be that ﬁrm Y’s behavior generates this expectation (because if ﬁrm Y
played a pure strategy, then X would strictly prefer one of its strategies over the
other). Let q denote the probability that ﬁrm Y plays L; that is, (q, 1 −q) is ﬁrm
Y’s mixed strategy. Against this mixed strategy, ﬁrm X expects to earn
q(−5) + (1 −q)(25) = 25 −30q
by choosing L and
q(0) + (1 −q)(10) = 10 −10q
by choosing N. For ﬁrm X to be willing to randomize, it must be that
25 −30q = 10 −10q. This simpliﬁes to q = 3>4. In other words, ﬁrm X can
randomize in playing a best response if ﬁrm Y’s strategy is (3>4, 1>4).
Let us move on to ﬁrm Y’s incentives and let p be the probability that ﬁrm
X plays L. Then, if ﬁrm Y selects L, its expected payoff is
p(−5) + (1 −p)(15) = 15 −20p.
By choosing N, ﬁrm Y obtains 10 −10p. Firm Y is indifferent between its two
strategies (and therefore willing to randomize) if 15 −20p = 10 −10p, which
simpliﬁes to p = 1>2.
The mixed-strategy proﬁle ((1>2, 1>2), (3>4, 1>4)) is a mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium. Given ﬁrm Y’s mixed strategy, ﬁrm X’s mixed strategy is a
best response—in fact, every strategy is a best response for ﬁrm X. Likewise,
given ﬁrm X’s strategy, ﬁrm Y’s prescribed strategy is a best response. Note that
constructing a mixed-strategy equilibrium entails an interesting new twist: we
look for a mixed strategy for one player that makes the other player indiffer-
ent between her pure strategies. This is the best method of calculating mixed-
strategy equilibria.
You should try your hand at computing mixed-strategy Nash equilibria. To
guide you in this regard, know that—like pure-strategy equilibria—mixed-strategy
equilibria never involve dominated strategies. Examine the games in Figure 9.2
again. Convince yourself of the mixed equilibrium notion by demonstrating that
((1>2, 1>2), (1>2, 1>2)) is the mixed-strategy equilibrium of both the matching
pennies and coordination games. Players select one strategy with probability 1>3

--- Sayfa 150 ---
135
Randomization in Sports
in the mixed equilibria of the battle of the sexes and Pareto coordination games.
Also ﬁnd the mixed-strategy equilibrium of the hawk–dove game.
RANDOMIZATION IN SPORTS
For another example, take the tennis-service game of Chapter 7’s Guided Exer-
cise, whose payoff matrix is reproduced in Figure 11.2. Recall that each player’s
strategy F is removed in the iterated-dominance procedure, so the set of ratio-
nalizable strategies for each player is {C, B}. The game has no Nash equilib-
rium in pure strategies. In any mixed-strategy equilibrium, the players will put
positive probability on only rationalizable strategies. Thus, we know a mixed-
strategy equilibrium will specify a strategy (0, p, 1 −p) for player 1 and a strat-
egy (0, q, 1 −q) for player 2. In this strategy proﬁle, p is the probability that
player 1 selects C, and 1 −p is the probability that he selects B; likewise, q is the
probability that player 2 selects C, and 1 −q is the probability that she selects B.
To calculate the mixed-strategy equilibrium in the tennis example, observe
that against player 2’s mixed strategy, player 1 would get an expected payoff of
q # 0 + (1 −q) # 3 = 3 −3q
if he selects C; whereas by choosing B, he would expect
q # 3 + (1 −q) # 2 = 2 + q.
In order for player 1 to be indifferent between C and B, which is required to
motivate him to randomize, it must be that player 2’s probability q solves
3 −3q = 2 + q,
implying q = 1>4. Turning to player 2’s incentives, note that she would get
p # 5 + (1 −p) # 2 = 2 + 3p
by choosing C and
p # 2 + (1 −p) # 3 = 3 −p
by choosing B. Equating these and solving for p yields p = 1>4. Thus, the
mixed-strategy equilibrium of the tennis-service example is (0, 1>4, 3>4) for
player 1 and (0, 1>4, 3>4) for player 2.
The example just considered is not a wacky theoretical curiosity. Real
tennis players have to make these choices dozens of times during a match. Some

--- Sayfa 151 ---
136
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
amateur players get into the habit of serving predominantly to one side or, on
defense, by always favoring one side. When such a player faces a slightly more
sophisticated opponent (one who notices his disposition), then the opponent
makes him pay c again and again. You might think that professional players,
in addition to their greater technical skills, don’t make this mistake. They get
paid for winning, after all. In fact, one can test whether professional players
choose their strategies optimally. Economists Mark Walker and John Wood-
ers performed such a study and found that the behavior of professional tennis
players is consistent with mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium, although it tends to
exhibit correlation over time.2
Most sports have a matching-pennies component, where each side would be
at a disadvantage if the other side knew its pure strategy. Randomization is thus an
essential aspect of play. Good examples are penalty kicks in soccer, play selection
in American football, and pitch selection in baseball. Some of these have been
studied empirically, with results that are similar to those found for tennis.3
TECHNICAL NOTES
The following summarizes the steps required to calculate mixed-strategy Nash
equilibria for simple two-player games.
Procedure for ﬁnding mixed-strategy equilibria:
1. Calculate the set of rationalizable strategies by performing the iterated-
dominance procedure.
2See M. Walker and J. Wooders, “Minimax Play at Wimbledon,” American Economic Review 91 (2001):
1521–1538.
3Examples of empirical work on randomization in soccer penalty kicks and American football are P.-A.
Chiappori, S. Levitt, and T. Groseclose, “Testing Mixed-Strategy Equilibria When Players Are Heteroge-
neous: The Case of Penalty Kicks in Soccer,” American Economic Review 92 (2002): 1138–1151; I. Palacios-
Huerta, “Professionals Play Minimax,” Review of Economic Studies 70 (2003): 395–415; and D. Romer, “Do
Firms Maximize? Evidence from Professional Football,” Journal of Political Economy 114 (2006): 340–365.
FIGURE 11.2
A tennis-service game.
F
C
B
F
C
B
0, 5
2, 3
2, 3
0, 5
2, 3
3, 2
5, 0
3, 2
2, 3
2
1

--- Sayfa 152 ---
137
Example: Duopoly with Capacity Constraints
2. Restricting attention to rationalizable strategies, write equations for each
player to characterize mixing probabilities that make the other player indif-
ferent between the relevant pure strategies.
3. Solve these equations to determine equilibrium mixing probabilities.
If each player has exactly two rationalizable strategies, this procedure is quite
straightforward. If a player has more than two rationalizable strategies, then there
are several cases to consider; the various cases amount to trying different combi-
nations of pure strategies over which the players may randomize. For example,
suppose that A, B, and C are all rationalizable for a particular player. Then, in a
mixed-strategy equilibrium, it may be that this player mixes between A and B
(putting zero probability on C), mixes between A and C (putting zero probability
on B), mixes between B and C (putting zero probability on A), or mixes between
A, B, and C. There are also cases in which only one of the players mixes.
Note that every pure-strategy equilibrium can also be considered a mixed-
strategy equilibrium—where all probability is put on one pure strategy. All of
the games analyzed thus far have at least one equilibrium (in pure or mixed
strategies). In fact, this is a general theorem.4
Result: Every ﬁnite game (having a ﬁnite number of players and a ﬁ-
nite strategy space) has at least one Nash equilibrium in pure or mixed
strategies.
For more on this theorem, see Appendix B. The result is quite useful because
it guarantees that the Nash equilibrium concept provides a prediction for every
ﬁnite game. You should now ask, “Is the prediction reasonable?” What about
examples such as the lobbying game, where there are both pure-strategy equi-
libria and nontrivial mixed-strategy equilibria? Is it more reasonable to expect
the mixed equilibrium to occur in some cases?
EXAMPLE: DUOPOLY WITH CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS
When previous editions of this book were in circulation, I sometimes asked for
feedback from colleagues and students. A few people told me that they found a
few of the exercises to be much more challenging than were the related exam-
ples in the text, and they recommended that I discuss some more complicated
examples in the chapters so readers would be prepared for the exercises. So here
you go c
4John Nash presented this theorem in “Non-Cooperative Games,” Annals of Mathematics 51 (1951): 286–295.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
138
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
Recall the Cournot and Bertrand duopoly models from the beginning of
Chapter 10. In these examples, the ﬁrms could produce as many units as they
wish at a constant marginal cost of 100. But in the real world, ﬁrms typically
face capacity constraints. A ﬁrm’s production facility, for instance, may allow
it to produce only up to a certain number of units; a higher level would simply
be infeasible. It is important to understand the strategic implications of such a
constraint. To explore the logic, consider a variation of the Bertrand game.
Suppose two ﬁrms produce a homogeneous good and compete by select-
ing prices. The ﬁrms produce at zero cost. There are ten consumers. Each
consumer would like to buy one unit of the good and is willing to pay at most 1
for the good. The ﬁrms simultaneously and independently select prices. Let p1
denote ﬁrm 1’s price and let p2 denote ﬁrm 2’s price. In a setting with uncon-
strained capacities, all of the consumers purchase from the ﬁrm that sets the
lower price, unless this price exceeds 1 in which case no one buys. If the ﬁrms
charge the same price, then the consumers divide equally between the ﬁrms. It
is easy to verify that the unique Nash equilibrium of this game without capac-
ity constraints has p1 = p2 = 0.
Suppose, however, that the ﬁrms face a capacity constraint. Speciﬁcally,
each ﬁrm can produce and sell at most eight units. If the ﬁrms charge the same
price p1 = p2 … 1, then ﬁve consumers buy from ﬁrm 1 and ﬁve consumers buy
from ﬁrm 2, as in the standard model. However, if ﬁrm i charges a lower price
than does ﬁrm j, so that pi < pj … 1, then eight consumers purchase from ﬁrm i
at ﬁrm i ’s price, and the remaining two consumers purchase from ﬁrm j at ﬁrm
j ’s price.
Let us look for an equilibrium in this pricing game. First note that select-
ing a price in excess of 1 is irrational, for this guarantees a payoff of zero (no
consumer would purchase from this ﬁrm). Next observe that each ﬁrm i can
guarantee a payoff of at least 2 by setting its price to exactly 1. Even if the other
ﬁrm selects a lower price, the other ﬁrm can sell to only eight consumers, and
so the remaining two consumers will purchase from ﬁrm i. We thus know that
p1, p2
 ∈[0, 1].
The next step is to demonstrate that there is no pure-strategy equilibrium.
For instance, consider prices such that p1 = p2 > 0. In this case, each ﬁrm has
the incentive unilaterally to deviate by slightly lowering its price and capturing
eight customers rather than ﬁve. If p1 = p2 = 0, then a ﬁrm would gain by rais-
ing its price to 1. Finally, consider the case of pi < pj … 1. In this case, it must
be that pj = 1, for otherwise ﬁrm j could gain by raising its price for the two
consumers who are stuck purchasing from this ﬁrm. But with pj = 1, it cannot
be optimal for ﬁrm i to charge strictly less; ﬁrm i would gain by raising its own
price. In summary, there is no proﬁle of prices that constitute a pure-strategy
Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
139
Example: Duopoly with Capacity Constraints
Therefore, if there is an equilibrium, then it must be in mixed strategies.
In fact, there is a unique mixed-strategy equilibrium, it is symmetric, and it
has ﬁrms randomizing over an interval [p–, 1]. Let F : [0, 1] S [0, 1] denote the
cumulative probability distribution for each ﬁrm’s mixed strategy. In words, for
each ﬁrm i, F(x) is the probability that ﬁrm i charges a price pi … x. One can
show that the function F must be continuous, for otherwise a ﬁrm would have
the incentive to deviate by selecting a price that is slightly below a point of
discontinuity (where there is a “mass point” in the other ﬁrm’s distribution). The
function must also be strictly increasing, for otherwise a player would deviate
from selecting prices that are just below a constant region of F.
We can characterize F by recalling the key requirement of a mixed-strategy
equilibrium: A player must be indifferent between the strategies that she selects
with positive probability. Note that if ﬁrm j plays according to distribution F and
if ﬁrm i chooses price pi, then ﬁrm i ’s expected payoff is
8pi
 (1 −F( pi
 )) + 2pi
 F( pi
 ).
To understand this expression, note that F( pi ) is the probability that ﬁrm j ’s
price is below pi, so 1 −F(pi
 ) is the probability that ﬁrm j ’s price is higher
than pi. In the latter contingency, ﬁrm i sells to eight consumers; in the former
contingency, ﬁrm i sells to two consumers.
Note also that because F(1) = 1, ﬁrm i gets a payoff of 2 by charging the
price pi = 1. Thus, we see that ﬁrm i ’s expected payoff must be 2 over all prices
in the interval [p–, 1]. This leads to the following identity:
8x(1 −F(x)) + 2xF(x) = 2
for all x ∈[p–, 1]. After bit of algebra to solve for F, we get
F(x) = 4x −1
3x
.
This expression also reveals the value of p– because we know that F(p–) = 0 by
deﬁnition. Solving this equation yields p– = 1>4.
In the mixed-strategy equilibrium, the ﬁrms select prices by randomiz-
ing over the interval [1>4, 1] according to cumulative distribution function F.
Each ﬁrm gets an expected payoff of 2 in equilibrium. Thus, a simple capacity
constraint leads ﬁrms to randomize as they jockey for position in the market.
The randomization probabilities balance two forces: By raising its price, a ﬁrm
increases its proﬁt margin but decreases the probability that it will be the lower-
priced ﬁrm and capture the higher quantity.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
140
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the following n-player game. Simultaneously, each of the n
players chooses between X and Y. The payoff of player i is 1 if he or she selects
Y. In the event that player i selects X, his payoff is 2 if no other player chooses
X, and his payoff is 0 if at least one other player chooses X as well. In this game,
there is a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in which each player selects Y with
probability a. (The probability a is the same for all players.) Calculate a.
Solution: In the mixed-strategy equilibrium, a given player i must be indiffer-
ent between selecting X and Y. Suppose that each of the other n −1 players
selects Y with probability a. Note that because these players act independently,
the probability that they all select Y is an−1. It is in this event that player i would
obtain a payoff of 2 by choosing X; otherwise, the choice of X would yield 0.
Thus, player i ’s expected payoff of selecting X is
an−1 # 2 + 11 −an−12 # 0.
Equating player i ’s expected payoffs of X and Y, we obtain
2an−1 = 1,
which simpliﬁes to
a = c 1
2 d
1
1
n−12
.
Thus, there is a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in which each player selects
Y with this probability.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the following normal-form game.
Q
W
Z
X
Y
1, 7
1, 5
2, 3
0, 4
3, 4
0, 6
2
1
(a) Determine the set of rationalizable strategies for this game.
(b)  The game has only one Nash equilibrium, and it is a mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium. Compute this equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
141
Exercises
2. Suppose you know the following about a particular two-player game: S1 =
{A, B, C}, S2 = {X, Y, Z}, u1
 (A, X) = 6, u1
 (A, Y) = 0, and u1
 (A, Z) = 0.
In addition, suppose you know that the game has a mixed-strategy Nash
equilibrium in which (a) the players select each of their strategies with posi-
tive probability, (b) player 1’s expected payoff in equilibrium is 4, and (c)
player 2’s expected payoff in equilibrium is 6. Do you have enough infor-
mation to calculate the probability that player 2 selects X in equilibrium? If
so, what is this probability?
3. Consider another version of the lobbying game introduced in this chapter.
Suppose the payoffs are the same as presented earlier, except in the case in
which ﬁrm X lobbies and ﬁrm Y does not lobby. In this case, suppose the
government’s decision yields x to ﬁrm X and zero to ﬁrm Y. Assume that
x > 25. The normal form of this game is pictured here.
L
Y
X
N
L
N
-5, -5
x-15, 0
0, 15
10, 10
(a)  Designate the (pure-strategy) Nash equilibria of this game (if it has
any).
(b) Compute the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium of the game.
(c)  Given the mixed-strategy equilibrium computed in part (b), what is the
probability that the government makes a decision that favors ﬁrm X? (It
is the probability that (L, N) occurs.)
(d)  As x rises, does the probability that the government makes a decision
favoring ﬁrm X rise or fall? Is this good from an economic standpoint?
4. Compute the mixed-strategy equilibria of the following games.
A
B
A
B
2, 4
0, 0
1, 6
3, 7
L
M
R
U
C
D
8, 3
3, 5
3, 3
5, 5
6, 3
4, 8
5, 2
3, 7
4, 9
2
1
2
1

--- Sayfa 157 ---
142
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
5. This exercise explores how, in a mixed-strategy equilibrium, players must
put positive probability only on best responses. Consider the game in the
following ﬁgure.
L
M
R
U
C
D
x, x
x, 0
0, x
2, 0
x, 0
0, 2
0, x
0, 2
2, 0
2
1
Compute the pure-strategy and mixed-strategy Nash equilibria for this
game, and note how they depend on x. In particular, what is the difference
between x > 1 and x < 1?
6. Determine all of the Nash equilibria (pure-strategy and mixed-strategy
equilibria) of the following games.

C
C
D
D
(b)
2, 2
0, 3
3, 0
1, 1
2
1
H
H
T
T
(a)
1, -1
-1, 1
-1, 1
1, -1
2
1

A
A
B
B
(d)
1, 4
2, 0
0, 8
3, 9
2
1
H
H
D
D
(c)
2, 2
3, 1
3, 1
2, 2
2
1
A
A
B
B
(e)
(f)
2, 2
0, 0
0, 0
3, 4
2
1
L
M
R
U
C
D
8, 1
0, 2
3, 1
4, 4
4, 3
0, 0
5, 0
3, 3
1, 4
2
1

--- Sayfa 158 ---
143
Exercises
7. Compute the mixed-strategy Nash equilibria of the following games. (First
convert the games into the normal form.)
A
B
6, 6
5, 5
1, 1
-1, 0
3, 2
0, 0
4, -1
2, 2
8, 8
1
2
1
2
X
Y
X
Y
C
O
O
D
1
U
I
I
8. Consider the following social problem.5 A pedestrian is hit by a car and
lies injured on the road. There are n people in the vicinity of the accident.
The injured pedestrian requires immediate medical attention, which will be
forthcoming if at least one of the n people calls for help. Simultaneously
and independently, each of the n bystanders decides whether or not to call
for help (by dialing 911 on a cell phone or pay phone). Each bystander ob-
tains v units of utility if someone (anyone) calls for help. Those who call for
help pay a personal cost of c. That is, if person i calls for help, then he ob-
tains the payoff v −c; if person i does not call but at least one other person
calls, then person i gets v; ﬁnally, if none of the n people calls for help, then
person i obtains zero. Assume v > c.
(a)  Find the symmetric Nash equilibrium of this n-player normal-form
game. (Hint: The equilibrium is in mixed strategies. In your analysis,
let p be the probability that a person does not call for help.)
(b)  Compute the probability that at least one person calls for help in equi-
librium. (This is the probability that the injured pedestrian gets medical
attention.) Note how this depends on n. Is this a perverse or intuitive
result?
5The social situation described here was featured in A. M. Rosenthal, Thirty-Eight Witnesses (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1964) and in J. Darley and B. Latané, “Bystander Intervention in Emergencies: Diffusion of
Responsibility,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8 (1968): 377–383.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
144
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
9. Prove that every 2 × 2 game has a Nash equilibrium (in either pure or
mixed strategies). Do this by considering the following general game and
breaking the analysis into two categories: (a) one of the pure-strategy pro-
ﬁles is a Nash equilibrium, and (b) none of the pure-strategy proﬁles is a
Nash equilibrium.
L
2
1
R
U
D
a, b
c, d
e, f
g, h
10. Does the rock–paper–scissors game have any pure-strategy Nash equilibria?
Find and report all of the mixed-strategy Nash equilibria of this game. (Take
an educated guess to ﬁnd one, verify it mathematically, and then search for
others.) If you forget the representation of this game, refresh your memory
by looking at Exercise 4 of Chapter 2 and Exercise 5 of Chapter 6.
11. The famous British spy 001 has to choose one of four routes, a, b, c, or d
(listed in order of speed in good conditions) to ski down a mountain. Fast
routes are more likely to be struck by an avalanche. At the same time, the
notorious rival spy 002 has to choose whether to use (y) or not to use (x) his
valuable explosive device to cause an avalanche. The payoffs of this game
are represented here.
x
y
a
b
c
d
12, 0
0, 6
11, 1
1, 5
10, 2
4, 2
9, 3
6, 0
002
001
(a)  Let u2
 (x) denote the probability that 001 believes 002 selects x. Explain
what 001 should do if u2
 (x) > 2>3, if u2
 (x) < 2>3, and if u2
 (x) = 2>3.
(b)  Imagine that you are Mr. Cue, the erudite technical advisor to British
military intelligence. Are there any routes you would advise 001 deﬁ-
nitely not to take? Explain your answer.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
145
Exercises
(c)  A viewer of this epic drama is trying to determine what will happen.
Find a Nash equilibrium in which one player plays a pure strategy si
and the other player plays a mixed strategy sj. Find a different mixed-
strategy equilibrium in which this same pure strategy si is assigned zero
probability. Are there any other equilibria?
12. Consider a game with n players. Simultaneously and independently, the
players choose between X and Y. That is, the strategy space for each player
i is Si = {X, Y}. The payoff of each player who selects X is 2mx −m2
x + 3,
where mx is the number of players who choose X. The payoff of each player
who selects Y is 4 −my, where my is the number of players who choose Y.
Note that mx + my = n.
(a)  For the case of n = 2, represent this game in the normal form and ﬁnd
the pure-strategy Nash equilibria (if any).
(b)  Suppose that n = 3. How many Nash equilibria does this game have?
(Note: you are looking for pure-strategy equilibria here.) If your answer
is more than zero, describe a Nash equilibrium.
(c)  Continue to assume that n = 3. Determine whether this game has a
symmetric mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in which each player
selects X with probability p. If you can ﬁnd such an equilibrium, what
is p?
13. Consider the following three-player team production problem. Simultane-
ously and independently, each player chooses between exerting effort (E) or
not exerting effort (N). Exerting effort imposes a cost of 2 on the player who
exerts effort. If two or more of the players exert effort, each player receives
a beneﬁt of 4 regardless of whether she herself exerted effort. Otherwise,
each player receives zero beneﬁt. The payoff to each player is her realized
beneﬁt less the cost of her effort (if she exerted effort). For instance, if
player 1 selects N and players 2 and 3 both select E, then the payoff vector
is (4, 2, 2). If player 1 selects E and players 2 and 3 both select N, then the
payoff vector is (−2, 0, 0).
(a)  Is there a pure-strategy equilibrium in which all three players exert
effort? Explain why or why not.
(b)  Find a symmetric mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium of this game. Let p
denote the probability that an individual player selects N.
14. Player 1 (the “hider”) and player 2 (the “seeker”) play the following game.
There are four boxes with lids, arranged in a straight line. For convenience,
the boxes are labeled A, B, C, and D. The administrator of the game gives

--- Sayfa 161 ---
146
11: Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium
player 1 a $100 bill, and player 1 must hide it in one of the four boxes.
Player 2 does not observe where player 1 hides the $100 bill. Once player 1
has hidden the bill, player 2 must open one (and only one) of the boxes. If
the money is in the box that player 2 opens, then player 2 keeps the $100. If
it is not, player 1 gets to keep the $100.
(a) Does this game have a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium?
(b) Find the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium.
(c)  Suppose it is common knowledge that player 1 likes the letter “A” and
would get extra satisfaction from putting the money in box A. Let this
satisfaction be equivalent to receiving $20. Assume this is in addition
to any money received in the game. How does player 1’s preference for
the letter “A” affect the equilibrium mixing probabilities? Calculate the
new equilibrium strategy proﬁle if you can.
(d)  Describe the equilibria of the game in which player 1’s extra satisfac-
tion from selecting box A is equivalent to receiving $120.
15. Consider a game between a police ofﬁcer (player 3) and two drivers (play-
ers 1 and 2). Player 1 lives and drives in the Clairemont neighborhood of
San Diego, whereas player 2 lives and drives in the Downtown area. On
a given day, players 1 and 2 each have to decide whether or not to use
their cell phones while driving. They are not friends, so they will not be
calling each other. Thus, whether player 1 uses a cell phone is indepen-
dent of whether player 2 uses a cell phone. Player 3 (the police ofﬁcer)
selects whether to patrol in Clairemont or Downtown. All of these choices
are made simultaneously and independently. Note that the strategy spaces
are S1 = {U, N}, S2 = {U, N}, and S3 = {C, D}, where “U” stands for “use
cell phone,” “N” means “not use cell phone,” “C” stands for “Clairemont,”
and “D” means “Downtown.”

Suppose that using a cell phone while driving is illegal. Furthermore,
if a driver uses a cell phone and player 3 patrols in his or her area (Claire-
mont for player 1, Downtown for player 2), then this driver is caught and
punished. A driver will not be caught if player 3 patrols in the other neigh-
borhood. A driver who does not use a cell phone gets a payoff of zero. A
driver who uses a cell phone and is not caught obtains a payoff of 2. Finally,
a driver who uses a cell phone and is caught gets a payoff of −y, where
y > 0. Player 3 gets a payoff of 1 if she catches a driver using a cell phone,
and she gets zero otherwise.
(a)  Does this game have a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium? If so, describe
it. If not, explain why.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
147
Exercises
(b)  Suppose that y = 1. Calculate and describe a mixed-strategy equilib-
rium of this game. Explain whether people obey the law.
(c)  Suppose that y = 3. Calculate and describe a mixed-strategy equilib-
rium of this game. Explain whether people obey the law.
16. Consider a variant of the Bertrand game with capacity constraints that was
analyzed in this chapter. Suppose that ﬁrm 1’s capacity constraint is c1 and
ﬁrm 2’s capacity constraint is c2, where c1, c2 Ú 5. That is, ﬁrm 1 can pro-
duce at most c1 units, and ﬁrm 2 can produce at most c2 units. As before, if
p1 = p2 … 1, then ﬁve consumers buy from ﬁrm 1, and ﬁve consumers buy
from ﬁrm 2, as in the standard model. Furthermore, if ﬁrm i charges a lower
price than does ﬁrm j, so that pi < pj … 1, then ci consumers purchase from
ﬁrm i at ﬁrm i ’s price, and the remaining 10 −ci consumers purchase from
ﬁrm j at ﬁrm j ’s price. The questions below ask you to analyze several cases.
(a)  Suppose that c1, c2 Ú 10. Conﬁrm that p1 = p2 = 0 is a pure-strategy
Nash equilibrium and that it is the unique equilibrium. Note that it
yields payoffs of zero.
(b)  Suppose that the capacity constraints satisfy c1 = c2 = 5. Show that the
unique equilibrium (a pure-strategy equilibrium) has p1 = p2 = 1 and
yields the payoff of 5 for each player.
(c)  Suppose that the capacity constraints satisfy c2 ∈[5, 10) and c1 Ú c2.
Verify that the following describes a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium.
(This is the unique equilibrium.) Let p– = (10 −c2
 )>c1. Firm 1 and ﬁrm
2 randomize over the interval [p–, 1] according to the following cumula-
tive probability distributions:
 F1
 (x) = c ¢
1
c1 + c2 −10 ≤c2
 ¢
x −p–
x
≤
if x ∈[p–, 1)
 1
if x = 1
 F2
 (x) = a
1
c1 + c2 −10 bc1
 a
x −p–
x
b.
If c1 = c2 then the equilibrium is symmetric and F1 = F2 is continuous. If
c1 > c2, then F1 has a discontinuity at 1 (a mass point for ﬁrm 1’s mixed
strategy). In any case, ﬁrm 1’s equilibrium expected payoff is c1
 p– and ﬁrm
2’s equilibrium expected payoff is c2
 p–.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
148
12
STRICTLY COMPETITIVE GAMES
AND SECURITY STRATEGIES
T
he concepts introduced in this chapter are of peripheral importance in the
grand scheme of things, but they are well worth digesting for several rea-
sons. First, they are low fat. Second, working with them will enhance your un-
derstanding of rationality and strategy in general. Third, they will be used to
produce some useful results later in this tour of game theory. The ﬁrst concept
is the deﬁnition of a particular class of games:
A two-player, strictly competitive game is a two-player game with the
property that for every two strategy proﬁles s, s9 ∈S, u1
 (s) > u1
 (s9) if
and only if u2
 (s) < u2
 (s9).
Thus, in a strictly competitive game, the two players have exactly opposite
rankings over the outcomes. In comparisons of various strategy proﬁles, wher-
ever one player’s payoff increases, the other player’s payoff decreases. Strictly
competitive games offer no room for joint gain or compromise.
Matching pennies (see Figure 3.4) is a good example of a two-player, strictly
competitive game. There are only two payoff vectors in matching pennies, one
that favors player 1 and one that favors player 2. The payoff vectors describe
who wins the game. When you think about it, lots of games have outcomes that
are limited to: (a) player 1 wins and player 2 loses, (b) player 2 wins and player 1
loses, and (c) the players tie (draw). Because players prefer winning to tying and
tying to losing, every two-player game with outcomes described in this way is a
strictly competitive game. Such games include chess, checkers, tennis, football
(with each team considered to be one player), and most other sports and leisure
games. Another example of a strictly competitive game appears in Figure 12.1.
Note that the outcomes of this game cannot be put in terms of a simple “winner”
and “loser.” Incidentally, the matching pennies game is a special type of strictly
competitive game called zero-sum, in which the players’ payoffs always sum
to zero.1 The strictly competitive game in Figure 12.1 is not a zero-sum game.
1A great deal of the early game-theory literature concerned zero-sum games, as analyzed in J. von Neumann
and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1944).

--- Sayfa 164 ---
149
Strictly Competitive Games and Security Strategies
Next consider the concept of a security strategy, which is based on evaluat-
ing “worst-case scenarios.” In any game, the worst payoff that player i can get
when he plays strategy si is deﬁned by
wi
 (si
 ) K

min
sj∈Sj
 ui
 (si, sj
 )
Here we look across player j’s strategies to ﬁnd the one that gives player i the
lowest payoff given that player i plays si. If player i selects strategy si then he is
guaranteed to get a payoff of at least wi
 (si). A security strategy gives player i
the best of the worst cases.
A strategy s–i ∈Si for player i is called a security strategy if s–i solves
maxsi
 ∈Si
 wi
 (si
 ). Player i’s security payoff level is maxsi
 ∈Si
 wi
 (si
 ).
Note that the security payoff level can also be written as

max
si∈Si

min
sj∈Sj
 ui
 (si, sj
 ).
Observe that in the game pictured in Figure 12.1, B is player 1’s security strat-
egy and Y is player 2’s security strategy. Player 1’s security level is 1, whereas
player 2’s security level is 3.
Note that the deﬁnition of a security strategy is formulated in terms of a
pure strategy for player i. Another version of the concept focuses on mixed strat-
egies. To differentiate it from the pure-strategy version, I use the term “maxmin
strategy”:
A mixed strategy s–i ∈Si for player i is called a maxmin strategy if
s–i solves maxsi∈Si minsj∈Sj ui
 (si, sj
 ). Player i’s maxmin payoff level is
the value maxsi∈Si minsj∈Sj ui
 (si, sj
 ).
The main difference between a security strategy and a maxmin strategy for
player i is that the former identiﬁes a payoff that player i can be certain to
achieve at minimum, whereas the latter identiﬁes a lower bound that player i
can achieve in expectation. In other words, by playing a maxmin strategy, player
FIGURE 12.1
A two-player, strictly
competitive game.
X
2
1
Y
A
B
3, 2
0, 4
6, 1
1, 3

--- Sayfa 165 ---
150
12: Strictly Competitive Games and Security Strategies
i expects to get at least his maxmin payoff on average, but he may get a lower
payoff.
It is not difﬁcult to see that a player’s maxmin payoff must be at least as large
as this player’s security level because selecting a security strategy is always an
option in the maximization problem over mixed strategies. There is no general
relation between these concepts and Nash equilibrium. However, an important
exception exists for strictly competitive games.
Result: If a two-player game is strictly competitive and has a Nash
equilibrium s* ∈S, then s*1 is a security strategy for player 1 and s*2 is a
security strategy for player 2.2 Furthermore, each player’s security level
and maxmin level are the same, so s*1 and s*2 are maxmin strategies for
the players as well.
In other words, if si is a Nash-equilibrium strategy for player i in a strictly
competitive game, then si guarantees player i at least her security payoff level,
and player i cannot improve this lower bound by randomizing. Figure 12.1 illus-
trates the result. Note that (B, Y) is a Nash equilibrium of the game, and we
already observed that B and Y are security strategies.
In fact, we can elaborate. By virtue of s* being a Nash equilibrium, s*j is a
best response to s*i . Thus, any deviation from s*j would weakly lower player j ’s
payoff and, because the game is strictly competitive, it would raise player i’s
payoff. We therefore know that with the equilibrium proﬁle s*, player i receives
the lowest payoff conditional on selecting s*i . This means that player i’s security
payoff level is ui
 (s*). To summarize, by choosing s*i , player i guarantees at least
her equilibrium payoff, whether or not player j selects his equilibrium strategy.
The result is not difﬁcult to prove mathematically, so I include the proof for
those who want to see it. The proof is a bit technical, so stay focused. Let us
prove the result for player 1’s strategy; the same arguments work for player 2’s
strategy as well. Because s* is a Nash equilibrium, player 2 cannot increase her
payoff by unilaterally deviating from s*2, which means that
u2
 (s*1 , s2
 ) … u2
 (s*)
for every strategy s2. But, because the game is strictly competitive, we can put
this inequality in terms of player 1’s payoff by reversing the direction of inequal-
ity. That is, we know that
u1
 (s*1 , s2
 ) Ú u1
 (s*)
2J. von Neumann, “Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele,” Mathematische Annalen 100 (1928): 295–320.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
151
Guided Exercise
for every strategy s2. In words, at strategy proﬁle s*, player 1 gets the lowest
possible payoff given that he plays s*1. Thus, u1(s*) = w1
 (s*1
 ). We’re almost
done. Because s* is a Nash equilibrium, player 1 cannot gain by deviating from
s*1, which means that
u1
 (s*) Ú u1
 (s1, s*2
 )
for every strategy s1. In addition, we know that u1(s1, s*2
 ) is not less than w1
 (s1
 )
because the latter is the worst-case payoff when player 1 selects s1. We conclude
that w1
 (s*1
 ) = u1
 (s*) Ú w1
 (s1
 ) for every strategy s1 which means s*1 is a security
strategy.
To prove the second claim of the result, that each player’s security level and
maxmin level coincide, we can use a contradiction argument: We presume that
the claim is false and then generate a logical contradiction from this assumption.
For the claim to be false, we would be able to ﬁnd an example with the follow-
ing property for some player i:
ui
 (s*) <

max
si∈Si

min
sj∈Sj
 ui
 (si
 , sj) =

min
sj∈Sj
 ui
 (s–i, sj
 ).
where s–i is a maxmin strategy for player i. The equality here holds by the deﬁni-
tion of maxmin strategy. Using the inequality and plugging in s*j , we get
ui
 (s*) < ui
 (s–i, s*j
 ).
This implies that there is a pure strategy si ∈Si such that
ui
 (si, s*j
 ) > ui
 (s*),
but this contradicts that s*i is a best response to s*j . The proof is complete.
I end this chapter with a note about mixed-strategy equilibria. The result
from this chapter extends to mixed strategies in the following way. Suppose that
a game is strictly competitive with respect to the mixed-strategy proﬁles; that
is, for any two mixed-strategy proﬁles s and s9, u1
 (s) > u1
 (s9) if and only if
u2
 (s) < u2
 (s9). If s* is a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium of the game, then
s*1 is a maxmin strategy for player 1 and s*2 is a maxmin strategy for player 2.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Are all security strategies rationalizable? Prove this or ﬁnd a counter-
example.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
152
12: Strictly Competitive Games and Security Strategies
Solution: In fact, not all security strategies are rationalizable, as the following
game demonstrates.
X
2
1
Y
A
B
3, 5
-1, 1
2, 6
1, 2
In this game, the only rationalizable strategy proﬁle is (A, X), yet B is player
1’s security strategy.
EXERCISES
1. Determine which of the following games are strictly competitive.
(b)
X
Y
Z
A
B
C
8, 1
7, 2
9, 0
2, 8
3, 6
4, 5
7, 2
8, 1
6, 4
2
1
(a)
X
Y
Z
A
B
C
2, 9
6, 5
5, 6
8, 2
7, 4
3, 8
9, 1
4, 7
7, 3
2
1
X
U
Y
D
(d)
1, 1
2, 2
4, 4
3, 3
2
1
X
A
Y
B
(c)
1, 1
2, 0
0, 2
1, 1
2
1
2. Find the players’ security strategies for the games pictured in Exercise 1.
3. Give some examples of games people play for entertainment that are strictly
competitive.

--- Sayfa 168 ---
153
Exercises
4. For a two-player game, two pure-strategy Nash equilibria (s1, s2
 ) and (t1, t2
 )
are called equivalent if ui
 (s) = ui
 (t) for i = 1, 2; they are called interchange-
able if (s1, t2
 ) and (t1, s2
 ) also are Nash equilibria. Mathematically prove that
any two pure-strategy Nash equilibria of a two-player, strictly  competitive
game are both equivalent and interchangeable.
5. The guided exercise in this chapter demonstrates that not all security strate-
gies are rationalizable. Find an example in which player 1’s security strat-
egy is dominated (in the ﬁrst round of the rationalizability construction).
For your example, what is the relation between player 1’s security level and
maxmin level?
6. Give an example of a game that is strictly competitive with respect to pure
strategies but is not strictly competitive with respect to mixed strategies.
7. Prove that any zero-sum game is also strictly competitive with respect to
mixed strategies.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
154
13
CONTRACT, LAW, AND ENFORCEMENT
IN STATIC SETTINGS
A
s indicated in the discussion of the Nash equilibrium concept, many insti-
tutions help align beliefs and behavior to achieve congruous outcomes. In
particular, contracting institutions—such as the legal system—govern a wide
variety of relationships in our society. Most economic relationships feature
some degree of contracting. For example, ﬁrms and workers generally negoti-
ate and agree on wages, job assignments, and other aspects of the employment
relation. Homeowners write contracts with building contractors. Firms contract
with their suppliers as well as with their customers. Nations contract with one
another on the subject of terms of trade and security interests.
Contracting does more than alleviate strategic uncertainty. It also helps
resolve the other two tensions of strategic situations discussed in preceding
chapters. Speciﬁcally, deliberate contracting gives players a way of avoiding
inefﬁcient coordination. Further, to the extent that the participation of third
parties changes the “game” to be played by the players, contracts can also miti-
gate conﬂicts between joint and individual incentives—that is, contracts may
help align incentives.
In this chapter, I explain how to use game theory to deﬁne and study contract-
ing, I describe the various ways in which contracts can be enforced, and I pre sent
some examples of how legal institutions facilitate cooperation. I begin with
some deﬁnitions.1 First, and most important, is the concept of a contract. The
U.S. legal system generally regards a contract as a “promise or a set of promises
for the breach of which the law gives a remedy, or the performance of which the
law in some way recognizes as a duty.”2 Although it is a useful working deﬁni-
tion in the legal world, this deﬁnition is too much a product of the development
of formal legal institutions to serve us well at the general conceptual level. I use
the following, more comprehensive, deﬁnition.
A contract is an agreement about behavior that is intended to be
enforced.
1The concepts noted here are covered more deeply in J. Watson, “Contract and Game Theory: Basic Concepts
for Settings with Finite Horizons,” University of California, San Diego, working paper, 2005.
2Section 1, Restatement (Second) of Contracts, American Law Institute, 1981.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
155
Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
As the deﬁnition suggests, we ought to differentiate between contracting and
enforcing contracts.
I call interaction between two or more economic agents a contractual rela-
tionship if the parties, with some deliberation, work together to set the terms
of their relationship. By “work together,” I mean that the parties negotiate and
agree on a course of action. Some aspects of their agreement may include the
interaction of third parties, such as judges or arbitrators. Often, we wish to study
the involvement of these third parties without actually modeling their prefer-
ences, in which case we will call the third parties “external players.” (Players
whose preferences we address, such as the players in all the games that we have
analyzed to this point, are considered “internal players.”) An external player
may be considered to take actions on the basis of information about the contrac-
tual relationship that is veriﬁable to this external party.
We can roughly divide any contractual relationship into two phases: a
contracting phase, in which players set the terms of their contract, and an imple-
mentation phase, in which the contract is carried out and enforced. I do not
explicitly model the contracting phase in this chapter. Instead, I focus on simple
static games that highlight the nature of contract and methods of enforcement.3
There are three methods of contract enforcement that are worth isolating
with game theory. First, a contract is said to be self-enforced if the players have
the individual incentives to abide by the terms of the contract. A contract is said
to be externally enforced if the players are motivated to behave in accordance
with a contract by the actions of an external player, such as a judge or arbitra-
tor. Finally, a contract is said to be automatically enforced if implementing the
contract is instantaneous with the agreement itself. People generally rely on a
combination of these three methods of enforcement.
We will study automatically enforced contracts later, through the analysis of
joint decision problems in Chapter 20. To illustrate the other two enforcement meth-
ods and to address some of the deeper issues regarding contracting institutions,
let us consider a speciﬁc example. Suppose Jessica and Mark, a happily married
couple, wish to remodel their home. Remodeling requires the efforts of both an
architect and a building contractor. The architect’s job is to make precise measure-
ments of the house, determine the work to be done, and decide what materials and
techniques should be used in the process. Suppose Mark himself is an architect,
so he plays the architect’s role in the remodeling project. The duty of the building
contractor is to handle the physical construction, with the assistance of workers
whom he or she hires. Let us name the building contractor Denny. Jessica, an attor-
ney, will use her legal expertise to design a contract between Denny and the couple.
3In the next part of the book (in particular, in Chapters 18–21), I analyze the contracting phase as a bargaining
problem.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
156
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
I begin by reviewing the technology of the relationship, which is the
game-theoretic representation of productive interaction in the contractual rela-
tionship. Production (the remodeling job) entails the inputs of Mark and Denny,
whose interaction is represented by the normal-form game pictured in Figure
13.1. I call it the underlying game. Mark is player 1 and Denny is player 2.
Simultaneously and independently, they each choose between investing effort in
the project (I) and not investing (N). For Mark, the investment of effort entails
architectural work that may be individually costly, but it makes Denny’s job
much easier and increases the value of the project. Denny’s investment refers to
effort expended that increases the quality of the remodeling work.
The payoff numbers are in thousands of dollars. Each player wants to maxi-
mize the number of dollars that he receives. Let us focus on the case in which
z1 + z2 > x1 + y2, z1 + z2 > x2 + y1, and z1 + z2 > 0.
In words, this means that the sum of the players’ monetary payoffs—the joint
value of their relationship—is highest when (I, I) is played. In fact, if the play-
ers have the ability to transfer money between themselves (that is, give money
to each other), then (I, I) is the only efﬁcient outcome of the underlying game.
This is because both players can always be made better off when they share a
larger joint value than when they share a smaller joint value.4 For the contract-
ing problems studied in this chapter, I make the reasonable assumption that the
parties can make monetary transfers. Thus, given that (I, I) is the best outcome,
our fundamental question is: Can the players enforce a contract specifying that
(I, I) will be played?
The players can easily implement (I, I) if this proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium
of the underlying game. In other words, an agreement to play (I, I) is a self-
enforced contract only if (I, I) is a Nash equilibrium, which is the case if
z1 Ú x1 and z2 Ú x2.
4For example, suppose z1 = z2 = 5, x1 = 6, and y2 = 2, and so the joint value of (I, I) is 10 and the joint value
of (N, I) is 8. Without transfers, player 1 prefers (N, I) to (I, I). However, if player 2 were to transfer 2 units to
player 1 when (I, I) is played, then both players would prefer (I, I) to (N, I). In Chapter 18, I elaborate on this
point about transfers and efﬁciency.
FIGURE 13.1
Technology of the
contractual relationship.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
y1, x2
x1, y2
0, 0

--- Sayfa 172 ---
157
 Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
However, if either of these inequalities fails to hold, then the players cannot rely
on self-enforcement to support the outcome (I, I). They need the participation of
a third party, whose actions may serve to change the nature of the game between
Mark and Denny. A court is such a third party.
The court enters the picture as follows: After Mark and Denny choose
whether to invest—so that the outcome of the underlying game is realized—
the court may step in and compel a transfer of money between them. The court
will not impose any transfer if (I, I) is played, because in this case the players
have cooperated as desired. But, if one or both players has deviated by select-
ing N, then the court takes remedial action. Let m denote the transfer required
by the court; assume it is a transfer from Denny to Mark. Thus, Mark’s payoff
increases by m while Denny’s payoff decreases by m. If m < 0, then it means
that Mark actually gives Denny money.
You might imagine that in some scenarios, the court’s intervention does not
lead to a transfer between the players but rather leads to an outcome whereby
both players lose money. For example, court costs impose a transfer from both
players, at least jointly. For now, we shall leave aside such costs and concentrate
on transfers from one player to another.
The court-imposed transfer m may depend on the outcome of the underlying
game. For instance, the transfer may be different if (I, N) occurred than it would
be if (N, I) occurred. In terms of the underlying game, then, there are possibly
four different transfers, one associated with each cell of the matrix. Assuming
the players know what the transfers will be, the court’s intervention changes the
game played between Mark and Denny. Instead of the underlying game, they
actually play the game depicted in Figure 13.2. This game adds the transfers to
the underlying game, implying the players’ true payoffs. Note that no transfer
is made when (I, I) occurs, as heretofore assumed. Transfers in the other cells
are denoted a, b, and g. In each case, these numbers represent a transfer from
Denny (player 2) to Mark (player 1). The game in Figure 13.2 is called the
induced game.
The induced game captures the two most important types of contract
enforcement: self-enforcement and external enforcement. External enforcement
is associated with how the actions of the external party (the court) change the
game to be played by the contracting agents—that is, how the formal contract
FIGURE 13.2
Induced game.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
y1 + b, x2 - b
x1 + a, y2 - a
g, - g

--- Sayfa 173 ---
158
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
between Mark and Denny inﬂuences the behavior of the court and, in turn, their
own payoffs in the induced game. Technically, external enforcement transforms
the underlying game into the induced game. Self-enforcement relates to the fact
that in the end, the players can only sustain a Nash equilibrium in the induced
game. Let us presume that the players will jointly select the best Nash equilib-
rium in the induced game.
The key to effective external enforcement is the extent to which the court-
imposed monetary transfers can be chosen arbitrarily. In regard to Figure 13.2,
what determines the transfers a, b, and g? Can the players select them before the
game is played? If so, to what extent are the players constrained? The answers to
these questions lie in a deeper understanding of the external enforcement insti-
tution. To this end, it is worthwhile to think about two contractual settings. In
the ﬁrst setting, the court allows people to write contracts as they see ﬁt and the
court enforces contracts verbatim. In the second setting, the court puts tighter
constraints on the set of feasible contracts.
COMPLETE CONTRACTING IN DISCRETIONARY ENVIRONMENTS
Return your thoughts to the example of a remodeling project. Suppose the court
allows the players to write a complete contract, which speciﬁes a transfer for
each of the outcomes of the underlying game. That is, the players can sign a
document assigning values to a, b, and g. After the underlying game is played,
the court reviews this document and observes the outcome of the game. The
court then enforces the agreement between the players by compelling them to
make the appropriate transfer.5
Enter Jessica and her legal sensibilities. She notices that an appropriately
designed contract can easily induce the efﬁcient outcome (I, I). This is accom-
plished by specifying externally enforced transfers sufﬁcient to make (I, I) a
Nash equilibrium in the induced game. Any a and b will do, as long as
z1 Ú x1 + a and z2 Ú x2 −b.
For example, consider the technology represented in Figure 13.3. Jessica might
recommend that Mark and Denny sign a document specifying a = −3, b = 0,
and g = 0. In words, this contract instructs the court to enforce a transfer of
3 from Mark to Denny in the event that Mark does not invest while Denny
5The contracting process (how players establish a contract) is addressed in Chapters 18 and 20 in Part III of
this book. For now, it is enough to focus on maximizing the joint value of the contractual relationship by an
appropriately speciﬁed externally enforced contract and coordination by the players on the best self-enforced
component (Nash equilibrium).

--- Sayfa 174 ---
159
Complete Contracting In Discretionary Environments
does invest. This externally enforced component implies the induced game
pictured in Figure 13.4. Because (I, I) is a Nash equilibrium in the induced
game, the agreement to play (I, I) is self-enforced.
The lesson from the preceding example is that under certain conditions,
complete contracts allow the players to induce any proﬁle in the underlying
game, regardless of the technology of the relationship—that is, regardless of the
payoffs in the underlying game. The essential condition is that the court must
be able to differentiate between all of the different outcomes of the underly-
ing game. For example, the court must be able to verify whether each player
selected I or N in the game. Then the court knows when to impose transfer a,
when to impose b, and so on. We call this informational condition full veriﬁ-
ability. To summarize:
Result: With full veriﬁability, there is an enforced contract yielding the
efﬁcient outcome (that which maximizes the players’ total payoff).
In legal terms, full veriﬁability means that sufﬁcient evidence exists to prove to
the court exactly what the outcome of the underlying game was.6
Unfortunately, full veriﬁability is more often the exception than the rule.
Usually there is not sufﬁcient evidence to completely reveal the outcome of the
underlying game. For example, the court may have no way of knowing whether
Mark or Denny individually invested in the remodeling project. The court may
be able to conﬁrm only whether the end result is good or poor. A good job indi-
cates that both Mark and Denny invested as promised; a bad job reveals that one
or both players did not invest.
6Although the model does not address how the evidence is produced and by whom, it is reasonable at this level
of analysis to suppose that the evidence will make its way to the court.
FIGURE 13.3
Speciﬁc example.
FIGURE 13.4
Induced game for the
speciﬁc example.
I
2
1
N
I
N
8, 8
-4, 4
10, -2
0, 0
I
2
1
N
I
N
8, 8
-4, 4
7, 1
0, 0

--- Sayfa 175 ---
160
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
To be more speciﬁc, suppose the remodeling job entails the design and
construction of cabinetry. The court can observe only whether, in the end, the
cabinets ﬁt together seamlessly. If they do, then the court can conclude that
both Mark and Denny invested. If the cabinets do not ﬁt together, then the court
knows that at least one of the players failed to invest. However, the court does
not know if the faulty outcome was the result of Mark’s failure to supply the
correct measurements and instruction or the result of Denny’s failure to take
care during construction. This is an example of limited veriﬁability, deﬁned
as a setting in which the court cannot perfectly verify the players’ productive
actions.
In the limited-veriﬁability setting, Jessica observes that it is impossible to
specify different externally enforced transfers for each cell of the game matrix.
Because the court cannot distinguish between (I, N), (N, I), and (N, N), the
contract must specify the same transfer for each of these outcomes. In legal
terms, the players sign a document directing the court to impose transfers on
the basis of what the court veriﬁes about the relationship. Because the court
can verify only whether the cabinets ﬁt, the transfer can be conditioned only on
whether this is the case. In game-theory terms, the externally enforced compo-
nent of the contract consists of a single number a, yielding the induced game
pictured in Figure 13.5.
It can be difﬁcult, even impossible, to support (I, I) with limited veriﬁabil-
ity. To see this, note that although raising a does reduce player 2’s incentive to
play N, it increases player 1’s incentive to select N. In order for (I, I) to be a
Nash equilibrium of the induced game, a must be selected to balance the incen-
tives of the players. Speciﬁcally, we need
z1 Ú x1 + a and z2 Ú x2 −a.
Rearranging terms simpliﬁes this to
x2 −z2 … a … z1 −x1.
We conclude that there is an a that satisﬁes these inequalities if and only if
z1 + z2 Ú x1 + x2.
FIGURE 13.5
Induced game with limited
veriﬁability.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
y1 + a, x2 - a
x1 + a, y2 - a
a, - a

--- Sayfa 176 ---
161
Contracting with Court-Imposed Breach Remedies
As an example, take the underlying game shown in Figure 13.3. Setting
a = −3 yields the induced game in Figure 13.6, for which (I, I) is a Nash equi-
librium. Next consider the underlying game shown in Figure 13.7. Under limited
veriﬁability, (I, I) cannot be enforced. (Check that there is no a that makes this
a Nash equilibrium of the induced game.) However, as with all technologies,
(I, I) can be supported with full veriﬁability. Thus, limited veriﬁability puts
real constraints on players’ ability to achieve efﬁcient outcomes. Contractual
imperfections, such as limited veriﬁability, lead to the three strategic tensions
identiﬁed earlier in this book.7
CONTRACTING WITH COURT-IMPOSED BREACH REMEDIES
Courts do not always enforce what players write into their contracts. In fact,
in the United States, courts are more likely to impose transfers on the basis of
certain legal principles, rather than be dictated to by the contract document.
Further, contracts in the real world tend not to be complete speciﬁcations of
transfers as a function of veriﬁable information. There are several reasons why
players write such “incomplete” contracts. For example, it may be expensive or
time-consuming to list all of the contingencies that may arise in a contractual
relationship. More importantly, players may count on the court to “complete” a
contract (ﬁll in the gaps) during litigation, trusting that the court will be able to
determine the appropriate remedial action. Because courts are active with regard
7In addition, the three tensions discussed earlier operate on the level of contracting. For example, players 1 and
2 may contract separately from players 3 and 4, yet these two contractual relationships may affect one another
in prisoners’ dilemma fashion. Players 1 and 2 may have the narrow incentive to select a contract of form “D”
and players 3 and 4 may have the same incentive, yet all four would prefer a grand contract specifying “C” in
each bilateral relationship.
FIGURE 13.6
Induced game with a = −3.
I
2
1
N
I
N
8, 8
-7, 7
7, 1
-3, 3
FIGURE 13.7
Another speciﬁc example.
I
2
1
N
I
N
10, 10
-4, 12
12, -4
0, 0

--- Sayfa 177 ---
162
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
to assessing relationships and imposing transfers, the players need not write a
detailed contract up front.
An externally enforced contract is often merely a statement of how the play-
ers intend to behave in their relationship. For example, Mark and Denny may
agree to play (I, I) in the game. That is, Mark promises to supply Denny with
accurate measurements and thorough instructions, whereas Denny promises to
exercise care in the building process. The players may never even mention the
possibility that one or both of them may deviate from this plan, much less what
the legal remedy should be in such a case. In this sense, the contract is incom-
plete. The players’ contract provides no guidance to the court for the eventuality
in which one of the players fails to invest.
In this section, I sketch three legal principles that guide damage awards
in U.S. commercial cases.8 The principles apply in the setting of incomplete
contracts, where either the players do not specify a transfer for each contingency
or the court ignores the players’ statement of transfers. For simplicity, I assume
that the externally enforced component of a contract is simply a joint statement
by the players describing the actions that they intend to take in the underlying
game. For the examples, we are interested in the contract specifying (I, I). A
deviation from this proﬁle by one or both players is called a breach. If one
player commits a breach, then this player is called the defendant and the other
player is called the plaintiff. On verifying a breach, the court imposes a breach
remedy, which implies a transfer between the players. For now, assume that the
court can fully verify the outcome of the underlying game—that is, that there
is full veriﬁability. With reference to Figure 13.2, the court’s breach remedy
deﬁnes a, b, and g.
Under the legal principle of expectation damages, the court forces the
defendant to transfer to the plaintiff the sum of money needed to give the plain-
tiff the payoff that he or she would have received had the contract been fulﬁlled.
In terms of the underlying game in Figure 13.1, player 1’s expectation is z1
and player 2’s expectation is z2. Thus, if Mark (player 1) breaches, then he is
forced to pay Denny an amount to make Denny’s payoff z2. This implies that
a = y2 −z2. Likewise, the transfer imposed if Denny breaches is b = z1 −y1.
For simplicity, we can let g = 0. Under expectation damages, the induced game
is that depicted in Figure 13.8.
In the induced game, (I, I) is a Nash equilibrium if and only if
z1 Ú x1 + y2 −z2 and z2 Ú x2 + y1 −z1.
8The standard breach remedies analyzed here were studied by S. Shavell, “Damage Measures for Breach of
Contract,” Bell Journal of Economics 11 (1980): 466–490. For an overview of contract law, you can browse
through a law school textbook such as R. Barnett, Contracts: Cases and Doctrine, 3rd ed. (New York: Aspen
Law & Business, 2003).

--- Sayfa 178 ---
163
Contracting with Court-Imposed Breach Remedies
Rearranging these inequalities yields
z1 + z2 Ú x1 + y2 and z1 + z2 Ú x2 + y1,
which should be familiar to you—they are the inequalities that deﬁne conditions
under which (I, I) is efﬁcient. Thus:
Result: Under expectation damages with the underlying game of Figure
13.1, (I, I) is enforceable if and only if (I, I) is efﬁcient.
This result is quite strong because it means that expectation damages alleviate
the tension between individual and joint incentives. In fact, even if the players
do not know the values xi, yi, and zi at the time of contracting, these damages
encourage the efﬁcient outcome. Speciﬁcally, if the agents formally agree to
play (I, I) and then observe the values xi, yi, and zi before deciding whether to
invest, then they will have the incentive to breach only if (I, I) turns out to be
inefﬁcient—in which case breach is an efﬁciency-enhancing choice.
Expectation damages are the ideal court remedy, both in theory and in
practice. Courts generally impose expectation awards whenever possible. But
expectation requires a great deal of information—more information than exists
in many economic settings. First, the court must be able to conﬁrm which
of the two players has breached the contract (full veriﬁability). Second, the
players must know the payoff parameters before deciding whether to invest.
Third, and most critically, the court must be able to determine the payoffs in
the breach and nonbreach outcomes of the underlying game (in particular, zi
and yi ).
The parameter yi is sometimes easily veriﬁed by courts. For example, yi
may include expenses borne by the defendant, for which the defendant can
produce receipts. That is, Denny may be able to prove how much he spent on
materials and assistants. On the other hand, a court may ﬁnd it very difﬁcult
to determine zi, in particular after breach. If the cabinetry is not built properly,
how can the court accurately estimate the value that would have resulted if the
job had been completed with care? An even better example arises in a joint
venture on the development of a new product. If contractual breach destroyed
FIGURE 13.8
Induced game under
expectation damages.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
z1, x2 + y1 - z1
x1 + y2 - z2, z2
0, 0

--- Sayfa 179 ---
164
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
the chance that the product could be brought to market, then one can hardly
expect the court accurately to estimate the value that the product would have
generated.
The second breach remedy applies well to cases in which zi cannot be
observed. Under the principle of reliance damages, the court imposes a trans-
fer that returns the plaintiff to the state in which he or she would have been but
for the contract. That is, the court determines the payoff that the plaintiff would
have received had no contract been written, and then the court forces a transfer
sufﬁcient to give the plaintiff this total payoff. The idea behind this legal prin-
ciple is that the plaintiff should be compensated for the initial investment that
he makes in the contractual relationship—an investment that, in a contractual
commitment, places one party in the position of relying on the other to fulﬁll
the terms of the contract. For example, when Mark makes detailed drawings of
his house, he relies on Denny to follow the drawings with care during construc-
tion. A player is due compensation for his investment if the other player does
not honor the contract.
In our model, we can capture the “no contract” value in two ways. First, we
might view this value as a particular value wi that player i would have received
had the underlying game not been played. Second, we might suppose that the
underlying game is played with or without a contract, in which case the absence
of a contract implies the play of a Nash equilibrium in the underlying game. Our
choice between these alternatives should be sensitive to the actual case at hand.
For simplicity, let us use the second modeling approach. Assuming that yi … 0
for i = 1, 2, (N, N) is a Nash equilibrium of the underlying game; this is our
prediction for the no-contract outcome.
With reference to Figures 13.1 and 13.2, reliance damages imply a = y2
and b = −y1, and so the induced game is the one shown in Figure 13.9. Note
that (I, I) is a Nash equilibrium in the induced game if and only if
z1 Ú x1 + y2 and z2 Ú x2 + y1.
Unless the defendant’s damage yi is sufﬁciently large, reliance awards may not
support the efﬁcient outcome.
The third common legal principle on breach refers to restitution damages,
which seek to cancel any unjust enrichment that the defendant obtained by
breaching the contract, relative to the no-contract state. The best way to think
about this principle is to imagine the following comparison that a mischievous-
minded Denny might make. On one hand, he could enter into a contract with
Mark with the thought of breaching it. For example, Denny may value Mark’s
detailed drawings independently of the project at hand (he can present them to
a future customer perhaps). Denny may be able to take advantage of Mark in

--- Sayfa 180 ---
165
Contracting with Court-Imposed Breach Remedies
other ways as well, say, by raiding Jessica and Mark’s refrigerator and watching
television while they are out of the house. On the other hand, Denny can obtain
zero by not having a contract with Mark. The breach value x2 represents the
unjust enrichment (relative to the no-contract outcome yielding him zero) that
an opportunistic Denny can obtain from the contract.
Restitution damages imply a = −x1 and b = x2, which yields the induced
game pictured in Figure 13.10. Note that (I, I) is a Nash equilibrium in the
induced game if and only if z1 Ú 0 and z2 Ú 0. Restitution awards do not imply
the efﬁcient outcome in two cases: (1) when one value of zi is negative, and (2)
when both values of zi are positive yet (I, I) is not efﬁcient.
As Jessica readily points out to Mark and Denny, expectation damages are
best; however, such damages require the court to know the value of the hypo-
thetical performance outcome in the event that the contract is actually breached.
When zi cannot be estimated with precision, the court may adopt a reliance or
restitution test. Reliance requires the court to know the plaintiff’s expenditures
related to the contract, as well as the value of the plaintiff’s foregone opportuni-
ties. Restitution requires knowledge of the defendant’s unjust enrichment.
Complicating factors often make it difﬁcult to estimate the payoff param-
eters. For example, evaluating the plaintiff’s foregone opportunities can be a
slippery exercise. If Mark and Denny had not entered into a contract, would
Mark have beneﬁted from searching for another building contractor? How much
effort should Mark have expended in looking for an alternative contractor? How
much effort should Mark expend to minimize damage to his house after a breach
by Denny? The answers to these questions and more can be provided—or are at
least addressed—by your local attorney and economist.
FIGURE 13.9
Induced game under
reliance damages.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
0, x2 + y1
x1 + y2, 0
0, 0
FIGURE 13.10
Induced game under
restitution damages.
I
2
1
N
I
N
z1, z2
x2 + y1, 0
0, x1 + y2
0, 0

--- Sayfa 181 ---
166
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider a contractual relationship, where the technology of the rela-
tionship is given by the following matrix:
I
2
1
N
I
N
6, 8
0, 9
7, 0
0, 0
(a)  Suppose that the players write a contract whereby they agree to play (I, I).
Draw the matrix that describes the induced game under the assumption that
the court enforces expectation damages.
(b)  Suppose that the players can write a complete contract, but that they are in
a setting of limited veriﬁability, where the court can verify only whether N
was played by one or both of the players (but the court cannot verify which
of the players chose N). Is there a contract that induces play of (I, I)?
Solution:
(a)  Recall that with expectation damages, the defendant must pay the plaintiff
the amount that would make the plaintiff’s payoff the same as it would be
if the contract were fulﬁlled. For instance, if player 1 breaches the contract,
leading to proﬁle (N, I), then player 1 is compelled to transfer 8 to player 2.
The induced game is therefore the following:
I
2
1
N
I
N
6, 8
6, 3
-1, 8
0, 0
(b)  No, (I, I) cannot be induced. To prevent player 1 from deviating, the court
must require player 1 to transfer at least 1 unit to player 2 if cell (N, I) is
reached in the underlying game. On the other hand, to prevent player 2 from
deviating, the court must require player 2 to transfer at least 1 unit to player
1 if cell (I, N) is reached in the underlying game. Limited veriﬁability re-
quires the transfers speciﬁed for cells (N, I) and (I, N) to be the same, which
contradicts these two conditions.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
167
Exercises
EXERCISES
1. Consider a contractual setting in which the technology of the relationship is
given by the following underlying game:
I
2
1
N
I
N
5, 5
-1, 1
7, -1
0, 0
Suppose an external enforcer will compel transfer a from player 2 to player
1 if (N, I) is played, transfer b from player 2 to player 1 if (I, N) is played,
and transfer g from player 2 to player 1 if (N, N) is played. The players wish
to support the investment outcome (I, I).
(a)  Suppose there is limited veriﬁability, so that a = b = g is required.
Assume that this number is set by the players’ contract. Write the
matrix representing the induced game and determine whether (I, I) can
be enforced. Explain your answer.
(b)  Suppose there is full veriﬁability, but that a, b, and g represent reli-
ance damages imposed by the court. Write the matrix representing the
induced game and determine whether (I, I) can be enforced. Explain
your answer.
2. Consider a contractual setting in which the technology of the relationship is
given by the following partnership game:
I
2
1
N
I
N
4, 4
-4, 9
2, -4
0, 0
Suppose the players contract in a setting of court-imposed breach remedies.
The players can write a formal contract specifying the strategy proﬁle they
intend to play; the court observes their behavior in the underlying game and,
if one or both of them cheated, imposes a breach transfer. The players wish
to support the investment outcome (I, I).

--- Sayfa 183 ---
168
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
(a)  Write the matrix representing the induced game under the assumption
that the court imposes expectation damages. Can a contract specifying
(I, I) be enforced? Explain your answer.
(b)  Write the matrix representing the induced game under the assumption
that the court imposes restitution damages. Can a contract specifying
(I, I) be enforced?
(c)  Write the matrix representing the induced game under the assumption
that the court imposes reliance damages. Can a contract specifying (I, I)
be enforced with reliance transfers? Explain your answer.
(d)  Suppose litigation is costly. When a contract is breached, each player
has to pay a court fee of c in addition to the reliance transfer imposed
by the court. What is the induced game in this case?
(e)  Under what condition on c can (I, I) be enforced with reliance transfers
and court costs?
(f)  Continue to assume the setting of part (d). Suppose the court intervenes
after a breach only if the plaintiff brings suit. For what values of c does
the plaintiff have the incentive to sue?
(g)  How does your answer to part (e) change if the court forces the losing
party to pay all court costs?
3. Consider a setting of complete contracting in a discretionary environment,
where the court will impose transfers as speciﬁed by the players. For each
of the following two underlying games, how much should the players be
jointly willing to pay to transform the setting from one of limited veriﬁabil-
ity, where the court cannot distinguish between (I, N), (N, I), and (N, N) but
knows whether (I, I) was played, to one of full veriﬁability, where the court
knows exactly what the players did? To answer this question, you must de-
termine the outcomes in the two different information settings. Here are the
two underlying games:
I
(a)
(b)
2
1
N
I
N
5, 5
-5, 6
8, -4
0, 0
I
2
1
N
I
N
4, 7
-4, 8
2, -2
0, 0
4. Reconsider the pedestrian-injury example of Exercise 8 in Chapter 11. Sup-
pose you are a prominent legal expert. The government has asked for your

--- Sayfa 184 ---
169
Exercises
advice on a proposed law specifying punishment of bystanders who fail to
call for help. If the law is enforced, then with some probability a “do noth-
ing” bystander will be forced to pay a ﬁne.
(a)  In words, explain how this law changes the game played between the
bystanders. If you can, sketch and solve a version of the model incorpo-
rating the ﬁne and the probability that a bystander is prosecuted.
(b)  Compare the following two rules: (1) a bystander can be prosecuted if
he or she fails to call, regardless of whether another person calls; and
(2) a bystander can be prosecuted for not calling only if no one else calls
(in which case the pedestrian’s injury is not treated, resulting in lifelong
health problems).
(c)  What kind of bystander law would you recommend? Explain your crite-
rion (efﬁciency?).
5. Which is more critical to effective external enforcement: breach or veriﬁ-
ability? Explain.
6. Which remedy is more likely to achieve efﬁciency: expectation damages or
restitution damages? Explain.
7. The technologies of interaction for two different contractual relationships
are given by matrices A and B.
I
A
B
2
1
N
I
N
3, 8
-6, 9
5, -1
0, 0
I
2
1
N
I
N
6, 7
3, 2
10, -5
0, 0
Answer the following questions for both technology A and technology B.
(a)  Suppose the players can obtain externally enforced transfers by writ-
ing a contract. Under the assumption that the court can verify exactly
the outcome of production, what value can the players obtain and what
contract is written? Describe both the externally and self-enforced
components.
(b)  Repeat part (a) under the assumption that the court can only verify
whether (I, I) is played—that is, it cannot distinguish between (I, N),
(N, I), and (N, N).

--- Sayfa 185 ---
170
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
(c)  Explain or calculate the outcome for the setting of court-imposed
breach remedies. Separately study expectation, reliance, and restitution.
Assume (0, 0) is the benchmark, nonrelationship payoff for reliance and
restitution.
8. Suppose a manager (player 1) and a worker (player 2) have a contractual re-
lationship with the following technology of interaction. Simultaneously and
independently, the two parties each select either low (L) or high (H) effort.
A party that selects high effort suffers a disutility. The worker’s disutility
of high effort (measured in dollars) is 2, whereas the manager’s disutility of
high effort is 3. The effort choices yield revenue to the manager, as follows:
If both choose L, then the revenue is zero. If one party chooses L while the
other selects H, then the revenue is 3. Finally, if both parties select H, then
the revenue is 7. The worker’s payoff is zero minus his disutility of effort
(zero if he exerted low effort), and the manager’s payoff is her revenue mi-
nus her disutility of effort.
(a)  Draw the normal-form matrix that represents the underlying game.
(b)  If there is no external enforcement, what would be the outcome of this
contractual relationship?
(c)  Suppose there is external enforcement of transfers but that there is
limited veriﬁability in that the court can only observe the revenue
generated by the parties. Explain how this determines which cells of the
matrix the court can distinguish between.
(d)  Continuing to assume limited veriﬁability, what is the best outcome that
the parties can achieve and what contract will they write to achieve it?
(Assume maximization of joint value.)
(e)  Now assume that there is full veriﬁability. What outcome will be
reached and what contract will be written?
9. Suppose that Shtinki Corporation operates a chemical plant, which is lo-
cated on the Hudson River. Downstream from the chemical plant is a group
of ﬁsheries. The Shtinki plant emits some byproducts that pollute the river,
causing harm to the ﬁsheries. The proﬁt Shtinki obtains from operating the
chemical plant is a positive number X. The harm inﬂicted on the ﬁsheries
due to water pollution is measured to be Y in terms of lost proﬁts. If the
Shtinki plant is shut down, then Shtinki loses X while the ﬁsheries gain Y.
Suppose that the ﬁsheries collectively sue Shtinki Corporation. It is easily
veriﬁed in court that Shtinki’s plant pollutes the river. However, the values
X and Y cannot be veriﬁed by the court, although they are commonly known
to the litigants.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
171
Exercises

Suppose that the court requires the ﬁsheries’ attorney (player 1) and the
Shtinki attorney (player 2) to play the following litigation game. Player 1
is supposed to announce a number y, which the court interprets as the ﬁsh-
eries’ claim about their proﬁt loss Y. Player 2 is to announce a number x,
which the court interprets as a claim about X. The announcements are made
simultaneously and independently. Then the court uses Posner’s nuisance
rule to make its decision.9 According to the rule, if y > x, then Shtinki
must shut down its chemical plant. If x Ú y, then the court allows Shtinki
to operate the plant, but the court also requires Shtinki to pay the ﬁsheries
the amount y. Note that the court cannot force the attorneys to tell the truth.
Assume the attorneys want to maximize the proﬁts of their clients.
(a)  Represent this game in the normal form by describing the strategy
spaces and payoff functions.
(b)  For the case in which X > Y, compute the Nash equilibria of the litiga-
tion game.
(c)  For the case in which X < Y, compute the Nash equilibria of the litiga-
tion game.
(d)  Is the court’s rule efﬁcient?
10. Discuss a real-world example of a contractual situation with limited veriﬁ-
ability. How do the parties deal with this contractual imperfection?
11. Consider a two-player contractual setting in which the players produce as a
team. In the underlying game, players 1 and 2 each select high (H) or low
(L) effort. A player who selects H pays a cost of 3; selecting L costs noth-
ing. The players equally share the revenue that their efforts produce. If they
both select H, then revenue is 10. If they both select L, then revenue is 0. If
one of them selects H and the other selects L, then revenue is x. Thus, if both
players choose H, then they each obtain a payoff of 1
2 # 10 −3 = 2; if player
1 selects H and player 2 selects L, then player 1 gets 1
2 # x −3 and player 2
gets 1
2 # x; and so on. Assume that x is between 0 and 10.

Suppose a contract speciﬁes the following monetary transfers from
player 2 to player 1: a if (L, H) is played, b if (H, L) is played, and g
if (L, L) is played.
(a)  Suppose that there is limited veriﬁability in the sense that the court can
observe only the revenue (10, x, or 0) of the team, rather than the play-
ers’ individual effort levels. How does this constrain a, b, and g?
9See R. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law, 5th ed. (Boston: Little, Brown, 1997). The exercise here is from
I. Kim and J. Kim, “Efﬁciency of Posner’s Nuisance Rule: A Reconsideration,” Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics 160 (2004): 327–333.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
172
13: Contract, Law, and Enforcement in Static Settings
(b)  What must be true about x to guarantee that (H, H) can be achieved with
limited veriﬁability?
12. Consider the following two-player team production problem. Each player
i chooses a level of effort ai Ú 0 at a personal cost of a2
i . The players se-
lect their effort levels simultaneously and independently. Efforts a1 and a2
generate revenue of r = 4(a1 + a2
 ). There is limited veriﬁability in that
the external enforcer (court) can verify only the revenue generated by the
players, not the players’ individual effort levels. Therefore, the players are
limited to revenue-sharing contracts, which can be represented by two func-
tions f1 : [0, ) S [0, ) and f2 : [0, ) S [0, ). For each player i, fi (r) is
the monetary amount given to player i when the revenue is r. We require
f1
 (r) + f2
 (r) … r for every r.

Call a contract balanced if, for every revenue level r, it is the case that
f1
 (r) + f2
 (r) = r. That is, the revenue is completely allocated between the
players. A contract is unbalanced if f1
 (r) + f2
 (r) < r for some value of r,
which means that some of the revenue is destroyed or otherwise wasted.
(a)  What are the efﬁcient effort levels, which maximize the joint value
4(a1 + a2
 ) −a2
1 −a2
2?
(b)  Suppose that the players have a revenue-sharing contract specify-
ing that each player gets half of the revenue. That is, player i gets
(r>2) −a2
i = 2(a1 + a2
 ) −a2
i . What is the Nash equilibrium of the
effort-selection game?
(c)  Next consider more general contracts. Can you ﬁnd a balanced contract
that would induce the efﬁcient effort levels as a Nash equilibrium? If
so, describe such a contract. If not, see if you can provide a proof of this
result.
(d)  Can you ﬁnd an unbalanced contract that would induce the efﬁcient
effort levels as a Nash equilibrium? If so, describe such a contract. If
not, provide a proof as best you can.
(e)  Would the issues of balanced transfers matter if the court could verify
the players’ effort levels? Explain.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
Analyzing Behavior
in Dynamic Settings
P A R T I I I
Rationalizability and Nash equilibrium are based on the
normal-form representation of a game. As demonstrated
in Part II of this book, these concepts generate useful and
precise conclusions regarding how people behave in many
applied settings. In this part, I focus on extensive-form
games and I show how features of the extensive form suggest
reﬁned versions of the rationalizability and Nash equilibrium
concepts.1 I also embark on a detailed analysis of several
classes of games that command the interest of economists and
researchers in other disciplines: models of competition between
ﬁrms, employment relations, negotiation, reputation, and parlor
games. The analysis pays close attention to the information
that players have at different points in a game. In addition,
it considers how players should look ahead to evaluate how
others will respond to their actions. It is an important lesson to
think about the consequences of your actions before making a
choice.
1Note that there is no difﬁculty in applying the standard forms of rationalizability and Nash equilibrium to games in the extensive
form because every extensive form generates a single normal form (to which we apply the concepts). But, as you will see, some
straightforward reﬁnements present themselves vividly when we consider the extensive form.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
175
DETAILS OF THE EXTENSIVE FORM 14
B
efore proceeding to the analysis of extensive-form games, I will elaborate
on the technical aspects of the extensive-form representation.1 As I de-
scribed in Chapter 2, an extensive-form game is deﬁned by a tree that has been
properly constructed and labeled. Those who love to ﬂaunt technical jargon will
appreciate knowing that, in formal mathematical terms, a tree is a “directed
graph.” I do not think there is any reason to ﬂaunt technical jargon.
Recall that trees consist of nodes connected by branches. Each branch is an
arrow, pointing from one node to another. Thus, you can start from a given node
and trace through the tree by following arrows. Nodes that can be reached in this
manner are called successors of the node at which you start. Branches from a
given node point to its immediate successors. Analogously, by tracing backward
through the tree from a given node, you can deﬁne a node’s predecessors and
immediate predecessor. In Figure 14.1, nodes b and c are successors of node a.
Node b is an immediate successor of node a and the immediate predecessor of
node c. Obviously, a given node x is a successor of node y if and only if y is a
predecessor of x. Also note that for nodes x, y, and z, if x is a predecessor of y
and y is a predecessor of z, then it must be that x is a predecessor of z. That is,
trees have a “transitive precedence relation.”
A tree starts with the initial node and ends at terminal nodes (from which no
arrows extend). We would like the initial node clearly to designate the “begin-
ning” of the tree, and so we impose the following rule on trees:
Tree Rule 1 Every node is a successor of the initial node, and the ini-
tial node is the only one with this property.
A path through the tree is a sequence of nodes that (1) starts with the initial
node, (2) ends with a terminal node, and (3) has the property that successive
nodes in the sequence are immediate successors of each other. Each path is one
way of tracing through the tree by following branches. For example, in Figure
14.1, one path starts at the initial node, goes to node a and then node b, and
ends at node c. We require that terminal nodes exist and that each terminal node
1If you want to get really technical, read the formal deﬁnition of an extensive-form game in D. M. Kreps and
R. Wilson, “Sequential Equilibria,” Econometrica 50 (1982): 863–894.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
176
14: Details of the Extensive Form
completely and uniquely describes a path through the tree. Thus, no two paths
should cross. The following rule captures this requirement.
Tree Rule 2 Each node except the initial node has exactly one immedi-
ate predecessor. The initial node has no predecessors.
To check your understanding of paths and precedence, I recommend drawing
some trees to verify that paths do not cross as long as Tree Rule 2 holds.2
Remember that branches represent actions that the players can take at deci-
sion nodes in the game. We label each branch in a tree with the name of the
action that it represents.
Tree Rule 3 Multiple branches extending from the same node have dif-
ferent action labels.
Information sets represent places where players have to make decisions.
Formally, an information set is a set of nodes between which a player cannot
distinguish when making a decision. The concept of an information set adds the
following two rules for trees.
Tree Rule 4 Each information set contains decision nodes for only one
of the players.
Tree Rule 5 All nodes in a given information set must have the same
number of immediate successors and they must have the same set of ac-
tion labels on the branches leading to these successors.
2“Family trees” do not satisfy Tree Rule 2 because humans reproduce sexually. In a family tree, one normally
associates a node with a single individual, and so everyone has two immediate predecessors (a mother and a
father). Of course, a family tree is not a game. But families play games and you know “the family that plays
together stays together.”
FIGURE 14.1
A tree.
a
b
c
Initial node
Terminal nodes

--- Sayfa 192 ---
177
Details of the Extensive Form
Regarding Tree Rule 4, it does not make sense to have, say, an informa-
tion set containing nodes a and b if a is a decision node for player 1 and b is a
decision node for player 2, as shown in Figure 14.2(a). It would imply that at
some point in the game, the players do not know who is to make a decision. The
intuition behind Tree Rule 5 is that if a player has a different number of avail-
able actions at nodes a and b, then he must be able to distinguish between these
nodes (that is, they are not in the same information set). A tree that violates Tree
Rule 5 is pictured in Figure 14.2(b).
In addition to the tree rules, it is generally reasonable to assume that play-
ers remember their own past actions as well as any other events that they have
observed. A game satisfying this assumption is said to exhibit perfect recall.
Figure 14.3 depicts a setting of imperfect recall. In this example, player 1 ﬁrst
chooses between U and D and then chooses between X and Y. That nodes a and
b are contained in the same information set means that player 1 has forgotten
whether he chose U or D when he makes the second choice. Although there
are real-world examples of imperfect recall (Where did I park my car?), game
theory focuses on models with perfect recall. Some game theorists have studied
imperfect recall, but they seem to have misplaced their notes.
In summary, an extensive-form game consists of a properly labeled tree
obeying rules 1 through 5. If every information set of the extensive form is a
FIGURE 14.2
Crazy information sets.
FIGURE 14.3
Imperfect recall.
(a)
(b)
1
1
a
b
1
2
2
U
D
1
1
X
Y
X
Y
a
b

--- Sayfa 193 ---
178
14: Details of the Extensive Form
single node—if there are no dashed lines in the picture—then we say that the
game is of perfect information; otherwise, the game is of imperfect information.
In a game of imperfect information, there is at least one contingency in which
the player on the move does not know exactly where he is in the tree.
One issue that has not yet been addressed herein is how to model random
events not under the control of the players, such as whether it rains when the
Super Bowl is played or whether there is a drought in a particular growing
season. Such random events (“moves of nature”) require analysis that is best put
off until later, which in this book means discussion in Part IV.
On the subject of drawing game trees, I have one more point to make. As you
have seen, in some games a player can choose from an inﬁnite number of actions.
For example, consider a simple market game between two ﬁrms in which ﬁrm 1
ﬁrst decides how much to spend on advertising and then ﬁrm 2, after observing
ﬁrm 1’s choice, decides whether to exit or stay in the market. Suppose that ﬁrm
1 may choose any advertising level between zero and one (million dollars). This
ﬁrm may choose advertising levels of .5, .3871, and so forth. Because there are an
inﬁnite number of possible actions for ﬁrm 1, we cannot draw a branch for each
action. One way of representing ﬁrm 1’s potential choices, though, is to draw two
branches from ﬁrm 1’s decision node, designating advertising levels of zero and
one, as in Figure 14.4(a). These branches are connected by an arc, which shows
that ﬁrm 1 can select any number between zero and one. We label this graphical
conﬁguration with a variable (in this case, the letter a), which stands for ﬁrm
1’s action. In the interior of the arc, we draw a generic node that continues the
tree. Note that in the game illustrated in Figure 14.4(a), the payoffs of the play-
ers depend on a. In another version of the game, player 2 does not observe the
advertising level of ﬁrm 1, as depicted in Figure 14.4(b).
I conclude this chapter with a simple model of bargaining that has played a
signiﬁcant role in economic analysis. Economists spend a lot of time studying how
people trade goods. In some markets, goods are traded through posted prices and
with very little negotiation. In other markets, buyers and sellers bargain over the
FIGURE 14.4
Advertising/exit.
a
1
Exit
Stay
in
2
1 - a, 0
a - a2, 1/4 - a/2
(a)
a
1
Exit
Stay
in
2
1 - a, 0
a - a2, 1/4 - a/2
(b)

--- Sayfa 194 ---
179
Recalling the Strategy Definition
price at which they will trade. Negotiation is a part of buying homes, automo-
biles, souvenirs in the shops of tourist destinations, merchandise at swap meets,
and in many other markets. As a rule, regardless of what is for sale, one can always
bargain over the price. Because bargaining is such a widespread means of estab-
lishing the terms of trade, economists, business people, and everyday consumers
seek to understand how negotiation takes place and how to master its art.
Imagine that person 1 wishes to sell a painting to person 2. Person 1, the
seller, has no interest in the painting; it is worth nothing to her. On the other
hand, the painting is worth $100 to the buyer. Thus, if the painting is sold for
any price between 0 and $100, both parties will be better off than if the painting
is not sold. There are many procedures by which bargaining over the price can
take place. I will later try to help you develop an understanding through some
simple models. For now, consider the simplest model of negotiation, called
 ultimatum-offer bargaining.
Suppose that if the parties do not reach an agreement over the price quickly,
then the opportunity for trade disappears. In fact, there is only time for one take-
it-or-leave-it offer by one of the parties. For the sake of argument, assume that
the seller can make the offer. She states a price at which she is willing to sell the
painting, and the buyer then either accepts it (“Yes”) or rejects it (“No”). If the
buyer rejects the price, then he and the seller must part without making a trade.
If the buyer accepts the price, then they trade the painting at this price. This
simple game is represented in Figure 14.5. Note the payoffs. If the painting is
not traded, both parties obtain nothing. If the painting is traded, then the seller
obtains the price and the buyer gets the value of the trade to her (the difference
between what the painting is worth to her and the price).
RECALLING THE STRATEGY DEFINITION
Before beginning to analyze sequential-move games, it is critically important
to make sure that you completely understand the deﬁnition of “strategy.” Other-
wise, you’re in for some major discomfort as you try to learn the material in this
and the next parts of this book.
Consider the ultimatum-offer bargaining game just described. In this game,
player 1’s strategy is simply a number p, which we can assume is between 0
FIGURE 14.5
Ultimatum-offer bargaining.
p
1
Yes
No
2
p, 100 - p
0, 0

--- Sayfa 195 ---
180
14: Details of the Extensive Form
and 100. Thus, the strategy space for player 1 is S1 = [0, 100]. Player 2’s strat-
egy is from a more complicated space. Note that player 2 has an inﬁnite number
of information sets, one for each of the feasible offers of player 1. For instance,
one information set corresponds to player 1 having just made the offer p = 28;
another information set follows the offer p = 30.75; another follows the offer
p = 62; and so on. Because there is an inﬁnite number of points in the interval
[0, 100], player 2 has an inﬁnite number of information sets.
Remember that a strategy for a player is a complete contingent plan. Thus,
player 2’s strategy must specify player 2’s choice between Yes and No at every
one of player 2’s information sets. In other words, player 2’s strategy describes
whether she will accept an offer of p = 28, whether she will accept an offer of
p = 30.75, whether she will accept an offer of p = 62, and so on. Formally,
player 2’s strategy in this game can be expressed as a function that maps player
1’s price offer p to the set {Yes, No}. That is, considering p ∈[0, 100], we can
write player 2’s strategy as some function s2 : [0, 100] S {Yes, No}. Then, for
whatever offer p that player 1 makes, player 2’s response is s2( p).
Here are some examples of strategies for player 2 in the ultimatum-offer
bargaining game. A really simple strategy is a constant function. One such
strategy speciﬁes s2
 ( p) = Yes for all p; this strategy accepts whatever player
1 offers. Another type of strategy for player 2 is a “cutoff rule,” which would
accept any price at or below some cutoff value p– and otherwise would reject. For
a given number p–, this strategy is deﬁned by
s2
 ( p) = c
Yes
if p … p–
No
if p > p–
 .
I suggest that for practice, you describe some other strategies for player 2.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Provide an example to show that more than one strategy proﬁle can
correspond to a single path through an extensive-form tree.
Solution: In the following extensive-form game, the strategy proﬁles (A, ac)
and (A, ad) induce the same path.
A
B
1
2
2
a
b
c
d
0, 3.5
3, 3
0, 4
3, 3

--- Sayfa 196 ---
181
Exercises
EXERCISES
1. Do normal-form games exhibit perfect or imperfect information? Explain.
2. Given an extensive-form game, prove that each pure-strategy proﬁle  induces
a unique path through the tree.
3. Consider the following two-player game: First, player 1 selects a number
x, which must be greater than or equal to zero. Player 2 observes x. Then,
simultaneously and independently, player 1 selects a number y1 and player
2 selects a number y2 , at which point the game ends. Player 1’s payoff is
u1 = y1
 y2 + x y1 −y 2
1 −(x3>3), and player 2’s payoff is u2 = −( y1 −y2
 )2.
Represent this game in the extensive form.
4. Draw the extensive form of the following game, a version of the Cournot
duopoly game (analyzed in Chapter 10). Two ﬁrms compete in a homoge-
neous good market, where the ﬁrms produce exactly the same good. The
ﬁrms simultaneously and independently select quantities to produce. The
quantity selected by ﬁrm i is denoted qi and must be greater than or equal to
zero, for i = 1, 2. The market price is given by p = 12 −q1 −q2. For sim-
plicity, assume that the cost to ﬁrm i of producing any quantity is zero. Fur-
ther, assume that each ﬁrm’s payoff is deﬁned as its proﬁt. That is, ﬁrm i’s
payoff is (12 −qi −qj
 ) qi, where j denotes ﬁrm i’s opponent in the game.
5. Consider the ultimatum-offer bargaining game described in this chapter and
recall the cutoff-rule strategy for player 2.
(a)  Suppose that player 1 selects the strategy p = 50 and player 2 selects
the cutoff-rule strategy with p– = 50. Verify that these strategies form a
Nash equilibrium of the game. Do this by describing the payoffs players
would get from deviating.
(b)  Show that for any p ∈[0, 100], there is a Nash equilibrium of the game
in which an agreement is reached at this price. Describe the equilibrium
strategy proﬁle and explain.
6. Consider a variant of the game described in Exercise 4. Suppose that the
ﬁrms move sequentially rather than simultaneously. First, ﬁrm 1 selects its
quantity q1 , and this is observed by ﬁrm 2. Then, ﬁrm 2 selects its quantity
q2 , and the payoffs are determined as in Exercise 4, so that ﬁrm i’s payoff is
(12 −qi −qj
 ) qi. As noted in Exercise 6 of Chapter 3, this type of game is
called the Stackelberg duopoly model. This exercise asks you to ﬁnd some
of the Nash equilibria of the game. Further analysis appears in Chapter 15.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
182
14: Details of the Extensive Form

Note that ﬁrm 1’s strategy in this game is a single number q1 . Also
note that ﬁrm 2’s strategy can be expressed as a function that maps ﬁrm 1’s
quantity q1 into ﬁrm 2’s quantity q2 . That is, considering q1, q2 ∈[0, 12],
we can write ﬁrm 2’s strategy as a function s2 : [0, 12] S [0, 12]. After ﬁrm
1 selects a speciﬁc quantity q1 , ﬁrm 2 would select q2 = s2
 ( q1
 ).
(a) Draw the extensive form of this game.
(b)  Consider the strategy proﬁle (q1, s2
 ), where q1 = 2 and s2 is deﬁned as
follows:
s2
 ( q1
 ) = c
5
if q1 = 2
12 −q1
if q1 2
 .
That is, ﬁrm 2 selects q2 = 5 in the event that ﬁrm 1 chooses q1 = 2; other-
wise, ﬁrm 2 picks the quantity that drives the price to zero. Verify that these
strategies form a Nash equilibrium of the game. Do this by describing the
payoffs players would get from deviating.
(c)  Show that for any x ∈[0, 12], there is a Nash equilibrium of the game in
which q1 = x and s2
 (x) = (12 −x)>2. Describe the equilibrium strat-
egy proﬁle (fully describe s2 ) and explain why it is an equilibrium.
(d)  Are there any Nash equilibria (q1, s2
 ) for which s2
 ( q1
 ) (12 −q1)>2?
Explain why or why not.

--- Sayfa 198 ---
183
SEQUENTIAL RATIONALITY AND
SUBGAME PERFECTION 15
T
o this point, our analysis of rational behavior has centered on the normal
form—where we examine strategies and payoff functions. Although the
normal-form concepts are valid for every game (because an extensive form
can be translated into the normal form), they are most convincing for games in
which all of the players’ decisions are made simultaneously and independently.
I want you now to consider games with interesting dynamic properties, where
the extensive form more precisely describes the order of moves and the informa-
tion structure.
To see that there are some interesting issues regarding comparison of the
normal and extensive forms, study the game pictured in Figure 15.1. There are
two ﬁrms in this market game: a potential entrant (player 1) and an incumbent
(player 2). The entrant decides whether or not to enter the incumbent’s industry.
If the entrant stays out, then the incumbent gets a large proﬁt and the entrant gets
zero. If the potential entrant does enter the industry, then the incumbent must
choose whether or not to engage in a price war. If the ﬁrm triggers a price war,
then both ﬁrms suffer. If the incumbent accommodates the entrant, then they
both obtain modest proﬁts.
Pictured in Figure 15.1 are both the extensive- and the normal-form repre-
sentations of this market game. A quick look at the normal form will reveal that
the game has two Nash equilibria (in pure strategies): (I, A) and (O, P). The
former equilibrium should not strike you as controversial. The latter equilibrium
calls for an explanation. Suppose the players do not select their strategies in
FIGURE 15.1
Entry and predation.
Accommodate
Out
In
1
2
0, 4
Price war
A
2
1
P
I
O
2, 2
-1, -1
-1, -1
2, 2
0, 4
0, 4

--- Sayfa 199 ---
184
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
real time (as the game progresses), but rather choose their strategies in advance
of playing the game as suggested by the normal form. Perhaps they write their
strategies on slips of paper, as instructions to their managers regarding how to
behave. The entrant prefers not to enter if she expects the incumbent to initiate
a price war. That is, she responds to the threat that player 2 will trigger a price
war in the event that player 1 enters the industry. For his part, the incumbent has
no incentive to deviate from the price-war strategy when he is convinced that
the entrant will stay out. Note that the incumbent’s thought process here consists
of an ex ante evaluation; that is, the incumbent is willing to plan on playing the
price-war strategy when he believes that his decision node will not be reached.
Is the (O, P) equilibrium really plausible? Many theorists think not, because
games are rarely played by scribbling strategies on paper and ignoring the real-
time dimension. In reality, player 2’s threat to initiate a price war is incredible.
Even if player 2 plans on adopting this strategy, would he actually carry it out in
the event that his decision node is reached? He would probably step back for a
moment and say, “Whoa, Penelope! I didn’t think this information set would be
reached. But given that this decision really counts now, perhaps a price war is
not such a good idea after all.” The incumbent will therefore accommodate the
entrant. Furthermore, the entrant ought to think ahead to this eventuality. Even
though the incumbent may “talk tough,” claiming that he will initiate a price war
if entry occurs, the entrant understands that such behavior would not be ratio-
nal when the decision has to be made. Thus, the potential entrant can enter the
industry with conﬁdence, knowing that the incumbent will capitulate.1 There are
many examples of games such as these, where an equilibrium speciﬁes an action
that is irrational, conditional on a particular information set being reached.
INCREDIBLE THREATS IN THE STACKELBERG DUOPOLY GAME
Here is another example. Consider the Stackelberg duopoly game described
in exercise 6 of Chapter 14.2 In this game, ﬁrm 1 selects a quantity
q1 ∈[0, 12], which is observed by ﬁrm 2, and then ﬁrm 2 selects its quantity
1Children sometimes play games like these with their parents. Parents may threaten to withhold a trip to the
ice-cream parlor unless a child eats his vegetables. But the parents may have an independent interest in going
to the ice-cream parlor, and, if they go, then they will have to take the child with them, lest he be left at home
alone. They can punish the child by skipping sundaes, but they would also be punishing themselves in the
process. A shrewd child knows when his parents do not have the incentive to carry out punishments; such
children grow up to be economists or attorneys. They also feed peas to their dogs from time to time.
2Heinrich von Stackelberg was one of the ﬁrst to study sequential moves in markets. The source is H. von
Stackelberg, Marktform un Gleichgewicht (Vienna: Springer, 1934). A translation is The Theory of the Market
Economy, A. T. Peacock, trans. (London: William Hodge, 1952).

--- Sayfa 200 ---
185
Sequential Rationality
q2 ∈[0, 12]. Firm 1’s payoff is (12 −q1 −q2
 )q1
 , and ﬁrm 2’s payoff is
(12 −q1 −q2
 )q2
 . Remember that ﬁrm 2’s strategy can be expressed as a func-
tion s2
 : [0, 12] S [0, 12] that maps ﬁrm 1’s quantity into ﬁrm 2’s quantity in
response. This is because each value of q1 yields a distinct information set for
ﬁrm 2. Part (c) of the exercise asked you to conﬁrm that for any x ∈[0, 12], there
is a Nash equilibrium of the game in which q1 = x and s2
 (x) = (12 −x)>2.
Let us check this assertion for x = 0, the case in which ﬁrm 1 is supposed
to produce q1 = 0 and ﬁrm 2 is supposed to follow with the quantity q2 = 6.
In words, by producing nothing, ﬁrm 1 leaves the entire market to ﬁrm 2. First
verify that q2 = 6 is the payoff-maximizing quantity for ﬁrm 2 when ﬁrm 1
produces 0; clearly q2 = 6 maximizes (12 −q2
 )q2
 . Next, note that this calcula-
tion is not enough to verify Nash equilibrium because we have not yet speciﬁed
the strategy for ﬁrm 2. We have so far only speciﬁed that s2
 (0) = 6; we have
not yet deﬁned s2
 (q1
 ) for q1 0. Furthermore, we need to check whether ﬁrm
1 would have the incentive to deviate from q1 = 0.
Consider the following strategy for ﬁrm 2: s2
 (0) = 6 and s2
 (q1
 ) = 12 −q1
for every q1 0. Note that if ﬁrm 1 produces a positive amount, then ﬁrm 2 will
produce exactly the amount that pushes the price (and therefore ﬁrm 1’s payoff)
down to 0. Clearly, against strategy s2
 , ﬁrm 1 cannot gain by deviating from
q1 = 0. Furthermore, against q1 = 0, ﬁrm 2 has no incentive to deviate from s2
 .
To see this, observe that by changing the speciﬁcation s2
 (0) = 6, ﬁrm 2’s payoff
would decrease. Moreover, changing the speciﬁcation of s2
 (x) for any x 0
would have no effect on ﬁrm 2’s payoff, as player 1’s strategy is q1 = 0. Thus,
(0, s2) is a Nash equilibrium.
Notice that the strategy s2 just described comprises a host of incredible
threats. For instance, suppose that ﬁrm 1 were to select q1 = 6. What is the
rational response of ﬁrm 2? If ﬁrm 2 were to follow through with strategy s2,
then this ﬁrm’s payoff would be 0. But ﬁrm 2 would get a strictly positive payoff
by choosing any quantity that is strictly between 0 and 6. You can check that
ﬁrm 2’s optimal choice is q2 = 3 in this case. The bottom line is that although
(0, s2) is a Nash equilibrium, it is not consistent with rationality at all of ﬁrm 2’s
information sets. In fact, strategy s2 prescribes rational behavior at only the
information sets given by q1 = 0 and q1 = 12.
SEQUENTIAL RATIONALITY
As these examples indicate, more should be assumed about players than that
they select best responses ex ante (from the point of view of the beginning of
the game). Players ought to demonstrate rationality whenever they are called on
to make decisions. This is called sequential rationality.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
186
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
Sequential rationality: An optimal strategy for a player should maxi-
mize his or her expected payoff, conditional on every information set
at which this player has the move. That is, player i’s strategy should
 specify an optimal action from each of player i’s information sets, even
those that player i does not believe (ex ante) will be reached in the game.
If sequential rationality is common knowledge between the players (at every
information set), then each player will “look ahead” to consider what players
will do in the future in response to her move at a particular information set.
To operationalize the notion of sequential rationality, one has to deal with
some intricacies regarding limitations on the beliefs players have about each
other at different information sets. In addition, there are versions that build on
rationalizability (iterated dominance) and others that build on Nash equilibrium.
Over the past few decades, researchers have developed a number of reﬁnements
based on different assumptions about beliefs and the scope of best-response
behavior. In this chapter, I’ll introduce you to three of the most basic concepts.
The key one, called subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, is the most straightfor-
ward and is widely applied in following chapters.
BACKWARD INDUCTION
Perhaps the simplest way of representing sequential rationality is through a
procedure that identiﬁes an optimal action for each information set by work-
ing backward in the game tree. Consider, for instance, a game of perfect infor-
mation, which you’ll recall has only singleton information sets (there are no
dashed lines in the extensive-form diagram). One can start by looking at the
decision nodes that are immediate predecessors of only terminal nodes. At such
a decision node, the game ends after the relevant player makes her choice and
so, to determine the optimal action, there is no need to think about the behav-
ior of other players. Essentially, the player on the move has a choice among
some terminal nodes, and we assume that she will select the payoff-maximizing
action. Let us call the other actions “dominated.”
The procedure then moves to evaluate decision nodes whose immediate
successors are either terminal nodes or the nodes we already evaluated. From
each node in this second class, the payoff consequences of each action are clear
because the player on the move can anticipate how other players will behave
later. The process continues all the way back to the initial node.
Backward induction procedure: This is the process of analyzing a
game from the end to the beginning. At each decision node, one strikes

--- Sayfa 202 ---
187
Backward Induction
from consideration any actions that are dominated, given the terminal
nodes that can be reached through the play of the actions identiﬁed at
successor nodes.
For a demonstration of backward induction, examine the game in Figure
15.2. There are two nodes at which player 1 makes a decision. At the second
node, player 1 decides between E and F. On reaching this node, player 1’s only
rational choice is E. We can therefore cross out F as a possibility. Player 2 knows
this and, therefore, in her lower decision node she ought to select C (which she
knows will eventually yield the payoff 3 for her). We thus cross out action D for
player 2. Furthermore, A is the best choice at player 2’s upper decision node,
so we cross out B. Finally, we can evaluate the initial node, where player 1 has
the choice between U and D. He knows that if he chooses U, then player 2 will
select A and he will get a payoff of 1. If he chooses D, then player 2 will select
C, after which he will select E, yielding a payoff of 3. Player 1’s optimal action
at the initial node is therefore D; action U should be crossed out.
Using the process of backward induction in this example, we have identiﬁed
a single sequentially rational strategy proﬁle: (DE, AC). In fact, it is also easy to
check that (DE, AC) is a Nash equilibrium. Strategy DE is a best response for
player 1 to player 2’s strategy AC; further, AC is a best response to DE for player 2.
The backward induction procedure identiﬁes a unique strategy proﬁle for
every game of perfect information that has no “payoff ties” (where a player
would get the same payoff at multiple terminal nodes). The procedure is also
well deﬁned and meaningful for perfect-information games with payoff ties, but
in this case it can lead to more than one strategy proﬁle. Further, it can be applied
even to some games with nontrivial information sets (as an exercise later shows),
FIGURE 15.2
Backward induction.
A
U
D
B
1, 4
5, 2
2
1
C
D
2
1
2, 0
6, 2
3, 3
E
F

--- Sayfa 203 ---
188
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
but it is dodgy in general. Sticking with games of perfect information, regardless
of payoffs, the backward induction procedure is well deﬁned. For each game,
you will obtain a subset of strategy proﬁles, at least one of which is a Nash
equilibrium. This conclusion becomes an existence result for pure-strategy
 equilibrium.
Result: Every ﬁnite game with perfect information has a pure-strategy
Nash equilibrium. Backward induction identiﬁes an equilibrium.3
If there are ties in the payoffs, then there may be more than one such equilib-
rium, and there may be more than one sequentially rational strategy proﬁle.
SUBGAME PERFECTION
Because the backward induction procedure can be applied to only a limited
class of games, we must start from a different foundation to represent sequential
rationality in general. One useful direction is to start with the concept of Nash
equilibrium and then think of reﬁnements based on the consideration of sequen-
tial rationality. In other words, for any given game, we can calculate all of the
Nash equilibria and then remove the ones that violate sequential rationality. To
do this, we need to deﬁne what it means to “violate sequential rationality.” The
most straightforward deﬁnition is based on the Nash equilibrium concept itself,
along with the notion of a subgame.
Given an extensive-form game, a node x in the tree is said to initiate a
subgame if neither x nor any of its successors are in an information set
that contains nodes that are not successors of x. A subgame is the tree
structure deﬁned by such a node x and its successors.
This deﬁnition may seem complicated on ﬁrst sight, but it is not difﬁcult
to understand. Take any node x in an extensive form. Examine the collection of
nodes given by x and its successors. If there is a node y that is not a successor
of x but is connected to x or one of its successors by a dashed line, then x does
not initiate a subgame. In other words, once players are inside a subgame, it is
common knowledge between them that they are inside it. Subgames are self-
contained extensive forms—meaningful trees on their own. Subgames that start
from nodes other than the initial node are called proper subgames. Observe that
in a game of perfect information, every node initiates a subgame.
3H. W. Kuhn, “Extensive Games and the Problem of Information,” in Contributions to the Theory of Games,
vol. II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28), ed. H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1953), pp. 193–216.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
189
Subgame Perfection
To test your comprehension, examine the game in Figure 15.3. Note that this
game is a three-player game. The initial node initiates a subgame, because the
entire game is itself a subgame. Node y also initiates a subgame, because y is
not tied to any other nodes by a dashed line and all of y’s successors are termi-
nal nodes. Node x, in contrast, does not initiate a subgame, because one of its
successors (node z) is in the same information set as a node that is not one of its
successors (node w). In other words, starting from node x, there is a contingency
in which player 3 does not know whether he is at a successor of x. By the same
reasoning, neither z nor w initiates a subgame. Thus, this extensive form has two
subgames: (1) the entire game, and (2) the proper subgame starting at node y.
Here is the reﬁnement of Nash equilibrium that incorporates sequential
rationality by evaluating subgames individually:
A strategy proﬁle is called a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPE)
if it speciﬁes a Nash equilibrium in every subgame of the original game.4
The basic idea behind subgame perfection is that a solution concept should
be consistent with its own application from anywhere in the game where it
4In 1994, Reinhard Selten was awarded the Nobel Prize in economic sciences for his work on this and another
“perfection” reﬁnement of Nash equilibrium. Corecipients of the prize were John Nash and John Harsanyi.
Harsanyi studied games with incomplete information, which is the topic of Part IV of this book. Selten’s contribu-
tions originated with “Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit Nachfragetragheit,” Zeitschrift
fur die gesamte staatswissenschaft 121 (1965): 301–324, 667–689. and “Reexamination of the Perfectness
Concept for Equilibrium Points in Extensive Games.” International Journal of Game Theory 4 (1975): 25–55.
FIGURE 15.3
Subgames.
E
F
G
H
G
H
3, 3, 6
1, 5, 7
8, 6, 0
2, 0, 3
7, 7, 2
0, 6, 1
A
C
D
U
D
2
2
B
1
1
6, 2, 4
y
w
z
x
3

--- Sayfa 205 ---
190
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
can be applied. Because Nash equilibrium can be applied to all well-deﬁned
extensive-form games, subgame perfect Nash equilibrium requires the Nash
condition to hold on all subgames.
To understand how to work with the concept of subgame perfection, consider
the game pictured in Figure 15.4. Note ﬁrst that this game has one proper
subgame, which starts at the node reached when player 1 plays U at the initial
node. Thus, there are two subgames to evaluate: the proper subgame and the
entire game. Because strategy proﬁles tell us what the players do at every infor-
mation set, each strategy proﬁle speciﬁes behavior in the proper subgame even
if this subgame would not be reached. For example, consider strategy proﬁle
(DA, X). If this proﬁle is played, then play never enters the proper subgame. But
(DA, X) does include a speciﬁcation of what the players would do conditional
on reaching the proper subgame; in particular, it prescribes action A for player
1 and action X for the player 2.
Continuing with the example, observe that two normal-form games appear
next to the extensive form in Figure 15.4. The ﬁrst is the normal-form version of
the entire extensive form, whereas the second is the normal-form version of the
proper subgame. The former reveals the Nash equilibria of the entire game; we
examine the latter to ﬁnd the Nash equilibria of the proper subgame.
In the entire game, (UA, X), (DA, Y), and (DB, Y) are the Nash equilib-
ria. But not all of these strategy proﬁles are subgame perfect. To see this,
observe that the proper subgame has only one Nash equilibrium, (A, X).
The strategies (DA, Y) and (DB, Y) are not subgame perfect, because they
do not specify Nash equilibria in the proper subgame. In particular, (DA, Y)
stipulates that (A, Y) be played in the proper subgame, yet (A, Y) is not
FIGURE 15.4
Subgame perfection.
A
B
2, 0
1, 4
2, 1
3, 4
1
1
2
X
Y
X
Y
U
D
2, 6
X
Y
UA
UB
DA
DB
3, 4
1, 4
2, 1
2, 0
2, 6
2, 6
2, 6
2, 6
2
1
X
Y
A
B
3, 4
1, 4
2, 1
2, 0
2
1

--- Sayfa 206 ---
191
The Spe of the Stackelberg Duopoly Game
an equilibrium. Furthermore, (DB, Y) speciﬁes that (B, Y) be played in the
subgame, yet (B, Y) is not an equilibrium. Thus, there is a single SPE in this
example: (UA, X).
The subgame perfection concept requires equilibrium at every subgame,
meaning that if any particular subgame is reached, then we can expect the play-
ers to follow through with the prescription of the strategy. This is an important
consideration, whether or not a given equilibrium actually reaches the subgame
in question. The example in Figure 15.4 illustrates this point vividly. Nash equi-
librium (DA, Y) entails a kind of threat that the players jointly make to give
player 1 the incentive to select D at his ﬁrst information set. But the threat is
not legitimate. In the proper subgame, (A, Y) is about as stable as potassium in
water. Player 1 has the strict incentive to deviate from this prescription.
Several facts are worth noting at this point. First, and most obvious, recog-
nize that an SPE is a Nash equilibrium because such a proﬁle must specify a
Nash equilibrium in every subgame, one of which is the entire game. We thus
speak of subgame perfection as a reﬁnement of Nash equilibrium. Second, for
games of perfect information, backward induction yields subgame perfect equi-
libria. Third, on the matter of ﬁnding subgame perfect equilibria, the procedure
just described is useful for many ﬁnite games. One should examine the matrices
corresponding to all of the subgames and locate Nash equilibria.
Calculating the subgame perfect equilibria of inﬁnite games can be more
challenging because it is sometimes difﬁcult to locate Nash equilibria in these
games. I recommend trying a type of backward-induction procedure where you
start by examining subgames at the end of the extensive form. Look for the
Nash equilibria of these subgames. If each of these subgames has a unique Nash
equilibrium, then, in any SPE, this is the exact outcome that must occur condi-
tional on the subgame being reached. You can then work your way toward the
beginning of the tree, evaluating larger and larger subgames as you go. This
procedure is illustrated next.
THE SPE OF THE STACKELBERG DUOPOLY GAME
Consider the Stackelberg duopoly game described earlier in this chapter. Firm
1 selects q1 ∈[0, 12], which is observed by ﬁrm 2, and then ﬁrm 2 selects
q2 ∈[0, 12]. Firm 1’s payoff is (12 −q1 −q2
 ) q1, and ﬁrm 2’s payoff is
(12 −q1 −q2
 ) q2
 . Recall that every value of q1 yields a distinct information set
for ﬁrm 2. Each of these information sets is a single decision node that initiates
a subgame, where ﬁrm 2 chooses q2 and the game then ends. In other words,
there is an inﬁnite number of proper subgames—one for every feasible value of
q1
 . Each of these subgames has a unique Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
192
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
The Nash equilibrium of such a subgame is simply the choice q2 that maxi-
mizes ﬁrm 2’s payoff. The optimal choice depends on the value of q1
 , so we
should write it as a function of q1
 . You should verify that for a ﬁxed value of q1
 ,

max
q2∈[0, 12](12 −q1 −q2
 ) q2
is solved by q2 = (12 −q1
 )>2. Thus, in the subgame that follows ﬁrm 1’s selec-
tion of any particular q1
 , ﬁrm 2’s rational response is to select q2 = (12 −q1
 )>2.
This implies that ﬁrm 2’s payoff will be
a12 −q1 −12 −q1
2
b 12 −q1
2
= a6 −q1
2 b
2
 ,
and ﬁrm 1’s payoff will be
a12 −q1 −12 −q1
2
bq1 = a6 −q1
2 bq1
 .
This last expression gives ﬁrm 1’s payoff as a function of ﬁrm 1’s own quantity
choice, anticipating ﬁrm 2’s optimal response. Hence, ﬁrm 1’s best choice of q1
is that which maximizes 16 −q1>22q1, which is q1 = 6 .
So, we have found the unique SPE of this Stackelberg duopoly game.
It is the strategy proﬁle (6, s2
 ), where ﬁrm 2’s strategy s2 is deﬁned by
s2(q1
 ) = (12 −q1)>2 for all q1 ∈[0, 12]. It is important to remember that ﬁrm
2’s strategy is a function that speciﬁes the optimal action at every one of ﬁrm
2’s information sets. You should compare the sequentially rational strategy of
ﬁrm 2 with the ones used in the construction of various Nash equilibria at the
beginning of this chapter.
TECHNICAL NOTES
Let’s pause a moment for station identiﬁcation. I like this sentence, but I suppose
that it has no place in a game-theory textbook. So let me take the opportunity to
give you an additional deﬁnition, a useful result, and a philosophical note. Here
is the deﬁnition:
For a given node x in a game, a player’s continuation value (also called
continuation payoff) is the payoff that this player will eventually get
contingent on the path of play passing through node x.
Implicit in the notion of continuation value is a theory of how the players will
behave at the node in question and all of its successors. This could be any theory

--- Sayfa 208 ---
193
Technical Notes
of behavior. The continuation value at a node x is thus the payoff at the terminal
node that would be reached from x given that the players will behave as speci-
ﬁed in the theory.
For an illustration, look at the game pictured in Figure 15.2 and let back-
ward induction be our solution concept. We can summarize the rounds of the
backward induction procedure in terms of continuation values. The ﬁrst round
of the backward induction procedure establishes that player 1 would select E at
his second decision node. Thus, upon reaching this node, the players anticipate
that the game will end with the payoff vector (3, 3), so each player’s continua-
tion value is 3 at player 1’s second decision node. Moving backward in the tree,
we see that player 2 will get this continuation value if she selects C at her lower
decision node. This value beats the payoff of 2 that she would receive from D.
Because player 2 would therefore choose C, her continuation value at her lower
decision node is 3. Player 1’s continuation payoff is also 3 at this node. Because
player 2 would select A at her upper decision node, player 1’s continuation
value is 1 there. At the initial node, player 1 can choose U and get a continuation
value of 1 or he can select D and get a continuation value of 3, so he selects D.
The Stackelberg duopoly game provides another example of continuation-
value calculations. In this example, our behavioral concept can be subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium or backward induction (they yield the same results
here). As shown earlier in this chapter, contingent on ﬁrm 1 selecting a quantity
q1
 , ﬁrm 2’s optimal action leads to the payoff vector
a a6 −q1
2 bq1
 , a6 −q1
2 b
2
b,
so this is the vector of continuation values at ﬁrm 2’s information set following
ﬁrm 1’s selection of q1
 . At the initial node, ﬁrm 1 selects q1 to maximize the
continuation value 16 −q1>22q1
 .
There are some variations in the way that continuation values are calculated
in applications. In some games, payoffs are the sum of amounts received over
time. For example, in a market game where ﬁrms compete over two periods of
time, their payoffs are the sum of proﬁts received in period 1 and proﬁts received
in period 2. For settings such as these, it can be helpful to deﬁne continuation
values to be net of past receipts. For instance, we could say that a ﬁrm’s continua-
tion value from the start of the second period is the proﬁt that this ﬁrm will receive
from then (not including the ﬁrm’s proﬁt in the ﬁrst period). Furthermore, in some
games, the players discount the amounts that they receive over time. Then it is
convenient to deﬁne the continuation values to be discounted to the start of the
continuation point. You will see examples of these variations later in this book.
As you can see, thinking in terms of continuation values can help you keep
track of the implications of rational behavior in the “continuation of the game”

--- Sayfa 209 ---
194
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
starting from any node or information set. Another useful tool is a mathematical
result about what needs to be checked to verify that a given strategy proﬁle is a
subgame perfect equilibrium. Note that for any strategy proﬁle s, we can calcu-
late the continuation values associated with s. To do this, we simply construct,
from any particular node, the path to a unique terminal node that s implies.
Recall that to check whether s is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, we
have to ask the following question for every player i and every subgame: Fixing
s−i
 , is there a strategy s=
i that yields a strictly higher payoff for player i than
does si in the subgame? The next result shows that this analysis is equivalent to
looking at single deviations from si
 , meaning that s=
i differs from si at only one
information set. Note that the continuation values associated with (si
 , s−i
 ) and
(s=
i
 , s−i
 ) are the same at all nodes that are successors of nodes in the information
set where si and s=
i prescribe different actions. Therefore, it is easy to evaluate
whether player i gains from this deviation.
Result (one-deviation property): Consider any ﬁnite extensive-form
game. A strategy proﬁle s* is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if
and only if, for each player i and for each subgame, no single deviation
would raise player i’s payoff in the subgame.
Throughout the rest of this book, we will at least implicitly be using the concept
of continuation value and the one-deviation property.
The ﬁnal topic for this section is a philosophical note about alternatives
and difﬁculties in modeling how players assess each other’s rationality in
extensive-form games. Consider the game from Figure 3.1(b), which is repro-
duced here:
2, 2
1, 3
3, 4
4, 2
1
2
O
O
B
1
A
I
I
As you can verify, backward induction leads to the strategy proﬁle (OA, O),
and this is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium. To put sequential rationality
into words, we have the following story: If player 1’s second decision node is
reached, then this player will deﬁnitely select action A. Player 2 can anticipate
this (knowing that player 1 is sequentially rational), so player 2 would deﬁnitely
select O at her decision node. Finally, because player 1 knows that player 2 is
rational, player 1 optimally selects O at the initial node.
The story has an implicit assumption that deserves further inspection: If
player 2’s decision node is reached, should she really believe that player 1 is

--- Sayfa 210 ---
195
Conditional Dominance and Forward Induction
sequentially rational? It’s a tough question, with different answers based on
different ways of thinking about deviations. The logic of sequential rationality
implies that player 2’s decision node will not be reached, so at this node perhaps
player 2 should actually believe that player 1 is not sequentially rational. But
then the logic of the story breaks down, for player 2 might rationally select I,
now thinking that the irrational player 1 will later pick B.
This is an argument against backward induction and subgame perfection as
reasonable solution concepts, and theorists and experimental economists have
studied alternatives. However, there is a different perspective on beliefs that
supports sequential rationality: Players sometimes make mistakes. If player 2
thinks that player 1 occasionally makes mistakes when choosing his actions, she
can reasonably conclude that his selection of I was a mistake rather than a sign
of irrationality. Further, she can reasonably expect that player 1 will select A if
given the chance later, so she optimally chooses O.
The logic of sequential rationality is thus saved for now. In fact, it is the key
concept in the analysis of dynamic games and the most widely applied. It may
not always be appropriate, however, as the discussion above indicates.
CONDITIONAL DOMINANCE AND FORWARD INDUCTION
I conclude this chapter with an informal presentation of the third basic repre-
sentation of sequential rationality, a reﬁnement of rationalizability and iterated
dominance. The idea is to evaluate best response and dominance conditional on
players’ information sets. That is, for a strategy si of player i, we test whether
si can be rationalized at each of player i’s information sets. We remove si from
consideration if there is an information set for player i from which si is not a best
response (or equivalently, is dominated). An iterative removal process gives the
implications of common knowledge of sequential rationality.
Recall from Chapter 6 that there is a tight connection between best response
and dominance in the normal form. It turns out that the connection extends
to the concepts of sequential best response and conditional dominance, which
are the sequential-rationality versions of best response and dominance. Adding
a common knowledge assumption, these are the basis for extensive-form
rationalizability and iterated conditional dominance.5 I’ll present the iterated
5Extensive-form rationalizability was introduced in “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem of
Perfection” by D. Pearce, Econometrica 52 (1984): 1029–1050. It was clariﬁed by P. Battigalli in “On Ratio-
nalizability in Extensive Games,” Journal of Economic Theory 74 (1997): 40–61. Conditional dominance
is deﬁned and studied in “Conditional Dominance, Rationalizability, and Game Forms” by M. Shimoji and
J. Watson, Journal of Economic Theory 83 (1998): 161–195. Shimoji and Watson (1998) prove the relation
between extensive-form rationalizability and conditional dominance.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
196
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
conditional dominance construction here because it is simpler to describe and to
use in applications .  .  . and because I was instrumental in inventing and analyz-
ing it (shameless self-promotion time!).
To deﬁne conditional dominance and the iterated procedure, we’ll need a
few more deﬁnitions. For any extensive-form game of interest, let H denote
the set of information sets and let Hi comprise the information sets for player
i. For any strategy proﬁle s ∈S and any information set h ∈H, we can say that
s reaches h if a node in h is on the path through the tree that s induces. In other
words, if the players behave as proﬁle s prescribes, then information set h will
be reached in the game. Write S(h) as the set of strategy proﬁles that reach h.
Given a nonempty subset of strategy proﬁles Y K Y1 × Y2 × g × Yn
 , let
us say that player i’s strategy si is dominated in Y if si ∈Yi and there is a mixed
strategy σi ∈Yi such that ui (σi
 , s−i ) > ui (si
 , s−i ) for each s−i ∈Y−i
 . This is
just a more formal description of dominance than that shown in Chapter 6. Here
I am being more careful to precisely describe the set of strategies to be used in
the payoff comparisons.
In reference to the information sets H and a nonempty subset of strategy
proﬁles X K X1 × X2 × g × Xn
 , player i’s strategy si is said to be
conditionally dominated if there is an information set h ∈Hi such that
si is dominated in X S(h).
To repeat this in everyday language, a strategy si is conditionally dominated
if the following holds for some information set h of player i: Restricting atten-
tion to strategies that both (i) reach the information set h and (ii) are in X, we
ﬁnd that strategy si is dominated. Thus, this simply extends the notion of domi-
nance to be evaluated at individual information sets. The role that the set X plays
is also straightforward and will be familiar to you from the rationalizability
construction. It is the set of strategies that have survived to the current round of
the iterated deletion procedure.
Iterated conditional dominance works the same way that iterated dominance
does. Here is what you do: First, letting X = S, remove all of the conditionally
dominated strategies for each player and deﬁne R1 to be the strategy proﬁles
that remain. Then, letting X = R1, remove all of the conditionally dominated
strategies (in reference to H and the “reduced game” strategies R1), and deﬁne
R2 as the strategy proﬁles that remain. Continue this process to identify smaller
and smaller sets of strategy proﬁles, R3, R4, c, until no more strategies can
be deleted. Let R denote the resulting set of strategy proﬁles—those that survive
this iterated conditional dominance procedure.
For an illustration of iterated conditional dominance, consider the game
shown in Figure 15.5. In the ﬁrst round of conditional dominance, none
of player 2’s strategies are removed, and nothing is deleted conditional on

--- Sayfa 212 ---
197
Conditional Dominance and Forward Induction
player 1’s second information set. However, at player 1’s ﬁrst information set (the
initial node), her strategy WX is dominated by both ZX and ZY.  To see this, note
that by playing WX, player 1 can get a payoff of no more than 3, whereas she
obtains 4 by selecting ZY or ZX. No other strategies are dominated. Thus, after
one round of conditional dominance, the remaining strategy proﬁles are given by
R1 = {WY, ZX, ZY} × {A, B}.
Things get a bit more interesting in the second round of conditional domi-
nance. Letting h2 denote player 2’s information set, note that
S(h2) = {WX, WY} × {A, B}.
Because WX is not contained in R1, we have that
S(h2) R1 = {WY} × {A, B}.
In words, this means that player 2 reasons as such: “I am inclined to think that
player 1 is rational. I may not have expected that player 1 would select W,
but now that my information set has been reached, how can I rationalize what
player 1 has done? She surely is not playing the strategy WX, for she could
have guaranteed herself a higher payoff by choosing action Z at the beginning
of the game. Therefore, she must intend to select Y.” This is an example of
forward induction, meaning that player 2 uses an observation about player 1’s
past behavior to predict what she will do in the future.
Player 2’s strategy A is conditionally dominated in the second round. That
is, it is dominated in R1 S(h2
 ). After two rounds, the remaining strategy
proﬁles are given by
R2 = {WY, ZX, ZY} × {B}.
In the third round, player 1’s strategies ZX and ZY are conditionally dominated,
leaving R = {(WY, B)}. Iterated conditional dominance leads to a unique
prediction in this game.
A
B
6, 2
0, 0
0, 0
3, 3
2
1
1
X
Y
X
Y
W
Z
4, 4
FIGURE 15.5
Example of iterated
conditional dominance.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
198
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the ultimatum bargaining game described at the end of
Chapter 14. In this game, the players negotiate over the price of a painting that
player 1 can sell to player 2. Player 1 proposes a price p to player 2. Then, after
observing player 1’s offer, player 2 decides whether to accept it (yes) or reject
it (no). If player 2 accepts the proposal, then player 1 obtains p and player 2
obtains 100 −p. If player 2 rejects the proposal, then each player gets zero.
Recall that, as noted in Exercise 5 of Chapter 14, this game has many Nash equi-
libria. Verify that there is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in which player
1 offers p* = 100 and player 2 has the strategy of accepting any offer p … 100
and rejecting any offer p > 100.
Solution: The exercise here is to verify that a particular strategy proﬁle is a
subgame perfect equilibrium. We do not have to determine all of the subgame
perfect equilibria. Note that there is an inﬁnite number of information sets for
player 2, one for each possible offer of player 1. Each one of these information
sets consists of a single node and initiates a simple subgame in which player 2
says “yes” or “no” and the game ends. The suggested strategy for player 2, which
accepts (says “yes”) if and only if p … 100, implies an equilibrium in every
such subgame. To see this, realize that player 2 obtains a payoff of 100 −p if
he accepts, whereas he receives 0 if he rejects, so accepting is a best response
in every subgame with p … 100; rejecting the offer is a best response in every
subgame with p Ú 100. For p = 100, both accepting and rejecting are best
responses; thus, player 2 is indifferent between accepting and rejecting when
p = 100. We are assuming that in this case of indifference, player 2 accepts.
Having veriﬁed that player 2 is using a sequentially rational strategy, which
implies equlibirium in every proper subgame, let us turn to the entire ultimatum
game (from the initial node) and player 1’s incentives. Observe that the offer
p* = 100 is a best response for player 1 to the strategy of player 2. If player 1
offers this price, then, given player 2’s strategy, player 2 will accept it and player
1’s payoff would be 100. In contrast, if player 1 were to offer a higher price, then
player 2 would reject it and player 1 would get a payoff of zero. Furthermore,
if player 1 were to offer a lower price p < 100, then player 2 would accept it
and player 1 would obtain a payoff of only p. Also note that in the entire game,
player 2’s strategy is a best response to player 1’s strategy of offering p* = 100
because player 2 accepts this offer.
We have thus established that the suggested strategy proﬁle induces a Nash
equilibrium in all of the subgames, including the entire game, and so we have a
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. You will ﬁnd further analysis of the ultima-
tum bargaining game in Chapter 19, where it is shown that the equilibrium we
have just identiﬁed is, in fact, the unique subgame perfect equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
199
Exercises
EXERCISES
1. Consider the following extensive-form games.
(a) 2, 6
1, 4
1, 5
2, 3
1
2
A
C
E
1
F
D
B
(b)
C
A
B
D
2, 1
7, 9
1, 2
3, 8
2
1
1
1
1
1
G
H
I
J
E
F
2
0, 5
10, 4
K
L
8, 3
4, 0
M
N
(c)
A
B
7, 5, 5
4, 3, 1
2
5, 0, 0
2, 2, 2
1, 2, 6
3, 2, 1
3
1
X
Y
X
Y
C
I
O
Solve the games by using backward induction.
2. Compute the Nash equilibria and subgame perfect equilibria for the follow-
ing games. Do so by writing the normal-form matrices for each game and its
subgames. Which Nash equilibria are not subgame perfect?

--- Sayfa 215 ---
200
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
(a)
A
W
Z
B
2, 1
8, 5
4, 6
3, 0
2
2
1
1
X
Y
X
Y
C
D
3, 2
6, 4
(b)
A
U
D
B
2, 3
5, 4
2
1
C
D
2
1
2, 6
0, 2
6, 2
E
F
3. Consider the following game.
G
H
7, 3
9, 2
1
1
2
I
J
4, 5
5, 4
2, 4
3, 6
6, 7
8, 1
C
D
K
L
1
1
2
M
N
E
F
1
A
B
(a)  Solve the game by backward induction and report the strategy proﬁle
that results.
(b) How many proper subgames does this game have?
4. Calculate and report the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of the game
described in Exercise 3 in Chapter 14.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
201
Exercises
5. In the envelope game, there are two players and two envelopes. One of the
envelopes is marked “player 1,” and the other is marked “player 2.” At the
beginning of the game, each envelope contains one dollar. Player 1 is given
the choice between stopping the game and continuing. If he chooses to stop,
then each player receives the money in his own envelope and the game ends.
If player 1 chooses to continue, then a dollar is removed from his envelope
and two dollars are added to player 2’s envelope. Then player 2 must choose
between stopping the game and continuing. If he stops, then the game ends
and each player keeps the money in his own envelope. If player 2 elects to con-
tinue, then a dollar is removed from his envelope and two dollars are added to
player 1’s envelope. Play continues like this, alternating between the players,
until either one of them decides to stop or k rounds of play have elapsed. If nei-
ther player chooses to stop by the end of the kth round, then both players obtain
zero. Assume players want to maximize the amount of money they earn.
(a) Draw this game’s extensive-form tree for k = 5.
(b) Use backward induction to ﬁnd the subgame perfect equilibrium.
(c)  Describe the backward induction outcome of this game for any ﬁnite
integer k.
6. Consider a variation of the television station broadcast game of Exercise 4
in Chapter 7. Suppose the stations interact sequentially. First, MBC chooses
between 6:00 and 7:00. Then, after observing MBC’s choice, RBC decides
between 6:00 and 7:00. Finally, after observing the behavior of both MBC
and RBC, CBC chooses either 6:00 or 7:00. Payoffs are as given before.
Draw the extensive form of this sequential game and compute the subgame
perfect equilibrium. Is the outcome different from that in the simultaneous-
play game? Explain.
7. Consider a game in which player 1 ﬁrst selects between I and O. If player 1 se-
lects O, then the game ends with the payoff vector (x, 1) (x for player 1), where
x is some positive number. If player 1 selects I, then this selection is revealed
to player 2 and then the players play the battle-of-the-sexes game in which
they simultaneously and independently choose between A and B. If they coor-
dinate on A, then the payoff vector is (3, 1). If they coordinate on B, then the
payoff vector is (1, 3). If they fail to coordinate, then the payoff vector is (0, 0).
(a) Represent this game in the extensive and normal forms.
(b) Find the pure-strategy Nash equilibria of this game.
(c)  Calculate the mixed-strategy Nash equilibria and note how they depend on x.
(d)  Represent the proper subgame in the normal form and ﬁnd its equilibria.
(e)  What are the pure-strategy subgame perfect equilibria of the game? Can
you ﬁnd any Nash equilibria that are not subgame perfect?
(f) What are the mixed-strategy subgame perfect equilibria of the game?

--- Sayfa 217 ---
202
15: Sequential Rationality and Subgame Perfection
8. Imagine a game in which players 1 and 2 simultaneously and independently
select A or B. If they both select A, then the game ends and the payoff vec-
tor is (5, 5). If they both select B, then the game ends with the payoff vector
(−1, −1). If one of the players chooses A while the other selects B, then the
game continues and the players are required simultaneously and independent-
ly to select positive numbers. After these decisions, the game ends and each
player receives the payoff (x1 + x2
 )>(1 + x1 + x2
 ) , where x1 is the positive
number chosen by player 1 and x2 is the positive number chosen by player 2.
(a) Describe the strategy spaces of the players.
(b) Compute the Nash equilibria of this game.
(c) Determine the subgame perfect equilibria.
9. Consider the following two-player game. First, player 1 selects a real num-
ber x, which must be greater than or equal to zero. Player 2 observes x. Then,
simultaneously and independently, player 1 selects a number y1 and player
2 selects a number y2
 , at which point the game ends. Player 1’s payoff is
u1 = y1
 y2 + xy1 −y 2
1 −x3
3
 ,
and player 2’s payoff is
u2 = −(y1 −y2
 )2.
Calculate and report the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of this game.
10. This exercise will help you see that subgame perfection does not embody
the notion of forward induction presented at the end of this chapter.
(a)  Consider the game in Figure 15.5. Calculate and report the subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium strategy proﬁles. Are all of these equilibrium
strategy proﬁles consistent with iterated conditional dominance? If not,
comment on the equilibrium belief of player 2 and how it differs from
the belief identiﬁed in the iterated conditional dominance procedure.
(b)  For the game described in Exercise 7, can you ﬁnd a subgame perfect equi-
librium that does not survive the iterated conditional dominance procedure?
11. Consider the following game.
C
A
B
D
5, 7
4, 3
1, 2
3, 4
2
1
1
1
1
1
G
H
I
J
E
F
2
2, 8
6, 5
K
L
3, 6
9, 1
M
N

--- Sayfa 218 ---
203
Exercises
(a) How many proper subgames does this game have?
(b)  Solve the game by backward induction and report the strategy proﬁle
that results.
(c)  Find the set of strategies that survive iterated conditional dominance.
Compare these with the strategy you found for part (b).
(d)  Compare the path through the tree that results from the strategy you
found for part (b) with the paths that are consistent with iterated condi-
tional dominance.
12. Suppose players 1 and 2 will play the following prisoners’ dilemma.
C
D
C
D
5, 5
0, 8
7, 0
1, 1
2
1

Prior to interacting in the prisoners’ dilemma, simultaneously each
player i announces a binding penalty pi that this player commits to pay
the other player j in the event that player i defects and player j cooperates.
Assume that these commitments are binding. Thus, after the announce-
ments, the players effectively play the following induced game.6
C
2
1
D
C
D
5, 5
p2, 8 - p2
7 - p1, p1
1, 1
(a)  What values of p1 and p2 are needed to make (C, C) a Nash equilibrium
of the induced game?
(b)  What values of p1 and p2 will induce play of (C, C) and would arise in
a subgame perfect equilibrium of the entire game (penalty announce-
ments followed by the prisoners’ dilemma)? Explain.
(c)  Compare the unilateral commitments described here with contracts (as
developed in Chapter 13).
6This exercise is based on C.-Z. Qin, “Penalties and Rewards as Inducements to Cooperate,” 2005 working
paper, University of California, Santa Barbara. See also M. Jackson and S. Wilkie, “Endogenous Games and
Mechanisms: Side Payments Among Players,” Review of Economic Studies 72 (2005): 543–566.

--- Sayfa 219 ---
204
16
TOPICS IN INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION
O
ne of the ﬁrst areas of economic research to be transformed by the game-
theory revolution is the ﬁeld of industrial organization—the study of mar-
ket structure, ﬁrm behavior, and overall industry performance. Game theory
provides a useful methodology for the study of market dynamics, such as how
ﬁrms compete or collude over time and how a ﬁrm can attain a monopoly and
exercise monopoly power. You have already seen a dynamic model of industry
competition: the Stackelberg game. In this chapter, I sketch a few more exam-
ples of how game theory is used to study industrial organization.
ADVERTISING AND COMPETITION
To generate proﬁt, ﬁrms must do more than just produce goods or services.
They must also market their products to consumers or other ﬁrms. For exam-
ple, when computer software company Columbus Research designs a new
software package to handle inventory control, it cannot expect all of its poten-
tial customers to beat down the door in search of the software. Most potential
customers will probably not even know about the software when it is ﬁrst
available. By advertising, Columbus Research can make customers aware of
its new product, as well as tout its advantages over competing products of
other ﬁrms.
Advertisements come in many forms and have different effects on demand
and welfare. Some advertisements function to announce the availability of a
new product; for example, a toothpaste producer may run a television adver-
tisement to let potential customers know that it has added to its product line
a new toothpaste that cleans teeth and freshens breath. An advertisement that
highlights a product’s advantages (“It freshens breath twice as well as did our
older formula”) is called a positive advertisement. A negative advertisement
highlights the disadvantages of competing products (“The other major brand
leaves your teeth feeling gritty”). Politicians often use negative advertisements,
leaving voters gritting their teeth. An extreme form of negative advertisement
attempts to make people feel bad unless they purchase a particular product.

--- Sayfa 220 ---
205
Advertising and Competition
Sadly, this form is effective with the young (“You are ugly unless you wear our
SikRapper tennis shoes”) and the old (“If you are bald, then you are ugly, so you
better try our hair-growth formula”).
Firms advertise to increase the demand for their products. Sometimes the
increased demand is achieved at the expense of competing ﬁrms, as is often the
case with advertisements that accentuate the disadvantages of the competing
products. For example, ﬁrm A may point out that ﬁrm B’s product is prone to
failure, causing the demand for A’s product to increase and the demand for B’s
product to decrease. In other cases, advertisements by one ﬁrm can increase
demand for all ﬁrms in the industry. For example, when a major producer of
clothing (such as Levi’s) advertises its line of jeans, it may increase consum-
ers’ general interest in jeans and boost the demand of all producers. Here is
a simple model of strategic interaction when advertising enhances industry
demand.
Consider an elaboration of the Cournot duopoly game in which ﬁrm 1
engages in advertising before the ﬁrms compete in the market. Firm 1 selects an
advertising level a, which is a number greater than or equal to zero. Advertising
has a positive effect on the demand for the good sold in the industry, enhanc-
ing the price that the consumers are willing to pay for the output of both ﬁrms.
In particular, the market price is p = a −q1 −q2
 , where q1 is the output of
ﬁrm 1 and q2 is the output of ﬁrm 2. After ﬁrm 1 selects a, it is observed by the
other ﬁrm. Then the two simultaneously and independently select their produc-
tion levels. Assume for simplicity that the ﬁrms produce at zero cost. However,
ﬁrm 1 must pay an advertising cost of 2a3>81.
This game has an inﬁnite number of proper subgames—namely, the Cournot
duopoly game that is played after ﬁrm 1 chooses a (for each of the possible
advertisement levels). Each subgame has an inﬁnite action space, making it
difﬁcult to begin the analysis by searching for Nash equilibria of the full game.
Because we know that the Cournot game has a unique Nash equilibrium and
because this equilibrium must be a part of any subgame perfect equilibrium, it
is easier to begin by identifying the equilibrium of each of the proper subgames.
That is, we should study the game by working backward.
Suppose a subgame is reached following advertisement level a selected by
ﬁrm 1. To ﬁnd the Nash equilibrium of the subgame, compute the best-response
functions of the players. Player 1’s proﬁt is
(a −q1 −q2
 )q1 −2a3
81
 .
Noting that a is a constant (having already been chosen by ﬁrm 1), we take
the derivative of this payoff function with respect to q1
 . To ﬁnd this ﬁrm’s best

--- Sayfa 221 ---
206
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
response to q2
 , we set this derivative equal to zero and solve for q1
 , yielding
q*1 = BR1
 (q2
 ) = a −q2
2
 .
Likewise, ﬁrm 2’s best-response function is
BR2
 (q1
 ) = a −q1
2
 .
Solving this system of equalities to ﬁnd where they are both satisﬁed, we obtain
q1 = q2 = a>3. The equilibrium price is p = a>3. Plugging these values into
the ﬁrms’ proﬁt functions, we see that ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt as a function of a is
z1
 (a) = a2
9 −2a3
81
 .
This is ﬁrm 1’s continuation value in the subgame.
Next, evaluate ﬁrm 1’s choice of an advertisement level at the beginning of
the game. Looking ahead, ﬁrm 1 knows that by advertising at level a, it induces a
subgame whose equilibrium yields a proﬁt of z1(a). Firm 1 maximizes this contin-
uation value. The proﬁt-maximizing choice of advertising level is found by taking
the derivative of z1
 (a) and setting it equal to zero. That is, the optimal a satisﬁes
2a
9 −6a2
81 = 0.
Solving for a, we obtain a* = 3, which completes the analysis.
The strategy proﬁle identiﬁed is a* = 3, q1
 (a) = a>3, and q2
 (a) = a>3.
Note that q1 and q2 are reported as functions of a. This is critically important
because a strategy speciﬁes what a player does at every information set at which
he or she takes an action. There are an inﬁnite number of information sets in this
game. In particular, each player has a distinct information set for every possible
value of a, and so a strategy must prescribe an action for each of them. Thus,
q1
 (a) = a>3 means: “At the information set following action a by ﬁrm 1, set
the quantity equal to a>3.” To report less than this function would be failure to
completely specify the subgame perfect equilibrium.
A MODEL OF LIMIT CAPACITY
In 1945, the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) dominated aluminum
production in the United States, controlling 90 percent of the raw ingot market.
As a result of this supremacy, one of the seminal antitrust cases of the post–

--- Sayfa 222 ---
207
A Model of Limit Capacity
World War II era, United States v. Alcoa, was initiated and considered by the
Supreme Court. In his decision to break up the aluminum giant, Judge Learned
Hand ruled that Alcoa was indeed guilty of anticompetitive practices. Central
to Hand’s argument was Alcoa’s rapid accumulation of capacity for aluminum
production, exceeding the levels that demand for its output seemingly warranted.
This excess capacity, it was argued, was intended to thwart the entry efforts of
Alcoa’s potential competitors. In essence, Alcoa was sacriﬁcing some proﬁtabil-
ity by overdeveloping its production facilities to maintain industrial dominance.1
A game-theoretic model demonstrates how excess capacity can limit entry
in an industry.2 Suppose two ﬁrms are considering whether and how to enter a
new industry in which a specialized electronic component will be produced.
Industry demand is given by the inverse demand function p = 900 −q1 −q2
 ,
where p is the market price, q1 is the quantity produced by ﬁrm 1, and q2 is the
quantity produced by ﬁrm 2. To enter the industry, a ﬁrm must build a produc-
tion facility. Two types of facility can be built: small and large. A small facility
requires an investment of $50,000, and it allows the ﬁrm to produce as many
as 100 units of the good at zero marginal cost. Alternatively, the ﬁrm can pay
$175,000 to construct a large facility that will allow the ﬁrm to produce any
number of units at zero marginal cost. A ﬁrm with a small production facility is
called capacity constrained; a ﬁrm with a large facility is called unconstrained.
The ﬁrms make their entry decisions sequentially. First, ﬁrm 1 must choose
among staying out of the industry, building a small facility, and building a large
facility. Then, after observing ﬁrm 1’s action, ﬁrm 2 must choose from the same
alternatives. If only one of the ﬁrms is in the industry, then it selects a quantity
and sells its product at the price dictated by market demand. If both ﬁrms are
in the industry, then they compete by selecting quantities (as in the Cournot
model). All output decisions are subject to capacity constraints in that a ﬁrm
with a small production facility cannot produce more than 100 units.
To ﬁnd the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game, let us begin by
analyzing the subgames following the ﬁrms’ entry decisions. First suppose that
only ﬁrm i is in the industry. Holding aside the ﬁrm’s sunk entry cost, this ﬁrm
obtains revenue of (900 −qi
 )qi by producing qi
 . This is maximized by select-
ing qi = 450, which yields revenue of $202,500. (You should check this.) Of
course, ﬁrm i can produce 450 units only if it had earlier invested in a large
production facility. Otherwise, it can produce only 100 units, which generates
revenue of $(900 −100)(100) = $80,000. Factoring in the entry cost, if ﬁrm i
1See United States v. Aluminum Co. of America, 148 F.2d 416 (2d Cir. 1945) or read any good industrial
organization textbook.
2This is a variant of the Stackelberg model discussed in Chapter 15.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
208
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
builds a large production facility and is alone in the industry, then it obtains a
proﬁt of $202,500 −175,000 = $27,500. If ﬁrm i builds a small facility and is
alone in the industry, then it gets $80,000 −50,000 = $30,000.
Next consider quantity decisions when both ﬁrms are in the industry. Net
of its entry cost, ﬁrm i ’s revenue is (900 −qi −qj
 )qi
 . Here qi is the quantity
selected by ﬁrm i, and qj is the quantity selected by ﬁrm j. Firm i ’s best-response
function is found by taking the derivative with respect to qi while holding qj
ﬁxed. This yields
BRi
 (qj
 ) = 450 −
qj
2
 .
If neither ﬁrm has a capacity constraint, then the Nash equilibrium of
this Cournot game is q1 = q2 = 300 (we get this result by solving q1 =
450 −q2>2 and q2 = 450 −q1>2), which yields each ﬁrm revenue of
$(900 −300 −300)(300) = $90,000.
Yet, one or both ﬁrms may be capacity constrained. If both ﬁrms have
small production facilities, then each will produce only 100 units (neither
has an incentive to produce less when the other produces 100), yielding each
ﬁrm $(900 −100 −100)(100) = $70,000. Finally, if one ﬁrm is capacity
constrained, then it will produce 100 while the other will produce the uncon-
strained best response to 100, which is 450 −100>2 = 400. In this case,
the price is 900 −100 −400 = 400, the constrained ﬁrm gets a revenue of
$40,000, and the unconstrained ﬁrm earns a revenue of $160,000.
In summary, with the entry cost factored in, if both ﬁrms have large production
facilities, then each ﬁrm obtains a proﬁt of $90,000 −175,000 = −$85,000.
If both ﬁrms have small production facilities, then each ﬁrm gets
$70,000 −50,000 = $20,000. If ﬁrm i has a small facility and ﬁrm j has a
large facility, then ﬁrm i earns $40,000 −50,000 = −$10,000 and ﬁrm j gets
$160,000 −175,000 = −$15,000.
The foregoing analysis fully characterizes the ﬁrms’ equilibrium behavior
in the subgames that follow their entry decisions. We next turn to the entry
decisions, which can be analyzed with the help of Figure 16.1. The ﬁgure
represents the ﬁrst part of the extensive-form game, in which the ﬁrms decide
whether to enter the industry. In Figure 16.1, N stands for “not enter,” S means
build a small production facility, and L means build a large production facility.
Note that because we have solved for the equilibrium quantities, we know the
continuation values following the entry decisions. These payoffs are written
directly in Figure 16.1 in units representing thousands. For example, as already
computed, if both ﬁrms enter with large production facilities, then equilibrium
in the Cournot phase implies that each ﬁrm obtains −$85,000.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
209
Dynamic Monopoly
To ﬁnish the analysis, we can solve the extensive form in Figure 16.1 by
using backward induction. This method is justiﬁed because in Figure 16.1
every node initiates a subgame. Note that S is ﬁrm 2’s optimal action at its top
decision node, S9 is its best alternative at the middle decision node, and N is
its preference at the bottom decision node. In words, it is optimal for ﬁrm 2
to enter and build a small production facility if and only if ﬁrm 1 either does
not enter the industry or enters with a small facility; otherwise, ﬁrm 2 would
not enter. Thus, at the initial node, ﬁrm 1 knows that it will obtain zero if it
selects N, 20 if it chooses S, and 27.5 if it selects L. Firm 1’s optimal action is
thus L. In summary, the subgame perfect equilibrium of this entry game has
ﬁrm 1 playing L, ﬁrm 2 choosing SS9N, and the ﬁrms selecting quantities as
heretofore described.
In the end, ﬁrm 1 invests in a large production facility and ﬁrm 2 decides not
to enter the industry. This result is interesting because, without competition in
the industry, ﬁrm 1 would have been better off investing in the small production
facility (yielding $30,000 instead of $27,500). That is, in the absence of ﬁrm
2’s entry threat, ﬁrm 1 would prefer to hold a monopoly in the industry with a
small production facility. But ﬁrm 1 must consider the possibility that ﬁrm 2 will
enter. A rational ﬁrm 1 calculates that overinvesting in capacity—by building a
large facility—commits it to being a tough competitor in the event that ﬁrm 2
decides to enter the industry. This makes entry unproﬁtable for ﬁrm 2.
DYNAMIC MONOPOLY
Retail ﬁrms frequently adjust prices. Sometimes price adjustments are due to
changes in wholesale prices, but more often the adjustments have to do with
customer demand. Consider the market for 3D television monitors. Not all
FIGURE 16.1
Abbreviated version of the
entry game.
0, 0
0, 30
0, 27.5
S
N
S
L
1
N
L
2
30, 0
20, 20
-10, -15
S
N
L
2
27.5, 0
-15, -10
-85, -85
S 
N 
L 
2

--- Sayfa 225 ---
210
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
consumers have the same interest in buying such a product; in other words,
demand is differentiated. The “high-value” customers are people who either
have a real need for the 3D technology or just love to buy the newest gadget on
the market. “Low-value” customers would be interested in purchasing 3D moni-
tors but only if these are priced to compete with standard displays.
Facing this heterogeneous consumer population—as is the case in most
markets—retailers wish to extract a high price from the high-value customers
and a lower price from the low-value customers. Although legal constraints and
arbitrage force retailers to charge the same price to all people, a retailer can use
time to its advantage. A common scheme is to initially set a high price that is
intended to attract only the high-value customers. Then, after selling to the high-
value folks, the retailer will drop the price in the hopes of capturing the demand
of low-value customers.
Superﬁcially, this scheme appears to give the retailer a very high proﬁt
by allowing it to extract the surplus of trade from both the high- and the low-
value customers. In other words, the retailer gets both types of customers
to pay the most that they are willing to pay for the product. But the retailer
does face some constraints. First, competition with other retailers may exert
downward pressure on prices. Second, the retailer must realize that customers
will behave strategically—in particular, high-value customers may delay their
purchase of 3D monitors if they anticipate that the price will fall over time.
In this section, I sketch a simple model that helps us explore the second stra-
tegic aspect.3 The model focuses on a monopoly setting (where a single ﬁrm
is in the industry), and therefore it ignores the matter of competition between
ﬁrms.
Suppose a single ﬁrm sells 3D monitors. Call the manager of this ﬁrm Tony.
To keep things simple, suppose there are only four potential customers: Hal,
Hilbert, Laurie, and Lauren. These ﬁve players interact over two periods of
time, which I call period 1 and period 2. Think of period 1 as a quarter of the
year (say, January through March) and period 2 as the following quarter. Each
customer’s beneﬁt from owning a 3D monitor depends on which periods he
or she owns the product. Hal could really use such a monitor at work where
he studies molecular structures—he is a high type. Hal would get a beneﬁt of
$1200 by using a 3D monitor in period 1, and he would get a beneﬁt of $500
from its use in period 2. Laurie, in contrast, doesn’t really need a 3D monitor—
she is a low type. In period 1, Laurie would obtain a beneﬁt of $500 from a 3D
monitor; in period 2, her beneﬁt would be $200. Hilbert is a high type just like
3Game-theoretic analysis of this issue ﬁrst appeared in J. I. Bulow’s “Durable-Goods Monopolists,” Journal of
Political Economy 90 (1982): 314–332, and N. L. Stokey’s “Rational Expectations and Durable Goods Pric-
ing,” Bell Journal of Economics 12 (1982): 112–128.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
211
Dynamic Monopoly
Hal; Lauren is a low type just like Laurie. The customers’ values of owning a
3D monitor are summarized in Figure 16.2.
To be clear about the beneﬁts, note that if Hilbert owns a 3D monitor for both
periods 1 and 2, then his total ownership value is $1700. Therefore, if Hilbert
pays p for the monitor at the beginning of period 1, then his payoff is 1700 −p.
If Hilbert waits until period 2 to purchase the monitor at price p, then Hilbert’s
payoff is 500 −p (because he does not own the monitor in period 1, he gets
no beneﬁt in this period). Hal’s payoff is deﬁned the same way. Laurie’s and
Lauren’s payoffs are deﬁned analogously, given their individual ownership bene-
ﬁts of $500 in period 1 and $200 in period 2. Tony’s payoff is his total revenue
from the sale of 3D monitors, minus some ﬁxed production cost, which I ignore.
The game is played as follows. At the beginning of period 1, Tony selects a
price p1
 . After observing the price, Hal, Hilbert, Laurie, and Lauren simultane-
ously decide whether to purchase 3D monitors at this price. After a customer
has purchased a monitor, he or she has no need to make another purchase (a
monitor purchased in period 1 is used in both periods 1 and 2). Further, Tony
has four units available, so the customers are not competing with one another
for a scarce product. At the beginning of period 2, Tony selects another price
p2
 . After observing this price, any customer who did not purchase a monitor
in period 1 may then buy one at price p2
 . (From here on, I will say “monitor”
instead of “3D monitor.”)
This is a complicated game with many (an inﬁnite number of) subgames
and a very large extensive-form tree representation. The game has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium, which you can ﬁnd by working backward through
the extensive form. But rather than subject you to the complete analysis, which
can be confusing, I shall present a few pricing strategies for Tony and explain
why one of them characterizes the subgame perfect equilibrium.
I start with a useful fact:
Regardless of p1
 , if at least one of the high-type customers (Hal, Hilbert)
and neither of the low types (Laurie, Lauren) purchases in period 1,
then it is optimal for Tony to select p2 = 200 in period 2.
To understand why this is true, ﬁrst note that Tony would never choose p2 < 200
as long as there is a sale to be made. For example, suppose Laurie does not
1
2
Benefit to Hal and Hilbert
Benefit to Laurie and Lauren
Period
Period
1200
500
500
200
FIGURE 16.2
The customers’ values of
owning a 3D monitor.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
212
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
purchase a monitor in period 1 and then Tony picks p2 = 150. Laurie will deﬁ-
nitely buy the monitor at this price, for doing so would give her a payoff of
200 −150 = 50, whereas not purchasing it would give her 0 (because the game
ends at the end of period 2). In fact, in period 2 both Laurie and Lauren will
buy a monitor at any price less than or equal to $200. If p2 = 200, then the low
types will be indifferent between buying and not buying; I assume that they will
each decide to purchase in this case.4 Likewise, Hal and Hilbert will purchase
monitors in period 2 at any price less than or equal to $500, assuming that they
did not purchase in period 1.
Second, note that p2 = 200 is obviously best if both Hal and Hilbert
already purchased in period 1. Further, if one of the high-type customers did not
purchase in period 1, then Tony has a simple choice: set p2 = 200 and sell to all
three remaining customers or set p2 = 500 and sell only to the single high-type
customer. The former option generates a proﬁt of $600, whereas the latter yields
$500. Thus, p2 = 200 is best.
Pricing Scheme A: Induce all of the customers to purchase in period 1.
Let us determine the highest price Tony can charge in period 1 that will guaran-
tee that Hal, Hilbert, Laurie, and Lauren all purchase in this period. Certainly
Laurie and Lauren will not purchase monitors in period 1 if the price is greater
than $500 + 200 = $700; if either did so, she would obtain a negative payoff,
whereas she can always get 0 by sticking to window shopping. In addition,
Laurie and Lauren each knows that she cannot obtain a positive payoff by wait-
ing until period 2 to buy a monitor (as p2 Ú 200). Thus, each low type will deﬁ-
nitely buy a monitor in period 1 as long as the price does not exceed her owner-
ship value of 700. The high types also will buy monitors at this price because it
will give them each a payoff of 1700 −700 = 1000, which exceeds what they
could get by waiting until period 2 (which is less than 500 −200 = 300 as
p2 Ú 200). Thus, if Tony selects p1 = 700, then all four customers will purchase
in period 1. This pricing strategy yields a payoff of 2800 for Tony.
Pricing Scheme B: Induce all of the customers not to purchase in period 1.
Tony can ensure that no customer buys a monitor in period 1 by setting p1 strictly
above 1700, the ownership value of the high-type customers. Then, Hal, Hilbert,
Laurie, and Lauren will all be without a monitor until the beginning of period 2.
At this point, Tony could sell to all four customers at the price p2 = 200 or sell
4In reality, Tony may have to set a price below $200 to make sure that the low types have the incentive to
purchase. Our theory says that the price can be just slightly below $200 (such as $199.99), which can be made
as close to $200 as desired. Thus, Tony can effectively charge p2 = 200. In fact, in equilibrium, the customers
will purchase when they are indifferent. This is used later as well.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
213
Price Guarantees as a Commitment to High Prices
only to Hal and Hilbert at the price p2 = 500. The latter yields a payoff of 1000,
whereas the former yields 800 for Tony; thus, p2 = 500 is best with scheme B.
Pricing Scheme C: Induce the high types (Hal and Hilbert) to purchase in
period 1 and the low types (Laurie and Lauren) to purchase in period 2.
By setting p1 above 700 but not too high, Tony can induce only the high types to
purchase in period 1. As already noted, Laurie and Lauren will not purchase at
such a price; further, as long as at least one high type purchases in period 1, we
know that p2 = 200 will be selected by Tony in period 2. Anticipating p2 = 200,
each high type knows that he would obtain 500 −200 = 300 by waiting until
period 2 to buy a monitor. Purchasing in period 1 at price p1 gives a high type a
payoff of 1200 + 500 −p1
 . Thus, Hal and Hilbert have the incentive to purchase
in period 1 if and only if 1700 −p1 Ú 300, which simpliﬁes to p1 … 1400. The
best such price for Tony is p1 = 1400. Thus, when Tony chooses p1 = 1400, he
obtains a payoff of 2 # 1400 in period 1 (from the sales to Hal and Hilbert) and
200 # 2 in period 2 (from the sales to Laurie and Lauren), for a total of 3200.
The foregoing analysis completely identiﬁes Tony’s options.5 Comparing
the payoffs from the various pricing schemes reveals that scheme C is Tony’s
best course of action. Intuitively, Tony wants to ﬁnd a way of discriminating
between the high- and low-type customers. But, because he must charge them
the same price in each period, he can only use time to differentiate between them.
Time is useful in this regard because there is a sense in which Hal and Hilbert
are less patient than are Laurie and Lauren. The high types’ value of owning a
3D monitor from period 1—relative to the value of purchasing it in period 2—is
much greater than is the case with the low types. To see this, observe that Hal’s
and Hilbert’s ownership value from period 1 is 1200 + 500 = 1700, which is
1200 more than the value of 500 that they would each get by waiting until period
2 to buy a monitor. In contrast, Laurie’s and Lauren’s value from period 1 is only
500 more than their value from period 2. Because Hal and Hilbert gain very
little by waiting until period 2, Tony can extract most of their ownership value
by setting a very high period 1 price.
PRICE GUARANTEES AS A COMMITMENT TO HIGH PRICES
As described earlier, under some conditions retail ﬁrms have an incentive to
decrease prices over time to extract surplus from customers with different
valuations. You might think that such a pricing policy is good for a ﬁrm—it
5Given the customers’ ownership values, there is no way for Tony to induce the low types to purchase in period
1 and the high types to purchase in period 2. In any case, it would not be optimal for Tony to select such a
pricing scheme.

--- Sayfa 229 ---
214
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
helps the ﬁrm obtain proﬁt from each type of customer. In fact, the incentive
to decrease prices over time may actually have the opposite effect on proﬁt. To
make sense of my claim, let us continue with the dynamic monopoly example.
Consider again the optimal pricing scheme, C. Recall that when selecting
the period 1 price p1
 , Tony must consider the customers’ strategic calcula-
tions. In particular, all of the players know that if the low-type customers do not
purchase and at least one of the high types does purchase a monitor in period
1, then in period 2 Tony will have the incentive to select p2 = 200. (You will
recall that this is the “useful fact” noted on page 212.) Tony’s scheme C pricing
policy is therefore a balancing act. On one hand, Tony wants to deal only with
Hal and Hilbert in period 1, raising the price as high as they are willing to pay.
On the other hand, once Hal and Hilbert have purchased monitors, Tony wants
to decrease the price and sell two more units to Laurie and Lauren. Because Hal
and Hilbert anticipate the second-period price, Tony can get them to pay only
$1400 in period 1.
By comparison, consider how much Tony would make if he could somehow
commit never to deal with Laurie and Lauren. For example, suppose that in
period 1 Tony could make a legally enforceable promise not to sell monitors in
period 2. Then suppose Tony chose a period 1 price of p1 = 1700, or just below
this amount. In this case, Hal and Hilbert would purchase monitors in period 1.
(By purchasing a monitor, a high type’s payoff would be 1700 −p1
 ; if he did
not purchase a monitor, then the high type would get 0, because no monitors
would be sold in period 2.) Laurie and Lauren would not purchase at this high
price. However, Tony’s payoff would be $3400, which is greater than the payoff
he would get without the ability to commit. Thus, commitment helps Tony.
There are many ways in which ﬁrms achieve commitment to prices over
time. One of the most common ways is through the use of “price guarantees,”
whereby a retailer offers to refund the difference between its current price and
any lower price that it sets on the same item in the near future. That is, if today
the store sells you a television for $300 and then tomorrow it lowers its price
on the same television to $250, you can claim a $50 refund. You probably have
seen advertisements or been reassured by a salesperson to this effect. Consum-
ers usually think of price guarantees as something favorable to them, but in fact
this may not be the case.
The dynamic monopoly model can be used to demonstrate how price
guarantees can be good for ﬁrms and bad for consumers. Suppose that Tony
institutes a price-guarantee policy and selects a period 1 price of p1 = 1700.
Suppose that at least one of the high types—Hal, for example—purchases a
monitor in period 1. Then, if Tony wants to sell monitors to Laurie and Lauren
in period 2, he has to reduce the price to 200. This gives Tony at most 600 in
period 2 revenue (sales to Hilbert, Laurie, and Lauren). However, Hal will claim

--- Sayfa 230 ---
215
Dynamic Price Competition with Capacity Constraints
a refund of 1700 −200 = 1500 from Tony, far offsetting the sales gain. Thus,
the price guarantee helps Tony commit not to reduce the price, thus allowing
him to achieve the payoff of 3400.
Intuitively, a price guarantee works like any other contractual commitment—
it helps the retailer tie its hands in the future. To the extent that the retailer
controls the terms of the sales contract, we should expect it to include such
contractual provisions when they beneﬁt the retailer. The consumers’ remedy
lies in seizing more control of the contract speciﬁcation process or relying on
the legal system to limit retailers’ use of commitment mechanisms.
DYNAMIC PRICE COMPETITION WITH CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS
In some industries, ﬁrms compete over time by setting prices, and they also face
capacity constraints. An important example is the airline industry. For instance,
consider nonstop air travel from Houston, Texas, to London, England, on a
particular date. As of the writing of this edition of the book, two airlines offered
this service: British Airways and United Airlines. Both allocate a Boeing 777
airplane with a ﬁxed number of seats in various classes of service (including
about 167 in standard coach class).
These airlines face an interesting pricing problem. Potential customers come
to the market at different times. Leisure travelers may look for seats several
weeks in advance, whereas business travelers may do so closer to the date of
travel. Also, leisure travelers typically have a lower valuation of the service than
do business travelers. The airlines have to decide what prices to set for the seats
over time. They want to manage their capacities (167 seats) to maximize proﬁt
and compete with each other.
Settings like this one are very complicated. If British Airways were alone in
the market, the pricing problem would be difﬁcult enough. Proﬁt maximization
would require pricing advance-purchase tickets (mainly to leisure travelers) at a
level that ensures there are sufﬁcient tickets available to business travelers who
are willing to pay a higher price closer to the date of travel. In the competitive
environment of duopoly, British Airways must also consider United Airlines’
pricing.
To get a feel for the strategic elements and possible outcomes in this market
scenario, I will present here an extension of the duopoly example developed in
Chapter 11 (in the text and in Exercise 16). Recall that price competition in a
homogeneous-good market (the Bertrand model) leads ﬁrms to price at marginal
cost, and they do not earn proﬁts in equilibrium. With capacity constraints, they
generally earn positive proﬁts in equilibrium. Furthermore, the equilibrium
typically entails randomized prices.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
216
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
Consider the setting of the model in Chapter 11. Two ﬁrms produce a homo-
geneous good and compete by selecting prices. The ﬁrms produce at zero cost
and face capacity constraints. Speciﬁcally, suppose that each ﬁrm can produce
and sell at most twenty units. Rather than having the ﬁrms interact at one time
with one set of customers, as in Chapter 11, suppose that the ﬁrms interact over
two periods of time, where different types of customers are present. In period 1,
there are forty customers ready to purchase the good. Each of these customers
has a valuation (willingness to pay) of 1>5. In period 2, there are ten custom-
ers and each of these has a valuation of 1. Each customer is present in only one
period. Therefore, customers present in period 1 who do not purchase will not
be present in period 2. In period 1, the ﬁrms simultaneously set prices and caps
on the number of units to sell. The caps must be at or below the ﬁrms’ capacity
constraints. After observing each other’s ﬁrst-period sales, the ﬁrms simulta-
neously select prices in period 2 and sell the demanded quantities (up to their
capacity constraints).
To establish a benchmark, consider ﬁrst a version of the model in which all
of the customers are present in the market at the same time, and the ﬁrms select
prices once. Assume for simplicity that if both types of customers are interested
in purchasing at a given price, then the high-valuation ones are served before
those with low valuations. In the Nash equilibrium of this game, the ﬁrms both
price at p = 1>5, and they sell twenty units each. Each ﬁrm earns a payoff
(proﬁt) of (20)(1>5) = 4. To see why higher prices cannot form an equilibrium,
suppose both ﬁrms were to price at 1. At this price, the ﬁrms would split the
market and sell to only the high-valuation customers. That is, each ﬁrm would
sell ﬁve units and get a payoff of 5. However, a ﬁrm would beneﬁt by deviating
to a slight lower price and capturing all of the high-valuation customers.
Returning to the two-period model, observe that the interaction in the second
period is exactly the model analyzed in Exercise 16 of Chapter 11. Speciﬁcally,
at the beginning of period 2, the ﬁrms face ten high-valuation customers and
have capacity constraints c1 and c2
 , where ci is the residual capacity for ﬁrm i
after the sales from period 1. We therefore already know the Nash equilibrium
of each subgame that starts in period 2, and this gives us the continuation values
from the start of period 2 as a function of c1 and c2
 . We shall look for a subgame
perfect equilibrium of the entire game, so we can analyze the interaction in
period 1 using these continuation values. Note that these continuation values are
deﬁned to be net of proﬁts in period 1.
As stated in Exercise 16 of Chapter 11, the continuation values from the
start of period 2 are as follows. If c1
 , c2 Ú 10, then the continuation values are
0 for each ﬁrm. If c1 = c2 = 5, then the continuation values are 5 for each ﬁrm.
Finally, if cj ∈[5, 10) and ci Ú cj
 , then ﬁrm i ’s continuation value is 10 −cj

--- Sayfa 232 ---
217
Guided Exercise
and ﬁrm j ’s continuation value is (10 −cj
 ) cj>ci
 . Although it is not stated in
Chapter 11, if cj < 5, then ﬁrm j ’s continuation value would be lower.6
I will next describe a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this game. In
period 1, ﬁrms 1 and 2 both select a price of 1>5 and a sales cap of 15. In period
2, the ﬁrms behave as described in Exercise 16 of Chapter 11, as a function of
the actual values of c1 and c2
 . The payoff (total proﬁt) for each ﬁrm is
15 # (1>5) + 5 = 8.
To see that this speciﬁcation of behavior constitutes an SPE, note what would
happen if a player deviates in the ﬁrst period. Because there are forty customers
in period 1 and the ﬁrms start with capacity constraints of twenty, each ﬁrm can
sell however many units it wishes (up to twenty units) at any price at or below
1>5. Thus, a ﬁrm could not gain by choosing a price other than 1>5.
The ﬁrst-period competition is all about the sales caps. Suppose ﬁrm i
were to deviate by selecting a sales cap below 15. Note that this would have
no effect on its continuation value in period 2, which is 10 −cj
 . The deviation
thus lowers ﬁrm i ’s payoff by lowering its ﬁrst-period sales. Next suppose that
ﬁrm i were to deviate by selecting a sales cap above 15. In this case, ﬁrm i gets
1>5 from each additional customer that it serves in the ﬁrst period, but ﬁrm
i loses 1 for each foregone second-period customer. Thus, the ﬁrms have no
incentive to deviate from the above speciﬁcation of behavior.
The interesting thing about this example is that by dealing with the custom-
ers in groups over time, competitive pressure between the ﬁrms is softened. The
ﬁrms are able to engineer essentially a shared monopoly in the second period
by the selection of their ﬁrst-period market positions. Firms obtain higher SPE
payoffs in the dynamic game than they do in the benchmark setting.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: A manufacturer of automobile tires produces at a cost of $10 per
tire. It sells units to a retailer who in turn sells the tires to consumers. Imagine
that the retailer faces the inverse demand curve p = 200 −(q>100). That is, if
the retailer brings q tires to the market, then these tires will be sold at a price of
p = 200 −(q>100). The retailer has no cost of production, other than whatever
it must pay to the manufacturer for the tires.
6To keep things simple, I did not describe how the ﬁrms would split the market in the event that they chose the
same price without sufﬁcient capacity for each ﬁrm to get half of the customers. Regardless of the “rationing
rule” in this case, there will be no equilibrium in which a ﬁrm leaves a residual capacity of less than 5 for
period 2 (by selling more than ﬁfteen units in period 1).

--- Sayfa 233 ---
218
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
(a)  Suppose that the manufacturer and retailer interact as follows. First, the
manufacturer sets a price x that the retailer must pay for each tire. Then, the
retailer decides how many tires q to purchase from the manufacturer and
sell to consumers. The manufacturer’s payoff (proﬁt) is q(x −10), whereas
the retailer’s proﬁt is
a200 −
q
100 bq −xq = 200q −q2
100 −xq.
Calculate the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
(b)  Suppose that the manufacturer sells its tires directly to consumers,
bypassing the retailer. Thus, the manufacturer can sell q tires at price
p = 200 −(q>100). Calculate the manufacturer’s proﬁt-maximizing
choice of q in this case.
(c)  Compare the joint proﬁt of the manufacturer and retailer in part (a) with the
manufacturer’s proﬁt in part (b). Explain why there is a difference. This is
called the double-marginalization problem.
Solution:
(a)  Start by calculating the retailer’s optimal quantity q as a function of the
manufacturer’s choice of x. Given x, the retailer selects q to maximize
200q −q2
100 −xq.
The ﬁrst-order condition for optimization implies that the retailer chooses
quantity q*(x) = 10,000 −50x. Thus, the manufacturer can anticipate sell-
ing exactly q*(x) units if it prices at x, which means that the manufacturer’s
payoff, as a function of x, will be
q*(x)(x −10) = (10,000 −50x)(x −10) = 10,500x −50x2 −100,000.
Taking the derivative of this expression and setting it equal to zero yields
the ﬁrst-order condition for the manufacturer’s optimization problem at the
beginning of the game. Solving for x, we ﬁnd that the manufacturer sets
x* = 105. Thus, the equilibrium quantity is q = q*(105) = 4750. This
implies p = 152.50.
(b) In this case, the manufacturer’s proﬁt is
a200 −
q
100 bq −10q.
Taking the derivative of this expression and setting it equal to zero yields the
manufacturer’s optimal quantity, which is qn = 9500. This implies p = 105.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
219
Exercises
(c)  Calculating the ﬁrms’ equilibrium payoffs in part (a), we see that the joint
proﬁt is
(152.50 −10) # 4,750 = 676,875.
The manufacturer’s proﬁt in part (b) is
95 # 9,500 = 902,500.
The difference arises because in a market in which a monopoly ﬁrm must
set a single price per unit of output, the monopolist optimally raises the
price above marginal cost. This implies an inefﬁciently low level of trade.
In part (a), such a monopoly distortion occurs twice—by the manufacturer
to the retailer, and again by the retailer to the consumers. But in part (b), dis-
tortion occurs just once because the monopolist manufacturer sells directly
to consumers.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the model of advertising and Cournot competition analyzed in this
chapter. Suppose the two ﬁrms could write an externally enforced contract
that speciﬁes an advertising level a and a monetary transfer m from ﬁrm 2 to
ﬁrm 1. Would the ﬁrms write a contract that speciﬁes a = 3? If not, to what
level of advertising would they commit?
2. Continuing with the advertising model, suppose the ﬁrms compete on price
rather than quantity. That is, quantity demanded is given by Q = a −p,
where p is the price consumers face. After ﬁrm 1’s selection of the level of
advertising, the ﬁrms simultaneously and independently select prices p1 and
p2
 . The ﬁrm with the lowest price obtains all of the market demand at this
price. If the ﬁrms charge the same price, then the market demand is split
equally between them. (To refresh your memory of the price-competition
model, review the analysis of Bertrand competition in Chapter 10.) Find the
subgame perfect equilibrium of this game and explain why ﬁrm 1 advertises
at the level that you compute.
3. Consider a variation of the limit-capacity model analyzed in this chapter.
Suppose that instead of the ﬁrms’ entry decisions occurring sequentially, the
ﬁrms act simultaneously. After observing each other’s entry decisions, mar-
ket interaction proceeds as in the original model. Find the subgame perfect

--- Sayfa 235 ---
220
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
Nash equilibria of this new model and compare it/them with the subgame
perfect equilibrium of the original model.
4. This exercise extends the analysis of the Stackelberg duopoly game (from
Chapter 15) to include ﬁxed costs of production. The analysis produces a
theory of limit quantity, which is a quantity the incumbent ﬁrm can produce
that will induce the potential entrant to stay out of the market.

Suppose two ﬁrms compete by selecting quantities q1 and q2
 , respec-
tively, with the market price given by p = 1000 −3q1 −3q2
 . Firm 1 (the
incumbent) is already in the market. Firm 2 (the potential entrant) must
decide whether or not to enter and, if she enters, how much to produce.
First the incumbent commits to its production level, q1
 . Then the potential
entrant, having seen q1
 , decides whether to enter the industry. If ﬁrm 2
chooses to enter, then it selects its production level q2
 . Both ﬁrms have the
cost function c(qi
 ) = 100qi + F , where F is a constant ﬁxed cost. If ﬁrm 2
decides not to enter, then it obtains a payoff of 0. Otherwise, it pays the cost
of production, including the ﬁxed cost. Note that ﬁrm i in the market earns
a payoff of pqi −c(qi
 ).
(a)  What is ﬁrm 2’s optimal quantity as a function of q1
 , conditional on
entry?
(b)  Suppose F = 0. Compute the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of
this game. Report equilibrium strategies as well as the outputs, prof-
its, and price realized in equilibrium. This is the Stackelberg or entry-
accommodating outcome.
(c)  Now suppose F > 0. Compute, as a function of F, the level of q1
that would make entry unproﬁtable for ﬁrm 2. This is called the limit
quantity.
(d)  Find the incumbent’s optimal choice of output and the outcome of
the game in the following cases: (i) F = 18,723, (ii) F = 8,112,
(iii) F = 1,728, and (iv) F = 108. It will be easiest to use your answers
from parts (b) and (c) here; in each case, compare ﬁrm 1’s proﬁt from
limiting entry with its proﬁt from accommodating entry.
5. Consider a slight variation of the dynamic monopoly game analyzed in this
chapter. Suppose there is only one high-type customer (Hal) and only one
low-type customer (Laurie).
(a)  Analyze this game and explain why p2 = 200 is not optimal if Hal does
not purchase a monitor in period 1. Find the optimal pricing scheme for
Tony. Discuss whether Tony would gain from being able to commit to
not selling monitors in period 2.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
221
Exercises
(b)  Finally, analyze the game with one of each type of customer and owner-
ship beneﬁts given in the following ﬁgure. In this case, would Tony gain
from being able to commit to not selling monitors in period 2?
1
2
Benefit to Hal
Benefit to Laurie
Period
Period
1200
300
500
200
6. Imagine a market setting with three ﬁrms. Firms 2 and 3 are already operat-
ing as monopolists in two different industries (they are not competitors).
Firm 1 must decide whether to enter ﬁrm 2’s industry and thus compete
with ﬁrm 2 or enter ﬁrm 3’s industry and thus compete with ﬁrm 3. Produc-
tion in ﬁrm 2’s industry occurs at zero cost, whereas the cost of production
in ﬁrm 3’s industry is 2 per unit. Demand in ﬁrm 2’s industry is given by
p = 9 −Q, whereas demand in ﬁrm 3’s industry is given by p9 = 14 −Q9,
where p and Q denote the price and total quantity in ﬁrm 2’s industry and p9
and Q9 denote the price and total quantity in ﬁrm 3’s industry.

The game runs as follows: First, ﬁrm 1 chooses between E2 and E3. (E2
means “enter ﬁrm 2’s industry” and E3 means “enter ﬁrm 3’s industry.”)
This choice is observed by ﬁrms 2 and 3. Then, if ﬁrm 1 chooses E2, ﬁrms 1
and 2 compete as Cournot duopolists, where they select quantities q1 and q2
simultaneously. In this case, ﬁrm 3 automatically gets the monopoly proﬁt
of 36 in its own industry. In contrast, if ﬁrm 1 chooses E3, then ﬁrms 1 and
3 compete as Cournot duopolists, where they select quantities q=
1 and q=
3
simultaneously; and in this case, ﬁrm 2 automatically gets its monopoly
proﬁt of 81>4.
(a)  Calculate and report the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of this
game. In the equilibrium, does ﬁrm 1 enter ﬁrm 2’s industry or ﬁrm 3’s
industry?
(b)  Is there a Nash equilibrium (not necessarily subgame perfect) in which
ﬁrm 1 selects E2? If so, describe it. If not, brieﬂy explain why.
7. Consider the location game (in Chapter 8) with nine possible regions at
which vendors may locate. Suppose that, rather than the players moving
simultaneously and independently, they move sequentially. First, vendor 1
selects a location. Then, after observing the decision of vendor 1, vendor 2
chooses where to locate. Use backward induction to solve this game (and
identify the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium). Remember that you need

--- Sayfa 237 ---
222
16: Topics in Industrial Organization
to specify the second vendor’s sequentially optimal strategy (his best move
conditional on every different action of vendor 1).
8. Consider the following market game: An incumbent ﬁrm, called ﬁrm 3, is
already in an industry. Two potential entrants, called ﬁrms 1 and 2, can
each enter the industry by paying the entry cost of 10. First, ﬁrm 1 decides
whether to enter or not. Then, after observing ﬁrm 1’s choice, ﬁrm 2 decides
whether to enter or not. Every ﬁrm, including ﬁrm 3, observes the choices
of ﬁrms 1 and 2. After this, all of the ﬁrms in the industry (including ﬁrm
3) compete in a Cournot oligopoly, where they simultaneously and inde-
pendently select quantities. The price is determined by the inverse demand
curve p = 12 −Q, where Q is the total quantity produced in the industry.
Assume that the ﬁrms produce at no cost in this Cournot game. Thus, if ﬁrm
i is in the industry and produces qi
 , then it earns a gross proﬁt of (12 −Q)qi
in the Cournot phase. (Remember that ﬁrms 1 and 2 have to pay the ﬁxed
cost 10 to enter.)
(a)  Compute the subgame perfect equilibrium of this market game. Do so
by ﬁrst ﬁnding the equilibrium quantities and proﬁts in the Cournot
subgames. Show your answer by designating optimal actions on the tree
and writing the complete subgame perfect equilibrium strategy proﬁle.
[Hint: In an n-ﬁrm Cournot oligopoly with demand p = 12 −Q and
0 costs, the Nash equilibrium entails each ﬁrm producing the quantity
q = 12>(n + 1).]
(b)  In the subgame perfect equilibrium, which ﬁrms (if any) enter the
industry?
9. This exercise will help you think about the relation between inﬂation and
output in the macroeconomy. Suppose that the government of Tritonland
can ﬁx the inﬂation level p# by an appropriate choice of monetary policy.
The rate of nominal wage increase, W
#
, however, is set not by the govern-
ment but by an employer–union federation known as the ASE. The ASE
would like real wages to remain constant. That is, if it could, it would set
W
#
= p# . Speciﬁcally, given W
#
 and p# , the payoff of the ASE is given by
u(W
#
, p# ) = −(W
#
−p# )2. Real output y in Tritonland is given by the equation
y = 30 + (p# −W
#
). The government, perhaps representing its  electorate,
likes output more than it dislikes inﬂation. Given y and p# , the government’s
payoff is v(y, p# ) = y −p# >2 −30. The government and the ASE interact
as follows. First, the ASE selects the rate of nominal wage increase. Then
the government chooses its monetary policy (and hence sets inﬂation) af-
ter observing the nominal wage increases set by the ASE. Assume that
0 … W
#
… 10 and 0 … p# … 10.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
223
Exercises
(a)  Use backward induction to ﬁnd the level of inﬂation p# , nominal wage
growth W
#
, and output y that will prevail in Tritonland. If you are famil-
iar with macroeconomics, explain the relationship between backward
induction and “rational expectations” here.
(b)  Suppose that the government could commit to a particular monetary
policy (and hence inﬂation rate) ahead of time. What inﬂation rate
would the government set? How would the utilities of the government
and the ASE compare in this case with that in part (a)?
(c)  In the “real world,” how have governments attempted to commit to
particular monetary policies? What are the risks associated with ﬁxing
monetary policy before learning about important events, such as the
outcomes of wage negotiations?
10. Regarding the dynamic monopoly game, can you ﬁnd ownership values for
Hal and Laurie that make scheme A optimal? Can you ﬁnd values that make
scheme B optimal?
11. Consider the application on dynamic price competition with capacity con-
straints presented at the end of this chapter. In the game described in the text,
is there a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in which the players choose
sales caps of less than 15 in the ﬁrst period? If so, describe such an equilib-
rium and show that the ﬁrms cannot gain by deviating. If not, explain why.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
224
A
s a kid, you probably played tic-tac-toe with your friends or siblings. In
this game, two players take turns claiming cells of a 3 × 3 matrix (a matrix
with three rows and three columns). Player 1 claims a cell by writing an “X” in
it; player 2 writes an “O” in each cell that he claims. A player can claim only
one cell per turn. The game ends when all of the cells have been claimed or
when one of the players has claimed three cells in a line (by claiming an entire
row, column, or diagonal). If a player has claimed three cells in a line, then he
wins and the other player loses. If all of the cells are claimed and neither player
has a line, then the game is declared a tie. Figure 17.1 depicts the playing of a
game in which player 1 wins.
Tic-tac-toe is a game of skill—nothing in the game is left to chance (no
coins are ﬂipped, no dice rolled, etc.). It is also a game of perfect information,
because players move sequentially and observe each other’s choices. Further, it
FIGURE 17.1
A game of tic-tac-toe.
Tic-tac-toe
matrix
Round 1
(Player 1
moves first)
Round 2
Round 3
X
X
O
X
X
O
Round 4
(Player 2
blocks a line)
Round 5
Round 6
(Player 2
blocks)
Round 7
(Player 1
wins with
diagonal)
X
X
O
O
X
X
X
O
X
X
O
O
X
X
O
O
X
X
O
O
X
O
17
PARLOR GAMES

--- Sayfa 240 ---
225
Parlor Games
is a ﬁnite game. These facts imply that the result on page 188 (Chapter 15) holds
for tic-tac-toe: this game has a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium. What else do
we know about tic-tac-toe? It is a two-player, strictly competitive game: either
player 1 wins and player 2 loses, or player 2 wins and player 1 loses, or the play-
ers tie. Thus, the result on page 149 (Chapter 12) also applies, meaning that each
player’s Nash equilibrium strategy is a security strategy for him.
Let’s review. One of the outcomes (1 wins, 2 wins, tie) occurs in a Nash
equilibrium. Because the equilibrium strategies are security strategies, each
player can guarantee himself this equilibrium outcome. For example, suppose
“1 wins” is the equilibrium outcome. Then our mathematical analysis proves
that player 1 has a winning strategy, which guarantees that he will win the game
regardless of what his opponent does. On the other side of the table, player 2 has
a strategy that guarantees at least a loss, regardless of what player 1 does. In this
case, player 2’s security strategy is not very helpful to her, but player 1’s secu-
rity strategy is quite helpful to him. The game is “solved” as long as player 1 is
smart enough to calculate his security strategy.
In fact, “1 wins” is not the equilibrium outcome of tic-tac-toe. The Nash
equilibrium actually leads to the tie outcome. Thus, our mathematical analysis
implies that each player has a strategy guaranteeing a tie. In other words, when
smart, rational players engage in tic-tac-toe, the game always ends in a tie. You
probably knew this already, because most people ﬁgure it out relatively early in
life. As a matter of fact, discovering the solution to tic-tac-toe is one of the major
stepping stones of childhood development. I am sure child psychologists put it
just before the dreaded Santa Claus realization on the time line of youth, at least
for kids destined to become game theorists.
The neat thing about the results in Chapters 12 and 15 is that they apply
generally. There are lots of two-player, strictly competitive, perfect-information,
ﬁnite games. On one end of the complexity spectrum, we have tic-tac-toe; on the
other end are games such as chess, which also ends with either 1 wins, 2 wins,
or tie (also called “a draw”).1 Putting the results together, we get:
Result: Take any two-player, extensive-form game that (a) is ﬁnite,
(b) has perfect information, and (c) is strictly competitive.
•฀
 If the possible outcomes of the game are “1 wins,” “2 wins,” and “tie,”
then either one of the players has a winning strategy or both players
have strategies guaranteeing at least a tie.
•฀
 If the possible outcomes of the game are only “1 wins” and “2 wins,”
then either player 1 has a winning strategy or player 2 has a winning
strategy.
1The rules of chess, including the “50 moves rule,” make this game ﬁnite.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
226
17: Parlor Games
This result proves something about chess. In chess, either one of the players has
a winning strategy or both players have a strategy guaranteeing a tie.2 At this
point, no one knows which of these statements is true; chess is too complicated
to solve by ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium. The best human chess players rely on
experience and the ability to look ahead a few turns to beat their opponents.
Computer programs such as IBM’s Deep Blue can now play at the grandmaster
level and will soon be able to beat any unassisted human. But, as Garry Kasp-
arov observes, chess will remain fascinating as the focus shifts to competition
between computer programs.3
You might ﬁnd it useful to make a list of games that you have played to
which the preceding result applies. Then see what you can deduce about the
games by using the theory you have learned. The following exercises will push
you in this direction.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Suppose there are two players and two baskets of colored balls.
The red basket contains m red balls. The blue basket contains n blue balls. The
numbers n and m are common knowledge between the players. Consider a
perfect-information game in which, starting with player 1, the players take turns
individually removing one ball from one of the baskets. The player who removes
the last red ball loses the game. Demonstrate that player 1 has a winning strategy
if m + n is an even number and player 2 has a winning strategy if m + n is an
odd number.
Solution: To win, a player must leave her opponent with one red ball and no
blue balls (an odd total). Consider the strategy of always removing a blue ball
as long as at least one blue ball remains, and otherwise removing a red ball. If
m + n is even, then the ﬁrst player is guaranteed to win with this strategy. If
m + n is odd, then player 2 wins with this strategy.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the following game between two players. The players take turns
moving a rock among cells of an m × n matrix. At the beginning of the
2Mathematician Ernst Zermelo is credited with doing some of the early game-theoretic work on chess. The
result presented here uses the two building-block results on pages 149 and 188, which are due to John von
Neumann and Harold Kuhn, respectively.
3The subject is discussed in M. Newborn, Kasparov versus Deep Blue (Montreal: McGill University Press,
1996).

--- Sayfa 242 ---
227
Exercises
game (before the ﬁrst move), the rock is placed in the bottom-right cell of
the matrix [cell (m, n)]. Player 1 goes ﬁrst. At each turn, the player with the
move must push the rock into one of the three cells above or to the left (or
both) of the cell where the rock currently sits. That is, the player may move
the rock to the cell above the current position, to the cell to the left of the
current position, or to the cell diagonal to the current position in the up-left
direction, as pictured below.
A player may not move the rock outside of the matrix. The player who is
forced to move the rock into the top-left cell of the matrix [cell (1, 1)] loses
the game.
(a)  Suppose the dimensions of the matrix are 5 × 7. Does either player
have a strategy that guarantees a victory? If so, which of the two players
has such a strategy?
(b)  In general, under what conditions on m and n does player 1 have a
winning strategy and under what conditions does player 2 have a winning
strategy?
2. The game Cliff runs as follows. There are two players, each of whom has
a pocketful of pennies, and there is an empty jar. The players take turns
tossing pennies into the jar, with player 1 moving ﬁrst. There are two rules:
(a) When a player is on the move, he must put between one and four pennies
in the jar (that is, he must toss at least one penny in the jar, but he cannot toss
more than four pennies in the jar), and (b) the game ends as soon as there are
sixteen or more pennies in the jar. The player who moved last (the one who
caused the number of pennies to exceed ﬁfteen) wins the game. Determine
which of the players has a strategy that guarantees victory, and describe the
winning strategy.

--- Sayfa 243 ---
228
17: Parlor Games
3. Consider Marienbad, a variation of the game described in the Guided Ex-
ercise of this chapter. As before, players take turns removing balls from the
baskets, except that players are allowed to remove as many balls as they wish,
provided that each player removes balls from only one of the baskets in each
round. For example, player 1 might remove three red balls in one round and
four blue balls in another round. Each player must remove at least one ball
when it is his turn to move. The player who is forced to remove the last ball
(whichever basket it is in) is declared the loser. As the result of this chapter
establishes, one of the players has a winning strategy in this game. Explain
which player has the winning strategy and how the identity of the winning
player depends on m and n. If you can, also describe the winning strategy.
4. Consider a variant of the game in Exercise 1, in which the player who moves
the rock into cell (1, 1) wins the game.
(a)  Does one of the players have a strategy that guarantees him a win? If so,
which player has a winning strategy?
(b)  Now consider a three-player version of the game, whereby play rotates
between the players, starting with player 1. That is, player 1 moves
ﬁrst, followed by player 2, then player 3, then back to player 1, and so
on. Players are allowed to move the rock just as described above. The
player who moves the rock into cell (1, 1) wins and gets a payoff of 1;
the other two players lose, each obtaining 0. Is there a subgame perfect
equilibrium in which player 1 wins? Is there a subgame perfect equilib-
rium in which player 2 wins? Is there a subgame perfect equilibrium in
which player 3 wins?
5. Chomp is a game in which two players take turns choosing cells of an m × n
matrix, with the rule that if a cell has been selected, then it and all cells be-
low and/or to the right of it are removed from consideration (graphically,
ﬁlled in) and cannot be selected in the remainder of the game. That is, if cell
( j, k) is selected, then one ﬁlls in all cells of the form ( j9, k9) with j9 Ú j and
k9 Ú k. The player who is forced to pick the top-left corner cell [cell (1, 1)]
loses; the other player wins. Player 1 moves ﬁrst. Analyze this game and
determine which player has a strategy guaranteeing victory. Explain how
the identity of the player with the winning strategy depends on m and n.
Can you calculate the winning strategy, for at least some cases of m and n?4
4Chomp was invented by mathematician David Gale. You can read about it and hundreds of other parlor
games in D. Gale, Tracking the Automatic Ant (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998) and E. R. Berlekamp, J. H.
Conway, and R. K. Guy, Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays, vols. 1 and 2 (New York: Academic
Press, 1982).

--- Sayfa 244 ---
229
Exercises
6. Consider a three-player version of Chomp. Play rotates between the three
players, starting with player 1. That is, player 1 moves ﬁrst, followed by
player 2, then player 3, then back to player 1, and so on. The player who is
forced to select cell (1, 1) loses the game and gets a payoff of 0. The player
who moved immediately before the losing player obtains 1, whereas the
other player wins with a payoff of 2.
(a) Does this game have a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium?
(b)  Do you think any one of the players has a strategy that guarantees him
a win (a payoff of 2)?
(c)  Can you prove that player 1 can guarantee himself any particular payoff?
Sketch your idea.
7. Consider a board game played on an m × n matrix. Player 1 has an unlim-
ited supply of white chips, and player 2 has an unlimited supply of black
chips. Starting with player 1, the players take turns claiming cells of the
matrix. A player claims a cell by placing one of her chips in this cell. Once
a cell is claimed, it cannot be altered. Players must claim exactly one cell
in each round. The game ends after mn rounds, when all of the cells are
claimed. At the end of the game, each cell is evaluated as either a “victory
cell” or a “loss cell.” A cell is classiﬁed as a victory if it shares sides with at
least two cells of the same color. That is, there are at least two cells of the
same color that are immediately left, right, up, or down from (not diagonal
to) the cell being evaluated. A player gets one point for each of the vic-
tory cells that she claimed and for each of the loss cells that her opponent
claimed. The player with the most points wins the game; if the players have
the same number of points, then a tie is declared.
(a)  Under what conditions on m and n do you know that one of the players
has a strategy that guarantees a win? Can you determine which player
can guarantee a win? If so, provide some logic or a proof.
(b)  Repeat the analysis for a version of this game in which a victory cell
must share sides with at least three cells of the same color.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
230
C
ontracting is a fundamental part of everyday economic life. Firms and their
employees, consultants and clients, doctors and patients, children and par-
ents, and members of a team are examples of relations governed by contract.
Many things may be covered in a contract. A sales agreement, for example, may
specify a quantity of items, a price to be paid for them, and terms of delivery. An
employment contract speciﬁes the worker’s duties, the ﬁrm’s responsibilities,
and a wage or salary. An agreement between team members or family members
determines how they will coordinate their behavior over time.
Recall that any contractual relationship can be divided into two phases: a
contracting phase, in which players set the terms of their contract, and an imple-
mentation phase, in which the contract is carried out and enforced. The nature of
contract and forms of enforcement were addressed in Chapter 13 and are further
discussed in Chapter 20. In this chapter, I begin the analysis of how the problem
of contract selection is resolved. I focus on the two-player case.
Contracts are usually determined through a negotiation process. Busi-
nesses negotiate over the prices and speciﬁcations of intermediate goods (those
traded between ﬁrms), people bargain over the price to be paid for articles at
garage sales (tag sales if you live in New England), and smart shoppers try to
get discounts at stores by offering prices slightly below those marked. People
buying or selling a house usually engage in a long bargaining process. First-
graders even know how to negotiate shrewdly the trade of lunch items. As you
can see, negotiation is a fundamental process in everyday economic life.
BARGAINING: VALUE CREATION AND DIVISION
Many contracts that people negotiate have to do with the trade of goods, services,
and money. Economists, who view themselves as undisputed experts on the
topic of trade, have always emphasized one important insight: people want to
trade because, in a society in which goods are scarce (that is, not available in
quantities that would satisfy everyone), trade can create value.1 Suppose I have
1Economists are well known for studying trade in markets, where people and ﬁrms meet to buy, sell, or barter.
An active market clearly indicates value from trade.
18
BARGAINING PROBLEMS

--- Sayfa 246 ---
231
Bargaining: Value Creation and Division
a pizza and you have a television. If we each consume what we individually
own, then you will be hungry for food and I will be hungry for entertainment.
In contrast, we could agree to a trade whereby you let me watch television in
exchange for half of my pizza. The trade may make us both better off, in which
case we say that the trade creates value.
Creating value is one thing—dividing value is another. What if I suggest
giving you one-quarter of the pizza in exchange for viewing the television? This
trade may still make us both better off than if no trade took place, but now the
terms of trade are more favorable to me than before. When you and I negoti-
ate, not only do we have to look for valuable trades, but we also have to jointly
decide how to divide the value. Our inherent bargaining strengths, the procedure
by which we negotiate, and the general contracting environment all contribute
to the terms of our ﬁnal agreement. For example, if you are a tough negotiator,
then perhaps you will force me to accept a trade giving you most of the pizza in
exchange for the right to watch television.
To divide value, people often utilize a divisible good. In the pizza/television
example, pizza most easily serves this role: the pizza can be cut to achieve any
proportional split between you and me. If we want an outcome in which I get
most of the value of trade, then we can specify that I obtain most of the pizza. In
contrast, if we want you to get most of the value, then we should specify that you
get most of the pizza. In principle, we can also “divide” the television by, say,
allowing me to watch only the ﬁrst half of a movie that I wish to see. But dividing
the movie can destroy its value (Who would want to watch only the ﬁrst half of
a movie, unless it is a dud?), which makes it a poor candidate for dividing value.
There is a special good that facilitates arbitrary division of the gains from
trade: money. In trade, money is often exchanged for some other good or service.
In a sales context, the price (money transferred from the buyer to the seller)
determines the division of value.2 In the labor market, wages may play this role.3
Note that negotiation and value creation do not have to entail a direct
exchange. For example, a ﬁrm and worker might negotiate over whether to
pursue business tactic A (tailoring the ﬁrm to a speciﬁc group of consumers, for
example) over business tactic B (emphasizing a quick response to competitors’
market behavior). Both players care about the business tactic, and implementing
it may require the consent and coordination of both the ﬁrm and the worker. Yet,
2The archetypical market setting is one in which there is a single market price for a particular good being sold.
This price is taken as given by ﬁrms wishing to sell the product and by consumers wishing to purchase it. Such
a price is thought to prevail under the ideal conditions of perfect competition—conditions that most students
of intermediate microeconomics can recall. In this chapter and the next, we develop an understanding of how
the price is determined through negotiation.
3Money is not very useful when people have liquidity constraints or when their preferences over money differ
substantially.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
232
18: Bargaining Problems
it may be a stretch to think of this selection as a direct trade because nothing
changes hands.
In summary, the main point here is that bargaining can be usefully viewed in
terms of value creation and value division. If you understand these two compo-
nents, you will have gone a long way toward learning how best to negotiate and
how bargaining is resolved in the real world. You will also be ready to think
about bargaining problems in the abstract.
AN ABSTRACT REPRESENTATION OF BARGAINING PROBLEMS
A simple way of mathematically representing a bargaining problem is to
describe the alternatives available to the parties—that is, the various contracts
they can make—and to describe what happens if the parties fail to reach an
agreement. With an understanding of how the relationship will proceed after
negotiation (and how contracts will be enforced), all of these things can be put
in terms of payoff vectors. For example, imagine that two players are trying
to decide whether to start a business partnership. Suppose that if they initiate
the partnership, then the business will yield a utility of 4 for player 1 and 6 for
player 2; if they do not form a partnership, then they will each get a payoff of 2.
Then, instead of thinking about their negotiation in terms of “form a partner-
ship” versus “do not form a partnership,” we can put it in terms of the end result:
payoff vector (4, 6) versus payoff vector (2, 2). In other words, we can think of
the players as negotiating directly over the payoffs.
Let V denote the set of payoff vectors deﬁning the players’ alternatives for a
given bargaining problem. For example, in the partnership story of the preced-
ing paragraph, V = {(4, 6), (2, 2)}. V is called the bargaining set. Let d denote
the payoff vector associated with the default outcome, which describes what
happens if the players fail to reach an agreement. The default outcome is also
called the disagreement point, and it is an element of V. In the partnership story,
the disagreement point is given by d = (2, 2), because the partnership is not
formed unless the parties agree to it. In general, each player can unilaterally
induce the default outcome by withholding his consent on any contract proposal.
In many bargaining problems, players can agree to a monetary transfer as
a part of the contract. The transfer may signify a wage, salary, or price, or it
may simply be an up-front payment made by one party to the other. I generally
assume that money enters the players’ payoffs in an additive way. For example,
consider a bargaining problem between players 1 and 2. Suppose the players
negotiate over a monetary transfer from player 2 to player 1 as well as other
items, such as whether to form a partnership, task assignment, and so forth. Let
t denote the contracted monetary transfer and let z represent the other items. A
positive value of t indicates a transfer from player 2 to player 1, whereas a nega-

--- Sayfa 248 ---
233
An Abstract Representation of Bargaining Problems
tive value indicates a transfer in the other direction. Money is said to enter addi-
tively if player 1’s payoff can be written u1 = v1
 (z) + t and player 2’s payoff can
be written u2 = v2
 (z) −t, for some functions v1 and v2
 . In other words, vi
 (z) is
player i ’s beneﬁt of z in monetary terms, which can then be added to the amount
of money that this player receives or gives up. When payoffs are additive in
money, we say that the setting is one of transferable utility, because utility can be
transferred between players on a one-to-one basis with the use of money.
With transferable utility, the bargaining set can be graphed as a collection
of diagonal lines, each with a slope of −1. For example, suppose that in the
preceding partnership story, the players’ alternatives are expanded to include
monetary transfers. Observe how this bargaining problem can be speciﬁed by
using the v, z, t notation. First, let z = 1 represent forming a partnership and let
z = 0 represent no partnership. Note that v1
 (0) = v2
 (0) = 2 , v1
 (1) = 4 , and
v2
 (1) = 6 . Thus, if bargaining is resolved with z = 0, then player 1 gets 2 + t
and player 2 gets 2 −t. If the players agree to z = 1, then player 1 obtains
4 + t and player 2 receives 6 −t. Payoff vector (4, 6) is in the bargaining set, as
before, because t = 0 is always feasible. Vector (6, 4) also is in the bargaining
set because it can be achieved by selecting z = 1 and t = 2. In fact, all vectors
of the form (4 + t, 6 −t) and (2 + t, 2 −t) are in the bargaining set. Varying
t traces out the lines shown in Figure 18.1; these lines constitute the bargaining
set. The disagreement point is (2, 2) because each player can unilaterally impose
that no partnership be formed and that no transfer be made.
As the picture makes clear, whenever there is transferable utility, the set of
efﬁcient outcomes is precisely those that maximize the players’ joint value.4
The joint value is deﬁned as the sum of the players’ payoffs—in other words,
4Recall that an outcome is called efﬁcient if there is no other outcome that makes one player better off without
making another player worse off.
(6, 4)
(4, 6)
10
10
d1 = 2
d2 = 2
u1
u2
d
FIGURE 18.1
The bargaining set in the
partnership example.

--- Sayfa 249 ---
234
18: Bargaining Problems
the total payoff. To develop your intuition, note that the bargaining set in Figure
18.1 contains no points upward and to the right of the line through (4, 6). Thus,
starting at any point on this line, there is no way to increase one player’s payoff
without decreasing the other’s payoff. In contrast, all of the points on the line
through (2, 2) are inefﬁcient, because, for each of them, one can ﬁnd a point on
the outer line that is more efﬁcient. For example, payoff vector (5, −1) can be
attained by setting z = 0 and t = 3. However, the players would both get higher
payoffs—in particular (6, 4)—if they chose z = 1 and t = 2.
Because t is merely a transfer between the players, it does not ﬁgure into the
joint-value calculation. Mathematically, for any z and t, the joint value is given by
[v1
 (z) + t] + [v2
 (z) −t] = v1
 (z) + v2
 (z).
The surplus of an agreement is deﬁned as the difference between the joint value
of the contract and the joint value that would have been obtained had the players
not reached an agreement. The latter value is just the total payoff of the default
outcome, d1 + d2
 . Thus, the surplus is equal to
v1
 (z) + v2(z) −d1 −d2
 .
AN EXAMPLE
Rosemary chairs the English department at a prominent high school; Jerry, a
former computer specialist and now a professional actor, is interested in work-
ing at the school. These two people have to make a joint decision. First, they
have to decide whether to initiate an employment relationship (that is, whether
Jerry will work for the high school). Further, two aspects of employment are on
the bargaining table: Jerry’s responsibilities on the job (represented by x) and
Jerry’s salary t. I use x instead of z here because, in this specialized application,
the variable has to do with items corresponding only to agreement between the
players (not the default outcome).
Suppose there are two possibilities for job duties: Jerry could be made
responsible for only the drama courses (x = 0) or Jerry could also be put in
charge of the softball team (x = 1). Suppose Jerry gets a personal value of
$10,000 when employed at the high school, owing to the happiness he obtains
from service work as a drama teacher. But if he coaches the softball team, this
value decreases by $3,000 because of the effort he must expend in the evenings.
Rosemary and the school value Jerry’s work as a drama teacher in the amount
$40,000; she assesses the additional value of Jerry’s work as softball coach to

--- Sayfa 250 ---
235
An Example
be $5,000. Thus, if the two parties agree to employment, Jerry’s payoff will be
10,000 −3,000x + t and Rosemary’s payoff will be 40,000 + 5,000x −t.
Note that using the notation deﬁned in the preceding section, we can write
Jerry’s payoff as uJ = vJ
 (x) + t and Rosemary’s payoff as uR = vR
 (x) −t , where
vJ
 (x) = 10,000 −3,000x and vR
 (x) = 40,000 + 5,000x.
If the parties do not initiate an employment relationship, then Jerry gets $15,000
from working on his own and Rosemary gets $10,000, which is her value of
hiring a less-qualiﬁed applicant. (Assume that no transfer can be made in this
case.) The disagreement point is therefore d = (dJ
 , dR
 ) where dJ = 15,000 and
dR = 10,000. The bargaining problem is pictured in Figure 18.2, in which the
two points noted on the x = 0 and x = 1 lines denote the payoff vectors associ-
ated with t = 0.
In this bargaining problem, an agreement to employ Jerry at the high school
yields the parties a joint value of
uJ
 (x) + uR
 (x) = [vJ
 (x) + t] + [vR
 (x) −t].
Using the exact form of the payoff functions, we have
[10,000 −3,000x] + [40,000 + 5,000x] = 50,000 + 2,000x.
Jerry and Rosemary have a joint interest in selecting x to maximize this value.
In Figure 18.2, this corresponds to selecting the diagonal line that is farthest
out—that is, choosing x = 1 to get the joint value $52,000. Note that increasing
x from 0 to 1 makes Jerry worse off, but it makes Rosemary so much better off
that the joint value of the relationship rises. Jerry can be compensated by way of
FIGURE 18.2
The bargaining problem of
Jerry and Rosemary.
10,000
15,000
x  = 0
x  = 1
uJ
uR
d

--- Sayfa 251 ---
236
18: Bargaining Problems
a salary increase, making both parties happy. In this example, the players’ joint
value from the default outcome is
dJ + dR = 15,000 + 10,000 = 25,000.
Thus, the agreement to set x = 1 generates a surplus of 52,000 −25,000 =
27,000.
THE STANDARD BARGAINING SOLUTION
Terms such as “efﬁciency” and “bargaining power” are sometimes useful in
discussion of how bargaining problems are resolved. For example, we may
say that a particular player is expected to obtain most of the surplus because
she has a lot of bargaining power. Or we may say that players are generally
expected to bargain efﬁciently. We can explore these notions by studying their
noncooperative foundations—that is, by examining how they are related to the
speciﬁc bargaining game that is played. You will be happy to know, in fact, that
noncooperative analysis of bargaining is the topic of Chapter 19. At this point,
however, I want you to see how bargaining power and efﬁciency are deﬁned by
using the abstract representation of bargaining problems just presented.
Efﬁciency is an important criterion with which to judge the outcome of a
negotiation process. As already noted, in settings with transferable utility, an
outcome is efﬁcient if and only if it maximizes the players’ joint value. Thus, it
is easy to determine which outcomes are efﬁcient—simply ﬁnd the value(s) of
x that yields the largest sum v1
 (x) + v2
 (x). Let us denote by v* the maximized
joint value for any given bargaining game.5 As an example, recall that in the
bargaining problem faced by Jerry and Rosemary, the parties’ joint value is
maximized by employing Jerry and having him coach softball in addition to
teaching drama (x = 1); thus, v* = 52,000. In general, efﬁciency is an attrac-
tive property and, on normative grounds, you would advise players to achieve it.
On the positive side, however, you might doubt whether people actually realize
efﬁcient outcomes in some cases.
Bargaining power is associated with how players divide the value of their
contract. To assess the scope of bargaining power, ﬁrst recall that each player
can unilaterally induce the default outcome by refusing to reach an agreement.
Thus, no rational player would accept an agreement that gives her less than her
default payoff. As a result, the players really do not negotiate over v*; they
negotiate over the surplus v* −d1 −d2
 . In the job-negotiation example, Jerry
will not accept an agreement that gives him less than 15,000, and Rosemary will
5There are cases in which default yields the greatest joint value, so v* is the default payoff.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
237
The Standard Bargaining Solution
not accept an agreement yielding her less than 10,000. Therefore, they actually
negotiate over the difference between the maximized joint value and the default
joint value, which is 52,000 −25,000 = 27,000.
It is useful to summarize bargaining powers by using bargaining weights
p1 and p2
 , where p1
 , p2 Ú 0 and p1 + p2 = 1  We interpret pi as the proportion
of the surplus obtained by player i. For example, in the bargaining problem of
Jerry and Rosemary, Jerry obtains proportion pJ of the $27,000 surplus, whereas
Rosemary obtains proportion pR
 .
The standard bargaining solution is a mathematical representation of efﬁ-
ciency and proportional division.6 Each player is assumed to obtain his default
payoff, plus his share of the surplus. For example, suppose Jerry’s bargaining
weight is pJ = 1>3 and Rosemary’s bargaining weight is pR = 2>3. Then we
expect the players to reach an agreement in which Jerry obtains the payoff
u*J = dJ + pJ(v* −dJ −dR) = 15,000 + (1>3) # 27,000 = 24,000
and Rosemary obtains the payoff
u*R = dR + pR
 (v* −dJ −dR
 ) = 10,000 + (2>3) # 27,000 = 28,000.
Note that because pJ + pR = 1, the sum of these payoffs is the joint value
v* = 52,000. We know that x = 1 is selected. Further, it must be that t is chosen
to yield the values u*J and u*R
 . Looking at Jerry’s payoff, we see that t solves
u*J = vJ
 (1) + t = 24,000;
that is,
10,000 −3,000 + t = 24,000,
which simpliﬁes to t = 17,000. (We get the same result by looking at Rose-
mary’s payoff.) In the end, the standard bargaining solution predicts that Jerry
and Rosemary will agree to put him in charge of both the drama courses and
the softball team (x = 1) and pay him a salary of t = 17,000. This leads to the
payoff u*J = 24,000 for Jerry and u*R = 28,000 for Rosemary.
In a general bargaining problem, you can compute the standard bargaining
solution as follows.
6The standard bargaining solution is an offshoot of John Nash’s seminal treatment of bargaining problems,
which is contained in his article “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica 18 (1950): 155–162. Nash’s
model is presented in Appendix D. For an overview of the literature on solutions to bargaining problems, see
W. L. Thomson, Bargaining Theory: The Axiomatic Approach (San Diego: Academic Press, forthcoming).

--- Sayfa 253 ---
238
18: Bargaining Problems
Procedure for calculating the standard bargaining solution:
1. Calculate the maximized joint value v* by determining the value x* that
maximizes v1
 (x) + v2(x) .
2. Note that with the standard bargaining solution, player i obtains the payoff
di + pi
 (v* −d1 −d2
 ) where di is player i ’s default payoff. Thus, the
transfer t will satisfy
d1 + p1
 (v* −d1 −d2
 ) = v1
 (x*) + t
for player 1 and
d2 + p2
 (v* −d1 −d2
 ) = v2
 (x*) −t
for player 2. These two equations are equivalent.
3. Solve one of these equations for t to ﬁnd the transfer that achieves the re-
quired split of the surplus.
A NOTE ABOUT LEGAL DEFAULT RULES
The standard bargaining solution can be used to make a simple point about
different paths to efﬁcient outcomes—a point associated with Nobel laureate
Ronald Coase. The idea is typically referred to as “the Coase theorem” even
though it is informal and imprecise. I’ll illustrate the point by recounting a story
along the lines of one that Coase discussed.7
Suppose that a cattle rancher and a corn farmer own and operate adjacent
parcels of land. Currently there is no fence between the ranch and the farm, so
the rancher’s cattle can freely enter the farmer’s ﬁeld and destroy some of his
corn. This results in a loss of 300 to the farmer each month. Suppose that the
value of production for the rancher is 1000 per month, and the value of produc-
tion for the farmer is 500 per month (factoring in the loss of 300).
A fence that will keep the cattle out of the cornﬁeld would cost 100 per
month to build and maintain. For simplicity, assume that only the rancher can
build and maintain the fence. Note that without a fence, the joint value for the
rancher and the farmer is 1500 per month. However, the joint value would be
higher with the fence in place. The fence has a cost of 100 but yields an increase
of 300 in the farmer’s value of production, owing to the farmer avoiding the
loss of corn each month. The joint value with the fence is 1700. Therefore, it is
socially optimal for the fence to be built and maintained.
7See R. H. Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics 3 (1960): 1–44.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
239
A Note About Legal Default Rules
A legal question pertaining to situations like this is the following: What
sort of legal rule or regulation is indicated here to ensure an efﬁcient outcome?
One option is to have a rule that the farmer has the right to use his land without
interference, so that any infringement by the rancher’s cattle would be severely
punished. An alternative rule is to give the rancher the right to let her cattle roam
across land boundaries, so that cattle grazing on the farm would not be punished
by law. Coase’s answer is that it does not matter which legal rule is adopted. The
key, he argued, is that some sort of property right is established.
Here is Coase’s argument using our bargaining theory. Suppose the law
gives the rancher a broad property right with respect to the cattle, so that she
would not be punished if the cattle ventured onto the farm. Because this would
lead to an inefﬁcient outcome (no fence), the parties have an incentive to form
a contract specifying that the rancher build and maintain the fence. The contract
would also specify a transfer of t from the farmer to the rancher, so that they are
both better off than they would be with the legal default. The default outcome
would lead to the payoff vector (1000, 500). The contract just described would
lead to payoff vector (900 + t, 800 −t). Note that the rancher’s payoff is her
production value, minus the cost of the fence, plus the transfer. The farmer’s
payoff is his enhanced production beneﬁt minus the transfer. Assuming for
simplicity that the parties have equal bargaining power, the standard bargain-
ing solution yields the payoff vector (1100, 600), where each party gets his or
her disagreement value plus half of the 200 surplus. The negotiated transfer is
t = 200.
Continuing with Coase’s story, suppose instead that the law gives the farmer
a strong property right, so that the rancher would be punished if her cattle
ventured onto the farm. In this case, in the absence of any contract with the
farmer, the rancher would optimally build and maintain a fence to ensure that
her cattle do not enter the farm, protecting herself from harsh punishment. The
parties still have the opportunity to form a contract, but the default outcome is
already efﬁcient and so there is nothing to bargain over. The payoff in this case
is (900, 800).
To summarize Coase’s point, under well-deﬁned property rights and efﬁ-
cient contracting, the efﬁcient outcome will always be reached. The exact prop-
erty right established by the law has an impact on the distribution, but not the
magnitude, of the joint value. This idea became a cornerstone in the “Chicago
school” of economic thinking. My own view, and probably the view of most
modern theorists, is that this idea may be compelling in some settings but is
over the top in general. Coase’s assumptions are unrealistically strong, and it
is a stretch to extend his reasoning to settings with more than two parties. Still,
however, Coase’s point sets a useful benchmark for a discussion about optimal
legal structure and policy.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
240
18: Bargaining Problems
I would argue that the message should be less about property rights and
more about information, the freedom to contract, and the existence of a reliable
and inexpensive external enforcement system. If the external enforcer has well-
deﬁned and predictable default rules, then perhaps the parties will have a shared
understanding of their disagreement point. With a reliable enforcement system,
the parties can then negotiate to an efﬁcient outcome. There is still a problem
with this logic, however, because parties may not bargain efﬁciently (in theory
or in practice). One issue is that in most real settings, the default outcome has
self-enforced aspects, so the parties still have to coordinate to some degree.
When there are multiple ways of coordinating in default or if parties would fail
to coordinate at all, they will not necessarily negotiate to an efﬁcient outcome.
Further, bargaining theory reveals more complications for settings with more
than two players. But I am getting ahead of myself here, especially considering
that the next steps in this analysis go way beyond this book!
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: John is a computer expert who is negotiating an employment contract
with a prospective employer (the ﬁrm). The contract speciﬁes two things:
(1) John’s job description (programmer or manager) and (2) John’s salary t. If
John works as a programmer for the ﬁrm, then John’s payoff is t −10,000 (in
dollars) and the ﬁrm’s payoff is 100,000 −t. If John works as a manager, then
his payoff is t −40,000 and the ﬁrm’s payoff is x −t, where x is a constant
parameter. Assume x > 150,000. If John and the ﬁrm fail to reach an agree-
ment, then the ﬁrm gets zero and John obtains w. In other words, the default
outcome of this negotiation problem leads to the payoff vector (w, 0), where
John’s payoff is listed ﬁrst. The value w is due to John’s outside opportunity,
which is to work on his own as a computer consultant.
Solve this bargaining problem by using the standard bargaining solution
under the assumption that John’s bargaining power is pJ and the ﬁrm’s bargain-
ing power is pF
 . Assume that w < 90,000.
Solution: Note that the surplus with John working as a programmer is
(t −10,000) + (100,000 −t) −w = 90,000 −w.
The surplus with him working as a manager is
(t −40,000) + (x −t) −w = x −40,000 −w,
which exceeds 110,000 −w by the assumption on x. Thus, the maximal joint
value is attained by having John work as a manager. The standard bargaining

--- Sayfa 256 ---
241
Exercises
solution makes John’s overall payoff equal to
w + pJ(x −40,000 −w) = (1 −pJ
 )w + pJ
 (x −40,000)
Setting this equal to t −40,000 (the direct deﬁnition of John’s payoff when he
works as a manager) and solving for t yields
t = (1 −pJ
 )(w + 40,000) + pJ x
EXERCISES
1. Calculate the standard bargaining solution for the following variations of the
Jerry–Rosemary example in this chapter. In each case, graph the bargaining
set, ﬁnd the maximized joint value, determine the players’ individual values,
and compute the transfer t that the players select.
(a)  dJ = 0, dR = 0, vJ
 (x) = 10,000 −6,000x, vR
 (x) = 40,000 + 4,000x,
x ∈{0, 1}, pJ = 1>2, and pR = 1>2.
(b)  dJ = 0, dR = 0, vJ
 (x) = 60,000 −x2, vR
 (x) = 800x, x is any positive
number, pJ = 1>2, and pR = 1>2.
(c)  dJ = 40,000, dR = 20,000, vJ
 (x) = 60,000 −x2, vR
 (x) = 800x, x is
any positive number, pJ = 1>4, and pR = 3>4.
2. Consider the setting of this chapter’s Guided Exercise. Suppose John can
invest some of his free time either enhancing his productivity with the ﬁrm
(increasing x) or raising his productivity as an individual computer consul-
tant (increasing w). How would you recommend that John spend his free
time? (Hint: The answer depends on pJ
 .)
3. Use the standard bargaining solution to ﬁnd the outcomes of the follow-
ing bargaining problems. Player 1’s payoff is u1 = v1
 (x) + t and player 2’s
payoff is u2 = v2
 (x) −t. In each case, graph the maximized joint value and
the default outcome; report the chosen x, t as well as the players’ individual
payoffs.
(a)  x ∈{5, 10, 15}, v1
 (x) = x, v2
 (x) = x, d1 = 0, d2 = 0, p1 = 1>2, and
p2 = 1>2.
(b)  x ∈{5, 10, 15}, v1
 (x) = x, v2
 (x) = x, d1 = 2, d2 = 4, p1 = 1>2, and
p2 = 1>2.
(c)  x ∈{5, 10, 15}, v1
 (x) = x, v2
 (x) = x, d1 = 2, d2 = 4, p1 = 1>4, and
p2 = 3>4.
(d)  x ∈{5, 10, 15}, v1
 (x) = 20x, v2
 (x) = −x2, d1 = 0, d2 = 0, p1 = 1>4,
and p2 = 3>4.

--- Sayfa 257 ---
242
18: Bargaining Problems
(e)  x ∈(−, ), v1 (x) = 16x + x2, v2 (x) = 8x −2x2, d1 = 0, d2 = 0,
and p1 and p2 arbitrary.
4. Suppose that you must bargain with another party over how to realize a
large joint value v*. Explain why you care about the other party’s disagree-
ment payoff.
5. Suppose that you must negotiate with another party and that you have an
opportunity either to raise your disagreement payoff by 10 units or raise
the maximal joint value v* by 10 units. Which should you choose? Is your
choice efﬁcient?
6. Discuss a real-world example of negotiation in terms of maximized joint
value, bargaining weights, and a disagreement point.
7. Ashley is negotiating an employment contract with a prospective employer,
the La Jolla YMCA. The contract speciﬁes two things: (1) Ashley’s job de-
scription, which is surﬁng instructor or tennis instructor, and (2) Ashley’s
salary t. Ashley is better at teaching people to surf than teaching people to
play tennis, and she enjoys surﬁng more. If Ashley works as a surﬁng in-
structor for the YMCA, then Ashley’s payoff is t −10,000 and the YMCA’s
payoff is 60,000 −t. If Ashley works as a tennis instructor, then her payoff
is t −20,000 and the YMCA’s payoff is 65,000 −t.

If Ashley and the YMCA fail to reach an agreement, then the YMCA
gets a payoff of 10,000 and Ashley obtains 20,000. In other words, the
disagreement outcome of this negotiation problem is given by dA = 20,000
and dY = 10,000. The value 20,000 is due to Ashley’s outside opportunity,
which is to work as a writer for the San Diego Reader newspaper. The value
of 10,000 for the YMCA is due to it having to hire someone who is less
skilled than Ashley.

Solve this bargaining problem using the standard bargaining solution,
under the assumption that Ashley and the YMCA have equal bargaining
weights of 1>2. What job description and salary do they agree to? Explain.
8. A physician and a confectioner are located in adjacent storefront ofﬁces. As
part of his process for making candy, the confectioner uses a large blender
that is very noisy and prevents the physician from effectively consulting
with patients. (The blender is so loud that the physician cannot hear through
her stethoscope when the blender is being used.) So, in the current situa-
tion, the physician’s value of production is 0, and the confectioner’s value
of production is 400. If the confectioner does not operate, he earns 0 but the
physician earns 2000.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
243
Exercises
(a)  Suppose that the confectioner has the legal right to operate his blender
but that the parties are free to contract and have good external enforce-
ment. Use the standard bargaining solution to predict the outcome under
the assumption that the parties have equal bargaining weights.
(b)  Suppose that it is illegal for the confectioner to operate his blender
without permission from the physician, but, again, the parties can freely
contract and have good external enforcement. What would the outcome
be in this case? Assume equal bargaining weights as before.
(c)  Suppose that the legal default is that the physician has the right to
recover damages of z if the confectioner uses his blender. Determine
what would happen if the parties do not contract, and note how this
depends on z. Finally, describe the ﬁnal payoffs, and whether the parties
contract, as a function of z. Apply the standard bargaining solution with
equal bargaining weights.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
244
T
he preceding chapter developed some of the basic concepts and language for
study of bargaining problems. In this chapter, I explain how bargaining is stud-
ied by using noncooperative game theory. The program analyzes speciﬁc bargain-
ing procedures as represented by extensive-form games. I evaluate the games by
using the concept of subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. The modeling exercises
allow us to generate intuition about the attainment of efﬁcient outcomes and about
the determinants of bargaining power (in particular, the bargaining weights de-
scribed in Chapter 18). As you shall see, we can trace bargaining strength to a play-
er’s patience and his ability to make offers at strategically important points in time.
ULTIMATUM GAMES: POWER TO THE PROPOSER
The ultimatum bargaining game is perhaps the simplest of bargaining models. In
the example presented in Chapter 14 (see Figure 14.5), a buyer and a seller nego-
tiate the price of a painting. The seller offers a price and then the buyer accepts or
rejects it, ending the game. Because the painting is worth $100 to the buyer and
nothing to the seller, trade will generate a surplus of $100. The price determines
how this surplus is divided between the buyer and the seller; that is, it describes
the terms of trade. From the Guided Exercise of Chapter 15, you have already
seen that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of this game in which trade takes
place at a price of 100, meaning that the seller gets the entire surplus. In this
section, I expand the analysis to show that this equilibrium is unique.
It will be helpful to study the ultimatum bargaining game in the abstract setting
in which the surplus is normalized to 1. This normalization helps us to concentrate
on the players’ shares of the monetary surplus; for example, if player 1 obtains 1>4,
then it means that player 1 gets 25 percent of the surplus. As discussed in Chapter
18, we assume transferable utility so that the price divides the surplus in a linear
fashion; thus, if one player gets m, then the other gets 1 −m. It will also be helpful
to name the players i and j, allowing us to put either player 1 or player 2 into the
role of making the offer. This standard ultimatum game is pictured in Figure 19.1.1
1Note that according to the extensive form pictured, player i cannot make an offer of m > 1 or m < 0. In fact,
the results do not change if one leaves m unrestricted. Intuitively, it is not rational for player i to offer m > 1
and it is not rational for player j to accept an offer of m < 0. For simplicity, I just impose m ∈[0, 1].
19
ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE BARGAINING GAMES

--- Sayfa 260 ---
245
Ultimatum Games: Power to the Proposer
Also pictured are the bargaining set and the disagreement point corresponding to
this game. The disagreement point is (0, 0) because this payoff occurs when the
responder rejects the proposer’s offer.
To ﬁnd the subgame perfect equilibrium of the ultimatum game, begin by
observing that the game has an inﬁnite number of subgames. In particular, every
decision node for player j initiates a subgame (that ends following his deci-
sion). This should be obvious because player j observes the offer of player i; all
information sets consist of single nodes. Consider the subgame following any
particular offer of m by player i, where m > 0. If player j accepts the offer, he
obtains m. If he rejects the offer, then he gets 0. Therefore, player j ’s best action
is to accept. Only when m = 0 can rejection be an optimal response for player
j, and in this case acceptance also is optimal (because player j is indifferent
between the two actions). The analysis thus indicates that player j has only two
sequentially rational strategies: (s*j
 ) accept all offers, and (snj
 ) accept all offers of
m > 0 and reject the offer of m = 0. These are the only strategies that specify a
Nash equilibrium for each of the proper subgames.
Having identiﬁed player j ’s sequentially rational strategies, one can easily
determine the subgame perfect equilibrium of the ultimatum game. The equi-
librium must include either strategy s*j or strategy snj on the part of player j. Let
us evaluate which of these strategies might be part of a subgame perfect equi-
librium. First, note that the strategy proﬁle in which player i picks m = 0 and
player j plays s*j is a Nash equilibrium of the game. Player i obviously has no
incentive to deviate from m = 0, given that he obtains the full surplus under the
prescribed strategy proﬁle. Second, observe that there is no Nash equilibrium of
the game in which player j adopts snj
 . To see this, note that player i has no well-
deﬁned best response to snj
 . If player i chooses m > 0, then he obtains 1 −m,
given player j ’s strategy. Therefore, player i would like to select the smallest
possible m. But m = 0 yields a payoff of 0 against snj
 .
m
j
i
Y
(Player i’s payoff
is listed first.)
N
Bargaining game
1
0
1 - m, m
0, 0
0
0
1
Bargaining set; disagreement point
1 ui
uj
d
FIGURE 19.1
Ultimatum bargaining.

--- Sayfa 261 ---
246
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
These facts imply that there is a single subgame perfect equilibrium of the
ultimatum game: player i selects m = 0, and player j selects s*j
 . The equilibrium
payoff is 1 for player i and 0 for player j. The equilibrium outcome is efﬁcient
because the parties realize the gains from trade; their joint value is maximized.
The ultimatum game demonstrates how a great deal of bargaining power is
wielded by a person in the position of making a take-it-or-leave-it offer; in terms
of the standard bargaining solution, pi = 1 . If you can put yourself in this posi-
tion (say, by somehow committing to terminate negotiation after consideration
of your offer), you would be wise to do so.2
TWO-PERIOD, ALTERNATING-OFFER GAMES:
POWER TO THE PATIENT
The ultimatum game is instructive and applicable, but it is too simplistic a model
of most real-world negotiation. Bargaining generally follows a more intricate
process in reality. The theory can be expanded in many ways, perhaps the most
obvious of which is to explicitly model multiple offers and counteroffers by
the parties over time. In fact, in many real settings, the sides alternate making
offers until one is accepted. For example, real estate agents routinely force home
sales into the following procedure: the seller posts a price, the prospective buyer
makes an offer that differs from the seller’s asking price, the seller makes a
counteroffer, and so forth.
Offers and counteroffers take time. In home sales, one party may wait a
week or more for an offer to be considered and a counteroffer returned. “Time
is money,” an agent may say between utterances of the “location, location, loca-
tion” mantra. In fact, the agent is correct to the extent that people are impatient
or forego productive opportunities during each day spent in negotiation. Most
people are impatient to some degree. Most people prefer not to endure protracted
negotiation procedures. Most people discount the future relative to the present.
How a person discounts the future may affect his or her bargaining position.
It seems reasonable to expect that a very patient bargainer—or someone who
has nothing else to do and nowhere else to go—should be able to win a greater
share of the surplus than should an impatient one. To incorporate discounting
2To some, it seems that offering 0 to player j is a bit extreme and maybe even risky. Perhaps player i should
at least make it worthwhile for player j to accept by offering a small positive amount. Intuitively, this might
be the case. However, whatever is required to get player j to accept is supposed to already be embedded in the
payoffs. That is, zero represents the amount that player j requires to accept the offer. If this still seems a bit
unintuitive, you may be comforted to know that in games with a smallest monetary unit, there are subgame
perfect equilibria in which the proposer offers a small, positive amount to the responder. For example, if player
i cannot offer fractions of pennies, then the offer and acceptance of one cent is a subgame perfect equilibrium
outcome.

--- Sayfa 262 ---
247
Two-Period, Alternating-Offer Games: Power to the Patient
into game-theoretic models, we use the notion of a discount factor. A discount
factor di for player i is a number used to deﬂate a payoff received tomorrow so
that it can be compared with a payoff received today.
To make sense of this idea, ﬁx a length of time that we call the period
length. For simplicity, suppose that a period corresponds to 1 week. If given
the choice, most people would prefer receiving x dollars today (in the current
period) rather than being assured of receiving x in one week (in the next period).
People exhibit this preference because people are generally impatient, perhaps
because they would like the opportunity to spend money earlier rather than later.
In the least, a person could take the x dollars received today and deposit it in a
bank account to be withdrawn next week with interest.
We could conduct a little experiment by asking a person what amount of
money received in the current period would be worth about the same to her as
receiving x in the next period. Call this amount y. Because of discounting, it
will be the case that y < x. Then we can deﬁne di so that y = di x. Thus, di is the
multiplicative factor by which any amount received in the following period is
discounted to make it comparable to payoffs in the current period. The discount
factor di is generally a number between 0 and 1, where larger values correspond
to greater patience.
Consider a two-period, alternating-offer bargaining game. This game begins
in the ﬁrst period, at which time player 1 makes an offer m1. After observing
the offer, player 2 decides whether to accept or reject it. If player 1’s offer is
accepted, the game ends with player 1 receiving 1 −m1 and player 2 obtaining
m1. If player 2 rejects the offer, then interaction continues in the second period
with the roles reversed. Player 2 makes a counteroffer m2, which player 1 either
accepts or rejects.3 Note that if the initial offer is rejected, time elapses before
player 2 can make her counteroffer. To compare payoffs received in the ﬁrst
period with those received in the second period, we multiply the latter by the
players’ discount factors. Speciﬁcally, if player 1 accepts player 2’s offer in the
second period, then player 1 gets d1m2 and player 2 gets d2
 (1 −m2). If player 1
rejects player 2’s offer, then the game ends and both players obtain 0.
Observe that the two-period, alternating-offer game consists basically of
repetition of the ultimatum-game structure. In the ﬁrst period, the players inter-
act as in the ultimatum game, with player 1 playing the role of i and player 2
the role of j. If the offer is rejected, then time passes into the second period,
where players interact in an actual ultimatum game with the roles reversed. The
game ends after two periods. If an agreement is reached in the second period,
then the payoffs are discounted relative to the ﬁrst period.
3The analysis of ﬁnite-period games such as this one were reported in I. Stahl, Bargaining Theory (Stockholm:
Economics Research Institute at the Stockholm School of Economics, 1972).

--- Sayfa 263 ---
248
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
The bargaining set and disagreement point associated with this bargain-
ing game are pictured in Figure 19.2(a). The extensive-form game itself is not
pictured; as an exercise, you might draw the extensive form yourself. In Figure
19.2(a), the outer line represents payoff vectors possible if the players reach an
agreement in the ﬁrst period. The inner line, from d1 on the x-axis to d2 on the
y-axis, represents payoff vectors that can be achieved if the players reach an
agreement in the second period. The disagreement point (0, 0) is the payoff that
would result if the players never reach an agreement.
Computing the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game is straightfor-
ward once one realizes that the subgames starting in the second period have
already been solved by our ultimatum game analysis. If player 2 rejects m1, then
she effectively induces play of the ultimatum game in the following period. To
convince yourself of this fact, simply observe that starting in period 2, the game
looks exactly like the ultimatum game, with player 2 playing the role of i. Then
note that subgame perfection implies that player 1 accepts all counteroffers and
player 2 chooses m2 = 0. The nondiscounted payoffs in these subgames are 1
for player 2 and 0 for player 1.
We thus know the continuation values from the start of the second period: 1
for player 2 and 0 for player 1. Note that I have written these continuation values
from the second-period point of view. That is, they are not discounted to be put
in terms of ﬁrst-period payoffs. From the perspective of period 1, these continu-
ation values are d1 # 0 and d2 # 1.
FIGURE 19.2
Bargaining set and disagreement point for two-period game.
1
1
0
0
u1
d1
12d2
d2
u2
d
(b)
1
1
0
0
u1
d1
d2
u2
d
(a)

--- Sayfa 264 ---
249
Two-Period, Alternating-Offer Games: Power to the Patient
With these values in mind, we can easily determine player 2’s optimal deci-
sion in response to player 1’s initial offer. If player 2 rejects player 1’s offer, then
player 2 will obtain the full surplus in the next period, which is worth d2 to her
in period 1. Therefore, player 2 must accept player 1’s offer of m1 if m1 > d2
 .
In contrast, rejection is the only rational move if m1 < d2
 . Player 2 is indifferent
between accepting and rejecting the offer m1 = d2
 .
The preceding analysis implies that only one thing has yet to be determined
regarding behavior following player 1’s initial offer: whether player 2 accepts
or rejects the offer m1 = d2
 . As with the ultimatum game, the only Nash equi-
librium has player 2 accepting the offer that makes her indifferent; furthermore,
player 1 makes this offer. Thus, there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium
of the two-period game. Player 1 offers m1 = d2
 , player 2 accepts if and only
if m1 Ú d2
 , player 2 always offers m2 = 0 at the start of the second period,
and player 1 accepts every offer in the second period. The equilibrium yields a
payoff of 1 −d2 to player 1 and d2 to player 2. Figure 19.2(b) gives a graphical
account of the analysis.
A few comments are in order. First, observe that patience is positively related
to bargaining power. In particular, if player 2 is impatient (represented by a small
value of d2), then her equilibrium payoff is close to 0. In terms of the standard
bargaining solution, p2 is close to 0, so player 1 obtains most of the surplus to
be divided. In general, with the equilibrium in the two-period, alternating-offer
game, we interpret player 1’s bargaining weight to be p1 = 1 −d2 and player
2’s to be p2 = d2
 .
The relation between patience and bargaining power is supported more
generally. For example, one can study a T-period version of the game where the
players alternate making offers until either an offer is accepted or T periods have
elapsed. Note that if T is even, then player 2 has the last offer in such a game;
if T is odd, then player 1 has the ﬁnal offer. In the T-period game, if agreement
is reached in some period t, then payoffs are discounted by the factors d t−1
1 and
d t−1
2 in relation to payoffs received in period 1. That is, the discount factor is
applied for every consecutive period that one moves away from the ﬁrst period.
The T-period game can be analyzed in the same way that the two-period game
is studied. One simply inserts the equilibrium payoffs from the (T −1)-period
contest, appropriately discounted, as the value of rejection in the ﬁrst period of
the T-period game. For example, rejection by player 2 in the ﬁrst period of the
three-period game results in the discounted payoffs of the two-period game,
which are d 2
1 for player 1 and d2
 (1 −d1
 ) for player 2. I elaborate on this with the
Guided Exercise of this chapter. Exercise 3 at the end of this chapter asks you to
characterize the subgame perfect equilibria of the T-period game.
The equilibrium of the alternating-offer game entails agreement made in
the ﬁrst period, so the players realize a joint value of 1. If they had reached

--- Sayfa 265 ---
250
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
an agreement only in the second period, then the joint value would have been
d1
 m2 + d2
 (1 −m2), which is strictly less than 1. If they had completely failed
to reach an agreement in either period, then the joint value would have been
0. Thus, the outcome of the subgame perfect equilibrium is efﬁcient. In fact,
the equilibrium of the general T-period game also features agreement without
delay. Thus, although the bargaining games studied thus far provide a theory of
bargaining power, they do not yield a theory of bargaining delay or inefﬁciency.
This conclusion may be a bit unsatisfying, because delay and inefﬁciency are
regular occurrences in real bargaining settings. For example, almost every year
there is a highly publicized case in which a union and a ﬁrm fail to reach an agree-
ment in contract negotiations, leading to a strike that lasts a substantial number
of days. Perhaps the main difference between the real world and the models just
examined is that people do not always have complete information about each
other in the real world, whereas both parties are assumed here to know exactly
what game is being played (including knowing each other’s discount factors).
Part IV of this text introduces games with incomplete information and demon-
strates how informational asymmetry can lead to inefﬁciency.
INFINITE-PERIOD, ALTERNATING-OFFER GAME
Next consider an alternating-offer game that runs for a potentially inﬁnite
number of periods. That is, there is no ﬁnal period in which bargaining takes
place. This game has a special property: the subgames starting from any period
t are exactly the same as the subgames starting from period t + 2. In other
words, every subgame starting in an odd period looks like every other such
subgame—these are inﬁnite-period, alternating-offer games in which player 1
makes the ﬁrst offer. Likewise, the subgames starting from even periods are
identical. Although the inﬁnite game seems much more complex than the ones
studied so far in this chapter, these facts about subgames serve to simplify the
search for a subgame perfect equilibrium.4
Recall that a subgame perfect equilibrium speciﬁes an equilibrium on every
subgame. Let us look for an equilibrium of the inﬁnite-period game that is
“stationary” in the sense that a player makes the same offer whenever she is on
the move. Also suppose that these offers are accepted.
To ﬁnd such an equilibrium, if one exists, let m2 be the offer that player 1
would make in odd-numbered periods (when he has the offer), and let m1 be the
4The ﬁrst analysis of this game was reported in A. Rubinstein, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,”
Econometrica 50 (1982): 97–110. My calculations of the equilibrium follow the method of A. Shaked and
J. Sutton, “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica 52
(1984): 1351–1364. For an overview of noncooperative models of bargaining, see A. Muthoo, Bargaining
Theory with Applications (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

--- Sayfa 266 ---
251
Multilateral Bargaining
offer that player 2 would make in even-numbered periods. Assuming that these
offers would be accepted in equilibrium, the continuation payoff vector from
any odd-numbered period is (1 −m2
 , m2
 ), and the continuation payoff vector
from any even-numbered period is (m1
 , 1 −m1
 ). Note that I am writing these
continuation values from the perspective of the current period, not discounted to
the beginning of the game.
Intuitively, it should be the case that player i ’s equilibrium offer puts player
j in the position of being indifferent between accepting the offer and rejecting it
in favor of going on to the next period. Accepting the offer would give player j
the payoff mj
 , discounted to the current period. Rejecting the offer would give
player j a continuation payoff of 1 −mi from the start of the next period, which
is worth dj
 (1 −mi
 ) in present-period payoff terms.
Indifference means dj
 (1 −mi
 ) = mj
 . Because this equation holds for both
players, we have the following system of equations: d1
 (1 −m2
 ) = m1 and
d2
 (1 −m1
 ) = m2
 . Solving these equations yields
m1 = d1
 (1 −d2
 )
1 −d1d2 and m2 = d2(1 −d1)
1 −d2d1
One can prove that the outcome sketched in the last paragraph is the unique
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome in the inﬁnite-period game. The equilib-
rium features agreement in the ﬁrst period and yields a payoff of
1 −d2
1 −d1d2
to player 1 and
d2(1 −d1)
1 −d1d2
to player 2. You should verify that player i ’s equilibrium payoff increases
as di rises or dj falls or both. Furthermore, using L’Hospital’s derivative rule,
one can verify that for d1 = d2 = d, these payoffs both converge to 1>2 as d
approaches 1. In other words, if the players are equally very patient, then they
split the surplus evenly. This outcome is characterized by equal bargaining
weights (p1 = p2 = 1>2) in the language of the standard bargaining solution.
MULTILATERAL BARGAINING
Sometimes negotiation involves more than two parties. With many players at the
bargaining table, there is an endless variety of bargaining protocols and rules
for agreement. For example, the members of a legislature must bargain over

--- Sayfa 267 ---
252
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
the speciﬁcations and passage of new laws. The legislature’s procedural rules
describe (1) how individual members can be recognized to make proposals,
(2) whether other members are allowed to offer amendments, and (3) a voting
rule that determines how members can respond to proposals and that gives the
criteria for passage into law.
Let us analyze a simple model of legislative bargaining, where the legisla-
ture has three members (players 1–3) and there is an inﬁnite number of periods.
Imagine that the three players represent three districts in a small metropolitan
region. There is an opportunity to fund a new project (an emergency-response
system, for instance) that will beneﬁt all of the regions equally. To keep things
simple, suppose that the beneﬁt of the project to each region is 1, for a total
beneﬁt of 3. The cost of the project is 2, which can be divided in any way
between the regions. Note that the project creates value, and thus efﬁciency
dictates that it be funded. Each player wants to maximize the gain to her own
region and therefore wants to lower the portion of the project’s cost borne by her
constituents. This is essentially a setting of three-person bargaining, whereby
the players negotiate over how to split the project’s surplus of 1.
Suppose that legislative interaction takes place as follows. In a given period,
one player has the right to make a proposal x = (x1
 , x2
 , x3
 ), where xi denotes
the amount offered to player i. For example, if x1 = 1>4, then it means that
player 1’s district is asked to pay 3>4 to help fund the project, so its gain is
1 −(3>4). Player 1 makes the proposal in period 1, player 2 makes the proposal
in period 2, player 3 makes the proposal in period 3, and the order cycles accord-
ingly in future periods. After a proposal is made in a given period, the other
two players simultaneously vote for or against it. Assume that the voting rule is
unanimity. If both players vote in favor, then the proposal passes, and the game
ends. If one or both players vote against the proposal, then the game continues
with another proposal in the next period. Amendments are not allowed, so we
have a so-called closed rule legislature. Assume that players discount the future
using the shared discount factor d.
Let us look for a stationary subgame perfect equilibrium in the way that
we analyzed the inﬁnite-period, alternating-offer game in the previous section.
Suppose that conditional on reaching any particular period, the proposer will
offer xn to the player who would be next to make a proposal and will offer xl to
the other player who would make the proposal two periods hence. Let xp be the
amount that the proposer offers for herself (that is, her own district). Because
the players have the same discount factor, it makes sense to conjecture that these
equilibrium amounts will not depend on the identity of the proposer. Suppose
also that the equilibrium proposal is accepted by the other players. We next
examine how these values must be related in equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
253
Multilateral Bargaining
First note that under our working hypothesis, equilibrium offers are accepted,
and we have
xp + xn + xl = 1
because the players are bargaining over a total value of 1. Next, notice that the
proposer must offer at least dxp to the player who would make the proposal in
the next period; otherwise, this player would vote against the proposal and get
xp in the following period when she can make the proposal and expect that it
be passed. Thus, we have xn Ú dxp. Likewise, the proposer must offer at least
d 2xp to the player who would make the proposal two periods hence, because this
player has the option of rejecting proposals until it is her turn to make the offer.
Thus, we have x1 Ú d 2xp.
The proposing player would like to obtain the most possible for her district,
which means lowering xn and xl until these two inequalities bind (they become
equalities—that is, xn Ú dxp becomes xn = dxp). We conclude that xn = dxp
and xl = d 2xp. Using this substitution in the ﬁrst equation of the previous para-
graph, we get
xp + xn + xl = xp + dxp + d 2xp = 1,
which simpliﬁes to
xp =
1
1 + d + d 2, xn =
d
1 + d + d 2, and xl =
d 2
1 + d + d 2
As a numerical example, take d = 1>2, in which case xp = 4>7, xn = 2>7, and
xl = 1>7. Then, in the subgame perfect equilibrium, player 1’s offer in the ﬁrst
period is x = (4>7, 2>7, 1>7), which is accepted by the other players. In the out-
of-equilibrium contingency in which period 2 is reached, player 2’s equilibrium
offer would be x = (1>7, 4>7, 2>7).
This simple model of legislative bargaining shows that the intuition from
the two-player, inﬁnite-period model carries over to the general setting of multi-
lateral bargaining. The player who gets to make the ﬁrst proposal fares better
than do the others, but equity arises as the discount factor converges to 1. You
can quickly verify that as d becomes close to 1, xp, xn, and xl all converge to
1>3. Important issues still on the table are (1) whether there are other equilibria
in addition to the stationary one just characterized, and (2) how the equilibrium
outcome might change under different procedural rules. These issues have been
probed in the scientiﬁc literature.5
5If you are interested in the analysis of legislative processes, a good place to start is with D. P. Baron and
J. A. Ferejohn, “Bargaining in Legislatures,” The American Political Science Review 83 (1989): 1181–1206.

--- Sayfa 269 ---
254
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the three-period, alternating-offer bargaining game.
Suppose that the discount factor for both players is d, where 0 < d < 1. In this
game, player 1 makes the ﬁrst offer, in period 1. If player 2 rejects this offer,
then the game continues in period 2, where player 2 makes the offer and player 1
decides whether to accept or reject it. If player 1 rejects this offer, then the game
continues in period 3, where player 1 makes the ﬁnal offer and player 2 accepts
or rejects. Compute the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
Solution: Consider the subgames from the beginning of period 3, where
player 1 makes an offer m3 and player 2 accepts or rejects it. Because this is an
ultimatum-offer subgame, we know its equilibrium: player 1 chooses m3 = 0
and player 2 accepts all offers. To see this, note that it would be irrational for
player 2 to reject a positive offer. As a consequence, it is not rational for player
1 to select some mn > 0 because, given that player 2 is sure to accept it, player 1
gains by selecting a lower offer (such as m = mn >2). Thus, if the game reaches
period 3, then sequential rationality dictates that player 1 will obtain the entire
surplus from that point.
Next, examine the end of period 2, where player 1 is considering whether
to accept an offer of m2 from player 2. If player 1 accepts this offer, then she
will obtain m2 in period 2. It will be useful not to write this payoff in period 1
terms, so let us not multiply it by the discount factor. Importantly, player 1 must
compare m2 to the payoff she would receive by rejecting player 2’s offer and
waiting until period 3. By waiting, player 1 will obtain the discounted value
of the outcome from period 3, which is d # 1 = d. Note that this is discounted
because player 1 gets all of the surplus in the next period. Also note that discount-
ing occurs just once as the payoffs are put in terms of period 2 (which we are
relating to period 3). We conclude that in period 2, player 1 will accept m2 if and
only if m2 Ú d. There is the issue of player 1 being indifferent between accept-
ing and rejecting if m2 = d. But it will turn out that she will have to accept in
this case, for otherwise, player 2 would have the incentive to offer “the smallest
amount that is strictly greater than d,” which does not exist.
Moving to the beginning of period 2, note that player 2 expects to get noth-
ing if he offers less than d to player 1, for in this case player 1 would reject the
offer. If player 2 offers at least d, then player 1 will accept. Thus, player 2’s
optimal offer is m2 = d. In summary, if the game reaches period 2, then in the
subgame perfect equilibrium player 1 gets d and player 2 gets 1 −d.
The foregoing basically repeated the calculations for the two-period game
discussed earlier in this chapter. Analysis of behavior in period 1 works the
same way. If player 2 rejects player 1’s offer of m1, then player 2 will get
1 −d from the next period. Discounting this amount to compare it to a payoff

--- Sayfa 270 ---
255
Exercises
received in period 1, we see that player 2 will accept player 1’s offer if and only
if m1 Ú d(1 −d ). Player 1’s optimal offer is thus m1 = d(1 −d ).
In summary, the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the three-period,
alternating-offer bargaining game features agreement in the ﬁrst period. Player
1 obtains 1 −d(1 −d ) and player 2 obtains d(1 −d ). The outcome is efﬁcient.
Player 1’s payoff is large when the players are very patient (because she can
always wait until the third period, where she enjoys having the ﬁnal offer), as
well as when the players are very impatient (because then she can take advan-
tage of player 2’s incentive to accept almost anything).
EXERCISES
1. Suppose the president of the local teachers’ union bargains with the super-
intendent of schools over teachers’ salaries. Assume the salary is a number
between 0 and 1, 1 being the teachers’ preferred amount and 0 being the
superintendent’s preferred amount.
(a)  Model this bargaining problem by using a simple ultimatum game. The
superintendent picks a number x, between 0 and 1, which we interpret as
his offer. After observing this offer, the president of the union says “yes”
or “no.” If she says “yes,” then an agreement is reached; in this case,
the superintendent (and the administration that she represents) receives
1 −x and the president (and the union) receives x. If the president says
“no,” then both parties receive 0. Using the concept of backward induc-
tion, what would you predict in this game?
(b)  Let us enrich the model. Suppose that before the negotiation takes place,
the president of the union meets with the teachers and promises to hold
out for an agreement of at least a salary of z. Suppose also that both the
superintendent and the president of the union understand that the presi-
dent will be ﬁred as union leader if she accepts an offer x < z. They also
understand that the president of the union values both the salary and her
job as the leader of the union and that she will suffer a great personal
cost if she is dismissed as president. To be precise, suppose that the
president suffers a cost of y utility units if she is ﬁred (this is subtracted
from whatever salary amount is reached through negotiation, 0 if the
president rejects the salary offer). That is, if the president accepts an
offer of x, then she receives x −y in the event that x < z, and x in the
event that x Ú z. If the president rejects the offer, then she obtains a
payoff of 0. In the bargaining game, what offers of the superintendent
will the president accept? (For what values of x will the president say
“yes”? Your answer should be a function of y and z.)

--- Sayfa 271 ---
256
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
(c)  Given your answer to part (b), what is the outcome of the game? (What
is the superintendent’s offer and what is the president’s response?)
Comment on how the union’s ﬁnal salary depends on y.
(d)  Given your answer to part (b), what kind of promise should the presi-
dent make?
2. Suppose that you are attempting to buy a house, and you are bargaining with
the current owner over the sale price. The house is of value $200,000 to you
and $100,000 to the current owner; so, if the price is between $100,000 and
$200,000, then you would both be better off with the sale. Assume that bar-
gaining takes place with alternating offers and that each stage of bargaining
(an offer and a response) takes a full day to complete. If agreement is not
reached after ten days of bargaining, then the opportunity for the sale disap-
pears (you will have no house and the current owner has to keep the house
forever). Suppose that you and the current owner discount the future accord-
ing to the discount factor d per day. The real estate agent has allowed you to
decide whether you will make the ﬁrst offer.
(a)  Suppose that d is small; in particular d < 1>2. Should you make the ﬁrst
offer or let the current owner make the ﬁrst offer? Why?
(b)  Suppose that d is close to 1; in particular d > 2
9 1>2 (which means
that d 9 > 1>2). Should you make the ﬁrst offer or let the current owner
make the ﬁrst offer? Why?
3. Consider the alternating-offer bargaining game with T stages, in which the
players discount payoffs received in successive stages according to the dis-
count factor d. That is, the two players take turns making offers. In each
stage, one of the players makes an offer, followed by acceptance or rejection
of the offer by the other player. Acceptance ends the game, and the surplus
is divided as agreed. Offers and counteroffers continue as long as the play-
ers reject each other’s offers. For example, if the players agree in the tth
stage that player 1 shall have m share of the surplus, then player 1 gets a
payoff of d t−1 m. If the offer in stage T is rejected, then the game ends with
both players receiving 0. For simplicity, assume the surplus to be divided is
one unit of utility.

Analyze this game by computing the subgame perfect Nash equilib-
rium. Start by restating the equilibrium derived in the text for T = 1 and
T = 2. Then analyze the three-, four-, and ﬁve-period games in order. Write
the payoff vectors corresponding to the equilibria of these games to reveal a
pattern. Can you tell to what the payoff vector of the T-stage game converges
as T becomes large?

--- Sayfa 272 ---
257
Exercises
4. [Nash’s demand game6] Compute and describe the Nash equilibria of the
following static bargaining game. Simultaneously and independently, play-
ers 1 and 2 make demands m1 and m2
 . These numbers are required to be
between 0 and 1. If m1 + m2 … 1 (compatible demands, given that the sur-
plus to be divided equals 1), then player 1 obtains the payoff m1 and player
2 obtains m2
 . In contrast, if m1 + m2 > 1 (incompatible demands), then
both players get 0. In addition to describing the set of equilibria, offer an
interpretation in terms of bargaining weights as in the standard bargaining
solution.
5. See if you can draw a graph like the one in Figure 19.2 to represent the
subgame perfect equilibrium calculation for the inﬁnite-period alternating-
offer bargaining game.
6. Consider the following discounted, three-period bargaining game. The dis-
count factor is d, where 0 < d < 1. In this game, player 1 makes the ﬁrst of-
fer. If player 2 rejects this offer, then player 1 makes another offer. If player
2 rejects the second offer, then player 2 makes the ﬁnal offer. In other words,
player 1 makes the offers in periods 1 and 2, whereas player 2 makes the of-
fer only in period 3. Compute the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
7. Consider a three-player bargaining game, where the players are negotiating
over a surplus of one unit of utility. The game begins with player 1 propos-
ing a three-way split of the surplus. Then player 2 must decide whether to
accept the proposal or to substitute for player 1’s proposal his own alterna-
tive proposal. Finally, player 3 must decide whether to accept or reject the
current proposal (whether it is player 1’s or player 2’s). If he accepts, then
the players obtain the speciﬁed shares of the surplus. If player 3 rejects, then
the players each get 0. Draw the extensive form of this perfect-information
game and determine the subgame perfect equilibria.
8. In experimental tests of the ultimatum bargaining game, subjects who pro-
pose the split rarely offer a tiny share of the surplus to the other party. Fur-
thermore, sometimes subjects reject positive offers. These ﬁndings seem
to contradict our standard analysis of the ultimatum game. Many scholars
conclude that the payoffs speciﬁed in the basic model do not represent the
actual preferences of the people who participate in the experiments. In real-
ity, people care about more than their own monetary rewards. For example,
people also act on feelings of spite and the ideal of fairness. Suppose that in
6J. F. Nash, “Two Person Cooperative Games,” Econometrica 21 (1953): 128–140.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
258
19: Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games
the ultimatum game, the responder’s payoff is given by y + a(y −z), where
y is the responder’s monetary reward, z is the offerer’s monetary take, and a
is a positive constant. That is, the responder cares about how much money
he gets and he cares about relative monetary amounts (the difference be-
tween the money he gets and the money the other player gets). Assume that
the offerer’s payoff is as in the basic model.
(a)  Represent this game in the extensive form, writing the payoffs in terms
of m, the monetary offer of the proposer, and the parameter a.
(b)  Find and report the subgame perfect equilibrium. Note how equilibrium
behavior depends on a.
(c)  What is the equilibrium monetary split as a becomes large? Explain
why this is the case.
9. Consider a bargaining game among three political parties—the Conserva-
tive Party, the Liberal Democratic Party, and the Labor Party (each party
is a player). There are T periods of bargaining, numbered t = 1, c, T.
In each period, one party is the “proposer,” one is the “responder,” and the
third is the “bystander.” The proposer makes an offer to the responder, who
may then accept or reject. If the responder accepts, then the game ends and
the offer is implemented. Otherwise, the game continues to the following
period unless the period is T, in which case the game ends. If the game ends
without an offer being accepted, all parties get zero.

Suppose that the Liberal Democratic Party is always the responder. In
odd-numbered periods the Conservative Party is the proposer, and in even-
numbered periods the Labor Party is the proposer. The total amount of value
to be divided among the parties is normalized to 1. A proposal speciﬁes a
vector (x, y), where x is the amount that the proposer will receive, and y is
an amount that the responder will receive. (The bystander is left out.) The
players discount the future according to the common discount factor d.
(a)  Suppose that T = 1. Prove that in the subgame perfect equilibrium, the
Conservative Party offers x = 1 and y = 0, and the Liberal Democratic
Party accepts any offer with y Ú 0.
(b)  Suppose that T is odd. Determine the unique subgame perfect equilib-
rium and describe what offer, if any, is accepted and in which period.
(c)  Suppose that T = . Describe a subgame perfect equilibrium in which
an offer is accepted in the ﬁrst period. What is the ﬁrst-period offer?

--- Sayfa 274 ---
259
I
 titled the preceding chapter “Analysis of Simple Bargaining Games” because
 the models examined there are very crude representations of the complex pro-
cesses through which negotiation often takes place in the real world. In reality,
there is usually more to bargaining than alternating offers and counteroffers. For
example, negotiation may be segmented into times in which different aspects
of the bargaining problem are discussed separately. The negotiation process
may include a brainstorming session. A person may make all sorts of physical
gestures intended to strengthen his bargaining position. Parties may make silly
threats, such as “I will scream if you don’t give in to my demands!” A person
may scream or talk softly or insult the party at the other side of the table. None
of these options are included in the models of Chapter 19; more realistic models
would include them.
Remember, however, that the point of game-theoretic modeling is not to
completely describe all of the nuances of strategic interaction. Rather, an artful
and useful application of game theory isolates just a few strategic elements by
using a model that is simple enough to analyze. There is no point in trying to
capture all of the aspects of negotiation in one model. In fact, for many purposes,
the games in Chapter 19 are themselves too complicated. For example, suppose
we want to model a situation in which two business partners ﬁrst bargain over
a proﬁt-sharing rule and then engage in productive interaction. On its own, the
bargaining component may be modeled by using an alternating-offer game.
Likewise, the productive interaction may be modeled by a game in which, say,
the parties exert effort on the job. If we combine these two games, we would
get a larger, more complicated game that may be difﬁcult to analyze. Further-
more, perhaps a characterization of the players’ bargaining powers is all we
really want from the bargaining game. That is, we just want to capture the idea
that the outcome of the negotiation process is consistent with certain bargaining
weights. Then it makes sense just to employ the standard bargaining solution in
place of the alternating-offer game.
Let me make this point again and more generally. As I noted already, contrac-
tual relationships normally include both (1) phases of interaction in which the
parties negotiate over something and (2) phases in which the parties work
20
GAMES WITH JOINT DECISIONS;
NEGOTIATION EQUILIBRIUM

--- Sayfa 275 ---
260
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
 independently. As theorists, we often want to focus on aspects of the second
type of interaction while summarizing the outcome of the ﬁrst type in terms
of the players’ bargaining weights and disagreement points. It is thus helpful
to address different components of strategic interaction at different levels of
modeling detail. That is, we can study some components of a strategic setting by
using a full noncooperative approach and other components by using an abbre-
viated approach. In this chapter, I explain how to use the standard bargaining
solution as an abbreviated model of negotiation.
JOINT DECISIONS
A simple way of inserting a “summary” negotiation component into a nonco-
operative game is to include joint-decision nodes in the game tree.1 A joint-
decision node is an abbreviated description of negotiation between players
over some tangible objects, such as proﬁt-sharing rules, monetary transfers, or
whether to form a partnership. Thus, a joint-decision node represents a place in
the game where players negotiate and establish a contract. We specify a joint
decision when we do not want to create a full noncooperative model of the nego-
tiation process and when we have a simple theory of how negotiation is resolved
(by using, for example, the standard bargaining solution).
To represent joint decisions in a tree, we can employ the same devices
currently used to specify individual decisions. We simply allow some decision
nodes to be designated as joint-decision nodes. The joint-decision nodes are
graphically represented by double circles to differentiate them from individual
decision nodes. Furthermore, we label a joint-decision node with the set of play-
ers who are called on to make the joint decision. Branches represent the alterna-
tives available to the players, as is the case with individual decision nodes. In
addition, wherever there is a joint-decision node, we must designate one of the
branches as the default decision, which is assumed to go into effect in the event
that the players do not reach an agreement.2
A game with joint decisions is illustrated in Figure 20.1, which is a simple
model of contracting between a supplier ﬁrm and a buyer ﬁrm. First, the ﬁrms
1The game-theoretic framework with joint decisions is covered more deeply in J. Watson, “Contract and Game
Theory: Basic Concepts for Settings with Finite Horizons,” University of California, San Diego, Working
Paper, 2005.
2Theories of joint decision making, such as the standard bargaining solution, may generally conclude that
the agents avoid negotiation impasse. Nonetheless, it is important to specify a default decision because it
inﬂuences the relative bargaining strengths of the parties and thus the outcome of negotiation. We implic-
itly assume that each party to a joint decision can unilaterally induce the default decision (by withholding
 agreement).

--- Sayfa 276 ---
261
Joint Decisions
jointly determine whether to contract and, if so, what damages c to specify if the
supplier (player 2) is caught providing a low-quality intermediate good. If they
choose not to contract (which is the default decision), then the game ends and
each receives nothing. If they contract, and ﬁrm 2 then provides a high-quality
good, payoffs are 10 for the buyer and 5 for the supplier. By providing a low-
quality good, ﬁrm 2 saves money. However, the low-quality good is useless to
the buyer. (These ideas are captured by the numbers −6 and 10.) But with prob-
ability 1>2, the supplier is caught and damages are awarded by a court. (This is
a payment of c from the supplier to the buyer.)
For another example, take the bargaining problem of Jerry and Rosemary
that was discussed in Chapter 18. This problem is depicted in Figure 20.2 as a
game with joint decisions. Note that in this example, the tree has just one deci-
sion node—the joint-decision node representing the negotiation between the
players. The default decision is no employment.
It is possible for a joint decision to be made at an information set contain-
ing more than one node. One can simply connect with dashed lines (enclose in
the same information set) several nodes specifying joint decisions. This implies
FIGURE 20.1
Representing joint
decisions in a simple
contract game.
1, 2
2
c
10, 5
0, 0
Default
Low
High
(no trade)
x, t
d
Default
J, R
(no
employment)
dJ
dR
vR
v
vJ
(x)
v (x)
dJ dR
,
FIGURE 20.2
A negotiation game.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
262
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
that all of the players participating in a joint decision have the same information
when the decision is to be made.3 While on this subject of information, let us
revisit the tree rules stated in Chapter 14. For games with joint decisions, Tree
Rules 1, 2, 3, and 5 are prescribed as before. Tree Rule 4 is replaced by:
 Tree Rule 6 For each information set, all included nodes must be
decision nodes for the same subset of players—that is, belonging to
either a single player or, in a joint decision, the same group of players.
Before I move on to the analysis of games with joint decisions, let me make
a few more comments on the interpretation of joint-decision nodes. At a joint-
decision node, the branches correspond to tangible items over which the parties
spot contract. By “spot contract,” I mean that these items are automatically
enforced as a part of the agreement. In regard to things such as proﬁt-sharing
rules, wage rates, or salaries, the spot contract amounts to a document that both
parties sign. Of course, the document (specifying the proﬁt-sharing scheme,
wage, or salary) certainly may affect future behavior because it may directly
affect the players’ payoffs or future options. Usually the future effect is related
to external enforcement; for example, the document may be submitted to a court.
This is the case for the game in Figure 20.1, in which the damage award c is
imposed by the court.
Overall, there are two reasons why joint decisions make a good model-
ing tool. First, by using an abbreviated model of negotiation, the theorist can
emphasize other aspects of a strategic situation while still capturing the intuitive
notion of bargaining power in the resolution of bargaining problems. This has
the further beneﬁt of helping us differentiate between the process of negotia-
tion and what the players are negotiating over. Second, joint decisions mark the
places in a game where contracting takes place.4
NEGOTIATION EQUILIBRIUM
To analyze general games with joint decisions, we combine backward induction
(more speciﬁcally, subgame perfection) with the standard bargaining solution;
3The simple framework described here does not consider contracting under asymmetric information.
4In fact, in addition to representing spot contracting on tangible items, joint-decision nodes may designate where
players engage in “meta-level” contracting, where they actively coordinate their future behavior by selecting
among self-enforceable alternatives. At this point, I shall not address meta-level contracting in the context of
games with joint decisions. The subject is important but beyond the scope of this book. For more information,
see J. Watson, “Contract and Game Theory: Basic Concepts for Settings with Finite Horizons,” University
of California, San Diego, Working Paper, 2005; and D. Miller and J. Watson, “A Theory of Disagreement in
Repeated Games with Bargaining,” University of California, San Diego, Working Paper, 2012.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
263
Example: Contracting for High-Powered Incentives
the former pins down behavior at individual decision nodes, whereas the latter
identiﬁes behavior at joint-decision nodes.
Given an extensive-form game with joint decisions, a speciﬁcation of behav-
ior at every information set is called a regime. This is simply a generalization of
the “strategy” concept to include joint decisions. I use the following equilibrium
deﬁnition:
 A regime is called a negotiation equilibrium if its description of behavior
at individual decision nodes is consistent with sequential rationality and its
speciﬁcation of joint decisions is consistent with the standard bargaining
solution, for given bargaining weights.
This deﬁnition is not precise enough to be clear-cut in every game with joint
decisions. In particular, we can run into two problems when trying to construct
a negotiation equilibrium. First, we have to decide what is meant by “sequential
rationality.” For example, we could use backward induction or subgame perfec-
tion. Second, how to apply the standard bargaining solution in some contexts
may not be obvious, in particular where there is not transferable utility. I avoid
these problems by focusing on games in which backward induction or subgame
perfection can be easily employed (this is a wide class, by the way) and by
assuming that players can transfer money whenever they negotiate. You can
leave to interested hot-shot theorists the task of navigating the labyrinthine
esoterica of more general application.
EXAMPLE: CONTRACTING FOR HIGH-POWERED INCENTIVES
To illustrate the negotiation equilibrium concept, consider a contract example.
Carina and Wendy, two bright and motivated people, wish to initiate a busi-
ness partnership. They have decided to open and run a bookstore specializing in
sports, games, literature, and dance. Wendy is an investment wizard, so she will
handle the ﬁnancial side of the company. She also plans to promote the store
by carrying a banner during her weekly running races and triathlons. Carina,
disgruntled after years of underappreciated professional work in the educational
system, is looking forward to handling the day-to-day operations of the store.
Witty and erudite, Carina will have no problem directing customers to
challenging new works of literature. However, as a liberal benefactor of all
 humanity, Carina ﬁnds it difﬁcult to ask people actually to pay for books. In
particular, when a customer asks for a price reduction on a book, holding to the
regular price makes Carina suffer some disutility. However, Wendy notes that
the disutility is more than offset by the gain in store proﬁt from maintaining

--- Sayfa 279 ---
264
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
a  “ﬁxed-price” policy. Wendy therefore suggests that Carina consider a compen-
sation package rewarding her for administering the ﬁxed-price policy.
The interaction between Wendy and Carina is modeled by the game in
Figure 20.3. First, the partners jointly decide on a compensation package
consisting of Carina’s salary t and a bonus b, the latter of which is paid only if
Carina administers the ﬁxed-price policy. Wendy obtains the remainder of the
ﬁrm’s revenue. Note that we are implicitly assuming that whether or not Carina
administers the pricing policy can be veriﬁed to the court; thus, transfers on the
basis of Carina’s pricing decisions are externally enforced. The default decision
is that Carina and Wendy do not open the store, leading to a payoff of zero for
both of them. If the players reach an agreement, then Carina chooses between
high effort and low effort on the job. High effort means implementing the ﬁxed-
price policy at a personal cost of $10,000, whereas low effort means giving in
to her instinct to be more generous with customers. High effort implies reve-
nues of $120,000 for the ﬁrm; low effort implies revenues of $50,000.
To solve this game, we start by analyzing Carina’s effort decision. Note that
there is an inﬁnite number of decision nodes for Carina, one corresponding to
each of the inﬁnite number of salary–bonus combinations. Given t and b, Carina
has the incentive to exert high effort if and only if
b + t −10,000 Ú t.
Thus, Carina selects high effort if and only if b Ú 10,000. In words, Carina will
not exert high effort unless her bonus for doing so sufﬁciently covers her disutil-
ity (a high salary does not work). This is a simple but important idea in the area
of contract and incentives: so-called high-powered incentives—which compen-
sate people conditional on their direct contribution to output—work well if a
person’s contribution is veriﬁable.
Next, we move to the joint-decision node, which we solve by using the
standard bargaining solution. Note that if Carina and Wendy select b Ú 10,000,
t, b
Default
High
Low
Carina’ s payoff is listed first.
0, 0
C, W
C
FIGURE 20.3
Bookstore example.

--- Sayfa 280 ---
265
Guided Exercise
in which case Carina will subsequently choose high effort, then their joint
value is
(b + t −10,000) + (120,000 −t −b) = 110,000.
If they select a bonus that is less than 10,000, then their joint value is 50,000.
Because they jointly prefer the higher value, they will choose a bonus of at least
10,000. Further, the salary and bonus serve to divide the surplus of 110,000
according to the players’ bargaining weights pC and pW so that Carina obtains
110,000pC and Wendy gets 110,000pW. For example, suppose Carina and
Wendy have equal bargaining powers. Then they might choose b = 10,000 and
t = 55,000. In general, with b = 10,000, the salary is t = 110,000pC. Any
higher bonus is also ﬁne, but it would be combined with an offsetting lower salary.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Suppose Frank, an aspiring chef, has a brilliant plan to open a
 musical-themed, neo-Italian restaurant in the hip Clairemont district of San
Diego. For the restaurant to be successful, Frank must employ two people: Gwen,
a free-spirited singer, and Cathy, a savvy market analyst and legal consultant.
With the help of Gwen and Cathy, Frank’s new business will generate a gross
proﬁt of $300,000. But unless both Gwen and Cathy assist Frank, his business
will fail, yielding zero proﬁt. The three parties negotiate over monetary transfers
and over whether Gwen and Cathy will participate in Frank’s project.
(a) Consider a situation in which the three players negotiate all at once. Let
x denote a transfer from Frank to Gwen, and let y denote a transfer from
Frank to Cathy. Thus, if the parties agree to start the business and to make
transfers x and y, then Frank obtains 30,000 −x −y, Gwen gets x, and
Cathy receives y. Under the assumption that the players have equal bargain-
ing weights and the disagreement point is (0, 0, 0), what is the outcome of
negotiation? Use the standard bargaining solution here.
(b) Next suppose that Frank negotiates with Gwen and Cathy sequentially.
First, Frank and Gwen make a joint decision determining whether Gwen
commits to participate in the business. They also agree to an immediate
transfer t from Frank to Gwen, as well as a payment x contingent on the
event that Cathy also agrees to participate in the business. Then Frank and
Cathy negotiate, with complete knowledge of the agreement between Frank
and Gwen. Frank and Cathy jointly determine a transfer y and whether
Cathy will join the project. Disagreement in the negotiation between Frank

--- Sayfa 281 ---
266
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
and Gwen yields 0 to each player. Disagreement between Frank and Cathy
yields an outcome in which Frank loses t (it was a sunk payment), Gwen
gains t, and Cathy gets 0. This game can be represented as shown here.
x, t
y
Default
Default
F, G
F, C
0, 0, 0
Under the assumption that the players have equal bargaining weights,
compute the negotiation equilibrium of this game.
(c) What are the players’ payoffs in the outcome of part (b)? Explain how the
contract between Frank and Gwen affects the negotiation between Frank
and Cathy. Is the outcome efﬁcient?
Solution:
(a) The surplus of negotiation is clearly 300,000. The default outcome yields a
payoff of 0 for everyone. Because the players have equal bargaining power
and negotiate all at once, the standard bargaining solution implies that each
player gets a third of the surplus, so each player gets a payoff of 100,000.
To achieve this, it must be that x = y = 100,000.
(b) Consider ﬁrst the negotiation between Frank and Cathy, under the assump-
tion that Frank and Gwen reached an agreement (speciﬁed x and t) earlier.
Examining the payoffs of Frank and Cathy, observe that the surplus of their
negotiation is
(300,000 −x −t −y) + y −[−t + 0] = 300,000 −x.
Frank’s disagreement payoff is −t, whereas Cathy’s disagreement payoff
is 0. Because Frank and Cathy have equal bargaining weights, the stan-
dard bargaining solution implies that their negotiation will be resolved in
a way that makes Frank’s payoff 150,000 −(x>2) −t and Cathy’s payoff
150,000 −(x>2). Anticipating this, at the beginning of the game, Frank

--- Sayfa 282 ---
267
Exercises
and Gwen realize that Cathy will extract 150,000 −(x>2). Subtracting this
amount from 300,000, we ﬁnd that the negotiation surplus for Frank and
Gwen at the start of the game is 150,000 + (x>2). Note that Frank and Gwen
have to pick x … 300,000 to induce Cathy to sign on as well. Thus, Frank and
Gwen optimally select x = 300,000, which yields a surplus of 300,000 for
them. They split the surplus evenly, which implies t = −150,000. Note that
Frank and Cathy then agree to a contract specifying y = 0.
(c) In the negotiation equilibrium in part (b), Frank and Gwen each receive
150,000 and Cathy obtains 0. By contracting before Cathy is on the scene,
Frank and Gwen are able to manipulate the way that Frank contracts with
Cathy. Basically, Frank and Gwen agree that if Frank and Cathy later
reach an agreement, then Frank will have to transfer the value of the
agreement to Gwen; this lowers to 0 the value of any agreement between
Frank and Cathy. Gwen’s lump-sum payment of 150,000 to Frank divides
the surplus.
EXERCISES
1. A manager (M) and a worker (W) interact as follows: First, the players
make a joint decision, in which they select a production technology x, a
bonus payment b, and a salary t. The variable x can be any number that
the players jointly choose. The bonus is an amount paid only if the worker
exerts high effort on the job, whereas the salary is paid regardless of the
worker’s effort. The default decision is “no employment,” which yields a
payoff of 0 to both players.
If the players make an agreement on x, b, and t, then the worker chooses
between low effort (L) and high effort (H). If the worker selects L, then
the manager gets −4 −t and the worker gets t. In contrast, if the worker
selects H, then the manager gets 8x −b −t  and the worker gets b + t −x2.
The interpretation of these payoffs is that 8x is the ﬁrm’s revenue and x2 is
the worker’s cost of high effort, given production technology x.
(a)  Represent this game as an extensive form with joint decisions (draw the
game tree). Your tree should show and properly label the joint-decision
node, as well as the worker’s individual decision node. Clearly repre-
sent the default outcome and payoff for the joint-decision node.
(b)  Given x, b, and t, under what conditions does the worker have the incen-
tive to choose H?
(c)  Determine the negotiation equilibrium of this game, under the assump-
tion that the players have equal bargaining weights. Start by calculating

--- Sayfa 283 ---
268
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
the maximized joint value of the relationship (call it v*), the surplus,
and the players’ equilibrium payoffs. What are the equilibrium values
of x, b, and t?
(d)  In this setting, is it appropriate to say that the worker’s effort is
veriﬁable or unveriﬁable? Why?
2. Consider another version of the game between Carina and Wendy, where
Carina selects any effort level e on the job. Assume e Ú 0. The revenue of
the ﬁrm is equal to $800e. Carina’s disutility of effort is e2 (measured in
dollars). Carina and Wendy interact as before; ﬁrst, they jointly determine
Carina’s compensation package, and then (if they agree) Carina selects her
level of effort.
(a)  Suppose Carina’s effort is not veriﬁable, so Carina and Wendy can write
a contract specifying only a salary t for Carina. Assume Carina and
Wendy have equal bargaining weights. Draw the extensive-form game
and compute the negotiation equilibrium. Does Carina expend effort?
(b)  Next, suppose that Carina and Wendy are constrained to linear
 “revenue-sharing” contracts. Such a compensation package states that
Carina gets a fraction x of the revenue of the ﬁrm [leaving the frac-
tion (1 −x) to Wendy]. Calculate Carina’s optimal effort level as a
function of x. Then, under the assumption that Wendy has all of the
bargaining power, calculate the value of x that maximizes Wendy’s
payoff. (Do not graph the bargaining set; this setting does not ﬁt very
well into our bargaining theory. Technically, this is an application of
the generalized Nash bargaining solution [see Appendix D].)
(c)  Now suppose that the contract is of the form w (p) = xp + t, where w
is the amount paid to Carina and p is the revenue of the ﬁrm. That is, the
contract speciﬁes that Carina receive some base salary t and, in addi-
tion, a fraction x of the ﬁrm’s revenue. Assume the players have equal
bargaining weights. Calculate the negotiation equilibrium of this game.
(Start by ﬁnding Carina’s optimal effort decision, given t and x. Then,
holding t ﬁxed, determine the number x that maximizes the players’
joint value. Finally, determine the players’ negotiation values and ﬁnd
the salary t that achieves this split of the surplus.)
3. A manager (M) and a worker (W) interact as follows: First, the players
make a joint decision, in which they select a bonus parameter p and a salary
t. The salary can be any number (positive or negative). The bonus parameter
p must be between 0 and 1; it is the proportion of the ﬁrm’s revenue that
the worker gets. The default decision is “no employment,” which yields a
payoff of 0 to both players.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
269
Exercises
If the players make an agreement on p and t, then, simultaneously and
independently, the worker chooses an effort level x and the manager chooses
an effort level y. Assume that x Ú 0 and y Ú 0. The revenue of the ﬁrm is
then r = 20x + 10y. The worker’s effort cost is x2, whereas the manager’s
effort cost is y 2. Each player gets his share of the revenue and his transfer,
minus his cost of effort. The players have equal bargaining weights (1>2 and
1>2). The game is depicted in the following illustration:
t, p
x
y
Default
Worker’s payoff
is listed first.
W
M
W, M
0, 0
Compute the negotiation equilibrium of this game by answering the follow-
ing questions:
(a)  Given p and t, calculate the players’ best-response functions and the
Nash equilibrium of the effort-selection subgame.
(b)  Finish the calculation of the negotiation equilibrium by calculating the
maximized joint value of the relationship (call it v*), the surplus, and
the players’ equilibrium payoffs. What are the equilibrium values of p,
t, x, and y?
4. Consider a contractual setting with two players, where the underlying stra-
tegic interaction is given by the following “partnership game”:
H
H
1
2
L
L
10, 6
2, 10
8, 4
3, 5
This matrix describes the technology of the relationship. Suppose that
before noncooperative interaction, the players sign an externally enforced
contract specifying a transfer t from player 2 to player 1 in the event that

--- Sayfa 285 ---
270
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
either (H, L) or (L, H) is played. The interpretation here is that the court can
observe the total output of the relationship (which is either 8, 12, or 16) and
is willing to enforce a transfer if output is 12. However, the court enforces
the transfer only if one or both players request enforcement. Each player
who requests enforcement must pay a legal fee of c. The court only allows
transfers less than or equal to 10 (from one player to the other) because this
is the greatest payoff a single player can earn in the partnership.
Consider a “grand game” in which the partnership game is one compo-
nent. Play in the grand game runs as follows. First, the players interact
by playing the illustrated partnership game. Then, if either (H, H) or
(L, L) is the outcome, the grand game ends. However, if (H, L) or (L, H)
is the outcome, then the players interact further by playing the following
 enforcement game:
The players’ payoffs in the enforcement game are added to their payoffs
from the partnership game.
(a)  Suppose you are a policy maker who determines the fee c and the
contract parameter t. Under what conditions on c and t will (H, H) be
played in a subgame perfect equilibrium of this game? That is, for what
values of c is there a number t that induces cooperation? Remember
that t is constrained to be between −10 and 10.
(b)  Explain your reasoning for your answer to part (a). In particular, what
happens when c = 0?
(c)  Suppose that between the partnership game and the enforcement game
the players make a joint decision about whether to continue with the
enforcement game or “settle out of court”; they can also make a mone-
tary transfer at this time. When the players settle out of court, they avoid
the court fee. The default decision is to continue with the enforcement
game. Do you think (H, H) can be supported in the negotiation equilibrium
of this game? Explain your reasoning without explicitly solving this game.
5. Construct a game with joint decisions by augmenting the Cournot duopoly
game in the following way: Suppose the two ﬁrms have a proﬁt-sharing
t – c, – t – c
t, – t – c
t – c, – t
0,  0
1
2
t - c, - t - c
t, - t - c
t - c, - t
0, 0
Enforce
Enforce
Not
Not

--- Sayfa 286 ---
271
Exercises
pact that is enforced by the government (legal collusion). First, the ﬁrms
 simultaneously select quantities, q1 and q2 , at a marginal cost of 10. The
price is determined from the inverse demand curve, p = 100 −q1 −q2 , and
the total revenue p(q1 + q2) is deposited into a joint bank account. Then the
ﬁrms must negotiate over how to share the revenue. Model the negotiation
as a joint decision over ﬁrm l’s share of the revenue, m, so that agreement
yields a payoff of m −10q1 to ﬁrm 1 and p(q1 + q2) −m −10q2 to ﬁrm 2.
If they disagree then neither ﬁrm obtains any revenue, so ﬁrm 1 gets −10q1
and ﬁrm 2 gets −10q2 .
6. This question leads you through the computation of the negotiation equilib-
rium of the game described in Exercise 5.
(a)  Start by analyzing the joint decisions made at the end of the game. For
given production levels q1 and q2 , calculate the players’ payoffs by
using the standard bargaining solution. Write the payoffs in terms of
arbitrary bargaining weights p1 and p2 .
(b)  What are the ﬁrms’ payoffs as functions of q1 and q2 for p1 = 1>2 and
p2 = 1>2?
(c)  While continuing to assume p1 = p2 = 1>2, solve the Cournot compo-
nent of the model by using Nash equilibrium. Explain why there are
multiple equilibria. How does the outcome compare with that of the
basic Cournot model? Is the outcome efﬁcient?
(d)  Next suppose that p1 p2 . Find the players’ Nash equilibrium output
levels. Remember that q1 and q2 are required to be greater than or equal
to 0. [Hint: The equilibrium is a corner solution, where at least one
of the inequalities binds (q1 = 0 and/or q2 = 0), so calculus cannot be
used.]
(e)  Discuss how the ﬁrms’ quantity choices depend on their bargaining
weights and explain the difference between the results of parts (c) and (d).
7. A manager (M) and employee (E) interact as follows. The manager can
choose whether to offer a written contract or simply shake hands with the
employee. If the manager offers a written contract, the parties bargain over
a wage and a bonus. Then the employee decides whether to work or shirk.
Under the written contract, the employee is paid the contractual wage p for
sure, and he is also paid the contractual bonus q if he worked. If the parties
do not have a written contract, then after the work/shirk decision, they nego-
tiate over the amount that the manager will pay the employee.
The extensive form of this game is shown in the illustration that follows.
The contractual variables p, q, and r may be any real numbers.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
272
20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation Equilibrium
(a)  Find a negotiation equilibrium in the subgame that starts at node 1.
(b)  Find a negotiation equilibrium in the subgame that starts at node 2.
(c)  Consider any negotiation equilibrium of the entire game. What are the
equilibrium payoffs?
8. This question asks you to compare two games, one of which has a joint
decision.
(a)  Find the pure-strategy negotiation equilibria of the extensive-form game
shown in the illustration that follows. Note that y is restricted to be in
the interval [0, 4] and t ∈(−, ). Is there an equilibrium in which
y = 4?
Employee’s payoff is listed first.
r
M
0, -3
E, M
1
E, M
0,  0
E
2
E
Contract
Handshake
Shirk
Default
Default
Work
Work
Shirk
p, q
Default
y
t
1, 2
1
0
4
2
1
A
A
A
B
B
B
2
1

--- Sayfa 288 ---
273
Exercises
(b)  Next consider the slightly different extensive-form game in the illustra-
tion that follows. Demonstrate that there exists a pure-strategy subgame-
perfect equilibrium in which y = 4.
y
1
0
4
A
A
A
B
1
2
B
B
(c)  Provide a concise economic interpretation of the contrast between these
two games.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
274
M
any economic examples are interesting precisely because of the tensions
inherent in strategic situations.1 In particular, a tension between individ-
ual and joint interests exists when a player’s private costs and beneﬁts are not
equal to joint costs and beneﬁts. This tension can have serious effects if there are
limits on external enforcement, such as if the players’ actions cannot be veriﬁed
to an enforcement authority.2
Dynamic contract settings often exhibit a particular tension between indi-
vidual and joint interests that is due to the timing of investments and negotiation.
The basic idea is that the success of a particular project relies on an investment
by person A as well as on the productive input of person B. The project requires
person A to make the investment ﬁrst. Only later does person B come onto the
scene. The key problem is person A’s incentives, for she can gain the returns of
her investment only by contracting with person B later. If person B will utilize
bargaining power to extract a share of the returns, so that person A does not
obtain the full value of her investment, then person A may not have the incentive
to invest optimally in the ﬁrst place. This is called the “hold-up” problem, because
person B extracts part of the returns under the threat of holding up production.
More generally, the hold-up problem can arise even if parties contract before
investments are made, in particular if the investments are unveriﬁable. This is
because the parties may want to write a contract that punishes them jointly if
one or both of them fail to invest; however, if the undesired contingency actually
arises, then the players would have the incentive to renegotiate their contract to
avoid the joint punishment. In this sense, the punishment fails to be credible
and, therefore, players may lack incentives to invest efﬁciently.
In this chapter, I review some of the basic insights on contracting with
unveriﬁable investments and hold up. Of particular interest are contractual
1Recall the tensions that I have presented: (1) the clash between individual and group incentives, (2) strategic
uncertainty, (3) inefﬁcient coordination, and variants of these tensions on the level of contract.
2 Classical economic theory tends to view this tension as arising because of informational asymmetries
between contracting parties or because of “missing markets.” The latter refers to interaction between people
concerning a good (such as air quality) that is not traded on a market. The term externality is often used in
relation to such a setting. The theory of strategy may allow a deeper understanding by removing the competi-
tive market from the center of consideration.
21 UNVERIFIABLE INVESTMENT, HOLD UP,
OPTIONS, AND OWNERSHIP

--- Sayfa 290 ---
275
Hold-up Example
methods of alleviating the hold-up problem and encouraging efﬁcient invest-
ment (speciﬁcally, the judicious use of option contracts and asset ownership).3
HOLD-UP EXAMPLE
For an illustration of the hold-up problem, consider a setting in which two
people—Joel Dean (JD) and Brynn—interact in the development of a new
product. JD is a scientist who can, with effort, design a new device for treating
a particular medical condition. He is the only person with a deep knowledge
of both the medical condition and physics sufﬁcient to develop the innovative
design. But JD has neither the engineering expertise nor the resources that are
needed to construct the device. Brynn is the CEO of an engineering company;
she is capable of implementing the design and creating a marketable product.
Thus, success relies on JD’s and Brynn’s combined contributions.
Suppose JD and Brynn interact over three dates as follows. At Date 1, JD
decides how much to invest in the design of the medical device. His investment—
in fact, the complete design speciﬁcations—is observed by Brynn. Then, at
Date 2, JD and Brynn meet to negotiate a contract that sets conditions (a price)
under which Brynn can produce and market the device at Date 3. Commercial
production of the device will generate revenue for Brynn, and this revenue will be a
function of JD’s initial investment level. The key issue is whether JD has the incen-
tive to invest efﬁciently, given that he has to later negotiate with Brynn to obtain
the fruits of his investment.
Here, a bit more formally, is a description of the sequence of events: At
Date 1, JD selects between “high investment” (abbreviated H), “low invest-
ment” (L), and “no investment.” If he chooses not to invest, then the game ends,
and both parties get a payoff of 0. In contrast, if JD chooses L or H, then JD
pays a personal investment cost, and the game continues at Date 2. JD’s cost of
low investment is 1, whereas his cost of high investment is 10. Assume that JD’s
investment choice is observed by Brynn but is not veriﬁable to the court, so that
the investment cannot directly inﬂuence a legal action.
At Date 2, JD and Brynn negotiate over contracted monetary transfer p,
which is a transfer from Brynn to JD to be compelled by the external enforcer
(the court) if and only if Brynn elects to produce at Date 3. The default price
3Early analysis of the hold-up problem appears in O. Williamson, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and
Antitrust Implications (New York: Free Press, 1975); P. Grout, “Investment and Wages in the Absence of
Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining Approach,” Econometrica, 52 (1984): 449–460; and S. Grossman
and O. D. Hart, “The Costs and Beneﬁts of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” The
Journal of Political Economy, 94 (1986): 691–719. The examples that I present here are in the formulation
of “Contract, Mechanism Design, and Technological Detail,” by J. Watson, Econometrica, 75 (2007): 55–81.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
276
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
is p, which represents the legal default rule in case JD and Brynn do not
establish an agreement. Assume that the court always compels a transfer of
0 if Brynn selects N.4 Also assume that the players have equal bargaining
weights, so pJD = pB = 1>2. At Date 3, Brynn chooses whether to “produce”
(P) or not (N). If Brynn chooses to produce, then p is the amount transfered
from Brynn to JD; if Brynn chooses not to produce, then the transfer is 0.
Thus, Brynn’s choice of whether to produce is veriﬁable, and the contract
simply prescribes the transfer as a function of this selection. The time line of
the game is pictured in Figure 21.1; note that this is not the extensive-form
diagram, which you can draw as an exercise.
In the end, JD’s payoff is whatever transfer he gets from Brynn minus
his investment cost. Brynn’s payoff is her revenue from production (if she
chooses P) minus the amount she transfers to JD. Suppose that Brynn’s reve-
nue from production is 4 in the event that JD chose investment L, whereas
her revenue is 18 in the event that JD chose investment H. If Brynn selects N,
then her revenue is 0, regardless of JD’s investment choice.
Note that it is more costly for JD to select high investment H rather than
low investment L, but high investment leads to a better product and enhanced
revenues for Brynn on the market for the medical device. In fact, efﬁciency
requires JD to select H and Brynn to choose P because these actions yield a
joint value of 18 −10 = 8. By comparison, if JD were to select L and Brynn
were to choose P, then the joint value would be 4 −1 = 3.
The key question is whether JD has the incentive to select investment H;
that is, does JD take the efﬁcient investment action in the negotiation equi-
librium of the game? To answer this question, we use backward induction
and the standard bargaining solution to calculate the negotiation equilibrium
of the game. The ﬁrst thing to note is that Brynn has the incentive to select P
if and only if her revenue from production exceeds p. Thus, if p > 18, then
Brynn will choose N, regardless of whether JD invested at level L (when the
4In general, a contract may specify a transfer other than 0 on the condition that Brynn selects N, but there
is no beneﬁt of such a transfer in the example here.
FIGURE 21.1
Time line for the hold-up
example.
Date 1
JD chooses his investment level
(H or L) or ends the game.
Brynn chooses between P and N, and
transfer p is compelled if P is chosen.
JD and Brynn negotiate to select
(a joint action with default p).
Date 2
Date 3
 p
-

--- Sayfa 292 ---
277
Hold-up Example
revenue would be 4) or at level H (when the revenue would be 18). If p … 4,
then Brynn has the incentive to produce, regardless of JD’s investment  choice.
Finally, if p ∈[4, 18], then it is rational for Brynn to select P in the event that JD
chose H and for Brynn to select N in the event that JD chose L.
Let us suppose that in the absence of a contract between JD and Brynn, the
law gives JD the sole right to produce any medical device that is based on his
design. Thus, if Brynn selects P without JD’s authorization, then the court will
punish Brynn in the form of a monetary transfer from Brynn to JD. To represent
this legal default rule, assume that p = 20. Then the only way production can
occur in equilibrium is if Brynn contracts with JD.
To analyze the negotiation between JD and Brynn at Date 2, let us consider
separately the case in which JD chose L at Date 1 and the case in which JD chose
H. If JD had selected L, then the players would be negotiating over a surplus of
4. To see this, notice that with the default outcome of negotiation, where p is
in force, Brynn would choose not to produce and the game would end with the
payoffs −1 for JD (because he paid the cost of low investment) and 0 for Brynn.
Thus, the joint value of the default outcome is −1. In contrast, by agreeing to set
p between 0 and 4, the players know that Brynn will choose to produce and that
they will obtain the joint value 4 −1 = 3. The surplus is the difference between
the joint value of contracting and the joint value of the default outcome:
3 −(−1) = 4.
Equal bargaining weights imply that the surplus is evenly split between JD and
Brynn, which is achieved by setting the price p = 2. Thus, if JD invests at level
L, he will eventually get the payoff −1 + 2 = 1, which is his disagreement
value plus his share of the surplus. Brynn will get the payoff 4 −2 = 2.
Next take the case in which JD chose H at Date 1. In the default outcome
of negotiation (where p is in force), Brynn would choose not to produce and
the game would end with the payoffs −10 for JD (because he paid the cost of
high investment) and 0 for Brynn. The joint value of the default outcome is
therefore −10. In contrast, by agreeing to set p between 0 and 18, the players
know that Brynn will choose to produce and that they will obtain the joint value
18 −10 = 8. Thus, in this case, the players are negotiating over a surplus of
8 −(10) = 18.
Equal bargaining weights imply that the surplus is evenly divided between JD
and Brynn, which is achieved by setting the price p = 9. Thus, if JD invests at
level H, he will eventually get the payoff −10 + 9 = −1 and Brynn will get
the payoff 18 −9 = 9.
Moving back to Date 1, we can now understand JD’s investment incen-
tives. Notably, his only rational action is to invest at the low level L because

--- Sayfa 293 ---
278
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
this is the only action that leads to a positive payoff for him. Thus, the example
illustrates the general phenomenon known as the hold-up problem. In particu-
lar, Brynn exercises her bargaining power to extract a signiﬁcant share of the
beneﬁt of JD’s investment, under the threat of “holding up” production. Antici-
pating not being able to extract the full beneﬁt of his investment, JD has the
incentive to invest at less than the efﬁcient level. In other words, to make his
investment decision, JD weighs his own cost and beneﬁt. The joint cost is fully
borne by him, whereas he retrieves only a fraction of the joint beneﬁt, so his
incentives are distorted in relation to what is efﬁcient.
UP-FRONT CONTRACTING AND OPTION CONTRACTS
Key aspects of the hold-up story are that (1) investments are unveriﬁable, so
the court cannot condition transfers directly on these actions, and (2) there is
some barrier to the parties writing a comprehensive contract prior to choosing
investments. In the example that I just presented, item (2) is represented by the
assumption that JD and Brynn meet only after JD makes his investment deci-
sion. This assumption may be a stretch, for in many real settings the contract-
ing parties can negotiate and form a contract before they are required to make
signiﬁcant investments and take other productive actions.
Let us consider, therefore, a version of the model in which JD and Brynn
meet and form a contract at Date 0, with interaction continuing in Dates 1–3
just as described in the previous section. Think of the contract at Date 0 as the
“initial contract,” and think of any contracting at Date 2 as “renegotiation.”
At Date 0, JD and Brynn jointly select the value of p (the amount Brynn
will have to pay JD if she produces at Date 3), and they also may specify
an up-front transfer. Then p becomes the default value for renegotiation at
Date 2. If the players keep p in place at Date 2, then we say that renegotia-
tion of the contract did not occur. Otherwise, the parties will have renegoti-
ated their initial contract to alter the production-contingent transfer. Assume
that the default decision for negotiation at Date 0 is p = 20, the legal default
rule assumed in the previous section. The time line of the game is pictured in
Figure 21.2.
Hold up is an issue even though contracting occurs at Date 0. Here’s why.
Because JD’s investment decision is unveriﬁable, there is no way for the contract
to give JD a high-powered incentive to invest (as was achieved for Carina in the
example at the end of Chapter 20; see pp. 263–265. Instead, the contract can
only be used to motivate Brynn in her choice between P and N at Date 3 (an
action that is veriﬁable). One hopes that Brynn’s action can be made contingent
on JD’s investment in such a way as to motivate JD to invest. Unfortunately,

--- Sayfa 294 ---
279
Up-Front Contracting and Option Contracts
renegotiation at Date 2 may interfere with the whole plan because it may undo
something to which the players wanted to commit at Date 0.
The entire enterprise may seem confusing at this point because the initial
contract has an indirect effect on JD’s incentives. But an intuitive and realistic
theme will emerge from the analysis: An optimal contract will give Brynn the
option of producing the device that JD designs, but only at a speciﬁc price that
Brynn must pay to JD. If the price is set high enough—but not too high—then
Brynn will exercise the option precisely in the circumstance in which JD invested
at the high level. Thus, JD knows that he will obtain the high price if and only
if he chooses H, which motivates him to select H rather than L in the ﬁrst place.
To analyze the game, we apply the standard bargaining solution to exam-
ine the joint decision at Date 0; analysis of the rest of the game proceeds as
reported in the previous section. First note that if, at Date 0, the players specify
p to be a number exceeding 18, then the game would proceed just as derived
in the basic hold-up example. Such a high price would basically force Brynn to
refrain from producing (regardless of JD’s investment choice), and so the players
would achieve a surplus only by renegotiating their initial contract. The players
anticipate that, at Date 2 renegotiation, Brynn will extract half of the value of
production, which will induce JD to select L at Date 1.
Second, note that a joint selection of p < 4 leads to grim investment incen-
tives as well. With such a low price, Brynn has the incentive to pick P, regardless of
JD’s investment (L or H), so there is no gain from renegotiation at Date 2. Antici-
pating a transfer of p, regardless of his investment choice, JD has no incentive to
select H at Date 1. More precisely, in the case of p < 1, JD rationally chooses no
investment and ends the game at Date 1; in the case of p ∈[1, 4), JD rationally
chooses to invest at level L. Either way, the outcome is inefﬁcient.
Contracts that specify p > 18 or p < 4 in this example are called forc-
ing contracts because they effectively force Brynn to take the same productive
action at Date 3, both in the event that JD invested high and in the event that
JD invested low. In contract, an option contract creates different incentives for
FIGURE 21.2
Time line for the setting with
renegotiation.
Date 0
JD and Brynn form a contract specifying
JD chooses his investment level
Brynn chooses between P and N, and
transfer p is compelled if P is chosen.
JD and Brynn renegotiate to select p
(a joint action with default p).
(H or L) or ends the game.
p (a joint action with default value 20).
Date 1
Date 2
Date 3
-
-

--- Sayfa 295 ---
280
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
Brynn, depending on JD’s investment. In the example, if we have p ∈[4, 18],
then Brynn has the incentive to choose P in the event that JD invested H, whereas
Brynn prefers to choose N in the event that JD invested L.
Consider the particular option contract that speciﬁes p = 14, and let us
see what will occur in Dates 1−3 under this contract. First note what would
happen at Date 3 if this contract were not renegotiated at Date 2 (that is,
with p = p = 14). In the event that JD had selected H at Date 1, Brynn will
choose P, which gives her a payoff of 18 −14 = 4 and gives JD a payoff of
14 −10 = 4. Anticipating this efﬁcient outcome, the players have nothing
to achieve by renegotiating at Date 2, so indeed renegotiation does not occur.
Next consider the case in which JD had selected L at Date 1. In this case,
Brynn will choose N at Date 3 because her beneﬁt of production (the amount
4) does not exceed the price she must pay to produce (which is 14). Anticipat-
ing this inefﬁcient outcome, the players would renegotiate at Date 2 to pick
a price p that is below 4 so that production occurs. As in the basic model, the
surplus of negotiation at Date 2 is 4, so equal bargaining weights imply that
negotiation is resolved with p = 2.
To summarize what we have thus far, if the players initially select p = 14,
then they expect the following in relation to JD’s investment decision at Date 1:
If JD selects H, then the players will not renegotiate at Date 2, Brynn will choose
P at Date 3, JD will get the payoff 14 −10 = 4, and Brynn will get the payoff
18 −14 = 4. If JD selects L, then the players will renegotiate to the price p = 2,
Brynn will choose P, JD will obtain the payoff 2 −1 = 1, and Brynn will get the
payoff 4 −2 = 2. Clearly, JD has the incentive to invest H.
Thus, the option contract that speciﬁes p = 14 induces the players to invest
and produce efﬁciently. Furthermore, this contract achieves an even split of the
value of the relationship (4 for each player).
On the calculation of the negotiation equilibrium, one question remains:
What contract will the players actually select at Date 0? Although the option
contract specifying p = 14 induces an efﬁcient outcome of the game, it is not
quite consistent with the standard bargaining solution applied at Date 0 because
the disagreement point is the payoff vector that would result under the default
p = 20—that is, 1 for JD and 2 for Brynn. Subtracting the joint value of default
from the joint value of contracting yields a surplus of 8 −3 = 5. An even divi-
sion of this surplus, added to the players’ disagreement values, would give JD
a payoff of 1 + 2.5 and Brynn a payoff of 2 + 2.5 from Date 0. You can easily
verify that the contract specifying p = 13.5 does the trick.
As the example shows, an option contract is quite helpful in situations with
unveriﬁable investments. By giving the “buyer” (Brynn in the example here)
the incentive to purchase only a good or service of sufﬁciently high quality,
it gives the “seller” (JD here) the incentive to make investments that ensure

--- Sayfa 296 ---
281
Asset Ownership
high quality. With just a little digging, you will notice option contracts utilized
in many real settings, such as professional sports, procurement, entertainment
(ﬁlms and music, in particular), and innovative industries. You will also notice
that renegotiation occurs periodically in the real world. Renegotiation can inter-
fere with the initial objectives of contracting, but it can sometimes be dealt with
effectively if the initial contract is shrewdly designed.5 With the optimal option
contract in the example here, renegotiation would occur if JD were to select L,
but JD is still given the incentive to choose H.
ASSET OWNERSHIP
As you have just seen, a well-designed option contract can sometimes induce
efﬁcient investments and production. But option contracts may also be compli-
cated and require many details. Some economists believe that there are barriers
to the writing of detailed contracts, either because composing them is costly (due
to lawyer’s fees, for instance) or because it is difﬁcult to describe or imagine all
of the contingencies that may arise later. A subset of these economists argues
that contracting parties can often deal effectively with unveriﬁable investments
and hold up by initially forming simple contracts that judiciously allocate asset
ownership. They claim that asset ownership can have an important impact on
investment incentives and that one can understand ownership patterns in real
industries on the basis of optimal responses to hold-up problems.
To see how asset ownership may play a role in investment incentives, consider
a simple extension of the JD–Brynn story in which production requires the use of a
particular asset, such as a computer-controlled manufacturing device. Suppose that
JD’s investment amounts to enhancing and conﬁguring this asset. Naturally, the
asset is owned by one of the contracting parties. Ownership means that the owner
has the exclusive right to use the asset and to obtain the revenue that it generates.
Once we think about the deﬁnition of ownership, it is natural to ask whether
the identity of the owner inﬂuences investment incentives. That is, would JD
have the same incentive to invest as the asset owner as he would have if Brynn
owned the asset? Suppose that following JD’s investment the best use of the
asset is by Brynn because her ﬁrm has the most relevant expertise among engi-
neering and manufacturing companies. But suppose as well that the asset has an
alternative use that also beneﬁts from JD’s investment. Think of the alternative
use as production by a different engineering company.
5 For more on the form of option contracts and the hold-up problem, see K. Buzard and J. Watson, “Contract,
Renegotiation, and Holdup: Results on the Technology of Trade and Investment,” Theoretical Economics, 7
(2012): 283–322.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
282
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
In particular, if JD owns the asset and severs his relationship with Brynn, then
he can contract with an alternative producer. (If Brynn owns the asset, then JD has
no such recourse.) Suppose there are plenty of alternative producers available and
that JD can extract the entire surplus of dealing with one of them because they
will compete for his business. But an alternative producer generates lower revenue
than would Brynn. Assume that revenue with an alternative producer would be
0 if JD invested at level L, whereas the revenue would be y if JD selected H. The
value y satisﬁes 0 < y < 18. If y is close to 0, then we say that JD’s investment
is speciﬁc to Brynn, in that it enhances the value of JD’s relationship with Brynn
much more than it would enhance a relationship with an alternative producer. In
contrast, if y is larger, then we say that JD’s investment is general.
Assume that JD and Brynn can contract at Date 0, but that they can then
contract only on ownership of the asset. That is, they can agree on who owns
the asset, but they cannot specify transfers as a function of Brynn’s choice
about whether to produce. The rest of the game proceeds as in the basic model,
except that if JD and Brynn fail to reach a deal at Date 2 and JD happens to own
the asset, then he can contract with an alternative producer. In the event that JD
invested H, he will then obtain y −10 (that is, y with the alternative supplier
and −10 representing the cost of investment). If JD invested L and owns the
asset, his disagreement value from Date 2 is −1 as in the basic model.
The key question is whether giving JD ownership of the asset at Date 0
will encourage him to invest H. The mechanism by which this might occur is
that JD’s investment affects his disagreement value for negotiation at Date 2.
Speciﬁcally, if JD selected L at Date 1, then there is no prospect for trading with
an alternative producer; his disagreement value is the same as speciﬁed in the
basic model analyzed at the beginning of this chapter, so JD eventually gets 1.
But if JD selected H at Date 1, then his disagreement value is y −10, and the
surplus of negotiating with Brynn—the difference between their joint value of
forcing production and their joint value of disagreement—is
18 −10 −(y −10) = 18 −y.
Applying the standard bargaining solution with equal bargaining weights, we
conclude that JD and Brynn will settle on the price p = 9 + (y>2), which gives
JD his disagreement value plus half of the surplus.
Consider JD’s incentives at Date 1 when he owns the asset. If he selects L,
then he will get 1. In contrast, if he selects H, then he will obtain
p −10 = 9 + y
2 −10 = y
2 −1.
He has the incentive to select H if this amount exceeds 1, which simpliﬁes to
y Ú 4. Therefore, if JD’s investment is sufﬁciently general, giving him control
of the asset will also give him the incentive to make the high investment.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
283
Guided Exercise
The analysis of asset ownership suggests several lessons for everyday deci-
sion making. First, recognize when an investment today affects the value of a
future relationship. Be wary of an investment that generates value subject to
hold up. Second, understand the difference between speciﬁc and general invest-
ments. Try to structure your relations so that you make general investments
and your partners or opponents make speciﬁc investments. Distinctions between
general and speciﬁc investments often emerge in employment relations, where
human capital (workers’ skills and expertise) is at stake. Third, try to engage in
negotiation at times in which you have good outside opportunities.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Suppose that a worker interacts with a ﬁrm as follows: The worker
ﬁrst decides how much to invest in developing his skills. Let x denote the work-
er’s investment, and suppose that the investment entails a personal cost to the
worker of x 2 ; assume x Ú 0. If the worker works in the ﬁrm, then his investment
generates return ax for the ﬁrm. If the worker decides to work on his own (sepa-
rate from the ﬁrm), then his investment generates a return of bx that he keeps.
The numbers a and b are positive constants satisfying a > b (which means that
the investment is more productive in the ﬁrm). After the worker chooses his
investment, the ﬁrm observes it. Then the ﬁrm offers the worker a wage w, and
the worker accepts or rejects it (ultimatum bargaining). If the worker accepts
the wage, then he works in the ﬁrm. If he rejects the wage, then he works on his
own. Here is the game’s extensive form:
F
W
W
x
w
0
A
R
The worker’s payoff is listed first.
∞
(a)  Find and report the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game. What in-
vestment level is selected?
(b)  Consider a variant of the game in which the worker gets to make the wage
offer. What investment level will prevail in equilibrium?
(c)  Consider the variant of the game pictured here, where the selection of the wage
is modeled as a joint decision of the ﬁrm and worker. Solve this game under

--- Sayfa 299 ---
284
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
the assumption that the joint decision is resolved according to the standard
bargaining solution. Let pW be the worker’s bargaining weight and let pF be
the ﬁrm’s bargaining weight. What investment level will prevail in equilibrium?
W
(accept)
x
w
0
Default
W, F
∞
(d)  Explain the difference between the outcomes of parts (a), (b), and (c). What
determines the level of investment in equilibrium? How do changes in b
affect the joint value (total payoff) that is realized? Which of parts (a), (b),
and (c) yield the maximum value of the relationship? Why?
Solution:
(a)  First, examine the worker’s choice of whether to accept the ﬁrm’s wage
offer. Clearly, the worker strictly prefers to select A (accept) if w > bx,
strictly prefers to select R (reject) if w < bx, and is indifferent if w = bx.
Thus, in equilibrium, the ﬁrm offers w = bx, and the worker accepts. (There
is no equilibrium in which the worker would reject this wage offer because
then there would be no optimal action for the ﬁrm in response.) At the initial
node, the worker therefore anticipates obtaining a payoff of bx −x2, which
he maximizes by investing at level xˆ = b>2.
(b) In the setting in which the worker makes the ultimatum offer, the ﬁrm will
accept if ax Ú w, so the worker offers w = ax in equilibrium. At the initial
node, the worker therefore anticipates obtaining a payoff of ax −x2, which
he maximizes by investing at level x* = a>2.
(c)  Note that the surplus of negotiation is (a −b)x, and the worker’s disagree-
ment value is bx −x 2. The standard bargaining solution implies that the
worker obtains
bx −x 2 + pW (a −b)x = (pW a + pF b)x −x 2,
 which translates into a wage of w = pW
 ax + pF
 bx. At the initial node, the
worker maximizes his payoff by investing at level x= (pW
 a + pF
 b)>2.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
285
Exercises
(d) Increasing the worker’s bargaining power, which is represented by moving
from part (a) to part (b) or increasing pW in part (c), implies a larger invest-
ment by the worker. This is because the worker faces a hold-up problem
in that the ﬁrm may extract some of the value of the worker’s investment.
An increase in b raises the equilibrium investment because it increases the
worker’s marginal disagreement value as a function of x and thus lessens
the hold-up problem. The hold-up problem disappears as either the worker’s
bargaining weight converges to 1 or b converges to a. The maximum value
of the relationship occurs at the efﬁcient investment level x*, which is the
case in part (b).
EXERCISES
1. A bicycle manufacturer (the “buyer,” abbreviated B) wishes to procure a
new robotic system for the production of mountain-bike frames. The ﬁrm
contracts with a supplier (S), who will design and construct the robot. The
contractual relationship is modeled by the following game:
B, S
S
H
R
A
A
R
B
B
L
0, 0
Default
The parties ﬁrst negotiate a contract specifying an externally enforced price
that the buyer must pay. The price is contingent on whether the buyer later
accepts delivery of the robot (A) or rejects delivery (R), which is the only
event that is veriﬁable to the court. Speciﬁcally, if the buyer accepts deliv-
ery, then he must pay p1; if he rejects delivery, then he pays p0 . After the
contract is made, the seller decides whether to invest at a high level (H) or
at a low level (L). High investment indicates that the seller has worked dili-
gently to create a high-quality robot—one that meets the buyer’s speciﬁca-
tions. High investment costs the seller 10. The buyer observes the seller’s

--- Sayfa 301 ---
286
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
investment and then decides whether to accept delivery. If the seller selected
H and the buyer accepts delivery, then the robot is worth 20 units of revenue
to the buyer. If the seller selected L and the buyer accepts delivery, then
the robot is only worth 5 to the buyer. If the buyer rejects delivery, then the
robot gives him no value.
(a) What is the efﬁcient outcome of this game?
(b)  Suppose the parties wish to write a “speciﬁc-performance” contract,
which mandates that the buyer accept delivery at price p1. How can p0
be set so that the buyer has the incentive to accept delivery regardless of
the seller’s investment? Would the seller choose H in this case?
(c)  Under what conditions of p0 and p1 would the buyer have the incen-
tive to accept delivery if and only if the seller selects H? Show that the
efﬁcient outcome can be obtained through the use of such an “option
contract.”
(d)  Fully describe the negotiation equilibrium of the game, under the
assumption that the parties have equal bargaining weights.
2. Estelle has an antique desk that she does not need, whereas Joel and his wife
have a new house with no furniture. Estelle and Joel would like to arrange a
trade, whereby Joel would get the desk at a price. In addition, the desk could
use restoration work, which would enhance its value to Joel. Speciﬁcally,
the desk is worth 0 to Estelle (its current owner), regardless of whether it is
restored. An unrestored desk is worth $100 to Joel, whereas a restored desk
is worth $900. Neither Joel nor Estelle has the skills to perform the restora-
tion. Jerry, a professional actor and woodworker, can perform the restora-
tion at a personal cost of $500. Jerry does not need a desk, so his value of
owning the restored or unrestored desk is 0.
(a)  Suppose Estelle, Jerry, and Joel can meet to negotiate a spot contract
specifying transfer of the desk, restoration, and transfer of money. Model
this as a three-player, joint-decision problem, and draw the appropriate
extensive form. Calculate the outcome by using the standard bargaining
solution, under the assumption that the players have equal bargaining
weights (pE = pJerry = pJoel = 1>3). Does the desk get traded? Is the
desk restored? Is this the efﬁcient outcome?
(b)  Suppose spot contracting as in part (a) is not possible. Instead, the
players interact in the following way. On Monday, Estelle and Jerry
jointly decide whether to have Jerry restore the desk (and at what price
to Estelle). If they choose to restore the desk, Jerry performs the work
immediately. Then on Wednesday, regardless of what happened on
Monday, Estelle and Joel jointly decide whether to trade the desk for

--- Sayfa 302 ---
287
Exercises
money. Model this game by drawing the extensive form. (Hint: The
extensive form only has joint-decision nodes.) Assume the parties have
equal bargaining weights at all joint-decision nodes. Determine the
negotiation equilibrium. Compare the outcome with that of part (a).
(c)  Now suppose the players interact in a different order. On Monday,
Estelle and Joel jointly decide whether to trade the desk for money.
Trade takes place immediately. On Wednesday, if Joel owns the desk,
then he and Jerry jointly decide whether to have Jerry restore the desk
(and at what price to Joel). If they choose to restore the desk, Jerry
performs the work immediately. Model this game by drawing the
extensive form. (Hint: Again, the extensive form only has joint-decision
nodes.) Assume the parties have equal bargaining weights at all joint-
decision nodes. Determine the negotiation equilibrium. Compare the
outcome with that of parts (a) and (b).
(d)  Explain the nature of the hold-up problem in this example.
3. Recall that “human capital” refers to skills and expertise that workers de-
velop. General human capital is that which makes a worker highly produc-
tive in potential jobs with many different employers. Speciﬁc human capital
is that which makes a worker highly productive with only a single employer.
What kind of investment in human capital should you make to increase your
bargaining power with an employer, general or speciﬁc? Why? Do valuable
outside options enhance or diminish your bargaining power?
4. This exercise asks you to combine the investment and hold-up issue from
this chapter with the “demand” bargaining game explained in Exercise 4
of Chapter 19. Consider an investment and trade game whereby player 1
ﬁrst must choose an investment level x Ú 0 at a cost of x 2. After player l’s
investment choice, which player 2 observes, the two players negotiate over
how to divide the surplus x. Negotiation is modeled by a demand game, in
which the players simultaneously and independently make demands m1 and
m2 . These numbers are required to be between 0 and x. If m1 + m2 … x
(compatible demands, given that the surplus to be divided equals x), then
player 1 obtains the payoff m1 −x2 and player 2 obtains m2 . In contrast, if
m1 + m2 > x (incompatible demands), then player 1 gets −x2 and player 2
gets 0. Note that player 1 must pay his investment cost even if the surplus is
wasted owing to disagreement.
(a) Compute the efﬁcient level of investment x*.
(b)  Show that there is an equilibrium in which player 1 chooses the efﬁcient
level of investment. Completely describe the equilibrium strategies.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
288
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
(c)  Discuss the nature of the hold-up problem in this example. Offer an
interpretation of the equilibrium of part (b) in terms of the parties’
bargaining weights.
5. Suppose that an entrepreneur is deciding whether or not to build a new high-
speed railroad on the West Coast. Building the railroad will require an initial
sunk cost F. If operated, the new railroad will generate revenue R. Operating
the railroad will cost M in fuel and nw in wages, where n is the number of
full-time jobs needed to operate the new railroad and w is the career wage
per worker. If a rail worker does not work on the new railroad, then he can
get a wage of w at some other job. Assume that R > M + F + nw, so it
would be proﬁtable to build and operate the new railroad even if rail work-
ers had to be paid somewhat more than the going rate w. The entrepreneur,
however, must decide whether to invest the initial sunk cost F before know-
ing the wages she must pay.
(a)  Suppose that if the railroad is built, after F is invested, the local rail
workers’ union can make a “take it or leave it” wage demand w to the
entrepreneur. That is, the entrepreneur can only choose to accept and
pay the wage demand w or to shut down. If the railroad shuts down,
each worker receives w. Will the railroad be built? Why?
(b)  Next suppose that the wage is jointly selected by the union and the entre-
preneur, where the union has bargaining weight pU and the entrepreneur
has bargaining weight pE = 1 −pU
 . Use the concept of negotiation
equilibrium to state the conditions under which the railroad will be built.
(c)  Explain the nature of the hold-up problem in this example. Discuss why
the hold-up problem disappears when the entrepreneur has all of the
bargaining power. Finally, describe ways in which people try to avoid
the hold-up problem in practice.
6. Describe a real-world setting in which option contracts are used.
7. Suppose that you work for a large corporation and that your job entails
many hours of working with a computer. If you treat the computer with
care, it will not break down. But if you abuse the computer (a convenience
for you), then the computer will frequently need costly service. Describe
conditions under which it is best that you, rather than your employer, own
the computer. Discuss veriﬁability and incentives in your answer.
8. Here is a description of interaction between two players who are consider-
ing a possible business partnership. First the players simultaneously choose
whether to make an investment. Investment entails a personal cost of 3; not

--- Sayfa 304 ---
289
Exercises
investing costs nothing. The investment choices become common knowl-
edge. Then the players jointly decide whether to form a partnership ﬁrm and,
if so, how to divide the proﬁt from the ﬁrm. If both players invested, then the
ﬁrm’s proﬁt is 16. If exactly one player invested or if neither invested, then
the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is 12. If the players decide not to form the ﬁrm, then each
player i gets a default payoff of x −3 if player i invested and zero if player
i did not invest. The default payoff of x −3 includes the cost of investment
plus some value x that represents what player i can obtain by using his invest-
ment in other endeavors. Assume that the players divide surplus according to
the standard bargaining solution with equal bargaining weights.
(a)  What outcome maximizes the joint value? That is, what are the efﬁcient
investment choices?
(b)  Describe conditions on x such that there is a negotiation equilibrium in
which both players invest. Show that this is an equilibrium.
(c)  In light of your answers to parts (a) and (b), brieﬂy provide some
intuition for your answers in relation to the “hold-up” problem.
9. Suppose that prior to negotiation with a ﬁrm, a worker chooses whether to
invest (I) or to not invest (N). Investing entails a personal cost of 10 to the
worker. Not investing entails a cost of zero. The manager of the ﬁrm ob-
serves the worker’s investment choice and then negotiates with the worker
on whether to hire him and, if so, at what salary. Assume that the outcome
of their negotiation is given by the standard bargaining solution with equal
bargaining weights.
The beneﬁt to the ﬁrm of hiring the worker depends on whether the
 worker has made the investment. Investment yields a beneﬁt of 30 to the
ﬁrm. Noninvestment yields a beneﬁt of 16 to the ﬁrm. The ﬁrm’s payoff is
the beneﬁt it receives less the salary it pays the worker. The worker’s payoff
is the salary received less the investment cost. If the worker is not hired,
then the ﬁrm’s payoff is zero and the worker’s payoff is zero less the cost
of investment.
(a)  In a negotiation equilibrium, what is the worker’s investment decision
and what is the outcome of the negotiation? Explain.
(b) Is the outcome you found in part (a) efﬁcient? Explain why or why not.
10. Consider the game shown here, which models a partnership between players
1 and 2. The players work as a team, with player 1 exerting effort x and player
2 exerting effort y on the job. Assume g ∈[0, 1], w ∈(−, ), x ∈[0, ),
y ∈[0,), and t ∈(−,).
At the initial joint decision node, player 1 has all the bargaining power
(p1 = 1 and p2 = 0). At this node they can agree to allocate some power to

--- Sayfa 305 ---
290
21: Unverifiable Investment, Hold Up, Options, and Ownership
player 2, such as by making him a part owner of the company. Speciﬁcally,
they choose g ∈[0, 1], which will become player 2’s bargaining weight in
the ﬁnal negotiation. They can also agree on an immediate transfer w from
player 2 to player 1. If they fail to agree, then the game ends and they each
earn zero.
After their initial negotiation, the players simultaneously choose their
effort levels. The cost of effort is x2 for player 1 and y 2 for player 2. After
both observe x and y, the players jointly decide whether and how to split
the returns of their effort choices. If they fail to agree, then their partnership
dissolves and they receive no revenues, but by this time they have already
incurred their effort costs and have made the transfer w. If they agree on a
transfer t, then player 1 collects revenues of x + 2y and pays t to player 2.
In this ﬁnal negotiation, player l’s bargaining weight is g and player 2’s bar-
gaining weight is 1 −g. Assume that joint decisions conform to the stan-
dard bargaining solution.
(a)  Consider a joint decision node in the players’ ﬁnal negotiation. What is
the surplus at this node, given g, w, x, and y? In a negotiation equilib-
rium, what payoffs do the players obtain under agreement at this node,
given g, w, x, and y? What value of t is chosen?
(b)  Next consider a subgame starting immediately after the initial negotia-
tion. In a negotiation equilibrium, what values of x and y are chosen,
given g and w?
(c)  Finally, consider the entire game. In negotiation equilibrium, what
values of g, w, x, y, and t arise?
(d) Interpret your results in economic terms.
1,2
Bargaining shares:
Bargaining shares:
2
Default
Default
1, 2
1
x
y
t
w
w
w
w
g, w

--- Sayfa 306 ---
P
eople often interact in ongoing relationships. For example, most
employment relationships last a long time. Countries competing over tar-
iff levels know that they will be affected by one another’s policies far into the
future. Firms in an industry recognize that they are not playing a static game
but one in which they compete every day over time. In all of these dynamic
situations, the way in which a party behaves at any given time is inﬂuenced
by what this party and others did in the past. In other words, players condi-
tion their decisions on the history of their relationship. An employee may
choose to work diligently only if his employer gave him a good bonus in the
preceding month. One country may set a low import tariff only if its trading
partners had maintained low tariffs in the past. A ﬁrm may elect to match its
competitor’s price by setting its price each day equal to the competitor’s price
of the preceding day.
When deciding how to behave in an ongoing relationship, one must
consider how one’s behavior will inﬂuence the actions of others in the future.
Suppose I am one of your employees and that our history is one of coopera-
tion. Since you hired me, I have been a loyal and hard-working employee, and
you have given me a generous bonus each month (above my salary). Today I
am considering whether to work hard or, alternatively, to neglect my duties
in favor of playing video games on the ofﬁce computer. For me, shirking has
an immediate reward—I get to avoid expending effort on the job. But you
will soon learn of my indolence, either through your monitoring activities or
through an observed decrease in my productivity. Your future behavior (in
particular, whether to give me bonuses each month) may very well be inﬂu-
enced by what I do today.
For instance, after observing that I have shirked, you might choose to
discontinue my monthly bonus. You might say to yourself, “By misbehaving,
Watson has lost my trust; I doubt that he will work diligently ever again and
therefore I will pay him no more bonuses.” Anticipating such a response, I may
decide that spending the workday playing chess over the Internet against some-
one in New Zealand is not such a good idea. Neglecting my duties may yield
an immediate gain (relaxation today), but it leads to a greater loss in the future
(no more bonuses each month). As this story suggests, people sometimes have
22
REPEATED GAMES AND REPUTATION
291

--- Sayfa 307 ---
292
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
an incentive to forego small immediate gains because of the threat of future
retaliation by others.
The term “reputation” is often used to describe how a person’s past
actions affect future beliefs and behavior. If I have always worked diligently
on the job, people would say that I have “established a reputation for being
a hard worker.” If I shirk today, then tomorrow people would say that I have
“destroyed my good reputation.” Often, those who nurture good reputations
are trusted and rewarded; people with bad reputations are punished. As the
employment story indicates, the concern for reputation may motivate parties
to cooperate with one another, even if such behavior requires foregoing short-
term gains. One of the great achievements of game theory is that it provides a
framework for understanding how such a reputation mechanism can support
cooperation.
The best way to study the interaction between immediate gains and long-
term incentives is to examine a repeated game. A repeated game is played over
discrete periods of time (period 1, period 2, and so on). We let t denote any
given period and let T denote the total number of periods in the repeated game.
T can be a ﬁnite number or it can be inﬁnity, which means the players inter-
act perpetually over time. In each period, the players play a static stage game,
whereby they simultaneously and independently select actions. These actions
lead to a stage-game payoff for the players. The stage game can be denoted by
{A, u}, where
A = A1 × A2 × . . . × An
is the set of action proﬁles and ui (a) is player i ’s stage-game payoff when proﬁle
a is played. The same stage game is played in each period. Furthermore, we
assume that in each period t, the players have observed the history of play—that
is, the sequence of action proﬁles—from the ﬁrst period through period t −1.
The payoff of the entire game is deﬁned as the sum of the stage-game payoffs
in periods 1 through T. We sometimes assume that players discount the future,
in which case we include a discount factor in the payoff speciﬁcation (recall the
analysis of discounting in Chapter 19).
A TWO-PERIOD REPEATED GAME
Suppose players 1 and 2 interact over two periods, called periods 1 and 2
(so T = 2). In each period, they play the stage game depicted in Figure 22.1.
Assume that the payoff for the entire game is the sum of the stage-game payoffs
in the two periods. For instance, if (A, X) is played in the ﬁrst period and (B, Y)
is played in the second period, then player 1’s payoff is 4 + 2 = 6 and player

--- Sayfa 308 ---
293
A Two-Period Repeated Game
2’s payoff is 3 + 1 = 4. Figure 22.2(a) graphs the set of possible repeated game
payoffs. Every point on the graph corresponds to the sum of two stage-game
payoff vectors. For example, the payoff vector (3, 5) can be attained if (A, Z)
is played in the ﬁrst period and (B, Y) is played in the second period; the same
payoff results if (B, Y) is played in the ﬁrst period, followed by (A, Z).
This two-period repeated game has a large extensive-form representation,
so I have not drawn it here. The extensive form starts with simultaneous selec-
tion of actions in the ﬁrst period: player 1 chooses between A and B, and player
2 selects X, Y, or Z. Then, having observed each other’s ﬁrst-period actions, the
players again select from {A, B} and {X, Y, Z}. Because each player knows what
happened in the ﬁrst period, his choice in the second period can be conditioned
on this information. For example, player 1 may decide to pick A in the second
period if and only if (A, X) or (B, Y) was played in the ﬁrst period; otherwise, he
picks B. As usual, the players’ information is represented by information sets.
Because there are six possible outcomes of ﬁrst-period interaction, each player
FIGURE 22.1
Stage game, repeated once
(T = 2).
X
A
1
2
B
Y
Z
4, 3
2, 1
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
1, 4
FIGURE 22.2
Feasible repeated-game payoffs.
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a)
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(b)
v2
v1
v2
v1

--- Sayfa 309 ---
294
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
has six information sets in the second period. In other words, each player has six
decisions to make in period 2: what to do if the outcome of period 1 was (A, X),
what to do if the outcome of period 1 was (A, Y), and so forth.
This game has a large set of strategies, making the analysis of rationality a
bit daunting. However, the analysis is quite illuminating, so read on. Let us look
for pure-strategy, subgame perfect Nash equilibria. We can simplify the search
by recognizing one important thing: every equilibrium must specify that in the
second period, the players select an action proﬁle that is a Nash equilibrium of
the stage game.
To see why this is so, recall that subgame perfection requires equilibrium
in every subgame. In the repeated game at hand, a different subgame is initiated
following every different action proﬁle in period 1. For example, consider what
happens in the event that the players choose (A, Z) in the ﬁrst period. Then,
knowing that (A, Z) was the outcome of ﬁrst-period interaction, the players
proceed to a subgame in which they simultaneously select actions again. Their
total payoff will be (1, 4) plus whatever the payoff vector is in the second play
of the stage game. Thus, following the play of (A, Z) in the ﬁrst period, the
subgame is described by the matrix in Figure 22.3. I constructed this matrix by
adding the payoff vector (1, 4) to each of the cells in the stage game (compare
Figures 22.1 and 22.3). Thus, Figure 22.3 describes the possible continuation
payoffs following play of (A, Z) in the ﬁrst period. You should verify that the
subgame has two Nash equilibria, (B, Y) and (A, Z). Therefore, a subgame
perfect equilibrium must specify that either (B, Y) or (A, Z) be played in the
second period if (A, Z) is played in the ﬁrst period.
We can say more. Because the subgame matrix is formed by adding the same
payoff vector to each cell of the stage-game matrix, the players’ preferences
over action proﬁles in the subgame are exactly the same as their preferences
in an isolated play of the stage game. In other words, writing the continuation
payoffs net of the stage-game payoff of period 1, the subgame is equivalent to the
stage game, and thus they have exactly the same Nash equilibria.1 In fact, every
1You should verify that (A, Z) and (B, Y) are the Nash equilibria of the stage game.
X
A
1
2
B
Y
Z
5, 7
1, 4
3, 5
1, 4
1, 4
2, 8
FIGURE 22.3
The subgame
following (A, Z).

--- Sayfa 310 ---
295
A Two-Period Repeated Game
subgame starting in period 2 has the same set of Nash equilibria because these
games have matrices like that in Figure 22.3—where the stage-game payoff in
the ﬁrst period is added to every cell of the stage game. Another way of thinking
about this is that once the ﬁrst period is over, the payoffs from the ﬁrst period are
sunk. Whatever the players obtain in the second period, it is in addition to what
they have already received in the ﬁrst. Thus a subgame perfect equilibrium must
specify that the players select a Nash equilibrium in the stage game in period 2,
whatever happens in period 1. To save ink, I use the phrase “stage Nash proﬁle”
to refer to a Nash equilibrium in the stage game.
Knowing that a stage Nash proﬁle will be played in the second period, we
can turn our attention to two other matters: (1) action choices in the ﬁrst period,
and (2) how behavior in the ﬁrst period determines which of the two stage Nash
equilibria will be played in the second period.
First consider subgame perfect equilibria that specify that a stage Nash
proﬁle be played in the ﬁrst period (as well as in the second). Here is one such
strategy proﬁle: The players are instructed to choose action proﬁle (A, Z) in the
ﬁrst period and then, regardless of the outcome of the ﬁrst period, they are to
choose (A, Z) in the second period. Because each player has six information
sets in the second period (six potential decisions to make), the phrase “regard-
less of the outcome of the ﬁrst period” is crucial; it means that, even if one or
both of the players deviate from (A, Z) in the ﬁrst period, they are supposed
to play (A, Z) in the second. You can easily verify that this strategy proﬁle is
a subgame perfect equilibrium—neither player can gain by deviating in either
or both periods, given the other player’s strategy. In this equilibrium, player 1
obtains 1 + 1 = 2 and player 2 gets 4 + 4 = 8. This payoff vector is one of
those boxed in Figure 22.2(b).
Any combination of stage Nash proﬁles can be supported as a subgame
perfect equilibrium outcome. For example, “choose (A, Z) in the ﬁrst period and
then, regardless of the ﬁrst-period outcome, choose (B, Y) in the second period”
is a subgame perfect equilibrium; it yields the payoff vector (3, 5). The payoffs
of equilibria that specify stage Nash proﬁles in both periods are all boxed in
Figure 22.2(b). I recommend reviewing the various combinations of stage Nash
proﬁles and verifying that the associated equilibrium payoffs are boxed in Figure
22.2(b). As the example intimates, the following general result holds:
Result: Consider any repeated game. Any sequence of stage Nash
proﬁles can be supported as the outcome of a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium.
It probably does not surprise you that stage Nash proﬁles can be supported
as equilibrium play. A more interesting question is whether there are equilibria

--- Sayfa 311 ---
296
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
stipulating actions that are not stage Nash proﬁles. In fact, the answer is “yes,” as
the two-period example at hand illustrates. Consider the following strategy proﬁle:
Select (A, X) in the ﬁrst period and then, as long as player 2 did not devi-
ate from X, select (A, Z) in the second period; if player 2 deviated by
playing Y or Z in the ﬁrst period, then play (B, Y) in the second period.
This strategy proﬁle prescribes that the players’ second-period actions depend
on what player 2 did in period 1. By playing X in the ﬁrst period, player 2 estab-
lishes a reputation for cooperating; in this case, he is rewarded in the second
period as the players coordinate on the stage Nash proﬁle that is more favorable
to him. In contrast, if player 2 deviates by, say, choosing Z in the ﬁrst period,
then he is branded a “cheater.” In this case, his punishment is that the players
coordinate on (B, Y) in the second period.
To verify that this strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium, we
must check each player’s incentives. Suppose player 1 behaves as prescribed
and consider the incentives of player 2. If player 2 goes along with the strategy
prescription, he obtains 3 in the ﬁrst period and 4 in the second period. If player
2 deviates in the ﬁrst period, he can increase his ﬁrst-period payoff to 4 (by
picking Z). But this choice induces player 1 to select B in the second period,
where player 2 then best responds with Y. Thus, although a ﬁrst-period devia-
tion yields an immediate gain of 1, it costs 3 in the second period (4 −1). This
shows that player 2 prefers to behave as prescribed. For his part, player 1 has the
incentive to go along with the prescription for play; deviating in either period
reduces player l’s payoff. The payoff vector for this subgame perfect equilib-
rium is enclosed by a pentagon in Figure 22.2(b).
Although the equilibrium construction is a bit complicated, it really is
 intuitive. Player 2’s concern about his reputation and what it implies for his
second-period payoff gives him the incentive to forego a short-term gain. If he
misbehaves in the ﬁrst period, his reputation is destroyed and he then suffers in
the second period.
Any two-period repeated game can be analyzed as has been done here.2 Only
stage Nash proﬁles can be played in the second period. However, sometimes
reputational equilibria exist whereby the players select non-stage-Nash proﬁles
in the ﬁrst period. These selections are supported by making the second-period
actions contingent on the outcome in the ﬁrst period (in particular, whether the
players cheat or not). The exercises at the end of this chapter will help you better
explore the reputation phenomenon.
2A general analysis of ﬁnitely repeated games is reported in J. P. Benoit and V. Krishna, “Finitely Repeated
Games,” Econometrica, 53 (1985): 905–922.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
297
An Inﬁnitely Repeated Game
AN INFINITELY REPEATED GAME
Inﬁnitely repeated games are deﬁned by T = ; that is, the stage game is
played each period for an inﬁnite number of periods. Although such a game
may not seem realistic at ﬁrst (people do not live forever), inﬁnitely repeated
games are useful for modeling some real-world situations. Furthermore, despite
the complexity of these games, analysis of their subgame perfect equilibria can
actually be quite simple. Consider an inﬁnitely repeated game with discounting,
whereby the payoffs in the stage game are discounted over time.3 Let us use d
(a  number between 0 and 1) to denote the discount factor for both players. When
comparing a payoff received today with a payoff received tomorrow (the next
period), we discount tomorrow’s payoff by multiplying it by the discount factor.
In this way, we say that the stream of payoffs—from today and tomorrow—are
“discounted to today.” Payoffs obtained two periods from now are discounted
by d 2, payoffs obtained three periods from now are discounted by d 3, and so on.
For repeated games, we will have to calculate the sum of a stream of
discounted payoffs. For example, a player may obtain 1 unit each period for an
inﬁnite number of periods. In this case, the sum of his discounted payoff stream is
v K 1 + 1d + 1d 2 + 1d 3 + . . . = 1 + d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . . .
We can simplify this expression by noting that
d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . . = d [1 + d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . . ] = dv.
Therefore, we have
v K 1 + d v,
which means that v = 1>(1 −d ). In summary,
1 + d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . .
 =

1
1 −d
 .
This expression will come in handy. Note that by multiplying both sides by any
constant number a, we have
a + ad + ad 2 + ad 3 + . . .
 =

a
1 −d .
The strategies in inﬁnitely repeated games can be exceedingly complex.
Recall that in general, a player’s strategy is a full description of what action to
take at every information set of the player. In a repeated game, there is a  different
3Recall the discussion of discounting in Chapter 19, where the discount factor is used in multistage  bargaining
games.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
298
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
information set for every period t and every different history of play from the
beginning of the game through period t −1. Thus, a strategy prescribes an
action for a player to take conditional on everything that took place in the past.
Fortunately, it is often sufﬁcient to consider just a few types of simple
strategies in repeated games. The simplest are those that prescribe stage Nash
proﬁles in each period; as noted in the preceding section, we know these consti-
tute subgame perfect equilibria.
To capture the idea of reputation, we can examine another type of simple strat-
egy called a trigger strategy. Trigger strategies speciﬁcally refer to two action
proﬁles for the stage game: one proﬁle is called the “cooperative proﬁle,” and the
other is called the “punishment proﬁle.” The punishment proﬁle is assumed to be
a stage Nash proﬁle. In a trigger-strategy equilibrium, the players are supposed to
play the cooperative proﬁle in each period. However, if one or both of them devi-
ate from the cooperative proﬁle, then they play the punishment proﬁle forever
after. In other words, deviating from the cooperative proﬁle destroys a player’s
reputation and triggers the punishment proﬁle for the rest of the game.
To see how this works, consider the inﬁnitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma.
The stage game is given in Figure 22.4. There is only one stage Nash equilibrium,
(D, D), so we use it as the punishment proﬁle. Let (C, C) be the cooperative proﬁle.
Our goal is to understand whether the players have the incentive to play (C, C)
each period under the threat that they will revert to (D, D) forever if one or both
of them cheat. To be precise, the trigger strategy speciﬁes that the players select
(C, C) each period as long as this proﬁle was always played in the past; otherwise,
they are to play (D, D). This is sometimes called the grim-trigger strategy.
Let us evaluate whether the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect
equilibrium. Consider the incentives of player i (i = 1, 2) from the perspective
of period 1. Suppose the other player—called player j—behaves according to
the grim trigger. Player i basically has two options. First, she can herself follow
the prescription of the grim trigger, which means cooperating as player j does.
In this case, player i obtains a payoff of 2 each period, for a discounted total of
2 + 2d + 2d 2 + 2d 3 + . . . =
2
1 −d .
FIGURE 22.4
A prisoners’ dilemma.
C
C
1
2
D
D
2, 2
0, 3
1, 1
3, 0

--- Sayfa 314 ---
299
An Inﬁnitely Repeated Game
Second, player i could defect in the ﬁrst period, which yields an immediate
payoff of 3 because player j cooperates in the ﬁrst period. But player i ’s defec-
tion induces player j to defect in each period thereafter, so then the best that i
can do is to keep defecting and get 1 each period. Thus, by defecting in period
1, player i obtains the payoff
3 + d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . . = 3 + d [1 + d + d 2 + d
 3 + . . . ] = 3 +
d
1 −d .
If
2
1 −d Ú 3 +
d
1 −d ,
then player i earns a higher payoff by perpetually cooperating against the grim
trigger than by defecting in the ﬁrst period. Simplifying this inequality yields
d Ú 1>2.
So far, we see that the players have no incentive to cheat in the ﬁrst period
as long as d Ú 1>2. In fact, the same analysis establishes that the players have no
incentive to deviate from the grim trigger in any period. For example, suppose
the players have cooperated through period t −1. Then, because the game is
inﬁnitely repeated, the “continuation game” from period t looks just like the
game from period 1, so the analysis starting from period t is exactly the same as
the analysis at period 1. Discounting the payoffs to period t, we see that coop-
erating from period t yields each player 2>(1 −d ). Defecting against the grim
trigger leads to the payoff 3 + d>(1 −d ). Thus neither player has an incentive
to defect in period t if the discount factor exceeds 1>2.
Analysis of subgame perfection requires us also to look at histories in which
one or both players selected D at some point earlier. After such a history, the
grim-trigger strategy prescribes play of D. It is clear that as (D, D) is a stage
Nash proﬁle, a player has no incentive to deviate from the grim trigger in such
a contingency.
In summary, the simple calculation performed in reference to period 1 is
enough to establish whether cooperation can be supported in a subgame perfect
equilibrium via a reputation mechanism. For the stage game in Figure 22.4, the
grim-trigger strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if and only
if d Ú 0.
It is useful to restate the foregoing analysis in terms of current-period payoffs
and continuation values. We can express player i ’s payoff from any period t as
u t
i + dv t+1
i
, where ut
i is player i ’s payoff in period t and v t+1
i
 is player i ’s contin-
uation value from the start of period t + 1. Note that the latter is multiplied by
d to make it comparable to amounts in period t.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
300
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
To evaluate whether the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle is a subgame
perfect equilibrium, we can appeal to the one-deviation property (discussed
previously in Chapter 15), which holds for discounted inﬁnitely repeated games.
Therefore, we simply check single deviations in two kinds of contingencies:
(i) after histories in which (C, C) was always played, and (ii) after histories in
which one or both players selected D at some point.
In the latter type of contingency, the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle selects
(D, D), which yields a current-period payoff of u t
i = 1 for each player.
Further, the continuation value from period t + 1 is v t+1
i
= 1>(1 −d). If a
player were to deviate from the grim trigger, his current-period payoff would
decrease and his continuation payoff would remain the same, so there is no
sense in deviating.
In the former type of contingency, after a history in which (C, C) was always
played, the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle yields a current-period payoff of u t
i = 2
and a continuation value of v t+1
i
= 2>(1 −d) from the start of the next period.
If player i were to deviate by selecting D in the current period, his current-period
payoff would increase to 3 but his continuation value would decrease to 1>(1 −d).
In other words, the current-period deviation gain is 2 −1 = 1, whereas the loss
in continuation value is
2
1 −d −
1
1 −d =
1
1 −d .
Multiplying the loss by d to put it in current-period terms, we get the condition
under which the players do not want to deviate from grim trigger,
1 … d
1
1 −d ,
which simpliﬁes to d Ú 1>2.
The grim-trigger analysis applies to any repeated prisoners’ dilemma; in
fact, it applies to any game in which the players would punish a deviator by
reverting to perpetual play of a stage Nash proﬁle. Moreover, the analysis merely
requires identifying three stage-game payoffs for each player: the “cooperative
payoff” uc
i the “deviator’s payoff” ud
i , and the “punishment payoff” up
i . These
are deﬁned as follows. The value uc
i is player i ’s stage-game payoff in the event
that the players select the action proﬁle that they hope to support, such as (C, C)
in the prisoners’ dilemma. The value ud
i is player i ’s stage-game payoff in the
event that he plays a stage-game best-response to the other player’s cooperative
action, such as selecting D when the other player selects C in the prisoners’
dilemma. Finally, the value up
i is player i ’s stage-game payoff from play of the
stage Nash proﬁle, which in the prisoners’ dilemma is (D, D).

--- Sayfa 316 ---
301
An Inﬁnitely Repeated Game
Note that a player who is ﬁrst to deviate from the grim-trigger proﬁle will
get a deviation gain of u d
i −u c
i in the current period, but will look forward to a
loss of (u c
i −u p
i)>(1 −d) in continuation value starting from the next period.
The player prefers not to deviate if
u d
i −u c
i …
d
1 −d [u c
i −u p
i].
Solving for d, this becomes
d Ú u d
i −u c
i
u d
i −u p
i
 ,
which is the necessary and sufﬁcient condition for cooperation to be sustained
by the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle as a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.
For another example, consider the prisoners’ dilemma shown in Figure
22.5. For this game we have u c
i = 4, u d
i = 6, and u p
i = 0, so cooperation can be
sustained if and only if
d Ú 6 −4
6 −0 = 1
3 .
You can run through calculations like this to double check the examples in the
next chapter.
The inﬁnitely repeated game demonstrates that patience—valuing the
future—is essential to an effective reputation. When contemplating whether to
defect in one period, the players consider the future loss that would result from
tarnishing their reputations. Patient players—those with high discount factors—
care a lot about payoffs in future periods and therefore they do not want to ruin
their reputations for some short-term gain. Thus, there is a sense in which main-
taining a reputation is more about the future than the past.4
4One of the early general analyses of discounted, repeated games may be found in D. Abreu, “On the Theory
of Inﬁnitely Repeated Games with Discounting,” Econometrica, 56 (1988): 383–396.
FIGURE 22.5
Another prisoners’ dilemma.
C
C
1
2
D
D
4, 4
-2, 6
6, -2
0,  0

--- Sayfa 317 ---
302
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
THE EQUILIBRIUM PAYOFF SET  WITH LOW DISCOUNTING
The grim-trigger equilibrium discussed in the preceding section is just one of
potentially many subgame perfect equilibria in the repeated prisoners’ dilemma.
We know from the result on page 295 that the following strategy proﬁle also
is an equilibrium regardless of the discount factor: play the stage Nash action
proﬁle (D, D) in every period, regardless of the history of play. This equilibrium
is not very “cooperative,” and it yields a low payoff relative to the grim-trigger
proﬁle. In this section, I demonstrate that depending on the discount factor,
there are many other equilibria exhibiting intermediate amounts of cooperation.
The analysis will get a bit technical, but the conclusion at the end is signiﬁcant.
To develop a picture of the entire set of equilibria in the repeated prisoners’
dilemma, consider again the stage game in Figure 22.5. For this stage game,
Figure 22.6 depicts the set of feasible stage-game payoffs. This ﬁgure also graphs
the possible repeated-game payoffs in terms of “average per period,” by multiply-
ing the discounted sum payoff by (1 −d). For example, the point (4, 4) is noted
in the picture with a solid circle, which refers to the players obtaining (4, 4) each
period in the game [by playing (C, C) each period].5 The point (6, −2) arises if
(D, C) is played each period.
The diamond formed by connecting points (4, 4), (−2, 6), (0, 0), and
(6, −2) is important; any payoff vector inside or on the edges of the diamond
can be obtained as an average payoff if the players choose the right sequence of
5Technically speaking, each player's payoff is 4>(1 −d) in this case. In Figure 22.6, I have multiplied this
payoff by (1 −d) to put it in terms of per period.
FIGURE 22.6
Possible repeated game
payoffs, per period.

6

4

2

2
4
6
-2
-2
v2
v1

--- Sayfa 318 ---
303
The Equilibrium Payoff Set  with Low Discounting
actions over time. For instance, consider the point (5, 1) designated by an open
circle in Figure 22.6. Suppose the players alternate between (C, C) and (D, C)
over time, starting with (C, C) in the ﬁrst period. For player 1, this sequence of
actions yields a discounted payoff of
4 + 6d + 4d 2 + 6d 3 + . . . .
Factoring terms, this expression simpliﬁes to
4 [1 + d2 + d4 + . . .] + 6d [1 + d2 + d4 + . . .] =
4
1 −d2 +
6d
1 −d2 .
Here I have used the same method as that put to use earlier to calculate the sums.6
Recognizing that 1 −d2 = (1 + d)(1 −d), we can write player 1’s payoff as
4 + 6d
(1 −d)(1 + d) .
Multiplying by (1 −d) puts this in terms of average per period:
4 + 6d
1 + d .
Likewise, player 2’s per-period average is
4 −2d
1 + d .
Note that if d is close to 1, then this average payoff vector is arbitrarily close
to (5, 1). Just plug in d = 1 to see this. You can try other examples to convince
yourself that the diamond in Figure 22.6 represents the set of average per-period
payoffs that can arise in the repeated game. For instance, determine how an
average payoff of (2, 2) can be obtained.
With the set of feasible repeated-game payoffs in mind, we can determine
whether or not any particular payoff vector can be supported as the result of a
subgame perfect equilibrium. For an example, focus on the per-period average
vector (5, 1) and consider the following “modiﬁed grim-trigger strategy”: The
players are instructed to alternate between (C, C) and (D, C) over time, starting
with (C, C) in the ﬁrst period. If either or both players has deviated from this
prescription in the past, the players are supposed to revert to the stage Nash
proﬁle (D, D) forever. To determine whether this strategy proﬁle is an equi-
librium, we must compare each player’s short-term gain from deviating to the
punishment.
6Letting v = 1 + d2 + d4 + . . . , we have v = 1 + d2v. Solving, we get v = 1>(1 −d2).

--- Sayfa 319 ---
304
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
Let us begin with the incentives of player 2. First note that if the players
conform to the modiﬁed grim trigger, then, starting from any odd-numbered
period [in which players select (C, C)], player 2’s payoff is
4 −2d + 4d 2 −2d3 + . . . = 4 −2d
1 −d2 .
Starting from any even-numbered period, player 2’s payoff is
−2 + 4d −2d 2 + 4d 3 + . . . = −2 + 4d
1 −d2 .
We need to check whether player 2 has an incentive to cheat in either an
odd-numbered or an even-numbered period. Note that in each odd-numbered
period, the players are supposed to select (C, C). If player 2 cheats (by defect-
ing), then he obtains a short-term gain of 6 −4 = 2; however, his continua-
tion value starting in the next period—an even-numbered period—will be 0
(because the players defect thereafter) rather than (−2 + 4d)>(1 −d2). If we
discount this future loss to the period in which player 2 cheats, the payoff is
d (−2 + 4d)>(1 −d2). Thus, player 2 prefers to cooperate in odd-numbered
periods if and only if the long-term loss of cheating outweighs the short-term
gain:

d (−2 + 4d )
(1 −d2)
Ú 2.
(1)
Repeating the calculation for even-numbered periods yields the following
inequality:

d(4 −2d)
(1 −d2) Ú 2.
(2)
The short-term gain of 2 here is due to player 2 obtaining 0 rather than −2.
In summary, assuming player 1 plays according to the modiﬁed grim trig-
ger, player 2 wishes to conform if and only if both inequalities 1 and 2 are
satisﬁed. You can verify with a bit of algebraic manipulation that the ﬁrst
simpliﬁes to d Ú (1 + 113)>6 and the second simpliﬁes to d Ú 1>2. Be cause
(1 + 113)>6 > 1>2, the ﬁrst inequality is more stringent than is the second.
Thus, player 2 cooperates as long as d Ú (1 + 113)>6. You can perform the
same kind of analysis to ﬁnd that player 1 will conform to the modiﬁed grim
trigger as long as d Ú (−3 + 121)>6. Because
 1 + 113
6
 > −3 + 121
6
 ,

--- Sayfa 320 ---
305
The Equilibrium Payoff Set  with Low Discounting
we conclude that the modiﬁed grim-trigger proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilib-
rium if and only if d Ú (1 + 113)>6. Furthermore, as already noted, the payoff
of this equilibrium is close to (5, 1) if d is close to 1.
I realize that you might ﬁnd this analysis complicated. But putting the
details of the arguments aside, recognize the general conclusion. I showed that a
point on one of the edges of the diamond in Figure 22.6 can be supported as an
equilibrium average per-period payoff as long as the players are patient enough.
In fact, any point on the edge or interior of the diamond can be so supported,
as long as two conditions hold: (1) each player obtains more than 0, and (2) the
discount factor is close enough to 1. Figure 22.7 depicts the set of equilibrium
payoffs. Here is the result stated for general repeated games:
Result: Consider any inﬁnitely repeated game. Suppose there is a stage
Nash proﬁle that yields payoff vector w (wi for player i, i = 1, 2, . . . , n).
Let v be any feasible average per-period payoff such that vi > wi for
each player i. The vector v can be supported arbitrarily closely by a
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if d is close enough to 1.
In other words, with the use of trigger strategies, almost any repeated-game
payoff can be achieved in equilibrium with patient players.7
7Game theorists call this the folk theorem because it was thought to have been a part of the profession’s
conventional wisdom before versions of the result were formally proved. A general treatment appears in
D. Fudenberg and E. Maskin, “The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with Discounting or with Incomplete
Information,” Econometrica, 54 (1986): 533–554. For his pioneering analysis of repeated games and the folk
theorem (among other theoretical contributions), Robert Aumann was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2005.
FIGURE 22.7
Equilibrium per-period
payoffs for large d.

6

4

2

2
4
6
-2
-2
v2
v1

--- Sayfa 321 ---
306
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Persons 1 and 2 are forming a ﬁrm. The value of their relationship
depends on the effort that each expends. Suppose that person i ’s utility from the
relationship is x 2
j + xj −xi xj , where xi is person i ’s effort and xj is the effort of
the other person (i = 1, 2). Assume x1, x2 Ú 0.
(a)  Compute the partners’ best-response functions and ﬁnd the Nash equilib-
rium of this game. Is the Nash equilibrium efﬁcient?
(b)  Now suppose that the partners interact over time, which we model with the
inﬁnitely repeated version of the game. Let d denote the discount factor of
the players. Under what conditions can the partners sustain some positive
effort level k = x1 = x2 over time?
(c)  Comment on how the maximum sustainable effort depends on the partners’
patience.
Solution:
(a)  To ﬁnd the best-response functions, ﬁx player j ’s effort xj and consider how
player i ’s effort level xi affects his payoff x 2
j + xj −xi
 xj . If xj = 0, then
player i ’s payoff is 0, regardless of his choice, so in this case all of player
i ’s feasible actions are best responses. Observe that in the case of xj > 0,
player i ’s payoff is strictly decreasing in xi and so player i ’s best response
is to select the lowest effort xi = 0. The only Nash equilibrium of this game
is the proﬁle (0, 0); that is, each player selects the lowest effort level. The
equilibrium is not efﬁcient. To see this, note that if both players select effort
level k > 0, then they each get the payoff k2 + k −k2 = k, which exceeds
the payoff of 0 that they get with proﬁle (0, 0). In other words, proﬁle (0, 0)
is less efﬁcient than proﬁle (k, k).
(b)  Each player can guarantee himself a payoff of 0 by selecting xi = 0 in every
period. Thus, repeated play of the stage Nash proﬁle, which yields a payoff
of 0, is the worst punishment that can be levied against a player. With this
in mind, consider the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle in which each player
selects effort level k in each period, as long as both players had done so
in the past. Otherwise, the players revert to the stage Nash proﬁle. When
this strategy proﬁle is played, then each player gets k in each period. The
discounted sum over an inﬁnite number of periods is k>(1 −d). Note that
the best way for a player to deviate is to select 0 effort rather than k, which
yields a payoff of k2 + k in the period of the deviation (as the other player
selects k).  Following the deviation, the players will revert to the stage Nash
proﬁle, which gives the deviator a payoff of 0 in all future periods. Thus, for

--- Sayfa 322 ---
307
Exercises
the grim trigger to be an equilibrium, we need k>(1 −d) Ú k2 + k, which
simpliﬁes to d>(1 −d) Ú k. Rearranging yields d Ú k>(1 + k).
(c)  The maximal sustainable effort is d>(1 −d), which is increasing in d. In
other words, more patient players can sustain higher levels of effort.
EXERCISES
1. Consider a repeated game in which the stage game in the following ﬁgure is
played in each of two periods and there is no discounting.
L
1
2
U
C
D
M
R
8, 8
9, 0
1, 3
0, 9
0, 0
3, 1
3, 3
0, 0
0, 0
Fully describe a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the players select
(U, L) in the ﬁrst period.
2. Find conditions on the discount factor under which cooperation can be sup-
ported in the inﬁnitely repeated games with the following stage games.
C
C
1
D
D
2
3, 4
0, 7
1, 2
5, 0
(b)
C
C
1
D
D
2
3, 2
0, 1
2, 1
7, 0
(c)
C
C
1
D
D
2
2, 2
0, 4
1, 1
4, 0
(a)
Use the grim-trigger strategy proﬁle.
3. Consider the following stage game.
X
A
1
Y
B
2
5, 6
0, 0
8, 2
2, 2

--- Sayfa 323 ---
308
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
(a) Find and report all of the (pure-strategy) Nash equilibria of this game.
(b)  Consider the two-period repeated game in which this stage game is
played twice and the repeated-game payoffs are simply the sum of the
payoffs in each of the two periods. Is there a subgame perfect equilib-
rium of this repeated game in which (A, X) is played in the ﬁrst period?
If so, fully describe the equilibrium. If not, explain why.
4. If its stage game has exactly one Nash equilibrium, how many subgame
perfect equilibria does a two-period, repeated game have? Explain. Would
your answer change if there were T periods, where T is any ﬁnite integer?
5. Consider the inﬁnitely repeated game where the stage game is the matrix
in Exercise 2(c). Under what conditions is there a subgame perfect equilib-
rium in which the players alternate between (C, C) and (C, D), starting with
(C, C) in the ﬁrst period? Under what conditions is there a subgame perfect
equilibrium in which the players alternate between (C, C) and (D, D), start-
ing with (C, C) in the ﬁrst period? (Use modiﬁed trigger strategies.)
6. Which is more important to achieving cooperation through a reputation, a
long history together or a long horizon ahead?
7. Consider the following three-player game.
2, 2, 0
5, 5, 5
0, 7, 4
8, 6, 8
L
U
1
2
D
R
A
B
3
4, 4,  1
4, 2, 8
4, 2, 5
0, 2, 9
L
U
1
2
D
R
The players make their choices simultaneously and independently. The pay-
offs are listed in order of the player numbers.
(a)  Find the (pure-strategy) Nash equilibria of this game.
(b)  Consider the two-period repeated game in which this stage game is played
twice and the repeated game payoffs are simply the sum of the payoffs in
the two periods. Compute and report all of the subgame perfect equilibria
of this repeated game. List the set of subgame perfect equilibrium payoffs.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
309
Exercises
8. Consider an inﬁnite-period repeated game in which a “long-run player” faces
a sequence of “short-run” opponents. Formally, player 1 plays the stage
game with a different player 2 in each successive period. Denote by 2t the
player who plays the role of player 2 in the stage game in period t. Assume
that all players observe the history of play. Let d denote the discount factor
of player 1. Note that such a game has an inﬁnite number of players.
(a)  In any subgame perfect equilibrium, what must be true about the behav-
ior of player 2t with respect to the action selected by player 1 in period t?
(b)  Give an example of a stage-game and subgame perfect equilibrium
where the players select an action proﬁle in the stage game that is not a
stage Nash equilibrium.
(c)  Show by example that a greater range of behavior can be supported
when both players are long-run players than when only player 1 is a
long-run player.
9. Consider the following “war of attrition” game. Interaction between play-
ers 1 and 2 takes place over discrete periods of time, starting in period 1. In
each period, players choose between “stop” (S) and “continue” (C) and they
receive payoffs given by the following stage-game matrix:
S
S
1
2
C
C
x, x
0, 10
10, 0
-1, -1
The length of the game depends on the players’ behavior. Speciﬁcally, if
one or both players select S in a period, then the game ends at the end of
this period. Otherwise, the game continues into the next period. Suppose
the players discount payoffs between periods according to discount factor
d. Assume x < 10.
(a)  Show that this game has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which player
1 chooses S and player 2 chooses C in the ﬁrst period. Note that in such
an equilibrium, the game ends at the end of period 1.
(b)  Assume x = 0. Compute the symmetric equilibrium of this game.
(Hint: In each period, the players randomize between C and S. Let a
denote the probability that each player selects S in a given period.)
(c)  Write an expression for the symmetric equilibrium value of a for the
case in which x is not equal to 0.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
310
22: Repeated Games and Reputation
10. Consider a repeated game between a supplier (player 1) and a buyer (play-
er 2). These two parties interact over an inﬁnite number of periods. In each
period, player 1 chooses a quality level q ∈[0, 5] at cost q. Simultaneously,
player 2 decides whether to purchase the good at a ﬁxed price of 6. If player 2
purchases, then the stage-game payoffs are 6 −q for player 1 and 2q −6 for
player 2. Here, player 2 is getting a beneﬁt of 2q. If player 2 does not purchase,
then the stage-game payoffs are −q for player 1 and 0 for player 2. Suppose
that both players have discount factor d.
(a)  Calculate the efﬁcient quality level under the assumption that transfers
are possible (so you should look at the sum of payoffs).
(b)  For sufﬁciently large d, does this game have a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium that yields the efﬁcient outcome in each period? If so,
describe the equilibrium strategies and determine how large d must be
for this equilibrium to exist.
11. This is an extension of the previous exercise. Consider the following
stage game between a manager (also called the “Principal”) and a work-
er (the “Agent”). Let the manager be player 1 and the worker be player
2.  Simultaneously, the manager chooses a bonus payment p ∈[0, ) and
the worker chooses an effort level a ∈[0, ). The stage-game payoffs are
u1(p, a) = 4a −p and u2(p, a) = p −a2.
(a) Determine the efﬁcient effort level for the worker.
(b) Find the Nash equilibrium of the stage game.
(c)  Suppose the stage game is to be played twice (a two-period repeated game)
and there is no discounting. Find all of the subgame perfect equilibria.
(d)  Suppose the stage game is to be played inﬁnitely many times in succes-
sion (an inﬁnitely repeated game) and assume that the players share
the discount factor d < 1. Find conditions on the discount factor under
which there is a subgame perfect equilibrium featuring selection of the
efﬁcient effort level in each period (on the equilibrium path).
12. Consider the inﬁnitely repeated prisoners’ dilemma and recall the deﬁnition
of the grim-trigger strategy. Here is the deﬁnition of another simple strat-
egy called Tit-for-tat: Select C in the ﬁrst period; in each period thereafter,
choose the action that the opponent selected in the previous period.8 Is the
tit-for-tat strategy proﬁle a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game for dis-
count factors close to one? Is this strategy proﬁle a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium of the repeated game for discount factors close to one? Explain.
8For more on tit-for-tat, you might look at R. Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic Books,
1984).

--- Sayfa 326 ---
311
I
n this chapter, I sketch three applications of repeated-game theory. Two of
them elaborate on analysis presented in Part II of this book. In particular, to
study collusion between ﬁrms, I use a repeated version of the Cournot duopoly
model; discussion of the enforcement of  international trade agreements utilizes
a similar repeated game.
DYNAMIC OLIGOPOLY AND COLLUSION
Consider the Cournot duopoly model in Chapter 10, with two ﬁrms that each
produce at zero cost (which I assume just to make the computations easy), and
suppose the market price is given by p = 1 −q1 −q2 . Firm i, which produces
qi , obtains a payoff of (1 −qi −qj ) qi . Note that the Nash equilibrium of this
game is q1 = q2 = 1>3, yielding a payoff of 1>9 for each ﬁrm. As noted in
Chapter 10, this outcome is inefﬁcient from the ﬁrms’ point of view; they would
both be better off if they shared the monopoly level of output by each produc-
ing 1>4. Sharing the monopoly output yields each ﬁrm a payoff of 1>8, which is
greater than the Nash equilibrium payoff of 1>9.1 In the static game, therefore,
the ﬁrms would like to collude to set q1 = q2 = 1>4, but this strategy proﬁle
cannot be sustained because it is not an equilibrium.
In most industries, ﬁrms do not interact in just a single point in time. They
interact every day, potentially forever. To model ﬁrms’ ongoing interaction, we
can examine an inﬁnitely repeated version of the Cournot duopoly, where the stage
game is deﬁned as the Cournot game described in the preceding paragraph. Anal-
ysis of the inﬁnitely repeated game demonstrates that collusion can be sustained
in equilibrium, using the reputation mechanism. In particular, let us evaluate the
following grim-trigger strategy proﬁle: Each ﬁrm is prescribed to select 1>4 in
each period, as long as both ﬁrms did so in the past; if one or both players devi-
ates, the ﬁrms are supposed to play the stage Nash proﬁle (1>3, 1>3) forever after.
1If numbers 1>8 and 1>9 seem insigniﬁcant, think of qi as millions of units, the price in dollars, and the payoff
therefore in millions of dollars.
23
COLLUSION, TRADE AGREEMENTS,
AND GOODWILL

--- Sayfa 327 ---
312
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
Assume that ﬁrm j plays according to this strategy. Then, if ﬁrm i cooperates,
it gets the discounted sum payoff
1
8
 (1 + d + d 2 + . . . ) =
1
8(1 −d ) .
Firm i can take advantage of ﬁrm j in the short run by producing more than 1>4.
However, it will then obtain 1>9 in all future periods (anticipating that the players
revert to the stage Nash proﬁle following the deviation). To check ﬁrm i ’s incen-
tives, note that to maximize its immediate gain from cheating, ﬁrm i chooses qi
to maximize (1 −1>4 −qi ) qi . You should verify that the maximum is attained
by picking qi = 3>8 and that it yields a payoff of 9>64 in the period of the devia-
tion. Note that  9>64 > 1>8, meaning that player i has a short-term incentive to
deviate. Thus, the most that ﬁrm i can get by deviating from the grim trigger is
an immediate payoff of 9>64, plus 1>9 in all future periods. With appropriate
discounting, this payoff stream sums to
9
64 +
d
9(1 −d ) .
Collusion can be sustained as a subgame perfect equilibrium if
1
8(1 −d ) Ú 9
64 +
d
9(1 −d ) ,
which simpliﬁes to d Ú 9>17. In words, if the ﬁrms do not discount the future
too much, collusion is possible.
This result is a bit disconcerting because economists believe that competition
yields many beneﬁts to society, among them efﬁciency of the economy as a
whole.2 When ﬁrms collude, consumers can lose out big time, which is why
there are laws against collusion to restrain trade. Government policy is, in this
case, best understood in terms of how it restricts contracting. A collusive equi-
librium, such as the grim trigger just studied, is a self-enforced contract. (Recall
the discussion of contract in Chapter 13.) The Sherman Act, passed in the United
States in 1890, prohibits such contracts between ﬁrms.3 Thus, it is a no-no for
managers of competing ﬁrms to meet in smoke-ﬁlled rooms and make deals.
Unfortunately, outlawing explicit collusion contracts is not enough because
ﬁrms often ﬁnd ways of colluding without their managers actually having to
communicate directly. For example, many ﬁrms make a big deal out of their
2Do not confuse efﬁciency of the economy—which takes into consideration all ﬁrms, consumers, and
markets—with efﬁciency from the point of view of the two ﬁrms in the model presented here.
3The Clayton and Federal Trade Commission Acts (1914) extended the law on monopolization practices.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
313
 Enforcing International Trade Agreements
commitment to “match competitors’ prices,” and ﬁrms ﬁnd ways to make this
commitment legally binding. Although price-match commitments may seem
competitive, in a dynamic setting they can have the opposite effect. By commit-
ting to match prices, ﬁrms may merely be committing to play the grim-trigger
strategy. Thus, although the message to consumers is, “We’re competitive,” the
message between ﬁrms may be, “We agree to get into a price war [the stage
Nash proﬁle] if any ﬁrm deviates from the collusive agreement.” Firms with
dominant market positions can also facilitate collusion by acting as “market
leaders” who set prices expecting other ﬁrms to follow suit. When collusion
takes place without the ﬁrms actively communicating about it, it is called an
implicit contract. The Sherman Act forbids such tacit collusion, evaluating
whether ﬁrms engage in parallel conduct that is likely different from what one
would expect in a competitive market.
ENFORCING INTERNATIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS
Whereas self-enforced contracts between colluding ﬁrms is undesirable, the
opposite is true of contracts between countries. International trade agreements
can be very beneﬁcial, but, because there is no strong external enforcement insti-
tution for interaction between countries, nations must rely on self-enforcement.
The reputation mechanism is used to enforce trade agreements.
For example, a signiﬁcant fraction of the world’s nations have agreed to
set low tariffs on imports (a reduction from the high tariffs that existed decades
ago). Low tariffs are generally efﬁcient in that countries are better off when they
all set low tariffs than if they all set high tariffs. However, as you have learned
by analyzing the equilibrium of the static tariff game in Chapter 10, low tariffs
cannot be sustained as a self-enforced contract when the countries rely on short-
term incentives. In other words, low tariffs do not constitute a Nash equilibrium
in the static game. Instead, nations utilize the repeated nature of their interaction.
They often agree to trigger-strategy equilibria, whereby low tariffs (cooperation)
are sustained by the threat of reverting to the high-tariff stage Nash proﬁle. That
is, if one country cheats by unilaterally raising a tariff, then it and its trading
 partners expect low value in the future as play turns to the stage Nash proﬁle.
Self-enforced contracts between countries are quite explicit—they result
from active, sometimes intense, negotiation. International institutions facilitate
trade agreements by bringing the nations’ representatives together, by provid-
ing them with a language that fosters mutual understanding, by recording agree-
ments, and by disseminating information. The World Trade Organization (WTO)
and its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), have
been the focal point for achieving dramatic tariff reductions in the past century.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
314
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
Central to the WTO is the concept of “reciprocity,” whereby a country is allowed
to retaliate when one of its trading partners raises a tariff level. Reciprocity
evokes the notion of trigger strategy.4
Owing to uncertainty and information problems, countries periodically get
into disputes. For this reason, the WTO encourages a limited trigger- strategy
equilibrium in which the punishment phase does not last forever; that is,
governments do not exactly play the grim trigger, but they play something
that delivers moderate punishment for a short time. Countries also renegotiate
their contracts over time, to resolve disputes and balance their interests in the
rapidly changing world. The “banana trade war” between the United States and
the  European Union illustrates the manner in which disputes, punishment, and
renegotiation take place. In 1998, the United States asked the WTO to force the
EU to dismantle favored trading terms given by the EU to banana producers
in former European colonies. The WTO sided with the United States. In 1999,
the EU responded by relaxing its rules toward imports of U.S. companies such
as Chiquita, but not enough to satisfy the United States. With WTO approval,
the United States retaliated by raising the tariff rates from 6 to 100 percent on
several European luxury goods, such as pecorino cheese, cashmere wool prod-
ucts, and handbags.
GOODWILL AND TRADING A REPUTATION
The word “trade” usually makes people think of the exchange of physical goods
and services. But some less-tangible assets also are routinely traded. Reputation
is one of them. Those who have studied accounting know that “goodwill” is a
legitimate and often important item on the asset side of a ﬁrm’s balance sheet.
Goodwill refers to the conﬁdence that consumers have in the ﬁrm’s integrity,
the belief that the ﬁrm will provide high-quality goods and services—in other
words, the ﬁrm’s reputation. It is often said that a ﬁrm’s reputation is its great-
est asset. Firms that have well-publicized failures (product recalls, for example)
often lose customer conﬁdence and, as a result, proﬁts.
When a ﬁrm is bought or sold, its reputation is part of the deal. The current
owners of a ﬁrm have an incentive to maintain the ﬁrm’s good reputation to the
extent that it will attract a high price from prospective buyers. This incentive
4The following recent articles use repeated-game theory to study international institutions: K. Bagwell and
R. W. Staiger, “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American Economic Review, 89 (1999): 2l5–248; G. Maggi,
“The Role of Multilateral Institutions in International Trade Cooperation,” American Economic Review, 89
(1999): 190–214; and M. Klimenko, G. Ramey, and J. Watson, “Recurrent Trade Agreements and the Value of
External Enforcement,” University of California, San Diego, Discussion Paper 2001–01, 2001.

--- Sayfa 330 ---
315
 Goodwill and Trading a Reputation
may outweigh short-term desires to take advantage of customers or to do other
things that ultimately will injure the ﬁrm’s good name.
A game-theory model illustrates how reputation is traded.5 The follow-
ing game-theoretic example is completely abstract—it is not a model of a ﬁrm
per se—but it clearly demonstrates how reputation is traded. Consider the two-
period repeated game analyzed at the beginning of Chapter 22; the stage game
is reproduced in Figure 23.1. Here I add a new twist. Suppose there are three
players, called player 1, player 21, and player 22. In the ﬁrst period, players 1 and
21 play the stage game (with player 21 playing the role of player 2 in the stage
game). Then player 21 retires, so he cannot play the stage game with player 1
again in period 2. However, player 21 holds the right to play in period 2, even
though he cannot exercise this right himself. Player 21 can sell this right to player
22, in which case players 1 and 22 play the stage game in the second period.
To be precise, the game begins in the ﬁrst period, where players 1 and 21 play
the stage game. Between periods 1 and 2, players 21 and 22 make a joint decision,
determining whether player 22 obtains the right to play in period 2 as well as a
monetary transfer from player 22 to player 21. If player 22 obtains the right from
player 21, then players 1 and 22 play the stage game in period 2; otherwise, the
game ends before the second period. The default outcome at the joint-decision
phase is no transfer and no trade of the play right, ending the game. As for
payoffs, player 1 obtains the sum of his stage-game payoffs; player 21 obtains his
stage-game payoff from period 1 plus whatever transfer he negotiates with player
22 between periods; and player 22 obtains his payoff from the second-period
stage game (if played) minus the transfer to which he agreed between periods.
Note that this is a game with joint decisions.
To see how player 21’s ability to sell the right to player 22 affects behavior,
let us ﬁrst solve the version of the game in which there is no joint decision
FIGURE 23.1
Stage game from Chapter 22.
5The model I describe here is inspired by D. M. Kreps, “Corporate Culture and Economic Theory,” in Firms,
Organizations and Contracts: A Reader in Industrial Organization, ed. P. J. Buckley and J. Michie (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 221–275. Recent, more rigorous research on this topic is contained
in S. Tadelis, “The Market for Reputations as an Incentive Mechanism,” Journal of Political Economy, 92
(2002): 854–882.
X
A
1
2
B
Y
Z
4, 3
2,1
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
1, 4

--- Sayfa 331 ---
316
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
between periods 1 and 2. In this version of the game, players 1 and 21 play the
stage game in period 1 and then players 1 and 22 play the stage game in period 2.
Observe that subgame perfection requires either (A, Z) or (B, Y) to be played in
each period. To see this, suppose you wanted to sustain (A, X) in the ﬁrst period.
It would be irrational for player 21 to follow this prescription because X is domi-
nated in the stage game and player 21’s payoff does not depend on anything that
happens after the ﬁrst period.
Now return to the game in which player 21 can sell player 22 the right
to play the stage game in period 2. In this setting, player 21 actually can be
given the incentive to play X. Consider the following regime: Players 1 and
21 are prescribed to select (A, X) in the ﬁrst period. Then, in the event that the
second-period stage game is played, the behavior of players 1 and 22 depends
on the outcome of ﬁrst-period interaction. If (A, X) was chosen in period 1,
then 1 and 22 are supposed to choose (A, Z) in period 2; otherwise, they select
(B, Y) in period 2. Note that the outcome of period 1 inﬂuences the amount
that player 22 is willing to pay for the right to play. Play in period 2 is worth
4 to player 22 if (A, X) was the outcome of period 1; otherwise, the right to
play is worth 1.
Assume the joint decision between periods is resolved according to the
standard bargaining solution, where players 21 and 22 divide the surplus in
proportion to their relative bargaining powers. Let a be the bargaining weight
for player 21, so (1 −a) is the weight for player 22. The disagreement point
yields both of these players a payoff of 0, net of whatever player 21 received in
the ﬁrst period (which he gets regardless of interaction after the ﬁrst period).
If (A, X) was the outcome in period 1, then players 21 and 22 negotiate over a
surplus of 4 (which is what player 22 would obtain by securing the right to play).
Thus, conditional on (A, X) occurring in the ﬁrst period, player 21 obtains a # 4
and player 22 obtains (1 −a) # 4 from the negotiation phase. These values are
achieved by having player 22 make a transfer of a # 4 to player 21 in exchange
for the right to play in period 2. By similar reasoning, if (A, Z) was the outcome
in the ﬁrst period, then players 21 and 22 negotiate over a surplus of 1, yielding
a # 1 to player 21 and (1 −a) # 1 to player 22.
As I have constructed it, the regime under consideration speciﬁes Nash
equilibrium behavior in the second period—that is, (A, Z) or (B, Y), depending
on the outcome of period 1—and joint decisions consistent with the standard
bargaining solution. To complete the analysis, we must check whether players
1 and 21 have the unilateral incentive to deviate from playing (A, X) in the ﬁrst
period. If not, the regime is a negotiation equilibrium.
First, observe that player 1 has no incentive to deviate: He could induce (B, Y)
to be played in the second period, but only at a ﬁrst-period cost exceeding his
second-period gain. As for player 21, if he goes along with (A, X), then his

--- Sayfa 332 ---
317
 Guided Exercise
immediate payoff is 3 and he gets 4a through negotiation with player 22, for
a total of 3 + 4a. In contrast, if player 21 picks Z, then he would obtain 4 in
the ﬁrst period and a through negotiation, for a total of 4 + a. Thus, player 21
has the incentive to cooperate in the ﬁrst period if and only if 3 + 4a Ú 4 + a,
which simpliﬁes to a Ú 1>3. In conclusion, the regime is a negotiation equilib-
rium if and only if a Ú 1>3.
This analysis demonstrates that a reputation can be established by one party
and then transferred to another party who ﬁnally exploits it. In the game, player
21’s incentive to cooperate in period 1 derives entirely from his desire to build
a reputation that he can sell to player 22. The model also illustrates the hold-up
problem ﬁrst discussed in Chapter 21. If the terms of trade favor player 22—
represented by a < 1>3—then player 21 cannot appropriate much of the value
of his reputation investment; in this case, (A, X) cannot be supported in the
ﬁrst period.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the following game:
(a) What are the Nash equilibria of this game?
(b)  If the players could meet and make a self-enforced agreement regarding
how to play this game, which of the Nash equilibria would they jointly
select?
(c)  Suppose the preceding matrix describes the stage game in a two-period
repeated game. Show that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which
(z, z) is played in the ﬁrst period.
(d)  One can interpret the equilibrium from part (c) as a self-enforced, dynamic
contract. Suppose that after they play the stage game in the ﬁrst period but
before they play the stage game in the second period, the players have an
opportunity to renegotiate their self-enforced contract. Do you believe the
equilibrium from part (c) can be sustained?
x
1
2
y
z
x
y
z
3, 3
5, 5
0, 0
0, 0
9, 0
8, 8
0, 9
0, 0
0, 0

--- Sayfa 333 ---
318
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
Solution:
(a) You can easily verify that the Nash equilibria are (x, x) and (y, y).
(b)  Because strategy proﬁle (y, y) is more efﬁcient than proﬁle (x, x), the  players
would agree to play (y, y).
(c)  Consider the following strategy proﬁle for the two-period repeated game:
In the ﬁrst period, the players are supposed to select (z, z). If neither player
deviates, then the strategy proﬁle prescribes that stage Nash proﬁle (y, y)
be played in the second period. In contrast, if one or both players deviate
in the ﬁrst period (for example, if one player chooses y for an immediate
gain of 9 −8 = 1), then the players coordinate on stage Nash proﬁle (x, x)
in the second period. To see that this strategy proﬁle constitutes a subgame
perfect equilibrium, note that it always prescribes a stage Nash proﬁle in the
second-period subgames. Furthermore, a player gains at most 1 by deviating
in the ﬁrst period, but in this case the player then loses 2 because of the shift
to (x, x) in the second period.
(d)  Renegotiation can interfere with the equilibrium described in part (c).
For example, if player 1 deviates by choosing y in the ﬁrst period, he
could then say the following to player 2: “Hey, I made a mistake. Let’s
not continue with the equilibrium we agreed to earlier, for it now speci-
ﬁes play of (x, x). It is strictly better for both of us to coordinate on
(y, y).” Indeed, the players have a mutual interest in switching to (y, y).
But anticipating that they would do this in the event of a ﬁrst-period
deviation, (z, z) is not sustainable in the ﬁrst period. The theory of re-
negotiation is, by the way, an important topic at the frontier of current
research in game theory.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the Bertrand oligopoly model, where n ﬁrms simultaneously and in-
dependently select their prices, p1, p2, . . . , pn , in a market. (These prices are
greater than or equal to 0.) Consumers observe these prices and only purchase
from the ﬁrm (or ﬁrms) with the lowest price p, according to the demand
curve Q = 110 −p, where p = min{p1, p2, . . . , pn}. That is, the ﬁrm with
the lowest price gets all of the sales. If the lowest price is offered by more than
one ﬁrm, then these ﬁrms equally share the quantity demanded Q. Assume
that ﬁrms must supply the quantities demanded of them and that production
takes place at a constant cost of 10 per unit. (That is, the cost function for each
ﬁrm is c (q) = 10q.) Determining the Nash equilibrium of this game was the
subject of a previous exercise.

--- Sayfa 334 ---
319
 Exercises
(a)  Suppose that this game is inﬁnitely repeated. (The ﬁrms play the
game each period, for an inﬁnite number of periods.) Deﬁne d as the
discount factor for the ﬁrms. Imagine that the ﬁrms wish to sustain
a collusive arrangement in which they all select the monopoly price
pM = 60 each period. What strategies might support this behavior in
equilibrium? (Do not solve for conditions under which equilibrium
occurs. Just explain what the strategies are. Remember, this requires
specifying how the ﬁrms punish each other. Use the Nash equilibrium
price as punishment.)
(b)  Derive a condition on n and d that guarantees that collusion can be
sustained.
(c)  What does your answer to part (b) imply about the optimal size of
cartels?
2. Examine the inﬁnitely repeated tariff-setting game, where the stage game
is the two-country tariff game in Chapter 10 (see also Exercise 3 in that
chapter).
(a)  Compute the Nash equilibrium of the stage game.
(b)  Find conditions on the discount factor such that zero tariffs (x1 = x2 = 0)
can be sustained each period by a subgame perfect equilibrium. Use the
grim-trigger strategy proﬁle.
(c)  Find conditions on the discount factor such that a tariff level of
x1 = x2 = k can be sustained by a subgame perfect equilibrium, where
k is some ﬁxed number between 0 and 100.
3. Repeat the analysis of goodwill presented in this chapter for the following
stage game:
4. Consider an inﬁnite-period repeated prisoners’ dilemma game in which a
long-run player 1 faces a sequence of short-run opponents. (You dealt with
games like this in Exercise 8 of Chapter 22.) Formally, there is an inﬁnite
number of players—denoted 21, 22, 23, .  .  . —who play as player 2 in the
stage game. In period t, player 1 plays the following prisoners’ dilemma
with player 2t.
X
A
B
1
2
Y
Z
5, 5
4, 4
0, 0
0, 0
0, 3
4, 8

--- Sayfa 335 ---
320
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
Assume that all of the players observe the history of play. Let d denote the
discount factor of player 1.
(a)  Show that the only subgame perfect equilibrium involves play of
(D, D) each period.
(b)  Next suppose that the players 2t have the opportunity to buy and sell the
right to play the game each period. Formally, suppose that in order for
player 2t to play the stage game in period t, this player must purchase
the right from player 2t−1. Model the negotiation between successive
players 2t−1 and 2t as a joint decision. Further, assume the outcome of
negotiation is consistent with the standard bargaining solution. Under
what conditions on bargaining weights and the discount factor can
(C, C) be supported over time?
5. Repeat the analysis of the Guided Exercise for the following stage game:
In your answer to part (d), discuss the role of bargaining weights and
disagreement points in the renegotiation phase.
6. This exercise addresses the notion of goodwill between generations. Con-
sider an “overlapping generations” environment, whereby an inﬁnite-period
game is played by successive generations of persons. Speciﬁcally, imagine
a family comprising an inﬁnite sequence of players, each of whom lives for
two periods. At the beginning of period t, player t is born; he is young in
period t, he is old in period t + 1, and he dies at the end of period t + 1.
Thus, in any given period t, both player t and player t −1 are alive. Assume
that the game starts in period 1 with an old player 0 and a young player 1.
C
1
2
C
D
D
2, 2
3, 0
1, 1
0, 3
x
1
2
y
z
x
y
z
6, 6
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
0, 9
8, 8
0, 0
0, 0
9, 0

--- Sayfa 336 ---
321
 Exercises
When each player is young, he starts the period with one unit of wealth.
An old player begins the period with no wealth. Wealth cannot be saved
across periods, but each player t can, while young, give a share of his wealth
to the next older player t −1. Thus, consumption of the old players de-
pends on gifts from the young players. Player t consumes whatever he does
not give to player t −1. Let xt denote the share of wealth that player t gives
to player t −1. Player t ’s payoff is given by (1 −xt) + 2xt+1, meaning that
players prefer to consume when they are old.
(a)  Show that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which each
player consumes all of his wealth when he is young; that is, xt = 0
for each t.
(b)  Show that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the young
give all of their wealth to the old. In this equilibrium, how is a player
punished if he deviates?
(c)  Compare the payoffs of the equilibria in parts (a) and (b).
7. Consider an inﬁnitely repeated game with the following stage game:
1
2
I
I
N
N
4, 4
0, 0
-1, 8
6, -1
Suppose that this repeated game is the underlying game in a contractual
setting with external enforcement. Speciﬁcally, an external enforcer will
compel transfer a from player 2 to player 1 in every period in which
(N, I) is played, transfer b from player 2 to player 1 in every period in
which (I, N) is played, and transfer g from player 2 to player 1 in every
period in which (N, N) is played. The numbers a, b, and g are chosen by
the players in their contract before the repeated interaction begins. These
numbers are ﬁxed for the entire repeated game. Assume that the players
discount the future using discount factor d.
(a)  Suppose there is full veriﬁability, so that a, b, and g can be different
numbers. Under what conditions on d is there a contract such that the
players choose (I, I) in each period in equilibrium?
(b)  Suppose there is limited veriﬁability, so that a = b = g is required.
Under what conditions on d is there a contract such that the players
choose (I, I) in each period in equilibrium? Consider the grim-trigger
strategy proﬁle.

--- Sayfa 337 ---
322
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
(c)  Continue to assume the conditions in part (b), with a value of d that
supports play of (I, I) in each period of the repeated game. Suppose that
when the players select a, b, and g before the repeated game is played,
they can also make an up-front monetary transfer m from player 2 to
player 1. Assume that if the players do not reach an agreement on a, b,
g, and m, then they will not play the repeated game and each player
will get 0. If player 1’s bargaining weight is p1 = 2>3, what does the
standard bargaining solution predict will be the value of m?
8. Consider the prisoners’ dilemma stage game pictured here:
C
C
Column
player
player
Row
D
D
3, 3
2, 2
5, 0
0, 5
Row player’s payoff is listed first.
The following questions ask you to consider various discrete-time environ-
ments in which people meet and play the stage game. For each environment,
you are to determine the extent to which cooperation can be sustained in a
subgame perfect equilibrium.
(a)  Suppose that two players interact in an inﬁnitely repeated game, with
the stage game shown, and that the players share the discount factor
d ∈(0, 1). Under what conditions on d is there a subgame perfect equi-
librium that supports both players selecting C each period?
(b)  Suppose that there is a society of k individuals. In each period, two
people from the society are randomly selected to play the stage game.
Individuals are equally likely to be selected. Furthermore, the random
draw that determines who is selected in a given period is independent of
the outcomes in previous periods. Thus, an individual has a probability
2>k of being selected to play the stage game in any given period. One
of the people selected plays the role of Row player in the stage game,
whereas the other person plays the role of Column player. (The stage
game is symmetric, so the roles do not matter.) Those who are selected
obtain the payoffs of the stage game, whereas the individuals who were
not selected get 0 for this period. Everyone discounts the future using
discount factor d.
Assume that the individuals can identify each other. That is, indi-
viduals know the names and faces of everyone else in the society.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
323
 Exercises
Assume also that before the stage game is played in a given period,
everyone observes who is selected to play. Further, everyone observes
the outcome of each period’s stage game.
Is there a sense in which it is more difﬁcult to sustain cooperation
in this random-matching setting than was the case in part (a)? Explain
why or why not. Calculate the cutoff value of d under which coopera-
tion can be sustained.
(c)  Consider the same setting as in part (b) except assume that the indi-
viduals only observe their own history of play. As before, individuals
can identify each other. However, an individual only knows when he is
selected to play the stage game; if he is not selected to play in a given
period, he observes neither who was selected to play nor the outcome of
the stage game. When an individual is selected to play the stage game,
he learns whom he is matched with; then the stage game is played, and
the two matched individuals observe the outcome.
Explain why cooperation is more difﬁcult to sustain in this setting
than in the setting of part (b). If you can, calculate the cutoff value of d
under which cooperation can be sustained.
9. Consider the following strategic setting. Every fall, two neighboring ele-
mentary schools raise money for ﬁeld trips and playground equipment by
selling giant candy bars. Suppose that individuals in the surrounding com-
munities love candy bars and care about helping the children from both
schools but have a slight preference for purchase of candy from the clos-
est school. (In other words, candy bars from the two schools are imperfect
substitutes.) Demand for school i ’s candy, in hundreds of bars, is given by
qi = 24 −2pi + pj , where pi is the price charged by school i, and pj is the
price charged by the other school j. Assume that the candy bars are donated
to the school and there are no costs of selling the candy. The schools simul-
taneously set prices and sell the number of candy bars demanded, so school
1’s payoff is the revenue p1
 q1 and school 2’s payoff is the revenue p2
 q2 .
(a)  Compute the schools’ best-response functions and the Nash equilib-
rium prices. How much money (in hundreds) does each school raise?
(b)  In an effort to raise more money, the schools decide to meet and work
together to set a common price for the candy bars sold at both schools.
What price should the schools charge to maximize their joint fund-
raising revenues? How much money (in hundreds) would each school
raise if they charge this price?
(c)  Suppose that there is no way to externally enforce the price-ﬁxing agree-
ment, so the schools must rely on repeated interaction and reputations to

--- Sayfa 339 ---
324
23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
sustain cooperation. If the schools anticipate holding the same fundraiser
each fall for 5 years (and no longer), will they be able to maintain the
price obtained in part (b)? Explain how or why not.
(d)  Now suppose that the schools anticipate holding the same fundraiser
every year forever. Deﬁne d as the schools’ discount factor for periods
of a year. Derive a condition on d that guarantees the schools will be
able to sustain a cooperative agreement to sell candy bars at the price
obtained in part (b).
10. Persons 1 and 2 are forming a ﬁrm. The value of their relationship depends
on the effort that they each expend. Suppose that person i ’s utility from the
relationship is x2
j + xj −xi xj , where xi Ú 0 is person i ’s effort and xj is the
effort of the other person (i = 1, 2).
(a)  Compute the partners’ best-response functions and ﬁnd the Nash equi-
librium of this game. Is the Nash equilibrium efﬁcient?
(b)  Now suppose that the partners interact over time, which we model with
the inﬁnitely repeated version of the game. Let d denote the discount
factor of the players. Under what conditions can the partners sustain
some positive effort level x = x1 = x2 over time? (Postulate strategies
and then derive a condition under which the strategies form an equilib-
rium in the repeated game.)
(c)  Comment on how the maximum sustainable effort depends on the partners’
patience.

--- Sayfa 340 ---
P A R T I V
Information
P A R T I V
Many strategic settings are interesting because players have
different information at various junctures in a game. Most
of the games presented in preceding chapters have some sort
of information imperfection; that is, their extensive forms
contain nontrivial information sets (those consisting of more
than one node). The most interesting information problems
feature private information, which exists when a player knows
something that other players do not observe. This is also called
asymmetric information.
The analysis presented in preceding chapters covers stra-
tegic settings in which there is asymmetric information only
regarding players’ actions. More broadly, there are important
settings in which players have private information about other
things as well. For example, suppose a buyer and a seller
negotiate the price of a house. It may be that, in the negotiation
process, actions are taken sequentially and in the open. Still,
the buyer might know something that the seller does not know.
The buyer may know his true valuation of the house—the
 highest price that he is willing to accept. The seller may have
some belief about the buyer’s reservation value (represented by
a probability distribution), but the seller may not know for sure
what it is.
The best way of modeling private information about intan-
gible items, such as a person’s value of a good, is to incorpo-
rate random events in the speciﬁcation of a game—events that
are out of the players’ control. Game theorists call such random

--- Sayfa 341 ---
events moves of nature. In this sense, nature is a player in the
game, whom we may call player 0. But nature is a nonstrategic
player; nature’s actions are deﬁned by a ﬁxed probability distri-
bution and not by incentives. In the home-buying example, you
can think of the buyer’s reservation value as selected by nature
at the start of the negotiation game. The buyer immediately
observes this value; the seller only knows the distribution over
nature’s choices.
The expression incomplete information refers to games
having moves of nature that generate asymmetric information
between the players. Theorists use the term type to indicate
the different moves of nature that a single player privately
observes. Often, a player’s private information has to do with
his or her own personal attributes and tastes, to which the term
type is particularly well suited. For example, we can speak of
the different types of home buyer distinguished by different
valuations of the house.
Incomplete information is present in a variety of trad-
ing environments: bargaining, competitive markets, contract
environments, auctions, and so forth. In this part of the book, I
introduce tools for analyzing games with moves of nature, and
I survey some of the major applications of the theory. I start
with games in which nature moves last, so there is no incom-
plete information between the players; this is the simplest class
of games to study. I then turn to static games with incomplete
information, followed by dynamic games with incomplete
information.
326
Part IV: Information

--- Sayfa 342 ---
327
RANDOM EVENTS
AND INCOMPLETE INFORMATION 24
A
s already noted, it is useful to think of random events as acts of nature. In the
extensive form, we model nature as “player 0,” whose decisions are made
according to a ﬁxed probability distribution. Because nature is not a strategic
player, no payoff numbers are associated with nature. Graphically, nature’s de-
cision nodes—also called chance nodes—are depicted by open circles, to distin-
guish them from the decision nodes of the strategic players.1 Nature’s “player 0”
title is used very narrowly. Generally, when we speak of the “players in the
game,” we mean the strategic players. Thus, some researchers prefer to use the
term “chance node” instead of “nature’s decision node.”
Figure 24.1 depicts a game of incomplete information. In this game, nature
ﬁrst determines the type of player 1, which is either Friend (with probability p)
or Enemy (with probability 1 −p). Player 1 then observes nature’s move, so
he knows his own identity. In this model, friends tend to keep desirable objects
in their pockets, such as jewelry and new electronic gadgets. These objects are
suitably gift wrapped. Enemies keep undesirable objects in their pockets, such
as rocks and frogs. These things also are wrapped.
FIGURE 24.1
The gift game.
1 The foundation for the analysis of incomplete information games is John Harsanyi’s “Games with Incomplete
Information Played by Bayesian Players,” Management Science, 14 (1967–1968): 159–182, 320–334, 486–502.
A
R
A
R
2
1, 1
0,  0
0,  0
N
F
1
F
G
F
N
E
1
E
G
E
Friend
Enemy (1 - p)
(p)
-1, 0
-1, 0
1, -1

--- Sayfa 343 ---
328
24: Random Events and Incomplete Information
Player 1 then decides whether to offer a gift to player 2. If he chooses not to
offer a gift (action N), then the game ends and both players receive zero. Offer-
ing a gift (action G) entails handing player 2 one of the handsomely wrapped
objects from his pocket. In this case, player 2 must decide whether to accept
(A) or reject (R) player 1’s gift. Importantly, player 2 does not observe player
1’s type (Friend or Enemy) directly. She knows only whether a gift has been
offered, in which case she must make a decision.
The payoffs are meant to capture the following preferences: Player 1’s
favorite outcome occurs when he offers a gift and it is accepted. In other words,
a friend enjoys seeing player 2 unwrap a piece of jewelry, whereas an enemy
revels in the cruelty of insulting player 2 with a gift of a frog. Both types of
player 1 prefer having not extended a gift to enduring the humiliation of a gift
rejected. Player 2 prefers accepting a desirable gift to refusing a gift and prefers
refusing a gift to discovering a frog inside the box. Apparently, player 2 does not
mind associating with people whose pockets bulge.
Note that the game in Figure 24.1 is one of incomplete information in
that player 1 has private information about nature’s action. It is interesting
that player 1’s type determines player 2’s value of accepting a gift. That is,
player 1’s personal attributes affect player 2’s payoff. This is meant to illustrate
that although a player’s private information often concerns his own payoffs, it
sometimes has to do with the payoffs of another player.
Another thing you should recognize is that in games of incomplete informa-
tion, rational play will require a player who knows his own type to think about
what he would have done had he been another type. For example, if you are
a friend and you are considering whether to give a gift, you ought to imagine
how you would behave if you were an enemy. The reason that putting yourself
in another type’s shoes is so important is that although you know that you are
a friend, player 2 does not know this. Your optimal decision depends on how
player 2 will react to a gift, which, in turn, in part depends on whether player 2
thinks the enemy is duplicitous (gives gifts).
It can be helpful to study the normal-form version of a game with nature.
Such a normal-form representation is called the Bayesian normal form. Trans-
lating the extensive form into the normal form requires just a bit more work in
this case than it does in settings without moves of nature. But the procedure is
the same. The key idea is that because nature’s moves are predetermined by a
probability distribution, we can focus on the strategies of the strategic play-
ers and compute payoffs by averaging over the random events in the game. To
illustrate, consider the gift game, where player 1 has four strategies and player
2 has two strategies. Figure 24.2 depicts the normal form. To obtain the payoffs
in the normal form, one traces paths through the tree corresponding to strategy
proﬁles. But contrary to the case without nature, where each strategy proﬁle

--- Sayfa 344 ---
329
Random Events and Incomplete Information
induces a single path, with nature there may be multiple paths. The payoffs of
these paths are averaged according to nature’s probability distribution, which
yields a payoff vector for each cell of the matrix.
For example, to ﬁnd the payoff of the strategy proﬁle (GF GE, A), note that
with probability p, player 1’s top node is reached. In this case, player 1 gives
a gift that is accepted by player 2, leading to the payoff vector (1, 1) . Like-
wise, with probability 1 −p , player 1’s lower decision node is reached, a gift
is offered and accepted, and the payoff (1, −1) is obtained. Thus, player 1’s
expected payoff from strategy proﬁle (GF
 GE, A) is
p # 1 + (1 −p) # 1 = 1.
Player 2’s expected payoff is
p # 1 + (1 −p) (−1) = 2p −1.
These numbers appear in the ﬁrst cell of the matrix. To solidify your understanding
of the normal form, verify the payoffs in the other cells.
Another example of a game with nature is depicted in Figure 24.3. In this
strategic setting, players 1 and 2 play according to the matrix shown. However,
player 1’s payoff number x is private information. Player 2 knows only that
x = 12 with probability 2>3 and x = 0 with probability 1>3. Note that the
FIGURE 24.2
The gift game in Bayesian
normal form.
FIGURE 24.3
A game of incomplete
information.
A
R
1
2
1, 2p - 1
1 - p, p - 1   p - 1, 0
 -1, 0
 0, 0
 0, 0
G
FG
E
G
FN
E
N
FG
E
N
FN
E
p, p
-p, 0
12 with probability 2/3
  0 with probability 1/3
e
x =
1
A
C
D
x, 9
3, 6
6, 0
6, 9
B
2

--- Sayfa 345 ---
330
24: Random Events and Incomplete Information
matrix pictured is not the true normal form of the game because player 1
observes x before making his decision. The extensive- and normal-form repre-
sentations of the game are pictured in Figure 24.4. As the extensive form shows,
player 1 observes nature’s action before selecting between A and B, yet player 2
must make his choice without observing player 1’s type or action. Thus, player
1 has two decisions to make: (1) whether to select A or B after observing x = 0,
and (2) whether to select A or B after observing x = 12.
Using the abbreviations employed in the preceding example, we can
write player 1’s strategies as A12A0, A12 B0, B12A0, and B12 B0. The payoffs
in the normal form of Figure 24.4 are the expected payoffs, given nature’s
probability distribution. For example, consider the strategy proﬁle (B12A0,
D). When this proﬁle is played, then, with probability 2>3, nature selects
x = 12 and the payoff vector (6,  9) is obtained; with probability 1>3, nature
selects x = 0 and the payoff vector (3, 6) is obtained. Therefore, player 1’s
expected payoff is 6 # (2>3) + 3 # (1>3) = 5, and player 2’s expected payoff is
9 # (2>3) + 6 # (1>3) = 8, as indicated in the normal-form matrix.
C
D
C
D
C
D
C
D
12, 9
3, 6
3, 6
6, 0
6, 0
6, 9
6, 9
0, 9
A12
A0
B0
A0
A12
B0
A12
A0
B12
B0
B12
B
x = 12
x = 0
1
1
(2/3)
(1/3)
12
2
1
2
8, 9
10, 6
3, 6
4, 7
5, 8
4, 3
6, 0
6, 9
C
D
FIGURE 24.4
Extensive-form and
normal-form representations.

--- Sayfa 346 ---
331
Guided Exercise
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the following market game. There are two ﬁrms: the
“incumbent” and the “entrant.” The incumbent ﬁrm has either high costs (H)
or low costs (L); this is the incumbent’s type, which is selected by nature at the
beginning of the game. With probability q, the incumbent’s type is H and, with
probability 1 −q , the incumbent’s type is L. The incumbent observes its own
type, but the entrant does not observe the incumbent’s type. After observing
its type, the incumbent selects either a high price ( p ) or a low price (p). The
entrant observes the incumbent’s price and then decides whether or not to enter
the market (E or N). The incumbent’s payoff is 0 if the entrant chooses E (regard-
less of the incumbent’s type). If the entrant picks N and the incumbent’s price
is p, then the high-type incumbent gets 2 and the low-type incumbent gets 4. If
the entrant picks N and the incumbent’s price is p, then the high-type incumbent
gets 0 and the low-type incumbent gets 2. The entrant obtains nothing if it does
not enter. It obtains a payoff of 1 if it enters and faces the high-type incumbent.
It obtains −1 if it enters and faces the low-type incumbent.
(a)  Represent this game in the extensive form.
(b)  Explain the relation between Nash equilibrium and subgame perfect equi-
librium in this game.
(c)  Represent this game in the Bayesian normal form.
Solution:
(a) Here is the extensive-form diagram:
H
L
H
1
L
1
0, 1
0, 0
2, 0
N
E
E
E
N
0, -1
-
E9
E9
N9
N9
E
0, 1
2, 0
4, 0
0, -1
(q)
p
-p9
(1 - q)
p
p9
-
-

--- Sayfa 347 ---
332
24: Random Events and Incomplete Information
(b)  Recall that a subgame perfect equilibrium involves speciﬁcation of a Nash
equilibrium on each subgame. Note that this game has no proper subgames,
so the only subgame is the entire game. Thus, subgame perfection is the
same as Nash equilibrium in this game.
(c) Here is the Bayesian normal-form matrix:
To see how the payoffs are determined, consider as an example the strategy
proﬁle ( pp9, EN9) and trace through the tree. If nature selects H, then player
1 chooses p, player 2 chooses N9, and the payoff vector is (2, 0). If nature
selects L, then player 1 chooses p9, player 2 chooses E, and the payoff vector is
(0, −1). Multiplying these, respectively, by nature’s probabilities q and 1 −q
and summing yields the expected payoff vector (2q, q −1), which is shown in
the appropriate cell of the matrix.
EXERCISES
1. Here is a description of the simplest poker game. There are two players and
only two cards in the deck, an Ace (A) and a King (K). First, the deck is
shufﬂed and one of the two cards is dealt to player 1. That is, nature chooses
the card for player 1. It is the Ace with probability 1>2 and the King with
probability 1>2. Player 2 does not receive a card.
Player 1 observes his card and then chooses whether to bid (B) or fold
(F). If he folds, then the game ends with player 1 getting a payoff of −1 and
player 2 getting a payoff of 1 (that is, player 1 loses his ante to player 2). If
player 1 bids, then player 2 must decide whether to bid or fold. When player
2 makes this decision, she knows that player 1 bid, but she has not observed
player 1’s card. The game ends after player 2’s action. If player 2 folds, then
the payoff vector is (1, −1), meaning player 1 gets 1 and player 2 gets −1.
EE9
I
E
0, 2q - 1
0, 2q - 1
0, 2q - 1
0, 2q - 1
2q, q - 1
0, q - 1
2 - 2q, q
2 - 2q, 0
2 - 2q, 0
4 - 4q, q
4 - 4q, 0
0, 2q - 1
0, 2q - 1
4 - 2q, 0
4 - 2q, 0
pp9
--
pp9
--
pp9
-
-
pp9
-
-
EN9
NE9
NN9
2, 0

--- Sayfa 348 ---
333
Exercises
If player 2 bids, then the payoff depends on player 1’s card; if player 1 holds
the Ace, then the payoff vector is (2, −2); if player 1 holds the King, then
the payoff vector is (−2, 2).
Represent this game in the extensive form and in the Bayesian normal
form.
2. Suppose Andy and Brian play a guessing game. There are two slips of
paper; one is black and the other is white. Each player has one of the slips of
paper pinned to his back. Neither of the players observes which of the two
slips is pinned to his own back. (Assume that nature puts the black slip on
each player’s back with probability 1>2.) The players are arranged so that
Andy can see the slip on Brian’s back, but Brian sees neither his own slip
nor Andy’s slip.
After nature’s decision, the players interact as follows. First, Andy
chooses between Y and N. If he selects Y, then the game ends; in this case,
Brian gets a payoff of 0, and Andy obtains 10 if Andy’s slip is black and
−10 if his slip is white. If Andy selects N, then it becomes Brian’s turn to
move. Brian chooses between Y and N, ending the game. If Brian says Y
and Brian’s slip is black, then he obtains 10 and Andy obtains 0. If Brian
chooses Y and the white slip is on his back, then he gets −10 and Andy gets
0. If Brian chooses N, then both players obtain 0.
(a) Represent this game in the extensive form.
(b) Draw the Bayesian normal-form matrix of this game.
3. Represent the following game in the Bayesian normal form.
(1/2)
(1/2)
R
L
1
2
2, 0
0, 4
4, 0
4, 2
1
0, 0
2, 0
R9
D
D
U
U
L9
4. Draw the extensive-form representation of the following three-card poker
game. There are three cards in the deck: an Ace, a King, and a Queen. The
deck is shufﬂed, one card is dealt to player 1, and one card is dealt to player 2.

--- Sayfa 349 ---
334
24: Random Events and Incomplete Information
Assume the deck is perfectly shufﬂed so that the six different ways in which
the cards may be dealt are equally likely. Each player observes his own card
but not the card dealt to the other player.
Player 1 then decides whether to fold or bid. If he folds, then the game
ends and the payoff vector is (−1, 1); that is, player 1 obtains −1 (he loses
his ante), and player 2 obtains 1 (gaining player 1’s ante). If player 1 bids,
then player 2 must decide whether to fold or bid. If player 2 folds, then the
game ends with payoff vector (1, −1). If player 2 decides to bid, then the
players reveal their cards. The player with the higher card wins, obtaining
a payoff of 2; the player with the lower card loses, getting a payoff of −2.
Note that when both players bid, the stakes are raised. By the way, the Ace
is considered the highest card, whereas the Queen is the lowest card.
5. Suppose Microsoft and Celera are considering a joint venture to use con-
sumers’ genetic ﬁngerprints as license keys for software registration. How-
ever, in a joint venture there is always the possibility that one partner is
trying to extract proprietary trade secrets from the other, rather than trying
to earn a joint proﬁt. Suppose that there are two possible types of Microsoft:
Friend and Enemy. Microsoft knows its own type, but Celera knows only
that the two types are equally likely.
(a)  Consider the following simultaneous game. Microsoft can “Invest” or
“Sabotage,” and Celera can “Reveal” or “Hide” its proprietary trade
secrets. This game is shown in extensive form in the illustration that
follows. Microsoft’s payoffs are listed ﬁrst. Translate this game into the
normal form.
ME
MF
SF
N
E
F
IE
SE
½
½
IF
C
R
H
R
H
R
H
R
H
5, 1
0, 3
8, -1
7, 0
9, 9
0, 0
0, 4
2, 0

--- Sayfa 350 ---
335
Exercises
(b)  Next consider the following dynamic game. Microsoft has some Celera
stock, and it can either “Buy” more or “Sell” what it is holding. Celera
observes Microsoft’s action and then decides whether to “Reveal” or
“Hide” its proprietary trade secrets. This game is shown in extensive
form in the illustration that follows. Microsoft’s payoffs are listed ﬁrst.
Represent this game in the normal form.
FS
5, 6
5, -1
15, -14
0, -1
SR
SH
SR
SH
MF
ME
F
N
(½)
(½)
E
FB
C
-1, 1
15, 12
5, -6
5, 1
BR
BH
BR
BH
C
ES
EB

--- Sayfa 351 ---
336
T
he games with nature that are easiest to analyze are those in which nature’s
moves occur only at the end. In other words, the players make decisions
knowing that some random event will make payoffs uncertain, but during the
game the players have the same information about nature. Such games can be
analyzed by using the tools developed in Part III of this book.
Payoff uncertainty is an important consideration in contractual relation-
ships because people usually care about whether they are exposed to risk. For
example, the owner–manager of a retail shopping mall has a lease contract with
each of his commercial tenants. The proﬁts of the owner and of the tenants
depend on the number of customers who visit the mall in any given month. The
contracting parties face uncertainty because mall trafﬁc is partly a function of
random factors such as the strength of the local economy, demographics, fad
and fashion, and whether the latest teen-idol or boy band agrees to perform on
the mall’s stage.
Owner–tenant contracts can be structured to distribute risk. A contract that
requires the tenant to pay a ﬁxed rent would allocate most of the risk to the
tenant because then the mall owner gets a guaranteed lease payment, whereas
the tenant’s revenue is subject to the random factors. Alternatively, the risk can
be shifted to the mall owner by using a contract that makes the tenant’s rent
payment contingent on mall trafﬁc.
The objective of distributing risk in any particular way can conﬂict with the
goal of providing incentives. For example, if the mall owner gets a ﬁxed lease
payment, he may not be motivated to exert effort advertising the mall or running
the kind of promotions that would increase mall trafﬁc (and hence the proﬁts
of his tenants). The bottom line is that contracts sometimes have to balance the
concerns of risk and incentives. In this chapter, I provide a model to demonstrate
this trade-off.
RISK AVERSION
Before sketching the model of risk and incentives, I must elaborate on how
payoffs represent players’ preferences toward risk. I noted in Chapter 4 that
25 RISK AND INCENTIVES IN CONTRACTING

--- Sayfa 352 ---
337
Risk Aversion
payoff functions measure more than just the players’ rankings over certain
outcomes; they also capture the players’ preferences over random outcomes.1 A
simple thought exercise will demonstrate how this works. Suppose I offer you a
choice between two alternatives, A and B. If you choose A, then I will give you
$950. If you choose B, then I will ﬂip a coin and give you $2000 if the coin toss
yields “heads,” $0 if it yields “tails.” In other words, alternative B is a lottery
that pays $2000 with probability 1>2 and $0 with probability 1>2. Figure 25.1
displays your choice as a game.
Note that the picture represents the outcome in words, rather than with
utility or payoff numbers. As usual, we should convert the outcomes into
payoffs to analyze the game. You might be inclined to use the dollar amounts
as payoffs—as has been done many times so far in this book. But at this point I
would like you to think more generally. Because the outcomes are all in mone-
tary terms and because you ultimately care how much money you receive, we
can imagine a function v that deﬁnes the relation between money and utility.
That is, v (x) is the utility of receiving x dollars. I use the term “utility” here
because I want you to be thinking about preferences over random monetary
payments, aside from any particular game. In the end, the utility function will
indicate the payoffs in speciﬁc games.
Because you (presumably) prefer more money to less, we better assume that
v (0) < v (950) < v (2000). Lots of different functions satisfy these inequalities.
One function that works is the identity function v (x) = x, which simply associ-
ates utility with the dollar amount. Other functions that are consistent with the
“more money is better” assumption are v (x) = x>1000 and v (x) = 1x. You
should realize that any increasing function would do the job. But will just any
increasing function accurately represent your preferences? In fact, no. Remem-
ber that random outcomes are evaluated by computing expected utility. Thus,
your utility of selecting A is v (950), whereas your expected utility of selecting
1John von Neumann and Oscar Morgenstern, in their book The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior
(1944, 1947), developed the theory of decision making under uncertainty now used by economists everywhere.
FIGURE 25.1
Lottery or sure thing.
A
B
T
H
Receive $2000
Receive $950
Receive $0
(1/2)
(1/2)
Yo u

--- Sayfa 353 ---
338
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
B is (1>2) v (0) + (1>2) v (2000). If you strictly prefer alternative A, then your
utility function has the property that
v (950) > v (0)
2
+ v (2000)
2
.
If you prefer alternative B, then the opposite inequality holds. Your preference
between A and B therefore further restricts the utility function.
What decision would you make? Most people who are given a choice such
as this one opt for alternative A—the “sure thing” payoff of $950. As a theo-
rist, you might ﬁnd this choice interesting because alternative B actually gives
an expected monetary payment of (1>2)(0) + (1>2)(2000) = 1000, which is
greater than the payment from picking A. However, there is a big difference
between expected monetary payments and expected utility, the latter of which
represents attitudes toward risk. Most people choose A over B because B is a
lottery that subjects people to risk. Sure, B gives you an expected payment of
$1000, but you end up with $0 half the time. Most people do not like to face such
randomness and are willing to forego $50 to get money for sure. This means that
most people have utility functions satisfying v (950) > v (0)>2 + v (2000)>2.
Note that the function v (x) = x does not satisfy the inequality because
950 < (1>2)(0) + (1>2)(2000). A utility function that does satisfy the inequal-
ity is v (x) = 1x. You should verify that 1950 > (1>2)(0) + (1>2)12000 (use
a calculator).
Risk preferences are manifested in the way that a person’s utility func-
tion curves. To interpret the curvature, compare the expected utility of any
lottery with the utility of its expected monetary payment. For example, the
lottery that pays 2000 with probability 1>2 has an expected dollar payment of
(1>2)(0) + (1>2)(2000) = 1000. If a person strictly prefers to get $1000 for
sure, then his utility function has the property that
v (0)
2
+ v (2000)
2
< v (1000).
Concave utility functions, such as v (x) = 1x have this property; linear func-
tions, such as v (x) = x, do not (Figure 25.2). With the use of calculus, concavity
is measured by the second derivative. If the second derivative is negative, then
the function is concave (open side down). If the second derivative is equal to
zero, then the function is linear (a straight line). For example, the second deriva-
tive of 1x is −1>(4 x3>2 ), which is negative (assuming x > 0; otherwise, the
function is not deﬁned).
A person is said to be risk averse if he strictly prefers to get a monetary
payment for sure rather than playing a lottery that has the same expected

--- Sayfa 354 ---
339
Risk Aversion
payment. A person is risk neutral if he is indifferent between lotteries and their
expected payments. As just shown, risk aversion is represented by a concave
utility function. A higher degree of risk aversion implies a more concave utility
function; it also implies a greater risk premium, which is the amount of expected
monetary gain that a person is willing to give up to obtain a sure payment rather
than a random one. In the preceding choice between alternatives A and B, if you
choose A, then your risk premium is at least $50 because you are willing to give
up this amount to get a sure payment.2
2A risk-loving person has a convex utility function and negative risk premiums. I do not address this kind of
preference, although it does play a role for some people.
FIGURE 25.2
Utility functions
and concavity.
v(0)
x
v(x)
v
v(2000)
v(1000)
1000
0
2000
Concave
  utility
 function

v(0)
x
v(x)
v
v(2000)
1000
0
2000
Linear
utility
function

v(0)
2
+ v(2000)
2
v(1000) = v(0)
2
+ v(2000)
2

--- Sayfa 355 ---
340
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
One measure of risk aversion—called the Arrow–Pratt measure of relative
risk aversion—is given by −x v (x)>v9 (x).3 As an example, consider the util-
ity function v (x) = xa, where a is a positive constant.4 Taking the derivatives,
we have v9(x) = a xa−1 and v (x) = a (a −1) xa−2. The Arrow–Pratt measure
for this utility function is thus −x a (a −1) xa−2>a xa−1, which equals 1 −a.
Note that if a = 1, then the risk aversion measure is 0 and the utility function is
a straight line. If a is less than 1, then the risk aversion measure is positive and
the utility function is concave. As a gets closer to 0, the measure of risk aver-
sion increases. This is pictured in Figure 25.3. Note that linear utility functions
represent risk neutrality, where the agent is indifferent to risk and treats a lottery
the same as its expected payment.
A PRINCIPAL–AGENT GAME
With the knowledge of how to represent attitudes toward risk, you can consider
the management of risk and incentives in contracting. The basic model of
risk and incentives is called the Principal–Agent Model with Moral Hazard.
 “Principal–agent” refers to a situation in which one party (the principal) hires
another party (the agent) to work on a project on her behalf. “Moral hazard”
3Kenneth Arrow and John Pratt developed this and other measures in the following publications: J. W. Pratt,
“Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica, 32 (1964): 122–136; and K. Arrow, Essays in
the Theory of Risk Bearing (Chicago: Markham, 1970).
4Such a utility function is valid only for x Ú 0 because, when a 1, x a is undeﬁned for x < 0.
FIGURE 25.3
Different levels of
risk aversion.
x
v(x)
Risk
Slight risk
aversion
Greater risk
aversion
neutral

--- Sayfa 356 ---
341
A Principal–Agent Game
stands for the setting in which the agent’s effort is not veriﬁable, so the parties
cannot write an externally enforced contract specifying a transfer as a function
of effort. Only the outcome of the project is veriﬁable. Furthermore, the project
outcome depends not only on the agent’s effort but also on random events.5
Suppose Pat manages a large computer software company and Allen is a
talented program designer. Pat would like to hire Allen to develop a new soft-
ware package. If Allen works for Pat, Allen must choose whether or not to
expend high effort or low effort on the job. At the end of the work cycle (say,
one year), Pat will learn whether the project is successful or not. A successful
project yields revenue of 6 for the ﬁrm, whereas the revenue is 2 if the project
is unsuccessful. (Imagine that these numbers are in hundreds of thousands of
dollars.)
Success depends on Allen’s high effort as well as on a random factor.
Speciﬁcally, if Allen expends high effort, then success will be achieved with
probability 1>2; if Allen expends low effort, then the project is unsuccessful
for sure. Assume that, to expend high effort, Allen must endure a personal cost
of 1 in utility terms. The parties can write a contract that speciﬁes compensa-
tion for Allen conditional on whether the project is successful, but it cannot be
conditioned directly on Allen’s effort. Assume that Allen values money accord-
ing to the utility function vA(x) = x
 a. Assume Allen is risk averse, meaning
that 0 < a < 1. Finally, suppose Pat is risk neutral (because she manages a
large company that pools the risks of its various divisions) with utility function
vP
 (x) = x.
Imagine that the players interact as depicted in Figure 25.4. At the  beginning
of the game, Pat offers Allen a wage and bonus package. The wage w is to be paid
5The example I present here is a special case of the model of S. Grossman and O. Hart, “An Analysis of the
Principal–Agent Problem,” Econometrica, 51 (1983): 7–45.
Y
A
A
P
N
0, 0
H
U
(1/2)
(1/2)
S
L
w, b
2 −w, wa −1
6 −w −b,
(w + b)a
 −1
2 −w, wa
FIGURE 25.4
Principal–agent game.

--- Sayfa 357 ---
342
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
regardless of the project outcome, whereas the bonus b would be paid only if the
project is successful. Then Allen decides whether or not to accept the contract. If
he declines (N), then the game ends and both players get zero (corresponding to
their outside options).
If Allen accepts the contract (Y), then he decides whether to exert high (H)
or low (L) effort. Low effort leads to an unsuccessful project, whereby Pat gets
revenue of 2 minus the wage w and Allen gets his utility of the wage, wa. High
effort leads to a chance node, where nature picks whether the project is success-
ful or not (each with probability 1>2). An unsuccessful project implies the same
payoffs as with low effort, except that, in this case, Allen also pays his effort
cost of 1. A successful project raises Pat’s revenue to 6 and triggers the bonus b
paid to Allen in addition to the wage. Calculating the expected payoffs from the
chance node, we can rewrite the game as shown in Figure 25.5.
To solve the game and learn about the interaction of risk and incentives,
we use backward induction. Start by observing that Pat would certainly like
Allen to exert high effort. In fact, it is inefﬁcient for Allen to exert low effort at
small levels of compensation. To see this, consider an outcome in which Allen
chooses L and is paid w. Note that Allen is indifferent between this outcome
and the one in which he chooses H and is paid y for sure, where we deﬁne y so
that y a −1 = w a. It is not difﬁcult to verify that y < w + 2 for values of w
that are close to 0. Thus, by having Allen select H, Pat’s revenue increases by
2 in expectation, and she makes Allen indifferent by raising his compensation
by an amount less than 2. Another way of looking at this is that if Allen’s effort
were veriﬁable, the parties would write a contract that induces high effort.
Given that high effort is desired, we must ask whether there is a contract that
induces it. That is, can Pat ﬁnd a wage and bonus package that motivates Allen to
exert high effort and gives Pat a large payoff? Let us begin by checking what can
FIGURE 25.5
Principal–agent game with expected payoffs.
Y
A
A
P
N
0, 0
H
L
w, b
2 −w, wa
2 −w + 1
2
 (4 −b),
1
2
 wa + 1
2
 (w + b)a −1

--- Sayfa 358 ---
343
A Principal–Agent Game
be accomplished without a bonus (that is, b = 0). First note that b = 0 implies
that Allen has no incentive to exert high effort; he gets wa when he chooses L
and less, wa −1, when he chooses H. Knowing this, the best that Pat can do
without a bonus is to offer w = 0, which Allen is willing to accept.6 Thus, the
best no-bonus contract (w = 0 and b = 0) yields the payoff vector (2, 0).
Next consider a bonus contract designed to induce high effort. In order for
him to be motivated to exert high effort, Allen’s expected payoff from H must
be at least as great as is his payoff from L:

1
2
 (w + b)a + 1
2
 w
 a −1 Ú w
 a.
(1)
In principal–agent models, this kind of inequality is usually called the effort
constraint or incentive compatibility condition. In addition to the effort
constraint, the contract must give Allen an expected payoff at least as great as
the value of his outside opportunity; otherwise, Allen would reject the contract.
Mathematically, this is

1
2
 (w + b) a + 1
2
 w a −1 Ú 0.
(2)
Theorists call this the participation constraint.
Assuming that she wants to motivate high effort, Pat will offer Allen the
bonus contract satisfying inequalities 1 and 2 at terms most favorable to Pat
(because she gets to make the contract offer). In fact, the best bonus contract
satisﬁes inequalities 1 and 2 with equality (meaning that you can replace the
“Ú” signs with “=”). The reasoning goes as follows. First, if the participation
constraint does not hold with equality, then there must be a way for Pat to lower
both w and b such that both the effort constraint and the participation constraint
remain satisﬁed. To maintain the effort constraint, w and b have to be adjusted
in a related way, but the important thing is that the adjustment causes both w
and w + b to decrease (in fact, b decreases as well). This would increase Pat’s
expected payoff (because she pays less to Allen in both the successful and the
unsuccessful outcomes). We thus conclude that the best contract for Pat satisﬁes

1
2
 (w + b)a + 1
2
 w

 a −1 = 0.
(3)
Second, consider the effort constraint. If it holds strictly, then Allen is forced
to face too much risk. We know that he is risk averse (because 0 < a < 1)
and that a larger bonus increases his risk (because it increases the difference
6Allen will accept no less because he would otherwise be better off rejecting the contract offer.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
344
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
between what Allen gets in the successful and unsuccessful outcomes). Pat can
lower the bonus and raise the wage slightly in a way that maintains equality
3 but lowers the risk premium that she has to pay Allen. This increases Pat’s
expected payoff while keeping Allen’s unchanged.7 Thus, the best contract for
Pat satisﬁes inequality 1 with equality, meaning that

1
2
 (w + b)
 a + 1
2
 w

 a −1 = w
 a.
(4)
Combining equations 3 and 4, we ﬁnd that w
 a = 0, so w = 0. Substituting
w = 0 into equation 3, we get b = 21>a. In summary, Pat’s best bonus contract
speciﬁes the wage w = 0 and the bonus b = 21>a. Allen will accept this contract
and expend high effort, yielding an expected payoff of
2 −0 + 1
2
 (4 −21>a ) = 4 −2(1−a) >a
for Pat and 0 for Allen. Note that if Allen were risk neutral (so that a = 1) then
Pat’s payoff would be 4 −20 = 3. The difference between this payoff and Pat’s
payoff when a < 1 is the risk premium that Allen requires to exert high effort.
That is, the risk premium is
3 −[4 −2
 (1−a)>a] = 2 (1−a)>a −1.
If a = 1, then the risk premium is equal to 0, whereas the risk premium is posi-
tive when a < 1.
7 Here is a mathematical proof. Look at Allen’s expected payoff from H and think about adjusting w and b in
a way that does not change the expected payoff. Suppose that we want Allen to get an expected payoff of k.
Let f (w) be the function that gives the bonus b corresponding to wage w that yields expected payoff k. That
is, f (w) satisﬁes
1
2
 [w + f (w)]a + 1
2
 w a −1 = k.
Let us ﬁnd the derivative of f, which tells us the amount that b has to be adjusted when w is increased, to keep
Allen’s expected payoff equal to k. Differentiating the preceding equation with respect to w yields
a
2
  [w + f (w)]a−1[1 + f9(w)] + a
2
 wa−1 = 0.
Solving for f 9(w) and simplifying, we have
f 9 (w) = −1 − a
w + f (w)
w
b
1−a
,
which is always less than −2. In words, if w is increased by a small amount, then b can be decreased by more
than two times this amount, such that Allen’s expected payoff is held constant. Such an alteration of w and b
is to Pat’s beneﬁt because she has to pay the bonus with probability 1>2. Shifting w up and b down tightens
the effort constraint.

--- Sayfa 360 ---
345
Guided Exercise
The ﬁnal step in the analysis is to compare the optimal bonus and no-bonus
contracts. Recall that Allen’s payoff is 0 in either case. Pat’s payoff is 2 in
the no-bonus case and 4 −2(1−a)>a in the bonus case. Pat will select a bonus
contract if and only if
4 −2(1−a)>a Ú 2.
Rearranging this inequality yields a Ú 1>2. That is, Pat opts for a bonus contract
if and only if a Ú 1>2. There is important intuition behind this statement. When
a is close to 0—meaning that Allen is very risk averse—the risk premium that
Pat would have to pay to motivate high effort is larger than is the expected
revenue gain that Pat would get from Allen’s high effort.
The moral of the model is that the amount a principal has to pay to motivate
high effort increases with the agent’s level of risk aversion. Therefore, with an
agent who is highly risk averse, a principal will resort to a ﬁxed-wage contract
that induces low effort. With an agent who is closer to risk neutral, a principal
will optimally motivate high effort by using a bonus contract. This result also
indicates that the kind of contracts that one would expect in different industries
depends on the amount of risk in the production process. In ﬁelds where the
productive outcome is inﬂuenced more by random factors than by an agent’s
behavior, we expect to see ﬁxed-wage contracts. In contrast, where an agent’s
effort is crucial to the success of a business project—such as in real estate trans-
actions, automobile sales, and many other lines of work—bonus contracts are
very useful.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Suppose I prefer $20 for sure to a lottery that pays $100 with prob-
ability 1>4 and $0 with probability 3>4. Also suppose that I prefer lottery A to
lottery B, where lottery A pays $100 with probability 1>8, $0 with probability
7>8, and lottery B pays $20 with probability 1>2, $0 with probability 1>2. Is
there a utility function that is consistent with my preferences? If so, describe
such a utility function. If not, explain why.
Solution: The ﬁrst preference requires that
v (20) > 1
4
 v (100) + 3
4
 v(0).
One function that meets these requirements is u(x) = 1x. That lottery A is
preferred to lottery B implies
1
8
 v (100) + 7
8
 v (0) > 1
2
 v (20) + 1
2
 v (0).

--- Sayfa 361 ---
346
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
Subtracting v (0)>2 from each side and then multiplying by 2 yields
1
4
 v (100) + 3
4
 v (0) > v (20),
which contradicts the ﬁrst preference. Thus, there is no utility function that
represents the stated preferences.
EXERCISES
1. Discuss some examples of jobs about which you know, highlighting the
relation between risk, risk aversion, and the use of bonuses.
2. Repeat the analysis of the principal–agent game in this chapter, under the
assumption that p is the probability of a successful project with high effort
(rather than 1>2 as in the basic model). How does the optimal contract de-
pend on p?
3. A ﬁrm and worker interact as follows. First, the ﬁrm offers the worker a
wage w and a job z; z = 0 denotes the “safe” job and z = 1 denotes the
“risky” job. After observing the ﬁrm’s contract offer (w, z), the worker ac-
cepts or rejects it. These are the only decisions made by the ﬁrm and worker
in this game.
If the worker rejects the contract, then he gets a payoff of 100, which
corresponds to his outside opportunities. If he accepts the job, then the
worker cares about two things: his wage and his status. The worker’s status
depends on how he is rated by his peers, which is inﬂuenced by character-
istics of his job as well as by random events. Speciﬁcally, his rating is given
by x, which is either 1 (poor), 2 (good), or 3 (excellent). If the worker has
the safe job, then x = 2 for sure. In contrast, if the worker has the risky job,
then x = 3 with probability q and x = 1 with probability 1 −q. That is,
with probability q, the worker’s peers think of him as excellent.
When employed by this ﬁrm, the worker’s payoff is w + v (x), where
v (x) is the value of status x. Assume that v (1) = 0 and v (3) = 100, and let
y = v (2). The worker maximizes his expected payoff.
The ﬁrm obtains a return of 180 −w when the worker is employed in
the safe job. The ﬁrm gets a return of 200 −w when the worker has the
risky job. If the worker rejects the ﬁrm’s offer, then the ﬁrm obtains 0.
Compute the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game by answering
the following questions.

--- Sayfa 362 ---
347
Exercises
(a)  How large must the wage offer be in order for the worker rationally to
accept the safe job? What is the ﬁrm’s maximal payoff in this case? The
parameter y should be featured in your answer.
(b)  How large must the wage offer be in order for the worker rationally to
accept the risky job? What is the ﬁrm’s maximal payoff in this case?
The parameter q should be featured in your answer.
(c)  What is the ﬁrm’s optimal contract offer for the case in which q = 1>2?
Your answer should include an inequality describing conditions under
which z = 1 is optimal.
4. Most of this exercise does not concern players’ preferences about risk, but
it is a good example of a game with moves of nature that can be analyzed
by using subgame perfection. Consider a T -period bargaining game like the
alternating-offer game discussed in Chapter 19, except suppose that in each
period, nature chooses which player gets to make an offer. At the start of a
period, nature selects player 1 with probability q1 and player 2 with prob-
ability q2, where q1 + q2 = 1. The selected player proposes a split of some
surplus (of size 1). The other player then responds by accepting or reject-
ing the offer. Acceptance ends the game and yields the payoff associated
with the proposal, discounted according to the period in which agreement is
made. Rejection leads to the next period, except in period T, in which case
the game ends with zero payoffs. Assume the players are risk neutral and
have the same discount factor d.
(a)  Describe the extensive form of this game.
(b)  Find and report the subgame perfect equilibrium.
(c)  What are the equilibrium payoffs? Offer an interpretation in terms of
the standard bargaining solution (bargaining weights and a disagree-
ment point).
(d)  Suppose T = 2 and that the players are not necessarily risk neutral.
How would you expect the players’ risk preferences to inﬂuence the
equilibrium proposals that are made in the ﬁrst period?
5. Consider a game inspired by the long-running television program The Price
Is Right. Three players have to guess the price x of an object. It is common
knowledge that x is a random variable that is distributed uniformly over the
integers 1, 2, . . . , 9. That is, with probability 1>9 the value of x is 1, with
probability 1>9 the value of x is 2, and so on. Thus, each player guesses a
number from the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}.
The game runs as follows: First, player 1 chooses a number n1 ∈{1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}, which the other players observe. Then player 2 chooses

--- Sayfa 363 ---
348
25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
a number n2 that is observed by the other players. Player 2 is not allowed to
select the number already chosen by player 1; that is, n2 must be different
from n1. Player 3 then selects a number n3, where n3 must be different from
n1 and n2. Finally, the number x is drawn and the player whose guess is
closest to x without going over wins $1000; the other players get 0. That is,
the winner must have guessed x correctly or have guessed a lower number
that is closest to x. If all of the players’ guesses are above x, then everyone
gets 0.
(a)  Suppose you are player 2 and you know that player 3 is sequentially
rational. If player 1 selected n1 = 1, what number should you pick to
maximize your expected payoff?
(b)  Again suppose you are player 2 and you know that player 3 is sequen-
tially rational. If player 1 selected n1 = 5, what number should you pick
to maximize your expected payoff?
(c)  Suppose you are player 1 and you know that the other two players are
sequentially rational. What number should you pick to maximize your
expected payoff?
6. Consider a game in which two players take turns moving a coin along a strip
of wood (with borders to keep the coin from falling off). The strip of wood
is divided into ﬁve equally sized regions, called (in order) A, B, C, D, and
E. Player l’s objective is to get the coin into region E (player 2’s end zone),
whereas player 2’s objective is to get the coin into region A (player l’s end
zone). If the coin enters region A, then the game ends and player 2 is the win-
ner. If the coin enters region E, then the game ends and player 1 is the winner.
At each stage in the game, the player with the move must decide
between “Push” and “Slap.” If she chooses Push, then the coin moves one
cell down the wood strip in the direction of the other player’s end zone. For
example, if the coin is in cell B and player 1 selects Push, then the coin is
moved to cell C. If a player selects Slap, then the movement of the coin is
random. With probability 1>3, the coin advances two cells in the direction
of the other player’s end zone, and with probability 2>3 the coin remains
where it is. For example, suppose it is player 2’s turn and the coin is in cell
C. If player 2 chooses Slap, then with probability 1>3 the coin moves to
cell A and with probability 2>3 the coin stays in cell C. The coin cannot go
beyond an end zone. Thus, if player 1 selects Slap when the coin is in cell
D, then the coin moves to cell E with probability 1>3 and it remains in cell
D with probability 2>3.
If a player wins, then he gets a payoff of 1 and the other player obtains
zero. If the players go on endlessly with neither player winning, then they

--- Sayfa 364 ---
349
Exercises
both get a payoff of 1>2. There is no discounting. The game begins with the
coin in region B and player 1 moves ﬁrst.
(a)  Are there any contingencies in the game from which the player with the
move obviously should select Push?
(b)  In this game, an equilibrium is called Markov if the players’ strategies
depend only on the current position of the coin rather than on any other
aspects of the history of play. In other words, each player’s strategy
speciﬁes how to behave (whether to pick Push or Slap) when the coin
is in cell B, how to behave when the coin is in cell C, and so on. For
the player who has the move, let v k denote the equilibrium continu-
ation payoff from a point at which the coin is k cells away from this
player’s goal. Likewise, for the player who does not have the move, let
w k denote the equilibrium continuation payoff from a point at which the
coin is k cells away from this player’s goal. Find a Markov equilibrium
in this game and report the strategies and continuation values. You can
appeal to the one-deviation property.

--- Sayfa 365 ---
350
T
he Nash equilibrium and rationalizability concepts can be applied directly
to any game with random events. These static concepts are most valid for
games in which the players’ actions are taken simultaneously and indepen-
dently. Many interesting applications fall into this class of games. For example,
consider an auction, where bidders may have private information about their
valuations of the item on the block. In the “sealed bid” auction format, the bid-
ders choose their bids simultaneously. Similarly, interaction between oligopolist
ﬁrms can often be modeled as a static game with incomplete information. In
fact, for most static situations—from location games to partnership problems—
it is worthwhile and interesting to study variants with incomplete information.
There are two methods of evaluating Bayesian games. The ﬁrst method is to
compute rationalizability and Nash equilibrium on the Bayesian normal form.
This is recommended for any game that can be represented in matrix form. The
second method entails treating the types of each player as separate players. For
example, if player 1 is one of two types, A and B, then it may be helpful to think
of 1A and 1B as distinct players. Treating types separately often simpliﬁes the
analysis of inﬁnite games, where calculus may be required. Strictly speaking,
the methods do not always yield identical solutions.1 But no discrepancies arise
in the applications studied here. By the way, when applied to a game with nature,
solution concepts receive the “Bayesian” qualiﬁer; thus, we have Bayesian Nash
equilibrium and Bayesian rationalizability.
For an example of the ﬁrst method, consider the game discussed at the end
of Chapter 24 and pictured in Figures 24.3 and 24.4. The extensive-form and
normal-form representations are reproduced here in Figure 26.1. Examining the
normal form reveals that A12A0 and B12A0 are dominated strategies for player 1.
With reference to the extensive form, this is conﬁrmed by observing that player
l’s action A0 yields a lower payoff than does B0, regardless of whether player 2
selects C or D. Continuing, note that player 2’s strategy C is dominated in the
next round of the iterated dominance procedure. The extensive form provides
more details on this. Player 2 knows that player 1 of type 0 selects B0; given that
1Differences arise in the rationalizability context and when there is a type of player that arises with zero prob-
ability. One of the exercises at the end of the chapter addresses rationalizability.
26
BAYESIAN NASH EQUILIBRIUM
AND RATIONALIZABILITY

--- Sayfa 366 ---
351
Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability
C
D
C
D
C
D
C
D
12, 9
3, 6
3, 6
6, 0
6, 0
6, 9
6, 9
0, 9
A12
A0
B0
A0
A12
B0
A12
A0
B12
B0
B12
x = 12
x = 0
1
1
(2/3)
(1/3)
B
12
2
1
2
8, 9
10, 6
3, 6
4, 7
5, 8
4, 3
6, 0
6, 9
C
D
type 0 arises with probability 1>3, player 2 strictly prefers D to C, regardless of
his belief about the behavior of type 12. After C is removed, player l’s strategy
A12 B0 also is discarded. That is, B12 is the only rational choice for type 12, given
that player 2 selects D. The Bayesian rationalizable set is thus {(B12 B0, D)},
which also identiﬁes the unique Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the game.
As an example of the second approach to solving Bayesian games, consider
a simple Cournot duopoly game with incomplete information. Suppose that
demand is given by p = 10 −Q, where Q is the total quantity produced in the
industry. Firm 1 selects a quantity q1, which it produces at zero cost. Firm 2’s
cost of production is private information (selected by nature). With probability
1>2, ﬁrm 2 produces at zero cost. With probability 1>2, ﬁrm 2 produces at a
marginal cost of 4. Call the former type of ﬁrm 2 “L” and the latter type “H” (for
low and high cost, respectively). Firm 2 knows its type, whereas ﬁrm 1 knows
only the probability that L and H occur. Let qH
2 and qL
2 denote the quantities
selected by the two types of ﬁrm 2. Then when ﬁrm 2’s type is L, its payoff is
given by
uL
2 = (10 −q1 −qL
2) qL
2 .
FIGURE 26.1
A game from Chapter 24.

--- Sayfa 367 ---
352
26: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability
When ﬁrm 2’s type is H, its payoff is
uH
2 = (10 −q1 −qH
2
 ) qH
2 −4qH.
As a function of the strategy proﬁle (q1; qL
2 , qH
2
 ), ﬁrm 1’s payoff is
 u1 = 1
2
 (10 −q1 −qL
2) q1 + 1
2
 (10 −q1 −qH
2) q1
 = a10 −q1 −
 qL
2
2 −
 qH
2
2 b q1.
Note that ﬁrm 1’s payoff is an expected payoff obtained by averaging the payoffs
of facing the low and high types of ﬁrm 1, according to the probability of these
types.
To ﬁnd the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this market game, consider the
types of player 2 as separate players. Then ﬁnd the best-response functions
for the three player types and determine the strategy proﬁle that solves them
simultaneously. The best-response functions are calculated by evaluating the
 following derivative conditions:
0u1
0q1
= 0, 0uL
2
0qL
2
= 0, and 0uH
2
0qH
2
= 0.
This yields:
 BR1
 (qL
2 , qH
2
 ) = 5 −qL
2
4 −qH
2
4   for player 1,

BRL
2
 (q1) = 5 −q1
2
 for player-type 2L, and

 BRH
2
 (q1) = 3 −q1
2
 for player-type 2H.
Solving the associated system of equalities,
q1 = 5 −qL
2
4 −qH
2
4 , qL
2 = 5 −q1
2 , qH
1 = 3 −q1
2 ,
the Bayesian Nash equilibrium is found to be the proﬁle q1 = 4,  qL
2 = 3,
qH
2 = 1. In words, ﬁrm 1 produces 4, whereas ﬁrm 2 produces 3 if its cost is low
and 1 if its cost is high.

--- Sayfa 368 ---
353
Guided Exercise
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the following game with nature:
(a) Represent this game in the (Bayesian) normal form.
(b)  Calculate the (Bayesian) rationalizable set. Does this game have any pure-
strategy (Bayesian) Nash equilibria?
(c) Calculate the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium.
Solution:
(a) Here is the normal-form matrix:
(b)  Regarding the rationalizable set, note that player 2’s strategy BY is domi-
nated by a mixed strategy that puts high probability on BX and a small prob-
ability on either AX or AY. After removing BY, nothing else is dominated
for either player. Thus, the rationalizable set is
R = {L, D} × {AX, AY, BX}.
You can easily verify that there is no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium.
2
X
2
Y
B
Q
N
P
(1/2)
(1/2)
D
2, 2
0, 0
1
L
A
4, 0
0, 4
B
A
4, 0
0, 4
1
2
AX
L
D
AY
BX
BY
0, 4
3, 1
2, 0
1, 3
0, 2
0, 4
4, 0
4, 0

--- Sayfa 369 ---
354
26: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability
(c)  To ﬁnd the mixed-strategy equilibrium, ﬁrst note that it must involve player
1 randomizing between L and D, for if player 1 selects only L or only D,
then, given player 2’s best response, player 1 would want to switch. Next
observe that because player 1 will choose D with positive probability, player
2 strictly prefers not to play AY. Thus, the mixed-strategy equilibrium will
have player 1 mixing between L and D and player 2 mixing between AX
and BX. Suppose that player 1 puts probability p on L and 1 −p on D;
suppose player 2 puts probability q on AX and 1 −q on BX. Then the
required indifference conditions are
q # 0 + (1 −q) # 4 = q # 3 + (1 −q) # 1
and
p # 4 + (1 −p) # 1 = p # 0 + (1 −p) # 3.
 Solving these equations, we learn that the mixed-strategy equilibrium speci-
ﬁes p = 1>3 and q = 1>2.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the following game. Nature selects A with probability 1>2 and
B with probability 1>2. If nature selects A, then players 1 and 2 inter-
act  according to matrix “A.” If nature selects B, then the players interact
 according to matrix “B.” These matrices are pictured here.
(a)  Suppose that, when the players choose their actions, the players do
not know which matrix they are playing. That is, they think that with
probability 1>2 the payoffs are as in matrix A and that with probability
1>2 the payoffs are as in matrix B. Write the normal-form matrix that
1
2
V
X
Y
A
B
Z
W
6, 0
4, 1
0, 1
0, 0
5, 1
3, 0
1
2
V
X
Y
Z
W
0, 0
0, 1
4, 1
6, 0
5, 1
3, 0

--- Sayfa 370 ---
355
Exercises
describes this Bayesian game. (This matrix is the “average” of matrices
A and B.) Using rationalizability, what is the strategy proﬁle that is
played?
(b)  Now suppose that, before the players select their actions, player 1
observes nature’s choice. (That is, player 1 knows which matrix is being
played.) Player 2 does not observe nature’s choice. Represent this game
in the extensive form and in the Bayesian normal form. Using domi-
nance, what is player l’s optimal strategy in this game? What is the set
of rationalizable strategies in the game?
(c)  In this example, is the statement “A player beneﬁts from having more
information” true or false?
2. Two players simultaneously and independently have to decide how much
to contribute to a public good. If player 1 contributes x1 and player 2 con-
tributes x2 , then the value of the public good is 2(x1 + x2 + x1 x2), which
they each receive. Assume that x1 and x2 are positive numbers. Player 1
must pay a cost x2
1 of contributing; thus, player 1’s payoff in the game is
u1 = 2( x1 + x2 + x1 x2
 ) −x2
1. Player 2 pays the cost tx2
2 so that player 2’s
payoff is u2 = 2( x1 + x2 + x1 x2
 ) −tx2
2. The number t is private informa-
tion to player 2; player 1 knows that t equals 2 with probability 1>2 and it
equals 3 with probability 1>2. Compute the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of
this game.
3. Suppose that nature selects A with probability 1>2 and B with probability
1>2. If nature selects A, then players 1 and 2 interact according to matrix
“A.” If nature selects B, then the players interact according to matrix “B.”
These matrices are pictured here. Suppose that, before the players select
their actions, player 1 observes nature’s choice. That is, player 1 knows
from which matrix the payoffs are drawn, and player 1 can condition his
or her decision on this knowledge. Player 2 does not know which matrix is
being played when he or she selects between L and R.
1
2
L
U
D
A
R
2, 2
4, 4
0, 0
0, 0
1
2
L
U9
D9
B
R
0, 2
0, 4
2, 0
4, 0

--- Sayfa 371 ---
356
26: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability
(a)  Draw the extensive-form representation of this game. Also represent
this game in Bayesian normal form. Compute the set of rationalizable
strategies and ﬁnd the Nash equilibria.
(b)  Consider a three-player interpretation of this strategic setting in which
each of player l’s types is modeled as a separate player. That is, the
game is played by players 1A, 1B, and 2. Assume that player 1A’s
payoff is zero whenever nature chooses B; likewise, player 1B’s payoff
is zero whenever nature selects A. Depict this version of the game in the
extensive form (remember that payoff vectors consist of three numbers)
and in the normal form. Compute the set of rationalizable strategies and
ﬁnd the Nash equilibria.
(c)  Explain why the predictions of parts (a) and (b) are the same in regard
to equilibrium but different in regard to rationalizability. (Hint: The
answer has to do with the scope of the players’ beliefs.)
4. Demonstrate that, for the Cournot game discussed in this chapter, the only
rationalizable strategy is the Bayesian Nash equilibrium.
5. Consider a differentiated duopoly market in which ﬁrms compete by se-
lecting prices and produce to ﬁll orders. Let p1 be the price chosen by ﬁrm
1 and let p2 be the price of ﬁrm 2. Let q1 and q2 denote the quantities de-
manded (and produced) by the two ﬁrms. Suppose that the demand for ﬁrm
1 is given by q1 = 22 −2p1 + p2
 , and the demand for ﬁrm 2 is given by
q2 = 22 −2p2 + p1. Firm 1 produces at a constant marginal cost of 10 and
no ﬁxed cost. Firm 2 produces at a constant marginal cost of c and no ﬁxed
cost. The payoffs are the ﬁrms’ individual proﬁts.
(a)  The ﬁrms’ strategies are their prices. Represent the normal form by
writing the ﬁrms’ payoff functions.
(b)  Calculate the ﬁrms’ best-response functions.
(c)  Suppose that c = 10 so the ﬁrms are identical (the game is symmetric).
Calculate the Nash equilibrium prices.
(d)  Now suppose that ﬁrm 1 does not know ﬁrm 2’s marginal cost c. With
probability 1>2 nature picks c = 14, and with probability 1>2 nature
picks c = 6. Firm 2 knows its own cost (that is, it observes nature’s
move), but ﬁrm 1 only knows that ﬁrm 2’s marginal cost is either 6 or
14 (with equal probabilities). Calculate the best-response functions of
player 1 and the two types (c = 6 and c = 14) of player 2 and calculate
the Bayesian Nash equilibrium quantities.
6. Find the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the game pictured here. Note that
Exercise 3 of Chapter 24 asked you to convert this into the normal form.

--- Sayfa 372 ---
357
Exercises
7. Consider the following static game of incomplete information. Nature
selects the type (c) of player 1, where c = 2 with probability 2>3 and c = 0
with probability 1>3. Player 1 observes c (he knows his own type), but
 player 2 does not observe c. Then the players make simultaneous and inde-
pendent choices and receive payoffs as described by the following matrix.
(a) Draw the normal-form matrix of this game.
(b) Compute the Bayesian Nash equilibrium.
8. Consider a simple simultaneous-bid poker game. First, nature selects num-
bers x1 and x2. Assume that these numbers are independently and uniformly
distributed between 0 and 1. Player 1 observes x1 and player 2 observes x2,
but neither player observes the number given to the other player. Simultane-
ously and independently, the players choose either to fold or to bid. If both
players fold, then they both get the payoff −1. If only one player folds,
then he obtains −1 while the other player gets 1. If both players elected
to bid, then each player receives 2 if his number is at least as large as the
other player’s number; otherwise, he gets −2. Compute the Bayesian Nash
equilibrium of this game. (Hint: Look for a symmetric equilibrium in which
a player bids if and only if his number is greater than some constant a. Your
analysis will reveal the equilibrium value of a.)
(1/2)
(1/2)
R
L
1
2
2, 0
0, 4
4, 0
4, 2
1
0, 0
2, 0
R9
D
D
U
U
L9
X
0, 1
1, 0
1, 0
c, 1
A
B
Y
1
2

--- Sayfa 373 ---
358
26: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability
9. Consider the simple poker game described in Exercise 1 of Chapter 24,
where there are just two cards in the deck and one card is dealt to player 1.
This game has a single Nash equilibrium (perhaps in mixed strategies). Cal-
culate and report the equilibrium strategy proﬁle. Explain whether blufﬁng
occurs in equilibrium.
10. Consider the Cournot duopoly game with incomplete information. First,
nature chooses a number x, which is equally likely to be 8 or 4. This number
represents whether demand is high (x = 8) or low (x = 4). Firm 1 observes
x because this ﬁrm has performed market research and knows the demand
curve. Firm 2 does not observe x. Then the two ﬁrms simultaneously select
quantities, q1 and q2, and the market price is determined by p = x −q1 −q2.
Assume that the ﬁrms produce at zero cost. Thus, the payoff of ﬁrm 1 is
(x −q1 −q2) q1, and the payoff of ﬁrm 2 is (x −q1 −q2) q2
 .
(a)  Note that there are two types of ﬁrm 1, the high type (observing x = 8)
and the low type (observing x = 4). Let qH
1 and qL
1 denote the quantity
choices of the high and low types of ﬁrm 1. Calculate the players’ best-
response functions.
(b)  Find the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this game.
(c)  Does ﬁrm l’s information give it an advantage over ﬁrm 2 in this game?
Quantify this.
11. Consider a version of the “social unrest” game analyzed in Chapter 8
 (including Exercise 8) with incomplete information. Two people (players
1 and 2) have to simultaneously choose whether to protest (P) or stay
home (H). A player who stays home gets a payoff of 0. Player i’s payoff of
protesting is determined by this player’s protest value xi and whether the
other player also protests. Speciﬁcally, if player i decides to protest, then her
payoff is xi −1
3 if the other player also protests, whereas her payoff is xi −2
3
if the other player stays home.
Each player knows her own protest value but does not observe that of
the other player. Thus, xi is player i ’s type. Assume that x1 and x2 are inde-
pendently drawn from the uniform distribution on [0, 1].
(a)  Calculate the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this game. (Hint: Note that
each player’s strategy is a function from her type to {P, H}. Consider
cutoff strategies, where player i will protest if and only if xi Ú yi, for
some constant yi.) Document your analysis and report the equilibrium
cutoffs y*1 and y*2.
(b)  What is the set of rationalizable strategies in this game? Without provid-
ing mathematical details, try to give reasoning based on considering

--- Sayfa 374 ---
359
Exercises
(i) a lower bound on the types that protest regardless of their beliefs
and (ii) an upper bound on the types that stay home regardless of their
beliefs.
(c)  Consider an n-player version of the game in which the payoff of protest-
ing is xi −1
3 if at least m of the other players also protests, and it is
xi −2
3 if fewer than m of the other players also protests. Can you ﬁnd
values of n and m for which this game has multiple Nash equilibria?

--- Sayfa 375 ---
360
I
n this chapter, I present some examples of how incomplete information af-
fects trade and the aggregation of information between two or more economic
agents. Each of the settings is modeled as a static game.
MARKETS AND LEMONS
You may have had the experience of buying or selling a used automobile. If
so, you know something about markets with incomplete information. In the
used-car market, sellers generally have more information about their cars than
do prospective buyers. A typical seller knows whether his car has a shrouded
engine problem—something that the buyer might not notice but that would
likely require a costly repair before long. The seller knows whether the car tends
to overheat in the summer months. The seller knows the myriad idiosyncracies
that the car has developed since he acquired it. Prospective buyers may know
only what they can gather from a cursory inspection of the vehicle. Thus, buyers
are at an informational disadvantage. You would expect that, as a result, the
buyers would not fare well in the market. Nonetheless, sellers might lose if the
market failed owing to justiﬁably cautious buyers.1
To illustrate, suppose Jerry is in the market for a used car. One day he
meets a shifty looking man named Freddie, who offers an attractive ﬁfteen-
year-old sedan for sale. Jerry likes the car’s appearance. He imagines himself
at the wheel, cruising up and down Broadway, taking in the ﬂirtatious glances
of many a woman through his sunglasses. Then he imagines the engine explod-
ing, followed by an embarrassing scene in which he watches from the curb as a
ﬁreﬁghter dowses his vehicle with water. Jerry says to Freddie, “The car looks
good, but how do I know it isn’t a lemon?” Freddie rejoins, “You have my
word; this car is a peach; it’s in great shape!” Jerry insists, “Galimatias! Let’s
1The trading example that I present here is inspired by G. Akerlof, “The Market for Lemons: Qualitative
Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (1970): 488–500. For his work,
George Akerlof was awarded the 2001 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences, with corecipients A. Michael
Spence and Joseph Stiglitz.
27
LEMONS, AUCTIONS, AND
INFORMATION AGGREGATION

--- Sayfa 376 ---
361
Markets and Lemons
FIGURE 27.1 The lemons problem.
put aside the hep-talk. Since I will not likely see you again, your word means
nothing to me. I know game theory and, as Professor Watson clearly explains,
you have no way of, or interest in, establishing a reputation with someone you
will never see again.” Freddie nods and says, “Okay, let’s talk turkey. The Blue
Book tells us the market price for this car.2 You can look the car over as you
please. In the end, you will have to decide whether you are willing to pay the
Blue Book price for the car, as I must decide whether to offer the car at this
price.”
Interaction between Jerry and Freddie may be quite elaborate, but I would
like to abstract from this complexity and simply focus on the bottom line.
Suppose there is some ﬁxed market price for ﬁfteen-year-old sedans of the type
that Freddie is selling. Call this exogenously given price p. Assume that Jerry
and Freddie play the game depicted in Figure 27.1. Nature ﬁrst chooses whether
the car is a peach or a lemon. If the car is a peach, then it is worth $3000 to Jerry
and $2000 to Freddie. If the car is a lemon, then it is worth $1000 to Jerry and $0
to Freddie. Note that, in both cases, Jerry values the car more than does Freddie,
so efﬁciency requires that the car be traded and the surplus (in each case $1000)
be divided between them. But there is incomplete information: Freddie observes
nature’s choice, whereas Jerry knows only that the car is a peach with prob-
ability q. Then the players simultaneously and independently decide whether to
trade (T) or not (N) at the market price p. If both elect to trade, then the trade
takes place. Otherwise, Freddie keeps the car.
Two kinds of equilibria are possible in this game. In the ﬁrst kind, only
the lemon is traded. Let us check whether there are values of p for which only
2The Kelley Blue Book is a publication in the United States that establishes price guidelines for used
automobiles.
T
0, 2000
0, 2000
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
Lemon
Peach
0, 2000
TP
TL
N
(q)
T
N
NP
NL
J
F
J
F
3000 −p, p
1000 −p, p
(1 −q)

--- Sayfa 377 ---
362
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
the lemon is traded in equilibrium. That is, Jerry selects T and Freddie plays the
strategy NP TL (no trade if peach; trade if lemon). In order for Freddie’s strategy
to be optimal, it must be that 0 … p and p … 2000 (otherwise Freddie would
either not want to trade a lemon or want to trade a peach). In order for Jerry’s
strategy to be optimal, it must be that Jerry is willing to trade, conditional on
knowing that Freddie only offers the lemon for sale. Jerry obtains an expected
payoff of q # 0 + (1 −q) (1000 −p) if he chooses T, 0 if he chooses N. Jerry is
willing to trade if and only if
(1 −q) (1000 −p) Ú 0,
which simpliﬁes to p … 1000. Putting the incentive conditions together, we see
that if p ∈(0, 1000), then there is an equilibrium in which only the lemon is
traded. Intuitively, if the market price is below $1000, Freddie would want to
bring only the lemon to market. Anticipating that only a lemon will be for sale,
Jerry is willing to pay no more than $1000.
The second kind of equilibrium features trade of both the lemon and the
peach. That is, Jerry selects T and Freddie plays the strategy TP TL. In order for
this equilibrium to exist, the market price must be high enough so that Freddie
is willing to sell the peach; speciﬁcally, p Ú 2000. In addition, Jerry’s expected
value of owning the car must be at least as great as the price. That is, it must be
that
3000q + 1000(1 −q) Ú p,
which simpliﬁes to 1000 + 2000q Ú p. Thus, there is an equilibrium in which
both types of car are traded as long as
1000 + 2000q Ú p Ú 2000.
Note that there is a price p that works if and only if
1000 + 2000q Ú 2000,
which simpliﬁes to q Ú 1>2. In words, unless the probability of a peach is sufﬁ-
ciently high (there are not too many lemons in the world), there is no equilib-
rium in which the peach is traded.
If q < 1>2, then only lemons are traded in equilibrium. Recall that this
outcome is inefﬁcient because trading the peach creates value. Thus, the
model demonstrates that asymmetric information sometimes causes markets to
malfunction.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
363
Auctions
AUCTIONS
In the lemons example, the seller has private information about his and the
buyers’ valuations of the good to be traded. Other markets have different infor-
mation structures. In many instances, prospective buyers have private infor-
mation about their valuations for the good. Furthermore, different prospective
buyers have different tastes, needs, and abilities, leading to variations in people’s
willingness to pay for things such as houses, artwork, and productive inputs.
The seller of a good naturally wants to trade at the highest price that she can
obtain. When the seller has one object to sell and there are multiple potential
buyers, the seller would like to ﬁnd the buyer with the highest willingness to
pay for the object and then consummate a deal with this buyer at a price close
to the buyer’s valuation of the good. Unfortunately for the seller, she may not
know the prospective buyers’ valuations. One way for the seller to encourage
competition between prospective buyers and to identify the highest valuation is
to hold an auction.
Auctions are quite common in reality. All sorts of merchandise is sold at
formal and informal auction houses, often over the Internet. Many different
auction formats are in use as well. There are sealed-bid auctions, where bidders
simultaneously and independently submit offers; sealed bids are often used in
home sales and for government procurement. There are dynamic oral auctions,
where an auctioneer suggests prices in a sequence and the prospective buyers
signal or call out their bids. Several versions of these auction forms are in
prominent use.
To give you a taste of auction theory and its elemental intuition, I shall
present an analysis of three examples of sealed-bid auctions. For the ﬁrst two,
imagine that a person—the seller—has a painting that is worth nothing to her
personally. She hopes to make some money by selling the art. There are two
potential buyers, whom I call bidders 1 and 2. Let v1 and v2 denote the valua-
tions of the two bidders. If bidder i wins the painting and has to pay x for it, then
bidder i ’s payoff is vi −x. Suppose that v1 and v2 are chosen independently by
nature and that each is uniformly distributed between 0 and 900. Technically
speaking, the probability that vi < y is y>900. The bidders observe their own
valuations before engaging in the auction. However, they do not observe each
other’s valuations, so each must bid knowing only his own valuation and that
the other’s valuation is distributed uniformly between 0 and 900. The seller does
not observe the bidders’ valuations; she knows only their distributions.
In general, the seller designs the auction in which the bidders participate.
The auction implies a game between bidders 1 and 2, whom we can therefore
call players 1 and 2. The auction game speciﬁes which bidder gets the painting

--- Sayfa 379 ---
364
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
(or neither) and what monetary payments each bidder must make, as a function
of the bidding behavior.
Consider a second-price auction.3 In this game, players simultaneously
and independently submit bids b1 and b2. The painting is awarded to the high-
est bidder at a price equal to the second-highest bid. For example, if player 1
bids 420 and player 2 bids 380, then player 1 gets the painting and is required
to pay $380. In this outcome, player l’s payoff would be v1 −380 and player
2’s payoff would be 0 (because player 2 neither gets the painting nor has to pay
anything).4
Finding the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the second-price auction is not
too difﬁcult, once you notice that bidding one’s valuation is a weakly dominant
strategy for each player. A weakly dominant strategy is one that weakly domi-
nates all other strategies, so it is a best response to every strategy of the other
player. (Recall the deﬁnition of weak dominance from Chapter 6.) When all
players have a weakly dominant strategy, then this strategy proﬁle obviously is
an equilibrium in the game.
Here’s how you can prove that bidding one’s valuation is a weakly dominant
strategy in the second-price auction. Suppose that player i has valuation vi and
that he is considering whether to bid bi = vi or to bid some other amount bi = x.
I will show that bidding vi always gives him a weakly higher payoff than does
bidding x, regardless of the other player’s (player j ’s) bid. Further, bidding vi
yields a strictly higher payoff for some bids of player j.
Suppose, for instance, that x > vi and consider the following three possi-
bilities. First, it may be that player j ’s bid bj is at least as large as x. In this case,
player i will lose the auction regardless of whether he bids x or vi.5 Second, it
may be that bj is between vi and x. In this case, player i actually does worse by
bidding x than by bidding vi. If he bids vi, then he will lose the auction and get
a payoff of 0; in contrast, if he bids x, then he wins the auction and has to pay bj
 ,
giving him the negative payoff vi −bj. Third, consider the case in which bj

is less than vi
 . In this case, bidding vi
 and bidding x yield the same payoff to
player i; either way, player i wins the painting and has to pay bj
 for a payoff of
vi −bj.
3The second-price auction, as well as related mechanisms, is associated with William Vickrey, who, with
James Mirrlees, won the 1996 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. These men made fundamental contribu-
tions to the theory of incentives in environments of incomplete information. Vickrey’s auction analysis is
contained in his “Counterspeculation, Auctions and Competitive Sealed Tenders,” Journal of Finance, 16
(l961): 8–37.
4The second-price auction is growing in use and is also closely related to the dynamic ascending bid auction
form.
5I have not described what the auction speciﬁes (who wins the painting or with what probability) in the case
in which the bids are equal (b1 = b2). In fact, it will not matter what is speciﬁed for this contingency, so I
ignore it at this point.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
365
Auctions
In summary, player i is better off bidding his value vi, rather than bidding
any other amount x, regardless of what player j does. You can check that the
same result is reached when x < vi (Exercise 3 at the end of this chapter asks
you to do this). Thus, bidding one’s valuation is a weakly dominant strategy and
there is a Bayesian equilibrium in which both players use this strategy.
The equilibrium of the second-price auction is efﬁcient because the painting
goes to the player with the highest valuation. Therefore, by running an auction,
the seller locates the highest valuation bidder. But the seller is not able to appro-
priate all of the surplus of the trade because the winning bidder pays only the
second-highest bid. The seller’s expected revenue equals the expected second-
highest valuation, which is 300.6
Next consider a ﬁrst-price, sealed-bid auction. The players simultaneously
and independently submit bids b1 and b2 as before. The painting is awarded to
the highest bidder, who must pay his bid. For example, if player 1 bids 290 and
player 2 bids 310, then player 2 obtains the painting for the price of $310. Player
2’s payoff would then be v2 −310, whereas player l’s payoff would be 0. First-
price auctions such as this one are very common.
Computing the Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the ﬁrst-price auction is more
tricky than is the analysis for the second-price auction. Fortunately, some intu-
ition and a guess can help. Note that a player has no reason to bid more than his
valuation because he would then get a negative payoff in the event that he wins
the auction. In fact, each player ought to bid less than his valuation so that he
can obtain a positive payoff if he wins. Let us start by conjecturing the form of
the players’ equilibrium bidding strategies and then, by analyzing incentives,
determine whether the form is correct. Presume that each player adopts a strat-
egy in which he bids a fraction a of his valuation. That is, when player i ’s valu-
ation is vi
 , he bids bi = avi
 . We can compute whether this form of symmetric
strategy proﬁle is an equilibrium and, if so, we will be able to calculate what the
parameter a must be.
Let us compute player i ’s optimal strategy under the assumption that bidder
j uses the strategy bj = avj
 . Suppose that player i ’s valuation is vi and that he
is considering a bid of x. If player i wins the auction, then his payoff will be
6To see how this is computed, note that the expected second-highest valuation, conditional on knowing the
value v1, is
Prob[v2 Ú v1](v1) + Prob[v2 < v1] E [v2  v2 < v1].
The ﬁrst term represents the case in which v1 is the second-highest bid (occurring when v2 Ú v1), whereas the
second term represents the case in which v2 is the second-highest bid. E [v2  v2 < v1] denotes the expected
value of v2 conditional on v2 being less than v1. Because v2 is distributed uniformly, we know that, with v1 ﬁxed,
Prob[v2 < v1] = v1
 >900, Prob[v2 Ú v1] = 1 −v1
 >900, and E [v2  v2 < v1] = v1
 >2. If we substitute these
expressions and simplify, the expected second-highest valuation, conditional on knowing v1, is v1 −v1
2
 >1800.
Taking the expectation with respect to v1 (integrating with the density function 1>900) yields 300.

--- Sayfa 381 ---
366
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
vi −x. Of course, contingent on winning, player i prefers x to be small. But
lowering x reduces the chance that he wins the auction. In particular, player i
wins if and only if player j ’s bid falls below x. Because player j bids accord-
ing to the function bj = avj
 , a bid of x would be made by the type of player j
whose valuation is x>a; types of player j with valuations below x>a will bid less
than x. Because vj is distributed uniformly between 0 and 900, the probability
that vj < x>a is x>900a. Thus, if player i bids x, then he can expect to win the
auction with probability x>900a.
By bidding x, player i ’s expected payoff is equal to the probability of
winning times the surplus that he gets if he wins:
(vi −x)x
900a
.
Note that this payoff is a concave parabola as a function of x. To ﬁnd player i ’s
optimal bid, take the derivative with respect to x and set it equal to 0. Solving
for x yields x = vi>2. In words, player i ’s best response to j ’s strategy is to
bid exactly half his valuation. That is, bi = vi>2 is player i ’s optimal strategy.
Because this strategy is of the form that we assumed at the beginning, we know
that we have found a Bayesian Nash equilibrium and that the bidding param-
eter is a = 1>2. That is, b1(v1) = v1>2 and b2(v2) = v2>2 constitute a Bayesian
Nash equilibrium.
As with the second-price auction, the equilibrium of the ﬁrst-price auction
is efﬁcient; the player with the highest valuation wins the auction. Further-
more, the winner pays one-half his valuation, which bears a resemblance to
the outcome of the second-price auction. Speciﬁcally, recall that the winner
of the second-price auction pays the second-highest bid, which (as you can
check) happens to be one-half of the winner’s valuation on average. Thus, the
ﬁrst-price and second-price auctions yield the same expected revenue for the
seller, 300. This fact about “revenue equivalence” between different auction
forms actually holds in many auction environments.7
What can you learn from all this, besides the fact that auction theory is
complicated? First, in standard ﬁrst-price auctions, there is a trade-off between
the probability of winning and the surplus obtained by winning. Second, under
ﬁrst-price auction rules, it is optimal to bid less than one’s valuation. Third,
7For more on the revenue equivalence result, and auction theory in general, see the following articles:
P. McAfee and J. McMillan, “Auctions and Bidding,” Journal of Economic Literature, 25 (1987): 699–738;
P. Milgrom, “Auction Theory,” pp. 1–32, in Advances in Economic Theory, Fifth World Congress, ed.
T. Bewley (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987); and P. Milgrom and R. Weber, “A Theory of
Auctions and Competitive Bidding,” Econometrica, 50 (1982): 1089–1122.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
367
Auctions
auctions can be designed to induce “truthful” bidding (as is the case with the
second-price form). Fourth, competitive bidding produces information about the
bidders’ valuations and can allow the seller to extract surplus from the trade.
Before leaving the topic of auctions, I’ll introduce yet another wrinkle by
way of a third example. The preceding two examples are in the setting of private
values, meaning that each player knows his own valuation of the object but not
that of the other player. Furthermore, the bidders almost always have different
valuations. By contrast, in a common-value setting, the players’ valuations are
the same, but no one has perfectly accurate information.
For instance, consider the sale of a Treasury bill in the United States. Such a
bill pays a stated amount of money after a speciﬁed length of time. The value of
a T-bill depends on future interest rates and on the risk of default, which are typi-
cally the same regardless of who buys the bill. However, different bidders may
get different signals about where interest rates are heading. Another example is
the sale of distressed or seized property to commercial resellers. The winning
buyer will carefully evaluate the property (after the sale), recondition it, and sell
it to consumers. The value of doing this is independent of the buyer, unless the
buyers differ in their reconditioning skills. However, the bidders may get differ-
ent signals about the valuation of the property before making their bids, For
instance, one bidder may be good at spotting damage, whereas another bidder
may be good at estimating repair costs.
Let us analyze a simple common-value example. There are two bidders
(players 1 and 2), and they have the same valuation of the object being
auctioned. Let Y denote this valuation. Suppose that Y = y1 + y2, where y1 and
y2 are uniformly distributed between 0 and 10. That is, for any x ∈[0, 10], we
have yi < x with probability x>10. Player 1 privately observes the signal y1 and
player 2 privately observes the signal y2. The players then engage in a ﬁrst-
price, sealed-bid auction to determine who gets the object.
As a ﬁrst step in the analysis, consider the strategy in which player i bids
bi = yi + 5. That is, player i ’s bid is his expected valuation of the object, given
his own signal yi
 . (Note that the expected value of yj is 5.) One might think that
this strategy should yield an expected payoff of zero conditional on winning
the auction, but this is not so. There is an important subtlety: Conditional on
winning the auction, player i learns something about player j’s signal yj
 .
To see how this works, suppose both players use the strategy bi = yi + 5,
and player 1 happens to get the signal y1 = 8. Player 1 will then bid b1 = 13,
thinking that y2 is 5 on average. Will player 1 break even? Nope. Player 1 wins
the object only in the event that player 2’s bid is less than 13. Considering that
b2 = y2 + 5, player 2 bids less than 13 only if y2 < 8. Conditional on y2 < 8,
its expected value is 4. Thus, conditional on winning the auction, player 1 must
lower his estimate of y2 and, along with it, the valuation Y.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
368
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
The logic just described is known as “the winner’s curse.” A player wins
when the other players bid less, but this implies that the other bidders must have
received relatively bad signals of the object’s valuation. The strategic implica-
tion is that one should factor in that winning yields information, and this infor-
mation should be used in formulating the expected valuation.
The Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this common-value auction is the strat-
egy proﬁle in which b1 = y1 and b2 = y2, so the players are quite cautious. To
conﬁrm this equilibrium, let us calculate player l’s optimal bid as a function of
his signal, assuming that player 2’s bidding rule is b2 = y2. (The same analysis
applies to player 2.) Note that for any signal y1 and bid b1, player l’s expected
payoff is the probability of winning times the expected payoff conditional on
winning. The probability of winning is b1>10 because this is the probability that
player 2 bids below b1 (owing to b2 = y2 and that y2 is uniformly distributed on
[0,10]). The expected payoff conditional on winning is
y1 + b1
2 −b1,
because b1>2 is the expected value of y2 conditional on y2 < b1. Multiplying
these, we see that player l’s expected payoff of bidding b1 is
b1ay1 + b1
2 −b1b = b1ay1 −b1
2 b,
which is maximized by setting b1 = y1.
The new wrinkle introduced in the common-value environment is that a
player must consider the informational content of winning the auction, as it
pertains to the signals that other players received. This feature is also present in
the setting that I turn to in the next section.
INFORMATION AGGREGATION
The lemon/peach and auction examples just described are cases in which players
must make a joint decision (whether and how to trade) based on private infor-
mation. More generally, there are many situations in which a group, perhaps
all of society, must make a collective decision in an environment of incomplete
information. For instance, a city may be considering whether to extend a trolley
line and, to make the socially optimal choice, it will depend on its individual
citizens to report accurately what their own personal costs and beneﬁts from
the project would be. Another example is society’s decision as to whether to

--- Sayfa 384 ---
369
Information Aggregation
reelect a president, again optimally a function of the citizens’ individual and
privately known preferences. A third example is the question of whether to
convict an accused felon, which may be best decided by collecting the various
pieces of information that members of a jury have about the defendant and the
nature of the crime.
These examples involve information aggregation—that is, combining infor-
mation from individual players to inform a single decision that affects them
all. Such settings are typically called social-choice problems. A key issue in
social choice is whether a communication and decision-making rule (known
as a mechanism in the technical literature) can be found to achieve social
objectives. One component of the analysis is determining the incentives of the
players under any given mechanism. Although a formal analysis of general
social-choice problems is not a topic for this book, it is worthwhile to examine
an applied example to help you recognize nuances in the rational reporting of
private information. In plainer language, you will see that players do not always
have the incentive to “vote their information.”
Consider a setting in which a jury must decide whether to acquit or convict
a defendant who is on trial.8 For simplicity, suppose that the jury consists of
two people who are the players in the game. The defendant’s identity is either
guilty or innocent and, from the player’s perspective, this is determined by a
move of nature that assigns equal probability to each possibility. During the
trial, each juror obtains a signal of the defendant’s identity. Because the jurors
have different spheres of expertise and are alert at different times in the trial,
the signal that juror/player 1 obtains is independent of the signal that juror/
player 2 obtains. Suppose that each signal is either I or G, with the following
distribution: Conditional on an innocent defendant, player i ’s signal is I with
probability 3>4 and G with probability 1>4. Conditional on a guilty defendant,
player i ’s signal is I with probability 1>4 and G with probability 3>4. Thus, I
is an indication of innocence and G is an indication of guilt, although neither
is absolute.
For example, note that, conditional on the defendant being guilty, the prob-
ability of two G signals is
Prob[GGguilty] = 3
4 # 3
4 = 9
16 .
8What follows is an example along the lines of D. Austen-Smith and J. Banks, “Information Aggregation,
Rationality, and the Condorcet Jury Theorem,” American Political Science Review, 90 (1996): 34–45. For a
more general analysis, see T. J. Feddersen and W. Pesendorfer, “Voting Behavior and Information Aggrega-
tion in Elections with Private Information,” Econometrica, 65 (1997): 1029–1058.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
370
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
Conditional on the defendant being innocent, the probability of two G signals is
Prob[GGinnocent] = 1
4 # 1
4 = 1
16 .
In these mathematical expressions, the symbol “|” stands for “conditional on.”
The calculations show that getting two G signals is nine times as likely with the
guilty defendant as with the innocent defendant.
We can use Bayes’ rule to calculate the conditional probability of the defen-
dant being guilty given the signals. That is, we can ask a question such as: Given
that we initially thought that the defendant was guilty with probability 1>2 , and
now having learned that both players received signal G, what should we believe
is the probability that the defendant is guilty? The initial belief (1>2 here) is also
known as the prior belief. The assessment of the likelihood of a guilty defen-
dant conditional on the signals is called the updated or posterior belief. Bayes’
rule tells us that the updated probability of guilt equals the probability of the
particular signals conditional on a guilty defendant, times the prior probability
that the defendant is guilty, divided by the total probability that the particular
signals occur (irrespective of the defendant’s type):
Prob[guilty GG] = Prob[GGguilty] Prob[guilty]
Prob[GG]
.
Note that the overall probability of GG in the denominator is a sum of probabili-
ties over the events of guilty and innocent defendants; that is,
Prob[GG] = Prob[GGguilty] Prob[guilty]
 + Prob[GGinnocent] Prob[innocent].
Plugging in the numbers, the Bayes’ rule formula yields
Prob[guilty GG] =
(9>16) (1>2)
(9>16) (1>2) + (1>16) (1>2) = 9
10 .
This means that observing two G signals would cause us to believe that the
defendant is guilty with 90 percent probability. Incidentally, if this is your ﬁrst
exposure to Bayes’ rule, or you could use a general refresher on the basic deﬁ-
nitions of probability, please read Appendix A. You can test your understand-
ing by performing the calculations necessary to show that if one player gets

--- Sayfa 386 ---
371
Information Aggregation
the I signal and the other player gets the G signal, then the updated probability
of a guilty defendant is
Prob[guilty IG] = Prob[IGguilty] Prob[guilty]
Prob[IG]
= 1
2 .
At the end of the trial, the court (representing society) must declare the defen-
dant either acquitted or convicted. Suppose that the jurors’ preferences are
identical and depend only on the defendant’s identity and on the court’s ruling.
Each juror gets a payoff of 0 if the defendant is acquitted, regardless of the
defendant’s identity. If the defendant is guilty and is convicted, then each juror
gets a payoff of 3; if the defendant is innocent and is convicted, then each juror
gets a payoff of −2. Thus, jurors want to convict the guilty and acquit the
innocent.
The court’s ruling is issued on the advice of the jurors. Suppose that the
players are not allowed to converse about the case and that, at the end of the trial,
they are each asked to vote for acquittal or conviction. Furthermore, consider a
unanimity voting rule, in which the court declares the defendant convicted if and
only if both jurors vote to convict. The social objective is for each player to vote
for conviction if and only if his signal is G, so that the defendant is convicted
only when both signals are G.
How do rational jurors behave in this game? In particular, does each player
want to pass along his information by voting to convict if and only if he gets the
G signal? You might ﬁnd it curious that the answer is “no.” To be precise, voting
in this way does not constitute a Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the game. To
see this, put yourself in player 1’s shoes under the assumption that player 2 will
vote for conviction if and only if player 2 gets the G signal. Let us then calculate
whether behaving the same way is a best response.
Note that your vote affects the court’s ruling only in the situation in which
player 2 is voting for conviction. You see, if player 2 votes for acquittal, then,
under the unanimity rule, the defendant will be acquitted regardless of what
you do. In contrast, if player 2 votes for conviction, then the defendant’s fate
is in your hands. In this case, if you vote to convict, then the defendant will be
convicted. If you vote to acquit, then the defendant will be acquitted. In the
jargon of research on voting behavior, your vote is pivotal to the outcome only
if player 2 votes for conviction. Because our working assumption is that player 2
votes for conviction just when his signal is G, you know that your vote is pivotal
precisely when player 2 gets the G signal; your vote makes no difference to the
outcome when player 2 gets the I signal.
Also note that because you, as player 1, care only about the defendant’s
identity and the court’s ruling, your action affects your payoff only when your

--- Sayfa 387 ---
372
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
vote is pivotal. Thus, when deciding how to vote, you can limit your attention to
the case in which player 2’s signal is G. Let us consider your incentives on how
to vote in the situation in which your signal is I. Conditional on these signals,
your updated probability of the guilty defendant is 1>2 . Thus, if you vote to
convict (in which case the defendant is convicted), your payoff is
Prob[guilty IG] # 3 + Prob[innocent IG] # (−2) = 1
2 # 3 + 1
2 # (−2) = 1
2 .
If you vote to acquit, then the defendant is acquitted and you get 0. The bottom
line is that you strictly prefer voting for conviction rather than acquittal when
your signal is I, which is contrary to the desired social policy.
If “voting one’s information” is not an equilibrium, what is an equilibrium
of this game? In fact, there are several equilibria. Here is a simple pure- strategy
equilibrium: Player 2 always votes for conviction, regardless of player 2’s signal,
whereas player 1 votes to convict if and only if his signal is G. To see that this
is an equilibrium, let us evaluate the incentives of both players. Given player 2’s
strategy, player 1 knows that his vote is pivotal regardless of player 2’s signal;
it is as though there is a jury of one. If player 1 gets signal I then, using Bayes’
rule, player 1 believes that the defendant is guilty with probability
Prob[guilty I] = Prob[Iguilty] Prob[guilty]
Prob[I]
 =
(1>4) (1>2)
(1>4) (1>2) + (3>4) (1>2) = 1
4.
In this case, convicting the defendant yields an expected payoff of
(1>4) # 3 + (3>4) # (−2) = −(3>4), which is lower than the payoff of acquittal,
and so voting to acquit (as presumed) is better. If player 1 gets signal G, then,
using Bayes’ rule, player 1 believes that the defendant is guilty with probability
Prob[guilty G] = Prob[Gguilty] Prob[guilty]
Prob[G]
 =
(3>4) (1>2)
(3>4) (1>2) + (1>4) (1>2) = 3
4,
which, as you can check, makes conviction preferred. As for player 2, his pref-
erences are exactly as analyzed in the previous paragraphs (under the assump-
tion that player 1 votes to convict on signal G only), and so player 2 rationally
always votes to convict.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
373
Guided Exercise
In this equilibrium, only player l’s signal is used to determine the court’s
ruling, which is less precise than is the stated social objective. There is another
pure-strategy equilibrium in which the roles are reversed, with player 1 always
voting for conviction. There is also a mixed-strategy equilibrium in which play-
ers vote for conviction when they receive the I signal and randomize when they
get the G signal.
In all of the equilibria, less information is transmitted from the jury to the
court than society prefers. The main reason for this is that I have assumed in
the design of the game that the players actually have different preferences than
does society. To see this, recall that I suggested a social objective of convicting
the defendant only when both signals are G. Thus, society wants to acquit the
defendant if one player gets the I signal while the other gets the G signal. In this
contingency, the updated probability of the defendant being guilty is 1>2 . But
the players have a strict incentive to convict the defendant because, with equal
probabilities of innocence and guilt, the beneﬁt of conviction in the case of a
guilty defendant (a payoff of 3) outweighs the loss of convicting an innocent
defendant (a payoff of −2).
If the payoffs were changed so that the players had the same preferences as the
greater society, then there would be an efﬁcient equilibrium, which can be shown.
Thus, the potential for inefﬁciency in the voting game rests on a discrepancy
between the preferences of the jurors and society, or perhaps on a discrepancy
between the preferences of different jurors.9 Another issue is whether inefﬁcien-
cies disappear as the number of jurors increases; the answer to this question is
generally “yes.” One might also wonder if society would gain by allowing the
jurors to talk to one another and share information before voting, as is the case
in actual jury deliberations. Again, the answer is “yes.” Designing and managing
the optimal mechanism would be challenging, however, if the players had differ-
ent preferences; the scientiﬁc literature has left room for analysis in this direction.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the auction environment discussed in this chapter, where
the bidders’ values are independently drawn and distributed uniformly on the
interval [0, 900], but now suppose that there are n players. Compute the equi-
librium of the ﬁrst-price auction. (Hint: Presume that the players use a bidding
function of the form bi = avi
 ; note that, for a particular group of n −1 bidders,
the probability that all of these bidders’ valuations are simultaneously below x
is (x>900) n−1).
9On this, see A. Costinot and N. Kartik, “Information Aggregation, Strategic Voting, and Institutional
Reform,” unpublished manuscript, UC San Diego Department of Economics, 2006.

--- Sayfa 389 ---
374
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
Solution: Assume that the equilibrium strategies take the form bi = avi
 . Then,
given that the other players are using this bidding strategy (for some constant a),
player i ’s expected payoff of bidding x is
(vi −x) c
x
900a d
n−1
.
In this expression, the fraction x>900a represents the probability that an indi-
vidual player j (someone other than player i ) bids less than x, given that player j
is using strategy bj = avj and that j ’s valuation is uniformly distributed between
0 and 900. Raising this fraction to the power n −1 yields the probability that
the bids of all n −1 other players are below x, in which case player i wins the
auction. The ﬁrst-order condition for player i ’s best response is
(n −1) (vi −x)  x n−2 −x n−1 = 0.
Solving for x yields x = vi  (n −1)>n, which identiﬁes the parameter a to be
(n −1)>n. That is, in equilibrium each of the players uses the bidding function
bi = (n −1) vi  >n. Note that, as n S , a approaches 1, and the players bid
approximately their valuations (good for the seller).
EXERCISES
1. Regarding the trade game played by Jerry and Freddie that was analyzed in
this chapter, are there values of p such that no equilibrium exists? Are there
values of p such that the equilibrium entails no trade whatsoever?
2. Suppose you and one other bidder are competing in a private-value auction.
The auction format is sealed bid, ﬁrst price. Let v and b denote your valu-
ation and bid, respectively, and let vn and bn denote the valuation and bid of
your opponent. Your payoff is v −b if it is the case that b Ú bn. Your payoff
is 0 otherwise. Although you do not observe vn, you know that vn is uniformly
distributed over the interval between 0 and 1. That is, v9 is the probability
that vn < v9. You also know that your opponent bids according to the func-
tion bn(vn) = vn2. Suppose your value is 3>5. What is your optimal bid?
3. Complete the analysis of the second-price auction by showing that bidding
one’s valuation vi is weakly preferred to bidding any x < vi.
4. Suppose that a person (the “seller”) wishes to sell a single desk. Ten people
are interested in buying the desk: Ann, Bill, Colin, Dave, Ellen, Frank, Gale,
Hal, Irwin, and Jim. Each of the potential buyers would derive some utility

--- Sayfa 390 ---
375
Exercises
from owning the desk, and this utility is measured in dollar terms by the
buyer’s “value.” The valuations of the 10 potential buyers are shown in the
following table.
Ann
Bill
Colin
Dave
Ellen Frank
Gale
Hal
Irwin
Jim
45
53
92
61
26
78
82
70
65
56
Each bidder knows his or her own valuation of owning the desk. Using
the appropriate concepts of rationality, answer these questions:
(a)  If the seller holds a second-price, sealed-bid auction, who will win the
auction and how much will this person pay?
(b)  Suppose that the bidders’ valuations are common knowledge among
them. That is, it is common knowledge that each bidder knows the valu-
ations of all of the other bidders. Suppose that the seller does not observe
the bidders’ valuations directly and knows only that they are all between
0 and 100. If the seller holds a ﬁrst-price, sealed-bid auction, who will
win the desk and how much will he or she have to pay? (Think about the
Nash equilibrium in the bidding game. The analysis of this game is a bit
different from the [more complicated] analysis of the ﬁrst-price auction
in this chapter because here the bidders know one another’s valuations.)
(c)  Now suppose that the seller knows that the buyers’ valuations are 45, 53,
92, 61, 26, 78, 82, 70, 65, and 56, but the seller does not know exactly
which buyer has which valuation. The buyers know their own valuations
but not one another’s valuations. Suppose that the seller runs the follow-
ing auction: She ﬁrst announces a reserve price p–. Then simultaneously
and independently the players select their bids; if a player bids below p–,
then this player is disqualiﬁed from the auction and therefore cannot
win. The highest bidder wins the desk and has to pay the amount of his
or her bid. This is called a “sealed-bid, ﬁrst price auction with a reserve
price.” What is the optimal reserve price p– for the seller to announce?
Who will win the auction? And what will the winning bid be?
5. Consider the two-bidder auction environment discussed in this chapter,
where the bidders’ values are independently drawn and distributed uni-
formly on the interval [0, 900]. Demonstrate that, by setting a reserve price,
the auctioneer can obtain an expected revenue that exceeds what he would
expect from the standard ﬁrst- and second-price auctions. You do not have
to compute the optimal reserve price or the actual equilibrium strategies to
answer this question.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
376
27: Lemons, Auctions, and Information Aggregation
6. Consider an “all-pay auction” with two players (the bidders). Player 1’s valu-
ation v1 for the object being auctioned is uniformly distributed between 0 and
1. That is, for any x ∈[0, 1], player 1’s valuation is below x with  probability
x. Player 2’s valuation is also uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, so the
game is symmetric. After nature chooses the players’ valuations, each player
observes his/her own valuation but not that of the other player. Simultane-
ously and independently, the players submit bids. The player who bids higher
wins the object, but both players must pay their bids. That is, if player i bids
bi, then his/her payoff is −bi if he/she does not win the auction; his/her payoff
is vi −bi if he/she wins the auction. Calculate the Bayesian Nash equilibrium
strategies (bidding functions). (Hint: The equilibrium bidding function for
player i is of the form bi (vi
 ) = kv i
2 for some number k.)
7. Suppose that you and two other people are competing in a third-price,
sealed-bid auction. In this auction, players simultaneously and indepen-
dently submit bids. The highest bidder wins the object but only has to pay
the bid of the third-highest bidder. Sure, this is a silly type of auction, but it
makes for a nice exercise. Suppose that your value of the object is 20. You
do not know the values of the other two bidders. Demonstrate that, in con-
trast with a second-price auction, it may be strictly optimal for you to bid 25
instead of 20. Show this by ﬁnding a belief about the other players’ bids un-
der which 25 is a best-response action, yet 20 is not a best-response action.
8. Suppose John owns a share of stock in Columbus Research, a computer
software ﬁrm. Jessica is interested in investing in the company. John and
Jessica each receive a signal of the stock’s value v, which is the dollar
amount that the owner will receive in the future. John observes x1, whereas
Jessica observes x2. It is common knowledge that x1 and x2 are indepen-
dent random variables with probability distributions F1 and F2, respectively.
These numbers are between 100 and 1000. The value of the stock is equal
to v = (x1 + x2)>2.
Imagine a game in which John and Jessica may agree to trade the share
of stock at price p, which is exogenously given. (Perhaps some third party
or some external market mechanism sets the price.) Simultaneously and
independently, John and Jessica select either “trade” or “not.” A party that
chooses “trade” must pay a trading cost of $1. If they both choose to trade,
then the stock is traded at price p; otherwise, the stock is not traded. Thus,
if both announce “trade,” then John’s payoff is  p −1 and Jessica’s payoff
is v −p −1. If John chooses “trade” and Jessica chooses “not,” then John
receives v −1 and Jessica gets 0. If  Jessica announces “trade” and John
picks “not,” then John receives v and Jessica receives −1. Finally, if they
both say “not,” John’s payoff is v and Jessica’s payoff is 0.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
377
Exercises
(a)  Suppose that the probability distributions F1 and F2 are the same and
that they each assign positive probability to just two numbers. Speciﬁ-
cally, xi = 200 with probability 1>2, and xi = 1000 with probability
1>2, for i = 1, 2. In other words, there are two types of player John (200
and 1000) and there are two types of player Jessica (200 and 1000).
Remember that p is a ﬁxed constant, which you can assume is between
100 and 1000. Compute the Bayesian Nash equilibria of the trading
game, given these assumptions on F1 and F2.
(b)  Does trade occur in equilibrium with positive probability? Do the
predictions of this model conform to your view of the stock market? In
what ways would the model have to be altered to better explain market
phenomena?
(c)  Prove, if you can, that the result of part (a) holds more generally—for
any p, F1, and F2. To complete this proof, you will need to evaluate
some double integrals.
9. Consider the common-value auction described in this chapter, where
Y = y1 + y2 and y1 and y2 are both uniformly distributed on [0, 10]. Player
i privately observes yi. Players simultaneously submit bids and the one who
bids higher wins.
(a)  Suppose player 2 uses the bidding strategy b2
 (y2) = 3 + y2. What is
player 1’s best-response bidding strategy?
(b)  Suppose each player will not select a strategy that would surely give
him/her a negative payoff conditional on winning the auction. Suppose
also that this fact is common knowledge between the players. What can
you conclude about how high the players are willing to bid?
(c)  Show that for every ﬁxed number z > 0, there is no Bayesian Nash equi-
librium in which the players both use the bidding strategy bi = yi + z.
10. Consider a ﬁrst-price auction with three bidders, whose valuations are inde-
pendently drawn from a uniform distribution on the interval [0, 30]. Thus,
for each player i and any ﬁxed number y ∈[0, 30], y>30 is the probability
that player i ’s valuation vi is below y.
(a)   Suppose that player 2 is using the bidding function b2 (v2) = (3>4) v2,
and player 3 is using the bidding function b3 (v3) = (4>5) v3. Determine
player 1’s optimal bidding function in response. Start by writing player
1’s expected payoff as a function of player 1’s valuation v1 and her bid b1.
(b)  Disregard the assumptions made in part (a). Calculate the Bayes-
ian Nash equilibrium of this auction game and report the equilibrium
bidding functions.

--- Sayfa 393 ---
378
T
he games with moves of nature that were surveyed in preceding chapters
are those to which standard concepts of equilibrium, subgame perfection,
and rationalizability can be applied. Two classes of games were distinguished:
those in which nature moves last and those in which all of the players’ actions
are taken simultaneously. This chapter examines a third class of games, where
players have private information and they move sequentially. Many interesting
economic settings have these features, from some types of auctions to cases of
signaling one’s quality to a prospective business partner. To study games with
sequential moves and incomplete information, the appropriate notion of equi-
librium goes beyond subgame perfection to allow sequential rationality to be
applied to all information sets.
The gift game described in Chapter 24 illustrates the need for a modiﬁca-
tion of the subgame perfect equilibrium concept. Consider the version of the
game pictured in Figure 28.1. Relative to the game in Figure 24.1, in the vari-
ant player 2 enjoys opening gifts from both types of player 1. Suppose that
you are interested in applying equilibrium theory to this game. Because the gift
28 PERFECT BAYESIAN EQUILIBRIUM
FIGURE 28.1
A variant of the gift game.
A
1, 1
1, 0
R
A
R
2
0,  0
0,  0
N
F
1
G
F
N
E
1
G
E
Friend
Enemy
(p)
(q)
−1, 0
−1, −1
(1 −q)
(1 −p)

--- Sayfa 394 ---
379
Conditional Beliefs About Types
game has sequential decisions, it seems appropriate to look for subgame perfect
equilibria. But the game has no proper subgames, so every Nash equilibrium is
subgame perfect. In particular, (NF NE, R) is a subgame perfect equilibrium of
the game; you should verify this through examination of the Bayesian normal
form. In this equilibrium, both types of player 1 choose not to give a gift and
player 2 plans to refuse gifts.
One problem with the proﬁle (NF NE, R) is that it prescribes behavior for
player 2 that is clearly irrational conditional on the game reaching his infor-
mation set. Regardless of player 1’s type, player 2 prefers to accept any gift
offered. This preference is not incorporated into the subgame perfect equilib-
rium because (1) player 2’s information set is not reached on the path induced
by (NF NE, R), and (2) player 2’s information set does not represent the start of a
subgame. As this example shows, not all information sets are necessarily evalu-
ated in a subgame perfect equilibrium. In other words, the concept of subgame
perfection does not sufﬁciently capture sequential rationality (that players
maximize their payoffs from each of their information sets).
To address sequential rationality better, we must employ an equilibrium
concept that isolates every information set for examination. Perfect Bayes-
ian equilibrium does just that. The key to this equilibrium concept is that it
combines a strategy proﬁle with a description of beliefs that the players have
at each of their information sets. The beliefs represent the players’ assessments
about each other’s types, conditional on reaching different points in the game.
CONDITIONAL BELIEFS ABOUT TYPES
The gift game in Figure 28.1 illustrates the idea of a conditional belief. Recall
that in this game, player 2 does not observe nature’s decision. Therefore, at the
beginning of the game, player 2 knows only that player 1 is the friend type with
probability p and the enemy type with probability 1 −p. This belief p is called
player 2’s initial belief about player 1’s type. Keep in mind that this is a belief
about player 1’s type, not a belief about player 1’s strategy (which is the sort of
belief with which we were dealing in Parts I through III of this book).
Although player 2 does not observe nature’s decision, player 2 does observe
whether player 1 decided to give a gift. Furthermore, player 2 might learn some-
thing about player 1’s type by observing player 1’s action. As a result, player
2 will have an updated belief about player 1’s type. For example, suppose that
you are player 2 in the gift game and suppose that player 1 behaves according
to strategy NF GE; thus, you expect only to receive a gift from the enemy type.
What should you conclude, then, if player 1 actually gives you a gift? Given
player 1’s strategy, you should conclude that player 1 is an enemy. In reference

--- Sayfa 395 ---
380
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
to Figure 28.1, when your information set is reached, you believe that you are
playing at the lower of the two nodes in the information set.
In general, player 2 has an updated belief about player 1’s type, conditional on
arriving at player 2’s information set (that is, conditional on receiving a gift). Note
that player 2’s updated belief about player l’s type can be put in terms of a prob-
ability distribution over the nodes in player 2’s information set. In Figure 28.1,
this probability distribution is described by the numbers q and 1 −q that appear
beside the nodes. Literally, q is the probability that player 2 believes he is at the
top node when his information set is reached. Thus, q is the probability that player
2 believes player 1 is the friend type, conditional on receiving a gift.
SEQUENTIAL RATIONALITY
Taking account of conditional beliefs allows us to evaluate rational behavior
at all information sets, even those that may not be reached in equilibrium play.
Consider, again, the gift game pictured in Figure 28.1. Regardless of player l’s
strategy, player 2 will have some updated belief q at his information set. This
number has meaning even if player 2 believes that player 1 adopts the strategy
NF NE (where neither type gives a gift). In this case, q represents player 2’s
belief about the type of player 1 when the “surprise” of a gift occurs. Given
the belief q, we can determine player 2’s optimal action at his information set.
You can readily conﬁrm that action A is best for player 2, whatever is q. Thus,
sequential rationality requires that player 2 select A.
For another example, consider the gift game pictured in Figure 28.2. This is
the same game discussed in Chapter 24. Note that regardless of the probability
q, player 2 receives a payoff of 0 if he selects R at his information set.
FIGURE 28.2
The gift game.
A
1, 1
R
A
R
2
0,  0
0,  0
N
F
1
G
F
N
E
1
G
E
Friend
Enemy
(p)
(q)
(1 −q)
(1 −p)
−1, 0
−1, 0
1, −1

--- Sayfa 396 ---
381
Consistency of Beliefs
In contrast, if player 2 chooses A, then he gets a payoff of 1 with probability q
(the probability that his decision is taken from the top node in his information
set) and he gets a payoff of −1 with probability 1 −q. Player 2’s expected
payoff of selecting A is therefore
q + (−1) (1 −q) = 2q −1.
Player 2 will select A if q > 1>2, he will select R if q < 1>2, and he will be
indifferent between A and R if q = 1>2.
CONSISTENCY OF BELIEFS
In an equilibrium, player 2’s updated belief should be consistent with nature’s
probability distribution and player l’s strategy. For example, as noted earlier, if
player 2 knows that player 1 adopts strategy NFGE, then player 2’s updated belief
should specify q = 0; that is, conditional on receiving a gift, player 2 believes
that player 1 is the enemy type. In general, consistency between nature’s prob-
ability distribution, player 1’s strategy, and player 2’s updated belief can be
evaluated by using Bayes’ rule. Recall that Bayes’ rule was discussed in the
context of information aggregation in the previous chapter. If you did not read
about it there or if you could use a brief review, please read Appendix A.
The Bayes’ rule calculation is quite simple and intuitive. Here is the general
form for the gift game in Figure 28.2. At player 2’s information set, his updated
belief gives the relative likelihood that player 2 thinks his top and bottom nodes
have been reached. Let r F and r E be the probabilities of arriving at player 2’s top
and bottom nodes, respectively. That is, r F is the probability that nature selects
F and then player 1 selects GF.  Likewise, r E is the probability that nature selects
E and then player 1 chooses GE. As an example, suppose that r F = 1>8 and
r E = 1>16. In this case, player 2’s information set is reached with probability
1>8 + 1>16 = 3>16, which is not a very likely event. But note that the top node
is twice as likely as is the bottom node. Thus, conditional on player 2’s informa-
tion set actually being reached, player 2 ought to believe that it is twice as likely
that he is at the top node than at the bottom node. Because the probabilities must
sum to 1, this updated belief is represented by a probability of 2>3 on the top
node and 1>3 on the bottom node.
In general, the relation between r F, r E, and q is given by
q =
r F
r F + r E.

--- Sayfa 397 ---
382
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
In words, q is the probability of reaching the top node divided by the total prob-
ability of reaching the top and the bottom nodes (the latter of which is the proba-
bility of reaching the information set). Numbers r F and r E can be calculated from
nature’s probability distribution and player l’s strategy. Speciﬁcally, let aF and
aE denote the probabilities that the friend and enemy types of player 1 choose
to give a gift. Then player 2’s top node is reached with probability r F = paF,
whereas player 2’s bottom node is reached with probability r E = (1 −p) aE.
Therefore,
q K
paF
paF + (1 −p)aE.
This fraction can be represented in a more intuitive way. Let Prob[G] denote
the overall probability that player 1 gives a gift, which is the denominator of
the fraction. The numerator is the probability that nature selects the friend type,
Prob[F], times the probability that the friend gives a gift, Prob[G  F]. The
number q is the probability that player 1 is a friend conditional on player 1
giving a gift. Substituting for the terms in the preceding fraction, we have
q = Prob[F G] K Prob[GF] Prob[F]
Prob[G]
,
which is the familiar Bayes’ rule expression.
Note that Bayes’ rule cannot be applied if player 2’s information set is
reached with 0 probability, which is the case when player 1 employs strategy
NF NE. In this situation, q is still meaningful—it is the belief of player 2 when
he is surprised to learn that player 1 has given a gift—but q is not restricted to
be any particular number. In other words, any updated belief is feasible after a
surprise event.
EQUILIBRIUM DEFINITION
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium is a concept that incorporates sequential rational-
ity and consistency of beliefs. In essence, a perfect Bayesian equilibrium is a
coherent story that describes beliefs and behavior in a game. The beliefs must
be consistent with the players’ strategy proﬁle, and the strategy proﬁle must
specify rational behavior at all information sets, given the players’ beliefs. In
more formal language:
Consider a strategy proﬁle for the players, as well as beliefs over the
nodes at all information sets. These are called a perfect Bayesian equi-
librium (PBE) if: (1) each player’s strategy speciﬁes optimal actions,

--- Sayfa 398 ---
383
Equilibrium Definition
given his beliefs and the strategies of the other players, and (2) the
beliefs are consistent with Bayes’ rule wherever possible.1
Two additional terms are useful in categorizing the classes of potential equilibria.
Speciﬁcally, we call an equilibrium separating if the types of a player behave
differently. In contrast, in a pooling equilibrium, the types behave the same.
To determine the set of PBE for a game, you can use the following procedure.
Steps for calculating perfect Bayesian equilibria:
1. Start with a strategy for player 1 (pooling or separating).
2. If possible, calculate updated beliefs (q in the example) by using Bayes’
rule. In the event that Bayes’ rule cannot be used, you must arbitrarily select
an updated belief; here you will generally have to check different potential
values for the updated belief with the next steps of the procedure.
3. Given the updated beliefs, calculate player 2’s optimal action.
4. Check whether player 1’s strategy is a best response to player 2’s strategy.
If so, you have found a PBE.
To solidify your understanding of the PBE concept, follow along with the
computation of equilibria in the gift game of Figure 28.2. Let us focus on pure-
strategy equilibria, as usual. Then there are four potential equilibria: (1) a sepa-
rating equilibrium featuring strategy NF
 GE, (2) a separating equilibrium featur-
ing strategy GF
 NE, (3) a pooling equilibrium with strategy GF
 GE, and (4) a
pooling equilibrium with NF
 NE.
Here is the procedure in action:
Separating with NF
 GE: Given this strategy for player 1, it must be that
q = 0. Thus, player 2’s optimal strategy is R. But then player 1 would
strictly prefer not to play GE when of the enemy type. Therefore, there
is no PBE in which NF
 GE is played.
Separating with GF
 NE: Given this strategy for player 1, it must be that
q = 1. Thus, player 2’s optimal strategy is A. But then the enemy type
of player 1 would strictly prefer to play GE rather than NE. Therefore,
there is no PBE in which GF
 NE is played.
1The progression of ideas leading to the standard, formal deﬁnition of perfect Bayesian equilibrium is well
represented by the following articles: R. Selten, “Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilib-
rium Points in Extensive Games,” International Journal of Game Theory, 4 (1975): 25–55; D. M. Kreps and
R. Wilson, “Sequential Equilibria,” Econometrica, 50 (1982): 863–894; D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, “Perfect
Bayesian and Sequential Equilibrium,” Journal of Economic Theory, 53 (1991): 236–260; and P. Battigalli,
“Strategic Independence and Perfect Bayesian Equilibria,” Journal of Economic Theory, 70 (1996): 201–234.

--- Sayfa 399 ---
384
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
Pooling with GF
 GE: Here Bayes’ rule requires q = p, so player 2 opti-
mally selects A if and only if p Ú 1>2. In the event that p < 1>2, player
2 must select R, in which case neither type of player 1 wishes to play
G in the ﬁrst place. Thus, there is no PBE of this type when p < 1>2.
When p Ú 1>2, there is a PBE in which q = p and (GF
 GE, A) is played.
Pooling with NF
 NE: In this case, Bayes’ rule does not determine q. But
notice that the types of player 1 prefer not giving gifts only if player 2
selects R. In order for R to be chosen, player 2 must have a sufﬁciently
pessimistic belief regarding the type of player 1 after the “surprise” event
in which a gift is given. Strategy R is optimal as long as q … 1>2. Thus,
for every q … 1>2, there is a PBE in which player 2’s belief is q and the
strategy proﬁle (NF
 NE, R) is played.
The example shows that because the types of player 1 have the same prefer-
ences over outcomes, there is no separating equilibrium. There is always a pool-
ing equilibrium in which no gift is given. In this equilibrium, player 2 believes
that a gift signals the presence of the enemy. You probably know a misanthrope
who has beliefs such as this. Finally, if there is a great enough chance of encoun-
tering a friend (so that p Ú 1>2), then there is a pooling equilibrium in which
gifts are given by both types. In this equilibrium, a sanguine player 2 gladly
accepts gifts.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider a game between two friends, Amy and Brenda. Amy wants
Brenda to give her a ride to the mall. Brenda has no interest in going to the mall
unless her favorite shoes are on sale (S) at the large department store there. Amy
likes these shoes as well, but she wants to go to the mall even if the shoes are
not on sale (N). Only Amy subscribes to the newspaper, which carries a daily
advertisement of the department store. The advertisement lists all items that are
on sale, so Amy learns whether or not the shoes are on sale. Amy can prove
whether or not the shoes are on sale by showing the newspaper to Brenda. But
this is costly for Amy, because she will have to take the newspaper away from
her sister, who will yell at her later for doing so.
In this game, nature ﬁrst decides whether or not the shoes are on sale, and
this information is made known to Amy. (Amy observes whether nature chose
S or N.) Nature chooses S with probability p and N with probability 1 −p. Then
Amy decides whether or not to take the newspaper to Brenda (T or D). If she
takes the newspaper to Brenda, then it reveals to Brenda whether the shoes are

--- Sayfa 400 ---
385
Guided Exercise
on sale. In any case, Brenda must then decide whether to take Amy to the mall
(Y) or to forget it (F). If the shoes are on sale, then going to the mall is worth 1
unit of utility to Brenda and 3 to Amy. If the shoes are not on sale, then traveling
to the mall is worth 1 to Amy and −1 to Brenda. Both players obtain 0 utility
when they do not go to the mall. Amy’s personal cost of taking the newspaper to
Brenda is 2 units of utility, which is subtracted from her other utility amounts.
(a) Draw the extensive form of this game.
(b)  Does this game have a separating perfect Bayesian equilibrium? If so, fully
describe it.
(c)  Does this game have a pooling perfect Bayesian equilibrium? If so, fully
describe it.
Solution:
(a) Here is the extensive-form diagram, with Amy’s payoffs given ﬁrst:

 Note that the newspaper provides veriﬁable information of whether the
shoes are on sale. Thus, Brenda can distinguish between her top-left node
or her bottom-left node. Therefore, in any PBE, Brenda must use a strategy
that selects Y and F, respectively, at these two information sets.
(b)  This game does have a separating PBE. As shown in the extensive form, let
q denote Brenda’s updated probability that the shoes are on sale, conditional
on Amy not showing her the newspaper. Clearly, Amy has no incentive to
choose T9 because Brenda selects F. Thus, the only candidate for Amy’s
strategy in a separating equilibrium is TD9, which implies q = 0. Given
this value of q, Brenda’s optimal action at her right information set is F9,
which makes Amy’s prescribed strategy a best response. In summary, the
 separating equilibrium is (TD9, YF9F ) with q = 0.
S
N
A
T
D
A
B
Y
B
F
B
3, 1
1, 1
0, 0
0, 0
(p)
(q)
D9
T9
Y9
F9
Y9
F9
Y0
F0
(1 −q)
(1 −p)
−1, −1
1, −1
−2, 0
−2, 0

--- Sayfa 401 ---
386
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
(c)  This game has a pooling equilibrium if and only if p Ú 1>2. As observed
for part (b), Amy must choose D9 in any equilibrium, so the only candi-
date for Amy’s strategy in a pooling equilibrium is DD9, which implies that
Brenda’s updated belief is q = p. If p Ú 1>2, so that q Ú 1>2 as well, then
Brenda prefers action Y9 at her right information set. This, in turn, justiﬁes
Amy selecting the prescribed strategy. In contrast, if p < 1>2, then Brenda
strictly prefers F9, and it would not be rational for Amy to select D. To sum-
marize, if p Ú 1>2, then there is a pooling equilibrium with strategy proﬁle
(DD9, YY9F ) and q = p. If p < 1>2, then there is no pooling  equilibrium,
and Amy is forced to bring the newspaper to Brenda in the event of a
shoe sale.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the market game in the Guided Exercise of Chapter 24.
(a)  Find a separating perfect Bayesian equilibrium for this game. (Report
strategies and beliefs.)
(b)  Find a pooling perfect Bayesian equilibrium for this game. Under what
values of q does it exist?
2. Consider the following game with nature:
(a)  Does this game have any separating perfect Bayesian equilibrium?
Show your analysis and, if there is such an equilibrium, report it.
(b)  Does this game have any pooling perfect Bayesian equilibrium? Show
your analysis and, if there is such an equilibrium, report it.
(c)  Draw the normal-form matrix for this game.
H
L
1
A
B
1
Y
X
Y
X
2
0, 0
6, 4
4, 4
4, 2
6, 0
0, 6
(1/2)
(1/2)
(q)
A9
B9
(1 −q)

--- Sayfa 402 ---
387
Exercises
3. Consider the following game of incomplete information.
(a)  Does this game have a separating perfect Bayesian equilibrium? If so,
fully describe it.
(b)  Does this game have a pooling perfect Bayesian equilibrium? If so,
fully describe it.
4. Consider an extensive-form game in which player 1 is one of two types: A
and B. Suppose that types A and B have exactly the same preferences; the
difference between these types has something to do with the payoff of an-
other player. Is it possible for such a game to have a separating PBE, where
A and B behave differently?
5. A defendant in a court case appears before the judge. Suppose the actual
harm to the plaintiff caused by the defendant is equal to 1000x dollars, where
either x = 0 or x = 1. That is, the defendant is either innocent (x = 0) or
guilty of 1000 dollars of damage (x = 1). The defendant knows x and has
evidence to prove it. The judge does not observe x directly; she only knows
that x = 1 with probability 1>2 and x = 0 with probability 1>2.
The judge and defendant interact as follows: First, the defendant has
an opportunity to provide his evidence of x. He freely chooses whether or
not to provide the evidence; the court cannot force him to do it. Providing
evidence to the court costs the defendant one dollar (for photocopying). If
the defendant chooses to provide the evidence, then it reveals x to the judge.
Whether or not evidence is provided, the judge then decides the level of
damages y (in thousands of dollars) that the defendant must pay. The judge
prefers to select y “fairly”; she would like y to be as close as possible to x.
H
L
1
L
R
1
D
U
D
U
2
1, 0
3, 2
2, 0
2, 0
1, 0
1, 1
(1/2)
(1/2)
(q)
L9
R9
(1 −q)

--- Sayfa 403 ---
388
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
The defendant wishes to minimize his monetary loss. These preferences and
the players’ interaction are summarized by the extensive-form diagram that
follows. Note that “E” stands for “provide evidence” and N stands for “do
not provide evidence.”
(a)  This game has a unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium. Find and report
it. (Hint: Start by showing that it is optimal for the judge to set y equal
to the expected value of x, given her belief.)
(b)  In one or two sentences, explain why the result of part (a) is interesting
from an economic standpoint.
(c)  Consider a version of the game in which x is an integer between 0 and
K, inclusive, with each of these values equally likely. Compute the
perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this game. (Hint: Use your intuition
from part (a).)
6. In the classic Rob Reiner movie The Princess Bride, there is a scene at the
end where Wesley (the protagonist) confronts the evil prince Humperdinck.
The interaction can be modeled as the following game: Wesley is one of
two types: weak or strong. Wesley knows whether he is weak or strong,
but the prince only knows that he is weak with probability 1>2 and strong
with probability 1>2. Wesley is lying in a bed in the prince’s castle when
the prince enters the room. Wesley decides whether to get out of bed (O) or
stay in bed (B). The prince observes Wesley’s action but does not observe
Wesley’s type. The prince then decides whether to ﬁght (F) or surrender (S)
to Wesley. The payoffs are such that the prince prefers to ﬁght only with the
weak Wesley, because otherwise the prince is an inferior swordsman. Also,
the weak Wesley must pay a cost c to get out of bed. The extensive-form
representation of the game follows the questions.
y
y
(1/2)
1
1
2
(q)
(1/2)
E1
N1
E0
N0
y
y
−1000y −1,
−(y −1)2
−1000y- −1,
−1000y,
−(y −1)2
−1000y,
−y 2
−y 2
x = 1
x = 0
(1 −q)

--- Sayfa 404 ---
389
Exercises
(a)  What conditions on c guarantee the existence of a separating PBE?
Fully describe such an equilibrium.
(b)  For what values of c is there a pooling equilibrium in which both strong
and weak Wesleys get out of bed? Fully describe such an equilibrium.
7. Consider the “worker status” model of Exercise 3 in Chapter 25. Suppose
there are two possible types of worker, H and L. The types differ in the pa-
rameters y and q. Speciﬁcally, y = 75 and q = 3>5 for the H type, whereas
y = 65 and q = 2>5 for the L type.
(a)  Using your answer from Exercise 3 of Chapter 25, what contract would
the ﬁrm offer if it knew that the worker’s type is L? What if it knew that
the worker’s type is H?
(b)  Consider the game of incomplete information in which the worker knows
his own values of y and q, but the ﬁrm only knows that the worker is L
with probability p and H with probability 1 −p. Suppose the ﬁrm can
offer two contracts to the worker, which we can write as (w0, 0) and
(w1, 1). The interpretation is that the ﬁrm is willing to pay w0 for the safe
job and w1 for the risky job. After observing the ﬁrm’s offer, the worker
decides whether to accept a job and, if so, which contract to take. Suppose
that because of market pressure, the ﬁrm is constrained to set w0 = 35.
(Other ﬁrms are offering job z = 0 at wage 35.) Compute the ﬁrm’s opti-
mal choice of w1. Explain the steps you take to solve this problem.
(c)  Try to ﬁnd the optimal contract offers for the ﬁrm when w0 is not
constrained to equal 35.
8. Compute the PBE of the three-card poker game described in Exercise 4 of
Chapter 24. (Hint: Start by determining whether there are any information
Strong
Weak
B
O
S
P
F
S
F
P
1, 0
1, 0
1, 0
(1/2)
(1/2)
(q)
(r)
B9
S9
S9
F9
F9
O9
WW
WS
(1 −q)
0, −2
−1, 1
1 −c, 0
−1 −c, 1
(1 −r)
0, −2

--- Sayfa 405 ---
390
28: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
sets at which a player has an optimal action that is independent of his belief
about his opponent’s strategy.) Show that the PBE strategy proﬁle is also the
unique Bayesian Nash equilibrium.
9. Consider the following game with nature:
(a) Represent this game in the normal form.
(b)  Calculate and report the unique Nash equilibrium of this game. (It may
be in mixed strategies.)
(c)  Is there a perfect Bayesian equilibrium with the strategy proﬁle you
found in part (b)? If so, what is the equilibrium belief q?
10. Suppose that a delivery person named Clifford (player 2) is to deliver a
package to a house with a chihuahua (player 1) in the yard. The yard around
the house is fenced, but the gate is unlocked. Clifford can either enter the
yard and deliver the package (action D) or leave an “attempted delivery”
notice on the gate (action A). There are two types of chihuahua that Clifford
may face. The ﬁrst has no teeth; call this type W for “weak.” The second
has teeth and jaws similar to those of a steel bear trap; call this type G for
“gnarly.” The chihuahua is equally likely to be each type. Prior to entering
the yard, Clifford cannot tell which type of chihuahua he faces.
Clifford likes to deliver all packages, but he would not like to have an
encounter with the gnarly type of chihuahua. If Clifford chooses action A,
he receives the payoff of 0 regardless of the chihuahua’s type. Delivering
the package with the weak chihuahua in the yard yields a payoff of 4 for
Clifford, but delivering the package with the gnarly chihuahua in the yard
results in a payoff of −4 for Clifford. That is, the gnarly chihuahua will bite
Clifford, but the weak one will not. Both types of chihuahua would receive a
beneﬁt of 4 if Clifford delivers the package and a beneﬁt of 0 if not.
H
L
X
Y
M
L
M
L
2
6, 0
0, 6
3, 0
0, 0
3, 0
3, 6
(2/3)
(1/3)
(q)
X
Y
1H
1L
(1 −q)

--- Sayfa 406 ---
391
Exercises
Prior to Clifford’s choice (D or A), each type of chihuahua chooses
whether to bark (B) or not bark (N). The gnarly chihuahua does not like
to bark—the “steel trap” mouth makes barking difﬁcult—so barking costs
this type an amount c > 0. The weak chihuahua likes to bark and receives a
beneﬁt x > 0 from doing so. These costs and beneﬁts are in addition to the
chihuahua’s beneﬁt of Clifford’s selection of D described earlier.
(a) Represent this game in the extensive form.
(b)  For what values of x and c is there a separating equilibrium for which
the saying “barking dogs never bite” holds true?
(c)  How does this compare with the education signaling models?
11. Find the perfect Bayesian equilibrium in the extensive-form game that fol-
lows. To help you analyze the game, player 2’s beliefs are labeled as p, q,
and 1 −p −q. These beliefs are not part of the description of the game.
(Hint: Start your analysis with player 2.)
12. Consider the Microsoft–Celera game described in Exercise 5(b) of
Chapter 24. Determine whether this game has any pooling or separating
equilibria and, if so, describe them.
0, 10
6, 0
3, 5
2, 10
2, 10
1
2
1
B
G
F
G
F
A
F
L
N
H
E
G
C
D
3, 5
(p)
(q)
(1/2)
(1/2)
−10, 2
−10, 7
(1 −p −q)

--- Sayfa 407 ---
392
I
n this chapter, I present two examples of dynamic games with incomplete
information. The examples illustrate two important economic ideas: (1) that
a worker can signal his ability by engaging in costly schooling, and (2) that a
person may have an incentive to establish a reputation for being someone she
is not.
JOBS AND SCHOOL
Have you ever wondered why you are working so hard to complete an academic
degree? Is it because schooling helps you develop valuable skills, learn facts,
and recognize important insights? Will academic wisdom serve you in the work-
place? Will an understanding of the causes of the Peloponnesian War help you
to be a better nurse, lawyer, or salesperson? Do you think your potential future
employers care about what you learn in college? Why do universities set such
formal standards for degrees?
I think it would be insane to suggest that academic training has no intrinsic
value. Writing of essays about Peloponnesia helps you develop a critical mind
and good writing skills. Studying game theory helps you to develop a logical
mind and understand social interaction. Surely these facilities will enhance your
productivity later in life, particularly on the job. Prospective employers ought to
pay a premium for the labor of a well-trained, intelligent person like yourself.
Education adds value.
Yet, formal education has another—perhaps equally important—role in
the marketplace. An academic degree is a sign of quality to the extent that
highly productive people are more likely than less-productive people to get
degrees.1 People obtain degrees to prove their quality to prospective  employers,
colleagues, friends, and spouses. In this respect, degrees serve as signaling
mechanisms. Perhaps rather than helping people become smart, colleges exist
1This is a gross generalization. There are many unjust barriers that keep some of the brightest people from
going to college. Nonetheless, the impression in our society is that academic degrees are associated with
intelligence and skills.
29 JOB-MARKET SIGNALING AND REPUTATION

--- Sayfa 408 ---
393
Jobs and School
merely to help people who are already smart prove that they are smart. It is an
extreme view—offensive to some—but not without some validity.
Here is a simple model demonstrating the signaling role of education.2
Imagine a game of incomplete information played by a worker (W) and a ﬁrm
(F); see Figure 29.1. The worker has private information about her level of
 ability. With probability 1>3 she is a high type (H) and with probability 2>3 she
is a low type (L). After observing her own type, the worker decides whether to
obtain a costly education (E) or not (N); think of E as getting a degree. The ﬁrm
observes the worker’s education (which is described in her resumé), but the ﬁrm
does not observe the worker’s quality type. The ﬁrm then decides whether to
employ the worker in an important managerial job (M) or in a much less impor-
tant clerical job (C). In equilibrium, the ﬁrm may deduce the worker’s quality
level on the basis of the worker’s education.
The worker’s payoff is listed ﬁrst at the terminal nodes of the extensive
form. As the payoff numbers indicate, both types of worker would like to have
the managerial job. In particular, the managerial job yields a beneﬁt of 10 units
of utility to the worker, irrespective of type. The clerical job yields a beneﬁt
of 4 to both types of worker. In contrast, the high and low types have different
education costs; to obtain an education, the high type pays 4 units of utility,
whereas the low type pays 7 units. The education cost is subtracted from the job
beneﬁt in the event that the worker obtains an education. The interpretation of
2This model is due to M. Spence, “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87 (1973):
355–374.
FIGURE 29.1 Job-market signaling.
−3, 4
High
Low
N
E
F
F
6, 10
0, 4
3, 0
10, 10
4, 4
4, 4
10, 0
(1/3)
(2/3)
(q)
(p)
N9
C9
C9
M9
M9
M
M
C
C
E 9
WL
WH
(1 −q)
(1 −p)

--- Sayfa 409 ---
394
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
differential education costs is that low-ability workers have a more difﬁcult time
getting through college; they have to work harder, hire tutors, and so on.
The ﬁrm would like to put the high-ability worker in the management posi-
tion; this yields the ﬁrm a proﬁt of 10. In contrast, giving the management job to
the low-ability worker would be a disaster for the ﬁrm, leading to a proﬁt of 0.
When assigned to the clerical job, both types of worker produce a proﬁt of 4
for the ﬁrm. Importantly, education is of no direct value to the ﬁrm; the ﬁrm’s
payoff does not depend on whether the worker gets an education. Thus, educa-
tion is inefﬁcient in this model. However, it can serve to separate the two types
of worker.
To compute the perfect Bayesian equilibria of this game, divide the analysis
into two cases: pooling equilibria and separating equilibria. Regarding pooling
equilibria, ﬁrst note that there is no pooling equilibrium in which the worker
plays strategy EE9. This is because with EE9 the only consistent belief at the
ﬁrm’s right information set is q = 1>3 (because both types get an education,
the ﬁrm learns nothing at this information set). But under the belief q = 1>3, C
is the ﬁrm’s optimal action. This gives the low type a negative payoff, which is
worse than the least she could expect by playing N9.
There is a pooling equilibrium in which the worker adopts strategy NN9.
The ﬁrm’s belief at its left information set is p = 1>3 and there it selects action
C9. In this equilibrium, the high-type worker is deterred from selecting E by
anticipating the ﬁrm’s selection of C at its right information set. The ﬁrm’s
choice of C is justiﬁed by a belief q that is less than 2>5.3 In summary, there is a
pooling equilibrium with strategies NN9 and CC9 and beliefs given by p = 1>3
and any q … 2>5.
The game has a single separating equilibrium, which captures the idea of
education as a signaling device. To ﬁnd the separating equilibrium, ﬁrst realize
that NE9 cannot be part of a PBE.  If this strategy were played by the worker, then
the only consistent beliefs would be p = 1 and q = 0 and the ﬁrm would select
CM9; facing CM9, action E9 is obviously not rational for the low-type worker.
Thus, the separating equilibrium must feature strategy EN9 by the worker, imply-
ing beliefs p = 0 and q = 1 for the ﬁrm. The ﬁrm’s equilibrium strategy is MC9.
You should take two insights away from this example. First, the only way
for the high-type worker to get the job that she deserves is to signal her type
by getting an education. Otherwise, the ﬁrm judges the worker to be a low
type. The connection between education and perceived ability level gibes with
reality. Second, the value of education as a signaling device depends on the
types’ differential education costs, not on any skill enhancement that education
3Because the right information set is not reached, given the worker’s strategy, any q is consistent with Bayes’
rule.

--- Sayfa 410 ---
395
Reputation and Incomplete Information
delivers. This insight forces us to think more deeply about career preparation in
the real world; at the least, we should try to separate between the signaling and
the human capital aspects of education.
REPUTATION AND INCOMPLETE INFORMATION
Here is the last example of this textbook—are you relieved or dejected to have
reached the terminus? I hope the latter. Examine the extensive-form game
pictured in Figure 29.2. This is an investment game played between two people.
Player 1 owns an asset that can be put to productive use only if both players make
an investment. For example, the asset might be a motorcycle that is in need of
repair. Player 1 might be an expert in electrical systems, so his investment would
be to perform the electrical repairs on the bike. Player 2 might be a mechanical
specialist, whose investment would be to repair the engine mechanics.
At the beginning of the game, player 1 decides whether to invest in the
asset (perform the electrical repair). Player 1’s choice is observed by player 2.
If player 1 decides not to invest (N), then the game ends with zero payoffs.
If player 1 invests (I), then player 2 must decide whether to invest (repair the
engine). If he fails to invest (N), then the asset is of no productive use; in this
case, the game ends and player 1 gets a negative payoff owing to his wasted
investment. If player 2 invests (I), then the asset is made productive, creating a
net value of 4. That is, investment by both players puts the motorcycle in oper-
ating condition so that it can be enjoyed at the local park for off-road vehicles.
But because player 1 owns the asset, he determines how it will be used. He can
decide to be benevolent (B) by sharing the asset with player 2 (that is, allowing
player 2 to ride the bike) or he can be selﬁsh (S) and hoard the asset.
The game is easily solved by backward induction. Given the payoffs, player 1
would select S at the last decision node in the game. Anticipating this selec-
tion from the middle decision node, player 2 would choose N. That is, player 2
would have no reason to invest because she would expect that player 1 would
not share the fruits of investment with her. Expecting this, player 1 would select
FIGURE 29.2
An investment game.
2, 2
B
S
N
2
1
1
N
0, 0
I
I
−2, 0
6, −2

--- Sayfa 411 ---
396
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
N at the beginning of the game. Thus, the unique subgame perfect equilibrium is
(NS, N). Investments are not made and the asset sits idle. It is a sorry situation.
Next imagine the slight, possibly more realistic, variation of the investment
game pictured in Figure 29.3. There are two types of player 1. The “ordinary”
type (O) has payoffs as speciﬁed in the original game. You can see this by
conﬁrming that the top half of the extensive form in Figure 29.3 is identical with
the extensive form in Figure 29.2. The “cooperative” type (C) is more altruistic;
this type likes to share and likes to invest regardless of what the other player
does. Nature picks the ordinary type with probability 3>4 and the cooperative
type with probability 1>4. Player 1 knows whether he is cooperative or ordinary;
player 2 does not observe player l’s type.4
To compute the perfect Bayesian equilibria of this game of incomplete
information, we need to ﬁnd strategies for the players as well as the belief of
player 2 at her information set (designated q in Figure 29.3). We should begin
the analysis by observing that the cooperative player 1 has a strict incentive to
invest and take the benevolent action, regardless of player 2’s behavior. In other
words, player 1’s optimal choice at his lower-right decision node is B9 and his
optimal choice at the lower-left decision node is I9. Furthermore, as with the
4Games similar to this investment game were ﬁrst analyzed by theorists David Kreps, Paul Milgrom, John
Roberts, and Robert Wilson. An example of their work is “Rational Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated
Prisoners Dilemma,” Journal of Economic Theory, 27 (1982): 245–252. There is a decent chance that by the
time you read this book, one or more of these researchers will have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic
Sciences.
2, 2
2, 2
S
N
1
2
1
1
N
O
C
S9
N
N9
0, 0
0, 0
1, 0
B
I
I
B9
I9
I
−2, 0
6, −2
1, −2
(1 −q)
(3/4)
(s)
(s)
(q)
(r)
(1/4)
1
FIGURE 29.3
The investment game with
incomplete information.

--- Sayfa 412 ---
397
Reputation and Incomplete Information
original game, player 1’s optimal choice at his top-right decision node is S.
Thus, every PBE speciﬁes S, I9, and B9. Regarding player 1, only the behavior
of the ordinary type at the beginning of the game has yet to be determined. This
depends on what player 2 does.
Examine player 2’s information set, where q is the probability she attaches
to the bottom node (the probability of the C type conditional on investment by
player 1). Anticipating rational play from player 1, when player 2 selects I, she
expects a payoff of 2 if player 1 is cooperative and −2 in the event that player 1
is ordinary. Given her belief q, selecting I will give player 2 an expected payoff
of
2q −2(1 −q) = 4q −2.
Player 2 has the incentive to choose I if and only if 4q −2 Ú 0, which simpliﬁes
to q Ú 1>2. Player 2 is indifferent between I and N if q = 1>2.
With an understanding of the relation between player 2’s belief and optimal
strategy, we can return to evaluate player l’s action at the top-left node. Can
the ordinary type of player 1 select N in a PBE? In fact, no. Here is why. If the
O type chooses N and the C type chooses I9, then, in the event that player 2’s
information set is reached, she can deduce that player l’s type is C. In math-
ematical terms, Bayes’ rule implies that q = 1. Thus, player 2 must select I. But
anticipating that player 2 will invest, the ordinary player 1 will want to choose
I, contradicting what we presumed.
Can type O choose I in a PBE? Again, no. If O chooses I, then—because C
chooses I9 as well—player 2 learns nothing about player 1’s type upon reach-
ing her information set. Mathematically, here Bayes’ rule implies that q = 1>4.
Therefore, player 2 must choose N, making type O’s choice of I a bad one
indeed.
You might think that having checked both actions I and N for the ordinary
player 1, the analysis is complete. In neither case did we ﬁnd a PBE, so you
might be inclined to conclude that no PBE exists in this game. Finish the book
already, you say. Not so fast. In fact, so far we have examined only pure strate-
gies. What if the ordinary player 1 selects a mixed strategy? What if player 2
chooses a mixed strategy as well? In Figure 29.3, r designates the probability
that the O type of player 1 chooses I; s designates the probability that player 2
selects I.
In order for the O type to be indifferent between I and N, it must be that his
expected payoff from I is exactly zero. This occurs only when player 2 mixes
between I and N, putting probability 1>4 on I. Thus, it must be that s = 1>4.
Further, player 2 is willing to randomize only if her expected payoff from I is
exactly zero (because she obtains zero by choosing N, regardless of player l’s

--- Sayfa 413 ---
398
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
type). For this to be the case, player 2’s belief must put equal weight on the two
types of player 1; that is, q = 1>2. However, player 2’s belief must be justiﬁed in
that it is consistent with Bayes’ rule and player l’s strategy. Bayes’ rule requires
q =
1
4
1
4 + 3
4 r .
The numerator is the probability that player 2’s lower decision node is reached,
whereas the denominator is the probability that her information set is reached
(the sum of the probabilities of reaching the two nodes in her information set).
Plugging in 1>2 for q and solving for r yields r = 1>3. That is, if the O type
picks I with probability 1>3, then, upon reaching her information set, player 2
will believe that player l’s type is C with probability 1>2.
In summary, there is a unique PBE in this game of incomplete information.
Player 1 uses the strategy specifying S, I9, and B9 with certainty and action I
with probability 1>3. Player 2 holds belief q = 1>2, and she chooses I with prob-
ability 1>4. Player 2 and the ordinary player 1 get payoffs of zero, but the coop-
erative player 1 obtains a positive payoff of 5>4. Thus, with some probability,
the players invest in the asset and it creates value. Notably, in equilibrium, the
behavior of the ordinary type of player 1 causes investment to serve as a signal
that player 1 is the cooperative type. On observing that player 1 has invested,
player 2 upgrades her assessment that player 1 is the cooperative type from a
probability of 1>4 to a probability of 1>2. When the ordinary player 1 invests, he
is pretending to be cooperative. In other words, the presence of the cooperative
type helps the ordinary type establish a reputation for cooperative behavior.
GUIDED EXERCISE
Problem: Consider the following bargaining game with incomplete informa-
tion: Player 1 owns a television that he does not use; thus, the value of the
television to him is zero. Player 2 would like to have the television; his value
of owning the television is v, which is private information to player 2. (Assume
v > 0.) These players engage in a two-period, alternating-offer bargaining game
to establish whether player 1 will trade the television to player 2 for a price. The
players discount the second period according to the discount factor d. In the ﬁrst
period, player 1 makes a price offer and player 2 responds with “yes” or “no.”
If player 2 rejects player l’s offer, then player 2 makes the offer in the second
period. Agreement in the ﬁrst period yields the payoff p1 to player 1 and v −p1
to player 2. Agreement in the second period yields d p2 to player 1 and d (v −p2 )
to player 2. (Note the discounting.)

--- Sayfa 414 ---
399
Guided Exercise
(a)  Suppose that nature selects v = 2 with probability r and v = 1 with prob-
ability 1 −r. Player 2 observes nature’s choice; player 1 knows only these
probabilities. Compute the perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this game and
note how it depends on d and r. (Assume that if a player is indifferent be-
tween accepting and rejecting an offer, then he or she accepts it.)
(b)  Now suppose that nature selects v according to a uniform distribution on the
interval [0, 1]. That is, for any number a between 0 and 1, the probability
that nature selects v < a is equal to a. Compute the perfect Bayesian equi-
librium of this game and note how it depends on d. (Hint: Use the knowl-
edge that you have gained from part (a) and do not try to draw the extensive
form—it is a bit messy.)
Solution:
(a)  The perfect Bayesian equilibrium is easy to calculate in this example be-
cause there are no difﬁcult updated beliefs to analyze. In fact, we can basi-
cally solve the game using backward induction. It is easy to see that the
outcome of negotiation in the second period is trade at price p2 = 0 because
it is the lowest price that player 1 will accept. Thus, if the game reaches
the second period, then player 2’s payoff will be d v and player 1 will get
 nothing. An implication is that in the ﬁrst period, player 2 will accept any
price p1 that satisﬁes
v −p1 Ú d v,
 which simpliﬁes to p1 … (1 −d )v. Note that the high-type buyer is willing
to accept a higher price than is the low-type buyer. Because player 1 does
not observe v, this leaves player 1 with a simple choice: (1) offer a price
that only the high-type buyer will accept or (2) offer a lower price that both
types will accept. With alternative (1), the best price to offer is 2(1 −d )
because it is the highest price that the high-type buyer will accept. At this
price, player 1’s expected payoff would be 2(1 −d )r. With alternative (2),
the best price to offer is 1 −d, which yields to player 1 the payoff 1 −d.
Alternative (1) yields a higher expected payoff than does alternative (2) if
r Ú 1>2. Thus, in the case of r Ú 1>2, player 1 offers p1 = 2(1 −d ); in the
case of r < 1>2, player 1 offers p1 = 1 −d.
Player 1’s offer is decreasing in the discount factor; that is, a more
patient player 2 implies a lower p1. For low values of r, where player 1 is
reasonably sure that player 2 is the low type with v = 1, player 1 makes
the “safe” price offer 1 −d and agreement is reached without delay. In

--- Sayfa 415 ---
400
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
contrast, for high values of r where player 1 thinks it more likely that player
2 is the high type, player 1 offers a higher price, and agreement is delayed
(and inefﬁciency results) with probability 1 −r.
(b)  Behavior in the second period is exactly as described in part (a). Also, as
before, in the ﬁrst period type v of player 2 accepts any price p1 … (1 −d )v.
Rearranging this inequality yields
v Ú
p1
1 −d ,
 which is to say that all types above p1>(1 −d ) will accept the offer p1.
Because v is uniformly distributed on [0, 1], the probability that v exceeds
p1>(1 −d ) is
1 −
p1
1 −d.
Thus, player 1’s expected payoff of offering price p1 is
p1 a1 −
p1
1 −d b.
 To ﬁnd player 1’s optimal offer, we take the derivative of this expression, set
it equal to 0, and solve for p1. This yields p* = (1 −d )>2.
As in part (a), player 1’s offer is decreasing in the discount factor. Also,
the equilibrium is inefﬁcient because agreement is delayed in the event that
v is less than 1>2.
EXERCISES
1. Consider the job-market signaling model analyzed in this chapter. Would an
education be a useful signal of the worker’s type if the types had the same
education cost? Explain your answer.
2. Compute the PBE of the job-market signaling model under the assumption
that the worker is a high type with probability 1>2 and a low type with prob-
ability 1>2 (rather than probabilities of 1>3 and 2>3 as assumed in the text).
3. Consider the extensive-form game of incomplete information in the diagram
that follows. There is a ﬁrm and a worker. In this game, nature ﬁrst  chooses
the “type” of the ﬁrm (player 1). With probability p, the ﬁrm is of high

--- Sayfa 416 ---
401
Exercises
 quality (H) and, with probability 1 −p, the ﬁrm is of low quality (L). The
ﬁrm chooses either to offer a job to the worker (O) or not to offer a job (N). If
no job is offered, the game ends and both parties receive 0. If the ﬁrm offers
a job, then the worker either accepts (A) or rejects (R) the offer. The worker’s
effort on the job brings the ﬁrm a proﬁt of 2. If the worker rejects an offer of
employment, then the ﬁrm gets a payoff of −1 (associated with being jilted).
Rejecting an offer yields a payoff of 0 to the worker. Accepting an offer yields
the worker a payoff of 2 if the ﬁrm is of high quality and −1 if the ﬁrm is of
low quality. The worker does not observe the quality of the ﬁrm directly.
(a)  Is there a separating PBE in this game? If so, specify the equilibrium and
explain under what conditions it exists. If not, brieﬂy demonstrate why.
(b)  Is there a pooling PBE in which both types of ﬁrms offer a job? If so,
specify the equilibrium and explain under what conditions it exists. If
not, brieﬂy demonstrate why.
(c)  Is there a pooling PBE in which neither type of ﬁrm offers a job? If so,
specify the equilibrium and explain under what conditions it exists. If
not, brieﬂy demonstrate why.
4. What is the relation between the PBE of the investment–reputation game in
this chapter and the Bayesian Nash equilibria of its normal-form representa-
tion? You do not need to draw the normal-form representation to determine
the answer, but it will help. Explain why you ﬁnd this relation.
5. Compute the PBE for the investment–reputation model discussed in this
chapter, under the assumption that nature chooses the cooperative type
with probability p (rather than 1>4 as assumed in the text). What happens
if p > 1>2?
A
2, 2
R
H
L
A
R
2
0,  0
0,  0
N
H
1
O
H
N
L
1
O
L
(p)
(q)
−1, 0
(1 −q)
(1 −p)
−1, 0
2, −1

--- Sayfa 417 ---
402
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
6. Recall the bargaining game from part (b) of this chapter’s Guided Exercise,
where player 1 is interested in selling a television to player 2. Player 2’s
value of owning the television, v, is privately known to player 2. Player
1 only knows that v is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. Consider a
variation of the game in which player 1 makes the offer in both periods,
rather than having alternating offers as in the Guided Exercise. That is, in
the ﬁrst period, player 1 offers a price p1. If player 2 rejects this offer, then
play proceeds to the second period, where player 1 makes another offer,
p2. Assume, as before, that the players discount second-period payoffs by
the factor d.
Calculate the perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this game. Here are some
hints to help you with the analysis. In the perfect Bayesian equilibrium,
player 2 uses a cutoff rule in the ﬁrst period. The cutoff rule is characterized
by a function c : [0, 1] S [0, 1], whereby player 2 accepts an offer p1 if
and only if v Ú c ( p1
 ). Thus, whatever player 1 offers in the ﬁrst period, if
the offer is rejected, then player 1’s updated belief about player 2’s type is
that it is uniformly distributed between 0 and c ( p1
 ). In other words, because
player 1 knows that any type v Ú c ( p1
 ) would have accepted p1, that the
offer was rejected tells player 1 that player 2’s valuation is between 0 and
c ( p1
 ). This is Bayes’ rule in action.
Begin your analysis by determining player 2’s optimal behavior in the
second period and then calculating player 1’s optimal second-period price
offer when facing the types in some interval [0, x]. Then try to determine the
function c. In this regard, the key insight is that type c ( p1
 ) will be indifferent
between accepting p1 and waiting for the offer in period 2.
7. Suppose that two people (person 1 and person 2) are considering whether to
form a partnership ﬁrm. Person 2’s productivity (type) is unknown to person
1 at the time at which these people must decide whether to create a ﬁrm,
but person 1 knows that, with probability p, person 2’s productivity is high
(H) and, with probability 1 −p, person 2’s productivity is low (L). Person
2 knows her own productivity. If these two people do not form a ﬁrm, then
they each receive a payoff of 0. If they form a ﬁrm, then their payoffs are as
follows: If person 2’s type is H, then each person receives 10. If person 2’s
type is L, then person 2 receives 5 and person 1 receives −4 (which has to
do with person 1 having to work very hard in the future to salvage the ﬁrm).
(a)  Consider the game in which person 1 chooses between forming the ﬁrm
(F) or not forming the ﬁrm (O). Draw the extensive form of this game
(using a move of nature at the beginning to select person 2’s type). Note
that only one person has a move in this game. What is the Bayesian
Nash equilibrium of the game? (It depends on p.)

--- Sayfa 418 ---
403
Exercises
(b)  Now suppose that before person 1 decides whether to form the ﬁrm,
person 2 chooses whether or not to give person 1 a gift (such as a
dinner). Player 1 observes person 2’s choice between G and N (gift
or no gift) before selecting F or O. The gift entails a cost of g units of
utility for person 2; this cost is subtracted from person 2’s payoff desig-
nated earlier. The gift, if given, adds w to person 1’s utility. If person 2
does not give the gift, then it costs her nothing. Assume that w and g are
positive numbers. Draw the extensive form of this new game.
(c)  Under what conditions (values of g and w) does a (separating) perfect
Bayesian equilibrium exist in which the low type of person 2 does not
give the gift, the high type gives the gift, and person 1 forms the ﬁrm if
and only if a gift is given? Completely specify such an equilibrium.
(d)  Is there a pooling equilibrium in this game? Fully describe it and note
how it depends on p.
8. Consider the same setting as that in Exercise 7, except now consider that both
players have private information. Player 1’s type is either high or low as well.
The players’ types are independently selected by nature with the probability p.
(Thus, p2 is the probability that both players are the high type, p(1 −p) is the
probability that player 1’s type is H and player 2’s type is L, and so on.) Sup-
pose that if the ﬁrm is not formed, both players receive 0. If the ﬁrm is formed,
then the payoffs are as follows: If both players have high productivity, then
they each receive 10. If both have low productivity, then they each receive 0.
If one of the players has high productivity and the other has low productivity,
then the high-type player gets −4 and the low-type player gets 5.
(a)  Consider the game in which the players simultaneously and indepen-
dently select Y or O. The ﬁrm is formed if they both select Y. Otherwise,
the ﬁrm is not formed. Note that a strategy for each player speciﬁes what
the player should do conditional on being the high type and conditional
on being the low type. Demonstrate that (O, O; O, O) is a  Bayesian
Nash equilibrium in this game, regardless of p.
(b)  Under what values of p is (Y, Y; Y, Y) an equilibrium? (In this
 equilibrium, both types of both players choose Y.)
(c)  Now suppose that before the players choose between Y and N, they
have an opportunity to give each other gifts. The players simultaneously
and independently choose between giving (G) and not giving (N) gifts,
with the cost and beneﬁt of gifts as speciﬁed in Exercise 7. Under what
conditions is there a perfect Bayesian equilibrium in which the high
types give gifts and the ﬁrm is formed if and only if both players give
gifts? Specify the equilibrium as best you can.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
404
29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
9. A manager and a worker interact as follows. The manager would like the
worker to exert some effort on a project. Let e denote the worker’s effort.
Each unit of effort produces a unit of revenue for the ﬁrm; that is, revenue
is e. The worker bears a cost of effort given by ae2, where a is a positive
constant. The manager can pay the worker some money, which enters their
payoffs in an additive way. Thus, if the worker picks effort level e and the
manager pays the worker x, then the manager’s payoff is e −x and the work-
er’s payoff is x −ae2. Assume that effort is veriﬁable and externally en-
forceable, meaning that the parties can commit to a payment and effort level.
Imagine that the parties interact as follows: First, the manager makes a
contract offer to the worker. The contract is a speciﬁcation of effort en and
a wage xn. Then the worker accepts or rejects the offer. If she rejects, then
the game ends and both parties obtain payoffs of 0. If she accepts, then the
contract is enforced (effort en is taken and xn is paid). Because the contract is
externally enforced, you do not have to concern yourself with the worker’s
incentive to exert effort.
(a)  Solve the game under the assumption that a is common knowledge
between the worker and the manager. That is, ﬁnd the manager’s optimal
contract offer. Is the outcome efﬁcient? (Does the contract maximize
the sum of the players’ payoffs?) Note how the equilibrium contract
depends on a.
(b)  Let e– and x– denote the equilibrium contract in the case in which
a = 1>8 and let e and x denote the equilibrium contract in the case in
which a = 3>8. Calculate these values. Let us call a = 3>8 the high-
type worker and a = 1>8 the low-type worker.
(c)  Suppose that a is private information to the worker. The manager
knows only that a = 1>8 with probability 1>2 and a = 3>8 with
probability 1>2. Suppose that the manager offers the worker a choice
between contracts (e–, x–) and ( e, x )—that is, the manager offers a menu
of contracts—in the hope that the high type will choose ( e, x ) and the
low type will choose (e–, x–). Will each type pick the contract intended
for him? If not, what will happen and why?
(d)  Suppose that the manager offers a menu of two contracts (eL, xL ) and
(eH, xH ), where he hopes that the ﬁrst contract will be accepted by the
low type and the second will be accepted by the high type. Under what
conditions will each type accept the contract intended for him? Your
answer should consist of four inequalities. The ﬁrst two—called the
incentive compatibility conditions—reﬂect that each type prefers the
contract intended for him rather than the one intended for the other type.
The last two inequalities—called the participation constraints—reﬂect

--- Sayfa 420 ---
405
Exercises
that by selecting the contract meant for him, each type gets a payoff that
is at least 0.
(e)  Compute the manager’s optimal menu (eL, xL ) and (eH, xH). Note that
the manager wants to maximize his expected payoff
(1>2)[eH −xH] + (1>2)[eL −xL],
 subject to the worker’s incentive compatibility conditions and participa-
tion constraints. (Hint: Only two of the inequalities of part (d) actually
bind—that is, hold as equalities. The ones that bind are the high type’s
participation constraint and the low type’s incentive compatibility con-
dition. Using these two equations to substitute for xL and xH, write the
manager’s payoff as a function of eL and eH. Solve the problem by tak-
ing the partial derivatives with respect to these two variables and setting
the derivatives equal to 0.)
(f)  Comment on the relation between the solution to part (e) and the efﬁ-
cient contracts identiﬁed in part (b). How does the optimal menu under
asymmetric information distort away from efﬁciency?
10. Consider the following two-player team production problem. The players
simultaneously choose effort levels (a1 for player 1 and a2 for player 2), and
revenue is given by 2k[a1 + a2 ]. Suppose that player i ’s cost of effort is a2
i
in monetary terms. Revenue is split equally between the players, so player
i ’s payoff is k[a1 + a2] −a2
i .
Assume that the value of k is privately observed by player 1 prior to her
selection of a1. Player 2 does not know the value of k before choosing a2.
Player 2 knows only that k is either 4 or 8, with these being equally likely.
(a) Find the Bayesian Nash equilibrium (effort levels) for this game.
(b)  Consider a variation of the game in which, after observing k and prior
to effort selection, player 1 can provide evidence of the value of k to
player 2. That is, after either realization of k, player 1 chooses either E
or N. If she selects E, then k is revealed to player 2; otherwise, player
2 observes nothing other than that player 1 selected N. Represent this
game in the extensive form and calculate the perfect Bayesian equi-
libria. Are there any perfect Bayesian equilibria in which, at the time
player 2 selects a2, she is uncertain of k?
(c)  Would player 1 prefer to have the option of revealing k, as in part (b)
relative to part (a)? Explain.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
These appendices contain some additional technical material
that you might ﬁnd handy as you read the textbook. Appendix
A reviews some basic mathematical concepts. Appendix B
elaborates on the deﬁnitions of dominance and rationalizability.
Appendix C discusses the existence of Nash equilibrium, and
Appendix D presents the Nash bargaining solution. Appendix E
provides solutions to Exercises 1, 3, 5, and 9 from each chapter
(except where there are no such exercises).
Appendices

--- Sayfa 424 ---
409
I
n this appendix, I deﬁne and discuss a few basic mathematical concepts used
in the book. The coverage here is in no way general; it is not intended to stand
alone as an introduction to mathematical analysis. Rather, it is designed to help
you refresh your memory and solidify your understanding of the concepts by
reviewing some elementary deﬁnitions and examples. For a serious treatment
of mathematical analysis, you should consult calculus and analysis textbooks.1
SETS
A set is any collection of distinct items. For example, the “days of the week”
is a set comprising the following seven things: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Each member of a set is called an element
of the set; the term point has the same meaning. One way of mathematically
describing a set is to list its elements, separated by commas and surrounded by
brackets, as such:
{M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su}.
Note that for convenience, I use M to stand for Monday, Tu for Tuesday, and so
on. Abbreviations such as these are often helpful.
Another example of a set is “integers from 1 to 100,” which can be repre-
sented as
{1, 2, 3, c, 100}.
Note how an ellipsis (c) is used to signify the continuation of a pattern. The
set of “positive odd integers” has no upper bound, so we represent it as
{1, 3, 5, c}.
REVIEW OF MATHEMATICS
1For analysis, I recommend K. Binmore, Mathematical Analysis, 2nd ed. (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1982). For probability theory, you could try S. Ross, Introduction to Probability Models, 6th ed. (San
Diego: Academic Press, 1997).
A

--- Sayfa 425 ---
410
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
Sometimes sets are most easily deﬁned by mathematical conditions, such as
“the set of numbers that are the squares of positive integers”:
{x 
 x = n2  for n = 1, 2, 3, c}.
That is, x is an element of this set if there is a positive integer n such that x = n2.
Finite sets contain only a ﬁnite number of elements; “the days of the week” is
an example of a ﬁnite set. Inﬁnite sets contain an inﬁnite number of elements;
the set of positive odd integers is an inﬁnite set.
An interval is a set of numbers between two endpoints. For example, the
set of numbers between 0 and 1, including these two numbers, is an interval. It
can be written as
{x 
 0 … x … 1}.
It is also standard to represent intervals by enclosing the endpoints in parenthe-
ses or square brackets. For example, [a, b] denotes the set of points between a
and b, including the endpoints—that is, a and b are included in this set; (a, b)
describes the same interval except without the endpoints included. Finally,
(a, b] and [a, b) denote the intervals with only one of the endpoints included
(b in the ﬁrst case, a in the second).
Often, capital letters, such as X and S, are used to name sets. For example,
we could have
X K {M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su},
where “ K ” denotes “is deﬁned as.” Then we can write X instead of {M, Tu, W,
Th, F, Sa, Su} in our calculations. The symbol “∈” stands for “is an element of.”
Thus, we write x ∈X to say that x is an element of X. In general expressions,
sometimes lowercase letters refer to elements and uppercase letters denote sets.
A letter that represents individual elements of a set is called a variable. For
example, if X is the set of days of the week and I write x ∈X, then I mean that
the variable x can stand for any of the individual days of the week. I could “plug
in” Tu for x, or M for x, and so forth.
The symbol “⊂” means “is a subset of.” For two sets X and Y, X ⊂Y
means that every element of X is also an element of Y; that is, x ∈X implies
x ∈Y. For example, if we deﬁne
X K {1, 3, 5, c},
and
Y K {1, 2, 3, c},

--- Sayfa 426 ---
411
Functions and Calculus
then X ⊂Y. The union of two sets consists of the elements that are in at least one
of the sets. The intersection of two sets consists of the elements that are in both
of the sets. Formally, for sets X and Y, the union is
X Y K {x | x ∈X or x ∈Y or both}
and the intersection is
X Y K {x 
 x ∈X and x ∈Y}.
The symbol “0” represents the set with no elements; we call this the empty set.
The symbol “R” represents the set of real numbers (all of the usual numbers that
you can think of). We sometimes use the term space for a large set that contains
all of the elements relevant for a particular mathematical problem, in which case
all of the sets that we deﬁne are subsets of the space.
A vector is what you get when you put elements of different sets together
in a speciﬁc order. For example, you might want to combine a day of the week
with an hour of the morning, such as Tuesday and eight o’clock. Mathemati-
cally, this vector would be written (Tu, 8). Other vectors of this type are (M, 9)
and (Sa, 11). Note that the ﬁrst component of these vectors is an element of the set
D K {M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, Su}, whereas the second component is an element
of T K {1, 2, c, 11}. The vectors themselves are elements of a larger set
called the Cartesian product of the individual sets. The product set is written
D × T and it comprises all of the vectors of the form (d, t) where d ∈D and
t ∈T. That is,
 D × T = {(M, 1), (M, 2), c, (M, 11), (Tu, 1), (Tu, 2), c,
 (Su, 10), (Su, 11)}.
Note that D × T contains 77 elements (7 elements in D times 11 elements in
T). For a simpler example of a product set, note that the product of {A, B} and
{1, 2} is
{(A, 1), (A, 2), (B, 1), (B, 2)}.
In general, if we have n sets X1, X2, c
, Xn, then the product set X is given by
X K {(x1, x2, c, xn
 )x1 ∈X1, x2 ∈X2, c, xn ∈Xn}.
FUNCTIONS AND CALCULUS
A function describes a way of associating the elements of one set X with
elements of another set Y. For each point x ∈X, the function names a single
point y ∈Y; the point y associated with x is denoted by y = f (x). For ex ample,

--- Sayfa 427 ---
412
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
suppose X = {a, b} and Y = {3, 4}. A function f might be deﬁned by f (a) = 4
and f (b) = 3. Another function g might be deﬁned by g (a) = 3 and g (b) = 3.
(A single y value can be associated with more than one x value.) To make clear
between which sets a function relates, we usually write the expression f : X S Y,
which means “f maps X into Y.” Here X is called the domain and Y is called the
codomain. The set of points that f can return, which is deﬁned by
{ f (x)x ∈X },
is called the range of f. Many functions of interest map the real numbers into the
same set. For example, we could deﬁne the function f : R S R by f (x) = x2.
In this case, if x = 3 then y = f (3) = 9, if x = 5 then y = 25, and so forth.
Real functions (those with real domains and ranges) can be graphed in
the R × R product space—this is the usual x>y plane. The graph plots the set
of vectors of the form (x, y), where x ∈R and y = f (x) is the value at x. The
graph of f (x) = x2 is depicted in Figure A.1. To determine the graph of a func-
tion, start by plugging in some numbers for x and plotting the resulting (x, y)
vectors. Also ﬁnd the x- and y-intercepts, which are the vectors that correspond
to x = 0 in the ﬁrst case and y = 0 in the second case. Another useful exercise
is to check what happens to y as x converges to positive and negative inﬁnity.
For example, as x gets either very high or very low (large negative), x2 becomes
a very large positive number. Thus, the graph of f (x) = x2 points upward on
the right and the left.
The slope of a function measures the degree to which the value of the
function increases or decreases as x goes up. The slope may be different at
various points in the function’s domain, and it depends on the amount that x
is changed. Technically, the slope equals the rise (the difference in y) divided
FIGURE A.1
The graph of f (x) = x2.
y
x
f(x)
9
3

--- Sayfa 428 ---
413
Functions and Calculus
by the run (the difference in x). For example, once again look at the function
f (x) = x2, whose graph near x = 1 is magniﬁed in Figure A.2. To ﬁnd the
slope of f between the points x = 1 and x = 2, we simply compute the rise and
run between these two points. The rise is
f (2) −f (1) = 22 −12 = 4 −1 = 3,
whereas the run is 2 −1 = 1. Thus, the slope is 3>1 = 3. In Figure A.2, the
slope corresponds to the straight line segment drawn between vectors (1, 1)
and (2, 4).
The derivative of a function is deﬁned as the limit of the slope (where the
slope goes) as the change in x (that is, the run) becomes small. In other words,
the derivative is the instantaneous slope at a point x. In formal terms, the deriva-
tive of f at x is deﬁned as
lim
âS0 f (x + â) −f (x)
â
.
The expression “â S 0” means that the fraction is evaluated for a number â
that is taken to be very close to zero. Note that in this deﬁnition, the run is â
because this is the distance from the starting point x that we are measuring. We
denote the derivative of f at x by f 9(x); alternatively, where y = f (x), we also
write the derivative as dy>dx.
FIGURE A.2
Magniﬁed graph of f (x) = x2.
y
x
f(x)
2
4
1
1

--- Sayfa 429 ---
414
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
Let us compute the derivative of the function f (x) = x2 at an arbitrary
point x. In accord with the deﬁnition in the preceding paragraph, this is the limit of
(x + â)2 −x2
â
as â gets close to zero. Expanding the term in parentheses, we get
x2 + 2âx + â2 −x2
â
= 2x + â.
As â approaches zero, clearly this value converges to 2x. Thus, f 9(x) = 2x.
You can check that multiplying a function by a ﬁxed number a implies that
the derivative also is multiplied by a. Thus, if f (x) = ax2, then f 9(x) = 2ax.
You can also compute that for any constant b and the function f (x) = bx, the
derivative is f 9(x) = b. Finally, if f (x) = c for some constant c, then f 9(x) = 0.
Putting these things together, it is no surprise that for any function of the form
f (x) = ax2 + bx + c, we have f 9(x) = 2ax + b. Such a function f is called a
quadratic function.2
The graph of any quadratic function is a parabola, such as that pictured
in Figures A.1 and A.2. If the constant a is positive, then the ends of the
parabola point upward; if the constant is negative, then the ends point down-
ward. This is shown in Figure A.3. In the case in which a < 0, the maximum
value attained by f occurs where the slope is equal to zero. Thus, to ﬁnd the
value of x that maximizes f (x), simply solve the equation f 9(x*) = 0 for x*.
In the case in which a > 0, the function is minimized where the slope equals
zero. In general, for any function with a well-deﬁned derivative, you can ﬁnd
the maxima and minima (at least the “local” ones) by calculating where the
2In general, for a function of the form f (x) = ax k, we have f 9(x) = akx k−1.
FIGURE A.3
Functions of the form
f (x) = ax2 + bx + c.
a > 0
a < 0

--- Sayfa 430 ---
415
Probability
derivative equals zero. For most of the exercises in this textbook that require
calculus, computing where the derivative equals zero is all you have to do. To
reassure yourself about whether you are ﬁnding a maximum or a minimum, it
is helpful to sketch the graph of the function and check whether it looks like
one of the cases shown in Figure A.3.3
Some functions are deﬁned on several variables. For example, the func-
tion f (x, y) = xy + 2y associates a number z = f (x, y) with any two numbers
x and y. In this case, we write f : R × R S R, because with this function
we plug in two real numbers and get out one real number. With multivariate
functions such as this, we sometimes need to evaluate slopes on just one of
the dimensions of the domain (x or y). We can do so by simply treating the
other variables as ﬁxed constants. For example, if f (x, y) = xy + 2y, then
the derivative of f with respect to x is deﬁned as the change of z divided
by the change of x, holding y ﬁxed. This deﬁnes the partial derivative of f
with respect to x, which is the standard derivative calculation with y held
constant. We write 0z>0x for the partial derivative of f with respect to x. With
the function z = f (x, y) = xy + 2y, the partial derivatives are 0z>0x = y and
0z>0y = x + 2. In general, suppose x is an n-dimensional vector, so that
x = (x1, x2, c, xn
 ). If y = f (x), then we can compute the n partial deriva-
tives, 0y>0x1, 0y>0x2, c, 0y>0xn.
PROBABILITY
A coin toss produces a random event, where the outcome can be either “heads”
or “tails.” For a “fair” coin, we assess that these outcomes are equally likely.
Sometimes we use the phrase “ﬁfty-ﬁfty” to describe the prospects. In more
formal terms, we would say that the probability of heads is 1>2 and the prob-
ability of tails is 1>2. Using the concept of probability, we have an organized
and logical way of considering random events.
There are all sorts of situations that have random components. The weather
is random, machines fail randomly, and sometimes people behave randomly.
To study the random component, it is useful to consider a state space that
describes all of the possible resolutions of the random forces. For example,
if you are interested in a particular horse race, the state space may consist of
all of the different orderings of the horses (ways in which they could ﬁnish in
the race). If you are a poker player, the state space may comprise the different
ways in which the cards can be dealt. If you like ﬂipping coins, the state space
3You can also use second-derivative conditions. If the second derivative (the derivative of the derivative) is nega-
tive, then the function roughly has a downward parabola shape, meaning that f 9(x*) = 0 identiﬁes a maximum.
If the second derivative is positive, then f 9(x*) = 0 identiﬁes a minimum.

--- Sayfa 431 ---
416
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
is {heads, tails}. Each of the states in the state space is assumed to describe an
outcome that is mutually exclusive of what other states describe. Further, the
states collectively exhaust all of the possibilities. In other words, one and only
one state actually occurs.
To describe the relative likelihood of the different individual states, we
can posit a probability distribution over the state space. For example, suppose
the state space is {A, B, C}. Think of this as the possible outcomes of a
horse race, where all you care about is which horse wins (horse A, horse B,
or horse C ). A probability distribution for this state space implies a function
p: {A, B, C} S [0, 1] from which we get three numbers, p(A), p(B), and p(C ).
The number p(A) is the “probability that A occurs,” p(B) is the probability that
B occurs, and p(C ) is the probability that C occurs. Each of these numbers is
assumed to be between 0 and 1 (as you can see from the codomain designation
of p) and the numbers sum to 1. For example, if horse A is twice as likely to win
as are horses B and C individually and if B and C are equally likely to win, then
p(A) = 1>2, p(B) = 1>4, and p(C ) = 1> 4.
In general, for a ﬁnite state space X, a probability distribution is repre-
sented by a function p: X S [0, 1] such that g x∈X
  p(x) = 1. Note that “g x∈X”
means adding the numbers that you get by plugging in all of the different states,
where a generic state is represented by x. A random variable is a variable that
describes the actual state that occurs. For example, using the horse-race state
space, we could let y denote the winning horse. Then y is called a random vari-
able; it equals A with probability p(A), B with probability p(B), and C with
probability p(C ). More generally, a random variable is any function of the state
space.
In many cases, a random variable gives a real number—your dollar
winnings at the racetrack, for instance. We can then speak of the expected
value of the random variable, which is its average value weighted by the prob-
ability distribution. For example, suppose that you will get a payment of $60
if horse A wins the race and $0 if horse A does not win. Suppose you believe
that A will win the race with probability 1>2. Then your expected payment is
30, which is the average of 60 and 0. If A will win only with probability 1>4,
then your expected payment is 15. This is because there is a one-quarter
chance that you will get $60 (in other words, “one-quarter of the time”), so
the expected value is 1>4 times the payment of $60. In general, expected value
is the sum of the possible payment amounts, each weighted by its probability.
With the use of E to denote expectation, the expected value of random variable
y is deﬁned as
E[y] = a
x∈X
y(x) p(x).

--- Sayfa 432 ---
417
Probability
In this expression, y(x) is the value of the random variable (your payment) in
state x. As an example, suppose you get $60 in state A, $20 in state B, and $0
in state C. Further suppose that p(A) = 1>2, p(B) = 1>4, and p(C ) = 1> 4, as
before. Then your expected payment is
(1>2)(60) + (1>4)(20) + (1>4)(0) = 35.
Probability distributions attribute probabilities not only to single states but
also to sets of states. In the horse-race example, imagine that horses A and B are
from Kentucky, whereas horse C is from Tennessee. If you have a bet with your
friend regarding whether a horse from Kentucky wins, then you care about the
set {A, B}. Such a set of states is called an event. In formal terms, an event is any
subset of states—including a singleton set containing only one state. Because
all states are mutually exclusive (only one occurs), the probability of an event
is just the sum of the probabilities of the states that compose the event. For
instance, the probability that a horse from Kentucky wins is p(A) + p(B). In
general, if the state space X is ﬁnite, an event is any set D ⊂X. The probability
of event D is deﬁned as
Prob[D] K a
x∈D
p(x).
Note that the probability of the entire state space is 1; that is, Prob[X] = 1.
There are two ways of thinking about probability. The frequentist way asso-
ciates probability numbers with an objective test: the fraction of times that a
state will occur if the underlying situation were repeated over and over again.
For example, if you ﬂipped a coin l000 times and discovered that it came up
heads 504 times and tails 496 times, then you would say that the probabilities
of heads and tails are about 1>2 and 1>2. The second way of thinking about
probabilities is the Bayesian approach, where the probability numbers are not
derived from repetitive testing but are subjectively assessed. I can look at a
coin and surmise that heads and tails are equally likely results of a coin ﬂip.
I can size up a horse at the racetrack and conclude that he will win the race with
probability 1>3, although it is not even possible to verify this number through
testing (which would require repeating the race an arbitrary number of times
under identical conditions). In fact, my probability assessment may be wrong in
the sense that I ignored some information that would have led me to a different
assessment—the horse may have been scratched from the race, but I did not
realize it. However, my assessment is still valid for me because it is the basis of
my decision making.
Game theory utilizes both the frequentist and the Bayesian interpretations
of probability to some degree. However, game theory leans heavily toward the

--- Sayfa 433 ---
418
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
Bayesian approach, especially regarding players’ beliefs about each other’s
actions. Probability theory is essential for game-theoretic reasoning because it
is the foundation for dealing with uncertainty in a logically consistent and prac-
tical way.
For an inﬁnite state space, probability distributions are more complicated.
In fact, it may be that no state has positive probability by itself. Although the
inﬁnite setting requires a general, more sophisticated theory of probability
measure, you can often deal with inﬁnite state spaces without delving far into
the mathematics. In the most common case of an inﬁnite state space, the state
is a real number. For example, the state x might be a number between a and b,
where a < b, in which case the state space is [a, b]. A probability distribution
is then represented by a cumulative probability function F : [a, b] S [0, 1],
which gives the probability that x is less than or equal to any given number.
That is, F(z) is the probability of the event that x … z. It is proper, therefore,
to write
F (z) = Prob[x … z].
The cumulative probability function satisﬁes two main conditions. First,
because the state is between a and b, the probability that x … b must be 1; that
is, F(b) = 1. Second, F is weakly increasing, meaning that F(z) … F(z9) for any
numbers z and z9 such that z < z9. The greater is z, the higher is the probability
that x … z.
The uniform distribution is a particularly simple and useful one. Roughly,
in a uniform distribution, all numbers between a and b are equally likely.
Because there are inﬁnite numbers between a and b, this means that each
individual number has probability 0. However, some standard events can
be easily assessed. For example, the probability that x < (a + b)>2 is 1>2,
because (a + b)>2 is the midpoint between a and b. In other words, (a + b)>2
is the point that divides the state space in half; the probability that x lies below
(a + b)>2 is the same as the probability that x lies above (a + b)>2. More
generally, if we look at any point between a and b, the probability that x lies
below this point is equal to the proportion that this point represents on the
way to b from a. That is, the cumulative probability function for the uniform
distribution on [a, b] is given by
F(z) = Prob[x … z] = z −a
b −a ,
where z ∈[a, b]. The expected value of a uniformly distributed random variable
is simply the midpoint of the distribution, (a + b)>2.

--- Sayfa 434 ---
419
Probability
Sometimes people start with a state space and probability distribution and
then update their assessment on the basis of new information. When a prob-
ability distribution arises because of new information, it is called conditional
probability. To illustrate the concept, I continue with the horse-race example.
Suppose, as before, that there are three horses in the race: A, B, and C. The ﬁrst
two horses are from Kentucky, whereas C is from Tennessee. The probability
distribution is given by p(A) = 1>2, p(B) = 1>4, and p(C ) = 1>4. If I ask you
about the chance that horse A will win, you will tell me that A wins with prob-
ability 1>2. However, what if I tell you that the race has been run and that I heard
from a reliable source that a horse from Kentucky won. (That is, C did not win.)
On the basis of this new information, what would you assess the probabilities
of A and B to be?
Your updated assessment should be A with probability 2>3 and B with
probability 1>3. Here is why. Initially, you believed that A is twice as likely
to win as is B. Knowing that C lost does not contradict this statement; it
merely implies that the probability of C has been reduced to 0. Your updated
probability distribution must assign probability 1 to the set of all states. Thus,
because the probability of C has been reduced to 0, the probabilities of A and
B have to be raised so that they sum to 1. Maintaining that A is twice as likely
as is B, you conclude that A and B must now have probabilities of 2>3 and
1>3, respectively. These are the only two numbers that sum to 1 and have a
ratio of 2.
In general, conditional probability can be ﬁgured by reducing to 0 the
probabilities of states that have been ruled out and scaling up the probabili-
ties of states that are left. The “scaling up” operation is done by using the
same scaling factor for all states, and it makes the sum of the probabilities
equal to 1. In more technical language, take a state space X, a probability
distribution p, and two events K ⊂ X and L ⊂X. Suppose you learn that the
state is deﬁnitely in the set L and you want to know the updated probability
that the state is in K. Because the state cannot be outside of L, the only way
in which the state can be in K is if it is an element of K L. To maintain the
proportions between the states in L, you need to scale up the probabilities by
the factor Prob[L]. Thus, the probability of event K conditional on event L is
deﬁned as
Prob[K L] K Prob[K L]
Prob[L]
.
Note that this expression is undeﬁned if Prob[L] = 0. That is, if you initially
believe that L cannot occur and then I ask you about the probability of K given
that L has occurred, your initial assessment is of little guidance in calculating

--- Sayfa 435 ---
420
Appendix A: Review of Mathematics
the conditional probability. In this case, the conditional probability of K can be
arbitrarily deﬁned, as long as K L 0.
Rearranging the deﬁnition of conditional probability yields the following
expression:
Prob[K L] = Prob[K | L]Prob[L].
In words, the probability that x ∈K L equals the probability that x ∈L times
the probability that x ∈K conditional on x ∈L. Reversing the roles of K and L,
we have
Prob[L K] = Prob[L | K]Prob[K].
Note that the set K L is exactly the same as the set L K. Thus, the left
sides of the two preceding equations are the same. Equating the right sides and
rearranging yields
Prob[K | L] = Prob[L | K]Prob[K]
Prob[L]
.
This equation is known as Bayes’ rule.4 It is very useful for applications of
conditional probability. Note that, as with the deﬁnition of conditional probabil-
ity, Bayes’ rule does not constrain the assessment Prob[K | L] if the probability
of L is zero.
4Bayes’ rule is named for Thomas Bayes, who reported the equation in “An Essay towards Solving a Problem
in the Doctrine of Chances,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 53, 1764.

--- Sayfa 436 ---
T
his appendix concerns two of the components of rationalizability: the re-
lation between best response and dominance and the procedure by which
dominated strategies are iteratively removed. I ﬁrst sketch some of the analy-
sis not provided in Chapter 6 on the relation between dominance and best
response. Then I develop the formal mathematical construction of the ratio-
nalizable set of strategies. Finally, I describe the construction of iterated weak
dominance and iterated conditional dominance (presented in Chapter 15).
These topics are technical and are not essential material for those interested
only in concepts and applications.
DOMINANCE, BEST RESPONSE, AND CORRELATED CONJECTURES
To understand the formal relation between dominance and best response, you
have to begin with the concept of correlated conjectures. Remember that a
belief, or conjecture, of player i is a probability distribution over the strategies
played by the other players. In two-player games, this amounts to a probabil-
ity distribution over the strategy adopted by player j (player i ’s opponent). In
games with more than two players, though, player i ’s belief is more compli-
cated. It is a probability distribution over the strategy combinations (proﬁles)
of player i ’s opponents. For example, consider a three-player game in which
player 1 chooses between strategies A and B, player 2 chooses between M and
N, and player 3 chooses between X and Y. The belief of player 1 represents his
expectations about both player 2’s and player 3’s strategies. That is, player l’s
conjecture is an element of S−1 . The belief is a probability distribution over
{M, N} × {X, Y} = {(M, X), (M, Y), (N, X), (N, Y)}.
Let us explore the possible beliefs.
Suppose that player 1 thinks that with probability 1>2 player 2 will select
M, that with probability 1>2 player 3 will choose X, and that his opponents’
actions are independent. The last property implies that the probability
of any profile of the opponents’ strategies is the product of the individual
THE MATHEMATICS OF RATIONALIZABILITY
AND ITERATED DOMINANCE B
421

--- Sayfa 437 ---
422
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
probabilities.1 That is, player 1 thinks that (M, X) is his opponents’ strat-
egy profile with probability 1>4, (M, Y) occurs with probability 1>4,
and so on. We can represent this belief by the matrix in Figure B.1(a). The
marginal distributions appear on the outside of the matrix, on the right
for player 2 and below for player 3. The marginals are the probabilities
of each strategy for these players individually. Note that the probability
of each strategy profile (the number in a given cell) is the product of the
marginal probabilities.
Take another example of a conjecture of player 1, as depicted in the matrix
in Figure B.l (b). Here player 1 thinks that with probability 1>3 player 2 will
select M and with probability 2>3 player 2 will select N. He believes that player
3’s strategies are equally likely. Again, he believes that his opponents’ actions
are independent, as evident in the matrix because the joint probabilities of the
opponents’ strategies are equal to the product of the marginal probabilities.
The belief represented in the matrix in Figure B.l (c) has a different ﬂavor.
Here player 1 believes that player 2’s strategies are equally likely and that
player 3’s strategies are equally likely; the marginal probabilities are both
(1>2, 1>2). However, in this case, the joint distribution over the strategies of
players 2 and 3 is not deﬁned by the product of the marginal distributions.
Player 1 does not believe that the actions of players 2 and 3 are independent.
He believes that with probability 1>2 his opponents will play (M, X) and with
probability 1>2 they will play (N, Y).
To have such a belief, it is not necessary for player 1 to think that players
2 and 3 are in cahoots. That is, they do not have to be actively coordinating
their strategies to support such a belief. For example, player 1’s belief seems
reasonable in the following kind of situation. Suppose player 1 engages in this
game in a foreign country. He knows that, in some regions of the world, people
FIGURE B.1 Possible beliefs of player 1.
1If this is beginning to confuse you, think about ﬂipping coins. The outcome of one ﬂip is independent of the
outcome of a second ﬂip. If the probability of heads is 1>2, then the probability of getting heads in both of the
two ﬂips is (1>2)(1>2) = 1>4.
X
Y
M
N
1>4
1>4
1>4
1>4
3
2
1>2
1>2
1>2
1>2
1>2
1>2
X
Y
M
N
1>6
1>6
1>3
1>3
3
2
X
Y
M
N
1>2
1>2
1>2
1>3
2>3
0
0
1>2
3
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
1>2
1>2

--- Sayfa 438 ---
423
Dominance, Best Response, and Correlated Conjectures
tend to play the strategies M and X in this game. In other regions, people tend
to play N and Y. Player 1 is uncertain of the culture of the people in the foreign
country and thus has the belief shown in the matrix in Figure B.1(c).
The beliefs captured by the matrices in Figure B.l (a and b) are called
uncorrelated conjectures, whereas the belief captured by the matrix in Figure
B.l (c) is a correlated conjecture. In a given game, a correlated conjecture for
player i is any general belief from the set S−i . An uncorrelated conjecture has
the property that the joint distributions over S−i are equal to the product of the
marginal distributions over each Sj , for j i. In this case, the strategies of the
other players are, probabilistically speaking, independent. In general, we shall
assume that beliefs are uncorrelated. But, where a distinction must be made,
I denote uncorrelated distributions by u and correlated distributions by .
Write as Bi the set of best responses of player i over uncorrelated conjectures;
denote by Bc
i the set of best responses over all conjectures, including correlated
conjectures.
As written in Chapter 6, the relation between dominance and best response
for general, ﬁnite n-player games, is described by:
Result: For a ﬁnite game, Bi ⊂UDi and Bc
i = UDi for each
i = 1, 2, c, n.
To expose you to the methodology of formal proof, I shall prove parts of this
result.
First, let us prove that Bc
i ⊂UDi . That is, we will prove that if a strategy is a
best response to some belief, then it cannot be strictly dominated.2 Take a strategy
si* for player i and suppose that it is a best response to some belief u −i ∈S−i .
(The belief may be correlated.) We need to establish that there is no mixed strat-
egy si for player i such that ui
 (si, u−i
 ) > ui
 (si*, u−i ). Let us use a proof “by
contradiction,” which requires (1) assuming that such a si does exist and then
(2) showing that this implies that si* cannot be a best response (a contradiction).
The mixed strategy si is a probability distribution over player i ’s pure
 strategies.3 The expected payoff of strategy si against belief u−i is
ui
 (si, u−i
 ) = a
si∈Si
ui
 (si, u−i
 )si
 (si
 ),
which can exceed ui
 (si*, u−i
 ) only if there is a pure strategy s9i ∈Si such that
ui
 (s9i, u−i
 ) > ui
 (si*, u−i ). This is because the expected payoff from si is an
2Note that because allowing correlation means allowing more conjectures and possibly more best responses,
Bi ⊂Bc
i.
3It may put probability 1 on a single pure strategy, in which case it is synonymous with that pure strategy.

--- Sayfa 439 ---
424
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
average over the expected payoffs of player i ’s pure strategies. Because s9i yields
a higher expected payoff than does si*, it cannot be that si* is a best response to
the belief u−i. This concludes the proof that Bc
i ⊂UDi.
To complete the analysis behind the result, we must establish that UDi ⊂Bc
i
as well. Taken together, Bc
i ⊂UDi and UDi ⊂Bc
i imply that Bc
i = UDi ; that is,
with correlated conjectures, the set of undominated strategies is equivalent to
the set of strategies that are best responses for some possible beliefs. Rather than
prove UDi ⊂Bc
i for general games, which is quite difﬁcult and requires more
sophisticated mathematics than most readers would care to see, I just prove this
claim for the following special case. There are two players; player 1 has three
strategies and player 2 has two strategies.
In such a game, because player 2 has only two strategies, we do not need to
worry about one of player 2’s strategies being dominated by a mixed strategy.
Let us therefore focus on the strategies of player 1 and, for the sake of analysis,
call them a, b, and c. Name the strategies of player 2 m and w. Note that because
this game has only two players, correlated conjectures are not an issue and we
know that Bi = Bc
i , for i = 1, 2. To prove that UD1 ⊂B1 , I shall demonstrate
that if a strategy is not a member of B1, then it cannot be a member of UD1 .
Suppose strategy c is not a member of B1. This means that for every belief
that player 1 may have about player 2’s strategy, c is not a best response.
In mathematical terms, for every probability p ∈[0,1], c BR1
 (p, 1 −p).
[Here, the belief ( p, 1 −p) refers to player 2’s strategy m occurring
with probability p and strategy w occurring with probability 1 −p.]
We must show that there is a strategy of player 1 that strictly dominates
strategy c. The proof is easy if either a ∈BR1
 ( p, 1 −p) for all p or if
b ∈BR1
 ( p, 1 −p) for all p, because in this case it is obvious that either
a or b (or both strategies) strictly dominates c. Let us take the case in
which BR1
 ( p, 1 −p) = {a} for some values of p and BR1
 ( p, 1 −p) = {b}
for other values of p, but neither a nor b is a best response for all p. An
example is pictured in Figure B.2.
As functions of p, the payoffs u1
 (a, (  p, 1 −p)), u1
 (b, (  p, 1 −p)), and
u1
 (c, (  p, 1 −p)) are afﬁne—that is, their graphs are straight lines, as pictured
in Figure B.2. Furthermore, player l’s expected payoff from choosing the
mixed strategy (q, 1 −q, 0)—the strategy that puts probability q on a, 1 −q
on b, and zero probability on c—also is afﬁne as a function of p. That is, the
graph of qu1
 (a, ( p, 1 −p)) + (1 −q)u1
 (b, ( p, 1 −p)) as a function of p is
a straight line. As Figure B.2 indicates, one can ﬁnd a number p9 between
0 and 1 such that u1
 (a, (p9, 1 −p9)) = u1
 (b, (p9, 1 −p9)). We know that at
p9 the expected payoffs from choosing a and b are equal and strictly greater
than the expected payoff from choosing c. Graphically, the a and b lines cross
(at p9) above line c. We also know that the expected payoff line associated

--- Sayfa 440 ---
425
Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance Construction
with mixed strategy (q, 1 −q, 0) crosses the a and b lines at p9 as well. Such
a line is included in Figure B.2 and is labeled q. The point at which the lines
cross is designated as point A.
We need to ﬁnd a number q9 ∈[0, 1] such that the expected payoff of strat-
egy (q9, 1−q9, 0) is strictly greater than the payoff of strategy c, for all p. It
is not difﬁcult to see that such a number exists. By varying q, one changes the
slope of the q line, shifting it from the a line (where q = 1) to the b line (where
q = 0). But, regardless of the value of q, the line giving the expected payoff
of the mixed strategy passes through point A. We can just pick the value q9
that makes this line parallel to line c. Obviously, the q9 line is above the c line,
which means that the expected utility from the mixed strategy (q9, 1−q9, 0)
is strictly greater than the expected utility from strategy c, and this is true
for all values of p. In particular, it is true for p = 0 and p = 1. That is, the
mixed strategy (q9, 1−q9, 0) yields a strictly greater payoff than does strat-
egy c against both of player 2’s strategies. Thus, mixed strategy (q9, 1−q9, 0)
strictly dominates strategy c, which establishes what we needed to prove.
RATIONALIZABILITY AND ITERATED DOMINANCE CONSTRUCTION
Next let us examine the iterative dominance procedure in more detail.
Remember that in each new round of deleting dominated strategies for some
player, one does not consider the other players’ strategies that were deleted
in preceding rounds. That is, when a strategy has been “thrown out,” it does
not have to be considered to determine whether strategies of other players
are dominated. Let us deﬁne Bi and UDi in relation to subsets of the strategy
space as follows.
1
2
a
b
c
6, 3
0, 1
0, 1
5, 0
1, 2
3, 1
m
(p)
(q)
w
3
6
b
a
c
p9
A
q
1
p
u1
FIGURE B.2
Dominance and best response.

--- Sayfa 441 ---
426
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
Remember that n is the number of players in the game. A set of strat-
egy proﬁles X ⊂S is called a product set if X = X1 × X2 × gXn , for some
X1 ⊂S1, X2 ⊂S2, c, Xn ⊂Sn. For any product set X ⊂S, we say that player
i’s strategy si is dominated in X if si ∈Xi and there is a mixed strategy si ∈Xi
such that ui
 (si
 , s−i
 ) > ui
  (si
 , s−i
 ) for each s−i ∈X−i. This is the version of domi-
nance in which one focuses on the “reduced” game with strategy proﬁles in X.
(This deﬁnition is repeated in Chapter 15.) Given a product set X ⊂S, deﬁne
UDi
 (X ) K {si ∈Si | si is not dominated in  Si × X−i }
and
Bi
 (X ) K {si ∈Si | si ∈BRi
 (u−i
 ) for some u−i ∈u X−i }.
These deﬁnitions are the same as the ones in Chapter 6 except restricted to the
set of strategies in X−i for player i’s opponents. Thus, “uX−i” means the set of
uncorrelated probability distributions over S−i that assign positive probability
only to strategies in X−i . The deﬁnitions of UDi (X) and Bi (X) have the same
properties as do UDi and Bi . For instance, in two-player games, Bi
 (X) = UDi
 (X).
I can now formally describe the procedure of iterative removal of domi-
nated strategies. Let R0 K S and deﬁne
UD(X) K UD1
 (X) × UD2
 (X) × g× UDn
 (X).
Starting with the full game, we must delete players’ strategies that are strictly
dominated. Those strategies of player i that survive are given by UDi (R0), and
so UD(R0) is the set of strategy proﬁles that survive the ﬁrst round of iterated
dominance. Let R1 K UD(R0). We then continue with a second round of delet-
ing strictly dominated strategies. In evaluating strategies in the second round,
we do not need to consider strategies that were removed in the ﬁrst. Thus, R1 is
the relevant set of strategy proﬁles, and so UD(R1) is the set of strategy proﬁles
that survive through the second round.
This process continues. In mathematical terms, it deﬁnes a sequence of sets
R0, R1, R2, c, where R0 K S and, for every positive integer k,
Rk K UD(Rk−1).
The set of strategies that survives the iterative removal of strictly dominated
strategies is equal to the limit of this sequence. This may seem complicated, and
it can be in general. However, for ﬁnite games the process is fairly simple, at
least in application (as you can see from reading Chapter 7).
A few more comments are in order. First, it is not difﬁcult to show that
UD has the following property (which is, technically, called a monotonicity

--- Sayfa 442 ---
427
Iterated Weak Dominance
 property): for any product sets X and Y that are subsets of S, if X ⊂Y then
UD(X) ⊂UD(Y). This follows from the fact that if a strategy is dominated with
respect to a particular set of strategies for the other players, then it will also be
dominated with respect to any smaller set of strategies for the others. Also, if
X is ﬁnite and not empty (that is, it contains at least one strategy proﬁle), then
UD(X) is also not empty. For ﬁnite games, these facts imply that, for all k, Rk
is not empty and Rk ⊂Rk−1. The facts also imply that the process of removing
dominated strategies stops at some point, in the sense that no more strategies are
deleted in future rounds. In mathematical terms, this means that there is a posi-
tive integer K (which depends on the game) such that, for all k > K, Rk = RK.
The set of strategies that survive iterated dominance is equal to RK. A more
elegant way of writing this is t

k=1
 Rk.
One can perform the same kind of routine by using the operator Bi in
place of UDi. In formal terms, the set of rationalizable strategies is deﬁned as
R = t

k=1
 Rk, where Bi is used instead of UDi. We know that one will arrive
at exactly the same set of strategies if the game has two players, because Bi and
UDi are identical in this case. With games of more than two players, the result-
ing set depends on whether correlated conjectures are allowed, as noted earlier
in this appendix.
Note that in the deﬁnition of UDi
 (X ) above, even though Xi may be smaller
than Si , all strategies in Si are evaluated and allowed to be included in UDi
 (X )
if they pass the dominance test. You might wonder why, in a given round of the
iterated dominance procedure, we should have to look at strategies that were
removed in previous rounds. In fact, because of the monotonicity property of
UD, this is not necessary. Thus, we can redeﬁne UDi as follows, without affect-
ing the steps of the iterated dominance procedure:
UDi
 (X ) K {si ∈Xi | si  is not dominated in X}.
Thus, as described in Chapter 7, in each round of the procedure we can look
only at the “reduced” game comprising the strategies that have survived so far.
ITERATED WEAK DOMINANCE
As with best response and dominance, one can develop an iterated-removal
procedure based on the weak dominance notion.This amounts to using WUDi in
place of UDi . However, a technical issue arises.
Recall that a strategy removed in one round of iterated dominance would
never become justiﬁed (and therefore reintroduced) in a later round. This is
because for a strategy si and product sets X−i and Y−i satisfying Y−i ⊂X −i, if
si is dominated in Si × X−i then si must also be dominated in Si × Y−i. Weak

--- Sayfa 443 ---
428
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
dominance does not have this property. So a strategy that is removed in one
round of iterated weak dominance could cease to be weakly dominated in a later
round of the procedure.
Thus, it makes a difference whether we deﬁne the weakly undominated
operator WUDi
 (X ) to be “strategies not weakly dominated in X ” or “strategies
not weakly dominated in Si × X−i. ” In fact, the sequence R1, R2, c may not
converge with the latter deﬁnition. So the only useful way of deﬁning iterated
weak dominance is to use the operator
WUDi
 (X ) K {si ∈Xi | si is not weakly dominated in X}.
This operator is not monotone, but it does generate a sequence R1, R2, c that
is nested, meaning that Rk ⊂Rk−1 for all k.
ITERATED CONDITIONAL DOMINANCE
As discussed in Chapter 15, iterated conditional dominance works just like iter-
ated dominance. Here is the construction. Recall that, given the information sets
H in an extensive-form game, and for any product set X, a strategy si is said to
be conditionally dominated if there is an information set h ∈H i such that si is
dominated in X S(h). To make reference to H and X, let us call this “condi-
tional dominance on (H i, X).” Then we deﬁne
UDi
  (X; H ) K {si ∈Xi | si is not conditionally dominated on (H  i, X)}
and
UD(X; H ) K UD1
 (X; H ) × UD2
 (X; H ) × g × UDn
 (X; H ).
The sequence R1, R2, c is deﬁned as before, with R1 K UD (S; H) and
Rk K UD (Rk−1; H ) for every integer k Ú 2. By construction, this sequence is
nested and converges.
As with the relation between dominance and best response in the normal
form, conditional dominance is closely connected to sequential best response.
Without getting into technical details, we can imagine that a player i has a
“system of beliefs,” which gives this player’s belief about the other players’
strategies conditional on each of player i’s information sets. A strategy si is a
sequential best response to this belief system if, for every information set h ∈Hi
and restricting attention to strategies in S(h), si is a best response to player i’s
belief at h. It turns out that a strategy is conditionally dominated if and only if
there is no belief system that would make it a sequential best response. Thus,

--- Sayfa 444 ---
429
Exercises
iterated conditional dominance is equivalent to the concept of extensive-form
rationalizability.4
EXERCISES
The following exercises are challenging and recommended only for readers
with ample mathematics background.
1. Prove the following assertions made at the end of this appendix: for ﬁnite
games, (a) Rk is nonempty for each k; (b) Rk ⊂Rk−1, for each positive inte-
ger k; and (c) there exists an integer K such that Rk = RK for all k > K.
2. Consider the following game. There are n students. Simultaneously and in-
dependently, they each write an integer between 1 and 100 on a slip of paper.
The average of all of the students’ numbers is then computed, and the stu-
dent coming closest to 2>3 of this average wins $20. If two or more students
tie for the closest to 2>3 of the average, then these students equally share the
$20 prize. Compute the set of rationalizable strategies in this game. It may
be helpful to construct the best-response function for a typical student; think
of this as a function of the expected average of the other students’ numbers.
Calculate the strategies that are removed in the ﬁrst round of deleting strictly
dominated strategies by calculating the strategies that are best responses
over various beliefs. That is, calculate the set Bi

 (S ). Then calculate those
that are removed in the second round by calculating Bi

 (Bi

 (S )). Try to ﬁnd a
formula for Rk as a function of k.
3. Examine the game pictured here.
4For more on conditional dominance and the connection between it and sequential best response, see “Condi-
tional Dominance, Rationalizability, and Game Forms,’’ by M. Shimoji and J. Watson, Journal of Economic
Theory 83 (1998): 161–195. For the extensive-form rationalizability concept, see D. Pearce, “Rationalizable
Strategic Behavior and the Problem of Perfection,’’ Econometrica 52 (1984): 1029–1050, and also P. Batti-
galli, “On Rationalizability in Extensive Games,’’ Journal of Economic Theory 74 (1997): 40–61.
M
N
U
D
6
0
0
0
3
2
M
N
U
D
0
0
0
6
3
2
M
N
U
D
5
−100
−100
5
3
2
A
B
C

--- Sayfa 445 ---
430
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance

In this three-player game, player 1 selects between A, B, and C and therefore
chooses which matrix will be effective. Players 2 and 3 select between U
and D and between M and N, respectively. The actions of the three players
are taken simultaneously. Only the payoff of player 1 appears in the cells of
the matrices. This game illustrates the relation between correlated conjec-
tures and the best-response/dominance equivalence. Show ﬁrst that player
l’s strategy C is not strictly dominated. Then show that C is never a best re-
sponse if player 1’s conjecture about the strategies of the other players is not
allowed to exhibit correlation. Finally, show that C can be a best response for
player 1 if his belief exhibits correlation. [Look at a belief in which player 1
thinks the other players will coordinate on (U, M) or (D, N).]
4. Consider an alternative deﬁnition of WUDi
 (X) in which the strategies for
player i are not limited to the set Xi :
WUDi
 (X ) K {si ∈Si | si is not weakly dominated in Si × X−i}.

Find a normal-form game for which the iterative removal of weakly domi-
nated strategies does not converge but rather leads to a cycle of sets.

--- Sayfa 446 ---
EXISTENCE OF NASH EQUILIBRIUM
I
n Chapter 11, I stated a useful result, due to John Nash, on the existence of
Nash equilibrium. Here it is again:
Result: Every ﬁnite game (one that has a ﬁnite number of players and
a ﬁnite strategy space) has at least one Nash equilibrium (in pure or
mixed strategies).
The proof of this result is based on intuition that you can get from going over a
simple example. Consider the game pictured on the left side of Figure C.1. You
will quickly observe that this game has no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium but
that the mixed-strategy proﬁle ((1>2, 1>2), (1>3, 2>3)), where player 1 selects
U with probability 1>2 and player 2 selects L with probability 1>2, is a mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium. If this does not make sense to you, then I suggest
that you review the deﬁnitions in Chapters 9 and 11. If you haven’t read through
Chapter 11 yet, I say “quit skipping ahead!”
Examine how equilibrium arises in the example of Figure C.1. Let us do
this from the perspective of the players’ best responses in the space of mixed
strategies. Let p denote the probability that player 1 selects U, meaning that his
mixed strategy is ( p, 1 −p). Likewise, let q denote the probability that player
2 selects L, meaning that her mixed strategy is (q, 1 −q). Note that player 1’s
belief about player 2’s strategy is then given by q and player 2’s belief about
player l’s strategy is given by p.
1
2
L
U
D
3, 2
1, 3
4, 3
5, 2
R
MBR2
MBR1
p
q
1
0
1
FIGURE C.1
A normal-form game and
mixed best responses.
C
431

--- Sayfa 447 ---
432
Appendix C: Existence of Nash Equilibrium
Against player 2’s mixed strategy, player 1 obtains an expected payoff of
3q + 4 (1 −q) if he selects U, whereas he expects q + 5(1 −q) if he were to
select D. The payoff of U is strictly higher if
3q + 4 (1 −q) > q + 5(1 −q),
which simpliﬁes to q > 1>3. Thus, U is player l’s only best response if q > 1>3,
D is the only best response if q < 1>3, and both U and D are best responses
if q = 1>3. Observe how this statement translates this into mixed strategies.
If q > 1>3, then the only mixed strategy that player 1 can rationally select is
p = 1 (the mixed strategy that puts all probability on U). If q < 1>3, then the
only mixed strategy that player 1 can rationally select is p = 0 (the mixed strat-
egy that puts all probability on D). Finally, if q = 1>3, then all mixed strategies
p ∈[0, 1] are best responses for player 1. This last point is critical. At q = 1>3,
player 1 is indifferent between U and D, so he is indifferent between any mixture
of the two.
We can represent player l’s mixed-strategy best responses in terms of a
function MBR1 that maps the belief q into subsets of the interval [0, 1]. That is,
MBR1 (q) is the set of mixed strategies that are best responses for player 1 to the
belief q. In the example, we have MBR1
 (q) = {1} for q > 1>3, MBR1
 (q) = {0}
for q < 1>3, and MBR1
 (q) = [0, 1] for q = 1>3. A graphical representation of
MBR1 appears as the dashed line in the right part of Figure C.1.1
Repeating the analysis for player 2, you can see that the expected payoff of
L is strictly higher than the payoff of R if
2p + 3(1 −p) > 3p + 2(1 −p),
which simpliﬁes to p < 1>2. Thus, writing MBR2 as player 2’s set of mixed-
strategy best responses, we have MBR2
 ( p) = {1} if p < 1>2, MBR2
 ( p) = {0}
if p > 1>2, and MBR2
 ( p) = [0,1] if p = 1>2. This is represented by the solid
line in the right part of Figure C.1.
The mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium occurs where the dashed and solid
lines cross—that is, where the players are best responding to each other. The key
intuition about the existence of a Nash equilibrium is that MBR1 and MBR2 have
a continuity property. Speciﬁcally, MBR1 is a mapping that applies from q = 0
to q = 1, meaning from the bottom to the top of the box in Figure C.1. Like-
wise, MBR2 is a mapping that applies from p = 0 to p = 1, meaning from the
left to the right of the box in the ﬁgure. These mappings are continuous in the
1In technical terms, we would say that the dashed line is the graph of MBR1 when viewed as a “correspon-
dence,” which is a special function whose domain is the set of subsets of a given set.

--- Sayfa 448 ---
433
Appendix C: Existence of Nash Equilibrium
sense that you can draw each of them without lifting your writing instrument off
the page as you scan across the box. In summary, if you draw two lines through
a box, one that goes from the bottom to the top and the other from the left to the
right, and these lines are each continuous, then they must cross at some point.
The crossing point is a Nash equilibrium by deﬁnition.
The general existence proof works in the same way. One starts with the best-
response functions for each player (in mixed-strategy space) and collects them
into a function MBR that gives the proﬁle of best responses for a given proﬁle
of mixed strategies. One can show that MBR is well deﬁned for ﬁnite games and
has a continuity property along the lines of what we saw in the example.2 One
then uses Kakutani’s ﬁxed-point theorem, which establishes the existence of a
mixed-strategy proﬁle s* such that s* ∈MBR(s*).3 The proﬁle s* is a mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium because for each player i, si ∈MBRi
 (s−i
 ). That is,
each player’s strategy is a best response to the strategies of the others.
2The continuity property is called upper hemi-continuity.
3S. Kakutani, “A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem,” Duke Mathematical Journal 8 (1941):
457–459.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
434
T
his appendix presents a more general version of the standard bargaining solu-
tion shown in Chapter 18. It was developed by John Nash and is thus called the
“Nash bargaining solution.” 1 Nash’s theory initiated what we now call “axiomatic
bargaining theory,” which seeks to describe bargaining problems and their out-
comes without making reference to any particular noncooperative game. Accord-
ing to this axiomatic theory, a bargaining problem is given by a bargaining set and a
disagreement point (as discussed in Chapter 18). The theory posits general axioms
that represent intuition about the agreements one might expect players to reach.
To review Nash’s theory, let us start by recalling that a bargaining set V is
the set of feasible payoff vectors for the players. That is, every point in V is a
possible agreement point. I’ll focus on two-player settings, so V is a subset of R2.
Recall as well that the disagreement point, denoted d, is the payoff vector that
would result if the players fail to reach an agreement. We assume that d ∈V.
A bargaining problem is given by the pair (V, d ).
In Chapter 18, I made the assumption of transferable utility—that (i) the
players can freely transfer money and (ii) money enters payoffs in an additive
way. The key generalization here is that we can dispense with the assumption of
transferable utility, which implies that the efﬁcient frontier of the bargaining set
may not be linear. Thus, a generic bargaining problem looks like this:
NASH BARGAINING SOLUTION
1J. Nash, “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica 18 (1950): 155–162.
The set V encompasses the shaded region and its boundary.
D
u1
a
b
V
d
u2

--- Sayfa 450 ---
435
Appendix D: Nash Bargaining Solution
We must make two assumptions about V. First, V is closed and bounded,
meaning that there is an upper bound on the players’ payoffs and the set contains
its boundary points (in particular, on the efﬁcient boundary). Otherwise, it would
be impossible to ﬁnd efﬁcient points. Second, V is convex, which means that for
every two points a, b ∈V, the line between a and b is also fully contained in V.
This is shown in the diagram on the previous page.
A bargaining solution is a function that maps the space of bargaining prob-
lems to feasible payoff vectors. To be precise, for a given bargaining solution
f and a bargaining problem (V, d ), the predicted outcome of the problem in
payoff terms is f (V, d ), which is an element of V. As in Chapter 18, bargaining
solutions may make reference to ﬁxed bargaining weights p = (p1, p2
 ), where
p1, p2
 Ú 0 and p1 + p2 = 1. The Nash bargaining solution with weights p is
denoted Np and is deﬁned as the point v* ∈V that solves
 max1v1 −d1
 2p1
 1v2 −d2
 2p2,
subject to v ∈V, v1 Ú d1 , and v2 Ú d2 .
The standard bargaining solution developed in Chapter 18 is a restricted
version of the Nash bargaining solution. The two are equivalent where the
former is deﬁned—on bargaining problems with transferable utility. To see this,
consider the bargaining problem in which the players must divide one unit, they
can throw away resources, and the disagreement point is zero for both players.
Then the bargaining problem is given by (W, (0, 0)), where
W = 5v ∈R2 
 v1 + v2 … 16 ,
as pictured below.
For this bargaining problem, note that the standard bargaining solution
yields the payoff vector p. The Nash bargaining solution solves max vp1
1
 vp2
2
subject to v1 + v2 = 1. Substituting for v2 using the constraint, the problem
u2
u1
W
1
1

--- Sayfa 451 ---
436
Appendix D: Nash Bargaining Solution
becomes max vp1
1
 (1 −v1
 )p2. Taking the derivative and setting it equal to zero,
we have the ﬁrst-order condition
p1
 vp1−1
1
# (1 −v1 )p2 −vp1
1 # p2
 (1 −v1 )p2−1 = 0.
Multiplying by v1−p1
1
 (1 −v1
 )1−p2 and simplifying yields
p1 −p1 v1 −p2
 v1 = 0.
Recognizing that p1
 v1 + p2
 v1 = v1, we get v1 = p1 and v2 = p2.
We conclude that the Nash bargaining solution is a general version of the
standard bargaining solution. Nash showed that his bargaining solution is beau-
tifully related to some simple and intuitive axioms. These axioms are properties
that a given bargaining solution f may or may not have. Here is a version of
Nash’s ﬁrst axiom:
Invariance (INV): Consider any bargaining problem (V, d ) and, for
any positive numbers a1 and a2 , deﬁne
V9 K { 1a1
 (v1 −d1
 ), a2
 (v2 −d 2)2 v ∈V}.
Let v* =
 f (V, d ) be the solution of the given bargaining problem and
let v9 =
 f (V9, (0, 0)). Then v91 = a1 (v*1 −d1 ) and v92 = a2 (v*2 −d2 ).
The idea here is that one can perform an “afﬁne transformation” of the bargain-
ing problem—redeﬁning the set of feasible payoff vectors by subtracting the
constant d and then scaling by the factors a1 and a2—and the result is essentially
the same bargaining problem. The players’ relative payoffs and rankings have
not changed. Therefore, we expect that the solution to the bargaining problem
will be essentially the same—that is, transformed in exactly the same way.
Nash’s second axiom is that the players ought to reach an efﬁcient resolu-
tion to their bargaining problem:
Efﬁciency (EFF): For any bargaining problem (V, d ), the solution
f (V, d ) is on the efﬁcient boundary of V above the disagreement point.
It seems reasonable to expect that the players would not settle for an inefﬁcient
outcome when they can ﬁnd an outcome that makes them both better off.
Nash’s third axiom compares bargaining problems that have a special rela-
tionship. The version here supposes that the disagreement point is d = (0, 0).
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA): Consider any two
bargaining problems (V9, (0, 0)) and (W, (0, 0)) with the properties that

--- Sayfa 452 ---
437
Appendix D: Nash Bargaining Solution
f (W, (0, 0)) ∈V9 and for all v ∈V9 with v1 Ú 0 and v2 Ú 0, it is the
case that v ∈W. Then f (V9, (0, 0)) = f (W, (0, 0)).
In words, this axiom says that if players would settle on outcome v* in bargain-
ing problem (W, (0, 0)) and if, for a different bargaining problem (V9, (0, 0)) it
is the case that there are less alternatives available but v* is still feasible, then
the players would agree to v* as well in the second problem.
One can quibble with these axioms. Perhaps each is unreasonable to some
degree. One can also come up with alternative axioms to describe or prescribe
behavior. There is a big literature on this. The beauty of Nash’s approach is
the tight connection between the axioms and his suggested bargaining solution,
which is formalized in the following theorem.
Result: A bargaining solution f satisﬁes axioms INV, EFF, and IIA if
and only if it is the Nash bargaining solution for some ﬁxed bargaining
weights p.
The proof has two components. First, we need to show that N p satisﬁes the three
axioms for every p. This is easy, so I will leave it for you to do on your own if you
are interested. Second, we need to show that if a solution f satisﬁes the three axioms,
then there are bargaining weights p such that f = N p . Here is the argument.
Consider any bargaining solution f that satisﬁes the three axioms. Let us
start by deﬁning bargaining weights p in reference to the bargaining problem
(W, (0, 0)), where
W = {v ∈R2
 v1 + v2 … 1}.
Recall that in this bargaining problem, the players divide one unit and have trans-
ferable utility. From the EFF axiom, we know the solution f  (W, (0, 0)) is efﬁ-
cient and therefore the players’ payoffs sum to one, so we deﬁne p K f  (W, (0, 0))
We also have Np
 (W, (0, 0)) = p as shown earlier in this chapter. These facts are
depicted thus:
u2
u1
W
1
1

--- Sayfa 453 ---
438
Appendix D: Nash Bargaining Solution
Next consider any bargaining problem (V, d). Suppose that f  (V, d ) 
Np
 (V, d ), and I will demonstrate that this leads to a contradiction, proving that in
fact f  (V, d ) must equal Np
 (V, d ). Under the supposition that f  (V, d ) Np
 (V, d ),
the picture looks like this:
Note that both f  (V, d ) and Np
 (V, d ) are on the efﬁcient boundary of V because
both f and Np satisfy the EFF axiom. Let v* = Np
 (V ).
Next consider the related bargaining problem (V9, (0, 0)), where
V9 K {1a1
 (v1 −d1
 ), a2
 (v2 −d2
 )2 | v ∈V},
for the numbers a1 and a2 that solve a1
 (v*1 −d1
 ) = p1 and a2
 (v*2 −d2
 ) = p2 .
Note that bargaining problem (V9, (0, 0)) results from an afﬁne transformation
of (V, d ) and that the transformation maps the solution v* = Np
 (V, d ) to the
point p. By the INV axiom, we know that Np
 (V9, (0, 0)) = p = Np
 (W, (0, 0)).
We also know that f (V9, (0, 0)) p. Here is the picture of (V9, (0, 0)) super-
imposed on (W, (0, 0)):
u1
V
d
u2

u2
u1
W
V
1
1

--- Sayfa 454 ---
439
Appendix D: Nash Bargaining Solution
Sets V9 and W have a key property: For all v ∈V9 with v1 Ú 0 and v2 Ú 0,
it is the case that v ∈W. It probably will not be obvious to you why this is so.
It follows from the fact that p = Np
 (W, (0, 0)). That is, p solves the problem
max vp1
1
 vp2
2 subject to v1 + v2 = 1. If the points above the origin in V9 are not
all in W, then there would be a point v∈V9 with v1 + v2 > 1, meaning that
this point lies beyond the efﬁcient boundary of W. By convexity, points on the
line from p to v must also be in the set V9. One can then conﬁrm that p could
not be the solution to max vp1
1
 vp2
2 subject to v ∈V9 and v1, v2 Ú 0. This comes
down to examining the slope of the boundary of V9 and recalling the differential
condition for maximization. So, the points in V9 that are above the origin are
also in W.
Here comes the contradiction that ﬁnishes the proof. Sets V9 and W satisfy
the presumptions of the IIA axiom. Because f satisﬁes IIA, and because
f  (W, (0, 0)) = p, this axiom implies that f  (V9, (0, 0)) = p as well, which
contradicts what we found earlier.
Whether or not you have followed this proof, you can see that the Nash
bargaining solution—and hence the standard bargaining solution—has an intui-
tive characterization in terms of some simple axioms.

--- Sayfa 455 ---
T
his appendix contains solutions to Exercises 1, 3, 5, and 9 from each chapter
(except where there are no such exercises) for use as a study aid. The best
way to learn the material is ﬁrst to work on the exercises yourself, and then
check the solutions to conﬁrm or clarify your understanding.
CHAPTER 2: THE EXTENSIVE FORM
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
E
3. Note that payoffs are not speciﬁed here; you can ﬁll in your own.
R
A
B
G
100, 0, 0
100, 0, 0
0, 10, 100
0, 10, 100
L
J
J
A
B
a
b
r
g
M
M
0, 0, 100
100, 10, 0
A
B
0, 0, 100
100, 10, 0
a
b
1.
H
H
L
L
1
A
P
N
P
N
H
L
2
2
P
N
440

--- Sayfa 456 ---
441
Chapter 3: Strategies and the Normal Form
5. The payoffs below are in the order A, B, and C.
CHAPTER 3: STRATEGIES AND THE NORMAL FORM
1. Liz chooses between door A and door B at the initial node, so SL = {A, B}.
Monty has two information sets; each is a single decision node, at which
Monty chooses “red” or “green” after observing Liz’s choice of doors. A
strategy for Monty speciﬁes which color he chooses at each of these in-
formation sets. Thus, we can write SM = {Rr, Rg, Gr, Gg}. The ﬁrst/capi-
tal letter of each strategy speciﬁes the color Monty announces after Liz’s
choice of door A, and the second/lowercase letter speciﬁes the color Monty
announces conditional on Liz choosing door B. Similarly, because Janet
chooses a door after hearing Monty’s statement, her strategy speciﬁes a
door contingent on the color Monty announces: SJ = {Aa, Ab, Ba, Bb}.
3. (a)
(b)
H
H
F
F
1, 0, −1
−1, 0, 1
B
A
C
Y
N
H
F
B
−1, 0, 1
1, 0, −1
Y
N
0, 0, 0
0, 0, 0
CE
CF
DE
DF
A
B
0, 0
0, 0
2, 2
3, 4
1, 1
3, 4
1, 1
2, 2
2
1
2
1
I
O
IU
ID
OU
OD
4, 0
−1, −1
3, 2
−1, −1
1, 1
1, 1
1, 1
1, 1

--- Sayfa 457 ---
442
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
2
1
A
B
UXW
UXZ
UYW
UYZ
3, 3
5, 1
3, 3
5, 1
3, 3
3, 6
3, 3
3, 6
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
DXW
DXZ
DYW
DYZ
4, 2
9, 0
4, 2
9, 0
AC
AD
BC
BD
UE
UF
3, 3
3, 3
3, 3
3, 3
5, 4
5, 4
5, 4
5, 4
DE
DF
6, 2
2, 2
2, 6
2, 2
2, 2
2, 2
6, 2
2, 6
2
1
U
D
A
B
2, 1
1, 2
6, 8
4, 3
C
2, 1
8, 7
2
1
2
1
A
B
UXP
UXQ
UYP
UYQ
DXP
DXQ
DYP
DYQ
3, 8
1, 2
3, 8
1, 2
8, 1
2, 1
8, 1
2, 1
5, 5
0, 0
5, 5
0, 0
6, 6
6, 6
6, 6
6, 6

(c)

(d)

(e)
(f)
5. The normal form speciﬁes players, strategy spaces, and payoff functions.
Here there are two players, so n = 2, and S1 = S2 = [0, ). The payoff to
player i is given by ui

 ( qi, qj ) = (2 −qi −qj ) qi, for i = 1, 2 and j denoting
the other player.

--- Sayfa 458 ---
443
Chapter 6: Dominance and Best Response
CHAPTER 4: BELIEFS, MIXED STRATEGIES, AND EXPECTED PAYOFFS
1. (a) u1
 (U, C) = 0.
(b) u2
 (M, R) = 4.
(c) u2
 (D, C) = 6.
(d) For s1 = (1>3, 2>3, 0), u1
 (s1, C) = (0)1>3 + (10)2>3 + 0 = 20>3.
(e) u1
 (s1, R) = 3(1>4) + 6(1>2) + 6(1>4) = 21>4.
(f) u1
 (s1, L) = 2.
(g) u2
 (s1, R) = 3(1>3) + 4(2>3) + 6(0) = 11>3.
(h) u2
 (s1, s2) = 0(1>2)(1>4) + 10(1>2)(1>4) + 3(1>2)(1>2) +

10(1>2)(1>4) + 2(1>2)(1>4) + 4(1>2)(1>2) + 3(0)(1>4) +

 6(0)(1>4) + 6(0)(1>2) = 9>2.
3. (a) u1
 (s1, I) = 2(1>4) + 2(1>4) + 4(1>4) + 3(1>4) = 11>4.
(b) u2
 (s1, O) = 21>8.
(c) u1
 (s1, s2) = 2(1>4) + 2(1>4) + 4(1>4)(1>3) + (1>4)(2>3) +

(3>4)(1>3) + 14(2>3) = 23>12.
(d) u1
 (s1, s2) = 7>3.
5. The expected proﬁt of player 1 is (100 −2(14) −2(6 + 11 + 13)>3)14 −
20(14) = 448.
CHAPTER 6: DOMINANCE AND BEST RESPONSE
1. (a) B dominates A and L dominates R.
(b) L dominates R.
(c)  For player 1, mixed strategy (2>3, 0, 1>3), which we may also describe
as “2>3 U, 1>3 D,” dominates M. X dominates Z. Note that (2>3, 0, 1>3)
is not the only mixed strategy that dominates M. Consider a mixed strat-
egy s1 = (p, 0, 1 −p), in which U is played with probability p and D
is played with probability 1 −p. In order for s1 to dominate M, the
following four inequalities must be satisﬁed.
3p + 1(1 −p) > 2
4p + 2(1 −p) > 3
5p + 3(1 −p) > 4
0p + 4(1 −p) > 1.

--- Sayfa 459 ---
444
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises

 Simplifying each of the ﬁrst three inequalities yields p > 1>2.
Simplifying the fourth yields 3>4 > p. So for any p such that
1>2 < p < 3>4, (p, 0, 1 −p) dominates M.
(d) None.
3. Player 1 solves maxq1
 (100 −2q1 −2q2)q1 −20q1. The ﬁrst-order condition
is 100 −4q1 −2q2 −20 = 0. Solving for q1 yields BR1
 (q2) = 20 −q2>2,
and so BR1
 (0) = 20. Because q2 Ú 0, it cannot be that 25 is ever a best
response. Given the speciﬁed beliefs, player 1’s best response is 15.
5.
R
P
S
R
P
S
0, 0
−1, 1
1, −1
0, 0
1, −1
−1, 1
−1, 1
1, −1
0, 0
2
1
(a) BR1
 (u2) = {P}.
(b) BR1
 (u2) = {R, S}.
(c) BR1
 (u2) = {P}.
(d) BR1
 (u2) = {R, P, S}.
9. (a)  The strategy ( gi, hi
 ) = (0, 0) yields a payoff of ui = 0 regardless of what
the other player does. It is dominated by the strategy ( gi, hi ) = (1, 0),
which always yields a payoff of ui = 6 # 1 −12 = 5.
(b)  Any strategy ( gi, hi ) with hi > 5 is dominated by the strategy ( gi, 5):
The difference in payoffs between them, for any strategy of player −i, is

ui
 ( gi, 5, g−i, h−i ) −ui
 ( gi, hi, g−i, h−i )
= (max{0, 10 −h−i} −max{0, 2hi −h−i}) a
j=S, T
 (5 −gj) −50 + 2h2
i,

which is strictly less than zero since 2hi > 10 and 2h2
i > 50.
(c) If ( g1, h1 ) = ( g2, h2 ) = (1, 4), then
u1 = u2 = (2 # 4 −4)(10 −1 −1) + 6 # 1 −12 −2 # 42 = 5,

 where as the city-states could instead play ( g=
1 , h=
1 ) = ( g=
2 , h=
2 ) = (3, 2)
to attain

--- Sayfa 460 ---
445
Chapter 7: Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance
u1 = u2 = (2 # 2 −2)(10 −3 −3) + 6 # 3 −32 −2 # 22 = 9.

 Hence  ( g=
1, h=
1 ) = ( g=
2, h=
2 ) = (3, 2) is more efﬁcient than ( g1, h1 ) =
( g2, h2 ) = (1, 4).
CHAPTER 7: RATIONALIZABILITY AND ITERATED DOMINANCE
1. (a) R = {U, M, D} × {X, Y}.
(b)  U dominates D. When D is ruled out, Z dominates Y. Thus,
R = {U, M} × {X, Z}.
(c) R = {(U, X)}.
(d) R = {U, M} × {X, Y}.
(e) R = {A, B} × {X, Y}.
(f) R = {A, B} × {X, Y}.
(g) R = {(D, Y)}.
3. R = {(x, c)}. The order does not matter because if a strategy is dominated
(not a best response) relative to some set of strategies of the other player,
then this strategy will also be dominated relative to a smaller set of strate-
gies for the other player.
5. Yes. If s1 is rationalizable, then s2 is a best response to a strategy of player 1
that may rationally be played. Thus, player 2 can rationalize strategy s2.
9. (a)
¼
BR1
BR2
1
1
q1
q2

(b) B1 = [0, 1], B2 = 31
4, 14, and R = {(1, 1)}.

--- Sayfa 461 ---
446
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
CHAPTER 8: LOCATION, PARTNERSHIP, AND SOCIAL UNREST
1. Label the regions as shown below.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 It is straightforward to conﬁrm that strategy 5 dominates strategies 1, 3, 7,
and 9 for both players. One can ﬁnd beliefs that make the other strategies
best responses. Thus, after the ﬁrst round of iterated dominance we have
R1
i = {2, 4, 5, 6, 8} for i = 1, 2. Restricting attention to these strategies of
the opponent, we see that strategy 5 then dominates 2, 4, 6, and 8, and so
R2
i = Ri = {5} for i = 1, 2.
3. (a)  Yes, preferences are as modeled in the basic location game. How-
ever, if each player’s objective is to maximize his or her probabil-
ity of winning, the best responses are a bit different. For example,
BR1
 (1) = {2, 3, 4, c, 8} because all of these strategies give player 1
certain victory. In the basic location game, BR1
 (1) = {2}.
(b)  R = {5, 6} × {5, 6}. Unlike in the basic location model, there is not
a single region that is “in the middle.” Here, each of the rationalizable
strategy proﬁles yields 250 to each candidate. No rationalizable proﬁle
leads one of the candidates to win with probability 1.
(c)  When x > 75, R = {(6, 6)}. For intuition, note that player i ’s
best response to 5 is 6, and his or her best response to 6 is 6. When
x < 75, R = {(5, 5)}.
5. (a) u1
 ( p1, p2 ) = (10 −p1 + p2 ) p1. u2
 ( p1, p2 ) = (10 −p2 + p1 ) p2.
(b)  We have ui
 ( p1, p2 ) = 10pi −p2
i + pj pi. We solve for pi that maxi-
mizes player i’s payoff given pj, the expected value of pj according to
player i’s belief. The ﬁrst-order condition yields BRi
 ( pj ) = 5 + pj>2.
(c)  There is no upper bound on the price a player can select. Thus, we do
not obtain a unique rationalizable strategy proﬁle. The best-response
functions are represented in the following diagram.

--- Sayfa 462 ---
447
Chapter 9: Nash Equilibrium

 We have R1
i = [5, ) for i = 1, 2. Noting that BRi
 (5) = 15>2, we
have R2
i = [15>2, ). Repeating the analysis yields Ri = [10, ) for
i = 1, 2.
9. (a) pi
 ( pi, pj ) = max{0, (24 −2pi + pj ) pi}.
(b)  Note that 0pi>0pi = 24 −4pi + pj as long as proﬁts are strictly posi-
tive. Because pj Ú 0, both proﬁts and this partial derivative are strictly
positive whenever pi < 6. Thus, increasing pi in this range yields an
increase in proﬁts. Hence a price of 6 dominates all lower prices. Simi-
larly, because pj … 20, 0pi>0pi = 24 −4pi + pj is always negative
for pi > 11. Note that pi

 (11, pj ) = 22 + 11pj so for any pj ∈[0, 20],
choosing pi = 11 results in a nonnegative proﬁt. So pi = 11 dominates
all pi > 11. To see that Bi = [6, 11], consider player i’s ﬁrst-order condi-
tion for maximizing (24 −2pi + pj ) pi , which is 24 −4pi + pj = 0.
We thus have BR*i
 ( pj ) = 6 + pj>4, which runs from 6 to 11 as pj goes
from 0 to 20. This implies that Bi = [6, 11] for i = 1, 2.
(c)  The analysis proceeds as in Exercise 5, but here there is an upper bound
on strategies and so high prices are removed in the iterative procedure.
The maximum and minimum values of Rk
i converge to 8 as k increases,
so the only rationalizable strategy proﬁle is (8, 8).
CHAPTER 9: NASH EQUILIBRIUM
1. (a) The Nash equilibria are (w, b) and (y, c).
(b) (y, c) is efﬁcient.
(c) X is not weakly congruous because strategy “a” is never a best response.
BR2
BR1
x
5
5 7.5
10
y

--- Sayfa 463 ---
448
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
3. (a) None.
(b) (U, Z) and (M, X).
(c) (U, X).
(d) (A, X) and (B, Y).
(e) (A, X) and (B, Y).
(f) (A, X) and (B, Y).
(g) (D, Y).
5. Player 1 chooses s1 to maximize 3s1 −2s1s2 −2s2
1. Differentiating with re-
spect to s1 yields the ﬁrst-order condition 3 −2s2 −4s1 = 0. Rearranging,
we obtain player 1’s best-response function: BR1
 (s2) = 3>4 −s2>2. Player
2 chooses s2 to maximize s2 + 2s1s2 −2s2
2. Her best-response function is
BR2
 (s1) = 1>4 + s1>2. The Nash equilibrium is the strategy proﬁle that
solves the system of equations s1 = 3>4 −s2>2 and s2 = 1>4 + s1>2. This
is s* = (1>2, 1>2).
9. (a)  The Nash equilibria are (2, 1), (5>2, 2), and (3, 3).
(b) R = [2, 3] × [1, 3].
CHAPTER 10: OLIGOPOLY, TARIFFS, CRIME, AND VOTING
1. (a)  Si = [0, ). ui
 ( qi, Q−i ) = [a −bQ−i −bqi ]qi −cqi, where Q−i K
g ji qj.
(b)  Firm i solves maxqi[a −bQ−i −bqi]qi −cqi. This yields the ﬁrst-
order condition a −bQ−i −c = 2bqi. Player i’s best-response func-
tion is given by qi
 (Q−i) = (a −c)>2b −Q−i>2. This is represented in
the graph below.
q1
Q−1
BR1
(c)  One way to ﬁnd the equilibrium is to sum the best-response equa-
tions qi = (a −c)>2b −Q−i>2 over i = 1, 2, c, n. This yields an
expression for Q*, the equilibrium total output. Using the  substitution
Q*−i = Q* −q*i in ﬁrm i’s best-response equation identiﬁes q*i .

--- Sayfa 464 ---
449
Chapter 10: Oligopoly, Tariffs, Crime, and Voting
Another method is to realize that the equilibrium will be symmet-
ric (the ﬁrms choose the same quantity q*). Then we know that
Q*−i = (n −1)q*, which we can use in ﬁrm i’s best-response equa-
tion to get q* = [a −c −b(n −1)q*]>2b. Solving for q* yields
q* = [a −c]>b(n + 1) and Q* = n[a −c]>b(n + 1). After a bit of alge-
bra, we also ﬁnd that p* = [a + cn]>(n + 1), and the equilibrium proﬁt
for each ﬁrm is u* = (a −c)2>b(n + 1)2. As n becomes large, the equi-
librium price converges to the marginal cost c and proﬁts converge to zero.
(d)  In the duopoly case, player i ’s best-response function is
qi
 (qj) = (a −c)>2b −qj>2. The Nash equilibrium is found by
solving the system of equations q1 = (a −c)>2b −q2>2 and
q2 = (a −c)>2b −q1>2, or simply by setting n = 2 in the expressions
of part (c). We ﬁnd that both ﬁrms select q* = (a −c)>3b. By examin-
ing the best-response functions, we can identify the sequence Rk
i , and
inspection reveals that Ri = {(a −c)>3b} for i = 1, 2.
3. (a) BRi
 (xj) = 30 + xj>2.
(b) The Nash equilibrium is (60, 60).
(c) ui
 (60, 60) = 200. ui
 (0, 0) = 2000.
(d) The best-response functions are represented below.
30
80 100
100
80
x2
x1
BR1
BR2
30

 It is easy to see that player i will never set xi < 30 or xi > 80.
Thus, R1
i = [30, 80], R2
i = [45, 70], and so on. Thus, Ri = {60} for
i = 1, 2.
5. In equilibrium, b1 = b2 = 15,000. Clearly, neither player wishes to bid
higher than 15,000 as she will receive a negative payoff. Further, neither
does better by unilaterally deviating to a bid that is less than 15,000 because
this leads to a payoff of zero.

--- Sayfa 465 ---
450
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
9. For L, voting for McClintock is dominated by voting for Bustamante.
Knowing that L will not vote for McClintock, M strictly prefers voting for
Schwarzenegger to voting for McClintock. So neither L nor M will vote for
McClintock. We then see that L fares strictly better by voting for Busta-
mante than voting for Schwarzenegger (assuming M does not vote for
McClintock). Knowing this, M will vote for Schwarzenegger. Thus, C will
vote for Schwarzenegger as well.
CHAPTER 11: MIXED-STRATEGY NASH EQUILIBRIUM
1. (a)  R = {X, Y} × {Q, Z}.
(b)  The mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium is ((1>2, 1>2), (3>4, 0, 1>4)). To
calculate this, we put zero probability on W because it is not rationaliz-
able. Player 1 mixes over X and Y so as to make player 2 indifferent
between Q and Z. This requires
7p + 3(1 −p) = 4p + 6(1 −p).

 Collecting terms yields p = 1>2. Similarly, player 2 mixes over Q and
Z so as to make player 1 indifferent between X and Y, which requires
1q + 3(1 −q) = 2q + 0(1 −q).

Collecting terms yields q = 3>4.
3. (a) (N, L)  and (L, N).
(b)  Firm Y chooses q so that ﬁrm X is indifferent between L and N. This
yields −5q + (x −15)(1 −q) = 10 −10q. Rearranging yields
q = 25 −x
20 −x.

 Firm X chooses p so that ﬁrm Y is indifferent between L and N. This
yields −5p + 15 −15p = 10 −10p. Rearranging yields p = 1>2.
(c) The probability of (L, N) is
p (1 −q ) = 1
2 c 20 −x −25 + x
20 −x
d = 1
2 c
5
x −20 d .

--- Sayfa 466 ---
451
Chapter 12: Strictly Competitive Games and Security Strategies
(d)  As x increases, the probability of (L, N) decreases. However, as x
becomes larger, (L, N) is a “better” outcome.
5. For any x < 1, ((0, 1>2, 1>2), (0, 1>2, 1>2)) is a mixed-strategy Nash equi-
librium. For 0 < x < 1, (U, L) is an equilibrium and ((1 −x, x>2, x>2),
(1 −x, x>2, x>2)) is a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium. If x > 1, the unique
Nash equilibrium is (U, L).
9. (a) If the game has a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, we are done.
(b)  Assume the game has no pure-strategy Nash equilibrium, and proceed
as follows. That (U, L) is not a Nash equilibrium implies e > a and/or
d > b. That (U, R) is not a Nash equilibrium implies g > c and/or b > d.
That (D, R) is not a Nash equilibrium implies c > g and/or f > h.
That (D, L) is not a Nash equilibrium implies a > e and/or h > f. It
is easy to see that if there is no pure strategy Nash equilibrium, then
only one of each of these pairs of conditions can hold. This implies
that each pure strategy of each player is a best response to some other
pure strategy of the other. Further, it must be that there is a mixture for
each player i such that the other player j is indifferent between his two
strategies.
Consider player 1. It must be that either e > a and c > g or
a > e and g > c. It is easy to show that there exists a q ∈[0, 1]
such
that
aq + c (1 −q) = eq + g(1 −q).
Rearranging
yields
(a −e) = (g −c)(1 −q)>q. It is the case that (a −e) and (g −c)
have the same sign. The analogous argument can be made with respect
to player 2.
CHAPTER 12: STRICTLY COMPETITIVE GAMES AND SECURITY
STRATEGIES
1. (a) No. Note that u1
 (A, Z) = u1
 (C, Z), but u2
 (A, Z) > u2
 (C, Z).
(b) Yes.
(c) Yes.
(d)  No. Note that u1
 (D, X) > u1
 (D, Y), but u2
 (D, X) > u2
 (D, Y).
3. Examples include chess, checkers, tic-tac-toe, and Othello.

--- Sayfa 467 ---
452
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
5. Consider the following game.
1
2
A
B
C
10, 5
10, 4
0, 3
0, 5
1, 5
1, 5
X
Y

Player 1’s security strategy is C, and her security level is 1. However, C is
dominated by s1 = (1>2, 1>2, 0). Further, player 1 attains a maxmin value
of 5 from this mixed strategy.
CHAPTER 13: CONTRACT, LAW, AND ENFORCEMENT IN STATIC
SETTINGS
1. (a)

(I, I) can be enforced by setting a between −4 and −2.

(b)

No, reliance does not sufﬁciently punish player 1 for deviating.
3. (a)  Ten. With limited veriﬁability, (I, I) cannot be induced by a contract so
the players receive payoffs of (0, 0) by playing (N, N). However, with
full veriﬁability, (I, I) can be induced by a contract that speciﬁes a trans-
fer of at least 3 from player 1 to player 2 following play of (N, I), and a
I
I
1
2
N
N
5, 5
7 + a, -1 - a
a - 1, 1 - a
a, -a
I
I
1
2
N
N
5, 5
0, 2
6, 0
0, 0

--- Sayfa 468 ---
453
Chapter 14: Details of the Extensive Form
transfer of at least 1 from player 2 to player 1 following play of (I, N).
The players would then achieve a joint payoff of 5 + 5. So the players
get 10 under full veriﬁability and 0 under limited veriﬁability, and thus
they would be willing to pay up to 10 to transform a setting of limited
veriﬁability to one of full veriﬁability.
(b)  Zero. There is no gain to the players of transforming the limited veriﬁ-
ability to full veriﬁability because (I, I) can be induced in both settings.
5. Veriﬁability is more important. It must be possible to convey information to
the court in order to have a contingent transfer imposed.
9. (a)  S1 = [0, ), S2 = [0, ). If y > x, then the payoffs are (0, 0). If x Ú y,
the payoffs are (y −Y, X −y).
(b)  There are multiple equilibria in which the players report x = y = a,
where a ∈[Y, X]. There is another set of multiple equilibria in which
the players report x and y such that x … Y < X … y.
(c)  There are multiple equilibria; all satisfy x < y, y Ú X, and x … Y.
(d)  It is efﬁcient if an equilibrium in the ﬁrst set of multiple equilibria of
part (b) is selected. This is because the plant is shut down if and only if
it is efﬁcient to do so.
CHAPTER 14: DETAILS OF THE EXTENSIVE FORM
1. There is no general rule because the normal form does not display the infor-
mation that the players have while in the course of play. However, recall that
the normal form is typically interpreted as the players’ ex ante situation, in
which they simultaneously and independently select their strategies. For this
interpretation, it is appropriate to say that the game has imperfect information
because players cannot condition their strategies on the strategies of others.
3.
x
y1
y2
1
2
1
0
5. (a)  When player 1 selects p = 50 and player 2 selects p– = 50, each obtains
a payoff of 50. Consider player 1 unilaterally deviating to select p9. If

--- Sayfa 469 ---
454
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
p9 < 50, then player 1 would obtain p9. If p9 > 50, then player 2 does
not purchase and so player 1 would obtain 0. In both cases, player 1
loses with the deviation. If player 2 unilaterally deviates, then her pay-
off changes only if she switches to a strategy that rejects the offer of 50,
in which case her payoff is zero. So player 2 has no incentive to deviate.
(b)  For any p ∈ [0, 100], deﬁne p– K p. Let player 1’s strategy be to offer
this price, and let player 2 use a cutoff-rule strategy with cutoff value
p–. It is easy to check that, as with the strategy proﬁle described in part
(a) of this exercise, this proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium.
CHAPTER 15: SEQUENTIAL RATIONALITY AND SUBGAME
PERFECTION
1. (a) (AF, C)
(b) (BHJKN, CE)
(c) (I, C, X)
3. (a) (AHILN, CE)
(b) 6
5. (a)
1, 1
S
1          C         2          C          1         C             2       C            1       C
S
S
S
S
0, 0
0, 3
2, 2
1, 4
3, 3
(b)  Working backward, it is easy to see that in round 5, player 1 will choose
S. Thus, in round 4, player 2 will choose S. Continuing in this fashion,
we ﬁnd that in equilibrium, each player will choose S any time he is on
the move.
(c)  For any ﬁnite k, the backward induction outcome is that player 1 chooses
S in the ﬁrst round and each player receives one dollar.
9. Consider the subgame following player 1’s selection x. Player 2’s optimal
choice of y2 solves the ﬁrst-order condition 0u2>0y2 = −2(y1 −y2
 ) K 0,
which implies the following best-response function in the  subgame:
BR2
 (y1
 ) = y1 . For player 1, the ﬁrst-order condition is 0u1>0y1 =
y2 + x −2y1 K 0, implying BR1
 (y2
 ) = (x + y2
 )>2. Putting these together,

--- Sayfa 470 ---
455
Chapter 16: Topics in Industrial Organization
we see that the Nash equilibrium of the subgame is y1 = y2 = x, which
yields payoffs of u1 = x2 −x3>3 and u2 = 0. Player 1 optimally chooses
x to maximize x2 −x3>3. Solving the ﬁrst-order condition 2x −x2 K 0
yields x* = 2. So the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium is given by
y1
 (x) = x, y2
 (x) = x, and x* = 2.
CHAPTER 16: TOPICS IN INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION
1. As shown in the text, the ﬁrm’s joint proﬁt (the sum of their continuation
payoffs) following the choice of a is 2a2>9 −2a3>81. If the ﬁrms could
form a contract that commits them to a particular value of a, they would
choose a to maximize their joint proﬁt and divide the proﬁt with a transfer.
The ﬁrst-order condition is 4a>9 −6a2>81 K 0, which means a* = 6.
3. The following table gives the continuation payoffs for the players as a func-
tion of their capacity choices (incorporating the Nash equilibrium of the
quantity-selection subgames):
1
2
H
H
L
N
−85, −85
−15, −10
−10, −15
0, 27.5
27.5, 0
0, 30
20, 20
0, 0
30, 0
N
L
 In a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, the players must select a Nash
equilibrium from the beginning of the game, which implies that the play-
ers do not want to deviate from their speciﬁed capacity choices (recall
the one-deviation property). This is equivalent to saying that their capac-
ity choices are a Nash equilibrium of the table above. The equilibrium
is (L, L). Thus, in the subgame perfect equilibrium, both players invest
50,000 for the low-production plant, and their quantity choices are as
described in the text.
5. (a)  If no one purchases the monitor in period 1, then Tony’s optimal choice
in period 2 is p2 = 500 because Hal will purchase at this price. (Tony
could sell two units if he lowered the price to p2 = 200, but this  produces
a proﬁt of only 400.) Tony’s optimal pricing scheme is as follows. Set

--- Sayfa 471 ---
456
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
p1 = 1700 (or just below to make Hal strictly want to buy). If one unit is
sold in the ﬁrst period (that is, Hal purchased), then set p2 = 200 to sell
to Laurie. However, if there are no ﬁrst-period sales (Hal deviated), then
set p2 = 500 to sell to Hal in the second period. With Hal buying in the
ﬁrst period and Laurie in the second, total revenue is 1900. Tony would
not beneﬁt from being able to commit to not sell monitors in period 2.
(b)  The optimal prices are p1
 = 1400 and p2
 = 200. Hal buys in period 1,
and Laurie buys in period 2. Here, Tony would not beneﬁt from being
able to commit to not sell monitors in period 2, because the gain in
extracting surplus from Hal is more than offset by the loss of not selling
to Laurie.
9. (a)  The government chooses p# to maximize 30 + p# −W
#
−p# >2 −30 =
p# >2 −W
#
. Clearly, it wants to set p# as high as possible, regardless of the
level of W
#
. So p# * = 10. Knowing how the government will behave, the
ASE chooses W
#
 to maximize −(W
#
−10)2. The ASE therefore selects
W
#
* = p# * = 10. In equilibrium, y = 30.
(b)  If the government could commit, it would choose p# to maximize its
payoff of p# >2 −W
#
, anticipating that the ASE will respond by setting
W
#
= p# . Thus, the government chooses p# to maximize p# >2 −p# , which
implies that it commits to p# = 0. In part (a), the equilibrium payoffs
are u = 0 and v = −5. When commitment is possible, the payoffs are
u = 0 and v = 0.
(c)  One way is to have an independent central bank.
CHAPTER 17: PARLOR GAMES
1. (a)  Use backward induction to solve this. To win the game, a player must
not be forced to enter the top-left cell Z; thus, a player would lose if,
when it is his turn to move, the rock is in either cell 1 or cell 2 as shown
in the diagram that follows. A player who is able to move the rock into
cell 1 or cell 2 will win the game. This allows us to label some cells as
“winning positions.” Further, if a player is forced to move the rock into
a winning position, then this player is in a losing position. Using this
logic and backward induction allows us to determine which cells are
winning positions and which are losing positions. A cell marked with
an X in the following picture is a winning position; the rest are losing
positions. Cell Y, where the game begins, is a losing position, so player
2 has a strategy that guarantees victory in this game.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
457
Chapter 17: Parlor Games
Z
2
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Y
1
(b)  In general, player 2 has a winning strategy when m, n > 1 and both are
odd or when m or n equals 1 and the other is even. Otherwise, player 1
has a winning strategy.
3.  This can be solved by backward induction. Let (x, y) denote the “state of
the game” in which the red basket contains x balls and the blue basket con-
tains y balls. To win this game, a player must leave her opponent with either
(0, 1) or (1, 0). Thus, in order to win, a player must not leave her opponent
in any of the following positions: (0, z) or (z, 0) for z > 1, or (1, z) or (z, 1)
for z > 0. Note as well that a player wins if she leaves her opponent in the
state (2, 2). Thus, a player must not leave her opponent with either (w, 2)
or (2, w) for w > 2. Continuing with this logic and assuming m, n > 0, we
see that player 2 has a winning strategy when m = n, and player 1 has a
winning strategy when m n.
5. Player 1 has a strategy that guarantees victory. This is easily proved using a
contradiction argument. Suppose player 1 does not have a strategy guaran-
teeing victory. Then player 2 must have such a strategy. This means that for
every opening move by player 1, player 2 can guarantee victory from this
point. Let X be the set of matrix conﬁgurations that player 1 can create in
his ﬁrst move, which player 2 would then face. A conﬁguration refers to the
set of cells that are ﬁlled in.
We have that, starting from each of the conﬁgurations in X, the next
player to move can guarantee victory for himself. Note, however, that
if player 1 selects cell (m, n) in his ﬁrst move, then, whatever player 2’s
following choice is, the conﬁguration of the matrix induced by player
2’s selection will be in X (it is a conﬁguration that player 1 could have
created in his ﬁrst move). Thus, whatever player 2 selects in response
to his choice of cell (m, n), player 1 can guarantee a victory following
player 2’s move. This means that player 1 has a strategy that guaran-
tees him a win, which contradicts what we assumed at the beginning.

--- Sayfa 473 ---
458
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
Thus, player 1 actually does have a strategy that guarantees him victory,
regardless of what player 2 does.
 This game is interesting because player 1’s winning strategy in arbitrary
m × n Chomp games is not known. A winning strategy is known for the
special case in which m = n. This strategy selects cell (2, 2) in the ﬁrst
round.
CHAPTER 18: BARGAINING PROBLEMS
1. (a)  Graphs are not presented here. v* = 50,000; uJ* = uR* = 25,000;
t = 15,000. To see that v* = 50,000 (and that x = 0 is  optimal),
note that x = 1 yields joint value v = 48,000, whereas x = 0
yields joint value 50,000. The surplus is vJ + vR −dJ −dR =
40,000 + 10,000 −0 −0 = 50,000. The standard  bargaining solution
with equal bargaining weights implies payoffs of ui = 0 + (1>2)
[50,000] = 25,000 for each player i. Using Jerry’s value function, we
thus have that uJ = vj
  (0) + t = 25,000, implying t = 15,000.
(b)  Solving maxx
 60,000 −x2 + 800x yields x* = 400. This implies
v* = 220,000,
uJ* = uR* = 110,000,
vJ = −100,000,
and
vR = 320,000. Thus, t = 210,000.
(c)  x* = 400 and v* = 220,000. uJ* = 40,000 + (220,000 −40,000 −
20,000)>4 = 80,000 and uR* = 20,000 + (3>4)(220,000 −60,000) =
140,000. This implies t = 180,000.
3. (a)  x = 15, t = 0, and u1 = u2 = 15.
30
30
u1
u2
d

--- Sayfa 474 ---
459
Chapter 18: Bargaining Problems
(b)  x = 15, t = −1, u1 = 14,
and u2 = 16.
30
30
u1
u2
d
d1 = 2
d2 = 4
(c)  x = 15, t = −7, u1 = 8,
and u2 = 22.
30
30
u1
u2
d
d1  = 2
d2 = 4
(d)  x = 10, t = −175, u1 = 25,
and u2 = 75.
100
100
u1
u2
d
(e)  x = 12, t = 144p1 −336,
u1 = 144p1 ,
and u2 = 144p2 .
144
144
u1
u2
d

--- Sayfa 475 ---
460
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
5. You should raise the maximum joint value if your bargaining weight ex-
ceeds 1>2; otherwise, you should raise your disagreement payoff. In the
latter case, your decision is not efﬁcient.
CHAPTER 19: ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE BARGAINING GAMES
1. (a) The superintendent offers x = 0, and the president accepts any x.
(b) The president accepts x if x Ú min {z, y}.
(c) The superintendent offers x = min {z, y}, and the president accepts.
(d) The president should promise z = y.
3. In the case of T = 1, player 1 offers 0 to player 2 (1 for himself) and player 2
accepts. If T = 2, player 1 offers d to player 2 (1 −d for himself) in the ﬁrst
period and player 2 accepts, yielding the payoff vector (1 −d, d). For T = 3,
the SPE payoff vector is (1 −d(1 −d ), d(1 −d )). The SPE payoff vec-
tor is (1 −d + d2
 (1 −d ), d −d2
 (1 −d )) in the case of T = 4. For T = 5
, it is (1 −d + d2
 (1 −d + d2 ), d −d2
 (1 −d + d2 )). As T approaches
inﬁnity, the SPE payoff vector converges to (1>(1 + d ), d>(1 + d )), which
is the subgame perfect equilibrium payoff vector of the inﬁnite-period
game.
5. (a)
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
d
u1
u1
u2
u2
1
9. (a)  Consider any subgame beginning after player C makes an offer to player
LD. If xLD > 0, then player LD must accept the offer, as it will get 0
by rejecting, so there is a unique Nash equilibrium in the accept/reject
subgame. If xLD = 0, then there are two pure strategy Nash equilibria in
the accept/reject subgame, as player LD is indifferent between accept-
ing and rejecting. Thus, player LD’s SPE strategy is either to accept
if and only if xLD
 Ú 0 or to accept if and only if xLD > 0. If player LD
were to play the former strategy, then player C’s best response is to offer
(b)

--- Sayfa 476 ---
461
Chapter 20: Games with Joint Decisions; Negotiation  Equilibrium
xLD = 0 and xC = 1; this speciﬁcation constitutes the subgame perfect
equilibrium described in the statement. However, if player LD were
to play the latter strategy, then player C has no best response. That is,
player C would like to minimize xLD subject to xLD > 0, but no solution
to this problem exists.
(b)  Applying the argument from part (a) to every subgame that starts with
player C’s offer in the last stage of bargaining, we observe that in the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium, player LD obtains a payoff of zero.
Moving back to the second-to-last stage of bargaining, by the same
reasoning as in part (a) player LD must accept any offer with xLD
 Ú 0,
and player L must offer xLD = 0. Continuing by backward induction, we
conclude that player LD obtains a payoff of zero in every subgame that
starts with an offer in any period, including the ﬁrst period. Player C makes
the offer (xC, xLD
 ) = (1, 0) in the ﬁrst period, and player LD accepts.
(c)  We can conjecture that similar strategies constitute an SPE in the inﬁ-
nite horizon game—that is, the proposer always offers xLD = 0, and
player LD always accepts any offer with xLD Ú 0. Because player LD
earns a payoff of zero in every subgame that starts with an offer, it
is always sequentially rational to accept any offer with xLD Ú 0. Simi-
larly, because player LD will always accept any offer with xLD Ú 0, it
is always sequentially rational for the proposer to offer xLD = 0. This
validates the conjecture.
CHAPTER 20: GAMES WITH JOINT DECISIONS; NEGOTIATION
 EQUILIBRIUM
1. (a)
M, W
W
0, 0
Default
H
L
x, b, t
(b) When b Ú x2.
(c)  v* = 16, the surplus is 16, uM = 8, uW = 8, x* = 4, b* = 16, and
t* = 8.
(d) This assumes that the worker’s effort is veriﬁable.

--- Sayfa 477 ---
462
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
3. (a) x* = 10p and y* = 5(1 −p).
(b) p* = 0.8, t* = −19.5, x* = 8, and y* = 1.
5. The game is represented below. Note that m ∈[0, (100 −q1 −q2
 )(q1 + q2
 )].
2
Default
1, 2
1
q1
q2
m
CHAPTER 21: UNVERIFIABLE INVESTMENT, HOLD UP, OPTIONS,
AND OWNERSHIP
1. (a)  The efﬁcient outcome is high investment and acceptance (regardless of
the prices).
(b)  If p0 Ú p1 −5, then the buyer always accepts. The seller will not
choose H.
(c)  In the case that L occurs, the buyer will not accept if p1 Ú 5 + p0. In
the case that H occurs, the buyer will accept if p1 … 20 + p0. Thus, it
must be that 20 + p0 Ú p1 Ú 5 + p0 . Because the seller invests high
if p1 Ú 10 + p0 , there are values of p0 and p1 that induce the efﬁcient
outcome.
(d)  The surplus is 10. Each gets 5. Thus, p1 = 15 and p0 ∈[−5, 5]. The
seller chooses H. The buyer chooses A if H, and he chooses R if L.
3. If the worker’s bargaining weight is less than 1, then he gets a greater payoff
increase by raising his outside option than from increasing his productivity
with the single employer, assuming the two alternatives are for the same
amount. Thus, he does better to increase his general human capital.
5. (a)  The union demands w = (R −M)>n, which is accepted. This implies
that the railroad will not be built, as the entrepreneur can foresee that it
will lose F. To see that the offer of w = (R −M)>n is accepted, recall
that F has already been sunk by the entrepreneur. The offer gives all of
the surplus to the union.
(b)  The surplus is R −M. The entrepreneur gets pE
 (R −M) and the union
gets nw + pU
  (R −M). The railroad is built if pE
 (R −M) > F.

--- Sayfa 478 ---
463
Chapter 22: Repeated Games and Reputation
(c)  The entrepreneur’s investment is sunk when negotiation occurs, so
generally he does not obtain all of the returns from his investment.
When he has all of the bargaining power, he does extract the full return.
To avoid the hold-up problem, the entrepreneur may try to negotiate a
contract with the union before making his investment.
9. (a)  Investment yields v = 20, the surplus to allocate through bargaining is
20 −(−10) = 30, and so uw = −10 + (1>2)(30) = 5. No investment
yields v = 16, the surplus 16, and so uw = 0 + (1>2)(16) = 8. Thus,
W will not invest.
(b)  This is not efﬁcient because a higher joint value is attained with invest-
ment by the worker.
CHAPTER 22: REPEATED GAMES AND REPUTATION
1. (U, L) can be supported as follows. If player 2 defects by choosing M or R
in the ﬁrst period, then the players coordinate on (C, R) in the second pe-
riod. If player 1 defects by choosing C or D in the ﬁrst period, then the play-
ers select (D, M) in the second period. Otherwise, the players coordinate on
(D, R) in the second period.
3. (a)  The Nash equilibria are (B, X) and (B, Y).
(b)  Yes. Prescribe that the players select (A, X) in period 1. In period 2, player
1 should select B. Player 2 should select X in period 2 if player 1 chose A
in period 1, and player 2 should select Y if player 1 chose B in period 1.
5. Alternating between (C, C) and (C, D) requires that neither player has the
incentive to deviate. Clearly, however, player 1 can guarantee himself at
least 2 per period, yet he would get less than this starting in period 2 if the
players alternated as described. Thus, alternating between (C, C) and (C, D)
cannot be supported.
In contrast, alternating between (C, C) and (D, D) can be supported.
Note ﬁrst that, using the stage Nash punishment, player 2 has no incentive
to deviate in odd or even periods. Player 1 has no incentive to deviate in
even periods, when (D, D) is supposed to be played. Furthermore, player 1
prefers not to deviate in an odd period if
7 +
2d
1 −d … 3 + 2d + 3d2 + 2d3 + 3d4 + c,

--- Sayfa 479 ---
464
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
which simpliﬁes to
7 +
2d
1 −d … 3 + 2d
1 −d2 .
Solving for d yields d Ú 24
5.
9. (a)  Because x < 10, there is no gain from continuing. Thus, neither player
wishes to deviate.
(b)  If a player selects S, then the game stops and this player obtains 0.
Because the players randomize in each period, their continuation values
from the start of a given period are both 0. If a player chooses C in a
period, he thus gets an expected payoff of 10a −(1 −a). Setting this
equal to 0 (which must be the case in order for the players to be indif-
ferent between S and C) yields a = 1>11.
(c)  In this case, the continuation value from the beginning of each period is
ax. When a player selects S, he expects to get ax; when he chooses C,
he expects 10a + (1 −a)(−1 + dax). The equality that deﬁnes a is
thus ax = 10a + (1 −a)(−1 + dax).
CHAPTER 23: COLLUSION, TRADE AGREEMENTS, AND GOODWILL
1. (a)  Consider the strategy that, in a given period, selects pi = p = 60 if all
players selected this price in the past; otherwise choose pi = p = 10.
(b)  The quantity of each ﬁrm when they collude is qc = (110 −60)>n =
50>n. The proﬁt of each ﬁrm under collusion is (50>n)60 −
10(50>n) = 2500>n. The proﬁt in the Nash equilibrium of the stage
game is 0. If player i defects, she does so by setting pi = 60 −â, where
â is arbitrarily small. Thus, the stage game payoff of defecting can be
made arbitrarily close to 2500. To support collusion, it must be that
2500
n #
1
1 −d Ú 2500 + 0,

 which simpliﬁes to d Ú (n −1)>n.
(c)  Collusion is “easier’’ with fewer ﬁrms.
3. The Nash equilibria are (A, Z) and (B, Y). Obviously, there is an equilib-
rium in which (A, Z) is played in both periods and player 21 sells the right to
player 22 for 8a. There is also a “goodwill” equilibrium that is like the one
constructed in the text, although here it may seem undesirable from player
21’s point of view. Players coordinate on (A, X) in the ﬁrst period and (A, Z)

--- Sayfa 480 ---
465
Chapter 23: Collusion, Trade Agreements, and Goodwill
in the second period, unless player 21 deviated from X in the ﬁrst period, in
which case (B, Y) is played in the second period. Player 21 sells the right to
player 22 for 8a if he did not deviate in the ﬁrst period, whereas he sells the
right for 4a if he deviated. This is an SPE (player 21 prefers not to deviate)
if a > 3>4.
5. (a) The Nash equilibria are (x, x), (x, z), (z, x), and (y, y).
(b) They would agree to play (y, y).
(c)  In the ﬁrst round, they play (z, z). If no one defected in the ﬁrst period,
then they are supposed to play (y, y) in the second period. If player 1
defected in the ﬁrst period, then they coordinate on (z, x) in the second
period. If player 2 defected in the ﬁrst period, then they coordinate on
(x, z) in the second period. It is easy to verify that this strategy is a
subgame perfect equilibrium.
(d)  The answer depends on whether one believes that the players’ bargain-
ing powers would be affected by the history of play. If deviation by a
player causes his bargaining weight suddenly to drop to, say, 0, then
the equilibrium described in part (c) seems consistent with the oppor-
tunity to renegotiate before the second-period stage game. Another
way of interpreting the equilibrium is that the prescribed play for
period 2 is the disagreement point for renegotiation, in which case
there is no surplus of renegotiation. However, perhaps a more reason-
able theory of renegotiation would posit that each player’s bargain-
ing weight is independent of the history (it is related to institutional
features) and that each player could insist on some neutral stage Nash
equilibrium, such as (x, x) or (y, y). In this case, as long as bargain-
ing weights are positive, it would not be possible to sustain (x, z) or
(z, x) in period 2. As a result, the equilibrium of part (c) would not
withstand renegotiation.
9. (a)  ui = (24 −2pi + pj
 )pi . To maximize this, player i selects pi to satisfy
the ﬁrst-order condition 0ui>0pi = 24 −4pi + pj K 0, which yields
pi = 6 + pj>4. So BR1
 (p2
 ) = 6 + p2>4 and BR2
 (p1
 ) = 6 + p1>4.
Solving this system of equations yields the equilibrium prices
p*1 = p*2 = 8 and payoffs uN
1 = uN
2 = 128.
(b)  To maximize joint revenues by coordinating on the same price p, the
players solve  maxp
 (24 −2p + p)p = maxp
 (24 −p)p. The ﬁrst-
order condition is 24 −2p K 0, which implies p = 12 and each player
obtains a payoff of uC
i = 144.
(c)  No. Cooperation cannot be sustained in the ﬁfth year because subgame

--- Sayfa 481 ---
466
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
perfection requires that a Nash equilibrium of the stage game be played
then. Working backward, the same is true in previous periods.
(d)  The grim-trigger strategy speciﬁes: select (12, 12) as long as this was
played in the past; otherwise select (8, 8). Using the stage-game best-
response function derived above, we see that the optimal way to deviate
from (12, 12) in a given period is to set a price of pD
i = 6 + 12>4 = 9.
This yields a payoff of uD
i = 162. To sustain cooperation, it must be
that the value of cooperating forever exceeds the one-shot payoff from
deviating plus the discounted future punishment (reversion to the stage-
game Nash equilibrium):
144
1 −d Ú 162 + 128d
1 −d ,

 which simpliﬁes to d Ú 9>17.
CHAPTER 24: RANDOM EVENTS AND INCOMPLETE INFORMATION
1.
1
1>2, 1>2
−3>2, 3>2
−1, 1
−1, 1
1, −1
2
Bb
Bf
Fb
Ff
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
B
F
1>2
1>2
−1, 1
−1, 1
B
A
K
F
1, −1
2, −2
B
F
b
f
1
1
−1, 1
−2, 2
B
F
2

--- Sayfa 482 ---
467
Chapter 25: Risk and Incentives in Contracting
3.
1
1, 0
1, 2
0, 2
2
LL
LR
RL
RR
2, 0
3, 1
3, 0
4, 1
2, 0
U
D
5. (a)
(b)
IEIF
IESF
SGIF
SESF
M
C
7, 5
3.5, 0.5
0, 1.5
0, 3.5
3.5, 0
3.5, 2
8.5, 4
5, -0.5
R
H
SRBR
FSES
FSEB
FBES
FBEB
M
C
10, -4
10, -4
2.5, -1
2.5, -1
5, -3.5
10, -4
10, 3
2, 1
10, 3
2, 1
-5, 0
5, 0
5, 3.5
7, -6.5
7.5, 5.5
15, -1
SRBH
SHBR
SHBH
CHAPTER 25: RISK AND INCENTIVES IN CONTRACTING
1. Examples include stock brokers, commodities traders, and salespeople.
3. (a)  The wage offer must be at least 100 −y, so the ﬁrm’s payoff is
180 −(100 −y) = 80 + y.
(b)  In this case, the worker accepts the job if and only if w + 100q Ú 100,
which means the wage must be at least 100(1 −q). The ﬁrm obtains
200 −100(1 −q) = 100(1 + q).
(c)  When q = 1>2, it is optimal to offer the risky job at a wage of 50 if
y … 70; otherwise it is optimal to offer the safe job at a wage of 100 −y.
5. (a)  The nine integers are equally likely to be the correct/winning price.
Each player wants to maximize the number of integers that his guess is
closest to without being above.
(b) n2 = 6.
(c) n2 = 1 or 6.

--- Sayfa 483 ---
468
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
(d)  It is possible to rationalize n1 = 2, 4, 6, or 7. For instance, suppose that
you select n1 = 2. Player 2 could rationally pick n2 = 6, thinking that
player 3 will follow with n3 = 3. But player 3 would be indifferent
between n3 = 3 and n3 = 7, so player 3 might as well choose the latter.
If you expect these things (which are consistent with the rationality
of the others), then you can justify playing n1 = 2. You cannot ensure
yourself more than an expected payoff of (1>3) # 1000, and this belief
and strategy gives you exactly this amount. The other strategies noted
here can be similarly justiﬁed. It is important to note that this is not an
equilibrium construction.
CHAPTER 26: BAYESIAN NASH EQUILIBRIUM AND
RATIONALIZABILITY
1. (a) The Bayesian normal form is
1
2
V
X
Y
Z
W
3, 0
2, 1
2, 1
3, 0
5, 1
3, 0

(Z, V) is the only rationalizable strategy proﬁle.
(b)  The Bayesian normal form is
1
2
3, 0
6, 0
2, 1
4, 1
5.5, 0.5
5.5, 0.5
2.5, 0.5
1.5, 0.5
1.5, 0.5
3.5, 0.5
2.5, 0.5
3.5, 0.5
0, 0
0, 1
3, 0
5, 1
3, 0
2, 1
XAXB
XAYB
XAZB
YAXB
YAYB
YAZB
ZAXB
ZAYB
ZAZB
V
W

--- Sayfa 484 ---
469
Chapter 26: Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and Rationalizability

 XAYB is a dominant strategy for player 1. Thus, the rationalizable set is
the singleton {(XAYB, W)}.
(c) False.
3. (a) The extensive form and normal form representations are
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
2, 2
0, 0
2, 0
0, 0
4, 0
4, 4
0, 4
0, 2
U
u
d
D
A
B
N
1
1
(1>2)
(1>2)
2
L
R
Uu
Ud
Du
Dd
1, 2
1, 0
3, 1
0, 2
0, 1
3, 2
2, 0
2, 4
2
1

 The set of rationalizable strategies is the singleton {(Du, R)}, and (Du,
R) is the single Bayesian Nash equilibrium.
(b) The extensive form and normal form representations in this case are
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
2, 0, 2
0, 0, 0
0, 2, 0
0, 0, 0
0, 4, 0
4, 0, 4
0, 0, 4
0, 0, 2
U
u
d
D
A
B
N
1A
1B
(1/2)
(1/2)
2

--- Sayfa 485 ---
470
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises

 The equilibrium is (D, u, R). The set of rationalizable strategies is the
entire strategy space, S.
(c)  Regarding rationalizability, the difference between the settings of parts (a)
and (b) is that in part (b), the beliefs of players 1A and 1B do not have to
coincide. In equilibrium, the beliefs of player 1A and 1B must be the same.
5. (a)  u1
 (p1, p2) = 42p1 + p1 p2 −2p2
1 −220 −10p2 and
u2
 (p1, p2) = (22 + 2c)p2 + p1
 p2 −2p2
2 −22c −cp1.
(b)  BR1
 (p2
 ) = (42 + p2
 )>4 and BR2
 ( p1
 ) = (22 + 2c + p1
 )>4.
(c)  p*1 = 14 and p*2 = 14.
(d)  p*1 = 14, p*2,c=14 = 16, and p*2,c=6 = 12.
9. The unique Nash equilibrium is (Bf, B). That is, player 1 bids when he has
the Ace and folds when he has the King, and player 2 always bids.
CHAPTER 27: LEMONS, AUCTIONS, AND INFORMATION
AGGREGATION
1. There is always an equilibrium in this game. Note that, regardless of p,
there is an equilibrium in which neither the lemon nor the peach is traded
(Jerry does not trade and Freddie trades neither car). When either
1000 < p … 2000 or p > 1000 + 2000q, the only equilibrium involves no
trade whatsoever.
3. To show that bidding vi is weakly preferred to bidding any x < vi , con-
sider three cases, which exhaust the possible relations between x, vi, and the
other player’s bid bj . In the ﬁrst case, x < bj < vi . Here, bidding x causes
player i to lose, but by bidding vi player i would win and receive a payoff of
vi −bj , which is positive. Next consider the case in which x < vi < bj . In
1, 0, 2
1, 2, 1
0, 2, 4
0, 0, 1
u
U
1A
1B
D
d
L
R
2
0, 1,  0
0, 0, 2
2, 0, 4
2, 1, 2
u
U
1A
1B
D
d

--- Sayfa 486 ---
471
Chapter 27: Lemons, Auctions, And Information Aggregation
this case, it does not matter whether player i bids x or vi; he loses either way
and receives a payoff of 0. Finally, consider the case in which bj < x < vi .
Here, bidding either x or vi ensures that player i wins and receives the payoff
vi −bj . In summary, in the second and third cases, bidding vi and x yield the
same payoff for player i, but in the ﬁrst case bidding vi yields a strictly higher
payoff. This means that bidding one’s valuation is weakly preferred.
5. As discussed in the text, without a reserve price, the expected revenue of the
auction is 300. With a reserve price r, player i will bid at least r if vi > r.
The probability that vi < r is r>900. Thus, the probability that both players
have a valuation that is less than r is (r>900)2. Consider, for example, set-
ting a reserve price of 450. The probability that at least one of the players’
valuations is above 450 is 1 −(1>2)2 = 3>4. Thus, the expected revenue of
setting r = 450 is at least 450(3>4) = 337.5, which exceeds 300.
9. (a) Player 1’s best-response bidding strategy is b1
 (y1) = y1.
(b)  This part is very tricky; it is likely too difﬁcult even for a graduate student!
Note that if player i bids more than yi + 10 then, conditional on winning,
this player’s payoff must be negative. Therefore, player i will not bid
more than yi + 10, for i = 1, 2. Suppose that the implication of common
knowledge is that, for each player i and this player’s type yi, the player
will not bid more than g(yi). We have to determine the function g. We
can argue that it must be non-decreasing. Furthermore, where it is strictly
increasing, player i knows that by bidding bi = g(z) for some z ∈[0,10],
she will win against all types of the opponent satisfying yj < z. It turns out
that the highest expected payoff that player i could get is then:
ayi + z
2 −g(z)b z
10 +
ayi + 10 + max{g(z) −yi
 , z}
2
−g(z)b 10 −max{g(z) −yi
 , z}
10
.
The ﬁrst term is the expected payoff conditional on yj < z times the
probability of this event. The second term is the expected payoff condi-
tional on yj > max{g(z) −yi
 , z} times the probability of this event. Left
out is the event that yj ∈[z, max{g(z) −yi
 , z}], where player i would
lose money if she wins the auction; these types can rationally bid more
than g(z), so player i can believe that she will not beat them.
 Wherever g is strictly increasing, the highest-expected-payoff expres-
sion above should equal zero for z = yi . That is, this equation should

--- Sayfa 487 ---
472
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
deﬁne g. Solving this, we ﬁnd that g can be strictly increasing only
above yi = 5 and that it must equal yi + 5 in this interval. Thus,
g(z) = e 10
if z … 5
z + 5
if z > 5.
(c)  Against the bidding strategy bj
 (yj) = yj + z of player j, the strategy
bi
 (yi) = yi + z is not a best response for player i. In fact, bi
 (yi) = yi is
the best response.
CHAPTER 28: PERFECT BAYESIAN EQUILIBRIUM
1. Let w = Prob(Hp ) and let r = Prob(Hp
–
 ).
(a)  The separating equilibrium is (pp–9, NE9) with beliefs w = 1 and r = 0.
(b)  For q … 1>2, there is a pooling equilibrium with strategy proﬁle (pp9,
NN9) and beliefs w = q and any r … 1>2. There are also similar pooling
equilibria in which the entrant chooses E and has any belief r Ú 1>2. For
q > 1>2, there is a pooling equilibrium in which the strategy proﬁle is
(p–
 p–9, EE9) and the beliefs are w = q and any r … 1>2. There are also
pooling equilibria in which the incumbent plays p– p–9 .
3. (a) Yes, it is (RL9, U) with q = 1.
(b)  Yes, it is (LL9, D) with q … 1>3.
5. (a)  The perfect Bayesian equilibrium is given by E0N1, y = 1, y– = 0, q = 1,
and y = 1.
(b)  The innocent type provides evidence, whereas the guilty type does not.
The judge is able to deduce the defendant’s type perfectly in equilibrium.
(c)  In the perfect Bayesian equilibrium, each type x ∈{0, 1, c, K −1}
provides evidence, and the judge believes that he faces type K when no
evidence is provided.
9. (a)
1
2
XX
XY
YX
YY
2, 0
3, 0
2, 0
3, 2
0, 4
4, 0
1, 4
5, 2
L
M
(b)  Player 1, 1
2
 XY9, 1
2
 YY9; and player 2, 1
2
 L, 1
2
 M.
(c) Yes, with q = 1
2.

--- Sayfa 488 ---
473
Chapter 29: Job-Market Signaling and Reputation
CHAPTER 29: JOB-MARKET SIGNALING AND REPUTATION
1. Education would not be a useful signal in this setting. If high types and low
types have the same cost of education, then they would have the same incentive
to become educated, and there would typically not be a separating equilibrium.
3. (a)  There is no separating equilibrium. The low type always wants to mimic
the high type.
(b)  Yes, there is such an equilibrium provided that p is such that the worker
accepts. This requires 2p −(1 −p) Ú 0, which simpliﬁes to p Ú 1>3.
The equilibrium is given by (OHOL, A) with belief q = p.
(c)  Yes, there is such an equilibrium regardless of p. The equilibrium is
given by (NHNL, R) with belief q … 1>3.
5. As before, player 1 always plays S, I9, and B9. Also, player 2 random-
izes so that player 1 is indifferent between I and N, which implies that
s = 1>4. Player 1 randomizes so that player 2 is indifferent between I
and N. This requires 2q −2(1 −q) = 0, which simpliﬁes to q = 1>2.
However, q = p>(p + r −pr). Substituting and solving for r, we get
r = p>(1 −p). Thus, in equilibrium, player 1 selects action I with prob-
ability r = p>(1 −p), and player 2 has belief q = 1>2 and plays I with
probability 1>4. If p > 1>2, then player 2 always plays I when her informa-
tion set is reached. This is because 2p −2(1 −p) = 4p −2 > 0. Thus,
equilibrium requires that player 1’s strategy is II9SB9, that player 2 has
belief q = p, and that player 2 selects I.
9. (a)  The manager’s optimal contract solves max en, xn
  en −xn subject to
xn −aen2 Ú 0 (which is necessary for the worker to accept).  Clearly,
the manager will pick xn and en so that the constraint binds. Using
the constraint to substitute for xn yields the unconstrained problem
maxen
  nen −aen2. Solving the ﬁrst-order condition, we get en = 1>(2a)
and xn = 1>(4a).
(b)  Using the solution of part (a), we obtain e– = 4, x– = 2,  e = 4>3, and
x = 2>3.
(c)  The worker will choose the contract that maximizes xn −aen2. The high
type of worker would get a payoff of −4 if he chooses contract (e–, x–) ,
whereas he would obtain 0 by choosing contract ( e, x ). Thus, he would
choose the contract that is meant for him. In contrast, the low type
prefers to select contract ( e, x ), which gives him a payoff of 4>9, rather
than getting 0 under the contract designed for him.
(d)  The incentive compatibility conditions for the low and high types,
respectively, are

--- Sayfa 489 ---
474
Appendix E: Solutions to Selected Exercises
xL −1
8
 e2
L Ú xH −1
8
 e2
H

and
xH −3
8
 e2
H Ú xL −3
8
 e2
L.

The participation constraints are
xL −1
8
 e2
L Ú 0

and
xH −3
8
 e2
H Ú 0.
(e)  Following the hint, we can substitute for xL and xH using the equations
xL = xH −1
8
 e2
H + 1
8
 e2
L

and
xH = 3
8
 e2
H.

 Note that combining these gives xL = 1
4 e2
H + 1
8 e2
L. Substituting for xL
and xH yields the following unconstrained maximization problem:
max
eL,eH
1
2ceH −3
8
 e2
Hd + 1
2ceL −1
4
 e2
H −1
8
 eL
2d .

 Calculating the ﬁrst-order conditions, we obtain e*L = 4, x*L = 54>25,
e*H = 4>5, and x*H = 6>25.
(f)  The high type exerts less effort than is efﬁcient because this helps the
manager extract more surplus from the low type.
APPENDIX B: THE MATHEMATICS OF RATIONALIZABILITY AND
ITERATED DOMINANCE
1. (a)  Because the game is ﬁnite, best responses exist for every belief. Thus,
if product set X is nonempty then Bi
 (X) is nonempty and so B(X) is
nonempty. Note that R1 = B(S) and Rk = B(Rk−1) for all k. Since S is
nonempty, by induction every Rk is nonempty.

--- Sayfa 490 ---
475
(b)  It is easy to see that, like UD, the B operator is monotone. That is,
for two product sets X and Y with X ⊂Y, we have B(X) ⊂B(Y). To
see this, note that any belief for player i that puts positive probability
only on strategies in X−i can also be considered in the context of the
larger Y−i. Since R1 = B(S) ⊂S, the monotone property implies that
R2 = B(R1) ⊂B(S) = R1. By induction, the same relation holds for Rk
and Rk−1, for all k.
(c)  Suppose not. Then there are an inﬁnite number of rounds in which at
least one strategy is removed for at least one player. However, from (b),
we know strategies that are removed are never “put back,” which means
an inﬁnite number of strategies are eventually deleted. This contradicts
that S is ﬁnite.
3. For strategy C to be dominated, there would have to be a mixed strategy
putting positive probability on A and B that yields a strictly higher payoff
than does C, against all of the other players’ strategies. Consider a mixed
 strategy that puts probability p on A and probability 1 −p on B. For this
strategy to dominate C, we need 6p > 5 for the case of the opponents
playing (U, M) and we need 6(1 −p) > 5 for the case of (D, N). These
inequalities are incompatible, so C is not dominated.
Next consider beliefs of player 1 that do not exhibit correlation
between the strategies of players 2 and 3. Let p denote the probability
that player 2 plays U and let q denote the probability that player 3 plays
M. Suppose that C is a best response for some belief. Then it must deliver
a weakly higher expected payoff than do A and B. The expected payoff
of C is
5pq + 5(1 −p)(1 −q) −100p(1 −q) −100q(1 −p) =
5 −105p −105q + 210pq.
 Rearranging terms, this is equivalent to q(21 −42p) … 1 −21p. Manipu-
lating this inequality reveals that, in order to make the expected payoff of
C nonnegative (which is necessary for C to be a best response), it must
be that either pq > (20>21)2 or (1 −p)(1 −q) > (20>21)2. Note that
(20>21)2 > 9>10, so for beliefs in this range, either A or B will yield a
strictly higher expected payoff than will strategy C.
To show that strategy C is a best response to a correlated conjecture,
consider the belief u−1 that (U, M) is played with probability 1>2 and
(D, N) is played with probability 1>2. We have that u1
 (C, u−1) = 5 and
u1
 (B, u−1) = u1
 (A, u−1) = 3.
Appendix B: The Mathematics of Rationalizability and Iterated Dominance

--- Sayfa 492 ---
Page numbers in italics refer to
ﬁgures.
Abreu, D., 301n
actions, 3, 7, 14
and best response, 54–57
contractual, 4–5, 154–65,
278–83, 340–45
extensive-form games and, 10–17,
177, 178
fundamental game, notions
and, 67
individual, 3, 5, 9–17
inﬁnitely repeated games and,
297–301
information and, 325
joint, 4–5
labels and, 16, 176
meaning of game and, 5
in noncooperative games, 3,
9–17
in ongoing relationships, 291–92
in repeated games, 292, 294,
296, 298, 309
rule-of-thumb choice of, 111
in two-period repeated games,
292–96
See also type of action or game
advertising, 204–5, 219
Akerlof, George, 360n
Aluminum Company of America
(Alcoa), 206–7
Antz, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15
Arab Spring, 87–90
Arrow, Kenneth, 340n
Arrow-Pratt measure of relative
risk aversion, 340
asset ownership, 281–83, 288,
395, 398
asymmetric information, 45, 250,
262n, 274n, 325, 405
See also information
auctions, 115n, 125, 326, 350,
363–68, 373–77, 378
Austen-Smith, D., 369n
automatically enforced
contracts, 155
See also contracts,
enforcement of
Axelrod, R., 310n
axiomatic bargaining theory, 434
backward induction, 45, 184, 187
bargaining and, 198, 255,
262–63, 399
in battle-of-the-sexes
game, 201
deﬁnition of, 186–87
in envelope game, 201
exercises in, 199–203
in extensive-form games,
188–90, 201
in hold-up example, 276
in inﬂation games, 222–23
in location games, 221
Nash equilibrium and, 183–84,
187–92, 198–201
in normal-form games, 190,
199–201
outcomes and, 201
reputation and, 395
risk and, 342
sequential rationality and,
186–88, 198
strategy proﬁles and,
187–88, 190, 191–92, 198
strategy spaces and, 202
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 188–202
terminal nodes and,
186–87, 189
ultimatum bargaining and, 198
Bagwell, K., 314n
balanced contracts, 172
Baldwin, B. A., 30n
“banana trade war,” 314
Banks, J., 369n
bargaining, 2
abbreviated model of,
260–62
abstract representations of, 236,
244, 331–32
analysis of, 244–58
backward induction and, 198,
255, 263, 399
cooperation and, 5, 230–31
demand, 287, 288
disagreement points and, 232,
234, 235, 236n, 242, 245,
260, 269
discounting in,
246–47, 249, 256, 257,
399–400, 402
in employment games, 234–36,
240–42
exercises in, 241–43, 255–58,
398–99
in extensive-form games, 244,
248, 258, 263, 267–68
indifference and, 245, 249, 251,
254, 399
477
INDEX

--- Sayfa 493 ---
Index
478
bargaining (continued)
inefﬁciency and, 250, 400
in inﬁnite-period games, 250,
252, 257
information and, 245, 250,
261, 325
intuition and, 233, 244, 244n,
246n, 251, 254, 262
legal default rules and, 238–40
multilateral, 251–53
Nash bargaining solution and,
434–39
Nash equilibrium and, 245
in noncooperative games, 231,
244–58, 260
in partnership games, 232–34
patience in, 246, 249, 254
period length of, 247
price and, 231
problems concerning,
230–42, 233, 235, 259
rationalizability and, 244n,
249, 254
in repeated games, 316
sequential rationality and, 245,
254, 263
standard bargaining solution
and, 236–38
strategic uncertainty and, 95
strategy proﬁles and, 245
subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium and, 244, 245,
248, 250, 251, 254,
256, 258, 263
surplus and, 234, 236–37,
240–41, 244, 245, 247, 248,
251, 254–57, 266–68, 347
terms of trade and, 231
transfers and, 231–36, 238,
263–65, 267, 269
in two-period, alternating-offer
games, 245, 247, 247, 249, 254
ultimatum, 66, 179, 198,
244–46, 245, 247, 249,
254–58, 283
value and, 230–31, 236, 237,
250, 252
bargaining power
bargaining problems and,
236–38
contracts and, 2
hold-up example and, 288
investments and, 285, 287
negotiation equilibrium and,
265, 268
simple bargaining games and,
246–50
bargaining sets, 232, 233, 241,
245, 248
bargaining solution, 435
bargaining weights
bargaining problems and, 237,
242
contracts and, 276, 277, 282,
286, 287, 322, 347
negotiation equilibrium and,
260, 265–67, 269, 271
repeating games and, 316,
320, 322
simple bargaining games and,
249, 252
Barnett, R., 162n
Baron, D. P., 253n
Basu, K., 106n
Battigalli, P., 195n, 383n, 429n
battle of the sexes game, 29, 29,
54, 56, 71, 201
mixed-strategy Nash
equilibrium in, 135
Nash equilibrium in, 99,
104, 111
Bayes, Thomas, 420n
Bayesian equilibrium, perfect, See
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
Bayesian interpretation of
probability, 417
Bayesian Nash equilibrium, 45
in auctions, 364, 365, 366
Bayesian normal form and, 350,
353
deﬁnition of, 350
exercises in, 353–57
information and, 350–51,
355–57, 403
in investment games, 401
in normal-form games,
350, 353
in partnership games, 402–3
player types and, 350–52
rationalizability and, 350–58
reputation and, 401
strategy proﬁles and, 352
in trade games, 377
See also perfect Bayesian
equilibrium
Bayesian normal form, 328–29,
331–32, 350, 353, 356, 379
Bayesian rationalizability, 45,
350–54
Bayes’ rule, 370–71, 381–84,
397–98, 402, 420
Becker, Gary, 118
behavioral economics, 44
beliefs
Bayesian Nash equilibrium
and, 351
Bayes’ rule and, 381–82
best response and, 56, 58
conditional, 379–80
congruity and, 96, 105
consistency of, 381–82, 394
coordination of, 72–73
deﬁnition of, 24–25, 37
dominance and, 57, 67, 69,
421–25
information sets and, 379–81
jury deliberations and, 369–73
Nash equilibrium and, 100, 110
overview of, 37–39
in partnership games, 83–84
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 379–80, 382–84, 389
player types and, 379–82
prior (initial), 370, 379
in prisoners’ dilemma game, 37
randomness and, 37
rationalizability and, 67–7, 95,
351
reputation and, 396–98
sequential rationality and, 380
signaling and, 394

--- Sayfa 494 ---
479
Index
strategic uncertainty and, 37,
95–96
strategies and, 68, 381–82
updated (posterior), 370,
379–81, 399
Benoit, J. P., 296n
Berlekamp, E. R., 228n
Bernmheim, D., 70n
Bernoulli, Nicolas, 2
Bertrand, Joseph, 115
Bertrand duopoly model,
115–16, 219
exercises in, 124–25, 147
best response, 49, 54, 56
auctions and, 364, 376, 377
backward induction and,
185–88
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
352, 354, 356
beliefs and, 54–59
Bertrand model and, 116
complete sets, 105
congruity and, 99, 105
Cournot duopoly model and,
64, 114, 116–17, 206
deﬁnition of, 54
dominance and, 49, 57–60
in entry games, 208
exercises in, 61–65,
269–70
in ﬁnite games, 54, 58
iterated dominance
and, 67–7
in lobbying games, 134
in location games, 79
in matching pennies game, 132
mixed strategies and,
58–60, 132, 134
Nash equilibrium and, 97, 99,
108, 110, 111, 114, 116, 205
in partnership games, 83–84, 87
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 383, 385
probability and, 69
pure strategy and, 59
rationalizability and, 69, 76–77,
352, 354, 356
security strategies
and, 149
sequential rationality and,
185–86
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 198
in ultimatum bargaining game,
245–46
weak dominance and, 60–61
best-response complete, 105n
Bewley, T., 366n
Binmore, K., 409n
Blackburn, Barbara, 102n
board games, 229
Borel, Emile, 2
branches, of extensive-form
trees, 10–15, 175, 178,
260, 262
breach remedies, and contracts,
161–65, 167, 169
Broseta, Bruno, 107
Buckley, P. J., 315n
Bug’s Life, A, 9, 11, 12, 15
Bulow, J. I., 86n, 210n
Bustamante, Cruz, 121
Buzard, K., 281n
calculus, 411–15
California voter recall of 2003,
120–23
capacity constraints, 207, 208
duopoly with, 137–39
dynamic price competition
with, 215–17
Cartesian product, 23, 411
charitable projects, 26
chess, 2, 7, 148, 225n, 226
Chiappori, S., 136n
Chicago school, 239
chicken (game), 29, 30
mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium
and, 135
Nash equilibrium and, 98
Chiquita, 314
Chomp game, 229
Clayton Act (1914), 312n
closed rule legislature, 252
Coase, R. H., 238–39
codomains, 412
coin-toss examples, 38
collusion, 311–13, 319
Columbus Research,
204, 376
common knowledge, 44–45, 68,
70, 71, 95, 188, 226, 347,
375, 377, 404
common-value settings, 367
communication, 72, 95–96
competition, 164–65
advertising and, 204–5, 219
Bertrand model and, 219
cheating and, 312, 313
Cournot duopoly model and,
205–6, 221
dynamic monopolies and,
209–11
in entry games, 209
in limit-capacity model,
206–9, 219
in location games, 79–81,
90–93
in parlor games, 224–26
perfect, 231n
price and, 80–81, 219
security strategies and, 149–53
strict, 148, 225
complementarities, strategic,
81–87
complete contingent plan, 22, 24,
180
complete contracts, See contracts
conditional dominance, See
dominance
conditional probability, 419
conﬂict, 5
congruity
beliefs and, 96, 105
best response in, 105
communication and,
95, 96
contracts and, 154, 158
deﬁnition of, 96, 105
efﬁciency and, 103–4
in matrix games, 99–100

--- Sayfa 495 ---
480
Index
congruity (continued)
Nash equilibrium and,
97–99, 101
overview of, 96–97
probability and, 104–5
rationalizability in, 104–5
in repeated games, 104–5, 296
reputation and, 296
social welfare and, 101–4
strategic tension and,
71–72, 104
strategic uncertainty and,
97–99, 104
strategy spaces and, 105
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 191
weak, 97, 105–6, 158, 191
conjectures, correlated, 421–25
consumer inducements, 212–13
continuation payoff, 192
continuation value, 192–94, 304
contracts
advertising and, 219
asset ownership and,
281, 282
backward induction and, 342
beliefs and, 154
binding, 53, 404
bonus, 342, 345
breach remedies of, 161–64,
167, 169
collusion and, 312–13
complete, 158, 159, 161–62
courts and, 157–64, 168,
170–71, 261, 270, 275–78
deﬁnition of, 154
disagreement value
and, 282, 285
discretionary environments and,
158–61, 168
dominance and, 53
dynamic, 274
efﬁciency of, 156, 158, 163,
164–65, 168, 275, 281, 342,
404, 405
in employment games, 341–47
enforcement of, 4, 155–65,
167–71, 219, 230, 232, 262,
264, 270, 274, 275–76, 312,
313–14, 321, 341, 404
equilibrium and, 313–14, 404
examples of, 154, 230
exercises in, 125, 167–72
external players in, 155,
157–64, 170–71
failure to reach agreement on,
232, 240–41, 250, 261, 322
ﬁxed-wage, 345
forcing, 279
implicit, 313
incentives in, 154, 263–65,
274–81, 340–42, 346–47,
404
incomplete, 161–64
in induced games, 157–61, 163,
164–65, 165, 166, 168
information and, 274n, 404
investment and, 275, 285
menu of, 404
meta-level, 262n
Nash equilibrium and,
157–60, 164, 165, 171
negotiation equilibrium and,
259–71, 276, 280
negotiation of, 275, 277–81,
313, 314, 316–18, 320
option, 279–81, 288
in partnership games, 82
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 389
phases of, 155, 230
player types and, 404–5
price guarantees in, 215
principal-agent game, 340–46
reputation and, 312–13
risk and, 336–48
selection of, 4, 230
self-enforced, 308
speciﬁc-performance, 286
spot, 262, 286
tensions in, 161n, 274
theory of, 4n
transfers and, 156–58, 160, 162,
164, 166, 264, 276–78, 282,
286, 341
underlying games and, 156–65
veriﬁability and, 155, 159–61,
163, 167, 274–76, 340–41, 404
contractual relationships, 4
technology of, 156, 159,
166–68, 269–70
convergence, 84, 85n
Conway, J. H., 228n
cooperative game theory
bargaining and, 5, 230–32
contracts and, 4–5
joint action and, 4, 260–62
ongoing relationships and,
291–92, 297–301
prisoners’ dilemma and, 28–29
trade and, 9, 313–14
coordination, See congruity
coordination games, 28–29, 54,
95–96
Nash equilibrium in, 97–101, 134
coordination problem, 71–72
correlated conjectures, 421–25
Costa-Gomes, Miguel, 107
Costinot, A., 373n
Cournot, Augustin, 2, 113
Cournot duopoly model, 35, 41,
53, 64
advertising and, 205–6, 219
Bayesian Nash equilibrium in,
351–52, 356
best response in, 64, 114, 124,
126, 208
contracts and, 219
exercises in, 65, 124, 126,
181, 221
limit-capacity models and, 206–9
Nash equilibrium in,
113–15, 205–6, 311
negotiation equilibrium in, 271
outputs and, 205
prisoners’ dilemma and, 114
rationalizability in, 124, 351–52
strategy proﬁles in, 114, 206
strategy spaces in, 124
subgame perfect equilibrium
in, 205
Cournot oligopoly, 221
courts and contracts, 157–64,
167–69, 261, 270, 275–78

--- Sayfa 496 ---
481
Index
Crawford, Vincent, 107
crime-and-police model, 118, 125
cumulative probability function,
418
cutoff rule, 180
cutoff value, 323
damage awards, 161–64
Damme, E. van, 58n
Darley, J., 143n
Davis, Gray, 120
Dealey, William, 102
decision nodes, See nodes
default outcome, See
disagreement points
derivative of a function, 413–14
differentiated duopoly market
games, 356
differentiated-product oligopoly,
115n
disagreement points, 232
bargaining and, 232, 234, 235,
242, 245–47, 253, 254, 257,
260, 264–66, 347, 398–400
discounting, discount factors,
246–47
in hold-up example, 277,
278, 280
in inﬁnite games, 297, 299,
302, 304, 319–21
in joint decisions, 269, 271
in Nash bargaining solution, 434
and negotiation equilibrium,
260, 264–66
in prisoners’ dilemma, 302
in repeated games, 314, 316
in repeating games, 292, 297,
299, 304, 309, 312, 319–22
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 302
Disneyland, 71, 72, 95
Disney Studios, 9–11, 14
dispute resolution, 74–75
distortions, 82
divisible good, 231
domains, 412
dominance
in auctions, 364, 365
in battle-of-the-sexes game, 54
best response and, 49, 57,
57–60, 67, 421–25
conditional, 188, 195–97,
428–29
contracts and, 53
correlated conjectures and,
421–25
deﬁnition of, 50, 51
exercises in, 61–65
forward induction and, 195–97
game strategy and, 49–53
illustrations of, 50
in limit-capacity model, 207
in matching-pennies
game, 54
mixed strategies and, 51, 353
Pareto, 28n
in partnership games, 83–84
in prisoners’ dilemma, 52–53
rationality/rationalizability
and, 52, 67–77, 350–51, 353,
425-427
in repeated games, 313, 316
strategy and, 49–51, 54
strict, 51, 61, 68, 70–71,
79–80
weak, 60–61, 364, 365
See also iterated dominance
double-marginalization
problem, 218
Downs, A., 120n
DreamWorks SKG, 9, 15
Dvorak, August, 102–3
Dvorak keyboard, 102–3
dynamic monopolies, 210–15,
220, 222
dynamic price competition, with
capacity constraints, 210–13
dynamic settings, 274, 313
contracts and, 274
examples of, 291
information and, 392–409
economic games, 13–14
Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro, 2
education as signaling
mechanism, 392–95
efﬁciency
in auctions, 365
bargaining and, 233, 236–37,
241, 244, 245–46, 250, 252,
271
collusion and, 311
concept of, 53
contracts and, 156, 158, 163–
65, 168, 275, 342
equilibrium and, 373
in hold-up example, 278
information and, 361, 373, 404
joint, 104, 115
in Nash bargaining solution, 436
Nash equilibrium and, 101–2,
108, 110, 305
negotiation equilibrium
and, 271
outcomes and, 53, 69, 101–2,
126, 156, 158, 161, 233, 237,
254, 271, 280, 286, 287, 311,
362
Pareto, 53–54
in partnership games, 85
in prisoners’ dilemma, 53,
101–2
in repeated games, 306, 311,
312, 318
signaling and, 394
strategic tension and, 53, 71, 104
in strategy proﬁles, 53
effort constraint, See incentive
compatibility conditions
Eisner, Michael, 9–15
elements, 409
employment games
bargaining in, 234–36, 240–42
contracts in, 341–47
endpoints, 410
enforcement of contracts, 4,
154–65, 230, 232, 262, 274,
275–76, 312
court-imposed breach remedies
and, 161–65
discretionary environments
and, 158–61
high-powered incentives
and, 264

--- Sayfa 497 ---
482
Index
enforcement of contracts
(continued)
international trade agreements
and, 313–14
spot contracts and, 262
unveriﬁable investments and,
278–81
See also contracts
entry games, 183–84, 206–9, 209
exercises in, 220–23
equilibrium, 104
auction-bidding and, 365, 366,
373–74
bargaining and, 249, 251,
252–53
contracts and, 313–14, 404
exercises in, 123–31
investments and, 287
jury game and, 372, 373
negotiation, 262–63, 266–69,
271, 276, 286–88, 316–17
in partnership games, 100–101
perfect Bayesian, 45,
378–89, 394, 396–403
in repeated games, 295, 296,
302, 303, 305–9, 311,
317–19, 321
reputation and, 296, 398
in security strategies, 149
strategic tension and, 106
symmetric, 309
in trade games, 377
in used-car game, 361–62
See also Bayesian Nash
equilibrium; mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium; Nash
equilibrium; subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium
European Union (EU), 117, 314
events, 417
ex ante evaluation, 186
expectation damages, 162, 163,
163, 164
exercise in, 166–69
expected payoffs
in bargaining games, 399, 400
beliefs and, 38–39
best response and, 58, 67
contracts and, 337–40, 342,
343–44
deﬁnition of, 37
dominance and, 50, 58, 60
in gift game, 330
illustration of, 38
in investment games, 397
in jury games, 373
in lobbying games, 134
in lotteries, 339
in matching pennies game, 132
mixed strategies and, 40–41,
132
in partnership games, 83
preferences and, 337–39
risk and, 338–40
sequential rationality and, 381
in used-car games, 362
expected value, 38, 416
extensive-form games, 9–17
backward induction in, 191,
198–99, 201
bargaining in, 244, 248, 258,
263, 267, 283, 400–401
Bayesian Nash equilibrium in,
350–51
detailed descriptions of, 175–79
exercises in, 17–21, 33–35,
181–82, 201, 272–73, 283,
287, 331–35, 347, 356, 402–3
illustrations of, 24–25
job-offer games and, 400–401
Katzenberg-Eisner game
as, 9–17
Nash equilibrium in, 110, 173,
183–84
normal-form games and, 27–35,
183–84, 328–30
perfect Bayesian equilibrium in,
385, 387–89
rationalizability in, 173,
350–51, 356
repeated games and, 293
representations of, 9–11, 26, 35
reputation and, 293, 395–96
signaling and, 393
subgame perfect equilibrium in,
188–91
extensive-form rationalizability,
429
externality, 274n
externally enforced contracts,
155, 157–60, 162, 169, 219,
262, 275–76, 285, 313, 321,
341, 404
Feddersen, T. J., 369n
Federal Trade Commission Act
(1914), 312n
Feldman, Michael, 6n
Ferejohn, J. A., 253n
ﬁnite games, 137, 163, 191, 224
ﬁnite sets, 410
focal points, 73n
folk theorem, 305n
forward induction, 195–97
frequentist interpretation
of probability, 417
Fudenberg, D., 6n, 305n, 383n
functions, 411–15
Gale, David, 228n
game, deﬁnition of, 3
game show exercise, 18
game theory
cognitive bias in, 46
contracts and, 154
cooperative, 4–5
experimental, 106–7
interpretations of probability in,
417–18
market dynamics and, 204
mathematical representations
of, 7
models and modeling in, 2, 42,
53n, 117, 219, 259, 297
noncooperative, 3–4, 4n
real-world, 106, 297
Geanakoplos, J., 86n
Geffen, David, 9
General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), 314
general human capital, 287
gift game, 327–29, 378–81,
383, 403
goodwill, 313–23

--- Sayfa 498 ---
483
Index
Groseclose, T., 136n
Grossman, S., 275n, 341n
groups
decision-making in, 3
incentives in, 53, 274n
Grout, P., 275n
Guy, R. K., 228n
Hand, Learned, 207
Harsanyi, John, 189n, 327n
Hart, O. D., 275n, 341n
hawk-dove game, See chicken
hold-up example, 274,
275–78, 276, 279, 281, 285,
287, 288, 317
Hotelling, H., 78n, 120n
human capital, 283–84, 395
general vs. speciﬁc, 287
imperfect recall, 177
incentive compatibility conditions,
343, 344n, 404
incentives, group, 53, 274n
incentives, individual, 52–53
asset ownership and, 282,
283, 288
contracts and, 274–81, 286,
340–42, 405
high-powered, 264
in hold-up example, 276,
277–78
in induced games, 160
information and, 369
in investment games, 396–97
in prisoners’ dilemma, 101–2
in repeated games, 296, 298,
299, 304, 312, 317
risk and, 336, 342
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 191
incomplete information
auctions and, 363–68
deﬁnition of, 326
gift game and, 327–30
information aggregation and,
368–73
job-market signaling and,
392–95
jury deliberations and, 369–73
lemons in used car market and,
360–62
Nash equilibrium and
rationalizability and, 350–52
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 378–84
reputation and, 395–98
social-choice problems
and, 369
independence of irrelevant
alternatives (IIA), 436
induced games
bargaining in, 232–34, 237,
249
contracts and, 157, 157–58,
159, 160, 162, 165, 167, 342
repeated games and, 296,
299, 317
industrial organization, 165
and advertising, 204–5
inefﬁcient coordination, 103–4,
274n
inﬁnite games, 191, 350
inﬁnite-period, alternating-offer
games, 250, 252, 256
inﬁnite sets, 410
information
actions and, 325
aggregation, 368–73
asymmetric, 45, 250, 262n,
274n, 325, 326, 362
imperfect, 178, 325
incomplete, 250, 314, 326, 327,
350, 351, 355, 360–68, 378,
389, 393, 396, 398, 400
private, 325, 326, 328, 329,
350, 351, 363, 369, 378, 393,
398, 403, 404
information sets, 12, 15, 22, 24,
25–26, 36
backward induction and, 184,
187–90
in bargaining games, 245, 261
beliefs and, 379–82
crazy, 177, 177
deﬁnition of, 176
in investment games, 397–98
in Katzenberg-Eisner game, 13,
31–32
nontrivial, 45
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 378–84
in repeated games, 293–94
signaling and, 394
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 198
interdependence, 1, 5, 83n
intersection of sets, 411
intervals, 410
invariance, 436
investment levels, 283–85
investments, 274–82, 395–98
exercises in, 283–90
general vs. speciﬁc, 283
incomplete information and,
395–98
unveriﬁable, 274–81
iterated dominance, 425–27
Bayesian Nash equilibrium
and, 351
conditional, 428–29
deﬁnition of, 69
illustrations of, 68, 70
in location games, 79–80
in mixed-strategy Nash
equilibrium, 137
in Nash equilibrium, 107
overview of, 67–7
in partnership games, 86–87
strategies and, 69–71
weak, 427–28
Jackson, M., 203n
Jerry-Rosemary bargaining
example, 234–38, 241, 261
jobs, signaling and, 392–95, 400
Jobs, Steve, 9
joint, use of term, 86n, 104
joint decisions, joint action, 45
bargaining and, 260–65, 261,
267, 268, 270–71
contracts and, 260–71, 279,
286–87
default, 260, 261
exercises in, 284

--- Sayfa 499 ---
484
Index
joint decisions, joint action
(continued)
information and, 368
in Jerry-Rosemary example,
234–36, 235, 261
negotiation equilibrium and,
259–71
reputation and, 315–17
standard bargaining solutions
and, 259–60, 263
jointly optimal effort, 85–87
joint value, 156
bargaining and, 233–37,
240–42, 246, 250, 265
contracts and, 156, 158n
hold-up example and,
276–78, 281
negotiation equilibrium and,
265, 267, 269
jury deliberations, and
information aggregation,
369–73
Kagel, J., 107n
Kakutani, S., 433n
Kakutani’s ﬁxed-point
theorem, 433
Kartik, N., 373n
Kasparov, Garry, 226
Katzenberg, Jeffrey, 9–15, 22
Katzenberg-Eisner game, 14, 17,
22, 31, 42
Kim, J., 171n
Kim, L., 171n
Klemperer, E., 86n
Klimenko, M., 314n
Kreps, David, 107n, 175n, 315n,
383n, 396n
Krishna, V., 296n
Kuhn, H. W., 10n, 188n, 226n
labels, 176, 178
See also actions; information
sets; joint decisions, joint
action
Latané, B., 143n
LaVelle, P. J., 121n
legal default rules, 238–40
legislative bargaining model,
251–53
leisure games, 5, 148
Levitt, S., 136n
limit-capacity model, 206–9, 219
limit quantity, 220
lobbying game, 133, 133–34
exercises in, 141
location games, 78–81, 118–19
exercises in, 90–93, 123–31, 221
and voting, 118–20
lotteries, 337–39, 345–46
Luce, R. D., 10n, 29n
McAfee, P., 366n
McClintock, Tom, 121
McMillan, J., 117n, 366n
Maggi, G., 314n
Marelius, J., 120n, 121n
Marienbad game, 226–27
markets
efﬁciency and, 361
extensive-form games and,
15–17
information and, 331, 360–63
rationalizability and, 352, 357
surplus and, 361
value and, 361
Maskin, E., 305n
matching pennies game, 28, 29, 54
as example of non-Nash
equilibrium, 98, 100, 132
Nash equilibrium and, 134
as strictly competitive, 148
matrix, 27
normal-form, 32, 32
matrix games, 28, 224
best response in, 58, 59
contracts and, 157, 166–67
dominance in, 52, 55–57, 59,
63, 65
exercise in, 226–29, 269–70,
317–24, 331–32, 354–57, 386
experimental game theory and,
106
iterated dominance in, 68
Nash equilibrium in, 99–100
negotiation equilibrium in, 270
random events and, 329–30
rationalizability in, 68, 70–71,
73–76, 107, 351, 353, 355–57
repeated games and, 294, 308,
309, 317
reputation in, 292–96
maxmin payoff level, 149–51
maxmin strategy, 149–51
mechanisms, and social-choice
problems, 369
median voter theorem, 118–20
Meese, G. B., 30n
Michie, J., 315n
Milgrom, Paul, 86n, 366n, 396n
Miller, D., 262n
mind games, 67, 69
Mirrlees, James, 364n
mixed strategies
best response and, 58–60,
132, 133
deﬁnition of, 38
dominance and, 51, 353
exercises in, 39–41
in investment games, 397
in normal-form games, 40–41,
124–26
probability and, 37–40, 134–35,
137, 140–44
pure strategies and, 50–51, 134,
135, 137, 141, 142, 144
mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium,
431–33
deﬁnition of, 133–34
exercises in, 140–47, 353
rationalizable strategies and, 137
in tennis game, 135–36
in two-player games, 137
monopolies, 209–12, 311,
312n, 319
dynamic, 210–15, 220, 222
monopoly distortion, 219
Montmort, Pierre-Remond de, 2
Morgenstern, Osker, 2, 10n, 28n,
39n, 49n, 148n, 337n
moves of nature, See random
events, randomness
multilateral bargaining, 251–53
multivariate functions, 415

--- Sayfa 500 ---
485
Index
Muthoo, A., 250n
Myerson, R. B., 6n
Nash, John, 2, 49n, 51n, 97–98,
114n, 137n, 189n, 237n,
257n, 434
Nash bargaining solution, 434–39
Nash equilibrium, 45, 97–101, 98,
99–100, 431–33
advertising and, 205–6
backward induction and, 184,
187–91, 198, 199–202
bargaining and, 245, 249
in battle-of-the-sexes game, 95,
99, 135
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350–54
Bayesian normal form and, 350
beliefs and, 95
in Bertrand duopoly model, 116
best response in, 97, 99–101,
107–8, 110, 111, 114, 116,
124, 126
congruity and, 97–101,
108, 109
contracts and, 157–61, 164,
165, 171
in Cournot duopoly model, 114,
116–17, 205–6, 271
in crime-and-police model,
118, 125
exercises in, 107–12, 124–27,
221, 257, 269, 271, 356
in extensive-form games, 110,
173, 183–84
in ﬁnite games, 431–33
in gift games, 378–79
in location games, 119
in matrix games, 98–100
median voter theorem and,
119–20
one-shot games and, 350
in parlor games, 225–26
in partnership games, 100–101
in prisoners’ dilemma,
98–99, 114
pure strategy and, 111, 133,
183, 225
rationalizability and, 95, 97–98,
100, 101, 173, 350–54
in repeated games, 294, 295,
298, 305, 306, 308, 316–19
security strategy and, 148–49
social welfare and, 101–4
strategic uncertainty and, 95, 97
strategy proﬁles, 99, 101–2, 105
strict, 99–100, 111
in strictly competitive games,
148–49
in tariff-setting game, 117
in voter game, 119–20, 122
See also Bayesian Nash
equilibrium; mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium; subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium
negotiation, See bargaining
negotiation equilibrium, 262–63,
266–69, 271, 276, 286–88,
316–17
Neumann, John von, 2, 10n, 28n,
39n, 49n, 114n, 148n, 150n,
226n, 337n
Newborn, M., 226n
nodes, 10–15
beliefs and, 381
chance, 327, 342
decision, 12–13, 17, 176–78,
184, 187, 209, 245, 260, 261,
264, 327, 329, 395, 396
in extensive-form games,
175–78
in family trees, 176n
initial, 10, 175, 176, 187–90,
209
joint-decision, 260, 262, 263,
267
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 380, 381
predecessor, 175, 176
representations of, 10
successor, 175, 176, 188, 189
terminal, See terminal nodes
noncooperative game models, 2,
7, 236, 260
extensive form, 7–17
normal (strategic) form, 7
noncooperative game theory, 3–4,
4n, 244
normal-form games, 28
backward induction and, 183,
190, 200
in Bayesian Nash equilibrium,
350, 353–57
best response and, 62
exercises in, 40–41, 126,
140–41
extensive-form games and, 31,
183–84, 328–30, 350
illustrations of, 29, 133
interpretations of, 30–31
iterated dominance in, 69
Nash equilibrium and, 97–101,
114, 183
in partnership games, 82–83
random events and, 328–30
rationalizability and, 58, 64,
73–77, 173
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 190
underlying games and, 156
oligopoly, models of, 2
one-deviation property, 194, 300
one-shot games, 31, 47, 96
contracts and, 313
information and, 357
Nash equilibrium in, 313
repeated games and, 291, 292,
311, 313
option contracts, 279–81
Osborne, M. J., 6n
outcomes, 27, 39, 56, 69
backward induction and, 201
bargaining and, 231, 232,
233n, 234, 236, 238, 241,
245, 251, 254, 255–56, 260,
261, 269, 399
contracts and, 156–67, 337, 342,
343, 345
efﬁciency of, 101–4, 158,
233, 237, 254, 271, 280, 286,
311, 362
negotiation equilibrium and,
259, 260, 265, 266, 269

--- Sayfa 501 ---
486
Index
outcomes (continued)
random events and, 328, 337–38,
341, 345
in repeated games, 293–96,
311, 316, 323
in strictly competitive
games, 148
outputs, 205, 207, 220, 223, 270
“overlapping generations”
environment, 320–21
ownership
asset, 281–83
hold-up example and,
275–77, 281, 285, 317
value of, 210–13
owner-tenant contracts, 336
painting sale example, 179, 179,
244–46
Palacios-Huerta, I., 136n
Pareto, Wilfredo, 53n
Pareto coordination game, 28, 29n
as example of mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium, 135
as example of Nash
equilibrium, 98, 102
Pareto dominance, 28n
Pareto efﬁciency, 53–54
parlor games, 1–2, 224–29
See also speciﬁc games
participation constraints, 343, 404
partnership games, 81–87, 84
and bargaining, 232–34
exercises in, 90–93
Nash equilibrium in, 100–101
and strategic complementaries,
81–87
paths, 12, 175–76, 328–29, 379
patience vs. impatience
bargaining and, 246,
249, 254
in repeated games, 304, 306
See also discounting
payoffs, 13
additive, 233
in auctions, 364, 374, 377
backward induction and, 183,
186–88, 225
bargaining and, 6, 232–37, 240–
41, 245, 247–49, 251, 254–58,
261–63, 267, 398–400
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350, 352, 354–56
in Bertrand model, 116
concave, 338–40
continuation, 192
contracts and, 156–59, 166,
171, 276, 280, 281, 336–40,
342, 405
convex, 339n
in Cournot duopoly model, 114,
116, 271
deﬁnition of, 13–14, 44
in demand games, 287
discounting and, 246–47,
249, 297
in entry games, 209
exercises in, 39–41
expected, in mixed strategies,
40–41
in extensive-form games,
14–21, 393
in guessing games, 333–34
in hold-up example, 275, 281
in induced games, 158
in investment games, 398
in jury game, 371, 373
in Katzenberg-Eisner game,
14–15
in LCD monitor example, 210–13
linear, 338, 340
in market game, 332
in matching pennies
game, 148
in matrix games, 355
maximization of, 45, 54, 62,
158n, 170, 218, 284, 346,
348, 379, 405
maxmin strategy and, 149–51
mixed-strategy Nash
equilibrium and, 140
Nash equilibrium and, 100, 107,
115, 118
negative, 212, 364, 394, 395
negotiation equilibrium and,
264, 266, 269, 271
in normal-form games, 24,
329, 330
in partnership games, 82,
86, 270
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 379, 380–81, 388, 389
preferences and, 13, 17, 43,
337–39, 345–46
in prisoners’ dilemma game,
37–38, 52–53
random events and, 328–34
rationalizability and, 346, 350
in repeated games, 292–88,
294–97, 299, 302, 304–6,
308, 311, 312, 314, 316,
317, 321
risk and, 336–40
security strategies and, 149
in tire manufacturer-retailer
example, 218
transferable, 232–33
in voter game, 122–23
payoff ties, 187
Pearce, D., 195n, 429n
Pearce, D. G., 58n, 70n
pedestrian struck by car example,
143, 168–69
perfect Bayesian equilibrium, 45,
378–89, 394, 396–403
exercises in, 384–91
pooling, 383–87, 389, 394,
401
separating, 383–87, 389, 394
perfect information, 178, 188,
191, 224–26, 257
perfect recall, 177
Pesendorfer, W., 369n
pigs game, 29, 30, 98, 98, 99
Pixar Animation Studios, 9
play, history of, 292, 298, 309,
320, 322
player types
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350, 351–52
beliefs and, 379–82,
397–400, 402
contracts and, 404–5
deﬁnition of, 326

--- Sayfa 502 ---
487
Index
information and, 326, 328,
330, 331
moves of nature and, 326–30
partnership games and, 402–3
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 378–83, 387, 399, 400,
402, 403
reputation and, 393–94, 398
signaling and, 393
playing-card games, 20–21
points, 409
poker games, 332, 333–34,
357–58, 389
politics and game theory, 80–81
legislative bargaining, 251–53
median voter theorem, 118–20
voting games, 80, 120–23
pooling perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, 383–87, 389,
394, 401
Posner, R., 171n
Posner’s nuisance rule, 171
Pratt, John, 340n
predecessor nodes, 175, 176
price, 206
bargaining and, 231, 270
Bertrand duopoly model
and, 115
capacity constraints and, 138,
210–13
commitment, 214, 220
dynamic monopolies and,
210–13
ﬁxed, 263–64
guarantees, 213–15
optimal, 212, 220
random events and, 331
price-competition game, 15–17,
16
Prince of Egypt (ﬁlm), 9
principal-agent game, 340–46
Principal-Agent Model with
Moral Hazard, 340
prisoners’ dilemma
beliefs in, 37
dominance and, 52–53
efﬁciency in, 53, 101–2
individual incentives in, 101–2
Nash equilibrium in, 101–2,
111, 114
normal-form games and, 28–29
partnership games and, 85
payoffs in, 52–53
probability in, 37
repeated games and,
298–301, 319–20, 323
strategic tension in, 52
tariff-setting game and, 117
private values, 367
probability, 415–20
auctions and, 125, 363, 364n,
369, 373–74
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
351–54, 356
best response and, 54
congruity and, 104–5
contracts and, 169, 337
information and, 327–30, 332,
361, 362, 370–73, 393, 398
investment games and, 397, 401
mixed strategy and, 50, 353–54
Nash equilibrium and, 118
payoffs and, 38, 38–41, 40, 41,
342, 345, 355, 374, 385
perfect Bayesian equilibrium,
379–82, 384, 388
player types and, 403
positive, 69, 105n
prisoners’ dilemma game and, 37
raiionalizability and, 350n,
351–55
randomness and, 323,
327–30, 332, 333, 341, 347
risk and, 337, 346
probability distribution,
37–39, 83, 416, 417
product set, 426
proper subgames, 188, 189
property rights, 239
protests, 87–90, 93–94, 358–59
punishment, 1, 184n, 296, 298,
303, 306, 314, 319
pure strategy
best response and, 59
deﬁnition of, 38
and dominance, 51, 58
mixed strategy and, 50–51,
133–34, 137
Nash equilibrium and, 111,
133, 183, 225, 353
payoffs and, 133n
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 383
in repeated games, 294, 308
Qin, C.-Z., 203n
quadratic functions, 414–15
QWERTY keyboard, inefﬁciency
of, 102–3
Raiffa, H., 29n
Ramey, G., 314n
random events, randomness
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350, 353
Bayesian normal form and,
328–33
beliefs and, 37, 397–98
contracts and, 336, 346–47
exercises about, 331–35
exogenous random events,
45, 377
explanation of, 325–26
extensive-form games and, 327,
328, 330–34
guessing games and, 333
information and, 327–30, 336
lotteries and, 338
market games and, 331–32
matrix games and, 329–30,
332
Nash equilibrium and, 331, 350
normal-form games and,
328–30
outcomes and, 328,
337–38, 341
payoffs and, 327–34
player types and, 330, 331
preferences and, 274
probability and, 323,
327–30, 332, 333,
341, 347
rationalizability and, 328
risk and, 336

--- Sayfa 503 ---
488
Index
random events, randomness
(continued)
strategy proﬁles and, 328,
329, 332
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 331
two-player game and,
135–36
random variables, 416
range, of function, 412
rationalizability/rationality, 2, 24,
27, 43–44
backward induction and, 187
bargaining and, 244n, 249, 254
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350–54
Bayesian normal form and, 350,
353, 356
beliefs and, 56–59, 67, 351
best response and, 58
congruity and, 104–5
deﬁnition of, 43
dominance and, 52, 67–77,
350–51, 425–27
exercises in, 73–77, 126–27,
346–49
formal deﬁnition of
rationalizability, 427
in extensive-form games, 173,
350, 351, 353, 356
in game strategy, 45, 67–73
in hold-up example, 278
in investment games, 397
in jury games, 373
in location games, 80
in matching pennies game, 132
in matrix games, 73, 350,
353–55, 357
Nash equilibrium and, 97–98,
100, 173
in normal-form games, 173,
350, 353, 355, 357
in partnership games,
83–87
payoffs and, 43, 350–52,
355–57
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 378–80
player types and, 328
sequential, 184–88
signaling and, 394
and subgame perfect
equilibrium, 188
in voter game, 122–23
real functions, 412
real world, game theory and,
106, 250
Rebel Without a Cause, 30n
reciprocity, 314
regimes, 263, 316–17
regular strategy, See pure
strategy
reliance damages, 164, 165,
167–68
remodeling project, contracts
pertaining to, 155–56,
158–60
renegotiation, 314, 318, 320
repeated games
bargaining in, 316, 320
Bertrand oligopoly model
and, 318
best response in, 306–7
collusion in, 311–13, 319
congruity in, 296, 298
contracts in, 311, 312–13,
317–18, 321
Cournot duopoly model and,
311–13
defection in, 299, 304
deﬁnition of, 292
disagreement points in, 314,
316, 320
discounting in, 292, 297, 299,
307, 309, 312, 319–22
dominance in, 313, 316
efﬁciency in, 306, 311, 312
exercises in, 306–10
extensive-form games and,
293
future behavior in, 291
goodwill in, 313–23
history of play in, 292, 298,
309, 320, 322
induced games and, 296,
299, 317
as inﬁnitely repeated, 297–301,
306–7, 309, 311, 319–22
information sets and, 295, 298
intuition and, 296
Nash equilibrium in, 294, 295,
298, 305, 306, 308, 316–19
negotiation equilibrium in,
316–17
payoffs in, 292–97, 299, 302,
304–6, 308, 309, 312, 314,
316, 317, 321, 322
prisoners’ dilemma and,
298–301, 319–20, 323
pure strategy in, 294, 308
rationalizability in, 294
reputation in, 290–309, 311,
313–23
stage games and, 292–99,
302, 305, 307, 309, 311,
315–20, 323
standard bargaining solution and,
316, 320, 322
strategies in, 296, 297–98,
312, 319
strategy proﬁles in, 295, 296,
303, 306
subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium in, 294–98, 302,
303, 305, 307, 309, 312,
316–22
and surplus, 316
transfer and, 314, 316, 317, 321
trigger strategy in, 298, 303–8,
311–14, 321
two-period games and, 292–96,
308, 315–18
uncertainty in, 314
reputation
bargaining and, 361
collusion and, 311
congruity and, 296, 298
deﬁnition of, 292
future behavior and, 291
game theory and, 292
and goodwill, 313–23
history of play and,
292, 298
intuition and, 296

--- Sayfa 504 ---
489
Index
Nash equilibrium and, 294,
295, 317
negotiation equilibrium and,
316–17
player types and, 393–94
in repeated games,
290–309, 311
in stage games, 292–95, 313–23
standard bargaining solution
and, 316
strategies and, 296
strategy proﬁles and, 295
subgame perfect equilibrium
and, 294–96, 316
restitution damages, 165, 165,
168
Riordan, Richard, 121
risk, contracts and, 336–48
risk aversion, 336–41, 343,
345, 346
risk neutral, 339, 341, 344,
345, 347
risk premium, 339, 343–45
Roberts, John, 86n, 396n
rock-paper-scissors game, 19
exercise in, 64, 144
Rosenthal, A. M., 143n
Ross, S., 409n
Roth, A., 107n
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 71
Rubinstein, A., 6n, 250n
rule-of-thumb actions, 111
Savage, L., 39n
Schelling, Thomas, 72n
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 120–23
sealed-bid auction examples,
363–68
second-price auctions, 364, 365,
366, 374
security payoff level, deﬁnition
of, 149
security strategies, 149, 225
exercises in, 151–53
self-enforced contracts, 155,
157–58, 312, 313–14, 317–18
See also contracts,
enforcement of
Selten, Reinhard, 189n, 383n
separating perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, 383–87,
389, 394
sequential best response, 428
sequential moves, 325, 378–89
sequential rationality, 184–89,
207, 219, 224, 225, 245, 254,
263, 348, 378–80
sets, 409–11
See also bargaining sets;
information sets
Shaked, A., 250n
Shavell, S., 162n
Sherman Act (1890), 312, 313
Shimoji, M., 195n, 429n
signaling, 392–95, 400
Simon, Bill, 121
simple bargaining, See
bargaining
simultaneous choice/selection,
16–17, 56, 71, 85, 110, 111,
117–18, 143, 202, 205,
210–11, 219, 268, 271, 287,
292–94, 308, 318, 350, 355,
357, 361, 365, 375–77, 403
slope, 412–13
social, use of term, 86n, 104
social-choice problems, 369
social unrest, 87–90, 93–94,
358–59
solution concepts, 2, 3, 45, 190,
350
space, 411
SPE, See subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium
speciﬁc investments, 283
Spence, A. Michael, 360n, 393n
spot-contractibles, 5
spot contracts, 262, 286
Stackelberg, Heinrich von, 184n
stage games
collusion and, 311–13
discounting and, 297, 302–4
inﬁnitely repeated games and,
297
Nash equilibrium and, 294n,
319
Nash proﬁles and, 295,
296, 298, 302, 303, 306,
311–13, 318
payoffs and, 297, 302, 305, 322
repeated games and, 292–95,
297, 298, 302, 305, 307, 308,
311, 316–20, 323
trigger strategy and, 298
stag hunt game, 71–72
Stahl, L., 247n
Staiger, R. W., 314n
standard bargaining solution
asset ownership and, 282
bargaining problems and,
236–38, 240–41, 259, 260
deﬁnition of, 237
hold-up example and, 276,
279, 280
joint decisions/actions and,
259–60, 263, 270–71, 284–86
Nash’s work on, 237n, 434–39
negotiation equilibrium and,
263–66
procedure for calculating, 238
repeated games and, 316,
320, 322
simple bargaining games and,
244, 246, 249, 251, 257, 347
state space, 415-416
static games, See one-shot games
status, 286
Stiglitz, Joseph, 360n
Stokey, N. L., 210n
strategic complementarities, 81–87
strategic form, See normal-form
games
strategic interaction
deﬁnition of, 1
dominance of pure strategy,
50–51
in game theory, 6, 106, 260
strategic settings
deﬁnition of, 1
experimental game theory and,
106, 107
information and, 325
random events and, 329–30
See also speciﬁc setting

--- Sayfa 505 ---
490
Index
strategic tension, 6, 52–53, 71–72
contracts and, 274n
dominance and, 52–53
efﬁciency and, 53, 71, 104, 274n
ﬁrst, 53–54, 104, 161
inefﬁcient coordination
and, 274n
investments and, 274
negotiation and, 274
in prisoners’ dilemma, 52
second, 71–72, 104, 161
third, 104, 161
strategic voting, 120–23
strategy, 22, 24
in auctions, 364, 377
backward induction and, 184,
186–88, 213–15
in bargaining, 245
Bayesian Nash equilibrium and,
350–51
beliefs and, 381–82, 398
best response and, 54–60
deﬁnition of, 179
dominance and, 49–51, 54, 57–60
equilibrium and, 184
iterated dominance and, 68–71
market games and, 361–62
maxmin, 149–51
mixed, See mixed strategies
monopoly models and, 210
Nash equilibrium and, 97–101,
111, 116, 119, 198
in normal-form games, 22–24
in parlor games, 225, 226
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 379–83, 386, 394, 398
pure, See pure strategy
in repeated games, 295–98
sequential rationality and,
185–86
trigger, See trigger strategy
uncertainty in, 3, 6, 71–72, 95,
97, 104, 109, 274n
strategy proﬁles, 23, 27, 39, 70
in market games, 332, 352
in Nash equilibrium, 99,
101–2, 105
in one-shot games, 311
perfect Bayesian equilibrium
and, 379, 382
in repeated games, 295, 296,
303, 306, 318
in subgame perfect
equilibrium, 198
in subgames, 213–15
in ultimatum bargaining
game, 245
strategy space, 23, 27
in location game, 79–80
in partnership games, 82
strict dominance, 61
strictly competitive games,
148–49, 225
exercises in, 151–53
and Nash equilibrium, 149
subgame, deﬁnition of, 188, 189
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
(SPE), 45
advertising and, 205–6, 219
backward induction and,
188–202
bargaining and, 198, 244, 245,
248, 250–52, 256, 263
in battle-of-the-sexes game, 201
common knowledge and, 188
in Cournot duopoly model, 205
deﬁnition of, 189–91, 190
in entry games, 209, 220
exercises in, 198–203, 222,
228, 283
in extensive-form games, 188–91
individual incentives and,
184n, 191
in LCD monitor price
game, 211
in limit-capacity model,
207–8, 219
Nash equilibrium and, 189,
190, 200, 201, 202
and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, 379
in repeated games, 294–99,
303, 305, 307, 309, 312, 316,
318–22
reputation and, 294–96
risk and, 346, 347
sequential rationality in,
184–89, 198
of Stackelberg duopoly game,
191–92
strategy proﬁles and, 190, 198
in tire manufacturer-retailer
example, 157
successor nodes, 175, 176, 188, 189
surplus, 234
asset ownership and, 282
in auctions, 366–67
bargaining and, 234, 236–37,
240–41, 244, 245, 248, 251,
254–57, 265–68, 347
in hold-up example, 277, 279
and standard bargaining
solution, 236–37, 316
Sutton, J., 250n
symmetric equilibrium, 309
Tadelis, S., 315n
tariff game model, 117–18, 125,
313, 319
tariffs, 117, 291, 313–14
technology of contractual
relationship, 156, 159,
166–68, 269–70
tennis, 73, 73, 135–36, 136, 148
terminal nodes
and backward induction,
187, 189
deﬁnition of, 12
and extensive-form games, 175,
176, 186–87
and sequential rationality,
185–86
theory of games, See game theory
third-price auctions, 376
Thomson, W. L., 237n
three-player games, 189, 229, 257,
286, 355
tic-tac-toe, 224–26
Tirole, J., 6n, 383n
T-period game, 249–50,
256, 347
trade
agreements and contracts for,
313–23

--- Sayfa 506 ---
491
Index
exercises in, 374
tariffs and, 117, 313–14
terms of, 231, 244
transfers, 156
bargaining and, 231–36, 263
contracts and, 156–64, 168,
169, 219, 264, 270, 277,
286, 341
and negotiation equilibrium,
264, 265
and preferences, 156n
and repeated games, 314,
316, 317
transitive precedence relation, 175
transitivity, 43n
trees, 10–15, 176
and backward induction,
186, 188
deﬁnition/function of, 10
and extensive-form games,
10–15, 175–78, 212, 260,
261, 267
paths through, 12, 175–76, 178,
328–33
rules concerning, 175–78, 262
and subgame perfect
equilibrium, 188, 222
trigger strategy
collusion and, 311–13
grim-, 298–99, 303–7, 311,
312–13, 321
modiﬁed, 304, 308
prisoners’ dilemma and, 302
repeated games and,
298–99, 305, 311–14
reputation and, 298
trade agreement enforcement
and, 313–14
Tucker, A. W., 10n, 188n
two-period, alternating-offer
games, 246–50, 347,
398–400
two-period repeated games,
292–96, 315–17
two-player, strictly competitive
game, 148–49, 149
types, See player types
ultimatum bargaining, See
bargaining
unbalanced contracts, 172
uncertainty, 3, 6, 17, 71–72, 95,
97, 104, 109, 274n
unconstrained capacity, 207, 208
underlying games, 156–59,
161–64, 167, 170, 321
uniform distribution, 418
union of sets, 411
United States v. Alcoa, 207
unveriﬁable investments, 274–81
upper hemi-continuity, 433n
up-front contracting, 278–81
used car (“lemon”) example,
360–63
utilities, See payoffs
value, 210–11
auctions and, 350
bargaining and, 230–32,
235–37, 250, 361, 398
continuation, 192–94, 304
creation and division of,
230–32
cutoff, 323
expected, 362, 365n
information and, 361
private, 367
reservation, 325
signaling and, 394
See also joint value
value of a function, 412
variables, 410
vectors, 411
veriﬁability, 155, 268, 288
bargaining and, 224
of contracts, 155, 159,
274–76, 278, 281, 285,
321, 404
full, 159–61, 167–69, 321
investments and, 274, 281
limited, 160, 161, 166–68,
170, 321
VHS-Betamax format war,
103, 104
Vickrey, William, 364n
von Stackelberg duopoly model,
35, 181, 184–85, 191–92,
207, 220
voting, strategic, 120–23
and policy locations, 80,
118–20
voter game, 122–23
Waldegrave, James, 1–2
Walker, M., 136n
Walker, Paul, 2n
Wallis, K., 107n
Watson, J., 2n, 154n, 195n,
260n, 262n, 275n, 281n,
314n, 429n
weak congruity, 97, 105–6,
158, 191
weak dominance, 60–61, 364,
365, 427–28
Weber, R., 366n
Weibull, J. W., 106n
Wilkie, S., 203n
Williamson, O., 275n
Wilson, Robert, 383n, 396n
“winner’s curse,” 368
Wooders, J., 136n
“worker status” model,
346–47, 389
World Trade Organization
(WTO), 313–14
worst-case scenarios, 149
Zermelo, Ernest, 2, 226n
zero-sum games, 148