--- Sayfa 1 ---
Hilâl 7
DOI 10.30687/978-88-6969-338-0/006
75
Freemansonry and the Orient
Esotericisms between the East and the West
Barbara De Poli
6	 Sufi and Freemasons
in the Ottoman Empire
Summary 
6.1 ʿAbd Al-Qādir Al-Jazāʾirī. – 6.2 Jamāl Al-Dīn Al-Afghānī. – 6.3 Rizā Tevfīk.
6.1	 ʿAbd Al-Qādir Al-Jazāʾirī
The Algerian Emir ʿAbd al-Qādir al-Jazāʾirī (1808-1883) is a key fig-
ure of his days:1 an erudite Muslim, a Sufi of the Qādiriyya order, he
led the struggle against the French occupation of Algeria and fought
for many years before surrendering in 1847. At first imprisoned in
France, after an agreement with Napoleon III, in 1852, he was re-
leased on committing himself to avoid hindering the colonial enter-
prise, and spent the rest of his life in Damascus. There, in 1860, af-
ter riots based on religion broke out, he protected and saved over
10,000 Christians from being lynched, and this gesture won him re-
spect and approval from French Masonry.
The lodge Henry IV at the Orient of Paris invited him to join the
masonic brotherhood, but because of unspecified difficulties in do-
ing so in France, they asked the lodge Les Pyramides of Alexandria
in Egypt to carry out his initiation. The lodge accepted, and ʿAbd al-
Qādir was initiated there in the first degree on June 18, 1864.
The correspondence between the emir and the two lodges has
been carefully studied by Bruno Étienne. It has already been seen
how difficult it was for French masons to grasp the esoteric Islamic
universe, since their approach to Muslims was dictated mainly by in-
1 
Cf. Étienne, Abdelkader and Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie; Yacono, “Abd el-
Kader Franc-maçon”; Abd el-Kader, Ecrits spirituels.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Hilâl 7
76
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
terests which were strategic (spreading Masonry) if not political (fa-
cilitating the colonial enterprise). Especially, the French approach
was conditioned by a deterministic approach to history which gave
the Europeans primacy of civilisation and the mission of exporting
it to the rest of the world, an approach which was not exactly help-
ful for understanding that world without prejudices. For example,
the French, praising ‘Abd al-Qādir’s heroism in defending the Chris-
tians of Damascus, called him “supérieur aux préjugés de caste et
de religion”, without suspecting that the emir was simply applying
the Islamic principles of dhimma, protecting recognised minorities.
Especially, the French scholar shows how a large part of ‘Abd al-
Qādir’s doctrinal horizon must have escaped the French, who misun-
derstood the nature of several of his statements;2 while the Sufi in-
terpretation which the emir gave, when answering the questions for
his affiliation, reveals how he associated Freemasonry with the eso-
teric dimension of the Sufi orders. The following is a fragment of his
answer to the second question:
Quel sont les devoirs de l’homme envers ses semblables?
Réponse. – Il faut qu’il leur donne de bons conseils en les diri-
geant vers les avantages (intérets) de ce monde et de l’autre; qu’il
les aide en cela, en instruisant l’ignorant et en avertissant l’indif-
férent (le distrait), ne les protégeant, en respectant le grand sans
lui porter envie, en compatissant eu petit et pourvoyant à ses be-
soins, amenant à eux les choses utiles et repoussant d’eux le mal.
Toutes les lois reposent sur deux bases: la première de glori-
fier Dieu, la seconde d’avoir compassion des créatures de ce Dieu
Très Haut, l’homme doit considérer que leur âme et la sienne ont
une même origine, et qu’il y a entre elles d’autre diversité que
leur enveloppe et leur extérieur; car l’âme entière provient d’un
esprit entier qui, comme Eve provenant d’Adam, est l’origine de
toutes les âmes. L’âme est une, elle n’est pas multiple, la multipli-
cité n’est que dans les enveloppes par lesquelles elle se montre,
et dans les formes par lesquelles elle brille. C’est que les corps
sont des maisons obscures, de noires régions qui, lorsque les lu-
mières de l’âme entière les enveloppent, brillent et luisent par ces
lumières qui débordent d’elles.
These few lines show both the ethical heritage of the mystic futuwwa
and the emanentist teachings of Ibn al-ʿArabī (wahadat al-wujūd),
which ‘Abd al-Qādir had taken up and which, as a Sufi master, he
understood well.
2 
Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie, 20-33, 50-67.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire
Hilâl 7
77
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
Unfortunately, the speeches celebrating the masonic affiliation of
the emir by the brethren of the lodge Les Pyramides of Alexandria
again show their paternalistic attitude towards the Algerian Sufi,
and absolute ignorance of his important doctrinal and philosophical
references, thus appearing – perhaps unintentionally – offensive and
humiliating. According to the French masons his answers (which are
actually fully part of the Islamic mystic tradition), “révèlent un libre
penseur, élevé aux idées de la plus parfaite civilisation”, his defini-
tions “sont frappées au coin de la logique la plus serrée”, emphasising
how “Votre haute intelligence vous a fait apprécier la base de notre
doctrine”. However, the speakers did not hesitate to remind him of
his defeat by the French, and that the purpose of his initiation was to:
“déblayer les ruines de la barbarie, et faire fructifier dans ces pays
hostiles et ignorant les germes de la vérité universelle”.3
This dialogue shows the difficulties in interacting for both parts,
beyond expressing a shared faith in a single God (at the time, the the-
ist tendency still prevailed in French Masonry) and besides the rea-
sons for each to converge. Masons of the time were generally una-
ware of basic principles of Islamic law, such as the status of dhimma,
or of the ideas of Ibn al-‘Arabī or of the nature of Sufism, and found
it difficult to understand ‘Abd al-Qādir’s esoteric lexicon. But above
all, their relations with the emir were strongly prejudiced by the im-
perialist and Orientalist spirit of the age, which implicitly defined
the Muslims as backward barbarians. French masons saw the Alge-
rian Sufi as a tool for masonic penetration to dissipate darkness, “le
coin d’entré dans le roc de la barbarie”.4 The Sufi emir too probably
overestimated the philosophical and mystic quality of his European
brethren, and may have decided to be initiated for reasons of convic-
tion (as Étienne believes)5 or out of personal interest.6 In any case,
when masons and Sufis first met in the Middle East, in the wake of
European imperialism, it would have been hard to escape from the
political context. This leaves us with some doubts about the sinceri-
ty of the emir when, during a trip to France, he pronounced the fol-
lowing words before two masonic delegations (the Amboise speech):
3 
Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie, 41-9.
4 
Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie, 34.
5 
According to the French Islamologist, ‘Abd al-Qādir might actually have placed mor-
al and spiritual trust in Masonry, “peut-être parce que le langage codé en tant que sub-
culture de la franc-maçonnerie était ce que l’Occident produisait de moins éloigné de la
culture musulmane”. Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie, 70.
6 
Some believe he did so to prove his loyalty to France, which was paying him a pen-
sion of 150 million francs a year, or because he needed French protection against the
Ottomans who repeatedly demanded his expulsion. Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-
maçonnerie, 68-9.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Hilâl 7
78
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
Je considère la franc-maçonnerie comme la première institution du
monde. A mon avis, tout homme qui ne professe pas la fois maçon-
nique est un homme incomplet. J’espère qu’un jour les principes
maçonniques seront répandus dans le monde entier. Dès lors tous
les peuples vivront dans la paix et la fraternité.7
Once back to Syria, ‘Abd al-Qādir never attended masonic gather-
ings in Damascus or in Bayreuth (although he had mason friends),
which seems to prove the predominantly strategic nature of his affil-
iation – perhaps also confirmed by the later initiation of his two sons.
However, it is certain that his Sufi formation, as well as the progres-
sive Salafi vocation of the Algerian Emir determined an intellectu-
al contiguity with Freemasonry. Maybe the Amboise speech did not
fully reflect his thinking, but he certainly did not consider Masonry
incompatible with his spiritual, cultural and political beliefs.8
6.2	 Jamāl Al-Dīn Al-Afghānī
Another example of the meeting between the esoteric Sufi dimen-
sion and Masonry is that of Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī.9 Due to his pro-
gressive and rationalist intellectual approach, together with his open
opposition to imperialism and to his political activism, al-Afghānī is
considered to be one of the most effective actors in cultural and ide-
ological change in the Levant in the late nineteenth century. He is
mainly known for his political commitment, but his reformist efforts
probably also found fertile ground for rationalist renovation in his
personal Sufi dimension.
Al-Afghānī was not of Arab origin, and, notwithstanding his name,
he was not born in Afghanistan but in Iran10 (and was not a Sunni but
a Shiite). Various Persian sources say he received education in Islam-
ic disciplines, in Muslim philosophers and in mysticism. After having
stayed in India and in Istanbul, he spent the years from 1871 to 1879
in Egypt where he started his political activity against imperialism
and in favour of liberal reforms. In Cairo he began teaching religious
sciences, philosophy, logic, Sufism and Arab literature at al-Azhar,
the most prestigious Islamic university of the Middle East, enchant-
7 
Étienne, Abd el-Kader et la franc-maçonnerie, 71-2.
8 
Zarcone, Le mystère Abd al-Kader, pos. Kindle 211, 467, 535-9, 780.
9 
Cf. Keddie, An Islamic response; Sayyid Jamal ad-Din “al-Afghani”; Kedourie, Afgha-
ni and Abduh; Pakdaman, Djamal-Ed-Din Assad Abadi.
10 
Al-Afghānī was born in 1838-39 in As’adābād. He would claim the event took place
in the town of that name in the province of Kunar in Afghanistan; however it is far more
likely that he was born in another of the same name near Hamadan in Iran.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire
Hilâl 7
79
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
ing many of his students with his charisma, students who would play
a decisive role in the history of the country, like the reformist intel-
lectual Muhammad ʿAbduh11 or the nationalist Saʿd Zaghlūl. How-
ever, his reformist ideas led to his expulsion from the institution.12
It is not known whether he became a mason before 1876, but in the
years before, he certainly encouraged masonic publications and sup-
ported the organisation, which he saw as a tool for modernist reform
and change.13 After 1876, various documents prove al-Afghānī’s ma-
sonic affiliation. First of all, the minutes of a letter found among his
private documents discovered in Tehran in 1963, contain a request
in Arabic to be admitted to an unnamed lodge, dated March 31, 1875:
I the undersigned, a teacher of philosophical sciences, Jamāl al-Dīn
al-Kābulī, aged thirty-seven, ask the Brethren of Purity (Ikhwān
al-safā’), call on the faithful companions (Khullān wafā’), guides
of the sacred masonic organisation, [...] to be willing and favoura-
ble to accept me in that pure organisation, and to let me enter the
body of the affiliates of that glorious association.14
Another of these documents says: “I entered the lodge on April 7,
1876”, without specifying the name of the lodge. It is hard to under-
stand which lodges he joined during his sojourn in Egypt, since the
documents found in Tehran show a sort of ‘masonic frenzy’, which
has led to many hypotheses.15 It is known for certain that, in 1877, al-
Afghānī was initiated in the lodge Star of the East, under the Grand
Lodge of England,16 and as certified in a letter in Arabic, on Decem-
ber 1877 he was elected Grand Master of the same lodge.17
Studies have emphasised how al-Afghānī joined Freemasonry for
political reasons, but Elie Kedourie was determined in associating al-
Afghānī’s Sufi dimension, always pre-eminent in his human and spir-
itual career, with his masonic affiliation.18 This can be seen in the
nearly idolatrous adoration of his disciples, closer to that for a mystic
master than for an ordinary teacher; or the esoteric character attrib-
uted to definitions such as ‘perfect sage’, ‘the true science’ or ‘Truth
11 
Hourani, Arabic Thought, 130-60.
12 
Kudsi-Zadeh, “Afghānī and Freemasonry”, 25-35.
13 
Shalash, Al-Yahūd wa-al-māsūn, 224-6.
14 
Afshar, Mahdavi, Documents inédits, doc. 16, repr. 40.
15 
De Poli, La massoneria in Egitto, 112.
16 
De Poli, La massoneria in Egitto, 112.
17 
Afshar, Mahdawi, Documents inédits, doc. 17, repr. 41; Shalash, Al-Yahūd wa-al-
māsūn, 226-7.
18 
Cf. Kedourie, Afghani and Abduh, 9-17; Keddie, An Islamic Response, 8.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Hilâl 7
80
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
personified’ which ‘Abduh used when speaking of him.19 Also the for-
mulas used by al-Afghānī in his request for affiliation to Masonry,
such as ‘brethren of purity’ (Ikhwān al-safā’), and ‘faithful compan-
ions’ (Khullān wafā’), bring unmistakably to mind the Brethren of Pu-
rity who in the eighth century wrote treatises accused of heresy. This
at least shows that al-Afghānī associated Masonry with a clear phil-
osophical and esoteric dimension. Investigating his private papers,
Kedourie sees that the intellectual read and taught works of philoso-
phy and Sufism all his life, and continued to be interested in esoteric
topics, such as mystic alphabets and numerical combinations.20 While
al-Afghāni found in Masonry a tool for political action, its esoteric di-
mension was not foreign to him, and probably not entirely marginal.
However, convergence between al-Afghānī’s intellectual and spir-
itual universe and Masonry should not be sought so much in Sufism,
as in what Kedourie calls the passage from the mystic pantheism
of Sufism (wahdat al-wujūd) to rationalism (with sources in Greek
thought, but tied to Western positivism), through a philosophical ap-
proach, arriving at “a new rationalist religion”.21 This intellectual
path made him a “French style freethinker”, as his Indian friend
Syed Hussein put it.22 The belief that, if Scripture contradicts rea-
son and science, it is Scripture (in this case the sources of Islam, the
Qur’an and the Sunna of the Prophet) which must be reinterpreted,23
is perfectly compatible with the most progressive masonic spirit of
the epoch, especially French and Italian. For al-Afghānī, Masonry
must have appeared to be the best soil for receiving and spreading
the new reformist ideas – not always favourably accepted in his days.24
An enthusiastic modernist, the Persian intellectual propagate the
idea that appropriation of Western sciences and techniques was the
fundamental key to renew Islam in order to oppose Western impe-
rialism. He believed that after centuries of substantial hermeneutic
sclerosis,25 it was necessary to reopen efforts to interpret the sacred
19 
Kedourie, Afghani and Abduh, 9-10.
20 
Keddie, An Islamic Response, 8.
21 
Kedourie, Afghani and Abduh, 16.
22 
Kedourie, Afghani and Abduh, 17.
23 
Keddie, An Islamic Response, 38.
24 
After being driven out of al-Azhar, al-Afghānī continued teaching at home, and – as
one witness told it – when students came to his house, the neighbours would throw
stones at them and curse him. Kudsi-Zadeh, “Afghānī and Freemasonry”, 25.
25 
The tenth-eleventh centuries, in the Sunni Islamic world, saw the closing of the
‘gate of ijtihādʾ, that is the esegetic effort aimed at interpreting the Texts (the Qurʾan
and the Sunna which includes the sayings, the deeds and the silences of the Prophet),
in order to establish the legal corpus of the shariʿa, but also of theology. Since then, in-
terpretation was replaced by taqlīd, imitation of the ancients, leading to a substantial
immobility of Islamic sciences.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire
Hilâl 7
81
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
texts of Islam against every superstition, conservatism and obscu-
rantism. On this base, inside the nahda, he introduced a philosophical
and political movement called islāh,26 ‘reform’, later consolidated by
his disciple Muhammad ‘Abduh and, at least initially, by Rashīd Ridā.
Here, al-Afghāni’s thinking converged with that of other Turkish re-
formists: Mustafa Reșid Pasha and Midhat Pasha (the latter author
of the liberal Ottoman Constitution of 1876), among the most impor-
tant modernising and secularising reformers who changed the laws,
institutions and culture of the Ottoman empire in the nineteenth
century, masons too, or the writer Nāmık Kemāl, Sufi (perhaps Bek-
tashi) and mason, who tried to deduce the spirit of the reform from
verses of the Qur’an.27
His positions met with hostility from religious institutions but al-
so from the political establishment, and al-Afghānī was repeatedly
accused of impiety and heterodoxy.28 Masonry too began to consider
his opinions ‘heretical': when al-Afghānī was expelled from Egypt in
August 1879, the British consul general wrote: “He was recently ex-
pelled from the Freemasons’ Lodge at Cairo, of which he was a mem-
ber, on account of his open disbelief in a Supreme Being”,29 a sign
that anti-theist rationalism at the time was also poorly tolerated in
many Western milieux, even masonic (especially in British Freema-
sonry) – although in this case it was probably a mere pretext.30
It can be seen here how the link between the Sufi universe and
Masonry arose when both sides espoused liberal principles, which
in those years of rapid and profound change for the Middle East saw
cultural and religious reform built on the foundations of science and
freethinking. In this case, Sufism evolved by accepting rationalism
which, especially in Italian and French lodges promoted progres-
sive thinking in Europe and around the world throughout the nine-
teenth century.
26 
Islāh identifies itself with reformist and modernist Salafism, an attempt to mod-
ernise Islam starting from the reinterpretation of the original sources. Merad, Islāh;
De Poli, Riformisti, conservatori, radicali; Bori, Il pensiero radicale islamico.
27 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 98.
28 
This was basically the reason he had to leave Istanbul in March 1871. Pakdaman,
Djamal-Ed-Din Assad Abadi, 45-9.
29 
Archive document quoted by Kedourie, Afghani and Abduh, 20.
30 
The reasons appear to have been eminently political, since al-Afghānī had person-
ally expressed to the French consul the idea of deposing the Khedive Ismāʿīl, provoking
a dispute among masons. In revenge, and because of his public interventions against
the new Khedive Tawfīq, some two months later, on August 26, 1879, al-Afghānī was
expelled from the country. De Poli, La massoneria in Egitto, 127-31.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Hilâl 7
82
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
6.3	 Rizā Tevfīk
It has been seen how, in Turkey, politics, Sufism and Freemasonry
came the closest together at the dawn of the twentieth century, when
many Young Turks, often Bektashi affiliates, joined masonic lodges.
In this context, a figure of special note was the politician and intel-
lectual Rizā Tevfīk (1868-1949).
Born into a family hailing from northern Albania, Tevfīk spent his
youth at Edirne, Istanbul, Izmir and Gallipoli (Gelibolu); in this last
town, as a youth, he first came into contact with the Turkish mysti-
cism of the bards (aşık) of popular brotherhoods and, thanks to the
whirling dervishes he met at the convent of Hüssameddīn, he read
Rumi’s Masnavi, the great Sufi poem in Persian on which the Mevle-
vi order was founded.31 His education was complicated: he studied
at the Galata high school in Istanbul, then proceeded to the School
of Political and Administrative Sciences (the well known Mekteb-i
mülkiyye, where some of the most brilliant Ottoman intellectuals of
the fin-de-siècle studied), then finally enrolled in the Imperial School
of Medicine, but was expelled from each school for indiscipline. After
obtaining a diploma, he became a doctor at the customs of Istanbul,
but in 1907 he joined the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP)
becoming a strong supporter of the Revolution and after the Consti-
tution was proclaimed in 1908, he started on a political career, be-
ing elected to parliament. Of a progressive and liberal bent, in 1911
he began to strongly criticise the authoritarian policies of the CUP
and a few years later became one of the founders of the opposition
Freedom and Accord Party (Hürriyet ve İtilāf, also known as Liber-
al Entente or Union), which rose to power after the fall of the Young
Turks following defeat in World War One. He was twice a minister
(of National Education and of Post Telegraph and Telephone), Pres-
ident of the Senate and author of the political and social reforms in
Turkey of those years; but he was also one of the signatories of the
Treaty of Sèvres, which led to the dismemberment of Ottoman em-
pire, bringing him harsh criticism and personal discomfort. Since he
also opposed the rebellion led in Anatolia by Kemal Atatürk, after
the victory of the latter, he was put in the list of the ‘One Hundred
and Fifty’ politicians, writers, artists, and intellectuals accused of
having betrayed the country and sent into exile in 1922.32 As a con-
sequence it is hardly surprising that his name has remained mar-
ginal in the history of contemporary Turkey; the complexity of his
figure, rarely dealt with by Turkish scholars, appears in the work of
Thierry Zarcone who, starting from a thorough examination of his
31 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 339-40, 350.
32 
Exile left a deep mark on Tevfīk, whose intellectual activity declined sharply.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire
Hilâl 7
83
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
works and of many sources in Ottoman and modern Turkish, devot-
ed a considerable part of his study on mystics, philosophers and ma-
sons in Islam to him.33
Little is actually known about the masonic career of Tevfīk. Ac-
cording to a Turkish historian, he was initiated during a trip to Great
Britain in 1909. On his return home, together with other masons, he
made efforts to emancipate Turkish Masonry from the guardianship
of such foreign orders as the French and Italian Grand Orients and
the English Grand Lodge. He was one of the nine members of the Su-
preme Council of the High Degrees of the 33rd degree, he was thus
able – already in 1909 – to found a national obedience, the Ottoman
Grand Orient, where he was affiliated with the Constitution Lodge,
soon becoming its Grand Orator.34 His role in Turkish Masonry was
however controversial and not always tolerant of others. In 1911 he
publicly revealed the masonic affiliation of Mūsā Kāsım, a brother
in his lodge but also Shaykh al-Islam, the highest charge in the state
Religious Affairs office, creating a scandal which forced Kāsım to re-
sign. Again, in 1918, when he became Grand Master of the Ottoman
Grand Orient, a role he kept until 1920, Rizā Tevfīk launched a ‘purge’
which affected his brethren. His charge certainly had a strong polit-
ical touch, since his election coincided with the rise to power of his
party, the Liberal Entente, following the fall of the Young Turk gov-
ernment: under his guidance, Unionists were even expelled from the
lodges, and the order underwent strong rebuilding.35
However, Tevfīk’s masonic membership should not be reduced to
a merely political dimension.
The Ottoman intellectual was deeply immersed in the mystic cul-
ture of his times as a Sufi – he was a baba of the Bektashiyya and of-
ten attended meetings and convents of the order36 (as a poet, he was
famous for his mystic compositions, also sung by dervishes) – and be-
lieved there were several points of contact between Sufism and Ma-
sonry. One of the analogies he noted was certainly the vocation for
political involvement which both institutions manifested – especial-
ly the Melāmī –, but some of his articles clearly show he felt that ma-
sonic initiation differed little from the Sufi way, at least in its most
‘enlightened’ manifestations:37
Le plus grand devoir moral de la tarīqat melāmiyye, à mon avis,
est d’éprouver une profonde compassion pour l’humanité et de
33 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 329-494.
34 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 343.
35 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 265-6.
36 
He said so to Ramsaur. Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 351
37 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 343.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Hilâl 7
84
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
ressentir dans sa propre conscience le malheur des autres […] je
suis réellement plus derviche que de nombreux autres derviches
et je suis aussi plus que beaucoup d’autres, lié au soufisme. […]
je voudrais seulement dire un ou deux mots au sujet de la maçon-
nerie. Le premier est que l’on doit savoir avant tout qu’il ne de-
meure aujourd’hui plus aucun secret, sinon celui constitué pas le
“mystère de la création” que l’homme dans sa faiblesse ne peut at-
teindre. Mon opinion, en ce qui concerne l’ordre maçonnique, est
à ce point contraire à ce que croit la plupart des hommes non in-
formés, qu’il m’est impossible de la résumer en quelques mots. Je
dirai seulement que celui qui ne croit pas en une puissance créa-
trice, ne peut être maçon.38
Tevfik’s interest in metaphysical matters emerges especially in his
role as a ‘philosopher’, as he called himself.39 Tevfīk had a profound
knowledge of Western philosophy, which he wrote significant books
about,40 and was equally competent in Islamic philosophy, in history
and in the principles of Sufism, about which he published a number
of articles. His encyclopaedic knowledge was enriched by the study
of a very wide range of sources, facilitated by his mastery of sever-
al European and Oriental languages, and his meetings with Western
intellectuals, especially orientalists, such as the British Edward G.
Browne, E.E. Ramsaur, or the French Barbeir de Meynard and Car-
ra De Vaux. The latter especially held him in high esteem and trans-
lated some passages of his Philosophical Dictionary.
It would be beyond the scope of this study to go into the complexity
of Tevfīk’s philosophical thinking, a topic which can be read about in
Zarcone’s work; however, there are certain significant elements for
the purposes of this discussion. The works of the Ottoman intellectu-
al in fact show a confluence between Islamic and European thinking
which often turns into a synthesis or an acknowledgement of equiv-
alence, not without stretching some points. Especially the conjunc-
tion of Western and Islamic mystic philosophy is structured in the
doctrine of ‘agnosticism’ which he developed, that is the idea that
Man’s intelligence is not able to grasp the essence of things or the
nature of the divine (according to Socrates’ motto, “all I know is that
I know nothing”).41 The Ottoman intellectual formulates his own per-
38 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 319.
39 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 330.
40 
He published Felsefe dersleri, ‘Philosophy Lessons’, which in 564 pages collected
and developed the texts of his courses, held first in a high school and then at the Uni-
versity of Istanbul (Dār ül fünūn), and the unfinished Mufassal kāmūs-i-felsefe, known as
Philosophical Dictionary, his most appreciated work even though it ended at the letter C.
41 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 371.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire
Hilâl 7
85
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
sonal concept of ‘agnosticism’ developing some points of Ibn ʿArabī’s
thinking (and adopting his vision of the Unity of Being), together with
the thinking of the English philosopher Herbert Spencer, interpret-
ing it a posteriori as a foundation of Turkish mysticism.42 He wrote:
De même qu’il existe une forme mystique (Sufi) et théologique de
l’agnosticisme, il existe aussi une forme philosophique et scienti-
fique de celui-ci qui est respectable et indiscutable si l’on regarde
la philosophie contemporaine.43
In a similar fashion, he believed that definition of the principle of the
Absolute, one of the crucial points of his thinking, was substantial-
ly identical in Ibn ‘Arabī and Spencer, but also in Bergson.44 Animat-
ed by the same spirit, he wrote: “En fait, entre la philosophie de De-
cartes et le soufisme, il n’y a divergence qu’au dernier degré”.45
Tevfīk never gave a systematic structure to his philosophy, and
his work was not without limits and contradictions, but his approach
shows an effort to create a synthesis between cultures which have
roots and epistemes which cannot always be assimilated to each oth-
er. This orientation may be seen as an attempt to heal what many,
north or south of the Mediterranean, felt to be a fracture of civilisa-
tion between East and West, at a time when the East was most fragile
in the face of European political and cultural imperialism.46 Metab-
olization of modernity also passed through an appropriation of some
of its canons in a key which was not contextualised and relative, but
absolute and universalising.
However, Tevfīk’s philosophical studies reveal an interpretation
which is unable to free itself from its intellectual focus, clearly cen-
tred on metaphysical issues which ever since his adolescence in Gal-
lipoli had attracted and profoundly marked him, as he would later
write: “je crois que cette influence de Gelibolu m’a apporté la saveur
d’une enfance qui respirait la liberalité et la spiritualité”:47 in fact, he
interpreted Western philosophy through the prism of Islamic philos-
ophy and mysticism, although viewed from a Sufi perspective which
42 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 364.
43 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 372.
44 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 410.
45 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 393.
46 
One may remember the debate between Ernest Renan and Al-Afghani in the spring
of 1883. The Persian intellectual had objected to the opinion expressed by Renan ac-
cording to which Islam and science were substantially incompatible. Renan/Al-Afgha-
ni. URL http://blogs.histoireglobale.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/Renan-
al-Afghani.pdf.
47 
Cevdet, Doctor Rizā Tevfīk Bey, 37-8, quoted by Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 338.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Hilâl 7
86
Freemasonry and the Orient, 75-86
Zarcone calls ‘enlightened’,48 specifying that Tevfīk “n’a pris du sou-
fisme que ce qui l’intéressait”.49
This approach is also reminiscent of how ‘Abd al-Qādir interpreted
Masonry: in fact, the Algerian emir associated the nature of Freema-
sonry to Islamic esotericism, interpreting its principles in the light of
Sufi teachings, and especially of Ibn ‘Arabī, the spiritual and doctri-
nal reference for Tevfīk too. There are also clear analogies between
the career and views of Tevfīk and the experience of al-Afghānī: for
the Ottoman intellectual too, Freemasonry was a tool and politics
deeply marked his life, but the political and initiatory – Sufi and ma-
sonic – careers converged in support to progressive liberal ideas, ex-
pressed by his party, the Liberal Entente, espoused by the Bektashi-
yya order and spread by lodges since the mid nineteenth century.50
It is no surprise then that, like al-Afghānī, Tevfīk too, while openly
proclaiming his faith in God (although accepting the theist position
for the Ottoman Grand Orient) was accused of atheism, of being a
mason, qalandarī51 or freethinker.52
Sufi, mason or philosopher, Tevfīk remains an example of a re-
formist intellectual open to the cultural stimulation of his age, ca-
pable of finding analogies and developing original syntheses in the
meeting between Islamic and European thinking. As often happens
to the freest minds, his capacity for looking critically at his own back-
ground and his liberal orientation, both in politics and in metaphys-
ics, earned him stigma from the government and institutional Islam,
making people forget his story for a long time.
48 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 330.
49 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 352.
50 
De Poli, La Massoneria in Egitto, 162-9.
51 
The Qalandariyya was a heterodox sufi order spread from Morocco to China, es-
pecially in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries: their followers practised celiba-
cy, lived together and drank alcoholic beverages. Cf. Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes,
5; Yazıcı, Ḳalandariyya.
52 
Zarcone, Mystiques, philosophes, 382, 442-4.
Barbara De Poli
6 Sufi and Freemasons in the Ottoman Empire