--- Sayfa 1 ---
Journal of Positive School Psychology
http://journalppw.com
2022, Vol. 6, No. 5, 9764-9779

The Role of Game Theory and Artificial Intelligence in International Relations

Zahra Sharifzadeh1
  Ph.D. Student in International Relations, Department of Human Sciences,
Shahrood Branch,Islamic Azad University,Shahrood,Iran.

Amir Hooshang Mirkooshesh2
Department of Human Sciences, Shahrood Branch, Islamic Azad University,Shahrood,Iran,

Mohammad Mahdi Hosseini3
   Department of Computer engineering Shahrood Branch,Islamic Azad University Shahrood,Iran

Abstract
Politics might be the most challenging behavior among human behaviors for being
automated. Politics is, in nature, a complicated affair that reflects human behavior
considering both individual and social dimensions. Such complexity seems more real
in international relations. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an effective and inclusive area
that covers technical and engineering disciplines and human sciences, especially
international peace and security. Game theory has been used as a component of AI
in politics and international relations, focusing on the framework of some common
areas, including equitable distribution, political economy, public choice, bargaining
model of war, positive political theory, and public choice theory. Researchers have
discussed game theory models in the abovementioned areas. In this model, players
perform as voters, governments, special interest groups, and politicians. Therefore,
the extant study examined the role of game theory in international relations.

Keywords: International Relations, Rules of The Game, Game Theory, Computational Intelligence, Artificial
Intelligence

INTRODUCTION
No considerable association seems to exist
between the new scientific AI field and
international relations and security science;
however, the ascending attempts of some
countries in this area reject such an assumption.
The recent AI developments imply that this
newly-emerged technology will markedly and
potentially influence military power, strategic
competition, and world policy on an extensive
scale.
In this lieu, theories of international relations
may soon face a crisis of explanation power
(Slaughter & Hale, 2011). This crisis will
change
the
world
when
determining
policymakers to make political decisions

1 Email: z_sh1348@yahoo.com .Tel: 09155656516

2 Corresponding Author, Email: ammirkooshesh@gmail.com

matched with political goals (Burchil et al., 2013).
When governments trust information technologies
to analyze policies, advise, and implement them,
theories of international relations should consider
the consequence of new players within the same
information technologies of robots, AI. Other
information (Scott, Heumann & Lorenz, 2018:
19). Technologies that can make decisions
through the policy-making process must treat
individuals, states, and other players in a similar
ontological and epistemological way (Langhelle
et al., 2019).
On the other hand, AI contributes to producing
machines
that
can
learn
and
understand
complicated conditions, think, reason and present
responses, and acquire knowledge without human

--- Sayfa 2 ---
9765                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9765

help and interference (Ullah et al.,2020: 314-
315). Therefore, those countries that own such
machines and systems can change the balance of
power in the international system in their
desired way and create new alliances to
dominance over other nations and countries
(Schrodt, 1998: 71). In other words, countries
with excellent AI have a specific competitive
advantage that can exceed less-developed
countries depriving them of gaining revenue and
different political, economic, and military
advantages. Countries that use AI have a
competitive advantage over countries since they
employ a large processed information volume
and broad analytical power obtained from smart
machines. Therefore, these countries can use
this advantage to fulfill their diplomatic,
economic, business, and military goals more
successfully than others that rely on human
capabilities
and
instruments
to
analyze
information and decide on their profit and loss
(Kiggins, 2018: 19).
AI and game theory (GT) are two developed
research scopes stemming from similar roots
within different trajectories. However, a deep
and fundamental association exists between AI
and GT, so developing and searching these
associations can contribute to considerable
achievements in both scopes. Three main
notions
(learning,
representation,
and
reasoning) exist in the deep relationship
between AI and GT, which are common in two
representation and reasoning areas (TEMA,
2014: 1).
In GT, learning is a descriptive tool that explains
how Nash equilibrium occurs or agents behave
(Assaad, 2021: 3), while this notion, especially
reinforcement learning in AI, means learning
some algorithms that can generate a high profit
for an agent under uncertain environmental
conditions based on the received feedbacks
(Tembine, 2019). Agents are represented as
profit maximizers in GT (Shafiei & Farah Gol,
2019: 1), while other forms of decision-making,
including competition analysis or maximizing
security level (worse mode), also exist in AI
(Ahmadi et al., 2014: 13). Finally, agents must
infer in both scopes considering the rational and
communicational constraints in a distributed
space (Mirza Momen, 2011: 5).
Game theory can be applied in different AI
scopes, including multi-agent AI systems,
imitation
and
reinforcement
learning,
and
adversary training in Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs are algorithmic architectures
that put two neural networks against each other).
Therefore, the term "adversarial" is used to create
new synthetic samples from data that can be
transferred for real data and widely used to
generate video, film, and audio (Zhang, 2019: 2).
According to the mentioned points, the extant
study aims to examine the role and effect of AI on
future international relations (IR), considering US
status in the investment rate, application of AI in
the international area, and AI investment in future
wars. Moreover, game theory considerably affects
the configuration and design planning of an AI
model. The core method of GT should be
understood to find how GT improves power to AI
models. To do this, the present paper first
examines AI and its role in IR and then addresses
the definitions, concepts, and applications of GT
in IR. This study also examines the advantages
and specifications of AI in IR and threats raised
by using AI in military areas and the security of
countries.
Literature Review
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
AI includes a wide area of knowledge, which is
the intersection of other important knowledge
such
as
computer
sciences,
electronics,
psychology, biology, linguistics, logic, and
philosophy (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2019). We
can name more than 20 AI subdisciplines,
including learning machine (Alimadadi et al.,
2020), pattern recognition (de Souza et al., 2019),
natural language processing (Steinkamp & Cook,
2021), robotic (Dirican, 2015), expert systems
(Bahrammirzaee, 2010), neural networks (Kumar
& Thakur, 2012), fuzzy logic (Milčić et al., 2007),
and genetic algorithm (Ansari & Bakar, 2014).
The book entitled “game theory in international
relations” by Mehdi Reza Darvishzadeh and
colleagues is a relevant work. This book argues
that politics and IR are significant areas in which
game theory is used, while this scope has received
less attention in Iranian academic associations due
to its mathematical basics. Hence, this book
introduces titles and main models of non-
cooperative games to express models so that all
readers with different levels of mathematical

--- Sayfa 3 ---
9766                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9766

science can understand the topics. Moreover,
each chapter presents some examples of politics
and international relations. Another reference
entitled “quantitative methods in futurology of
time series and artificial intelligence” by
Mohsen Bahrami and Payam Abbaszadeh
examined a relatively complete range of linear-
to-smart models. However, the mentioned
works have not considered the role of GT or AI
in all economic, political, cultural, and military
aspects of IR.
AI Functions in IR
AI can play three analytical, predictive, and
operational roles in IR and policy-making. The
mentioned roles have been explained herein:
Analytical Role
AI systems are found in analytical roles
assessing large datasets and concluding based
on pattern recognition. These roles are tedious
tasks generally known as the highest priority for
automation. Monitoring the output of adjusted
sensors to verify the accuracy of, for instance, a
nuclear, chemical, or biological arms control
treaty that provides jobs for human analysts.
However,
they
require
specialized
and
professional training. On the contrary, a training
machine learning system set up to the same deed
does not get tired of its task, while it might
employ human specialists to oversee and correct
the system's accuracy, especially in the learning
process.
Similarly, however less dramatic, AI processes
might be very useful for optimizing the
procedures of simpler political exchange'
aspects. Given the increased volume of data
immediately generated by industrial and
commercial operations through the "internet of
things (IoT)," it is not difficult to imagine the AI
systems that monitor trade and feed decision-
making processes around the economic policy.
In other words, AI will only become important
in how policymakers see and perceive the
world. Doing so will effectively enhance their
information processing capacity while causing
new uncertainties and complexities in decision-
making protocols (Cumming et al., 2018: 2-3).
Predictive Role
Another set of AI roles can be prediction rather
than analysis. In other words, whereas analytical
applications of AI have been considered to
simplify current operations, AI systems may
provide
opportunities for
policymakers to
understand possible future events. One such
example in the IR arena is the possibility of
modeling complex negotiations. Besides using AI
systems to monitor compliance and improve the
efficiency of complex international documents,
negotiation
parties
(whether
economic
or
strategic) might use sophisticated machine
learning methods to predict others' positions and
tactics. However, some moderating factors should
be considered.
Considerably, for example, while predictive
algorithms have been shown in some capacities
successfully, they are not necessarily more
accurate than their human equivalents. Time,
accumulated knowledge, and computer hardware
that become increasingly powerful may make
them as accurate as human predictions. However,
the nature of prediction causes a lack of a clear
success standard in this field. Moreover, as seen
in Tesla's fatal accident in 2016, the interface
between machine and human understandings of
the world creates a new potential for wrong
calculations without necessarily providing a
compensatory advantage. The truth amplifies the
potential that complex negotiations are multi-
party by definition: the machine system and
human operator do not only try to obey a set of
rules more effectively. They try to forecast or
match measures of one or more rivals (who may
themselves use predictive algorithms). There
might be some advantages arising from machines
operating
in
such
predictive
capacities-
particularly the fact that the ability of an artificial
system to store and compare a large number of
historical data is almost certainly higher than a
human or a group of humans.
To share these advantages equitably, the
underlying technology should be available- and,
in this regard, strict measures must be taken to
protect personalized data that enter the algorithms.
It is indeed difficult to create the right balance.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that AI may play
other predictive roles with geopolitics that
contribute to the more accurate forecast of
elections, economic performance, and other
relevant events. However, such areas are
functions less than machine learning and more
than the quantity of available data but must mainly
be considered in this context (Cumming et al.,
2018: 3-4).

--- Sayfa 4 ---
9767                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9767

Operational Roles
The last category is somewhat different and
covers autonomous systems in the traditional
meaning of robots. Implications of this
application are probably scattered and indirect,
but their potential importance receives attention
alongside analytical and operational functions.
Autonomous logistical systems likely have
significant
indirect
implications
for
international politics.
If truck drivers, ship crews, or pilots are
replaced
with
autonomous
systems,
no
considerable change is expected to be observed
in the daily functioning of the international
system. However, an extensive replacement of
existing human labor in these capacities may
cause a widespread economy.
Autonomous weapons are another significant
case, although it is further from wide acceptance
than is generally recognized. A considerable
public debate exists about ethics, the legality of
the development, and the use of such weapons.
The main principle of this debate is the
autonomy that distinguishes it from what is
concerned about unmanned drones. These
systems are remotely piloted compared to fully
autonomous systems. Ethical questions aside,
autonomous weapons do not necessarily change
the balance of power.
An autonomous strike aircraft makes certain
tradeoffs relative to piloted aircraft more
endurance and expendability compared to
flexibility and adaptability- but is not an
inherently more powerful and game-changing
weapon.
In the long term, the ability of autonomous
systems to react with greater speed than humans
can make a difference in some environments.
Autonomy may also make it possible to develop
new classes of weapons; for instance, the swarm
of small and interconnected robotic vehicles can
create new military capabilities paradigms.
However, the logistical and ethical questions
arising from such potential systems indicate that
we cannot declare that technology is ready for
deployment, let alone game-changing.
One possible expectation can be cyberweapons
with autonomy and machine learning, with the
potential to make them more effective and
adaptive compared to their counterparts.
However, like a non-military autonomous
vehicle, the real impact probably is indirect for a
while. A military with autonomous systems may
be more capable than a military without a system-
at least in the short term. However, even if the
autonomy of an instant prospect does not cause a
fundamental change in war, the consequences of
changing norms and standards in policymakers'
attitudes and reactions to threats probably change
markedly (Cumming et al., 2018: 4-5).
Game Theory (GT)
GT is a notion that has been widely used in
different
branches
of
sciences,
including
economics, politics, military sciences, biology,
computer sciences, and so forth, over recent
decades (Myerson, 1997). GT is a mathematical
theory for designing, analyzing, and describing
conflicting situations in which the involved
players are exposed to several choices based on
certain rules. The GT is a study instrument used in
different levels of analysis- from economic,
political, and military strategies of governments to
individual and group relations (Golparvar &
Shahabi, 2011). It is possible to use GT to analyze
the logical behavior of players and their strategies,
recommend some rational methods to improve
choices, and gain maximum profit and minimum
loss (Khakestari et al., 2018). Moreover, this
theory introduces some relevant concepts that can
be used to design a framework for complicated
phenomena (Nobakht et al., 2011). Rational
human behaviors and choices are the most
underlying assumption of GT (Mahmoudinia et
al., 2016). GT is used in social and political
contexts, including election competitions and AI
(Ghahraman & Mohammad Javad, 2009).
Individuals face interactive situations in decision-
making, so the implications for every person or
group depend on their personal and group
decisions and behaviors and others' decisions and
behaviors (Mahmoudi et al., 2016: 2).
GT Concept
Scholars have expressed various definitions for
GT. For instance, Bruin (2005) defines game
theory as a branch of applied mathematics used to
investigate humans' social behavior, strategic
interaction, and logic of conflict between humans.
Carmichael (2005) explains that GT is a technique
used to analyze situations where two or more
individuals, the outcome of an action by one of
them depends not only on the action taken by that
individual but also on the actions taken by the

--- Sayfa 5 ---
9768                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9768

others. Osborne and Rubinstein (1994) define
GT in their book as a bag of analytical tools
designed to help us understand the phenomena
we observe when decision-makers interact.
Maschler, Solan, and Zamir (2013) define GT as
a methodology that uses mathematical tools to
model and analyze situations where several
decision-makers (players) exist. According to
the abovementioned definitions, there is a
consensus in these definitions explaining GT as
a decision theory under interactive conditions,
and this is the concept defined by theorists for
GT (Mahmoudinia, 2016: 3).
GT framework pursues the analysis within three
steps: metaphor, allegory, and modeling.
Metaphor is the first step to GT. Metaphors are
used not only in literature but also in mechanics,
biology, and social knowledge. Because
metaphor cannot reveal all game subjects, the
second step (allegory) is used to correspond to
different situations to express similarities.
Allegory creates a guide for empirical
observation in GT to enable comparison. Since
allegory cannot solve the game analysis
problem that is empirical data-based, the third
model of modeling is taken. The simplest
definition of the model is the streamlined form
of reality, and game theorists analyze the games
through the modeling process (Attar, 2018: 92).
The last goal of GT is to design some
prescriptions and advice for the rational
behavior of players in conflicting situations, i.e.,
to determine the optimal strategy for each player
(Shakibaei et al., 2021: 219). In GT, the optimal
strategy for a player is a strategy that ensures the
highest average privilege in repetitive cases. In
other words, this strategy is less likely to lead to
loss. This strategy is selected based on the
reasoning that a rival is as rational as us and does
anything to prevent us from achieving our goal.
The mentioned two principles generate all
advice in GT (Khatami, 2020: 184-185). As a
result, hazard-seeking that inevitably exists in
all strategies, miscalculations, or possible
mistakes of players are not considered (Wenzel,
1994: 17).
In general, game theory comprises three
concepts: assumptions, game components, and
context. Assumptions express hypotheses that
have created the theory. The elements and
components required to shape a game are
categorized as "game components," and the
circumstances on which the game is modeled are
called "game context." The rationality of players
is a significant assumption in GT; it means
decision-makers look for good exogenous defined
objectives and consider strategic reasonings
(Hosseini Dehaghani & Basirat, 2016: 95).
Constituents of GT
Every game has three underlying elements:
players, tactics (strategies), and implications
(outcomes).
Decision-makers are called players in a game. A
player is a person who decides in the game's
strategic space, and these decisions are based on
the player's rational behavior to achieve the best
outcome considering rivals. Tactic or strategy
includes a set of decisions and measures taken by
each player. The payoffs gained by players are
named outcome or implication (Souri, 2007: 5).
According to the basic definition of GT, this
theory is applied to model strategic situations. In
other words, these situations include interaction,
confrontation, and conflicting interests that
require awareness. Players should cooperate and
interact and have supplementary interests. This
theory is an uncertain environment for each
player, so players' behavior influences others'
behavior (Hosseini Dehaghani & Basirat, 2016:
96).

Figure 1. GT analysis tools
Source: Authors

Every game is determined based on the following
elements:
Players: the player is defined as each participant
or competitor that can choose a strategy and
influence the game conditions and other players'
choices (Ahmadi, 2006: 18). In other words, every
game has several rational decision-makers called
players. Governments are the main players in
international relations, and two exist in all
international conflicts and cooperation.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
9769                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9769

Rules of the Game: in GT, a game includes a
set of known rules for all players that set what
appointment can do or what can be the results or
outcome (Souri, 2011: 388). Rules of the game
can become public knowledge; each player can
know the rule of the game, and each player must
know that another player also knows the rule of
the game, and each player knows two former
cases. In this case, the rule of the game is the
general awareness or knowledge between
players (Abdoli, 2011: 12). Each player can
have perfect or imperfect information about the
play. In some games, players can make aware of
other players' outcomes and strategies, while
such a case is not possible in other cases
(Hatami, 2010: 1).
Outcomes: win or loss rates and/or the result
gained at the endpoint of players are called
outcomes. Although the utility is an abstract
notion, it should be quantified in GT. Everyone
might prioritize the game in different forms
(Poundstone, 2007: 218). Two points should be
mentioned about outcome rates: first, interest is
a mental concept, and outcome rates should
fulfill the mental satisfaction in an ideal case;
second, other players, theorists, or both consider
outcomes uncertain (McCain, 2013: 43). The
authors who have written about game theory
distinguish between the result of a game (win,
lose, draw) and outcome (the value every player
gives to the result). The relationship between
outcome and motivation is important which is
inevitable. Outcomes may have different
meanings for players, given their values,
position in the international system, and
domestic circumstances (Doherty, 1997: 788).
Strategy: strategy is a mental skill used to play
well in a game. In other words, strategy means
the optimal application of skill in the game
(Abdoli, 2011: 3). Moreover, strategy can be
defined as a player's plan or action choice under
any possible circumstance. In other words,
strategy is a sorted chain of measures that a
player can choose in different steps. Therefore,
it is a complete program of measures and
decisions that might be taken in the game.
Although some strategies may comprise only
one decision or measure, other strategies can
include numerous decisions and measures. The
general plan means a plan that considers the
probability of any measure occurrence (Moosavi
Jahromi, 2012: 21).

GT in AI
In AI scope, GT formulates the framework to
study cooperative and strategic interactions within
multi-agent systems. Moreover, GT is used in
those AI and deep learning systems in which
various agents should interact with each other.
The traditional GT provided mathematical basics
and powerful equilibrium concepts while allowing
GT to be applied in sophisticated and large
systems
in
terms
of
computational
and
demonstrative contents. Computational GT covers
a
range
of
modeling,
presentations,
and
algorithms that try to simplify and remove
constraints in traditional GT (Mirza Momen,
2016).
Many games like poker, solitaire, chess, ludo, etc.,
are some games that are played digitally on
laptops, phones, tablets, etc. All games have a
clear set of rules and instructions, so you should
follow the game's rules to win it. You have to
create some algorithms that consider the number
of players and rules if you want to make these
games digitally; therefore, the game theory will be
developed. The majority of popular games that we
play digitally have been developed using AI and
GT; GT is not just confined to games but has
considerable applications in AI, such as
Generative
Adversarial
Networks
(GANs),
machine learning algorithms, manipulation-
resistant
systems,
multi-agent
AI
system,
imitation, and reinforcement learning, etc. (Tyagi,
2019).
GT concept is necessary to solve many dynamic
problems. In this case, GT assists AI so that one
can improve traffic flow in a region by using AI-
controlled self-driving cars and implementing GT
in multi-agent reinforcement training. Each car
perfectly interacts with the external environment;
now assume that the case gets more complicated
if cars think in a group way.
Consider that one car conflicts with another
because you may follow a certain route for their
travels. This mode can be simply modeled using
GT. Regarding GT, cars perform as players, and
Nash Equilibrium is the point of cooperation
between different cars. Reinforcement learning
requires interacting with the real or virtual
environment and augmented reality. Assume that

--- Sayfa 7 ---
9770                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9770

an agent interacts with a random environment
and learns a policy through reward or
punishment; that environment teaches one
agent. This is not possible no longer. The reason
is that interaction now exists between different
agents
and
the
environment.
Therefore,
modeling a system with several agents is
difficult. The increasing number of agents leads
to an exponential increase in possible routes the
agents use to interact with each other. GT can
solve this problem.
In other words, AI and GT work on intelligence
agents embodied in a complicated world. These
agents may interact with other agents and use
learning and reasoning techniques to improve
their conduct. AI and game theory (GT) are two
developed research scopes from similar roots
within different trajectories. However, a deep
and fundamental association exists between AI
and GT, so developing and searching these
associations can contribute to considerable
achievements in both scopes. Three main
notions
(learning,
representation,
and
reasoning) exist in the deep relationship
between AI and GT, which are common in two
representation
and
reasoning
areas
(Tennenholtz, 2002: 58).
Game theory can be applied in different AI
scopes, including multi-agent AI systems,
imitation and reinforcement learning, and
adversary training in Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs are algorithmic architectures
that put two neural networks against each other).
Therefore, "adversarial" is used to create new
synthetic samples from data that can be
transferred for real data and widely used to
generate video, film, and audio (Ippolito, 2019).
Ian Goodfellow introduced GNAs in 2014. This
network is developed based on the GT, and a
deep learning network competes with an
adversarial trend. This network is also used to
generate audio and video content, amplify
videos, convert audio, or synthesize speech
(Soltani, 2018).
One fake video from Nancy Pelosi indicates
how much a deep fake can be risky in political
issues. This video shows the house speaker of
the US presenting a speech, but in the fake
version, her speech speed was reduced by about
25% and she appeared drunk and abnormal
mood.  Deepfake videos have violated the
privacy of politicians leaving them with numerous
problems. The Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) has spent millions of
dollars on detecting deep fakes. This is not the
only research center; Facebook and Google have
also spent money to find methods that can detect
fake content. News agencies, such as Reuters set
Factenchecker to fight against any deep fake in the
United
States
Presidential
election,
2020.
However, a responsible employee of UGC and the
UGC verification department of Reuters states
that good deep fakes can even mislead
professionals. Reinforcement learning training
can be mentioned in Multi-Agents Reinforcement
Learning.  Reinforcement learning learns to create
an agent through interacting with an environment
that can be real or virtual. Reinforcement learning
is used to detect correctness or wring cases, learn
from signals, and do implicit measurements for
indirect learning (IRIB News Agency, 2020).
Since AI is based on four assumptions (systems
that think rationally, systems that perform
rationally, systems that think like humans, and
systems that perform like humans), it consists of
three general parts of neural, evolutionary
computations, and fuzzy systems (Russell &
Norvig, 2021: 20-22).
Therefore, AI can understand the environment and
take a measure based on this understanding to
maximize the chance of fulfilling an objective.
This resembles the rational player model in
decision-making theory. The outcome of GT
indicates that humans are rational creatures that
want to maximize their profit. On the other hand,
mathematical optimizers, statistic and probability-
based techniques, and computational intelligence
are applied in AI and GT. GT is not a part of AI
and vice versa; these two methods are not
interconnected; they can overlap each other so that
one can use AI to solve or analyze a game.

International Relations (IR)
International relation is a branch of politics
pertained to relations between governments and
their foreign policies (Webster Dictionary). As the
realm of social life at the global level,
international relations are attractive for educated
classes that are interested in public issues
(Moshirzadeh, 2017: 1). International relations
study the relationships between countries, the role
of independent countries, interstate organizations,

--- Sayfa 8 ---
9771                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9771

international non-governmental organization,
NGOs, and multinational firms. International
Relations is an academic discipline that can be
normative and evidential since it analyzes the
foreign policy of a government (Hajizadeh,
2018: 1).
International Relations appeared in the Wets
and USA after its power and influence were
enhanced at the beginning of the 20th century.
While the study of international relations was
damaged in the newly-established Soviet Union
and Communist China due to formally imposed
Marxism ideology, this discipline could
eliminate ignorance, provide human progress,
and make political issues, such as foreign
affairs, public. Success stories in the West
included increased demand for finding effective
tools to make relations between people,
communities, governments, and economies.
Numerous studies and papers were also inspired
by this belief that regular research and
observation can destroy ignorance and develop
human communities.
Woodrow Wilson, president of the United States
from 1913 to 1921, introduced this new view
about relations between great powers after the
settlement of the First World War. The first
point of his fourteen points was the contact after
his plan was outlined. In the case of "open
covenants of peace," instead of confidential
treaties that were the reason for war, the
devastating aftermath made political leaders
believe there was insufficient information about
international
relations.
Accordingly,
universities had to promote research and
education on international collaborations, war,
and peace issues.
Application of GT in Politics and IR
Politics uses GT in some scopes, including
political economics, public choice, positive
political theory, and social choice theory.
Researchers have developed GT models
differently in the mentioned scopes so that
voters, interest group situations, and politicians
are players. Generally, this theory is applied in
all political aspects, especially in intra-
government and minor competitions between
leaders when game rules do not exist and
personal competitions dominate the legal
relations. No law can serve as a political conduct
framework in the mentioned case. Hence, this
game will become an illegal case influenced by
personal decisions. The game will get more
complicated in the absence of certain rules. In
such games, that part wins the game that can
mobilize maximum resources timely, although the
increased mobilization cost occurs (Abdoli, 2008:
247).
In GT, mathematics and logic are added to the
underlying principles of Balance of Power to
better analyze the economic, political, and
international coercion of governments and their
interest-centered
financial
thoughts.
The
mentioned analysis will be beyond the assumption
of governments' rationality, logic, and authority
(Pourkazemi et al., 2014: 27-28). In other words,
GT considers an international arena where each
player must rationalize their behavior to achieve
success.
The
global
environment
is
a
computational space where no irrational conduct
can be shown, although some friends act against
their national interests and international game
rules and framework (Taklif, 2014).
The international scene is a multi-player arena
where payoffs obtained by some parties do not
equal the loss of other players, so it is a non-zero-
sum game. For instance, the development of
different aspects of a country is not necessarily
conflicting with the interests of other players. It is
possible to reach national demands and goals in
the framework of dual or single interests of
countries or multiple interests of international
arena players. The first factor for entering the
game and taking action in the scene is accepting
the rule of the game in the international arena
based on logic and computational measures. This
necessarily does not mean avoiding nature and
national principles and values but is only a rational
and independent game in interactions. Lack of
totality is the main environmental characteristic of
the mentioned interactions (Ghahremani &
Mohammad Javad, 2016: 15). Therefore, each
government should provide its vital and national
interests, welfare, and security for the nation in an
arena consisting of both conflict and cooperation.
The best result of GT is the scene of international
interactions that include game rules, framework,
skill, bargaining, computational tools, rationality,
utility, professionality, and capabilities. Those
players capable of professional games based on
the mentioned properties and think of rational
success can win the game (Gibbons, 1992).

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9772                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9772

Main Principles of GT in International
Arena
GT provides clear information about the
diversity of competitive circumstances. GT
points to five aspects of strategic behavior in
terms of application in competition between
commercial
organizations:
cooperation,
deterrence,
commitment,
changing
game
structure, and signaling. A firm can use the
mentioned aspects to improve its competitive
results (Strategy Office of Sharif University,
2019: 1).
GT provides clear information about extensive
diversity of competitive circumstances, such as
the Cuban Missile Crisis of October 1962,
competition between Boeing and Airbus,
NASCAR Racing tactics, TV and Radio
Spectrum Auctions, Financial Crisis in 2008.
GT points to five aspects of strategic behavior
in terms of application in competition between
commercial
organizations:
cooperation,
deterrence,
commitment,
changing
game
structure, and signaling. A firm can use the
mentioned aspects to improve its competitive
results.

Cooperation
The ability to compete and cooperate is one of
the main criteria in GT. One shortcoming of the
Five Forces framework is that this framework
considers the nature of inter-firm relations
completely competitive. Consideration of dual
competition-cooperation relation is the main
point of Adam Brandenburger and Barry
Nalebuff’s perception. Although some relations
are perfectly competitive (Coca -Cola and Pepsi)
and others are completely cooperative (Intel and
Microsoft),
no
branch
exist
between
competition and cooperation. All commercial
relations have elements from both. Despite the
close competition between Coca -Cola and
Pepsi, they cooperate on different fronts,
including shared policies on selling non-alcohol
drinks in schools, environmental topics, and
health
concerns.
Moreover,
they
might
coordinate
their
pricing
and
product
introduction (Rahimian, 2020: 22).
In another case, Exxon and Shell's companies
fought for world oil leadership for over a
century while cooperating in joint investments.
Rivals' tendency to merge (sellers in London
antique market or filmmaking studios in
Hollywood) refers to the joint interests of rival
companies to enhance their market size and
develop infrastructures. The research author
believes that this principle of GT indicates that
competition leads to worse outcomes than
cooperation in many commercial circumstances.
Deterrence
Deterrence is a way to change the equilibrium of
a game. Deterrence means taking action or a set of
actions to exceed the enemy's hostile actions.
Deterrence theory means trying to influence
another party to prevent it from doing any action
that causes damage or cost for the first one (M
Elliott & Reginald, 1999: 370).
The notion of "deterrence" in GT has created a
significant area in international relations. Nuclear
arms racing between America and the Soviet
Union was based on the logic of "definite bilateral
devastation." However, the ability of deterrence to
create a sustainable and peaceful equilibrium
depends on the enemies' willingness for
deterrence. One of the main shortcomings of
George W. Bush’s “war on terrorism” was that
deterrence does not threaten terrorists with
ideologic motivations (Rahimian, 2020: 20).
Commitment
Deterrence should be rational to be effective; it
means
deterrence
must
be
supported
by
commitment. Commitment or obligation requires
removing
strategic
authorities:
"connecting
organization to the future solution." After Hernan
Cortes destroyed his ships when he entered
Mexico in 1519, he negotiated with Mendoza and
his companions and explained that he had no way
to defeat Aztec Empire. After Airbus decided to
produce
the
giant
A380
plane,
project
commitment appeared to be a significant case.
Airbus invested in plane promotion between
2000-2002 before the design phase to encourage
airlines to order and prevent Boeing from
manufacturing a rival plane (Rahimian, 2020: 29).
Changing Game Structure
Creative strategies can change the structure of the
competitive game. A firm may want to change the
industrial structure where it competes, to enhance
industry profitability potential or gain more share
of available profit. Therefore, alliance and
agreement with rivals can maximize the game
value by increasing market size and joint power

--- Sayfa 10 ---
9773                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9773

against
possible
new
rivals.
Numerous
opportunities may exist to change win-lose (or
even loss-loss) games to win-win games.
For instance, the bidding war between Norfolk
Southern- an American railway corporation
established in 1982- and CSX was created in
1980 after merging Chessie System and
Seaboard Coast Line Industries (two holdings
that controlled several railways in East USA).
After these two firms agreed on collaborating
for railway transportation separation and
purchase, the bidding war ended. In some cases,
rivals may be useful for the firm. Intel assigned
its potential monopoly over x86 microchips by
presenting the production license of their
products to AMD. Although Intel created a
competitor for itself, this firm encouraged
computer
manufacturers
(including
IBM,
concerned about over-dependence on Intel) to
accept x86 chips.
Signaling
The competitive reaction depends on the rivals'
perception of the competitor's action. The term
"signaling" describes the selective exchange of
information to competitors (with customers)
designed to influence their perception, stimulate
or prevent certain reactions.
Incorrect information is well used in military
information departments. The Book “Operation
Mincemeat" explains how Britain's military
department uses a dead body outfitted in
maritime military uniform and transfers fake
secret documents to persuade senior German
commanders that the allies' forces get off in
Greece, not Sicily (Rahimian, 2020: 32).
The Role of AI in Foreign Policy
AI can be used in different fields of foreign
policy in the current era that foreign policy is
moving towards algorithms that aim to analyze
data,
predict
events,
and
consult
with
governments. The most important applications
of AI in foreign policy include managing public
expectations in another country, deciding based
on the scenario writing, and analyzing the signs
received from speeches and positions of other
countries' officials. However, an accurate
understanding of foreign policy analysis is
before the applied model selection and how AI
tools are used. In this lieu, China introduced a
new AI system two years ago that was
structured for Chinese foreign policy. This
system called the "geopolitical environment
simulation and prediction platform,” provides
Chinese diplomats with some recommendations
for foreign policy after analyzing large data.
According to an informed source, China used the
same system to evaluate all foreign investment
projects over the past years (Majidzadeh, 2020).
AI assists policymakers in decision-making and
allows them to make the final decision. AI helps
decision-makers by enhancing their ability to use
this information technology. Moreover, AI helps
decision-makers
by
doing
more
mundane
activities that distract them from focusing on the
vital element of a subject. Because the software
industry prepares some plans for AI, it should
make plans for it under certain circumstances. AI
should look for approximate solutions without
ensuring optimality to provide a human-like
response. A system that can provide an 80%
solution can repeat the human function more
accurately and creates a 20% space for human
interpretation.
The Role of AI in Trade and the International
Economy
AI development affects international trade in
different ways: effects of AI macroeconomics and
its relevant business effects. If AI enhances
productivity growth, it will increase economic
growth and create new opportunities for
international
trade.
The
present
rate
of
productivity growth is low globally for various
reasons. One of the reasons for low productivity
growth, especially in understanding the potential
relationship with AI, is the economic effect of AI
in the integration of the economy and the effective
application of new technologies, particularly in
complicated cases. The mentioned effects include
a huge sufficient capital to have a total effect and
complementary investments required for the
perfect use of AI investments, such as access to
skilled individuals and commercial techniques
(Naghavian, 2021).
AI acts as the engine of productivity and economic
growth. AI can increase the efficiency of actions
and improve decision-making by analyzing
numerous data. Moreover, it can create new
products, services, markets, and industries,
increase consumer demand, and create new
income flow (Szczepański, 2019: 2).
AI affects the type and quality of economic
growth by influencing international trade. For

--- Sayfa 11 ---
9774                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9774

instance,
AI
accelerates
service-based
economies. It also is used for production, and
product value added. AI should contribute to a
higher contribution of services in production
and international trade.
Economic, Social, and Military Effects of AI
AI-based services will control and manage
transactions to minimize errors and mistakes in
future years because AI generates news without
involving journalists and reporters, so many
simple jobs provide services. This evolution
leads to an economic revolution. According to
forecasts, more than half of today's jobs will
disappear within the one or two next decades,
and smart robots and AI-based systems will
control these jobs. According to professional
predictions, AI development leads to the highest
evolution in human life after the end of World
War II. After producing self-driving cars and
independent
products
without
employing
humans, most social processes will be
automated (Movahedian, 2019).
AI has been used in the military, and many
countries are producing AI-based systems and
weapons to minimize human presence in war
and achieve the victory factor of information
priority in wars. This requires designing
advanced communication technologies-based
network systems that provide information
accessibility
and
accurate
data
analysis.
Technical aspects of AI have been markedly
developed in recent years. Like electricity, the
internet, and steam engine, AI is a technology
with a general goal that highly concentrates on
machine learning and development. AI affects
many significant variables, such as productivity,
economic growth, inequality, market power,
innovation, and employment in the economy
(Jahangard, 2019: 4).
Conclusion and Data Analysis
Since AI is based on four assumptions (systems
that think rationally, systems that perform
rationally, systems that think like humans, and
systems that perform like humans), it consists of
three general parts: neural, evolutionary
computations, and fuzzy systems. Therefore, AI
can understand the environment and take a
measure based on this understanding to
maximize the chance of fulfilling an objective.
This resembles the rational player model in
decision-making theory. The outcome of GT
indicates that humans are rational creatures that
want to maximize their profit. On the other hand,
mathematical optimizers, statistic and probability-
based techniques, and computational intelligence
are applied in AI and GT. GT is not a part of AI
and vice versa; these two methods are not
interconnected; they can overlap each other so that
one can use AI to solve or analyze a game.
According to the abovementioned points, AI can
be used in different fields of foreign policy in the
current era that foreign policy is moving towards
algorithms that aim to analyze data, predict
events, and consult with governments. The most
important applications of AI in foreign policy
include managing public expectations in another
country, deciding based on the scenario writing,
and analyzing the signs received from speeches
and positions of other countries' officials.
However, an accurate understanding of foreign
policy analysis is before the applied model
selection and how AI tools are used. Under such
circumstances in the current era, foreign policy
will generally change because countries are using
AI and algorithms to predict events. In this case,
countries interact with each other while knowing
that their actions might have been predicted in
previous days, weeks, or months. The changing
business world will transform geopolitical
relations. In this case, AI helps to select the type
of players and choices by determining the
assumptions based on the professional panel of
foreign policy experts (besides other essential
disciplines, such as social psychology, political
sociology, anthropology, etc.). Then AI calculates
and prioritizes the different scenarios. Although
the results of AI applications do not indicate their
certainty, AI can reduce the uncertainty of foreign
policies to take the best measures and strategies.
Furthermore, AI-GT integration in different forms
and scopes implies that GT is a decision-making
science, such as research in operation and
engineering economics, with the difference that
GT studies those problems where the results of a
decision depend on the decisions made by two or
more independent decision-makers. In other
words,
decision-makers
cannot
completely
control their decisions' results. Determining
competitive and cooperation strategies or a
combination of them in all (commercial,
industrial,
social,
political,
military,
etc.)
organizations is an underlying cause. GT supports

--- Sayfa 12 ---
9775                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9775

its genius founders; it provides decision-makers
and supporters with the required tools.
Therefore, decision-making theory can be used
to achieve the goal, and monitor the current
status, monitor current status, and optimal future
situation for any change in international
relations. Action and reaction stem from affairs
calculated
by
different
governments
in
international relations. In this approach,
governments are players that try to choose a
method in which maximizer and minimizer
players exist to reach an equilibrium point.
Therefore, governments can apply “Normative
Decision Theory” and “Descriptive Decision
Theory” that analyze the results of decisions or
determine
optimal
decisions
considering
constraints and assumptions. The mentioned
theories examine how individuals decide on this
process. in other words, one pays attention to the
decision's results, while another considers how
a decision is made.
Moreover, the conducted studies indicate that
the performance of some governments implies
sufficiently huge knowledge interest in AI.
Investments done by some countries, such as
France and China, indicate their expectations
from considerable local knowledge interests of
this
technology.
Many
large
private
corporations in the world have invested in AI.
Learning machine improves more data, so large
corporations and larger countries will gain more
benefits.
On the other hand, AI and GT all address
intellectual agents embodied in a complicated
world. These agents may interact with other
agents and use learning and reasoning techniques
to improve their conduct. This integration and
technology have been brainstormed and used in
military sectors.
AI increases exponentially and promotes its
influence using some amenities, such as large
databases, new data analysis technologies, and,
more importantly, the interpretable data received
from different sensors. The more free and
unknown variables, the more sophisticated the
decision-making will be. These systems help to
enter more variables into the decision-making
process. Moreover, one can consider the neural
network of unknown variables, the unknown
relationship between variables, and variables with
an unknown effect on the outcome. Accordingly,
these systems bring more accuracy to complicated
decision-making processes.
In general, it is concluded that such changes,
approaches, and positive or negative feedback
have led to two types of strategies for AI
development in the policymaking scope. One
policy focuses on the disseminating and
developing AI model, while another emphasizes
the implications of such dissemination and
development. The policy should consider the most
relevant policies associated with AI dissemination
and
development,
privacy,
trade,
and
responsibility. The policy design focuses on social
value for optimal balance between AI stimulation
and dissemination without causing risk.

REFERENCE

Abdekhodaei, M. (2019). Secularization
and desecularization in the theory of
international
relations,
Studies
of
International Relations Journal, Vol. 12,
Issue 45, 00661, 120-150.
Abdoli, Gh., Nakhoda M.J. (2009). An
application of Fearon’s theory to consider
OPEC’s stability: through a repeated game
approach, Journal of Energy Economics
Review, Vol. 6, Issue 20, 33-56.
Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2019).
“Artificial Intelligence, Automation, and
Work, “(pp. 197-236), University of
Chicago Press.
Ahmadi, S. A.A. and colleagues (2013).
Artificial
intelligence
and
business
opportunities: identifying the applications
of artificial intelligence in creating
competitive advantages for technological
firms (case of game industries), Journal of
Entrepreneurship Development, Vol. 6,
2(20).
Alimadadi, A., Aryal, S., Manandhar, I.,
Munroe, P. B., Joe, B., & Cheng, X
(2020),”
Artificial
intelligence
and
machine learning to fight COVID-19”,
Physiological genomics, 52 (4), 200-202
Ansari, A., & Bakar, A. A. (2014), “A
comparative study of three artificial
intelligence
techniques:
Genetic
algorithm, neural network, and fuzzy

--- Sayfa 13 ---
9776                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9776

logic, on scheduling problem,” In 2014 4th
International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence
with
Applications
in
Engineering and Technology (pp. 31-36).
IEEE.
Assaad, R., Ahmed, M. O., El-adaway, I.
H., Elsayegh, A., & Siddhardh Nadendla,
V. S. (2021), “Comparing the impact of
learning
in
bidding
decision-making
processes using algorithmic game theory,”
Journal of Management in Engineering,
37(1), 04020099.
Attar, S. (2018). The study of the nuclear
dispute between Iran and countries 5+1
based on the game theory, Journal of
Politics Strategic Studies, Vol. 7, Issue 72.
Bahrammirzaee,
A.
(2010),
"A
comparative
survey
of
artificial
intelligence
applications
in
finance:
artificial neural networks, expert system,
and hybrid intelligent systems." Neural
Computing and Applications, 19(8), 1165-
1195.
Burchill, S., Linklater, A., Devetak, R.,
Donnelly, J., Nardin, T., Paterson, M., ...
&
True,
J.
(2013).
Theories
of
international
relations.
Macmillan
International Higher Education.
Cummings,
M.L;
Roff,
Heather.M;
Cukier, Kenneth; Parakilas, Jacob&Bryce,
Hannah (2018),” Artificial Intelligence
and
International
Affairs
Disruption
Anticipated,” Chatham House Report, the
Royal Institute of International Affairs
Daraei, M.R., Ahmadi, S.A.A., Jafari,
M.R., Salamzadeh, A. (2013). Artificial
intelligence and business opportunities:
identifying the applications of artificial
intelligence
in
creating
competitive
advantages for technological firms (case of
game
industries),
Journal
of
Entrepreneurship Development, Vol. 6,
Issue 2.
de Souza, W. A., Garcia, F. D., Marafão,
F. P., Da Silva, L. C. P., & Simões, M. G.
(2019),”
Load
disaggregation
using
microscopic power features and pattern
recognition,” Energies, 12(14), 2641.
Dirican, C. (2015),” The impacts of
robotics, artificial intelligence on business
and economics,” Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 195, 564-573.
Elliot, J. M., Reginald, R. (1999). Political
and strategic encyclopedia, Translated by
Mirhossein Raeeszadeh, Tehran, Office of
Political and International Studies, 370.
February 2020).
Ghanbari, S. (2019). The concept of
international society and attempt to link
international
law
and
international
relations, International Studies, Vol. 16,
Issue 1(61), 001128, 7-30.
Gibbons. R (1992), "Games Theory for
Applied
Economists,"
Princeton
University Press.
Golparvar, M., Shahabi, M. (2011). The
application of games theory in describing
the elections competitions, Journal of
Political and International Research, Vol.
3, Issue 6, 175-202.
 Haji Yousefi, A.M., Nemati, A. H. (2019).
Saudi Arabia's alignment with Israel from
the perspective of international relations
theories,
Journal
of
Political
and
International Research, Vol. 11, Issue 40,
00953, 104-124.
Hajizadeh,
Gh.
(2018).
Power
in
international
relations,
National
Conference on Humanities Studies and
Research, Ghanoon Yar Institute, Islamic
Azad University Kermanshah Branch,
2018.
Hosseini Dehaghani, M., Basirat, M.
(2016). A game theory approach to the
analysis of urban power games: analysis of
construction building processes in Tehran
metropolis,
Journal
of
Fine
Arts-
Architecture, Issue 1.
Ippolito, P.P. (2019), "Game theory in
artificial intelligence," [Online], available
at https://
IRIB News, (2020), What is deep fake?
Adopted
from:
https://www.iribnews.ir/fa/news/2914823
Jahangard, S. (2015), Economic and
policies of AI, Economics Newspaper, No.
3426, 4.
Kaviyani Charati, M., Ghodsypour, S.H.,
Gheidar Kheljani, J. (2018). Agility In
competitive supply chain considering
strategic customers, Journal of Industrial
Engineering in Production Systems, Vol.
6, Issue 12, 00658, 33-47.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
9777                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9777

Khakestari, M., Joleini, S., Kameli, A.
(2018). An analysis of the behavior of
OPEC with the approach of evolutionary
game theory, Journal of Economic
Modeling
Research,
Vol.
8,
Issue
31001146, 103-130.
Khatami, S. (2020). Analysis of the
evolutionary game theory in agent-based
computational
systems:
OPEC
oil-
producing countries, Economic Research,
Vol. 16, Issue 64, 001006, 183-216.
Kiggins, R. D. (2018),” Big Data,
Artificial Intelligence, and Autonomous
Policy Decision-Making: A Crisis in
International Relations Theory?”, In The
Political Economy of Robots (pp. 211-
234). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Kumar, K., & Thakur, G. S. M. (2012), “
Advanced applications of neural networks
and artificial intelligence: A review.
International
journal
of
information
technology and computer” science, 4(6),
57.
Langhelle, O., Meadowcroft, J., &
Rosenbloom, D. (2019),” Politics and
technology:
deploying
the
state
to
accelerate socio-technical transitions for
sustainability.
In
What
Next
for
Sustainable
Development?”,
Edward
Elgar Publishing.
Mahmoudinia, D., Dalali Esfahani, R.,
Engwerda, J., Bakhshi Dastjerdi, R.
(2016). Game theory and its role in
determining optimal policies and strategic
interaction between fiscal and monetary
policymakers (application of differential
game theory and Stackelberg games),
Journal of Applied Economics Studies in
Iran, Vol. 5, Issue 77, 1-34.
Majidzadeh, R. (2020). Application of AI
in foreign policy, Strategic Council of
Foreign
Relations.
https://www.scfr.ir/fa/30030101/125202
McCain, R. A. (2013). Game theory and
public policy, Translated by Ali Bogheyri,
Tehran, Imam Sadiq University Press.
Milčić,
D.,
Anđelković,
B.,
&
MIJAJLOVIĆ, M. (2007), “ Decisions
making in the design process–examples of
artificial
intelligence
application."
Machine Design-Monograph, University
of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical
Sciences,
ADEKO–Association
For
Design, Elements And Constructions, 13-
20.
Moeeni S. (2019). Modeling the petroleum
export behavior of Iran after oil sanction in
the framework of analysis of the strategic
relations of the oil market, Journal of
Sustainable Growth and Development
(Economic Research), 19(3),163-185.
Moosavi Jahromi, Y., Sehati, E. (2012).
Game theory handbook (strategies and
applications),
retrieved
from:
https://noandishaan.com/41678/games-
theory/
Moshirzadeh, H. (2017). Development in
international
relations
theories,
The
Organization
for
Researching
and
Composing University textbooks in the
Humanities
or
(SAMT),
Humanities
Research and Development Center.
Movahedian,
E.
(2019).
Artificial
Intelligence: a technological threat for
international peace and security, Iranian
Diplomacy
Site,
retrieved
from:
http://irdiplomacy.ir/fa/news/1985459.
Myerson, R. B. (1997), “ Game theory:
analysis of conflict," Harvard university
press.
Nobakht, M. B., Gholami Nataj Amiri, S.,
Madjidzadeh, R. (2011). An evaluation of
the process of development in Iran in the
recent century with an emphasis on the
theory of chaos and game theory, Journal
of Strategy, Vol. 20, Issue 59, 271-317.
Norvig, P., & Russell, S. (2021). Artificial
Intelligence:
A
Modern
Approach,
Citeseer Publications, 4th Editions.
 Poundstone,
W.
(2007).
Prisoner's
dilemma, Translated by Ali Katiraee,
Tehran, Maziar Publications.
Pourkazemi, M. H., Moraddarvish, A.,
Vali, M. (2014). The political economy of
ninth government based on game theory,
Economic Research, Vol. 49, Issue 1, 19-
43.
Rahimian,
R.
(2020).
Strategic
management in organizations, Tehran
Press, Nasl-e-Roshan.
Schrodt,
P.
A.
(1988),”
Artificial
intelligence
and
formal
models
of
international behavior,” The American
Sociologist, 19(1), 71-85.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
9778                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9778

Scott, B., Heumann, S., & Lorenz, P.
(2018),” Artificial intelligence and foreign
policy”, Stiftung Neue Verantwortung
Policy Brief.
Shafiei, M., Farah Gol, P. (2019). Using
game theory in analyzing the supply chain
with the customer market approach, (Case
Study: Fars Cement), Journal of Industrial
Management Studies, Vol. 17, Issue 35,
193-217.
Shakibaei, A., Nejati, M., Hosseinzadeh,
M. (2021). Europe's reaction to our
withdrawal from the Paris environment
agreement: a game theory approach,
Journal of Development and Capital, Vol.
6, Issue 1, 209-230.
Slaughter, A. M., & Hale, T. (2011),”
International relations, principal theories,”
Max Planck Encyclopedia of public
international law, 129.
Soltani, M. (2018). Generative Adversarial
Networks, Part Research Center for AI,
retrieved from: https://dataio.ir
Souri,
A.
(2011).
Mathematical
economics, methods, and applications,
Tehran, Samt Publications.
Steinkamp, J., & Cook, T. S. (2021, “
Basic Artificial Intelligence Techniques:
Natural
Language
Processing
of
Radiology Reports”, Radiologic Clinics,
59(6), 919-931.
Szczepański, Marcin(2019),” Economic
impacts of artificial intelligence (AI)”,
European
Parliamentary
Research
Service(EPRS ), PE 637.967, July 2019
Taghavian, B. (2021). Effect of AI on
international trade, Economists News
Agency,
Technology
Department,
retrieved from: http://www.eqtesaddan.ir
Taklif, A. (2014). Cooperation amongst
GECF selected member countries in LNG
export:
a
cooperative
game
theory
approach, Economic Research, Vol. 49,
Issue 4, 835-868.
Tema, M. (2014), “Basic assumptions in
game theory and international relations”,
International Relations Quarterly, 5(1), 1-
4.
Tembine, H. (2019), “Deep learning meets
game theory: Bregman-based algorithms
for interactive deep generative adversarial
networks”,

IEEE
transactions
on
cybernetics, 50(3), 1132-1145.
Tennenholtz, M. (2002)," Game Theory
and Artificial Intelligence”, Foundations
and Applications of
Multi-Agent
Systems
UKMAS
Workshops 1996-2000 Selected Papers,
Mark d'Inverno, Mark; Luck, Michael;
Michael Fisher, Michael;  Preist, Chris
towardsdatascience.com/game-theory-in-
artificial-intelligence-57a7937e1b88
(accessed 27

--- Sayfa 16 ---
9779                                                                                       Journal of Positive School Psychology

© 2021 JPPW. All rights reserved
9779

Tyagi, Neelam(2019),” What is the Game
theory
in
AI?
Nash
Equilibrium",
https://www.analyticssteps.com
Ullah, Z., Al-Turjman, F., Mostarda, L., &
Gagliardi, R. (2020), “ Applications of
artificial intelligence and machine learning
in
smart
cities”,
Computer
Communications, 154, 313-323.
Wenzel, Y. S. (1994). Game Theory,
Translated by Jalil Roshandel and Alireza
Tayeb, Tehran: Ghoms Press.
Zhang, H., Goodfellow, I., Metaxas, D., &
Odena,
A.
(2019),
“
Self-attention
generative
adversarial
networks.
In
International conference on machine
learning “,(pp. 7354-7363). PMLR.
Zolfaghari, V. (2013). Political behavior
log of China’s new diplomacy: political
tactics for continuity or strategic policy for
alteration, Journal of Political Studies,
Vol. 6, Issue 21, 193-214.