--- Sayfa 1 ---
University of Nebraska - Lincoln
University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Faculty Publications, UNL Libraries
Libraries at University of Nebraska-Lincoln
1734
The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (1734). An Online
The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (1734). An Online
Electronic Edition.
Electronic Edition.
James Anderson A.M.
Right Worshipful Fraternity of Accepted Free-Masons
Benjamin Franklin
Grand Master of Masons of Pennsylvania
Paul Royster (editor & depositor)
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, proyster@unl.edu
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libraryscience
 Part of the Library and Information Science Commons
Anderson, James A.M.; Franklin, Benjamin; and Royster, Paul (editor & depositor), "The Constitutions of
the Free-Masons (1734). An Online Electronic Edition." (1734). Faculty Publications, UNL Libraries. 25.
https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libraryscience/25
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Libraries at University of Nebraska-Lincoln at
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Publications, UNL
Libraries by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Contents
Facsimile of the 1734 title page

frontispiece
Dedication: To His Grace the Duke of Montagu
3
The Constitution, History, Laws, Charges, Orders,
Regulations, and Usages of the Right Worshipful
Fraternity of Accepted Free-Masons
7
The Charges of a Free-Mason

47
Postscript: Coke’s Opinion on 3 Hen. VI. Chap. I.
57
General Regulations, Compiled by Mr. George Payne
59
Postscript: The Manner of Constituting a New Lodge
75
Approbation

78
The Master’s Song, or the History of Masonry
81
The Warden’s Song, or Another History of Masonry
86
[A Paragraph from an Old Record]

88
The Fellow-Crafts Song, by Charles Delafaye, Esq.
89
The Enter’d ’Prentices Song, by Mr. Matthew Birkhead
90
A New Song

91
[Order to Publish]

92
Editorial Note

93
The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (1734).
An Online Electronic Edition.
This is an online electronic edition of the the first Masonic book
printed in America, which was produced in Philadelphia by Benjamin
Franklin in 1734, and was a reprint of a work by James Anderson (who
is identified as the author in an appendix) printed in London in 1723.
This is the seminal work of American Masonry, edited and pub-
lished by one of the founding fathers, and of great importance to the
development of colonial society and the formation of the Republic.
The work contains a 40-page history of Masonry:  from Adam to
the reign of King George I, including, among others, Noah, Abra-
ham, Moses, Solomon, Hiram Abif, Nebuchadnezzar, Augustus Cae-
sar,  Vitruvius, King Athelstan the Saxon, Inigo Jones, and James I
of England. There are extended descriptions of the Seven Wonders
of the World, viz. 1) the Great Pyramid, 2) Solomon’s Temple, 3) the
City and Hanging-Gardens of Babylon, 4) the Mausoleum or Tomb of
Mausolus, King of Caria, 5) the Lighthouse of Pharos at Alexandria,
6) Phidias’s statue of Jupiter Olympius in Achaia, and 7) the Colossus
at Rhodes (although some maintain the 5th is the Obelisk of Semira-
mis). It is a celebration of the science of Geometry and the Royal Art
of Architecture, as practiced from ancient times until the then-current
revival of the Roman or Augustan Style. “The Charges of a Free-
Mason” and the “General Regulations” concern rules of conduct for
individuals and of governance for Lodges and their officers. The work
also includes five songs to be sung at meetings, one of which—“A New
Song”—appears in print for the first time and may have been com-
posed by  Franklin.
The document suggests that Masonry, in its modern Anglo-Ameri-
can form, was rooted in Old Testament exegesis (“So that the Isra-
elites, at their leaving Egypt, were a whole Kingdom of Masons,  …
under the Conduct of their GRAND MASTER MOSES”) and
in contemporary Protestant ideals of morality, merit, and political
equality.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Title page of the 1734 Philadelphia edition,
which measures approximately 5 3/4 x 8 inches
T H E
C ON S T I T U T ION S
O F T H E
FREE-MASONS.
C O N T A I N I N G T H E
Hi#ory, Charges, Regulations, &c.
of that most Ancient and Right
Worshipful FRATERNITY.
For the Use of the L O D G E S .
L O N D O N  Printed;  Anno 5723.
Re-printed in Philadelphia by special Order, for the Use
of the Brethren in N O R T H - A M E R I C A .
In the Year of Masonry 5734,  Anno Domini 1734.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
T O
His G R A C E the D U K E of
MON TAGU.
My Lord,
Y Order of his Grace the
D U K E of W H A R T ON,
the present Right Wor -
shipful GR AND-MASTER
of the Free-Masons ; and, as his Dep-
uty, I humbly dedicate this Book of
the Constitutions of our ancient Fra-
ternity to your Grace, in Testimony
of your honourable, prudent, and

--- Sayfa 5 ---
vigilant Discharge of the Office of
our G R A ND-M ASTER last Year.
I need not tell your Grace what
Pains our learned Author has taken
in compiling and digesting this
Book from the old Records, and how
accurately he has compar’d and
made every thing agreeable to His-
tory and Chronology, so as to render
these N EW C ONSTIT UTIONS a
just and exact Account of Masonry
from the Beginning of the World
to your Grace’s Mastership, still pre-
serving all that was truly ancient
and authentick in the old ones : For
every Brother will be pleas’d with
the Performance, that knows it had
your Grace’s Perusal and Approba-
tion, and that it is now printed for
the Use of the Lodges, after it was
approv’d by the Grand Lodge, when
your Grace was G R A ND-M ASTER.
All the Brother-hood will ever re-
member the Honour your Grace
has done them, and your Care for
their Peace, Harmony, and lasting
Friendship: Which none is more
duly sensible of than,
My L O R D ,
Your G R A C E’s
most oblig’d, and
most obedient Servant,
and Faithful Brother,
J . T . D E S A G U L I E R S,
Deputy Grand-Master.
D
E D I C A T I O N .
D
E D I C A T I O N .

--- Sayfa 6 ---
[ 7 ]
T H E
CONSTIT UTION,
History, Laws, Charges, Orders,
Regulations, and Usages,
O F T H E
Right Worshipful F R AT E R N I T Y
O F A C C E P T E D
Free-Masons;
Collected from their general R E C O R D S , and
their faithful T R A D I T I O N S of many
Ages.
T O B E R E A D
At the Admission of a N E W B R OT H E R , when
the Master or Warden shall begin, or order some other
Brother to read as follows :
DAM, our first Parent, created after the
Image of God, the great Architect of the Uni-
verse, must have had the Liberal Sciences,
particularly Geometry, written on his Heart;
for even since the Fall, we find the Principles
of it in the Hearts of his  Offspring, and which, in process
of time, have been drawn forth into a convenient Method
of Propositions, by observing the Laws of Proportion taken
Year of
the World
1.
4003 be-
fore Christ

--- Sayfa 7 ---
[ 8 ]
[ 9 ]
from Mechanism : So that as the Mechanical Arts gave Occa-
sion to the Learned to reduce the Elements of Geometry into
Method, this noble Science thus reduc’d, is the Foundation
of all those Arts, (particularly of Masonry and Architecture)
and the Rule by which they are conducted and perform’d.
No doubt Adam taught his Sons Geometry, and the use
of it, in the several Arts and Crafts convenient, at least for
those early Times ; for CAIN, we find, built a City, which
he call’d CONSECR ATED, or DEDICATED, after
the Name of his eldest Son ENOCH ; and becoming the
Prince of the one Half of Mankind, his Posterity would imi-
tate his royal Example in improving both the noble Science
and the useful Art.*
Nor can we suppose that SETH was less instructed, who
being the Prince of the other Half of Mankind, and also
the prime Cultivator of Astronomy, would take equal care to
teach Geometry and Masonry to his Offspring, who had also
the mighty Advantage of Adam’s living among them.†
But without regarding uncertain Accounts, we may safely
conclude the old World, that lasted 1656 Years, could not be
ignorant of Masonry ; and that both the Families of Seth and
Cain erected many curious Works, until at length NOAH,
the ninth from Seth, was commanded and directed of God to
build the great Ark, which, tho’ of Wood, was certainly fab-
ricated by Geometry, and according to the Rules of Masonry.
NOAH, and his three Sons, JAPHET, SHEM, and
HA M, all Masons true, brought with them over the Flood
the Tra ditions and Arts of the Ante-deluvians, and amply
com municated them to their growing Offspring ; for about
101 Years after the Flood we find a vast Number of ’em, if
not the whole Race of Noah, in the Vale of Shinar, employ’d
in building a City and large Tower, in order to make to
them selves a Name, and to prevent their Dispersion. And
tho’ they carry’d on the Work to a monstrous Height, and
by their Vanity provok’d God to confound their Devices,
by confounding their Speech, which occasion’d their Dis-
persion ; yet their Skill in Masonry is not the less to be cele-
brated, having spent above 53 Years in that prodigious Work,
and upon their Dispersion carry’d the mighty Know ledge
with them into distant Parts, where they found the good Use
of it in the Settlement of their Kingdoms, Com mon wealths,
and Dynasties. And tho’ afterwards it was lost in most Parts
of the Earth, it was especially preserv’d in Shinar and As-
syria, where NIMROD,* the Founder of that Monarchy,
after the Dispersion, built many splendid Cities, as Ereck,
Accad, and Calneh, in SHINAR ; from whence afterwards
he went forth into ASSYRIA, and built Nineveh, Rehoboth,
Caleh, and Rhesin.
*As other Arts were also improved by them, viz. working in Metal
by TUBAL CAIN, Music by JUBAL, Pastorage and Tent-
Making by JABAL, which last is good Architecture.
† For by some Vestiges of Antiquity we find one of ‘em, godly
ENOCH (who dy’d not, but was translated alive to Heaven) prophe-
cying of the final Conflagration at the Day of Judgment (as St. Jude
tells us) and likewise of the General Deluge for the Punishment of the
World : Upon which he erected his two large Pillars, (tho’ some ascribe
them to Seth) the one of Stone, and the other of Brick, whereon were
engraven the Liberal Sciences, &c. And that the Stone Pillar remain’d
in Syria until the Days of Vespasian the Emperor.
* NIMROD, which signifies a Rebel, was the Name given him by
the holy Family, and by Moses ; but among his Friends in Chaldea, his
proper Name was BELUS, which signifies LORD, and afterwards
was worshipped as a God by many Nations, under the Name of Bel or
Baal, and became the Bacchus of the Ancients, or Bar Chus, the Son
of CHUS.
Anno
Mundi
1 7 5 7 .
2 2 47 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
1 8 1 0 .
2 1 9 4 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
[ 10 ]
[ 11 ]
In these Parts, upon the Tygris and Euphrates, afterwards
flourish’d many learned Priests and Mathematicians, known
by the Names of CHALDEES and MAGI, who preserv’d
the good Science, Geometry, as the KINGS and great Men
encourag’d the Royal Art. But it is not expedient to speak
more plain of the Premises, except in a formed Lodge.
From hence, therefore, the Science and Art were both
transmitted to latter Ages and distant Climes, not with-
standing the Confusion of Languages or Dialects, which
tho’ it might help to give Rise to the Masons Faculty and an-
cient universal Practice of conversing without speaking, and
of knowing each other at a Distance, yet hinder’d not the
Improvement of Masonry in each Colony and their Com mun-
ication in their distinct National Dialect.
And, no doubt, the Royal Art was brought down to Egypt
by MITZRAIM, the second Son of Ham, about six Years
after the Confusion at Babel, and after the Flood 160 Years,
when he led thither his Colony ; (for Egypt is Mitzraim in
Hebrew) because we find the River Nile ’s overflowing its
Banks, soon caus’d an Improvement in Geometry, which
consequently brought Masonry much in request : For the an-
cient noble Cities, with the other magnificent Edifices of
that Country, and particularly the famous PYRAMIDS,
de mon strate the early Taste and Genius of that ancient King-
dom. Nay, one of those Egyptian PYRAMIDS* is reck on’d
the First of the Seven Wonders of the World, the Account of
which, by Historians and Travellers, is almost incredible.
The Sacred Records inform us well that the eleven great
Sons of CANAAN (the youngest Son of Ham) soon forti-
fied themselves in strong Holds, and stately walled Cities,
and erected most beautiful Temples and Mansions ; for when
the Israelites, under the great Joshua, invaded their Coun try,
they found it so regularly fenc’d, that without the im me diate
Intervention of God in behalf of his peculiar People, the Ca-
naanites were impregnable and invincible. Nor can we sup-
pose less of the other Sons of Ham, viz. Cush, his eld est, in
South Arabia, and Phut, or Phuts, (now called Fez) in West
Africa.
And surely the fair and gallant Posterity of JAPHET,
(the eldest Son of Noah ) even such as travell’d into the Isles
of the Gentiles, must have been equally skill’d in Geometry
and Masonry ; tho’ we know little of their Transactions and
mighty Works, until their original Knowledge was almost
lost by the Havock of War, and by not maintaining a due
Correspondence with the polite and learned Nations ; for
when that Correspondence was open’d in After-Ages, we
find they began to be most curious Architects.
The Posterity of SHEM had also equal Opportunities of
cultivating the useful Art, even those of ’em that planted
their Colonies in the South and East of Asia ; much more
those of ’em, that in the great Assyrian Empire, liv’d in a
separate State, or were blended with other Families : Nay,
that holy Branch of SHEM (of whom, as concerning the
Flesh, CHRIST came) could not be unskilful in the learned
Arts of Assyria ; for ABRAM, after the Confusion at Babel
about 268 Years, was called out of Ur of the Chaldees, where
he learned Geometry, and the Arts that are perform’d by it,
which he would carefully transmit to Ishmael, to Isaac, and
*The Marble Stones, brought a vast way from the Quarries
of Arabia, were most of ’em 30 Foot long ; and its Foundation
cover’d the Ground 700 Foot on each Side, or 2800 Foot in Com-
pass, and 481 in perpendicular Height. And in perfecting it
were employed every Day, for 20 whole Years, 360,000 Men, by
some ancient Egyptian King long before the Israelites were a
People, for the Honour of his Empire, and at last to become his
Tomb.
A. M.
2 0 7 8 .
1 9 2 6 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
1 8 1 6 .
2 1 8 8 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
[ 12 ]
[ 13 ]
to his Sons by Keturah ; and by Isaac, to Esau, and Jacob, and
the twelve Patriarchs : Nay, the Jews believe that ABRAM
also instructed the Egyptians in the Assyrian Learning.
Indeed, the select Family long used Military Architecture
only, as they were Sojourners among Strangers ; but before
the 430 Years of their Peregrination were expired, even about
86 Years before their Exodus, the Kings of Egypt forc’d
most of them to lay down their Sheperds Instru ments, and
Warlike Accoutrements, and train’d them to another sort
of Architecture in Stone and Brick, as holy Writ, and other
Histories, acquaint us ; which God did wise ly over-rule, in
order to make them good Masons before they possess’d the
promis’d Land, then famous for most curious Masonry.
And while marching to Canaan thro’ Arabia, under Moses,
God was pleased to inspire BEZALEEL, of the Tribe of
Judah, and AHOLIAB, of the Tribe of Dan, with Wisdom
of Heart for erecting that most glorious Tent, or Taberna-
cle, wherein the SHECHINAH resided ; which, tho’ not
of Stone or Brick, was framed, by Geometry, a most beauti-
ful Piece of Architecture, (and prov’d afterwards the Model
of Solomon’s Temple) according to the Pattern that God had
shewn to MOSES in the Mount ; who therefore became
the GENERAL MASTER-MASON, as well as King
of Jessurun, being well skill’d in all the Egyptian Learn-
ing, and divinely inspir’d with more sublime Knowledge in
Masonry,
So that the Israelites, at their leaving Egypt, were a whole
Kingdom of Masons, well instructed, under the Conduct of
their GRAND MASTER MOSES, who often mar shall’d
them into a regular and general Lodge, while in the Wil-
derness, and gave them wise Charges, Orders, &c. had they
been well observ’d ! But no more of the Premises must be
mention’d.
And after they were possess’d of Canaan, the Israelites
came not short of the old Inhabitants in Masonry, but rather
vastly improv’d it, by the special Direction of Heaven ; they
fortify’d better, and improv’d their City-Houses and the
Palaces of their Chiefs, and only fell short in sacred Archi-
tecture while the Tabernacle stood, but no longer ; for the
finest sacred Building of the Canaanites was the Temple of
Dagon in Gaza of the Philistines, very magnificent, and ca-
pacious enough to receive 5000 People under its Roof, that
was artfully supportcd by two main Columns *; and was a
wonderful Discovery of their mighty Skill in true Masonry,
as must he own’d.
But Dagon’s Temple, and the finest Structures of Tyre
and Sidon, could not be compared with the ETERNAL
God’s Temple at Jerusalem, begun and finish’d, to the
Amazement of all the World, in the short space of seven
Years and six Months, by that wisest Man and most glorious
King of Israel, the Prince of Peace and Architecture, SOL-
OMON (the Son of David, who was refused that Honour
for being a Man of Blood) by divine Direction, without the
Noise of Work-mens Tools, though there were employ’d
about it no less than 3600 Princes,† or Master-Masons, to
* By which the glorious SAMPSON pull’d it down upon the Lords
of the Philistines, and was also intangled in the same Death which he
drew upon his Enemies for putting out his Eyes, after he had reveal’d
his Secrets to his Wife, that betray’d him into their Hands ; for which
Weakness he never had the Honour to be number’d among Masons : But
it is not convenient to write more of this.
† In 1 Kings v. 16. they are call’d Harodim, Rulers or Provosts
assisting King Solomon, who were set over the Work, and their
Number there is only 3,300 : But 2 Chron. ii. 18. they are called
Menatzchim, Overseers and Com forters of the People in Working, and
in Number 3,600 ; be cause either 300 might be more curious Artists,
A. M.
2 8 9 3 .
1 1 1 1 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
2 5 1 4 .
1 4 9 0 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
2 5 54 .
1 4 5 0 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
2 4 2 7 .
15 7 7 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
[ 14 ]
[ 15 ]
conduct the Work according to Solomon’s Directions, with
80,000 Hewers of Stone in the Mountain, or Fellow Crafts-
men,  and   70,000   Labourers,   in   all
-----  153,600
besides  the  Levy  under  Adoniram,  to

work in the Mountains of Lebanon by               30,000
turns with the Sidonians, viz. - - -        ----------
being in all - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 183,600
for which great Number of ingenious Masons, Solomon was
much oblig’d to HIRAM, or Huram, King of Tyre, who
sent his Masons and Carpenters to Jerusalem, and the Firs
and Cedars of Lebanon to Joppa the next Sea-port.
But above all, he sent his Namesake HIRAM, or Huram,
the most accomplish’d Mason upon Earth. *
And the prodigious Expence of it also enhaunceth its
Excellency ; for besides King David’s vast Preparations,
his richer Son SOLOMON, and all the wealthy Israelites,
and the Nobles of all the neighbouring Kingdoms, largely
con tributed towards it in Gold, Silver, and rich Jewels, that
amounted to a Sum almost incredible.
Nor do we read of any thing in Canaan so large, the
Wall that inclos’d it being 7700 Foot in Compass ; far less
any holy Structure fit to be nam’d with it, for exactly pro-
portion’d and beautiful Dimensions, from the magni ficent
Porch on the East, to the glorious and reverend Sanctum
Sanctorum on the West, with most lovely and con venient
Apartments for the Kings and Princes, Priests and Levites,
Israelites, and Gentiles also ; it being an House of Prayer for
all Nations, and capable of receiving in the Tem ple proper,
and in all its Courts and Apartments to gether, no less than
300,000 People, by a modest Cal culation, allowing a square
Cubit to each Person.
and the Over seers of the said 3,300 ; or rather, not so excellent, and only
Deputy-Masters, to supply their Places in case of Death or Absence,
that so there might be always 3,300 acting Masters compleat ; or else
they might be the Over seers of the 70,000 Ish Sabbal, Men of Burden or
La bourers, who were not Masons but served the 80,000 Ish Chotzeb,
Men of Hewing, called also Ghiblim, Stone Cutters and Sculpturers ;
and also Bonai, Builders in Stone, part of which belong’d to Solomon,
and part to Hiram, King of Tyre, 1 Kings v. 18.
* We read (2 Chron. ii. 13.) HIRAM King of Tyre (called there
Huram) in his Letter to King SOLOMON, says, I have sent a cun-
ning Man, le Huram Abhi, not to be translated according to the vul-
gar Greek and Latin, Huram my Father, as if this Architect was
King HIRAM’s Father ; for his Description, ver. 14. refutes it, and
the Original plainly imports, Huram of my Father’s, viz. the Chief
Master-Mason of my Father, King ABIBALUS ; (who enlarg’d and
beautify’d the city of Tyre, as ancient Histories inform us, whereby the
Tyrians at this time were most expert in Masonry) tho’ some think
HIRAM the King might call Hiram the Architect Father, as learned
and skilful Men were wont to be call’d of old Times, or as Joseph was
call’d the Father of Pharaoh ; and as the same Hiram is call’d Solo-
mon’s FATHER, (2 Chron. iv. 16.) where ‘tis said
Shelomoh lammelech Abhif Churam ghnasah,
Did Huram, his Father, make to King Solomon.
But the Difficulty is over at once, by allowing the Word Abif to be
the Surname of Hiram the Mason, called also (chap. ii. 13.) Hiram
Abi, as here Hiram Abif ; for being so amply describ’d, (chap. ii. 14.)
we may easily suppose his Surname would not be conceal’d : And this
Reading makes the Sense plain and compleat, viz. that HIRAM, King
of Tyre, sent to King Solomon, his Namesake HIRAM ABIF, the
Prince of Architects, describ’d (1 Kings vii. 14.) to be a Widow’s Son
of the Tribe of Naphthali ; and in 1 Chron. ii. 14. the said King of
Tyre calls him the Son of a Woman of the Daughters of Dan ; and
in both Places, that his Father was a Man of Tyre ; which Difficulty
is remov’d by supposing his Mother was either of the Tribe of Dan, or of
the Daughters of the City called Dan in the Tribe of Naphthali, and
his deceased Father had been a Naphthalite, whence his Mother was
called a Widow of Naphthali ; for his Father is not called a Tyrian by
}

--- Sayfa 11 ---
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
And if we consider the 1453 Columns of Parian Marble,
with twice as many Pillasters, both having glorious Capitals
of several Orders, and about 2246 Windows, besides those in
the Pavement,  with the unspeakable and costly Decor a tions
of it within ; (and much more might be said ) we must conclude
its Prospect to transcend our Imagination; and that it was
justly esteem’d by far the finest Piece of Masonry upon Earth
before or since, and the chief Wonder of the World ; and was
dedicated, or consecrated, in the most so lemn manner, by
King SOLOMON.
But leaving what must not, and indeed cannot, be
communicated by Writing, we may warrantably affirm that
however ambitious the Heathen were in cultivating of the
Royal Art, it was never perfected, until God condescended
to instruct his peculiar People in rearing the above-men tion’d
stately Tent, and in building at length this gorgeous House,
fit for the special Refulgence of his Glory,  where he dwelt
between the Cherubims on the Mercy-Seat, and from thence
gave them frequent oraculous Responses.
This most sumptuous, splendid, beautiful and glorious
Edifice, attracted soon the inquisitive Artists of all Nations
to spend some time at Jerusalem, and survey its peculiar Ex-
cellencies, as much as was allow’d to the Gentiles ; where-
by they soon discover’d, that all the World, with their joint
Skill, came far short of the Israelites, in the Wisdom and
Dexterity of Architecture, when the wise King SOLO MON
was GRAND MASTER of the Lodge at Jerusalem, and
the learned King HIRAM was GRAND MASTER of the
Lodge at Tyre, and the inspired HIRAM ABIF was Mas-
ter of Work, and Masonry was under the immediate Care and
Direction of Heaven, when the Noble and the Wise thought
it their Honour to be assisting to the ingenious Masters and
Craftsmen, and when the Temple of the TRUE GOD be-
came the Wonder of all Travellers, by which, as by the most
perfect Pattern, they corrected the Architecture of their own
Country upon their Return.
So that after the Erection of Solomon’s Temple, Masonry
was improv’d in all the neighbouring Nations ; for the many
Artists employed about it, under Hiram Abif, after it was
finish’d, dispers’d themselves into Syria, Mesopotamia, As-
syria, Chaldea, Babylonia, Media, Persia, Arabia, Africa,
Lesser Asia, Greece and other Parts of Europe, where they
taught this liberal Art to the free born Sons of eminent Per-
sons, by whose Dexterity the Kings, Princes, and Poten-
tates, built many glorious Piles, and became the GRAND
MASTERS, each in his own Territory, and were emulous
of excelling in this Royal Art ; nay, even in INDIA, where
the Cor respondence was open, we may conclude the same :
Descent, but a Man of Tyre by Habitation ; as Obed Edom the Levite
is call’d a Gittite by living among the Gittites, and the Apostle Paul a
Man of Tarsus. But supposing a Mistake in Transcribers, and that his
Father was really a Tyrian by Blood, and his Mother only of the Tribe
either of Dan or of Naphthali, that can be no Bar against allowing
of his vast Capacity ; for as his Father was a Worker in Brass, so he
himself was filled with Wisdom and Understanding, and Cunning
to work all Works in Brass : And as King SOLOMON sent for
him, so King HIRAM, in his Letter to Solomon, says, And now I
have sent a cunning Man, endued with Understanding, skilful to
work in Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Stone, Timber, Purple, Blue,
fine Linnen and Crimson, also to grave any manner of Graving,
and to find out every Device which shall be put to him, with thy
cunning Men, and with the cunning Men of my Lord David thy
Father. This divinely inspired Workman maintain’d this Character in
erecting the Temple, and in working the Utensils thereof, far beyond the
Performances of Aholiab and Bezaleel, being also universally capable
of all sorts of Masonry.
A. M.
3 0 0 0 .
1 0 0 4 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
[ 18 ]
[ 19 ]
But none of the Nations, nor all together, could rival the
Israelites, far less excel them, in Masonry ; and their Temple
remain’d the constant Pattern.*
Nay, the GRAND MONARCH NEBUCHAD NE-
ZAR could never, with all his unspeakable Advantages,
carry up his Ma sonry to the Beautiful Strength and Magnifi-
cence of the Temple Work, which he had, in warlike Rage,
burnt down, after it had remain’d in Splendor 416 Years
from its Consecration. For after his Wars were over, and gen-
eral Peace proclaim’d, he set his Heart on Architecture, and
be came the GRAND MASTER-MASON ; and having
before led captive the ingenious Artists of Judea, and other
con quer’d Countries, he rais’d indeed the largest Work upon
Earth, even the Walls† and City, the Palaces and Hang-
ing-Gar dens, the Bridge and Temple of BABYLON, the
Third of the Seven Wonders of the World, tho’ vastly in-
ferior, in the sublime Perfection of Masonry, to the holy,
charming, lovely Temple of GOD. But as the Jewish Cap-
tives were of special use to NEBUCHADNEZAR in his
glorious Build ings, so being thus kept at work, they retain’d
their great Skill in Masonry, and continu’d very capable of
rebuilding the holy Temple and City of SALEM upon its
old Foun dations, which was order’d by the Edict or Decree
of the GRAND CYRUS, according to God’s Word, that
had fore told his Exaltation and this Decree: And CYRUS
having con stituted ZERUBBABEL, the Son of Salathiel
(of the Seed of David by Nathan, the Brother of Solomon,
whose Royal Family was now extinct) the Head, or Prince
* For tho’ the Temple of Diana at Ephesus is suppos’d to have been
first built by some of Japhet’s Posterity, that made a Settlement in
Jonia about the Time of Moses ; yet it was often demolish’d, and then
rebuilt for the sake of Improve ments in Masonry ; and we cannot com-
pute the Per iod of its last glorious Erection (that became another of the
Seven Wonders of the World ) to be prior to that of Solomon’s Temple ;
but that long afterwards the Kings of Lesser Asia join’d, for 220 Years,
in finishing it, with 107 Columns of the finest Marble, and many of
’em with most exquisite Sculpture (each at the Expence of a King,
by the Master-Masons DRESIPHON and ARCHIPHRON) to
support the planked Cieling and Roof of pure Cedar, as the Doors and
Linings were of Cypress : Where by it became the Mistress of Lesser
Asia, in Length 425 Foot, and in Breadth 220 Foot ; Nay, so admirable
a Fabrick, that XERXES left it standing when he burnt all the other
Tem ples in his Way to Greece ; tho’ at last it was set on Fire and burnt
down by a vile Fellow, only for the Lust of being talk’d of, on the very
Day that  ALEXANDER the Great was born.
† In Thickness 87 Foot, in Height 350 Foot, and in Compass 480
Furlongs, or 60 British Miles in an exact Square of 15 Miles a Side,
built of large Bricks, cemented with the hard Bitumen of that old Vale
of Shinar, with 100 Gates of Brass, or 25 a-side, and 250 Towers ten
Foot higher than the Walls.
From the said 25 Gates in each Side went 25 Streets in strait Lines,
or in all 50 Streets each 15 Miles long, with four half Streets, next the
Walls, each 200 Foot broad : And so the whole City was thus cut out
into 676 Squares, each being 2 Miles and quarter in Compass; round
which were the Houses built three or four Stories high, well adorn’d,
and accommodated with Yards, Gardens, &c. A Branch of the Eu-
phrates run thro’ the Middle of it, from North to South, over which, in
the Heart of the City, was built a stately Bridge, in Length a Furlong,
and thirty Foot in Breadth, by wonderful Art, for supplying the Want
of a Foundation in the River. At the two Ends of this Bridge were two
magnificent Palaces, the Old Palace, the seat of ancient Kings at the
East End, upon the Ground of four Squares ; and the New Palace
at the West End, built by Nebuchadnezzar, upon the Ground of nine
Squares, with Hanging-Gardens (so much celebrated by the Greeks)
where the loftiest Trees could grow as in the Fields, erected in a Square
of 400 Foot on each Side, carried up by Terraces, and sustain’d by vast
Arches built upon Arches, until the highest Terrace equal’d the Height
of the City-Walls, with a curious Aqueduct to water the whole Gar-
dens. Old Babel improv’d, stood on the East Side of the River, and the
A. M.
3 4 1 6 .
5 8 8 .
Ante Chr.
   A. M.
 3 6 4 8 .
   3 5 6 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 4 6 8 .
5 3 6 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
[ 20 ]
[ 21 ]
of the Captivity, and the Leader of the Jews and Israelites
returning to Jerusalem, they began to lay the Foundation
of the SECOND TEMPLE, and would have soon finish’d
it, if CYRUS had liv’d ; but at length they put on the Cape-
Stone, in the 6th Year of DARIUS, the Persian Monarch,
when it was dedicated with Joy, and many great Sacrifices,
by ZERUBBABEL the Prince and General Mas ter-Mason
of the Jews, about 20 Years after the Decree of the Grand
Cyrus. And tho’ this Temple of ZERUB BABEL came far
short of Solomon’s Temple, was not so richly adorn’d with
Gold and Diamonds, and all manner of precious Stones, nor
had the Shechina and the holy Relicks of  Moses in it, &c. yet
being rais’d exactly upon Solomon’s Foundation, and accord-
ing to his Model, it was still the most regular, symmetrical,
and glorious Edi fice in the whole World, as the Enemies of
the Jews have often testify’d and acknowledg’d.
At length the ROYAL ART was carry’d into Greece,
whose Inhabitants have left us no Evidence of such Improve-
ments in Masonry, prior to Solomon ’s Temple ;* for their
most ancient Buildings, as the Cittadel of Athens,  with the
Parthenion, or Temple of Minerva, the Temples also of The-
seus,  of Jupiter Olympius, &c. their Porticos also, and Fo-
rums, their Theatres and Gymnasiums, their publick Halls,
curious Bridges, regular Fortifications, stout Ships of War,
and stately Palaces, were all erected after the Temple of Solo-
mon, and most of them even after the Temple of Zerubbabel.
New Town on the West Side, much larger than the Old, and built in
order to make this Capital exceed old Niniveh,  tho’ it never had  so
many Inhabitants by one Half. The River was begirt with Banks of
Brick, as thick as the City Walls, in Length twenty Miles, viz. fifteen
Miles within the City, and two Miles and a half above and below it,
to keep the Water within its Channel ; and each Street that cross’d the
River had a brasen Gate leading down to the Water on both Banks ; and
West of the City was a prodigious Lake, in Compass 160 Miles, with a
Canal from the River into it, to prevent Inundations in the Summer.
In the Old Town was the Old Tower of BABEL, at the Founda-
tion a Square of half a Mile in Compass, consisting of eight square Tow-
ers built over each other, with Stairs on the out-side round it, going up
to the Observatory on the Top, 600 Foot high, (which is 19 Foot higher
than the highest Pyramid) whereby they became the first Astronomers.
And in the Rooms of the Grand Tower, with arched Roofs, supported
by Pillars 75 Foot high, the idolatrous Worship of their God BELUS
was perform’d, till now, that this mighty Mason and Monarch erected
round this ancient Pile a Temple of two Furlongs on every Side, or a
Mile in compass ; where he lodg’d the sacred Trophies of SOLOMON’s
Temple, and the golden Image 90 Foot high, that he had consecrated in
the Plains of Dura, as were formerly in the Tower lodg’d many other
golden Images, and many precious things, that were afterwards all
seiz’d by XERXES, and amounted to above 21 Millions Sterling.
And when all was finish’d, King NEBUCHADNEZZAR
walking in State in his Hanging-Gardens, and from thence taking a
Review of the whole City, proudly boasted of this his mighty Work ;
saying Is not this Great Babylon, that I have built for the House
of the Kingdom, by the Might of my Power, and for the Honour
of my Majesty ? but had his Pride immediately rebuk’d by a Voice
from Heaven, and punish’d by brutal Madness for seven Years, un-
til he gave Glory to the God of Heaven, the Omnipotent Architect
of the Universe, which he publish’d by a Decree thro’ all his Empire,
and dy’d next Year, before his GREAT BABYLON was little more
than half inhabited (tho’ he had led many Nations captive for that pur-
pose) ; nor was it ever fully peopled ; for in 25 Years after his Death, the
GRAND CYRUS conquer’d it, and remov’d the Throne to Shushan
in PERSIA.
* The Grecians having been long degenerated into Barbarity, for-
getting their original Skill in Masonry, (which their Fore-fathers
brought from Assyria) by their frequent Mixtures with other barbarous
Nations, their mutual Invasions, and wasting bloody Wars ; until by
travelling and corresponding with the Asiaticks and Egyptians, they
reviv’d their Knowledge in Geometry and Masonry both, though few
of the Grecians had the Honour to own it.
A. M.
3 4 8 9 .
5 15 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
[ 22 ]
[ 23 ]
Nor do we find the GRECIANS arriv’d to any con sid-
erable Knowledge in Geometry, before the Great Thales Mile-
sius, the Philosopher, who dy’d in the Reign of Bell shazzar,
and the Time of the Jewish Captivity. But his Scholar,
the Greater PY THAGORAS, prov’d the Author of the
47th Proposition of Euclid’s first Book, which, if duly ob-
serv’d, is the Foundation of all Masonry, sacred, civil, and
Military.*
The People of Lesser Asia about this Time gave large En-
couragement to Masons for erecting all sorts of sump tuous
Buildings, one of which must not be forgot, being usually
rcckon’d the Fourth of the Seven Wonders of the World,
viz. the Mausoleum, or Tomb of Mausolus, King of Caria,
between Lycia and Jonia,  at Helicarnassus, on the Side of
Mount Taurus in that Kingdom, at the Command of AR-
TEMISIA his mournful Widow, as the splendid Test imony
of her Love to him, built of the most curious Mar ble, in Cir-
cuit 411 Foot, in Height 25 Cubits, surrounded with 26 Col-
umns of the most famous Sculpture, and the whole opened on
all Sides, with Arches 73 Foot wide, per form’d by the four
principal Master-Masons and Engravers of those Times, viz.
the East Side by Scopas, the West by Leochares, the North by
Briax, and the South by Timo theus.
But after PYTHAGORAS, Geometry became the dar-
ling Study of Greece, where many learned  Philosophers
arose, some of whom invented sundry Propositions, or Ele-
ments of Geometry, and reduc’d them to the use of the mech-
anical Arts.* Nor need we doubt that Masonry kept pace
with Geometry ; or rather, always follow’d it in proportion’d
gradual Improvements, until the wonderful EUCLID of
Tyre flourish’d at Alexandria ; who gathering up the scatter’d
Elements of Geometry, digested them into a Method that was
never yet mended, (and for which his Name will be ever cel-
ebrated) under the Patronage of PTOLOMEUS, the Son
of Lagus King of Egypt, one of the immediate Successors of
Alexander the Great.
And as the noble Science came to be more methodically
taught, the Royal Art was the more generally esteem’d and
improv’d among the Grecians, who at length arriv’d to the
same Skill and Magnificence in it with their Teachers the
Asiatics and Egyptians.
The next King of Egypt, PTOLOMEUS PHILA-
DELPHUS, that great Improver of the liberal Arts, and
of all useful Knowledge, who gather’d the greatest Library
upon Earth, and had the Old Testament (at least the Penta-
teuch) first translated into Greek, became an excellent Archi-
tect and GENERAL MASTER-MASON, having among
* PYTHAGORAS travell’d into Egypt the Year that Thales
dy’d, and living there among the Priests 22 Years became expert in Ge-
ometry and in all the Egyptian Learning, until he was captivated by
Cambyses King of Persia, and sent to Babylon, where he was much
conversant with the Chal dean MAGI, and the learned Babylonish
JEWS, from whom he borrow’d great Knowledge, that render’d him
very fa mous in Greece and Italy, where afterwards he flourish’d and
dy’d ; when Mordecai was the prime Minister of State to Ahasuerus
King of Persia, and ten Years after ZERU BBABEL’s Temple was
finish’d.
*Or borrow’d from other Nations their pretended Inventions, as
Anaxagoras, Oenopides, Briso, Antipho, Democritus, Hippo crates,
and Theodorus Cyrenæus, the Master of the divine PLATO, who
amplify’d Geometry, and publish’d the Art Analytic ; from whose
Academy came forth a vast Number, that soon dispers’d their Knowl-
edge to distant Parts, as Leodamus, Theætetus, Archytas, Leon,
Eudoxus, Menaichmus, and Xenocrates, the Master of Aristotle,
from whose Academy also came forth Eudemus, Theophrastus, Aris-
tæus, Isidorus, Hypsicles, and many others.
A. M.
3 6 5 2 .
3 5 2 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 7 0 0 .
3 0 4 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 7 4 8 .
2 5 6 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 4 9 8 .
5 0 6 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 47 9 .
5 2 5 .
Ante Chr.
A. M.
3 4 5 7 .
547 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
[ 24 ]
[ 25 ]
his other great Buildings, erected the famous TOWER of
PHAROS,* the Fifth of the Seven Wonders of the World.
We may readily believe, that the African Nations, even to
the Atlantick Shore, did soon imitate Egypt in such Improve-
ments ; though History fails, and there are no Travellers
encourag’d to discover the valuable Remains in Masonry of
those once renowned Nations.
Nor should we forget the learned Island of SICILY,
where the prodigious Geometrician ARCHIMEDES did
flourish,† and was unhappily slain when Syracuse was taken
by Marcellus the Roman General : For from Sicily, as well as
from Greece, Egypt, and Asia, the ancient Romans learnt both
the SCIENCE and the ART, what they knew before being
either mean or irregular; but as they subdu’d the Nations,
they made mighty Discoveries in both ; and like wise Men,
led captive, not the Body of the People, but the Arts and Sci-
ences, with the most eminent Professors and Practitioners,
to Rome ; which thus became the Center of Learning, as well
as of imperial Power, until they advanc’d to their Zenith of
Glory, under AUGUSTUS CÆSAR, (in whose Reign was
born God’s MESSIAH, the great Architect of the Church)
who having laid the World quiet, by proclaiming universal
Peace, highly encourag’d those dexterous Artists that had
been bred in the Roman Liberty, and their learned Scholars
and Pupils ; but particularly the great VITRUVIUS, the
Father of all true Architects to this Day.
Therefore it is rationally believ’d, that the glorious AU-
GUSTUS became the Grand-Master of the Lodge at Rome,
having, besides his patronizing Vitruvius, much pro moted
the Welfare of the Fellow-Craftsmen, as appears by the many
magnificent Buildings of his Reign, the Remains of which
are the Pattern and Standard of true Masonry in all future
Times, as they are indeed an Epitome of the Asiatic, Egyp-
tian, Grecian and Sicilian Arch itecture, which we often ex-
press by the Name of the AUGUSTAN STILE, and which
we are now only endeav ouring to imitate, and have not yet
arriv’d to its Perfection.
The old Records of Masons afford large Hints of their
Lodges, from the Beginning of the World, in the polite Na-
tions, especially in Times of Peace, and when the Civil Pow-
ers, abhorring Tyranny and Slavery, gave due Scope to the
bright and free Genius of their happy Subjects ; for then al-
ways Masons, above all other Artists, were the Favourites of
the Eminent, and became necessary for their grand Under-
takings in any sort of Materials, not only in Stone, Brick,
Timber, Plaister ; but even in Cloth or Skins, or whatever
was us’d for Tents, and for the various sorts of Architecture.
*On an Island near Alexandria, at one of the Mouths of the Nile,
of wonderful Height and most cunning Workmanship, and all of the
finest Marble ; and it cost 800 Talents, or about 480,000 Crowns. The
Master of Work, under the King was Sistratus, a most ingenious Ma-
son ; and it was afterwards much admir’d by Julius Cæsar, who was
a good Judge of most Things, though chiefly conversant in Wars and
Politicks. It was intended as a Light-House for the Harbour of Al-
exandria, from which the Light-Houses in the Mediterranean were
often call’d Pharos. Though some, instead of this, mention as the Fifth
Wonder, the great OBELISK of Semiramis, 150 Foot high, and 24
Foot square at Bottom, or 90 Foot in Circuit at the Ground, all one
intire Stone, rising pyramidically, brought from Armenia to Babylon
about the Time of the Siege of Troy, if we may believe the History of
SEMIRAMIS.
† While ERATOSTHENES and CONON flourish’d in Greece
who were succeeded by the excellent APOLLONIUS of Perga, and
many more before the Birth of Christ, who, though not working Ma-
sons, yet were good Surveyors ; or, at least, cultivated Geometry,
which is the solid Basis of true Masonry, and its Rule.
A. M.
4 0 0 4 .
A. M.
3 7 9 2 .
2 1 2 .
Ante Chr.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
[ 26 ]
[ 27 ]
Nor should it be forgot, that Painters also, and Stat uaries,*
were always reckon’d good Masons, as much as Builders,
Stone-cutters, Bricklayers, Carpenters, Join ers, Upholders or
Tent-Makers, and a vast many other Crafts men that could be
nam’d, who perform according to Geo metry, and the Rules
of Building ; though none since HIRAM ABIF has been
renown’d for Cunning in all parts of Masonry : And of this
enough.
But among the Heathen, while the noble Science Geom-
etry † was duly cultivated, both before and after the Reign
of Augustus, even till the Fifth Century of the Christian
Æra, Masonry was had in great Esteem and Veneration :
And while the Roman Empire continu’d in its Glory, the
Royal Art was carefully propagated, even to the ULTIMA
THULE, and a Lodge erected in almost every Roman Gar-
rison ; whereby they generously communicated their Cun-
ning to the northern and western Parts of Europe, which
had grown barbarous before the Roman Conquest, though we
know not certainly how long ; because some think there are
a few Remains of good Masonry before that Period in some
Parts of Europe, raised by the original Skill that the first
Colonies brought with them, as the Celtic Edifices, erected
by the ancient Gauls, and by the ancient Britains too, who
were a Colony of the Celtes, long before the Romans invaded
this Island.*
But when the GOTHS and VANDALS, that had never
been conquer’d by the Romans, like a general Deluge, over-
ran the ROMAN EMPIRE, with warlike Rage and gross
Ignorance they utter destroy’d many of the finest Edifices,
and defac’d others, very few escaping ; as the Asiatic and Af-
rican Nations fell under the same Calamity by the Conquests
of the MAHOMETANS, whose grand Design is only to
* For it was not without good Reason, the Ancients thought that
the Rules of the beautiful Proportions in Building were copied, or
taken from the Proportions of the Body natural : Hence PHIDIAS is
reckon’d in the Number of ancient Masons for erecting the Statue of the
Goddess Nemesis at Rhamnus, 10 Cubits high ; and that of Minerva
at Athens, 26 Cubits high ; and that of JUPITER OLYMPIUS,
sitting in his Temple in Achaia, between the Cities of Elis and Pisa,
made of innumerable small Pieces of Porphyry, so exceeding grand
and proportion’d, that it was reckon’d one of the Seven Wonders, as the
famous COLOSSUS at Rhodes was another, and the greatest Statue
that ever was erected, made of Metal, and dedicated to the SUN, 70
Cubits high, like a great Tower at a distance, at the Entry of an Har-
bour, striding wide enough for the largest Ships under sail, built in 12
Years by CARES a famous Mason and Statuary of Sicyon, and Scholar
to the great Lysippus of the same Fraternity. This mighty COLOS-
SUS, after standing 56 Years, fell by an Earthquake, and lay in Ruins,
the Wonder of the World, till Anno Dom. 600, when the Soldan of
Egypt carry’d off its Relicks, which loaded 900 Camels.
* By Menelaus, Claudius, Ptolomeus, (who was also the Prince
of Astronomers) Plutarch, Eutocius (who recites the inventions of
Philo, Diocles, Nicomedes, Sphorus, and Heron the learned Me-
chanick) Kresibius also, the Inventer of Pumps (celebrated by Vitru-
vius, Proclus, Pliny, and Athenæus) and Geminus, also equall’d by
some to Euclid ; so Diophantus, Nicomachus, Serenus, Proclus,
Pappus, Theon, &c. all Geometricians, and the illustrious Cultiva-
tors of the mechanical Arts.
*The Natives within the Roman Colonies might be first instructed
in building of Citadels and Bridges, and other Fortifications neces-
sary; and afterwards when their Settlement produc’d Peace, and Lib-
erty, and Plenty, the Aborigines did soon imitate their learned and
polite Conquerors in Masonry, having then Leisure and a Disposition
to raise magnificent Structures. Nay, even the Ingenious of the Neigh-
bouring Nations not conquer’d, learnt much from the Roman Garri-
sons in Times of Peace and open Correspondence, when they became
emulous of the Roman Glory, and thankful that their being Conquer’d
was the means of recovering them from ancient Ignorance and Preju-
dices, when they began to delight in the Royal Art.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
[ 28 ]
[ 29 ]
convert the World by Fire and Sword, instead of cultivating
the Arts and Sciences.
Thus, upon the Declension of the Roman Empire, when
the British Garrisons were drain’d, the ANGLES & other
lower SAXONS, invited by the ancient BRITONS to
come over and help them against the SCOTS and PICTS,
at length subdu’d the South Part of this Island, which they
call’d England, or Land of the Angles ; who being a-kin to
the Goths, or rather a sort of Vandals, of the same warlike
Disposition, and as ignorant Heathens, encourag’d nothing
but War, till they became Christians ; and then too late la-
mented the Ignorance of their Fathers in the great Loss of
Roman Masonry, but knew not how to repair it.
Yet becoming a free People (as the old Saxon Laws tes-
tify) and having a Disposition for Masonry, they soon be-
gan * to imitate the Asiatics, Grecians, and Romans, in erect-
ing of Lodges and encouraging of Masons ; being taught,
not only from the faithful Traditions and valuable Remains
of the BRITONS, but even by foreign Princes, in whose Do-
minions the Royal Art had been preserv’d much from Gothic
Ruins, particularly by CHARLES MARTELL King of
France, who according to the old Records of Masons, sent
over several expert Craftsmen and learned Architects into
England, at the Desire of the Saxon Kings : So that during
the Heptarchy, the Gothic Architecture was much encourag’d
here, as in other Christian Lands.
And though the many Invasions of the DANES occa-
sion’d the Loss of many Records, yet in Times of Truce or
Peace they did not hinder much the good Work, though not
perform’d according to the Augustan Stile ; nay, the vast Ex-
pence laid out upon it, with the curious Inventions of the
Artists to supply the Roman Skill, doing the best they could,
demonstrate their Esteem and Love for the Royal Art, and
have render’d the GOTHIC BUILDINGS venerable, tho’
not imitable by those that relish the ancient Architecture.
And after the Saxons and Danes were conquer’d by the
NORMANS, as soon as the Wars ended and Peace was
proclaim’d, the Gothic Masonry was encourag’d, even in the
Reign of the Conqueror,* and of his Son King WILLIAM
Rufus, who built Westminster-Hall, the largest one Room
perhaps in the Earth.
Nor did the Barons Wars, nor the many bloody Wars
of the subsequent Norman Kings, and their contending
Branches, much hinder the most sumptuous and lofty Build-
ings of those Times, rais’d by the great Clergy, (who enjoying
large Revenues, could well bear the Expence) and even by
* No doubt several Saxon and Scotish Kings with many of the No-
bility, great Gentry, and eminent Clergy, became the Grand Masters
of those early Lodges, from a mighty Zeal then prevalent for building
magnificent Christian Temples ; which would also prompt them to en-
quire after the Laws, Charges, Regulations, Customs, and Usages,
of the ancient Lodges, many of which might be preserv’d by Tradition,
and all of them very likely in those Parts of the British Islands that
were not subdu’d by the Saxons, from whence in time they might be
brought, and which the Saxons were more fond of, than careful to re-
vive Geometry and Roman Masonry ; as many in all Ages have been
more curious and careful about the Laws, Forms, and Usages of their
respective Societies, than about the ARTS and SCIENCES thereof.
But neither what was convey’d, nor the Manner how, can be com-
municated by writing ; as no Man indeed can understand it without the
Key of a Fellow Craft.
* William the Conqueror built the Tower of LONDON, and
many strong Castles in the Country, with several religious Edifices,
whose Example was follow’d by the Nobility and Clergy, particularly
by Roger de Montgomery Earl of Arundel, the Archbishop of York,
the Bishop of Durham, and GUNDULPH Bishop of Rochester, a
mighty Architect.
An.Dom.
7 4 1 .
He dy’d.
An.Dom.
8 3 2 .
An.Dom.
1 0 6 6 .
An.Dom.
4 4 8 .

--- Sayfa 18 ---
[ 30 ]
[ 31 ]
the CROWN too ; for we read King EDWARD III. had
an Officer call’d the King’s Free-Mason, or General-Surveyor
of his Buildings, whose Name was HENRY YEVELE,
employ’d by that King to build several Abbies, and St. STE-
PHEN’s CHAPPEL at Westminster, where the House of
Commons now sit in Parliament.
But for the further Instruction of Candidates and younger
Brethren, a certain Record of Free-Masons, written in the
Reign of King EDWARD IV. of the Norman Line, gives
the following Account, viz.
That though the ancient Records of the Brotherhood in Eng-
land were many of them destroy’d or lost in the Wars of the
Saxons and Danes, yet King ATHELSTAN, (the Grand-
son of King ALFRED the Great, a mighty Architect) the first
anointed King of England, and who translated the Holy Bi-
ble into the Saxon Tongue, when he had brought the Land into
Rest and Peace, built many great Works, and encourag’d many
Masons from France, who were appointed Overseers thereof,
and brought with them the Charges and Regulations of the
Lodges preserved since the Roman Times, who also prevail’d
with the King to improve the CONSTITUTION of the Eng-
lish Lodges according to the foreign Model, and to increase the
Wages of working Masons.
That the said King’s youngest Son, Prince EDWIN, being
taught Masonry, and taking upon him the Charges of a MAS-
TER-MASON, for the Love he had to the said Craft, and the
honourable Principles whereon it is grounded, purchased a free
charter of King Athelstan his Father, for the Masons having a
Correction among themselves, (as it was anciently express’d)
or a Freedom and Power to regulate themselves, to amend what
might happen amiss, and to hold a yearly Communication and
General Assembly.
That accordingly Prince EDWIN summoned all the Masons
in the Realm to meet him in a Congregation at York, who came
and composed a General Lodge, of which he was GRAND
MASTER ; and having brought with them all the Writings
and Records extant, some in Greek, some in Latin, some in
French, and other Languages, from the Contents thereof that
Assembly did frame the CONSTITUTION and Charges
of an English Lodge, made a Law to preserve and observe the
same in all time coming, and ordain’d good Pay for working
Masons, &c.
That in process of time, when Lodges were more frequent,
the Right Worshipful the Master and Fellows, with the Con-
sent of the LORDS of the Realm, ( for most great Men were
then Masons) ordain’d, that for the future, at the Making or Ad-
mission of a Brother, the CONSTITUTION should be read,
and the Charges hereunto annex’d, by the Master or Warden ;
and that such as were to be admitted Master-Masons, or Mas-
ters of Work, should be examin’d whether they be able of Cun-
ning to serve their respective Lords, as well the Lowest as the
Highest, to the Honour and Worship of the aforesaid Art ; and
to the Profit of their Lords ? for they be their Lords that employ
and pay them for their Service and Travel.
And besides many other things, the said Record adds, That
those Charges and Laws of FREE-MASONS have been
seen and perused by our late Sovereign King Henry VI. and by
the Lords of his honourable Council, who have allow’d them,
and said that they be right good and reasonable to be holden, as
they have been drawn out and collected from the Records of an-
cient Times.*
*  In another Manuscript more ancient, we read : “That when
the Master and Wardens meet in a Lodge, if need be, the Sheriff of
the County, or the Mayor of the City, or Alderman of the Town, in
which the Congregation is held, should be made Fellow and Sociate to
About
An.Dom.
9 3 0 .
About
An.Dom.
1 47 5 .
About
An.Dom.
1 3 6 2 .

--- Sayfa 19 ---
[ 32 ]
[ 33 ]
Now though in the third Year of the said King Henry VI.
while an Infant of about four Years old, the Parliament made
an Act, that affected only the working Masons, who had,
contrary to the Statutes for Labourers, confederated not to
work but at their own Price and Wages ; and because such
Agreements were suppos’d to be made at the General Lodges,
call’d in the Act CHAPTERS and CONGREGATIONS
of MASONS, it was then thought expedient to level the said
Act against the said Congregations * : Yet when the said King
Henry VI. arriv’d to Man’s Estate ; the Masons laid before
him and his Lords the above-mention’d Records and Charges,
who, ’tis plain, review’d them, and solemnly approv’d of
them as good and reasonable to be holden : Nay, the said
King and his Lords must have been incorporated with the
Free-Masons, before they could make such Review of the Re-
cords ; and in this Reign, before King Henry’s Troubles, Ma-
sons were much encourag’d. Nor is there any Instance of ex-
ecuting that Act in that, or in any other Reign since, and the
Masons never neglected their Lodges for it, nor ever thought
it worth while to employ their noble and eminent Brethren
to have it repeal’d ; because the working Masons, that are
free of the Lodge, scorn to be guilty of such Combinations ;
and the other free Masons have no Concern in Trespasses
against the Statutes for Labourers.*
the Master, in help of him against Rebels, and for upbearing the Rights
of the Realm.
“That enter’d Prentices at their making were charg’d not to be
Thieves, or Thieves Maintainers ; that they should travel honestly for
their pay, and love their Fellows as themselves, and be true to the King
of England, and to the Realm, and to the Lodge.
“That at such Congregations it shall be enquir’d, whether any
Master or Fellow has broke any of the Articles agreed to. And if the Of-
fender, being duly cited to appear, prove Rebel, and will not attend,
then the Lodge shall determine against him that he shall forswear (or
renounce) his Masonry, and shall no more use this Craft ; the which
if he presume for to do, the Sheriff of the County shall prison him, and
take all his Goods into the King’s Hands, till his Grace be granted him
and issued : For this Cause principally have these Congregations been
ordain’d, that as well the lowest as the highest should be well and truly
served in this Art foresaid throughout all the Kingdom of England.
“Amen, so mote it be.”
* Tertio Henrici Sexti, Chap. I. An Dom. 1425.
Title. Masons shall not confederate themselves in
Chapters and Congregations.
“WHEREAS by yearly Congregations and Confederacies,
made by the Masons in their General Assemblies, the good Course &
Effect of the Statutes for Labourers be openly violated and broken, in
Subversion of the Law, and to the great Damage of all the Commons,
our said Sovereign Lord the King, willing in this Case to provide a
Remedy, by the Advice and Assent aforesaid, and at the special Request
of the Commons, hath ordained and established, that such Chapters
and Congregations shall not be hereafter holden ; and if any such be
made, they that cause such Chapters & Congregations to be assembled
& holden, if they thereof be convict, shall be judged for Felons, and
that the other Masons that come to such Chapters and Congregations be
punish’d by Imprisonment of their Bodies, and made Fine and Ransom
at the King’s Will.”
Co. Inst. 3. p. 99.
* That Act was made in ignorant Times, when true Learning was a
Crime, and Geometry condem’d for Conjuration ; but it cannot dero-
gate in the least Degree from the Honour of the ancient Fraternity, who
to be sure would never encourage any such Confederacy of their working
Brethren. But by Tradition it is believ’d, that the Parliament-Men
were then too much influenc’d by the illiterate Clergy, who were not
accepted Masons, nor understood Architecture (as the Clergy of some
former Ages) and generally thought unworthy of this Brotherhood ; yet
thinking they had an indefeasible Right to know all Secrets, by virtue
of auricular Confession, and the Masons never confessing any thing
thereof, the said Clergy were highly offended, and at first suspecting
them of Wickedness, represented them as dangerous to the State during

--- Sayfa 20 ---
[ 34 ]
[ 35 ]
The Kings of SCOTLAND very much encourag’d the
Royal Art, from the earliest Times down to the Union of the
Crowns, as appears by the Remains of glorious Buildings
in that ancient Kingdom, and by the Lodges there kept up
without Interruption many hundred Years, the Records and
Traditions of which testify the great Respect of those Kings
to this honourable Fraternity, who gave always pregnant
Evidence of their Love and Loyalty, from whence sprung
the old Toast among the Scots Masons, viz. GOD BLESS
THE KING AND THE CRAFT.
Nor was the Royal Example neglected by the Nobility,
Gentry, and Clergy of SCOTLAND, who join’d in every
thing for the good of the Craft and Brotherhood, the Kings
being often the Grand Masters, until, among other things,
the Masons of SCOTLAND were impower’d to have a cer-
tain and fix’d Grand-Master and Grand Warden, who had a
Salary from the Crown, and also an Acknowledgment from
every New Brother in the Kingdom at Entrance, whose Busi-
ness was not only to regulate what might happen amiss in
the Brotherhood, but also to hear and finally determine all
Controversies between Mason and Lord, to punish the Ma-
son, if he deserv’d it, and to oblige both to equitable Terms :
At which Hearings, if the Grand Master was absent (who was
always nobly born) the Grand Warden presided. This Privi-
lege remain’d till the Civil Wars, but is now obsolete ; nor can
it well be reviv’d until the King becomes a Mason, because it
was not actually exerted at the Union of the Kingdoms.
Yet the great Care that the SCOTS took of true Ma-
sonry, prov’d afterwards very useful to ENGLAND ; for
the learned and magnanimous Queen ELIZABETH, who
encourag’d other Arts, discourag’d this ; because, being a
Woman, she could not be made a Mason, tho’ as other great
Women, she might have much employ’d Masons, like Semir-
amis and Artemisia.*
But upon her Demise, King JAMES VI. of SCOT-
LAND succeeding to the Crown of ENGLAND, being a
Mason King, reviv’d the English Lodges ; and as he was the
First King of GREAT BRITAIN, he was also the First
Prince in the World that recover’d the Roman Architecture
from the Ruins of Gothic Ignorance : For after many dark
or illiterate Ages, as soon as all Parts of Learning reviv’d,
and Geometry recover’d its Ground, the polite Nations be-
gan to discover the Confusion and Impropriety of the Goth-
ick Buildings ; and in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centu-
ries the AUGUSTAN STILE was rais’d from its Rubbish
in Italy, by BRAMANTE, BARBARO, SANSOVINO,
SANGALLO, MICHAEL ANGELO, RAPHAEL
URBIN, JULIO ROMANO, SERGLIO, LABACO,
SCAMOZI, VIGNOLA, and many other bright Archi-
that Minority, and soon influenc’d the Parliament-Men to lay hold of
such supposed Agreements of the working Masons, for making an Act
that might seem to reflect Dishonour upon even the whole worshipful
Fraternity, in whose Favour several Acts had been both before and af-
ter that Period made.
*ELIZABETH being jealous of any Assemblies of her Subjects,
whose Business she was not duly appriz’d of, attempted to break up
the annual Communication of Masons, as dangerous to her Govern-
ment : But, as old Masons have transmitted it by Tradition, when the
noble Persons her Majesty had comissioned, and brought a sufficient
Posse with them at York on St. John’s Day, were once admitted into
the Lodge, they made no use of Arms, and return’d the Queen a most
honourable Account of the ancient Fraternity, whereby her political
Fears and Doubts were dispell’d, and she let them alone, as a People
much respected by the Noble and the Wise of all the polite Nations, but
neglected the Art all her Reign.
1640.
1707.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
[ 36 ]
[ 37 ]
tects : but above all, by the Great PALLADIO, who has not
yet been duly imitated in Italy, though justly rival’d in Eng-
land by our great Master-Mason, INIGO JONES.
But though all true Masons honour the Memories of
those Italian Architects, it must be own’d, that the Augus-
tan Stile was not reviv’d by any crown’d Head, before King
JAMES the Sixth of SCOTLAND, and First of ENG-
LAND, patroniz’d the said glorious Inigo Jones, whom he
employ’d to build his Royal Palace of WHITE-HALL ;
and in his Reign over all Great-Britain, the BANQUET-
ING HOUSE, as the first piece of it, was only rais’d, which
is the finest one Room upon Earth ; and the Ingenious Mr.
Nicholas Stone perform’d as Master-Mason under the Archi-
tect JONES.
Upon his Demise, his Son King CHARLES I. being also a
Mason, patroniz’d Mr. Jones too, and firmly intended to have
carried on his Royal Father’s Design of WHITE-HALL,
according to Mr. Jones’s Stile ; but was unhappily diverted
by the Civil Wars.* After the Wars were over, and the Royal
Family restor’d, true Masonry was likewise restor’d ; espe-
cially upon the unhappy Occasion of the Burning of LON-
DON, An. 1666 ; for then the City-Houses were rebuilt more
after the Roman Stile, when King CHARLES II. founded
the present St. PAUL’s Cathedral in London, (the old Goth-
ick Fabrick being burnt down) much after the Style of St.
PETER’s at Rome, conducted by the ingenious Architect,
Sir CHRISTOPHER WREN. That King founded also
his royal Palace at GREENWICH, according to Mr. Inigo
Jones’s Design (which he drew before he dy’d) conducted by
his Son-in-Law Mr. WEB : It is now turn’d into an Hospi-
tal for Seamen. He founded also Chelsea-College, an Hospi-
tal for Soldiers ; and at EDINBURGH he both founded
and finish’d his royal Palace of HALY-ROOD-HOUSE,
by the Design and Conduct of Sir WILLIAM BRUCE
Bart. the Master of the Royal Works in SCOTLAND*. So
that besides the Tradition of old Masons now alive, which
may be rely’d on, we have much reason to believe that King
CHARLES II. was an Accepted Free-Mason, as every one
allows he was a great Encourager of the Craftsmen.
But in the Reign of his Brother King JAMES II. though
some Roman Buildings were carried on, the Lodges of Free-
Masons in London much dwindled into Ignorance, by not
being duly frequented and cultivated.† But after the Rev-
* The Plan and Prospect of that glorious Design being still preserv’d,
it is esteem’d by skillful Architects to excel that of any other Palace in the
known Earth, for the Symmetry, Firmness, Beauty and Conveniency
of Architecture ; as indeed all Master JONES’s Designs and Erections
are Originals, and at first View discover him to be the Architect: Nay,
his mighty Genius prevail’d with the Nobility and Gentry of all Brit-
ain, ( for he was as much honour’d in Scotland as in England) to af-
fect and revive the ancient Stile of MASONRY, too long neglected ; as
appears by the many curious Fabricks of those Times, one of which shall
be now mention’d, the least, and perhaps one of the finest, the GATE of
the Physic Garden at OXFORD, rais’d by HENRY DANVERS
EARL OF DANBY, which cost his Lordship many hundred Pounds,
and is as curious a little piece of Masonry as ever was built there before
or since, with the following Inscription on the Front of it, viz.
GLORIÆ DEI OPTIMI MAXIMI, HONORI CAROLI
REGIS, IN USUM ACADEMIÆ ET REIPUBLICÆ,
ANNO 1632.
HENRICUS COMES DANBY.
* It was an ancient Royal Palace, and rebuilt after the Augus tan
Style, so neat, that, by competent Judges, it has been es teem’d the finest
House belonging to the Crown : And though it is not very large, it is both
magnificent and convenient, both Inside and Outside, with good Gar-
dens, and a very large Park ; and all other adjacent accom o dations.
† But by the royal Example of his Brother King Charles II. the

--- Sayfa 22 ---
[ 38 ]
[ 39 ]
olution, Anno 1688, KING WILLIAM, though a warlike
Prince, having a good Taste of Architecture, carried on
the aforesaid two famous Hospitals of Greenwich and Chel-
sea, built the fine part of his royal Palace of HAMPTON
COURT, and founded and finish’d his incomparable Palace
at LOO in HOLLAND, &c. And the bright Example of
that glorious Prince, (who by most is reckon’d a Free-Mason)
did influence the Nobility, the Gentry, the Wealthy and the
Learned of GREAT-BRITAIN, to affect much the Augus-
tan Style ; as appears by a vast Number of most curious Edi-
City of LONDON erected the famous Monument, where the Great
Fire began, all of solid Stone, 202 foot high from the Ground, a Pil-
lar of the Dorick Order, 15 Foot diameter, with a curious Stair Case
in the Middle of black Marble, and an iron Balcony on the Top (not
unlike those of Trajan and Antoninus at ROME) from whence the
City and Suburbs may be view’d ; and it is the highest Column we
know upon Earth. Its Pedestal is 21 Foot square, and 40 Foot high,
the Front of which is adorn’d with most ingenious Emblems in Basso
Relievo, wrought by that famous Sculptor, Mr. Gabriel Cibber, with
large Latin Inscriptions on the Sides of it ; founded Anno 1671, and
finish’d Anno 1677.
In his Time also the Society of MERCHANT ADVENTUR-
ERS rebuilt the ROYAL EXCHANGE of London (the old one
being destroy’d by the Fire) all of Stone, after the Roman Style, the fin-
est Structure of that use in Europe, with the King’s Statue to the Life,
of white Marble, in the Middle of the Square (wrought by the famous
Master-Carver and Statuary, Mr. GRINLIN GIBBONS, who
was justly admir’d all over Europe, for his rivalling, if not surpassing,
the most fam’d Italian Masters) on the Pedestal of which is the follow-
ing Inscription, viz.
CAROLO II. CÆSARI BRITANNICO
PATRIÆ PATRI
REGUM OPTIMO CLEMENTISSIMO AUGUSTISSIMO
GENERIS HUMANI DELICIIS
UTRIUSQUE FORTUNÆ VICTORI
PACIS EUROPÆ ARBITRO.
MARIUM DOMINO AC VINDICI
SOCIETAS MERCATORUM ADVENTUR. ANGLIÆ
QUÆ PER CCCC JAM PROPE ANNOS
REGIA BENIGNITATE FLORET
FIDEI INTEMERATÆ ET GRATITUDINIS ÆTERNÆ
HOC TESTIMONIUM
VENER ABUNDA POSUIT
ANNO SALU TIS HUMANÆ MDCLXXXIV.
TO CHARLES II. EMPEROR OF BRITAIN
FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY
BEST MOST MERCIFUL AND AUGUST OF KINGS
DELIGHT OF MANKIND
IN ADVERSITY AND PROSPERITY UNMOV’D
UMPIRE OF EUROPE’S PEACE
COMMANDER AND SOVEREIGN OF THE SEAS
THE SOCIETY OF MERCHANT ADVENTURERS
OF ENGLAND
WHICH FOR NEAR CCCC YEARS
BY ROYAL FAVOUR FLOURISHETH
OF UNSHAKEN LOYALTY AND
ETERNAL GRATITUDE
THIS TESTIMONY
HAS IN VENERATION ERECTED
IN THE YEAR OF SALVATION MDCLXXXIV.
Nor should we forget the famous THEATER of OXFORD,
built by Archbishop SHELDON, at his sole Cost, in that King’s
Time, which, among his other fine Works, was design’d and conduct-
ed also by Sir Christopher Wren the King’s Architect ; for it is justly
admir’d by the curious ; and the MUSÆUM adjoining to it, a fine
Building rais’d at the Charge of that illustrious UNIVERSITY,
where there have been since erected several more Roman Buildings, as
Trinity-College Chappel, Alhallows Church in High-street, Peck-
water-Square in Christ-Church College, the new Printing-House,
and the whole of Queen’s-College rebuilt, &c. by the liberal Dona-
tions of some eminent Benefactors, and by the publick Spirit, Vigilancy,

--- Sayfa 23 ---
[ 40 ]
[ 41 ]
fices erected since throughout the Kingdom : For when in
the Ninth Year of the Reign of our late Sovereign QUEEN
ANNE, her Majesty and the Parliament concurr’d in an Act
for erecting 50 new Parish-Churches in London, Westmin-
ster, and Suburbs ; and the QUEEN had granted a Commis-
sion to several of the Ministers of State, the principal Nobil-
ity, great Gentry, and eminent Citizens, the two Archbishops,
with several other Bishops and dignify’d Clergymen, to put
the Act in execution ; they order’d the said New Churches
to be rais’d according to the ancient Roman Style, as appears
by those that are already rais’d ; and the present honourable
Commissioners having the same good Judgment of Architec-
ture, are carying on the same laudable grand Design, and are
reviving the ancient Style, by the Order, Countenance, and
Encouragement of his present Majesty KING GEORGE,
who was also graciously pleas’d to lay the first Stone in the
Foundation of his Parish Church of St. MARTIN’s in
Campis, on the South-East Corner (by his Majesty’s Proxy
for the time, the present Bishop of Salisbury) which is now
rebuilding, strong, large, and beautiful, at the Cost of the
Parishioners.*
In short, it would require many large Volumes to contain
the many splendid Instances of the mighty Influence of Ma-
sonry from the Creation, in every Age, and in every Nation,
and Fidelity of the Heads of Colleges, who generally have had a true
Taste of Roman Architecture.
The learned UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE not having
had the Management of such liberal Donations, have not so many
fine Structures, but they have two of the most curious and excellent
in Great-Britain of their kind, the one a Gothick Building, KING’s
COLLEGE CHAPPEL (unless you except King Henry VII’s
Chappel in Westminster-Abbey) ; and the other a Roman Building,
TRINITY-COLLEGE LIBRARY.
* The Bishop of Salisbury went in an orderly Procession, duly at-
tended, and having levell’d the first Stone, gave it two or three Knocks
with a Mallet, upon which, the Trumpets sounded, and a vast Multi-
tude made loud Acclamations of Joy ; when his Lordship laid upon the
Stone a Purse of 100 Guineas, as a Present from his Majesty for the use
of the Craftsmen. The following Inscription was cut in the Founda-
tion Stone, and a Sheet of Lead put upon it, viz.
D. S.
SERENISSIMUS REX GEORGIUS
PER DEPU TATUM SUUM
REVERENDUM ADMODUM IN CHRISTO PATREM
RICHARDUM EPISCOPUM SARISBURIENSEM
SUMMUM SUUM ELEEMOSYNARIUM
ADSISTENTE (REGIS JUSSU )
DOMINO THO. HEWET EQU. AUR.
ÆDIFICIORUM REGIORUM CUR ATORE
PRINCIPALI
PRIMUM HUJUS ECCLESIÆ LAPIDEM
POSUIT
MARTII 19 ANNO DOM. 1721.
ANNOQUE REGNI SUI OCTAVO.
SACRED TO GOD.
HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY KING GEORGE
BY HIS PROXY
THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST
RICHARD LORD BISHOP OF SALISBURY
HIS MAJESTY’S CHIEF ALMONER
ASSISTED (AT HIS MAJESTY’S COMMAND)
BY SIR THOMAS HEWET KNIGHT
OF HIS MAJESTY’S ROYAL BUILDINGS
PRINCIPAL SURVEYOR
THE FIRST STONE OF THIS CHURCH
LAID
THIS 19th OF MARCH ANNO DOMINI 1721
AND THE EIGHTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
[ 42 ]
[ 43 ]
as could be collected from Historians and Travellers : But
especially in those Parts of the World where the Europeans
correspond and trade, such Remains of ancient, large, curi-
ous, and magnificent Colonading, have been discover’d by the
Inquisitive, that they can’t enough lament the general Dev-
astations of the Goths and Mahometans ; and must conclude,
that no Art was ever so much encourag’d as this ; as indeed
none other is so extensively useful to Mankind.*
Nay, if it were expedient, it could be made appear, that
from this ancient Fraternity, the Societies or Orders of the
Warlike KNIGHTS, and of the Religious too, in process of
time, did borrow many solemn Usages ; for none of them
were better instituted, more decently install’d, or did more
sacredly observe their Laws and Charges than the Accepted
Masons have done, who in all Ages, and in every Nation,
have maintain’d and propagated their Concernments in a
* It were endless to recount and describe the many curious Roman
Buildings in Great-Britain alone, erected since the Revival of Roman
Masonry ; of which a few may be here mention’d, besides those already
spoken of, viz.
The QUEEN’s House at Greenwich,
Belonging to the Crown.
The great Gallery in Somerset-Gardens,
The Crown.
Gunnersbury-House near Brentford,               {
Possess’d by the Duke
        Middlesex,
         of Queensbury.
Lindsay-House in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields,        Duke of Ancaster
York-Stairs at the Thames in York-Buildings.
St. Paul’s-Church in Covent-Garden, with its
        glorious Portico.
The Building and Piazza of Covent-Garden,   Duke of Bedford.
Wilton Castle in Wiltshire,
Earl of Pembroke.
Castle-Ashby in Northamptonshire,
Earl of Strafford.
Stoke-Park in ditto,
          Arundel Esq;
Wing-House in Bedfordshire,
Hon. William Stanhope, Esq;
Chevening-House in Kent,
Earl Stanhope.
Ambrose-Bury in Wiltshire,
Lord Carleton.
All design’d by the incomparable INIGO JONES, and most of
them conducted by him, or by his Son-in-Law Mr. Web, according to
Mr. Jones’s Designs.
Besides many more conducted by other Architects, influenc’d by the
same happy Genius ; such as,
Bow-Church Steeple in Cheapside,
Built by Sir Chri. Wren.
Hotham-House in Beverly, Yorkshire,
 Sir Charles Hotham Bart.
Melvin-House in Fife,
Earl of Levin.
Longleate-House in Wiltshire,
Viscount Weymouth.
Chesterlee-Street-House in Durham County,   John Hedworth, Esq;
Montague-House in Bloomsbury, London,  Duke of Montagu.
Drumlanrig-Castle in Nithisdaleshire,
Duke of Queensbury.
Castle-Howard in Yorkshire,
Earl of Carlisle.
Stainborough-House in ditto,
Earl of Strafford.
Hopton-Castle in Linlithgowshire,
Earl of Hopton.
Blenheim-Castle at Woodstock, Oxfordshire,  Duke of Marlborough.
Chatsworth-Castle in Derbyshire,
Duke of Devonshire.
Palace of Hammilton in Clydsdaleshire,
Duke of Hammilton.
Wanstead-House in Epping-Forest, Essex,  Lord Castlemain.
Duncomb-Park in Yorkshire,
Thomas Duncomb Esq;
Mereworth-Castle in Kent,
Hon. John Fane Esq;
Sterling-House near Sterling-Castle,
Duke of Argyle.
Kinross-House in Kinrossshire,
Sir William Bruce Bart.
Stourton-Castle in Wiltshire,
Henry Hoar Esq;
Willbury-House in ditto,
William Benson Esq;
Bute-Castle in Isle of Bute,
Earl of Bute.
Walpole-House near Lin Regis, Norfolk,
Hon. Rob. Walpole Esq;
Burlington-House in Pickadilly, St.

Earl of Burlington.
        James’s, Westminster,
Dormitory of King’s-School, Westminster,            The Crown.
Tottenham-Park in Wiltshire,
          Lord Bruce.
These three last are design’d and conducted by the Earl of BURL-
INGTON, who bids fair to be the best Architect of Britain, [if he is
not so already] and we hear his Lordship intends to publish the valuable
Remains of Mr. Inigo Jones, for the Improvement of other Architects.
}

--- Sayfa 25 ---
[ 44 ]
[ 45 ]
way peculiar to themselves, which the most Cunning and
the most Learned cannot penetrate into, though it has been
often attempted ; while They know and love one another,
even without the Help of Speech, or when of different
Languages.
And now the Freeborn BRITISH NATIONS, disintan-
gled from foreign and civil Wars, and enjoying the good
Fruits of Peace and Liberty, having of late much indulg’d
their happy Genius for Masonry of every sort, and reviv’d
the drooping Lodges of London, this fair Metropolis flour-
isheth, as well as other Parts, with several worthy particular
Lodges, that have a quarterly Communication, and an an-
nual grand Assembly, wherein the Forms and Usages of the
most ancient and worshipful Fraternity are wisely propagat-
ed, and the Royal Art duly cultivated, and the Cement of the
Brotherhood preserved ; so that the whole Body resembles a
well built Arch ; several Noblemen and Gentlemen of the best
Rank, with Clergymen and learned Scholars of most Profes-
sions and Denominations, having frankly join’d and submit-
ted to take the Charges, and to wear the Badges of a Free and
Accepted Mason, under our present worthy Grand-Master, the
most noble PRINCE John Duke of MONTAGUE.
Besides more of the same Roman Style, and yet many more in Imi-
tation of it, which though they cannot be reduc’d to any certain Style,
are stately, beautiful, and convenient Structures, notwithstanding the
Mistakes of their several Architects : And besides the sumptuous and
venerable Gothick Buildings, past reckoning, as Cathedrals, Par-
ish-Churches, Chappels, Bridges, old Palaces of the Kings, of the
Nobility, of the Bishops, and the Gentry, known well to Travellers,
and to such as peruse the Histories of Counties, and the ancient Monu-
ments of great Families, &c. as many Erections of the Roman Style
may be review’d in Mr. Campbell the Architect’s ingenious Book,
call’d VITRUVIUS BRITANNICUS : And if the Disposition
for true ancient Masonry prevails, for some time, with Nobelemen,
Gentlemen, and learned Men, (as it is likely it will) this ISLAND
will become the MISTRESS of the Earth, for Designing, Drawing,
and Conducting, and capable to instruct all other Nations in all things
relating to the ROYAL ART.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
[ 47 ]
THE
C H A R G E S
Of  a  F R E E - M A S ON,
Extracted from the ancient R ECORDS of
Lodges beyond Sea, and of those in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, for the Use of the Lodges
in London : To be read at the making of New
Brethren, or when the Master shall order it.
The G E N E R A L H E A D S , viz.
I.                       F GOD and RELIGION.
II.  Of the CI V IL MAGISTR ATE
supreme and subordinate.
III.  Of LODGES.
IV.  Of MASTERS, Wardens, Fellows, and Apprentices.
V.  Of the Management of the Craft in working.
VI.  Of BEHAV IOUR, viz.
1. In the Lodge while constituted.
2. After the Lodge is over and the Brethren not
gone.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
[ 48 ]
[ 49 ]
3. When Brethren meet without Strangers, but
not in a Lodge.
4. In Presence of Strangers not Masons.
5. At Home, and in the Neighbourhood.
6. Towards a strange Brother.
I. Concerning GOD and RELIGION.
A Mason is oblig’d by his Tenure, to obey the moral Law ;
and if he rightly understands the Art, he will never be a stu-
pid Atheist, nor an irreligious Libertine. But though in an-
cient Times Masons were charg’d in every Country to be of
the Religion of that Country or Nation, whatever it was, yet
’tis now thought more expedient only to oblige them to that
Religion in which all Men agree, leaving their particular
Opinions to themselves ; that is, to be good Men and true, or
Men of Honour and Honesty, by whatever Denominations
or Persuasions they may be distinguish’d ; whereby Masonry
becomes the Center of Union, and the Means of conciliating
true Friendship among Persons that must else have remain’d
at a perpetual Distance.
II. Of the CI V IL MAGISTR ATE supreme and
subordinate.
A Mason is a peaceable Subject to the Civil Powers, wher-
ever he resides or works, and is never to be concern’d in
Plots and Conspiracies against the Peace and Welfare of the
Nation, nor to behave himself undutiful to inferior Mag-
istrates ; for as Masonry hath been always injured by War,
Bloodshed, and Confusion, so ancient Kings and Princes
have been much dispos’d to encourage the Craftsmen, be-
cause of their Peaceableness and Loyalty, whereby they
practically answer’d the Cavils of their Adversaries, and
promoted the Honour of the Fraternity, who ever flourish’d
in Times of Peace. So that if a Brother should be a Rebel
against the State, he is not to be countenanc’d in his Rebel-
lion, however he may be pitied as an unhappy Man ; and if
convicted of no other Crime, though the loyal Brotherhood
must and ought to disown his Rebellion, and give no Um-
brage or Ground of political Jealousy to the Government for
the time being ; they cannot expel him from the Lodge, and
his Relation to it remains indefeasible.
III. Of LODGES.
A LODGE is a place where Masons assemble and work :
Hence that Assembly, or duly organiz’d Society of Masons,
is call’d a LODGE, and every Brother ought to belong to
one, and to be subject to its By-Laws and the GENERAL
REGULATIONS. It is either particular or general, and
will be best understood by attending it, and by the Regula-
tions of the General or Grand Lodge hereunto annex’d. In
ancient Times no Master or Fellow could be absent from it,
especially when warn’d to appear at it, without incurring a
severe Censure, until it appear to the Master and Wardens,
that pure Necessity hinder’d him.
The Persons admitted Members of a Lodge must be good
and true Men, free-born, and of mature and discreet Age,
no Bondmen, no Women, no immoral or scandalous Men,
but of good Report.
IV. Of MASTERS, WARDENS, Fellows, and
Apprentices.
All Preferment among Masons is grounded upon real
Worth and personal Merit only ; that so the Lords may be
well served, the Brethren not put to Shame, nor the Royal

--- Sayfa 28 ---
[ 50 ]
[ 51 ]
Craft despis’d : Therefore no Master or Warden is chosen
by Seniority, but for his Merit. It is impossible to describe
these things in writing, and every Brother must attend in his
Place, and learn them in a way peculiar to this Fraternity :
Only Candidates may know, that no Master should take an
Apprentice, unless he has sufficient Imployment for him,
and unless he be a perfect Youth, having no Maim or De-
fect in his Body, that may render him uncapable of learning
the Art, of serving his Master’s LORD, and of being made a
Brother, and then a Fellow-Craft in due time, even after he
has served such a Term of Years as the Custom of the Coun-
try directs ; and that he should be descended of honest Par-
ents ; that so, when otherwise qualify’d, he may arrive to the
Honour of being the WARDEN, and then the Master of
the Lodge, the Grand Warden, and at length the GRAND-
MASTER of all the Lodges, according to his Merit.
No Brother can be a WARDEN until he has pass’d the
part of a Fellow-Craft ; nor a MASTER until he has acted
as a Warden, nor GRAND-WARDEN until he has been
Master of a Lodge, nor GR AND MASTER unless he
has been a Fellow-Craft before his Election, who is also to
be nobly born, or a Gentleman of the best Fashion, or some
eminent Scholar, or some curious Architect, or other Artist,
descended of honest Parents, and who is of singular great
Merit in the Opinion of the Lodges. And for the better, and
easier, and more honourable Discharge of his Office, the
Grand-Master has a Power to chuse his own DEPUTY
GRAND-MASTER, who must be then, or must have
been formerly, the Master of a particular Lodge, and has the
Privilege of acting whatever the GRAND MASTER, his
Principal, should act, unless the said Principal be present,
or interpose his Authority by a Letter.
These Rulers and Governors, supreme and subordinate,
of the ancient Lodge, are to be obey’d in their respective
Stations by all the Brethren, according to the old Charges
and Regulations, with all Humility, Reverence, Love, and
Alacrity.
V. Of the Management of the CR AF T in working.
All Masons shall work honestly on working Days, that
they may live creditably on holy Days ; and the time appoint-
ed by the Law of the Land, or confirm’d by Custom, shall
be observ’d.
The most expert of the Fellow-Craftsmen shall be chosen
or appointed the Master, or Overseer of the Lord’s Work ;
who is to be call’d MASTER by those that work under him.
The Craftsmen are to avoid all ill Language, and to call each
other by no disobliging Name, but Brother or Fellow ; and to
behave themselves courteously within and without the Lodge.
The Master, knowing himself to be able of Cunning,
shall undertake the Lord’s Work as reasonably as possible,
and truly dispend his Goods as if they were his own ; nor to
give more Wages to any Brother or Apprentice than he re-
ally may deserve.
Both the MASTER and the Masons receiving their
Wages justly, shall be faithful to the Lord, and honestly fin-
ish their Work, whether Task or Journey. Nor put the Work
to Task that hath been accustomed to Journey.
None shall discover Envy at the Prosperity of a Brother,
nor supplant him or put him out of his Work, if he be capable
to finish the same ; for no Man can finish another’s Work so
much to the Lord’s Profit, unless he be thoroughly acquaint-
ed with the Design and Draughts of him that began it.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
[ 52 ]
[ 53 ]
When a Fellow-Craftsman is chosen Warden of the Work
under the Master, he shall be true both to Master and Fel-
lows, shall carefully oversee the Work in the Master’s Ab-
sence to the Lord’s Profit ; and his Brethren shall obey him.
All Masons employ’d, shall meekly receive their Wages
without Murmuring or Mutiny, and not desert the Master
till the Work is finish’d.
A younger Brother shall be instructed in working, to pre-
vent spoiling the Materials for want of Judgment, and for
encreasing and continuing of Brotherly Love.
All the Tools used in working shall be approved by the
Grand Lodge.
No Labourer shall be employ’d in the proper Work of
Masonry ; nor shall Free-Masons work with those that are
not free, without an urgent Necessity ; nor shall they teach
Labourers and unaccepted Masons, as they should teach a
Brother or Fellow.
VI. Of BEHAV IOUR, viz.
1. In the LODGE while CONST U T U TED.
You are not to hold private Committees, or separate Con-
versation, without Leave from the Master, nor to talk of any
thing impertinent or unseemly, nor interrupt the Master or
Wardens, or any Brother speaking to the Master : Nor be-
have yourself ludicrously or jestingly while the Lodge is en-
gaged in what is serious and solemn ; nor use any unbecom-
ing Language upon any Pretence whatsoever ; but to pay
due Reverence to your Master, Wardens, and Fellows, and
put them to worship.
If any Complaint be brought, the Brother found guilty
shall stand to the Award and Determination of the Lodge,
who are the proper and competent Judges of all such Controver-
sies, (unless you carry it by Appeal to the GRAND LODGE)
and to whom they ought to be referr’d, unless a Lord’s Work be
hinder’d the mean while, in which Case a particular Reference may
be made ; but you must never go to Law about what concerneth
Masonry, without an absolute Necessity apparent to the Lodge.
2. BEHAVIOUR after the LODGE is over and the
BR ETHR EN not gone.
You may enjoy yourself with innocent Mirth, treating one an-
other according to Ability, but avoiding all Excess, or forcing any
Brother to eat or drink beyond his Inclination, or hindering him
from going when his Occasions call him, or doing or saying any-
thing offensive, or that may forbid an easy and free Conversation
for that would blast our Harmony, and defeat our laudable Purpos-
es. Therefore no private Piques or Quarrels must be brought with-
in the Door of the Lodge, far less any Quarrels about Religion, or
Nations, or State-Policy, we being only, as Masons, of the Catholick
Religion above-mention’d ; we are also of all Nations, Tongues,
Kindreds, and Languages, and are resolv’d against all Politicks, as
what never yet conduc’d to the Welfare of the Lodge, nor ever will.
This Charge has been always strictly enjoin’d and observ’d ; but es-
pecially ever since the Reformation in BRITAIN, or the Dissent
and Secession of these Nations from the Communion of ROME.
3. BEHAVIOUR when Brethren meet without Strangers, but
not in a  LODGE  form’d.
You are to salute one another in a courteous Manner, as you will
be instructed, calling each other Brother, freely giving mutual In-
struction as shall be thought expedient, without being overseen or
overheard, and without encroaching upon each other, or derogat-

--- Sayfa 30 ---
[ 54 ]
[ 55 ]
ing from that Respect which is due to any Brother, were he
not a Mason : For though all Masons are as Brethren upon
the same Level, yet Masonry takes no Honour from a Man
that he had before ; nay rather it adds to his Honour, espe-
cially if he has deserv’d well of the Brotherhood, who must
give Honour to whom it is due, and avoid ill Manners.
4. BEHAVIOUR in the Presence of STR ANGERS not
MASONS.
You shall be cautious in your Words and Carriage, that
the most penetrating Stranger shall not be able to discover
or find out what is not proper to be intimated ; and some-
times you shall divert a Discourse, and manage it prudently
for the Honour of the worshipful Fraternity.
5. BEHAVIOUR at HOME, and in your
NEIGHBOURHOOD.
You are to act as becomes a moral and wise Man ; partic-
ularly, not to let your Family, Friends, and Neighbors know
the Concerns of the Lodge, &c. but wisely to consult your
own Honour, and that of the ancient Brotherhood, for Rea-
sons not to be mention’d here. You must also consult your
Health, by not continuing together too late, or too long
from home, after Lodge Hours are past ; and by avoiding
of Gluttony or Drunkenness, that your Families be not ne-
glected or injured, nor you disabled from working.
6. BEHAVIOUR towards a strange Brother.
You are cautiously to examine him, in such a Method
as Prudence shall direct you, that you may not be impos’d
upon by an ignorant false Pretender, whom you are to reject
with Contempt and Derision, and beware of giving him any
Hints of Knowledge.
But if you discover him to be a true and genuine Brother,
you are to respect him accordingly ; and if he is in want,
you must relieve him if you can, or else direct him how he
may be reliev’d : You must employ him some Days, or else
recommend him to be employ’d. But you are not charged to
do beyond your Ability, only to prefer a poor Brother, that
is a good Man and true, before any other poor People in the
same Circumstances.
FINALLY, All these CHARGES you are to observe,
and also those that shall be communicated to you in another
way ; cultivating BROTHERLY-LOVE, the Founda-
tion and Cape-stone, the Cement and Glory of this ancient
Fraternity, avoiding all Wrangling and Quarrelling, all
Slander and Backbiting, nor permitting others to slander
any honest Brother, but defending his Character, and do-
ing him all good Offices, as far as is consistent with your
Honour and Safety, and no farther. And if any of them do
you Injury, you must apply to your own or his Lodge and
from thence you may appeal to the GRAND LODGE at
the Quarterly Communication, and from thence to the an-
nual GRAND LODGE, as has been the ancient laudable
Conduct of our Fore-fathers in every Nation ; never taking
a legal Course but when the Case cannot be otherwise decid-
ed, and patiently listning to the honest and friendly Advice
of Master and Fellows, when they would prevent your going
to Law with Strangers, or would excite you to put a speedy
Period to all Law-Suits, that so you may mind the Affair
of MASONRY with the more Alacrity and Success ; but
with respect to Brothers or Fellows at Law, the Master and
Brethren should kindly offer their Mediation, which ought

--- Sayfa 31 ---
[ 56 ]
[ 57 ]
to be thankfully submitted to by the contending Brethren ;
and if that Submission is impracticable, they must however
carry on their Process or Law-Suit without Wrath and Ran-
cor (not in the common way) saying or doing nothing which
may hinder Brotherly Love, and good Offices to be renew’d
and continu’d ; that all may see the benign Influence of MA-
SONRY, as all true Masons have done from the Beginning
of the World, and will do to the End of Time.
AMEN SO MOTE IT BE.
P O S T S C R I P T .
A
Worthy BROTHER, learned in the Law, has com-
municated to the Author (while this Sheet was print-
ing) the Opinion of the Great Judge COKE upon the Act
against Masons, 3 Hen. VI. Chap. I. which is Printed in
this Book, Page 31, and which Quotation the Author has
compar’d with the Original, viz.
COKE’s Institutes, third Part, Fol. 99.
The CAUSE wherefore this Offence was made Felony, is,
for that the good Course and Effect of the Statutes of La-
bourers were thereby violated and broken. Now (says my
Lord COKE) all the Statutes concerning Labourers, before
this Act, and whereunto this Act doth refer, are repeal’d by the
Statute of 5 Eliz. Chap. 4. whereby the Cause and End of the
making of this Act is taken away ; and consequently this Act is
become of no Force or Effect ; for, cessante ratione Legis, ces-
sat ipsa Lex : And the Indictment of Felony upon this Statute
must contain, that those Chapters and Congregations were
to the violating and breaking of the good Course and Effect
of the Statutes of Labourers ; which now cannot be so alledg’d,
because these Statutes be repeal’d. Therefore this would be put
out of the Charge of Justices of Peace, written by Master
LAMBERT, pag. 227.
This Quotation confirms the Tradition of old Masons,
that this most learned JUDGE really belong’d to the an-
cient Lodge, and was a faithful Brother.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
[ 59 ]
zBXzBXzBXzBXzBXzBX
GEN ER A L R EGUL ATIONS,
Compiled first by Mr. G E O R G E PA Y N E , Anno
1720, when he was GR AND-MASTER, and ap-
prov’d by the GRAND-LODGE on St. John Bap-
tist’s Day, Anno 1721 ; at Stationer’s-Hall, LON-
DON; when the most noble PRINCE John Duke
of
MONTAGU was unanimously chosen our
GRAND-MASTER for the Year ensuing ; who chose
JOHN BEAL, M.D., his Deputy Grand-Master ;
and    Mr. Josiah Villeneau      were chosen by the Lodge
         Mr. Tho. Morris, jun.         GRAND-WARDENS.
And now, by the Command of our said Right Wor-
shipful GR AND-MASTER MONTAGU, the
Author of this Book has compar’d them with, and
reduc’d them to the ancient Records and immemo-
rial Usage, of the Fraternity, and digested them into
this new Method, with several proper Explications,
for the Use of the Lodges in and about London and
Westminster.
I.
HE GR AN D-MASTER, or his DEPU-
T Y,  hath Authority and Right, not only
to be present in any true Lodge, but also to
preside where-ever he is, with the Master
of the Lodge on his Left-Hand, and to order his Grand-War-
dens to attend him, who are not to act in particular Lodges
{
}

--- Sayfa 33 ---
[ 60 ]
[ 61 ]
as Wardens, but in his Presence, and at his Command ; be-
cause there the GRAND-MASTER may command the
Wardens of that Lodge, or any other Brethren he pleaseth,
to attend and act as his Wardens pro tempore.
II. The MASTER of a particular Lodge, has the Right
and Authority of congregating the Members of his Lodge
into a Chapter at pleasure, upon any Emergency or Occur-
rence, as well as to appoint the time and place of their usual
forming : And in case of Sickness, Death, or necessary Ab-
sence of the Master, the senior Warden shall act as Master
pro tempore, if no Brother is present who has been Master
of that Lodge before ; for in that Case the absent Master’s
Authority reverts to the last Master then present ; though
he cannot act until the said senior Warden has once congre-
gated the Lodge, or in his Absence the junior Warden.
III. The Master of each particular Lodge, or one of the
Wardens, or some other Brother by his Order, shall keep a
Book containing their By-Laws, the Names of their Mem-
bers, with a List of all the Lodges in Town, and the usual
Times and Places of their forming, and all their Transac-
tions that are proper to be written.
IV. No Lodge shall make more than FIVE new Brethren
at one Time, nor any Man under the Age of Twenty-five,
who must be also his own Master ; unless by a Dispensation
from the Grand-Master or his Deputy.
V. No man can be made or admitted a Member of a par-
ticular Lodge, without previous Notice one Month before
given to the said Lodge, in order to make due Enquiry into
the Reputation and Capacity of the Candidate ; unless by the
Dispensation aforesaid.
VI. But no man can be enter’d a Brother in any particu-
lar Lodge, or admitted to be a Member thereof, without the
unanimous Consent of all the Members of that Lodge then
present when the Candidate is propos’d, and their Consent is
formally ask’d by the Master ; and they are to signify their
Consent or Dissent in their own prudent Way, either virtu-
ally or in form, but with Unanimity: Nor is this inherent
Privilege subject to a Dispensation ; because the Members of
a particular Lodge are the best Judges of it ; and if a frac-
tious Member should be impos’d on them, it might spoil
their Harmony, or hinder their Freedom ; or even break and
disperse the Lodge, which ought to be avoided by all good
and true Brethren.
VII. Every new Brother at his making is decently to
cloath the Lodge, that is, all the Brethren present, and to
deposite something for the Relief of indigent and decay’d
Brethren, as the Candidate shall think fit to bestow, over
and above the small Allowance stated by the By-Laws of
that particular Lodge ; which Charity shall be lodg’d with
the Master or Wardens, or the Cashier, if the Members think
fit to chuse one.
And the Candidate shall also solemnly promise to sub-
mit to the Constitutions, the Charges, and Regulations, and
to such other good Usages as shall be intimated to them in
Time and Place convenient.
VIII. No Set or Number of Brethren shall withdraw or
separate themselves from the Lodge in which they were made
Brethren, or were afterwards admitted Members, unless the
Lodge becomes too numerous ; nor even then, without a Dis-
pensation from the Grand-Master or his Deputy : And when
they are thus separated, they must either immediately join
themselves to such other Lodge as they shall like best, with
the unanimous Consent of that other Lodge to which they

--- Sayfa 34 ---
[ 62 ]
[ 63 ]
go (as above regulated ) or else they must obtain the Grand-
Master’s Warrant to join in forming a new Lodge.
If any Set or Number of Masons shall take upon them-
selves to form a Lodge without the Grand-Master’s Warrant,
the regular Lodges are not to countenance them, or own
them as fair Brethren and duly form’d, nor approve of their
Acts and Deeds ; but must treat them as Rebels, until they
humble themselves, as the Grand-Master shall in his Pru-
dence direct, and until he approve of them by his Warrant,
which must be signify’d to the other Lodges, as the Custom is
when a new Lodge is to be register’d in the List of Lodges.
IX. But if any Brother so far misbehave himself as to ren-
der his Lodge uneasy, he shall be twice duly admonish’d by
the Master or Wardens in a form’d Lodge ; and if he will not
refrain his Imprudence, and obediently submit to the Ad-
vice of the Brethren, and reform what gives them Offence,
he shall be dealt with according to the By-Laws of that
particular Lodge, or else in such a manner as the Quarterly
Communication shall in their great Prudence think fit ; for
which a new Regulation may be afterwards made.
X. The Majority of every particular Lodge, when congre-
gated, shall have the Privilege of giving Instructions to their
Master and Wardens, before the assembling of the Grand
Chapter, or Lodge at the three Quarterly Communications
hereafter mention’d, and of the Annual Grand Lodge too ;
because their Master and Wardens are their Representatives,
and are supposed to speak their Mind.
XI. All particular Lodges are to observe the same Usages
as much as possible ; in order to which, and for cultivating
a good Understanding among Free-Masons, some members
out of every Lodge shall be deputed to visit the other Lodges
as often as shall be thought convenient.
XII. The GR AND-Lodge consists of, and is form’d by
the Masters and Wardens of all the regular particular Lodges
upon Record, with the GRAND-MASTER at their Head,
and his Deputy on his Left-hand, and the Grand-Wardens
in their proper Places ; and must have a QUARTERLY
COMMUNICATION about Michaelmas, Christmas, and
Lady-Day, in some convenient Place, as the Grand-Master
shall appoint, where no Brother shall be present, who is not
at that time a Member thereof, without a Dispensation ; and
while he stays, he shall not be allow’d to vote, nor even give
his Opinion, without Leave of the Grand-Lodge ask’d and
given, or unless it be duly ask’d by the said Lodge.
All Matters are to be determin’d in the Grand-Lodge by
a Majority of Votes, each Member having one Vote, and the
Grand-Master having two Votes, unless the said Lodge leave
any particular thing to the Determination of the Grand-
Master, for the sake of Expedition.
XIII. At the said Quarterly Communication, all Matters
that concern the Fraternity in general, or particular Lodges,
or single Brethren, are quietly, sedately, and maturely to be
discours’d of and transacted : Apprentices must be admitted
Masters and Fellow-Craft only here, unless by a Dispensa-
tion. Here also all Differences, that cannot be made up and
accommodated privately, nor by a particular Lodge, are
to be seriously considered and decided : And if any Brother
thinks himself aggrieved by the Decision of this Board, he
may appeal to the annual Grand-Lodge next ensuing, and
leave his Appeal in Writing, with the Grand-Master, or his
Deputy, or the Grand-Wardens.
Here also the Master or the Wardens of each particular
Lodge shall bring and produce a List of such Members as
have been made, or even admitted in their particular Lodges
since the last Communication of the Grand-Lodge : And there

--- Sayfa 35 ---
[ 64 ]
[ 65 ]
shall be a Book kept by the Grand-Master, or his Deputy, or
rather by some Brother whom the Grand-Lodge shall ap-
point for SECRETARY, wherein shall be recorded all the
Lodges, with their usual Times and Places of forming, and
the Names of all the Members of each Lodge ; and all the
Affairs of the Grand-Lodge that are proper to be written.
They shall also consider of the most prudent and effec-
tual Methods of collecting and disposing of what Money
shall be given to, or lodged with them in Charity, towards
the Relief only of any true Brother fallen into Poverty or
Decay, but of none else : But every particular Lodge shall
dispose of their own Charity for poor Brethren, according
to their own By-Laws, until it be agreed by all the Lodges
(in a new Regulation) to carry in the Charity collection by
them to the GRAND-LODGE, at the Quarterly or Annual
Communication, in order to make a common Stock of it, for
the more handsome Relief of poor Brethren.
They shall also appoint a Treasurer, a Brother of good
worldly Substance, who shall be a Member of the Grand-
Lodge by virtue of his Office, and shall be always present,
and have Power to move to the Grand-Lodge any thing, es-
pecially what concerns his Office. To him shall be commit-
ted all Money rais’d for Charity, or for any other Use of the
Grand-Lodge, which he shall write down in a Book, with the
respective Ends and Uses for which the several Sums are in-
tended ; and shall expend or disburse the same by such a cer-
tain Order sign’d, as the Grand-Lodge shall afterwards agree
to in a new Regulation : But he shall not vote in chusing a
Grand-Master or Wardens, though in every other Transac-
tion. As in like manner the Secretary shall be a Member of
the Grand-Lodge by virtue of his Office, and vote in every
thing except in chusing a Grand-Master or Wardens.
The Treasurer and Secretary shall have each a Clerk,
who must be a Brother and Fellow-Craft, but never must
be a Member of the Grand-Lodge, nor speak without being
allow’d or desir’d.
The Grand-Master, or his Deputy, shall always command
the Treasurer and Secretary, with their Clerks and Books, in
order to see how Matters go on, and to know what is expedi-
ent to be done upon any emergent Occasion.
Another Brother (who must be a Fellow-Craft ) should be
appointed to look after the Door of the Grand-Lodge ; but
shall be no Member of it.
But these Offices may be farther explain’d by a new Reg-
ulation, when the Necessity and Expediency of them may
more appear than at present to the Fraternity.
XIV. If at any GRAND-LODGE, stated or occa-
sional, quarterly or annual, the GRAND-MASTER and
his Deputy should be both absent, then the present Master
of a Lodge, that has been the longest a Free-Mason, shall
take the Chair, and preside as Grand-Master pro tempore ;
and shall be vested with all his Power and Honour for the
time ; provided there is no Brother present that has been
Grand-Master formerly, or Deputy Grand-Master ; for the
last Grand-Master present, or else the last Deputy present,
should always of right take place in the Absence of the pres-
ent Grand-Master and his Deputy.
XV. In the GRAND-LODGE none can act as Wardens
but the Grand-Wardens themselves, if present ; and if ab-
sent, the Grand-Master, or the Person who presides in his
Place, shall order private Wardens to act as Grand-Wardens
pro tempore, whose Places are to be supply’d by two Fellow-
Craft of the same Lodge, call’d forth to act, or sent thither

--- Sayfa 36 ---
[ 66 ]
[ 67 ]
by the particular Master thereof ; or if by him omitted, then
they shall be call’d by the Grand-Master, that so the Grand-
Lodge may be always compleat.
XVI. The GRAND-WARDENS, or any others, are
first to advise with the Deputy about the Affairs of the Lodge
or of the Brethren, and not to apply to the Grand-Master
without the Knowledge of the Deputy, unless he refuse his
Concurrence in any certain necessary Affair ; in which
Case, or in case of any Difference between the Deputy, and
the Grand-Wardens, or other Brethren, both Parties are to
go by Concert to the Grand-Master, who can easily decide
the Controversy and make up the Difference by virtue of his
great Authority.
The Grand-Master should receive no Intimation of Busi-
ness concerning Masonry, but from his Deputy first, except
in such certain Cases as his Worship can well judge of ; for
if the Application to the Grand-Master be irregular, he can
easily order the Grand-Wardens, or any other Brethren thus
applying, to wait upon his Deputy, who is to prepare the
Business speedily, and to lay it orderly before his Worship.
XVII. No GR AN D-MASTER, Deputy Grand-Mas-
ter, Grand-Wardens, Treasurer, Secretary, or whoever acts for
them, or in their stead pro tempore, can at the same time be
the Master or Warden of a particular Lodge ; but as soon as
any of them has honourably discharg’d his Grand Office, he
returns to that Post or Station in his particular Lodge, from
which he was call’d to officiate above.
XVIII. If the DEPUTY GRAND-MASTER be
sick, or necessarily absent, the Grand-Master may chuse
any Fellow-Craft he pleases to be his Deputy pro tempore :
But he that is chosen Deputy at the Grand-Lodge, and the
Grand-Wardens too, cannot be discharg’d without the Cause
fairly appear to the Majority of the Grand-Lodge ; and the
GRAND-MASTER, if he is uneasy, may call a GRAND-
LODGE on purpose to lay the Cause before them, and
to have their Advice and Concurrence : In which case, the
Majority of the Grand-Lodge, if they cannot reconcile the
MASTER and his Deputy or his Wardens, are to concur in
allowing the MASTER to discharge his said Deputy or his
said Wardens, and to chuse another Deputy immediately ;
and the said Grand-Lodge shall chuse other Wardens in that
Case, that Harmony and Peace may be preserv’d.
XIX. If the GRAND-MASTER should abuse his
Power, and render himself unworthy of the Obedience and
Subjection of the Lodges, he shall be treated in a way and
manner to be agreed upon in a new Regulation ; because
hitherto the ancient Fraternity have had no occasion for it,
their former GRAND-MASTERS having all behaved
themselves worthy of that honourable Office.
XX. The GRAND-MASTER, with his Deputy and
Wardens, shall (at least once) go round and visit all the
Lodges about Town during his Mastership.
XXI. If the GRAND-MASTER die during his Master-
ship, or by Sickness, or by being beyond Sea, or any other
way should be render’d uncapable of discharging his Office,
the DEPUTY, or in his Absence, the Senior GRAND-
WARDEN, or in his Absence the Junior, or in his Absence
any three present Masters of Lodges, shall join to congregate
the GRAND-LODGE immediately, to advise together
upon that Emergency, and to send two of their Number to
invite the last GRAND-MASTER to resume his Office,
which now in course reverts to him ; or if he refuse, then the

--- Sayfa 37 ---
[ 68 ]
[ 69 ]
next last, and so backward : But if no former Grand-Master
can be found, then the Deputy shall act as Principal until
another is chosen ; or if there be no Deputy, then the oldest
Master.
XXII. The BRETHREN of all the Lodges in and
about London and Westminster, shall meet at an ANNUAL
COMMUNICATION and Feast, in some convenient
Place, on St. JOHN Baptist ’s Day, or else on St. JOHN
Evangelist ’s Day, as the Grand-Lodge shall think fit by a
new Regulation, having of late Years met on St. John Bap-
tist’s Day : Provided,
The Majority of the Masters and Wardens, with the Grand-
Master, his Deputy and Wardens, agree at their Quarterly
Communication, three Months before, that there shall be a
Feast, and a General Communication of all the Brethren : For
if either the Grand-Master, or the Majority of the particular
Masters, are against it, it must be dropt for that Time.
But whether there shall be a Feast for all the Brethren, or
not, yet the GRAND-LODGE must meet in some conve-
nient Place annually on St. JOHN’s Day ; or if it be Sun-
day, then on the next Day, in order to chuse every Year a
new GRAND-MASTER, Deputy, and Wardens.
XXIII. If it be thought expedient, and the GRAND-
MASTER, with the Majority of the Masters and Wardens,
agree to hold a GRAND FEAST, according to the an-
cient laudable Custom of Masons, then the GR AND-WAR-
DENS shall have the Care of preparing the Tickets, seal’d
with the Grand-Master’s Seal, of disposing of the Tickets,
of receiving the Money for the Tickets, of buying the Ma-
terials of the Feast, of finding out a proper and convenient
Place to feast in ; and of every other Thing that concerns
the Entertainment.
But that the Work may not be too burthensome to the two
Grand-Wardens, and that all Matters may be expeditiously
and safely managed, the Grand-Master, or his Deputy, shall
have Power to nominate and appoint a certain Number of
Stewards, as his Worship shall think fit, to act in Concert
with the two Grand-Wardens ; all Things relating to the
Feast being decided amongst them by a Majority of Voices ;
except the Grand-Master or his Deputy interpose by a par-
ticular Direction of Appointment.
XXIV. The Wardens and Stewards shall, in due time,
wait upon the Grand-Master, or his Deputy, for Directions
and Orders about the Premisses ; but if his Worship and his
Deputy are sick, or necessarily absent, they shall call to-
gether the Masters and Wardens of Lodges to meet on pur-
pose for their Advice and Orders ; or else they may take the
Matter wholly upon themselves, and do the best they can.
The Grand Wardens and the Stewards are to account for
all the Money they receive, or expend, to the Grand-Lodge,
after Dinner, or when the Grand-Lodge shall think fit to
receive their Accounts.
If the Grand-Master pleases, he may in due time summon
all the Masters and Wardens of Lodges to consult with them
about ordering the Grand-Feast, and about any Emergency
or accidental Thing relating thereunto, that may require
Advice ; or else to take it upon himself altogether.
XXV. The Masters of Lodges shall each appoint one
experienc’d and discreet Fellow-Craft of his Lodge, to com-
pose a Committee, consisting of one from every Lodge, who
shall meet to receive, in a convenient Apartment, every Per-
son that brings a Ticket, and shall have Power to discourse
him, if they think fit, in order to admit him, or debar him,
as they shall see cause : Provided they send no Man away

--- Sayfa 38 ---
[ 70 ]
[ 71 ]
before they have acquainted all the Brethren within Doors
with the Reasons thereof, to avoid Mistakes ; that so no true
Brother may be debarr’d, nor a false Brother or meer Pre-
tender, admitted. This Committee must meet very early on
St. John’s Day, at the Place, even before any Persons come
with Tickets.
XXVI. The Grand-Master shall appoint two or more
trusty Brethren to be Porters, or Door-keepers, who are also
to be early at the Place for some good Reasons ; and who are
to be at the Command of the Committee.
XXVII. The Grand-Wardens, or the Stewards, shall ap-
point before-hand such a Number of Brethren to serve at
Table as they think fit and proper for that Work ; and they
may advise with the Masters and Wardens of Lodges about
the most proper Persons, if they please, or may take in such
by their Recommendation ; for none are to serve that Day ;
but free and accepted Masons, that the Communication may
be free and harmonious.
XXVIII. All the Members of the Grand-Lodge must be
at the Place long before Dinner, with the Grand-Master, or
his Deputy at their Head, who shall retire, and form them-
selves. And this is done in order,
1. To receive any Appeals duly lodg’d, as above regulated,
that the Appellant may be heard, and the Affair may be ami-
cably decided before Dinner, if possible ; but if it cannot, it
must be delay’d till after the new Grand-Master is elected ;
and if it cannot be decided after Dinner, it may be delay’d,
and referr’d to a particular Committee, that shall quietly ad-
just it, and make Report to the next Quarterly Communica-
tion, that Brotherly-Love may be preserv’d.
2. To prevent any Difference or Disgust which may be
fear’d to arise that Day ; that no Interruption may be given
to the Harmony and Pleasure of the GRAND FEAST.
3. To consult about whatever concerns the Decency and
Decorum of the Grand-Assembly, and to prevent all Inde-
cency and ill Manners, the Assembly being promiscuous.
4. To receive and consider of any good Motion or any mo-
mentous and important Affair, that shall be brought from
the particular Lodges, by their Representatives, the several
Masters and Wardens.
XXIX. After these things are discuss’d, the GRAND-
MASTER and his Deputy, the Grand-Wardens, or the
Stewards, the Secretary, the Treasurer, the Clerks, and every
other Person, shall withdraw, and leave the Masters and
Wardens of the particular Lodges alone, in order to consult
amicably about electing a NEW GRAND-MASTER, or
continuing the present, if they have not done it the Day be-
fore ; and if they are unanimous for continuing the present
Grand-Master, his Worship shall be call’d in, and humbly
desir’d to do the Fraternity the Honour of ruling them for
the Year ensuing : And after Dinner it will be known whether
he accepts of it or not ; For it should not be discover’d but by
the Election it self.
XXX. Then the Master and Wardens, and all the Breth-
ren, may converse promiscuously, or as they please to sort
together, until the Dinner is coming in, when every Brother
takes his Seat at Table.
XXXI. Some time after Dinner the GRAND-LODGE
is form’d, not in Retirement, but in the Presence of all the
Brethren, who yet are not Members of it, and must not
therefore speak until they are desired and allow’d.
XXXII. If the GRAND-MASTER of last Year has
consented with the Masters and Wardens in private, before
Dinner, to continue for the Year ensuing ; then one of the

--- Sayfa 39 ---
[ 72 ]
[ 73 ]
Grand-Lodge, deputed for that purpose, shall represent to all
the Brethren his Worship’s good Government, &c. And turn-
ing to him, shall, in the name of the Grand Lodge, humbly
request him to do the FRATERNITY the great Honour (if
nobly born, if not, the great Kindness) of continuing to be
their Grand Master for the Year ensuing. And his Worship
declaring his Consent by a Bow or a Speech, as he pleases,
the said deputed Member of the Grand-Lodge shall pro-
claim him GRAND-MASTER, and all the Members of
the Lodge shall salute him in due Form. And all the Breth-
ren shall for a few Minutes have leave to declare their Satis-
faction, Pleasure and Congratulation.
XXXIII. But if either the Master and Wardens have
not in private, this Day before Dinner, nor the Day before,
desir’d the last Grand-Master to continue in the Master-
ship another Year ; or if he, when desir’d, has not consented:
Then,
The last Grand-Master shall nominate his Successor
for the Year ensuing, who if unanimously approv’d by the
Grand-Lodge, and if there present, shall be proclaim’d, sa-
luted, and congratulated the New Grand Master as above
hinted, and immediately install’d by the last Grand-Master,
according to Usage.
XXXIV. But if that Nomination is not unanimously
approv’d, the new Grand-Master shall be chosen immedi-
ately by Ballot, every Master and Warden writing his Man’s
Name, and the last Grand-Master writing his Man’s Name
too ; and the Man, whose Name the last Grand Master shall
first take out, casually or by chance, shall be GRAND-
MASTER for the Year ensuing ; and if present, he shall
be proclaimed, saluted, and congratulated, as above hinted,
and forthwith install’d by the last Grand-Master according
to Usage.
XXXV. The last Grand-Master thus continued, or the
new Grand-Master thus install’d, shall next nominate and
appoint his Deputy Grand-Master, either the last or a new
one, who shall be also declar’d, saluted and congratulated,
as above hinted.
The GRAND-MASTER shall also nominate the new
GRAND-WARDENS, and if unanimously approv’d by
the Grand-Lodge, shall be declar’d, saluted, and congratu-
lated as above hinted ; but if not, they shall be chosen by
Ballot, in the same way as the Grand-Master : As the War-
dens of private Lodges are also to be chosen by Ballot in
each Lodge, if the Members thereof do not agree to their
Master’s Nomination.
XXXVI. But if the BROTHER, whom the present
Grand-Master shall nominate for his Successor, or whom
the Majority of the Grand-Lodge shall happen to chuse by
Ballot, is, by Sickness or other necessary Occasion, absent
from the Grand-Feast, he cannot be proclaim’d the NEW
GRAND-MASTER, unless the old Grand-Master, or some
of the Masters and Wardens of the GRAND-LODGE can
vouch, upon the Honour of a Brother, that the said Person,
so nominated or chosen, will readily accept of the said Of-
fice ; in which case the old GRAND-MASTER shall act
as Proxy, and shall nominate the Deputy and Wardens in
his Name, and in his Name also receive the usual Honours,
Homage, and Congratulation.
XXXVII. Then the GRAND-MASTER shall allow
any Brother, Fellow-Craft, or Apprentice to speak, directing
his Discourse to his Worship ; or to make any Motion for the

--- Sayfa 40 ---
[ 74 ]
[ 75 ]
good of the Fraternity, which shall be either immediately
consider’d and finish’d, or else referr’d to the Consideration
of the GRAND-LODGE at their next Communication,
stated or occasional. When that is over,
XXXVIII. The GRAND-MASTER or his Deputy,
or some Brother appointed by him, shall harangue all the
Brethren, and give them good Advice : And lastly, after
some other Transactions, that cannot be written in any
Language, the Brethren may go away or stay longer, as they
please.
XXXIX. Every Annual GRAND-LODGE has an in-
herent Power and Authority to make new Regulations, or to
alter these, for the real Benefit of this ancient Fraternity :
Provided always that the old LANDMARKS be carefully
preserv’d, and that such Alterations and new Regulations be
proposed and agreed to at the third Quarterly Communica-
tion preceding the Annual Grand Feast ; and that they be of-
fered also to the Perusal of all the Brethren before Dinner,
in writing, even of the youngest Apprentice ; the Approba-
tion and Consent of the Majority of all the Brethren present
being absolutely necessary to make the same binding and
obligatory ; which must, after Dinner, and after the new
GRAND-MASTER is install’d, be solemnly desir’d ; as it
was desir’d and obtain’d for these REGULATIONS, when
propos’d by the GRAND-LODGE, to about 150 Brethren,
on St. John Baptist’s Day, 1721.
P O S T S C R I P T .
Here follows the Manner of constituting a NEW
LODGE, as practis’d by his Grace the DUKE
of WHARTON, the present Right Worshipful
GR AND-MASTER, according to the ancient
Usages of MASONS.
A
NEW LODGE, for avoiding many irregularities,
should be solemnly constituted by the Grand-Master,
with his Deputy and Wardens ; or in the Grand-Master ’s Ab-
sence, the Deputy shall act for his Worship, and shall chuse
some Master of a Lodge to assist him ; or in case the Deputy
is absent, the Grand-Master shall call forth some Master of
a Lodge to act as Deputy pro tempore.
The Candidates, or the new Master and Wardens, being
yet among the Fellow-Craft, the GRAND-MASTER shall
ask his Deputy if he has examin’d them, and finds the Can-
didate Master well skill’d in the noble Science and the royal
Art, and duly instructed in our Mysteries, &c.
And the Deputy answering in the affirmative, he shall
(by the Grand-Master’s Order) take the Candidate from
among his Fellows, and present him to the Grand-Mas-
ter ; saying, Right worshipful Grand-Master, the Brethren
here desire to be form’d into a new Lodge ; and I present this
my worthy Brother to be their Master, whom I know to be of
good Morals and great Skill, true and trusty, and a Lover of
the whole Fraternity, wheresoever dispers’d over the Face of the
Earth.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
[ 76 ]
[ 77 ]
Then the GRAND-MASTER, placing the Candidate
on his left Hand, having ask’d and obtain’d the unanimous
Consent of all the Brethren, shall say, I constitute and form
these good Brethren into a new Lodge, and appoint you the
Master of it, not doubting of your Capacity and Care to preserve
the Cement of the Lodge, &c. with some other Expressions
that are proper and usual on that Occasion, but not proper
to be written.
Upon this the Deputy shall rehearse the Charges of a
Master, and the GRAND-MASTER shall ask the Candi-
date, saying, Do you submit to these Charges as Masters have
done in all Ages ? And the Candidate signifying his cordial
Submission thereunto, the Grand-Master shall, by certain
significant Ceremonies and ancient Usages, install him,
and present him with the Constitutions, the Lodge-Book, and
the Instruments of his Office, not all together, but one after
another ; and after each of them, the Grand-Master or his
Deputy, shall rehearse the short and pithy Charge that is
suitable to the Thing presented.
After this, the Members of this new Lodge, bowing all
together to the Grand-Master, shall return his Worship
Thanks, and immediately do their Homage to their new
Master, and signify their Promise of Subjection and Obedi-
ence to him by the usual Congratulation.
The Deputy and the Grand-Wardens, and any other
Brethren present, that are not Members of this new Lodge,
shall next congratulate the new Master ; and he shall re-
turn his becoming Acknowledgements to the Grand-Master
first, and to the rest in their Order.
Then the Grand-Master desires the new Master to enter
immediately upon the Exercise of his Office, in chusing his
Wardens : And the new Master, calling forth two Fellow-
Craft, presents them to the Grand-Master for his Approba-
tion, and to the new Lodge for their Consent. And that be-
ing granted,
The senior or junior Grand-Warden, or some other
Brother for him, shall rehearse the Charges of Wardens ;
and the Candidates being solemnly ask’d by the new Master,
shall signify their Submission thereunto.
Upon which the new Master, presenting them with the
Instruments of their Office, shall in due Form, install them
in their proper Places ; and the Brethren of that new Lodge
shall signify their Obedience to the new Wardens by the
usual Congratulation.
And this LODGE being thus compleatly constituted,
shall be register’d in the Grand-Master’s Book, and
by his Order notified to the other Lodges.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
[ 78 ]
[ 79 ]
A P P R O B A T I O N.
W
HEREAS by the Confusions occasioned in the
Saxon, Danish, and Norman Wars, the Records of
Masons have been much vitiated, the Free-Masons of Eng-
land twice thought it necessary to correct their Constitu-
tions, Charges, and Regulations ; first in the Reign of King
Athelstan the Saxon, and long after in the Reign of King
Edward IV. the Norman : and whereas the old Constitu-
tions in England have been much interpolated, mangled,
and miserably corrupted, not only with false Spelling, but
even with many false Facts and gross Errors in History and
Chronology, through Length of Time, and the Ignorance
of Transcribers, in the dark illiterate Ages, before the Re-
vival of Geometry and ancient Architecture, to the great
Offence of all the learned and judicious Brethren, whereby
also the Ignorant have been deceiv’d.
And our late worthy Grand-Master, his Grace the Duke
of MONTAGU, having order’d the Author to peruse, cor-
rect, and digest into a new and better Method, the History,
Charges, and Regulations of the ancient Fraternity ; He has
accordingly examin’d several Copies from Italy and Scot-
land, and sundry Parts of England, and from thence, (tho’
on many things erroneous) and from several other ancient
Records of Masons, he has drawn forth the above-writ-
ten new Constitutions, with the Charges and General Reg-
ulations. And the Author having submitted the whole to
the Perusal and Corrections of the late and present Dep-
uty Grand-Masters, and of other learned Brethren ; and
also of the Masters and Wardens of particular Lodges at
their Quarterly Communication ; he did regularly deliver
them to the late Grand-Master himself, the said DUKE of
MONTAGU, for his Examination, Correction, and Appro-
bation ; and his Grace, by the Advice of several Brethren,
order’d the same to be handsomely printed for the use of the
Lodges, tho’ they were not quite ready for the Press during
his Mastership.
THEREFORE We, the present Grand-Master of the
Right Worshipful and most ancient Fraternity of Free and
Accepted Masons, the Deputy Grand-Master, the Grand-
Wardens, the Masters and Wardens of particular Lodges
(with the Consent of the Brethren and Fellows in and about
the Cities of London and Westminster) having also pe-
rused this Performance, Do join our laudable Predecessors
in our solemn Approbation thereof, as what We believe will
fully answer the End proposed ; all the valuable Things of
the old Records being retain’d, the Errors in History and
Chronology corrected, the false Facts and the improper
Words omitted, and the whole digested in a new and better
Method.
And we ordain that these be received in every particular
Lodge under our Cognizance, as the ONLY CONSTI-
TUTIONS of Free and Accepted Masons amongst us, to
be read at the making of new Brethren, or when the Master
shall think fit ; and which the new Brethren should peruse
before they are made.
P H I L I P Duke of W H A R T O N , Grand-Master,
J . T . D E S A G U L I E R S , L.L.D. and F.R.S.
D E P U T Y Grand-Master,
J O S H UA T I M S O N ,                  Grand-Wardens.
W I L L I A M H A W K I N S ,}

--- Sayfa 43 ---
[ 81 ]
I. THOMAS MORRIS, sen. Master.
John Bristow    }
 Wardens.
Abraham Abbot
II. RICHARD HALL, Master.
Philip Wolverston  }
 Wardens.
John Doyer
III. JOHN TURNER, Master.
Anthony Sayer  }
 Wardens.
Edward Cale
IV. Mr. GEORGE PAYNE, Mast.
Stephen Hall, M.D.  }
 Wardens.
Francis Sorell, Esq;
V. Mr. M. BIRKHEAD, Master.
Francis Bayly         }
 Wardens.
Nicholas Abraham
VI. WILLIAM READ, Master.
John Glover    }
 Wardens.
Robert Cordell
VII. HENRY BRANSON, Master.
Henry Lug          }
 Wardens.
John Townsend
VIII.                                      Master.
Jonathan Sisson  }
 Wardens.
John Shipton
IX. GEO. OWEN, M. D.  Master.
Eman Bowen  }
 Wardens.
John Heath
X.                                          Master.
John Lubton   }
 Wardens.
Richard Smith
XI. FRANCIS Earl of Dalkeith, Mr.
Capt. Andrew Robinson  ‡‡Wardens.
Col. Thomas Inwood       ‡
XII. JOHN BEAL, M. D. and
F. R. S.   Master.
Edward Pawlet       ‡ ‡Wardens.
Charles More, Esq;  ‡
XIII. THO. MORRIS, jun. Master.
Joseph Ridler  ‡ ‡Wardens.
John Clark      ‡
XIV. THO. ROBBE, Esq;  Master.
Thomas Grave  ‡ ‡Wardens.
Bray Lane         ‡
XV. JOHN SHEPHERD, Master.
John Senex   ‡ ‡Wardens.
John Bucler  ‡
XVI. J. GEORGES, Esq;  Master.
Robert Gray, Esq;        ‡ ‡Wardens.
Charles Grymes, Esq;  ‡
XVII. JA. ANDERSON, A.M. and
Author of this Book, Master.
Gwin Vaughan, Esq;      ‡‡Wardens.
Walter Greenwood, Esq; ‡
XVIII. THO. HARBIN, Master.
William Attley  ‡ ‡Wardens.
John Saxon        ‡
XIX. ROBERT CAPELL, Master.
Isaac Mansfield  ‡ ‡Wardens.
William Bly       ‡
XX. JOHN GORMAN, Master.
Charles Garey         ‡ ‡Wardens.
Edward Morphey  ‡
I.
A
DAM, the first of humane Kind,
Created with GEOMETRY
Imprinted on his Royal Mind,
Instructed soon his Progeny
CAIN & SETH, who then improv’d
The lib’ral Science in the Art
Of Architecture, which they lov’d,
And to their Offspring did impart.
II.
CAIN a City fair and strong
First built, and call’d it Consecrate,
From Enoch’s Name, his eldest Son,
Which all his Race did imitate :
But godly ENOCH, of Seth’s Loins,
Two Columns rais’d with mighty Skill:
And all his Family enjoins
True Colonading to fullfil.
III.
Our Father NOAH next appear’d
A Mason too divinely taught ;
And by divine Command uprear’d
The ARK, that held a goodly Fraught:
’Twas built by true Geometry,
A Piece of Architecture fine ;
Helpt by his Sons, in number THREE,
Concurring in the grand Design.
IV.
So from the gen’ral Deluge none
Were sav’d, but Masons and their Wives ;
And all Mankind from them alone
Descending, Architecture thrives ;
For they, when multiply’d amain,
Fit to disperse and fill the Earth,
In SHINAR’s large & lovely Plain
To MASONRY gave second Birth.
V.
For most of Mankind were employ’d,
To build the City and the Tow’r ;
The Gen’ral Lodge was overjoy’d,
In such Effects of Masons Pow’r ;
’Till vain Ambition did provoke
Their Maker to confound their Plot ;
Yet tho’ with Tongues confus’d they spoke,
The learned Art they ne’er forgot.
C H O R U S .
Who can unfold the Royal Art ?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song ?
They’re safely kept in Masons HEART
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink the present GRAND
MASTER’s Health.
T H E
Master’s SONG.
O R T H E
HISTORY of MASONRY.
To be sung with a Chorus, when the MASTER shall give Leave (no Bro-
ther being present to whom Singing is disagreeable) either one Part
only, or all together, as he pleases.
PA R T I .
[ 80 ]
And the Masters and Wardens of particular Lodges, viz.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
[ 82 ]
[ 83 ]
I.
T
HUS when from BABEL they disperse
In Colonies to distant Climes,
All Masons true, who could rehearse
Their Works to those of after Times;
King NIMROD fortify’d his Realm,
By Castles, Tow’rs, and Cities fair ;
MITZRA’M, who rul’d at Egypt’s Helm,
Built Pyramids stupendous there.
II.
Nor JAPHET, and his gallant Breed,
Did less in Masonry prevail ;
Nor SHEM, and those that did succeed
To promis’d Blessings by Entail ;
For Father ABRAM brought from UR
Geometry, the Science good ;
Which he reveal’d, without demur,
To all descending from his Blood.
III.
Nay JACOB’s Race at length were taught,
To lay aside the Shepherd’s Crook,
To use Geometry were brought,
Whilst under Phar’oh’s cruel Yoke,
’Till MOSES Master-Mason rose,
And led the HOLY LODGE from thence,
All Masons train’d, to whom he chose,
His curious Learning to dispense.
IV.
AHOLIAB and BEZALEEL,
Inspired Men, the TENT uprear’d ;
Where the Shechinah chose to dwell,
And Geometrick Skill appear’d :
And when these valiant Masons fill’d
Canaan, the learn’d PHENICIANS knew
The Tribes of Isra’l better skill’d
In Architecture firm and true.
V.
For DAGON’s House in Gaza Town,
Artfully propt by COLUMNS two ;
By SAMSON’s mighty Arms pull’d down
On Lords Philistian, whom it slew ;
Tho’ ’twas the finest Fabrick rais’d
By Canaan’s Sons, could not compare
With the Creator’s Temple prais’d,
For glorious Strength and Structure fair.
VI.
But here we stop a while to toast
Our MASTER’s Health and Wardens both;
And warn you all to shun the Coast
Of Samson’s Shipwrackt Fame and Troth;
His Secrets once to WIFE disclos’d
His Strength was fled, his Courage tam’d
To cruel Foes he was expos’d,
And never was a Mason nam’d.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art ?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song ?
They’re safely kept in Masons HEART,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink the Health of the Mas-
ter and Wardens of this particular Lodge.
PA R T I I .
I.
W
e sing of MASONS ancient Fame
When fourscore Thousand Crafts-
men stood,
Under the MASTERS of great Name
Three Thousand and six Hundred good,
Employ’d by SOLOMON the Sire
And Gen’ral MASTER-MASON too ;
As HIRAM was in stately Tyre,
Like Salem built by Masons true.
II.
The Royal Art was then divine,
The Craftsmen counsell’d from above,
The Temple did all Works outshine,
The wond’ring World did all approve,
Ingenious Men, from every Place,
Came to survey the glorious Pile ;
And when return’d, began to trace,
And imitate its lofty Style.
III.
At length the GRECIANS came to know
Geometry, and learnt the Art,
Which great PYTHAGORAS did show,
And Glorious EUCLID did impart ;
Th’ amazing ARCHIMEDES too,
And many other Scholars good ;
’Till ancient ROMANS did review
The Art, and Science understood.
IV.
But when proud ASIA they had quell’d,
And GREECE and EGYPT overcome,
In Architecture they excell’d,
And brought the Learning all to ROME;
Where wise VITRUVIUS, Master prime
Of Architects, the Art improv’d,
In Great AUGUSTUS’ peaceful Time,
When Arts and Artists were belov’d.
V.
They brought the Knowledge from the East ;
And as they made the Nations yield,
They spread it thro’ the North and West,
And taught the World the Art to build,
Witness their Citadels and Tow’rs.
To fortify their Legions fine,
Their Temples, Palaces, and Bow’rs,
That spoke the Masons GRAND DE-
SIGN.
VI.
Thus mighty Eastern Kings, and some
Of Abram’s Race, and Monarchs good,
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Rome,
True Architecture understood
No wonder then if Masons join,
To celebrate those Mason Kings,
With solemn Note and flowing Wine,
Whilst ev’ry Brother jointly sings,
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art ?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song ?
They’re safely kept in Mason’s HEART,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink to the glorious Memory
of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Gen-
try, Clergy, and learned Scholars that ever
propagated the Art.
PA R T I I I .

--- Sayfa 45 ---
[ 84 ]
[ 85 ]
I.
O
H ! glorious Days for Masons wise,
O’er all the Roman Empire when
Their Fame, resounding to the Skies,
Proclaim’d them good and useful Men;
For many Ages thus employ’d,
Until the Goths with warlike Rage,
And brutal Ignorance, destroy’d
The Toil of many a learned Age.
II.
But when the conqu’ring Goths were brought
T’embrace the Christian Faith, they found
The Folly that their Fathers wrought,
In loss of Architecture sound.
At length their Zeal for stately Fanes,
And wealthy Grandeur, when at Peace,
Made them exert their utmost Pains,
Their Gothic Buildings to up-raise.
III.
Thus many a sumptuous lofty Pile
Was rais’d in every Christian Land,
Tho’ not conform to Roman Style,
Yet which did Reverence command :
The King and Craft agreeing still,
In well form’d Lodges to supply
The mournful Want of Roman Skill
With their new sort of Masonry.
IV.
For many Ages this prevails,
Their Work is Architecture deem’d ;
In England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales,
The Craftsmen highly are esteem’d,
By Kings, as Masters of the Lodge,
By many a wealthy noble Peer,
By Lord and Laird, by Priest and Judge,
By all the People every where.
V.
So Masons ancient Records tell,
King Athelstan, of Saxon Blood,
Gave them a Charter free to dwell
In Lofty Lodge, with Orders good,
Drawn from old Writings by his Son,
Prince Edwin, General Master bright,
Who met at York the Brethren soon,
And to that Lodge did all recite.
VI.
Thence were their Laws and Charges fine
In ev’ry Reign observ’d with Care,
Of Saxon, Danish, Norman Line,
Till British Crowns united were :
The Monarch First of this whole Isle
Was learned James a Mason King,
Who first of Kings reviv’d the Style
Of great Augustus : therefore sing.
C H O R U S .
Who can unfold the Royal Art ?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song ?
They’re safely kept in Mason’s Heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink to the happy Memory of
all the Revivers of the ancient Augustan
Style.
PA R T I V .
I.
T
HUS tho’ in Italy the Art
From Gothick Rubbish first was rais’d;
And great Palladio did impart
A Style by Masons justly prais’d :
Yet here this mighty Rival Jones,
Of British Architects the prime,
Did build such glorious Heaps of Stones,
As ne’er were match’d since Cæsar’s
Time.
II.
King Charles the first, a Mason too,
With several Peers and wealthy Men,
Employ’d him & his Craftsmen true,
’Till wretched Civil Wars began.
But after Peace and Crown restor’d,
Tho’ London was in Ashes laid,
By Masons Art and good Accord,
A finer London rear’d its Head.
III.
King Charles the second raised then
The finest Column upon Earth,
Founded St. Paul’s, that stately Fane,
And Royal Change, with Joy and Mirth:
But afterwards the Lodges fail’d ;
Till great Nassau the Tast reviv’d,
Whose bright Example so prevail’d
That ever since the Art has thriv’d.
IV.
Let other Nations boast at will,
Great Britain now will yield to none,
For true Geometry and Skill,
In building Timber, Brick, and Stone;
For Architecture of each sort,
For curious Lodges, where we find
The Noble and the Wise resort,
And drink with Craftsmen true and
kind.
V.
Then let good Brethren all rejoice,
And fill their Glass with chearful
Heart,
Let them express with grateful Voice
The Praises of the wondrous Art ;
Let ev’ry Brother’s Health go round,
Not Fool or Knave but Mason true,
And let our Master’s Fame resound,
The noble Duke of MONTAGU.
C H O R U S .
Who can unfold the Royal Art ?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song ?
They’re safely kept in Mason’s Heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
PA R T V .

--- Sayfa 46 ---
[ 86 ]
[ 87 ]
I.
W
HEN e’er we are alone,
And ev’ry Stranger gone,
In Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring,
Begin to play, begin to sing,
The mighty Genius of the lofty Lodge,
In ev’ry Age
That did engage
And well inspir’d the Prince, the Priest,
the Judge,
The Noble and the Wise to join
In rearing Masons Grand Design.
II.
The Grand Design to rear,
Was ever Mason’s Care,
From Adam down before the Flood,
Whose Art old Noah understood,
And did impart to Japhet, Shem and Ham,
Who taught their Race
To build apace
Proud Babel’s Town and Tow’r, until it came
To be admir’d too much, and then
Dispersed were the Sons of Men.
III.
But tho’ their Tongues confus’d
In distant Climes they us’d,
They brought from Shinar Orders good,
To rear the Art they understood :
Therefore sing first the Princes of the Isles ;
Next Belus great,
Who fixt his Seat
In old Assyria, building stately Piles ;
And Mitzraim’s Pyramids among
The other Subjects of our Song.
IV.
And Shem, who did instil
The useful wondrous Skill
Into the Minds of Nations great :
And Abram next, who did relate
Th’ Assyrian Learning to his Sons, that when
In Egypt’s Land
By Pharoah’s Hand,
Were roughly taught to be most skilful Men;
Till their Grand-Master Moses rose
And them deliver’d from their Foes.
T H E
Warden’s Song ;
O R A N O T H E R
H I S T O R Y o f M A S O N R Y .
C O M P O S ’ D
Since the most noble Prince PHILIP Duke of WHAR-
TON was chosen GR AND-MASTER .
To be sung and play’d at the Quarterly Communication.
V.

But who can sing his Praise,

Who did the Tent upraise ?
 Then sing his Workmen true as Steel,
 Aholiab and Bezaleel ;
Sing Tyre and Sydon, and Phenicians old.

But Samson’s Blot

Is ne’er forgot :
He blabb’d his Secrets to his Wife, that sold
 Her Husband, who at last pull’d down
 The House on all in Gaza Town.
VI.

But Solomon the King

With solemn Note we sing,
 Who rear’d at length the Grand Design,
 By Wealth, and Pow’r, and Art divine;
Helpt by the learned Hiram Tyrian Prince,

By Craftsmen good,

That understood
Wise Hiram Abif’s charming Influence :
 He aided Jewish Masters bright,
 Whose curious Works none can recite.
VII.

These glorious Mason Kings

Each thankful Brother sings,
 Who to its Zenith rais’d the Art,
 And to all Nations did impart
The useful Skill: For from the Temple
fine,

To ev’ry Land,

And foreign Strand,
The Craftsmen march’d, and taught the
Grand Design ;
 Of which the Kings, with mighty Peers,
 And learned Men, were Overseers.
VIII.

Diana’s Temple next,

In Lesser Asia fixt ;
 And Babylon’s proud Walls, the Seat
 Of Nebuchadnezar the Great ;
The Tomb of Mausolus, the Carian King ;

With many a Pile

Of lofty Style
In Africa and Greater Asia, sing,
 In Greece, in Sicily, and Rome,
 That had those Nations overcome.
IX.

Then sing Augustus too,

The Gen’ral Master true,
 Who by Vitruvius did refine
 And spread the Masons Grand Design
Thro’ North and West ; till ancient Brit-
ons chose

The Royal Art

In ev’ry Part,
And Roman Architecture could disclose;
 Until the Saxons warlike Rage
 Destroy’d the Skill of many an Age.
X.

At length the Gothick Style

Prevail’d in Britain’s Isle,
 When Masons Grand Design reviv’d,
 And in their well form’d Lodges thriv’d,
Tho’ not as formerly in Roman Days :

Yet sing the Fanes

Of Saxons, Danes,
Of Scots, Welch, Irish ; but sing first the
Praise
 Of Athelstan and Edwin Prince,
 Our Master of great Influence.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
[ 88 ]
[ 89 ]
XI.

And eke the Norman Kings

The British Mason sings :
 Till Roman Style revived there,
 And British Crowns united were
In learned James, a Mason King, who rais’d

Fine Heaps of Stones

By Inigo Jones,
That rival’d wise Palladio, justly prais’d
 In Italy, and Britain too,
 For Architecture firm and true.
XII.

And thence in ev’ry Reign

Did Masonry obtain
 With Kings, the Noble and the Wise,
 Whose Fame resounding to the Skies,
Excites the present Age in Lodge to join,

And Aprons wear,

With Skill and Care,
To raise the Masons ancient Grand Design,
 And to revive th’ Augustan Style
 In many an artful glorious Pile.
XIII.

From henceforth ever sing

The Craftsman and the King,
 With Poetry and Musick sweet
 Resound their Harmony compleat ;
And with Geometry in skilful Hand,

Due Homage pay,

Without Delay,
To Wharton’s noble Duke our Master Grand
 He rules the Free-born Sons of Art,
 By Love and Friendship, Hand and Heart.
CHORUS.

Who can rehearse the Praise,

In soft Poetick Lays,
 Or solid Prose, of Masons true,
 Whose Art transcends the common View?
Their Secrets, ne’er to Strangers yet expos’d,

Preserv’d shall be

By Masons Free,
And only to the ancient Lodge disclos’d ;
 Because they’re kept in Masons Heart
 By Brethren of the Royal Art.
To fill up this Page, it is thought not amiss to insert here a Paragraph from
an old Record of Masons, viz. The Company of Masons, being otherwise
termed Free Masons, of auncient Staunding and good Reckoning, by means of
affable and kind Meetings diverse Tymes, and as a loving Brotherhood should
use to doe, did frequent this mutual Assembly in the Tyme of King Henry V.
the 12th Year of his most gracious Reign. And the said Record describing a Coat
of Arms, much the same with That of the LONDON COMPANY of Free-
men Masons, it is generally believ’d that the said Company is descended of
the ancient Fraternity ; and that in former Times no Man was made Free of
that Company until he was install’d in some Lodge of Free and Accepted Ma-
sons, as a necessary Qualification. But that laudable Practice seems to have
been long in Dissuetude. The Brethren in foreign Parts have also discover’d
that several noble and ancient Societies and Orders of Men have derived their
Charges and Regulations from the Free-Masons, (which are now the most an-
cient Order upon Earth) and perhaps were originally all Members too of
the said ancient and worshipful Fraternity. But this will more fully appear
in due Time.
I.
H
AIL Masonry ! thou Craft divine !
Glory of Earth, from Heav’n reveal’d;
Which dost with Jewels precious shine,

From all but Masons Eyes conceal’d.
C H O R U S .
Thy Praises due who can rehearse
In nervous Prose, or flowing Verse ?
II.
As Men from Brutes distinguish’d are,

A Mason other Men excels ;
For what’s in Knowledge choice and rare

But in his Breast securely dwells ?
C H O R U S .
His silent Breast and faithful Heart
Preserve the Secrets of the Art.
III.
From scorching Heat, and piercing Cold;

From Beasts, whose Roar the Forest rends;
From the Assaults of Warriours bold

The Masons Art Mankind defends.
C H O R U S .
Be to this Art due Honour paid,
From which Mankind receives such Aid.
IV.
Ensigns of State, that feed our Pride,

Distinctions troublesome, and vain !
By Masons true are laid aside :

Art’s free-born Sons such Toys disdain;
C H O R U S .
Ennobled by the Name they bear,
Distinguished by the Badge they wear.
V.
Sweet Fellowship, from Envy free :

Friendly Converse of Brotherhood ;
The Lodge’s lasting Cement be !

Which has for Ages firmly stood.
C H O R U S .
A Lodge, then built, for Ages past
Has lasted, and will ever last.
VI.
Then in our Songs be Justice done
To those who have enrich’d the Art,
From Jabal down to Burlington,
And let each Brother bear a Part.
C H O R U S .
Let noble Masons Healths go round ;
Their Praise in lofty Lodge resound.
T H E
FELLOW-CR AFTS SONG:
By our Brother C H A R L E S D E L A FA Y E , Esq;
To be sung and play’d at the G R A N D - F E A S T .

--- Sayfa 48 ---
[ 90 ]
[ 91 ]
I.
 C
OME let us prepare,
We Brothers that are
Assembled on merry Occasion :

Let’s drink, laugh, and sing ;

Our Wine has a Spring :
Here’s a Health to an Accepted Mason.
II.

The World is in pain

Our Secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on ;

They ne’er can divine

The Word or the Sign
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.
III.

’Tis This, and ’tis That,

They cannot tell What,
Why so many Great Men of the Nation

Should Aprons put on,

To make themselves one
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
IV.

Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,

Have laid by their Swords,
Our Myst’ry to put a good Grace on,

And ne’er been asham’d

To hear themselves nam’d
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
V.

Antiquity’s Pride

We have on our side,
And it maketh Men just in their Station:

There’s nought but what’s good

To be understood
By a Free and an Accepted Mason.
VI.

Then join Hand in Hand,

T’each other firm stand,
Let’s be merry, and put a bright Face on:

What Mortal can boast

So NOBLE A TOAST,
As a Free and an Accepted Mason ?
T H E
Enter’d ’PRENTICES SONG.
By our late B R O T H E R
Mr.  M A T T H E W B I R K H E A D , deceas’d.
To be sung when all grave Business is over, and with the MASTER’s Leave.
I.
W
HAT though they call us Masons
Fools,
We prove by Geometry and Rules,
We’ve Arts are taught in all our Schools;

They charge us falsely then.
We make it plainly to appear,
By our Behaviour every where
That where you meet a Mason, there

You meet a Gentleman.
II.
’Tis true we once have charged been
With Disobedience to our Queen ;
But after Monarchs plain have seen,

The Secrets they have sought.
We hatch no Plots against the State,
Nor ’gainst great Men in Power prate
But all that’s generous, good and great

Is daily by us taught.
III.
What noble Structures do we see
By ancient Brethren raised be !
The World’s surpriz’d, and shall not we

Then honour Masonry ?
Let those that do despise the Art
Live in a Cave in some Desart,
And herd with beasts from Men apart,

For their Stupidity.
IV.
View but those Savage Nations, where
No Masonry did e’er appear,
What strange unpolish’d Brutes they are!

Then honour Masonry.
It makes us courteous, easy, free,
Generous, honourable, and gay ;
What other Art the like can say ?

Here’s a Health to Masonry.
A  New  S ONG .

--- Sayfa 49 ---
L O N D O N , this 17th Day of January, 1722,3.
A
T the Quarterly Communication, This Book, which
was undertaken at the Command of His GRACE the
DUKE of MONTAGU, our late Grand-Master, having
been regularly approved in Manuscript by the Grand-Lodge,
was this Day produced here in Print, and approved by the
SOCIET Y : Wherefore we do hereby Order the same to be
Published, and recommend it for the Use of the LODGES.
PHILIP DUKE of WHARTON, Grand-Master.
J. T. DESAGULIERS, Deputy Grand-Master.
F I N I S.
[ 92 ]
Editorial Note
James Anderson (c.1679–1739) was born and edu-
cated in Aberdeen, Scotland. He was ordained a minister
in the Church of Scotland in 1707, and moved to London,
where he ministered to the Glass House Street congregation
until 1710, and to the Presbyterian church in Swallow Street
until 1734, and at Lisle Street Chapel until his death. He
is reported to have lost a large sum of money in the South
Sea Company crash of 1720. Anderson was a Master of a
Masonic lodge and a Grand Warden of the Grand Lodge.
He was commissioned to write this history of the Free-Ma-
sons by the Grand Lodge of London and Westminster in
September of 1721, and it was published in 1723. A second
edition, much expanded, appeared in 1738. The work was
translated into many languages, including Dutch (1736),
German (1741), and French (1745). His other published
works include Royal Genealogies (1732), A Defence of Ma-
sonry (1738?), News from Elysium (1739) , and A Genealogi-
cal History of the House of Yvery (1742). His authorship of
the present work is declared on page 80.
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) came to Phila-
delphia from Boston in 1723, and opened his own printing
business in 1728, in partnership with Hugh Meredith, who
left in 1730. He began to publish the Pennsylvania Gazette
in October of 1729 and became the official printer for the
colony of Pennsylvania in 1731. Franklin was admitted to
the St. John’s Lodge of Free-Masons in January of 1731, be-
came a junior grand warden of the lodge in June of 1732, and
Grand Master of Masons of Pennsylvania in June of 1734.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
He advertised his edition of The Constitutions of the Free-Ma-
sons as “just published” in the Pennsylvania Gazette for May
16, 1734 (at a price of 2s.6d., or bound at 4s.). Franklin’s
connections with Masonry were very important for his pro-
fessional, intellectual,  and political careers, and he main-
tained them throughout his life, not only in America, but in
England and France, as well.
The edition of The Constitutions of the Free-Masons that
Franklin produced in Philadelphia in 1734 is a fairly faith-
ful reprinting of the London original of eleven years ear-
lier. It omits only the musical scores for some of the songs,
the engraved frontispiece and coat of arms of the Duke of
Montagu, and the Hebrew type occurring in the note to
page 15 in this edition. In general, it is not as ornate or as
typographically complex as the London edition, although
clearly the effort was made to produce an attractive and
fully ornamented book. It consisted of 96 pages, with the
last two blank, on imported Genoese paper, with the pages
measuring 8 inches high by 5.7 inches wide. In August of
1734, Franklin sent 70 copies to the Masonic Lodge in Bos-
ton and, at some point, another 25 copies to Charleston.
Seventeen copies of the edition are known to survive. Fac-
simile editions have appeared in New York in 1905 and in
Washington, D.C., in 1924. (See C. William Miller, Benja-
min Franklin’s Philadelphia Printing, 1728-1766: A Descrip-
tive Bibliography, [Philadelphia: American Philosophical
Society, 1974], pp. 39-40.)
One of the five songs (“A New Song,” page 91) in the
book appeared in print for the first time in the 1734 edi-
tion. It is not known if Franklin composed this song, but
it is known that he composed another (“Fair Venus Calls”)
around 1741 that continued to be sung at Masonic meetings
into the nineteenth century.  (See J. A. Leo Lemay, Benja-
min Franklin: A Documentary History ; available online at
http://www.english.udel.edu/lemay/franklin/, and Leon-
ard W. Labaree, ed., The Papers of Benjamin Franklin, v. 1,
pp. 373-76.)
The text of this edition was transcribed from digi-
tal page images of the 1734 edition accessed online in the
Early American Imprints, Series I: Evans, 1639-1800, no.
3744, which is derived from microfilm of the copy held in
the Henry E. Huntington Library in San Marino, Cali-
fornia. The London edition of 1723 is available online as
digital page images—in the Eighteenth Century Collec-
tions Online series—and it has been used for reference and
comparison.
The design and layout of this edition are based on the
Philadelphia edition of 1734. The text typeface is IM Fell
DW Pica, originally cut by Peter de Walpergen, and dig-
itized and furnished by Igino Marini (available online at
http://iginomarini.com/fell.html). Larger type in the ti-
tles and text of the “Dedication” is IM Fell Double Pica,
from the same source. Some accomodations have been made
in the composition: in deference to modern readers, the long
“s” and its ligatures have not been used, nor have the ligatures
for “ª”, “¤”, “¥”, “{”, “¦”, “}”, and “¬”—in order to
allow for easier and more accurate searching and excerpting.
Paragraph-long quotations have been rendered in the modern
style, rather than beginning each line with quotation marks.
One curious feature deserves special note: in the list of “Mas-
ters and Wardens of Particular Lodges” in the “Approbation”
section, the typesetter apparently ran out of brackets and used
double-daggers to indicate the last ten pairs of Wardens; this
feature is preserved in this edition. The ornaments reproduced
in this electronic version are reproductions or reconstructions
of those found in the printed Philadelphia edition.
94
95

--- Sayfa 51 ---
This edition retains the spelling, capitalization, italics,
and punctuation of the 1734 Philadelphia edition. No at-
tempt has been made to standardize spellings or orthogra-
phy. Some typographical errors have been corrected, and a
list of emendations is given below, keyed to page and line
number of the present edition (the line count includes chap-
ter headings, but not running heads or hairlines):
Page.line
1734 reading

emended to
10.29
perpendciular

perpendicular
20.20
which

(which
22.5
PYTAHGORAS

PYTHAGORAS
24.31
exellent

excellent
33.25
Conjurnation

Conjuration
40.30*
TRINITY COLLEGE TRINITY-COLLEGE
41.37
Fief

Fife
43.10*
County

County,
43.12*
Drumlanrig Castle
Drumlanrig-Castle
43.18
Clysdaleshire

Clydsdaleshire
43.19*
Wanstead House

Wanstead-House
43.21*
Mereworth Castle

Mereworth-Castle
43.26
Earle

Earl
48.16
may distinguish’d

may be distinguish’d
80.9b
THO

THO.
80.28b
Master

Master.
83.38
belov’d

belov’d.
83.29b
Art

Art.
85.29
thriv’d

thriv’d.
87.6b
King

King ;
88.5b
compleat ?

compleat ;
90.22b
T’each each

T’each
91.14b
are

are !
96
97
The five emendations indicated with asterisks represent occa-
sions where the text of the Philadelphia edition departs from its
London source-document within a list or context where it is other-
wise faithful to that source. In these five cases, the reading of the
London text has been adopted (i.e., four hyphens and a comma
have been restored). In all other cases, other than the correction of
typographical errors, the Philadelphia edition has been followed.
The following bibliographies and webliographies may be help-
ful to those seeking further sources for research on Masonry:
“Masonry and the Printed Word,” National Heritage Museum, Lex-
ington, MA 02421   http://www.monh.org/Default.aspx?tabid=359
Brandy Farese, “Freemasonry in the Eighteenth-Century,”
http://www.louisville.edu/a-s/english/subcultures/colors/black/bljett01/farebiblio.html
“DOCUMENTARY HISTORY OF PHILANTHROPY AND VOL-
UNTARISM IN THE UNITED STATES, 1600-1900,”
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~phall/dochistcontents.html
“Freemasonry, “  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freemasonry
Walgren, Kent Logan, Freemasonry, Anti-Masonry, and Illuminism in
the United States, 1734-1850, A Bibliography. Worcester, MA:  American
Antiquarian Society,  2003.
Paul Royster
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
February 14, 2006