--- Sayfa 2 ---
PROPHET
MUHAMMAD
ii
The Sultan of Hearts
Dr. Re~it Haylamaz
I
~
~·
i
II
New Jersey

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Copyright © 20 17 by Blue Dome Press
20 19 18 17 1 2 3 4
Originally published in Turkish as Goniil Tahtimizm E:jsiz Sultam
Efendimiz in 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and
retrieval system without permission in writing from the Publisher.
Published by Blue Dome Press
335 Clifton Avenue, Clifton
New Jersey 07011, USA
www.bluedomepress.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available
Haylamaz, Resit.
[Gonul tahtimizin essiz sultani efendimiz. English]
Prophet Muhammad: the sultan of hearts I Resit Haylamaz.
1. Muhammad, Prophet, -632--Biography. 2. Islam--History. I. Title.
BP75.H355 2013
297.6'3--dc23
2013029084
Translated by Nagihan Haliloglu
Digital ISBN: 978-1-59784-683-7

--- Sayfa 4 ---
PREFACE
A
fter a long and painstaking study, our publishing house has the honor and
pleasure of bringing you this book Prophet Muhammad: The Sultan of
Hearts about the exemplary life of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings
be upon him, the Pride for the Universe. Without breaking its ties from the tradition of
sirah, or biography of the Prophet, this book speaks of the life of the Messenger of
Allah, with the aim of revealing certain details that have usually stayed in between
lines and that could help shape the future. The book is new and original in the sense
that it transports the reader to centuries ago and makes connections with our own day;
it makes us aware of the presence of Abu Lahab who has not died and draws our
attention to Abu Jahl who still shuttles across the continents; while doing that it is also
a handbook full of messages that call the Abu Bakrs, Umars, Uthmans and Alis of our
age to duty. Today, we need biographies of the Prophet that put the emphasis on the
mission of the Messenger of Allah in society as a member of that society rather than
overemphasizing wars as if they are the most significant moments of his blessed,
fruitful life, and the book that is in your hands is an effort to see to this need.
We hope that the reader will find in this book a life story whose milestones are
determined not by battles, but the life story of a consummate human being who is
affectionate in his feelings and responses, who is the perfect guide for the society in
every aspect. It should not be forgotten that in order to reach a turning point such as
Badr, there is the ten day period in which our beloved Prophet left Medina and then
returned to it, and the Badr battle itself is only a five or six hour event within this ten
day period. Undoubtedly the Messenger of Allah spent the rest of his time with his
Companions as well. It is very important that this very precious time spent with the
Prophet, each minute as precious as gold, should not be overshadowed by an event
that took on five or six hours, and the work in your hand speaks of what happened in
the remaining nine and a half days in Badr, it tries to focus on details that might seem
secondary and thus portray the whole picture.
This work has been penned with a simple, elegant and fluent idiom, and it is

--- Sayfa 5 ---
realistic when it comes to relating incidents. It is a text wrought with emotions, a text
that aims to lift constraints of time and space if only for a while, a text that connects
the Age of Happiness to our day so that this life that was lived for others becomes part
of the reader's experience and thus the followers of the Prophet may realize the
mission that they have been entrusted with.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
INTRODUCTION
N
ow is a time when with each passing day, we are more aware ofthe value of
and the need for the message brought by the Safekeeper of Humanity, peace
and blessings be upon him. On the one hand, we are swept by material
development, and on the other we are heading towards a total depletion of peace, a
state of affairs in which humanity is being sacrificed in the name of development and
this makes it clear to everyone that the road we are on is far from being healthy.
Humanity is faced with two alternatives; either it will continue this race towards the
nadir-as no species has done before-and make the world into its own prison, or it
will come together on its shared humanity and basic values and find itself anew; it will
rebuild the world and will enjoy the happiness of finding peace which it has lost quite
some time ago.
Here we find our beloved Prophet standing at the crossroads with his open heart,
inviting everyone to his own realm; with his life-giving messages he calls humanity to
the magical atmosphere in which one can rebuild both one's world and Hereafter. In
his deep world of affection there is space even for those dealers in hatred who
attempted at his life at every given opportunity. In his world, people were neither
distanced nor "otherized." We see that among those who were up in arms against him,
some came to him and awakened to the truth-and then they became his most devoted
Companions, doing their utmost to defend him, atoning for their previous behavior.
Here is Abu Jahl's son Ikrima and Suhayl ibn Amr, we see Amr ibnu'l-As and Walid
ibn Uqba ibn Abi Muayt, there is Abu Sufyan and Hind, there is Wahshi and Khalid
ibn Walid ... There are thousands of such examples, indeed.
The Messenger of Allah is the bearer of the universal message that embraces
everyone. His banner is big enough to provide shade for the whole of humanity. The
twenty three years in which he shared his message are full of examples of how one can
enter the shade of his banner. As such, the people represented in the examples of the
imam (Abu Bakr) whom he put to the mihrab and behind whom he prayed as he was
about to leave this world and the young soldier (U sam a) whom he made a commander

--- Sayfa 7 ---
by giving him the flag of the army are very important indeed. For each heart who has
declared its bondage to him and who want to be like U sama, servant to the message
that was entrusted to the Prophet, it is essential to read his pure life, to know his life
and to live accordingly, to be enthused with the will to let his life live in the life of
others ... This book is the product of such an intention. With this book our aim is not
to speak about him with our own descriptions, but to let him be observed in his own
actions. We believe that this is not a biography of the Prophet, but an attempt to record
historical awareness through the character, attitude, statements and attributes of his
friends. We do not want to present a life that was lived alone but in connection with
his Companions, to present a life model that has been miraculously constructed.
There is no doubt that the noble Prophet wanted to embrace everybody with
affection; he did not want to reciprocate with violence even to those who set up
devious traps for him, meaning him bodily harm. Even though the first fifteen years of
the twenty three years of his life when he delivered his message was a time full of
oppression and torture, he never once thought of taking a hard stance and resort to
violence, he chose the route of tolerance, he responded to those who bared their teeth
and raised their hands against him with absolute patience, and when war became
inescapable, it was again not him who initiated it; however he did not leave caution
and he calculated the worst possibilities; when it came to fighting in battle he did not
shy away from it either. All his wars were for defense, all his campaigns were efforts
aimed at ensuring security and safety. It is interesting to note that during the eight
years of hostilities between the Muslims and the polytheist Meccans, all the blood that
was spilled on both sides comes nowhere near the blood that is spilled today in our
"modem" world-we know the latter to the extent that we can observe from the
media.
This was his way when he was under oppression, and this attitude of reconciliation
would continue when his was the voice that all listened to, when he became sovereign.
He never chose the route of hatred and even to those who were ready to submit their
necks to his justice, he would show the way to freedom and forgive them all.
Today, we can be happy to the extent that we know him; blessed to the extent that
we are informed about his life. In other words, to the extent that we need him, we will
have no need for others, and to the extent that we stay away from his excellent
example, we are doomed to be beggars waiting at the doors of others, our honor thus
trampled upon.
Indeed, the various issues we are faced with today make us aware of the need to
read his unique life anew, to interpret the steps he has taken once more, to re-orient

--- Sayfa 8 ---
our lives taking the details in his actions and words into consideration, to analyze the
arguments he made when he lent a helping hand. Are we now not more aware of the
need to reshape our lives according to his wishes and requests?
A Few Reminders
Before I move on to the study properly, let me mention a few reminders that will make
it easier to benefit from the study more efficiently, and a few facts.
To start with, this study is not a reinterpretation of the events of the Age of
Happiness with references to its origins and aftermath, rather it has been prepared by
taking recourse the basic and primary biographies of the noble Prophet and accounts
of the wars such as Ibn Hisham's Sirah, Ibn Sa' d's Tabaqat, Ibn Kathir's Al-Bidaya
wa 'n-Nihaya, Halabi's Sirah, Ibn Hajar's !saba, lbnu'l-Athir's Usdu 'l-Ghaba, Ibn
Abdilbarr's Istiab and Tabari's Tarikh, along with basic Tafiir (exegesis) sources and
Hadith literature known as Al-Kutub al-Tis 'a (the nine canonical collections of the
Hadith).
Apart from this, all biographies of our beloved Prophet which have been accepted
by the general public have been studied, and other, more contemporary works have
also been referenced with regard to certain interpretations and arranging chapters.
Accordingly, I have not given footnotes to every reference in order to avoid cluttering,
and I have given footnotes only to the passages that refer to things that have not been
treated in the popular biographies of the noble Prophet. In these footnotes, the digital
versions of such works as Al-Maktabatu 's-Sirah, Al-Maktabatu 'l-Al.fiyah and Al-
Maktabatu 'sh-Shamilah have been used. Rather than quoting different sources
separately, for the sake of brevity I connected different reports and then gave the
names of the sources consulted in the footnote. In some other cases, when reports
differ, I chose one of them to put into the body of the text, and discussed the different
aspects of the others in the footnote. In translations, rather than applying a word for
word, mechanical translation, I prioritized translating the content; sometimes I took
the route of summary, and sometimes I provided a synthesis of all the hadith
concerning a particular subject-all this was done for the sake of avoiding repetition.
Another aspect that sets the book you have in your hands apart from the others is
that it gives frequent examples of how the "Divine address" transformed the society
with every single verse that was revealed. This means I have made use of what is
known as the Asbab al-Nuzuli 'l Qur 'an (Reasons of Revelation of the Qur'anic
verses) in the field of Tafiir in re-constructing the life of the noble Prophet.
This style lays bare the role of the Qur'an in the education of the large congregation

--- Sayfa 9 ---
of the Companions, and with it reveals the kind of teaching and drill that the
Messenger of Allah exercised in his close circle.
This method is known as the Asbab al-Wurudi 'l-Hadith (Reasons or circumstances
surrounding the generation of a hadith) and it aims to inform the reader of the
developments that preceded and followed after the statements of our beloved Prophet,
in order to point both to the educative aspect of the Qur'an and the role of our noble
Prophet in transforming people's lives. This study also aims to look at the spiritual
state of people at the time, including those who were both for and against the Allah's
Messenger's mission, and to describe the psychology of people of the period. It is
clear that much more needs to be done by way of carrying the story of his life along
with his friends' to our time. Each piece of knowledge that is attained leads to other
information, and all these mean new opportunities for his message to reach people in
the world. Each door that opens up to his life, are harbingers of thousand other doors
that are waiting to be opened. In order not to lose our step as we make our way
towards the future, it is crucial that these doors keep opening!
If we have made mistakes on this road that we have set upon, with much doubt for
own caliber for such work, we have our heads bowed and ask for forgiveness from the
Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, if we have injured him in any
way-it is he who does not withhold his forgiveness even from the likes of Abu Jahl
and so we duly ask to enter under his wings of devotion.
We consider it a great gain if the reader relates to us any error he or she stumbles
upon; should however, the reader wish to express praise, we would be grateful if they
say "May Allah be pleased with your work" from the heart-this will be the greatest
happiness for those who have contributed to the work from its beginning to the end.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
THE VOICE THAT ECHOES IN
THE VALLEY OF BAKKA
A
voice from many centuries ago echoes in the valley of Bakka: "Ibrahim!
Where are you going, leaving us alone in this deserted and desolate valley?"
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, who is the pinnacle of trust and
faith, makes no move that could be regarded as an answer to this echoing voice. He
was doing only what he had been told to do and did not want to compromise the
orders he had taken. This was a Divine directive; he was to lay the foundations of the
place that would be honored by the Last Prophet to come centuries later but whose
good tidings had already been given.
On the other hand, there was Hajar, who did not know the full extent of Prophet
Ibrahim's reasons, and whose fear was mounting with every step that took her
husband away from her. In that state of desperation she called out once again, her
voice resonating with anguish: "Ibrahim! Where are you going, leaving us alone in
this deserted and desolate valley?"
It was clear that Prophet Ibrahim, who was following his steps back from where he
had come from, was not going to answer her call. It was no use running after him with
her baby cradled in her arms. It was as if Prophet Ibrahim who had prayed for a child
from his Lord for so many years had disappeared, and now walking away from her
was another man. There was no doubt that such a change could only have been
wrought by a directive from the Lord. That is why Hajar asked: "Has Allah ordered
you to do this?"
Prophet Ibrahim who had not responded till that moment answered this question
with his trustworthy voice:
''Yes!"
If it was Him who had ordered this, than it was going to be Him who would take
care of them. Having entered His protection, she would not fear either the wilderness
in this desolate valley or the lack of protection from their head of the family. That's

--- Sayfa 11 ---
why when she turned on her toes to go back with her baby in her arms, she said:
"Then He will not let us perish. "l
This sentence marked the end of the dialogue between the father and the family.
Prophet Ibrahim was by now far away, and Hajar had returned to the spot where she
had been left with her baby son Ismail.
Prophet Ibrahim's Prayers
When Prophet Ibrahim reached a point where he would be invisible to his family he
turned back and raising his hands up at the sky supplicated to his Lord the
Compassionate in the following way: "Dear Lord! I have placed a part of my family
near Your holy temple in a valley where nothing grows."
As is clear from his expression "I have placed," he foresees that this valley where
one can see no trace of life will be a location where things can be placed, that it will be
inhabited. This was an important place, where the first building was ever built on
earth. This was the valley of Bakka, where the first and the last would meet.
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, continued his supplication in the following
way: "Dear Lord! I did this so that they may perform the Prayers as they should be."
It was clear that the main goal of coming here was once again the duty of the
servant to the Lord, a duty that brings the two closer. The Personage who would
embody this duty in himself would come to the world in this place; the world would
experience the true meaning of the words of submission and devotion, with the light
that would emanate from this place.
Prophet Ibrahim had another request:
Our Lord! I have settled some of my offspring (Ishmael and his
descendants) in an uncultivable valley near Your Sacred House, so that,
our Lord, they may establish the Prayer; so make the hearts of people
incline towards them, and provide them with the produce of earth (by
such means as trade), so that they may give thanks (constantly from the
heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling Your commandments).
(Ibrahim 14:37)
His supplication was part telling the Lord that he had done his duty, and part asking
Him to realize the good tidings that He had promised. In his ears was the echo of the
glad news he had been informed just at the time when he was sharing the joy of his
wife's pregnancy at a rather advanced age: "Verily Hajar will bring a boy into the
world and the hand of one from his lineage will rule over the whole of humanity, and

--- Sayfa 12 ---
all hands will open up to him, in reverence and humility."~
There could be no greater happiness for Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him; he
had received the reward for waiting patiently for years, without losing hope, and a
reward that was not limited to the son that was going to be born to him. . . The
appearance of the Last Prophet from among his grandchildren, and the glad tiding that
humanity would unite under him.
The following would be revealed to Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, as he
prayed and supplicated:
I have accepted your prayer concerning Ismail and I have given him
bounty. Many generations will come after him, but then one day from his
lineage there will come twelve tribes, and I will make him the leader of a
great multitude!2.
This was the experience that Prophet Ibrahim was walking with as he moved away
from his wife, and he was struggling to keep with the Divine order that had been
entrusted to him.
Building a New Civilization
After Prophet Ibrahim, upon a Divine command, left his wife and baby son on a bare
desert valley which was to become the cradle of a new civilization, Hajar was
worrying about her son in this valley; she was running to and fro in order to find water
to drink. The only thing that gave her hope in this desolate situation was her trust in
her Lord. Maybe she remembered the angel she had met when she was pregnant, and
the things that the angel said. One day when she had entrusted to her Lord all her
troubles, an angel appeared and said to her: "Do not worry or fear! For with the son
that you are pregnant with now, Allah wants to grace the world."
This wasn't all that the angel said; he had also whispered that the name of the boy
was to be Ismail and then added:
The boy who will be born will be peerless and he will be the hope of all
humanity. His hand will be above all others', he will reign over all, and all
others' hands will be with him. Everyone will shape themselves according
to his orders and directives. He will also be the possessor of all his
brothers' lands.:!
These were exactly in keeping with what had been told to Prophet Ibrahim. Even
though she believed these good tidings fully, it was essential to seek that which would
bring them about and that's why in an effort to find water or any sign of life Hajar

--- Sayfa 13 ---
started to race anxiously between the two hillocks of Safa and Marwa. The water in
the water skin had finished, and Hajar, the affectionate mother, was now in fear. While
running, she was also keeping an eye on her son, and was afraid that something might
happen to him.
The space between Safa and Marwa had become her orbit. When she reached the
skirts of these hills she would hasten more and tum to race towards the other hill. This
anxious run repeated seven times. When she came to the hill of Marwa, she was
startled by a voice. This voice seemed to be calling her to her son. It was indeed so;
there was an angel standing next to her beloved son. She looked carefully. She
couldn't believe what she saw; there was a spring at her son's feet and it kept bubbling
in the middle of the desert. She made haste towards her son, and heard the angel say
the following to her: "Do not be afraid of being lost or of perishing! For here is the
house of Allah. It will be built by this boy and his father. Allah will never let perish
[t]his family ... "2.
Mission completed, the angel disappeared and Hajar and her son were left alone
once again. But water, which has always been a source of life, would attract people
there, and the life that was already fated for Hajar and her son Ismail would start to be
built around them, the foundations of the city that would see the coming of the
Awaited Prophet would be laid.
Not much later the Jurhum tribe came there and when they saw signs of life they
asked Hajar's permission to settle and they started to build the city of Mecca. Thus,
between the rocky mountain ranges of Paran a new life started that would culminate
with the coming of the Messenger of Allah who would give new life to humanity. The
Zamzam water gave life to the desert and it became fertile land, and this fertility
attracted people, and in between these rocky mountain ranges of somber black, a
process would start that would lead to the appearance of the Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him.
Prophet Ibrahim's prayer was answered and now this desolate valley was blessed
with the Zamzam water and it was attracting people. This gift of water would result in
all sorts of goods and bounty arriving in the valley and the people here would
experience a continuous blessing.
In the meanwhile Ismail grew up and now was a young man. He married a girl from
the Jurhum tribe, and this union that started with the Zamzam water was consolidated
with family ties and it laid the strong foundations for the future.
Prophet Ibrahim came now and then to visit Hajar and Ismail, and after staying for a

--- Sayfa 14 ---
while he would leave them and go back. Then some more time passed. This time
Prophet Ibrahim came not to return immediately but to stay for a long while to rebuild
the Ka'ba. This was Divine Will and Prophet Ibrahim was coming to Mecca in order
to fulfill this duty. He started to build the Ka'ba with his son Ismail and thus started to
call humanity to a source which would never be abandoned. On the one hand they
continued the construction and on the other they opened their hands to their Lord and
prayed:
Dear Lord! Please accept this from us. There is no doubt that You are the
One who hears and You are the One who knows! Dear Lord! Make Ismail
and I Muslims whose heads will be bowed only in Your presence, and
make Muslim people from our own lineage who bow only in Your name,
and show us the ways of worship and prayer. Respond to our
supplications of forgiveness with grace. Verily, You are the Forgiver, You
are the Compassionate!
The prayers of these Prophets made in this place of the first abode on earth and this
place of the projection of the skies would of course be accepted.
The words of Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, who attained such heights in
prayer, would come to the mention of the Last Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him:
Our Lord! Raise up among that community a Messenger of their own,
reciting to them Your Revelations, and instructing them in the Book (that
You will reveal to him) and the Wisdom, and purifying them (of false
beliefs and doctrines, of sins and all kinds of uncleanness). Surely You
are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise. (al-Baqarah
2: 129)
The wise Prophet that Prophet Ibrahim was asking Allah to send in this prayer was
of course the Last Prophet, Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, for
there is no other Prophet among the progeny of Prophet Ismail, peace be upon him,
other than Muhammad. The value of this sincere prayer was great in the presence of
Allah. Indeed, centuries later the Messenger of Allah would say in gratitude: "I am the
prayer of my forefather Ibrahim, the good tidings of my brother Isa (Jesus), and my
mother's dream."£
Another point that shows that we should learn fidelity from its rightful
practitioner. .. An incorrigible example of being true to your promise and responding
to prayer with prayer! The followers of the noble Prophet, who were mentioned in
Prophet Ibrahim's prayer so that they may come into being, will express their gratitude

--- Sayfa 15 ---
in their own prayers in the final sitting of each of their Daily Prayers as they call
Allah's blessings and peace upon Prophet Ibrahim and his family together with
Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, and his family: "0 Allah!
Bestow Your blessings upon our master Muhammad and the Family of Muhammad,
as You bestowed Your blessings upon Ibrahim and the Family of Ibrahim."
There is a version of this loyalty, regarding Prophet Ibrahim, as well. The good
tidings of the beloved Prophet's coming was so inscribed on his soul that even in
compliments paid to him he would remember Muhammad, peace and blessings be
upon him, he would say it was the Awaited Sultan who deserved all the praise.
Allah the Almighty put Prophet Ibrahim to various tests and He praised Ibrahim,
who accomplished each given task, in the following way: "I will make you the imam,
or leader, for people."
This was a very great praise and it needed to be returned with gratitude and
humbleness. Humbleness would be the rightful response as testimony to his gratitude.
However, this wasn't exactly what Prophet Ibrahim did. He said: "From my progeny,
too!"
And this reflex on the part of Prophet Ibrahim needs to be considered. It was also a
manifestation of what kind of information his subconscious was already fed with. In
truth, these unexpected situations are moments when real intentions of people are
revealed. Allah made it clear to Prophet Ibrahim that such an important duty as
imamah, or leadership, cannot be left to people like the Children of Israel, who at the
time, were riddled with superstitions: "(I will appoint from among those who merit it.
But) My covenant does not include the wrongdoers" (al-Baqarah 2: 124).
And this expression made it clear that the covenant would not be renewed in the
near future, and that the search for the imam would have to be postponed to the
coming centuries.
This also verified the fact that wrongdoing and Prophethood cannot be reconciled,
and that due to their iniquity and superstitious practices the Children of Israel had lost
this great honor, and now this honor was transferred to the lineage of Prophet Ismail.
Accordingly, the imam that Prophet Ibrahim was calling out for would be from the
lineage of his son Ismail whom he had left in that desolate valley.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
l Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 131152
:?. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 11153
'2-Jbid.
:lfbid.
2. Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 13/230
2 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 14/313; Hakim, Al-Al-Mustadrak, 2/453 (3566)

--- Sayfa 17 ---
THE SHARED REQUEST OF ALL PROPHETS
T
he good tidings concerning the Last Messenger were not limited to what
Prophet Ibrahim had experienced. Starting from Prophet Adam, peace be
upon him, to our day, all Prophets spoke of him, and all Prophets that came
after Prophet Ibrahim shared this same good news with their followers, for this was a
duty of theirs. Allah the Almighty had called out to them and had made a covenant
with them in the following way:
And when Allah took compact with the Prophets: 'That I have given you
a Book and Wisdom; then there will come to you a Messenger confirming
what (of the Divine Revelations) you already possess-you shall certainly
believe in him and you shall certainly help him.' So saying, He asked:
'Have you affirmed this and agreed to take up My burden (that I lay upon
you) in this matter?' They answered: 'We have affirmed (it).' He said:
'Then bear witness (you and your communities), and I will be with you
among the witnesses.' Then whoever after this turns away, those are the
transgressors. (Al Imran 3 :81-82)
Prophet Adam would hasten towards the time of the break of fast and then he would
raise his hands towards his Lord, and he would see the inscription on the pillars of
heaven and he would change his prayer to the following: "0 Allah! I ask you to
forgive me for the sake of Muhammad, Messenger of Allah."
And his prayer would be answered with: "How do you know of Muhammad even
though I have not created him yet?"
Upon which Prophet Adam said with great respect: "Dear Lord! When You created
me with the Will ofY our Hand and blew from your Pure Soul, I lifted up my eyes and
I saw the following written on the pillars of the skies: There is no deity but Allah, and
Muhammad is His Messenger. I know that You will put Your name next to only he
who is the most deserving and most full of good works among those You have
created."

--- Sayfa 18 ---
This sincere declaration and supplication of Prophet Adam is answered with the
following call: 'What you say is true 0 Adam! Verily, among creation he is most dear
to me. For his sake, I will surely always forgive you. Had it not been for Muhammad,
I would not have created you either. "2
His was the first soul to be created and it was his name that was put into the main
book as Abdullah (servant of Allah).§. And it was he who was given the title the Last of
the Prophets.2
This meant that the reunion of his soul with his body would come towards a later
time. Just as he was the beginning that enabled creation to follow, the end would also
be sealed with his life, for he was the first created, and is the Last Sultan.
All Prophets that came after Adam, peace be upon him, would keep their covenants
and would always speak of him to their followers to prepare them for his coming.
Prophet Noah, peace be upon him, was happy knowing that he would hold the
followers of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, as his witness
regarding the completion of his mission; Prophet David, peace be upon him, would
say the following as he read the Psalms out loud: "0 Allah, grace us with the
Implementer of Sunnah (Nature of Things),"l2 and he prayed that Prophet Ahmad
would come soon. Prophet John would articulate the same thing, Prophet Moses
would sing out the same praises to the Children of Israel, and Prophet Jesus, would
spread the same love to his people.
Prophet Moses, peace be upon him, had chosen seventy people from among the
Children of Israel who had turned away from him despite all the miracles that he had
shown them and took them over the deserts of Tih. Then they moved towards Mount
Tur (Mount Sinai) and Prophet Moses experienced a marvelous meeting along with
his people. There was much fog on Mount Tur and it was difficult to see. Then from
His Good Grace, He let them hear His Voice in a manner we cannot know. However,
these people whose intellect had been limited to their eyes hesitated even in the face of
such Great Grace, and they said that they could not know the possessor of that voice,
and asked to see the possessor. However, for people whose abilities to see were
limited, it was difficult to grasp the boundless entity of the Lord. This was a known
fact. Maybe their aim was not to see the Lord, for had they seen Him, they may have
found other excuses and turned away. Turning away from the Truth had become their
habit.
Such disrespect shown towards the Lord would incur the Divine Wrath. Mount Tur
started to shake. The seventy people who were on the mountain stopped in their tracks

--- Sayfa 19 ---
and lay unconscious. Prophet Moses, who had been watching the events, was
extremely devastated. In the face of such ingratitude shown towards such Grace,
Prophet Moses was experiencing great remorse. He had put himself on the spot for his
people, and had spent great efforts to lead them to the right path. He was very sad to
see that a community of people who had grown in Divine Hands, starting from the
time of their inception, was ready to tum away every time he loosened his grip. Still,
he had not expected them to behave this way in the presence of the Lord. There was
only one door he could still tum to, and opening up his hands, he said with a trembling
voice:
My Lord! Had You so willed, You would have destroyed them before,
and me (along with them). Will You now destroy us for what the fools
among us have done? This is a trial from You whereby You lead whom
You will astray, and whom You will You guide. You are Our Guardian
(to Whom we entrust our affairs and on Whom we rely), so forgive us and
have mercy on us! You are the Best in forgiving. (al-A'raf7:155)
After saying these with a sincere heart he turned once again to the door of the All-
Compassionate Lord and said despite everything: "Ordain for us good in this world as
well as in the Hereafter, for we have turned to You, following Your way" (al-A'raf
7: 156).The Most Gracious Lord replied:
My punishment-! afflict with it whom I will (and no one can escape it
except that I have mercy on him), and My Mercy embraces all things; and
so, (although in the world every being has a share in My Mercy, in the
Hereafter) I will ordain it for those who act in reverence for Me and piety
and pay their Prescribed Purifying Alms, and they are those who truly
believe in all ofOurRevelations and signs. (al-A'raf7:156)
Prophet Moses, peace be upon him, never despaired from being refused at the gate
of Grace and he trusted that another door would open for his people. However, the
truth was different. The Divine address continued:
They follow the (most illustrious) Messenger, the Prophet who neither
reads nor writes (and has therefore remained preserved from any traces of
the existing written culture and is free from any intellectual and spiritual
pollution), whom they find described (with all his distinguishing features)
in the Torah and the Gospel (that are) with them. He enjoins upon them
what is right and good and forbids them what is evil; he makes pure,
wholesome things lawful for them, and bad, corrupt things unlawful, and
he relieves them of their burdens (remaining of their own Law) and the

--- Sayfa 20 ---
restraints that were upon them. So those who believe in him (with all
sincerity), honor and support him, and help him, and follow the Light (the
Qur'an) which has been sent down with him-they are those who are the
prosperous. (al-A'raf7:157)
This was, in other words, the declaration of the coming of the Last Messenger
repeated once again through the Divine Voice echoed in Mount Tur. Eyes were turned
once again to the future, to invite people to contemplate the days that were now being
promised.
It had now become obligatory to bring the conversation to him when most issues
were being discussed. When speaking to his people, Prophet Moses would speak of
him, when Prophet Jesus spoke to his disciples, he would make references to him.
From the mountains of Paran to Arafat, from the area where he would be born to
where he would migrate, and to the mission he would take on through his life, all these
were referred to in the aforementioned messages ofthe Prophets. Everyone was on the
alert, for his coming had become so clear that those who waited for him built tall
towers called "misfa" in order to not miss his coming, and it was there that they waited
for the coming ofMustafa.ll

--- Sayfa 21 ---
1 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 1/75; Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami '1-Qur 'an, 1/324; Qastalani,
Mawahib, 1/7, 16. These words are an approximate paraphrasing of the truth of "Were it not for
you, I would not have created the heavens either."
l! Expressing the same meaning in another way, the Messenger of Allah one day would say "The first
thing that Allah created was my light" (Alusi, Ruhu '1-Maani, 8/71). Another day when Jabir ibn
Abdullah asked what the first thing created was, he would answer "0 Jabir! Before creating
things, Allah the Almighty created from His Own Light the light of your Prophet," and he would
then tell him that from this light the genesis of space would come. See Qastalani, Mawahib, 1/7.
There are also reports that the first things that Allah created were reason and the pen. Though at
first these reports seem to differ, they all refer to the same point of precedence of the Messenger
of Allah before 'things,' for the universe is a book that should be read page by page and the
Messenger of Allah is the indelible pen of that book.
2 One day the Messenger of Allah would say "When Adam was in a state between earth and mud, I
was with Allah, His servant and the Last of the Prophets." See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11175; Tabari,
Tarikh, 21128. Ahmad was the Prophet's name that circulated among all the Prophets. It is
recorded in the Qur'an that Isa, peace be upon him, said: 0 Children of Israel! I am the
Messenger of Allah. I have been sent to verifY the Torah and with the good tiding of a Messenger
who will come after with the name of Ahmad (as-Saff 61 :6). In a hadith the Messenger of Allah
says: "My name is Muhammad in the Qur'an, Ahmad in the Gospel and Ahyad in the Torah." See
al-Hindi, Kanzu '1-Ummal, 1/356 (1021).
!Q See Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1: 176. Indeed "Mukimu 's-Sunnah," which means, "He who will establish the
sunnah (the nature of things)" is one of our noble Prophet's names.
ll Thus was the situation before he came and it would be no different on the Judgment Day. In a long
hadith concerning shafa 'ah (intercession), the Messenger of Allah says that human beings who
are faced with a negative verdict and who seek salvation through intercession will turn to Prophets
starting with Prophet Adam and they will be referred to other Prophets and then finally end up at
his door. This is the consolidation of the fact that the position of intercession lies with Prophet
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him. See Bukhari, Sahih, 4:1745 (4435). Readers who
want to read more about the good tidings proclaiming the arrival of the Messenger of Allah can
consult the books The Prophet Promised in World Scriptures, from Tughra Books as well as
Dillerdeki Miijde (The Good Tidings on the Lips) from I~1k Publishing.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
THE VOICE THAT ECHOED ON
THETONGUESOFSCHOLARS
I
nformation about the beloved Messenger was not only provided by the Prophets,
but it was also what motivated the studies of scholars who were the followers of
those Prophets. These people, who received their light from what the Prophets
had left behind, always brought the conversation to this Personage and according to
the mission they had taken up in society, they fulfilled their role in revealing messages
concerning the future. From near and far-in places as distant as India-there were
many scholars who roamed the land, most of them residing in the region of Yemen,
Damascus and the Hijaz.
1. Yemen
Yemen was a land that Akk, one of the sons of Adnan and a forefather of the Sultan of
Sultans, peace and blessings be upon him, had established. After a state was deeply
rooted here, there came a king named Rabia ibn Nasr. One night he had an
unforgettable dream that was deeply affected by. There was no oracle or soothsayer
left in the region that he had not visited to have this dream interpreted. However, none
of these efforts soothed the worries that this dream had left in his heart. He brought
together all the scholars in his land, but whatever they said failed to convince him. He
had come to such a point that he no longer trusted anyone, even those who merely
wanted to know what his dream was about. He was of the view that the person who
was to interpret the dream correctly should also be able to foretell correctly, without
being told, what he had dreamt. At last one scholar advised him of a way to put his
mind at ease. According to this wise man, if the king wanted a true and accurate
interpretation of his dream, he had to consult two oracles named Satih and Shiqq, for
these two oracles had gained widespread attention with their physical attributes and
the impressive news that they had given people; they had become authorities in the
region where they lived. Both were born the day that the great oracle Tarifa had died,
and it seemed as ifTarifa had passed all his abilities on to them.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
The physical appearance of these two oracles was very strange. Satih's body looked
like a big mass; his face looked as if it grew out of his torso. It was as if he had a body
without bones, and this attribute was what had given him his name. When he got
angry he would bloat from where he sat, and he would not be able to move. As for
Shiqq, he was also strange; he looked as if he was half a man.
When the king heard that his dream could be interpreted by these two oracles, he
sent word to both of them. Satih arrived before Shiqq. The king first told him of his
situation, and then to measure the capabilities of his interlocutor, he spoke about his
dream: "If you know what my dream was, then you will also know what it means."
Satih looked very sure of himself: "I can interpret your dream," he said with self-
confidence, and he started to foretell the king's dream before the king told him
anything.
"In your dream, you saw something black rise from within the darkness. It went
towards a place called Tahma, and then every living thing that had a skull started to
eat from it."
The king was astonished. Indeed, he had seen exactly what Satih was describing. He
couldn't hide his surprise: "Spot on, 0 Satih! Without any errors, it was exactly as you
described. What, then, is the interpretation?"
"I swear by all that I believe in, 0 King, that the Abyssinians will attack your land
and they will take over the land between Abyan and Jarash."
"But this means doom for us 0 Satih! Tell me, will this happen during my rule or
after me?"
"I swear by your father that it will happen shortly after your rule, maybe sixty,
maybe seventy years after."
"And will their reign last long, or will it end quickly?"
"It will last for about seventy years. They will be invaded, some of them will be
killed, and some ofthem will run away."
"So when they leave, who will inhabit these lands afterwards?"
"Dhi Yazan. They will come from the area of Adn and they will spare no one in
Yemen."
"How about them, will their reign last, or will it also end?"
"They, too, will have an end."
"And who will bring that end?"
"The Prophet who is "az-Zaki" (the Pure One). He will have revelation from up

--- Sayfa 24 ---
above."
'Will you tell me from whom will that Prophet be?"
"From Ghalib ibn Fihr ibn Malik ... Kingship will be with his tribe till the end of the
world."
"So, will there really be an end to this life?"
''Yes, the first and the last will all be brought together. Those who live content and
with common sense will be elevated up high, and those who terrorize people will be
underfoot, the lowest of the low."
"Is what you tell me really true?"
''Yes. I swear by the light of the dawn, the darkness of the night, and the horizon
from where the sun rises, what I tell you is true and will definitely come to pass."
Not long after this conversation with Satih, the king met with Shiqq. This time the
king turned to Shiqq and tried him without telling him about the conversation he had
with Satih. His aim was to see whether they could repeat the same interpretation
without the other's influence.
Shiqq wasn't empty handed either. He first foretold the king's dream: "You saw
something black rising out of the darkness. Then it went towards a steep place with
gardens. Then every living thing started to eat from it."
The king's doubts disappeared. They were both speaking ofthe same things. While
Satih could give the name of the place, Shiqq had only described it. While Satih had
said "every living thing with a skull," Shiqq had only said "every living thing."
"It is exactly as you say Shiqq, now what do you think it means?"
"I swear by everyone living between these two hot lands, your lands will be invaded
by the Sudanese. They will take over the land between Alyan and Najran and start to
govern there."
"I swear by your father's name, this would mean our ruin. When will these things
happen, during my rule, or after me?"
''No, this will happen a short time after your rule. You will be saved by a man of
great fame and character, and they will taste bitter pain."
'Who is this great personage?"
"A young man that will come from the house of Dhi Y azan."
'Will his reign continue, or will that end as well?"
"His reign will end, too, and by the hand of a Messenger who will be sent with
religion and virtue, one who will represent justice and righteousness, and after that, till

--- Sayfa 25 ---
the day of separation, kingship will be his tribe's."
'What do you mean by 'the day of separation'?"
"The day that everyone's good and bad deeds are weighed, the day when voices
from heaven will be heard by both the dead and the living, the day when all will be
brought together for the meeting-that day there will be good tidings and salvation for
those who fear."
"Is what you tell me really true?"
"I swear by the Lord of the skies and the earth and all that is between the two, that
all I tell you is true and will come to pass."
The king who had now heard the same things from both oracles tried to send his
family to a safe place near Persia for fear of what was awaiting them, thinking that he
was guaranteeing their safety. However, despite the measures he took, he was not able
to stop fate taking its course, and Yemen would witness the occurrence of everything
both the oracles had told as their predestined time came one by one.ll
Abu Karb's Medina Campaign
The reign of Rabia ended in Yemen and the throne was taken up by another king
named Abu Karb. This king was quite ambitious and because he considered himself to
be very strong, he started military campaigns into neighboring countries. During these
campaigns he proceeded towards Medina, however he was very much affected by
what the two wise Jewish men he met from the Qurayza tribe told him, and he decided
against attacking Medina. When he wanted to lay siege to the city, these two wise
Jewish men stood in front of him and said: "0 king! Do not do such a thing! If you
insist on saying 'I will do as I please', then know that certain obstacles will arise and
you will not be successful."
'Why would that be?" the king asked.
"Because towards the end of time, this place is where the Messenger, who will
appear in Haram among the Quraysh, will migrate to. This land will be his home, and
where he will make his decisions."ll
The sentences he heard must have been stronger than the military means he had,
such that he decided against attacking Medina and took these two wise Jewish men,
whose wisdom he admired greatly, with him back to Yemen, and later converted to
their religion.
The king, now reborn with the energy he gained from two sincere hearts, started
campaigns into his own self and soul. When he returned to Yemen, he tried to share

--- Sayfa 26 ---
his excitement with his people, but the people ofHimyar were indifferent to his call at
first, and then they asked for proof about the faith they were now being invited to join.
There was a fire in whose divinity they believed in, and in order to test the words of
the king, they invited him to a test with this fire. The king was not worried; he
accepted the test and went near the sacred fire. In their belief, the truth of any claim
could be understood by offering it to the fire; the party that was damaged by the fire
was the party that was at fault.
During this offering, the two Jewish men were present as well. Their holy books
were hanging from their necks, and on their tongues were verses from the Torah. They
waited patiently for their tum, having put their faith in their Lord. Meanwhile the idols
that the people had brought with them to the fire had all burnt and perished, however,
the two wise men and the king seemed to bear no injury. As they approached the fire,
it grew smaller, as if to disappear into the very source it came from. A great majority
of the Himyar people who saw this phenomenon decided to convert to the religion of
these wise men, and thus Judaism made its first entry toY emen.l1
Later, with the directives of these two wise men, Abu Karb engaged in partial
renovation of the Ka'ba. In his dream he was told to cover the Ka'ba with a thick
cloth, and thus he was the first to have a mantle made for the Ka'ba and to have it
covered. Afterwards, he had a similar dream twice, and each time he was told to cover
it with a better cloth and in the end he covered it with the highest quality of cloth at
the time and put it in his will that the Ka'ba should always be covered with the best
quality cloth, even after his death. He was so caught up with what these two wise men,
who had now become his chief advisors, told him that he fell in love with the Last
Messenger whose coming the two had told him about. He kept murmuring his name,
and in one ofhis poems he said:
"I know someone by the name of Ahmad,
and he is the messenger of Allah
and is the most honorable of creation.
If my life span touches his, I will be a loyal disciple to him,
and close to him like a cousin
Today I have declared war unto his enemies with my sword,
Such that I may alleviate the troubles that may touch him from today."11
King of Tubba in Medina
Such was the depth of his faith that the king of Tubba had, Abu Karb would sacrifice

--- Sayfa 27 ---
his land and rule for the sake of being a vizier to this good news. He would take to the
road and like Caliph Ali, would leave his land in order to be with him, he would
migrate to Medina to wait for the day that he, too, would migrate there. Such was the
exemplariness ofthe situation: he would go to Medina, having abandoned the throne,
to build a house for the noble Messenger, a town which he was planning to take and
ransack by force only years ago. He was now an ordinary man. He came to Medina
and bought a house. Medina was a small town and everyone knew each other. It didn't
take long to figure out who the stranger was. The man had come from Yemen, and he
had given up his throne which anyone would have risked their lives to get. The curious
eyes that were observing this newcomer were waiting for an explanation. Why had he
left such wealth and the thousands of people waiting for him head and foot? Why was
he buying land here and why was he settling here? The curious onlookers wanted
answers. Abu Karb had the aura of a man who did not want to speak by force. His
attitude seemed to say "Leave me to my own devices!" However, others needed to
know the truth and there was no point in him hiding it.
With his heart fluttering and his voice quavering, he said: "I have seen from old
books that soon there will come a Messenger from between the mountains of Paran,
and Mecca will not welcome him, on the contrary, it will treat him harshly. He will
then have to leave that town and he will migrate to Medina. That's why I am building
this house, so that when he comes he can stay in it."
Only a few people understood exactly what these words meant. Some knew that
these were not empty words, but couldn't really make sense of it at the time. The
many who did not understand dispersed, thinking to have understood.
The construction was complete and the house was ready. It was an innocent wish,
acted on with a sincere heart. However, the time for the arrival of the Last Prophet had
not yet come. Days turned into months and the king continued to wait. Then fate took
its course and the king left this mortal world and walked into eternity. The king's
house was inherited by his sons, and they sold it to others.l2
Traces That Were Revealed Later
The proof of these positive developments in Yemen would be felt years later and
documents and inscriptions unearthed in excavations reveal the facts about the belief
system of the people at the time.
Here are two examples: In a tomb that was found in San'a years later, they found
the bodies of two brothers and a silver plate by their side. The following was written
on the plate in gold lettering: "This is the tomb of Lamis and Wahabi, the sons of

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Tubba. These two died, like good people before them, on the belief of "There is no
deity but Allah, and there is no doubt that He has no partner."l2
During the time of Caliph Umar, a man from Najran was digging in his garden. As
he made some way, he was surprised to find a body that had died many years ago. The
deceased had put his hand on his forehead and he seemed to be waiting in this
position. When the digger tried to lift him from his hand, the head of the body started
to bleed. It was an astonishing sight, how could a body that had died years ago have
blood running inside it! He let the hand that he had removed fall back into his place
and the blood stopped. On a more careful look, he realized a ring on the man's finger.
When he knelt down to read it, he saw on it written "Allah is my Lord. "ll!
2. Damascus
In those days Damascus was one of the important trade centers. The Quraysh tribe
would pull its resources together and form a caravan, and they would come all the way
to Damascus for trade every year. Damascus was at the time a greater entity than the
city itself, with the name Biladussham, meaning the lands of Damascus comprising of
what is today Palestine and Jordan. The majority was Christian and it was under
Byzantine rule, and there were a good number of Christian and Jewish scholars
present in the city.
Sometimes these wise scholars would speak of the days to come and they would
mention a Messenger that would arrive. In Busra, which was one of the important
centers of the time, the priests Bahira and Nastura were the two leading scholars. One
was the predecessor of the other; however, they had both gone into seclusion and
prayer as they waited for the noble Messenger to come. Their windows were closed to
the worries of the world, but open to Allah, as they waited for the Last Prophet, and
they would articulate their sadness in his delay.l2
Salman al-Farisi was a young man oflranian descent and he would pray often at the
fire temple. On one of his visits to Damascus, he saw something satisfying at a church
which led him to look for a more meaningful ways of worship, and this was why he
had left his home to come and learn under a priest in Damascus. However, the priest
that he had bound himself to did not tum out as he had expected. The priest was
deceiving people and exploiting the religious feelings of the congregation, making
unlawful profit. The priest died soon after, and another priest was appointed in his
place. Now, Salman spent his whole time with this new priest whom he respected in
all aspects and whom he loved dearly. But the span of this priest's life was also
limited. One day this priest became very ill and when Salman asked the priest to

--- Sayfa 29 ---
whom he should now tum to, the priest said: "My dear son! I swear by Allah I do not
know anyone in this land whom I could recommend to you. People have perished.
Many of them have exchanged religion for the life of the world. Many have
abandoned their values. I would recommend a certain man in Mosul to you. He carries
the same concerns as I do. Go to him and stay with him." Shortly after, the priest
closed his eyes to this world.
Salman went directly to Mosul and without wasting any time he found the address
he had been given, and started to pass his days with his new guide. However, like the
others, this priest's life turned out to be short as well. He asked the priest whom he
should now go to, and the address he was given was in Nusaybin. Salman stayed in
Nusaybin for a while, but then the time to move came once again. The old priest he
was staying with now was pointing to Ammuriya. Salman went there without losing
any time. His time in Ammuriya was a little bit longer, but however long the days may
have been, they too came to an end. He approached the priest and asked with a heavy
heart: "Who are you leaving me with as you go?"
The priest was also very heavy of heart. At times he would lift his eyes to the skies
and stare for a while. Then with a sad voice he said: "I don't know anyone here with
whom I can leave you. But the shadow of the Last Messenger, who will be sent with
the Hanif religion of Ibrahim, is upon us already. He will appear in the Arab world.
Where he will migrate to is a place full of date palms between two hot places. He will
have marks and signs that will not be hidden secret. He has the mark of Prophethood
between his shoulders. He accepts gifts, but never takes alms. If you are strong enough
to go to this land, do so, and wait for him there. You will know him when you see
him."
And the sad Salman sold all his possessions and took to the road again. This time
his aim was to reach the Last Prophet of Allah, in whose coming he had put his faith.IQ
Ibn Hayyaban used to live in a rich area with fertile land near Damascus. His love
for religion had soon made him into a Jewish scholar. Due to the knowledge he gained
from reading, he left his home and started on a journey to look for the Messenger he
was waiting for. His goal was to reach Medina.
He was going to settle there and that way, he was not going to miss the arrival of
the Last Messenger whom he was waiting for. Before long, he had become one with
the people of Medina. He was a soulful man; he was performing the Daily Prayers, he
was doing good to the people, he would advise them and he thought of nothing but
prayer and worship. In times of famine the people of Medina would come to him and
they wanted him to facilitate their prayers for rain and bounty together with them.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Before accompanying them in their prayers he would first see to it that they gave alms
and only then go with them. Then they would start prayer and they would witness the
clouds come heavy with rain. When this repeated a number of times, it became a well-
known fact.
However, for Ibn Hayyaban, too, there came the sign of immanent passage. When
he realized that he was about to leave this world, he gathered the people together
around him and said to them: "0 Jewish people! As you know I left a land rich with
wheat and grapes to come to a land of drought and poverty. Do you know why?"
Everyone wondered. But nobody knew the real reason of his coming. He had come
quietly and he had started to live the life of Medina like one ofthem. They curled their
lips and said: "You know better."
He had to make a historical note of this and so Ibn Hayyaban started to say the
following: "I came to this land to wait for the Prophet whose coming has come near.
This is where he will migrate to. I am in the hope that he will come here and I will be
one of his followers. His shade is upon us; he is about to come ... "
But he had one concern. He had lived with them so he knew their nature and their
character well. These stubborn people would always regard any development from the
outside with suspicion; they would assume a negative attitude without considering
whether this development may be good or bad. What if they showed the same reaction
when the Last Prophet came! In that fear he let them know what awaited them should
they fall short of welcoming the noble Prophet. He told them the following words
which they would never forget: "0 Jewish people! Do not stand in his way! For his
mission is striving for Allah and he will take as captive those who oppose him. Don't
let this deter you from obeying him!"
He said these, and continued on his way without having seen the Messenger he was
waiting for. Now all that was left in Medina was the words of Ibn Hayyaban and his
sweet memories.ll
3. Hijaz
Another region where there was talk of the coming Messenger was the Hijaz. Even
though the majority ofthe people were wallowing in ignorance, there were also those
who longed for the true light and were waiting for its appearance. These people were
Waraqa ibn Nawfal, Zayd ibn Amr and Quss ibn Saida. These people, who were
lovers of virtue, were disturbed by what was happening around them but they had no
means of combating the problems they saw. They had one hope: The Last Messenger

--- Sayfa 31 ---
would come and save the people who were perishing in the darkness of their pitiable
state. Those who were waiting had access to primary sources such as the Torah and
the Gospel, and in them they had found the characteristics of the Last Messenger who
was going to save them.
Zayd ibnAmr
Zayd ibn Amr was the father of Said ibn Zayd, one of the ten people who were given
the glad news that they had deserved Paradise while they were still alive, the brother
of Zaynab hint Jahsh, and uncle to Caliph Umar. He was of the Hanif who practiced
the religion that was left by Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him. The followers of
Hanif turned away from idols and declared that these idols would not be able to harm
or benefit them. They ate only that which was slaughtered in the Name of Allah, and
never touched unclean things or acts. Zayd ibn Amr was heard one day saying the
following, as he sat with his back to the Ka'ba: "0 people of Quraysh! I swear by the
breath of Zayd and the power in his hand, there is none among you except me who
follows the religion of Prophet Ibrahim."
Then he lifted his hands up to the skies and said: "Dear Allah! Had I known which
face was the best in Your regard, I would bow down before it. But I do not know it."
Thus he expressed his helplessness and then prostrated on the back of the animal he
was riding, expressing his thanks to his Lord whom he knew to be "One."rl.
In order to escape the oppression he felt living in an atmosphere of idolatry, Zayd
took to the road with others believing in the Oneness and Unity of Allah including
Waraqa ibn Nawfal, Uthman ibnu'l-Huwayris and Abdullah ibn Jahsh, and they came
upon a priest in Mawsil. The priest turned to Zayd and said: ''You, the owner of the
camel! Where are you coming from?"
"From where the building built by Ibrahim stands," Zayd answered. When the man
asked: 'What are you looking for? What is it that you want?" Zayd answered: "I am
looking for a religion within which I can live out my faith."
The priest was astonished. Here was someone coming from a land that all those
looking for religion had turned their eyes towards, and he was looking for some other
religion. This was indeed a strange situation. It was true that sometimes people didn't
see what was right in front of their very eyes. Still, one had to be fair and the priest
turned to Zayd and said: "Tum back, for what you are waiting for is about to appear
where you have come from."ll
Zayd's constant loud negation of the power of hand-made idols had disturbed many
people and they were not very fond ofhim. He was censured by Caliph Umar's father,

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Al-Khattab. How could someone from the family of Al-Khattab disobey Meccan
authority and choose another way of life! He believed that there had to be a
punishment for his behavior of not worshipping the idols as he should, and not to eat
from the meat that had been cut in their name. In order to bring him to his senses, Al-
Khattab would take Zayd to the surrounding hills of Mecca and torture him. When he
himself grew tired, he would appoint someone from the youth to continue until Zayd
would repent.
He would also appoint all sorts of wayward men, such as his own brother, to stop
him from returning to Mecca. Zayd was able to enter Mecca only in secrecy.
Whenever he was found, he would be kicked out for fear that he would lead others
into his belief and destroy the religion that they believed in. Zayd, on the other hand,
would prostrate himself at every given opportunity and say: "My Allah is the Allah of
Ibrahim; my religion is the religion oflbrahim.":l.±
He was so fed up with the ways of the Jahiliyya (the Period of Ignorance before
Islam) that he sought for other ways. First he sat down with the Jews and tried to adopt
their beliefs, but saw that it would not satisfy him. He then considered Christianity but
soon decided that what he sought was not in it either. Then one day he went towards
the lands near Damascus in the hope that he may find someone who, like him, was a
Hanif and who practiced the religion of Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him. He
roamed around and among the People of the Book in order to find what he was
looking for, and his travels brought him to Mawsil and Jaziratu'l-Arab (Arabian
Peninsula). He was, however, unable to find anyone who would satisfy his needs.
When at last he came to Damascus, they directed him to a priest. He told him his
situation. The priest was not uninformed. He understood what Zayd's aim was and
advised him in the following way: "You talk to me of such a religion that it is
impossible to find it among the living today. You are looking for the Hanif religion of
Ibrahim. He was not a Jew, nor a Christian; he was a servant to a peerless Allah, and
he would direct and prostrate himself towards the House that stands in the region
where you came from and he would pray. The people who studied that religion and
who knew of it have all passed away. But there is an awaited Messenger, and his
coming is soon. You go back to your own land and wait there, for Allah will send
someone from your people who will be practicing the religion of Ibrahim, and he is
the most gracious human being in Allah's regard."
All description seemed to point to Mecca where Zayd had come from. It was a twist
of fate that the land he abandoned in search for true religion was going to be the one
where the Promised Messenger would arrive. There was no time to lose and so he set

--- Sayfa 33 ---
off for the road back to Mecca. The Jews and Christians of Damascus had not liked
Zayd's attitude. Their dislike came to such a point that they stopped him and killed
him before he could find what he was looking for.
Although his faith in the Last Messenger was complete, he had to leave the world
before experiencing his moment of happiness. The following words were always on
his tongue: "I know a religion whose appearance is soon; its shade is upon your heads.
But I do not know whether I myself will live to see that day."
Zayd was someone who was saddened by what he saw, and whose conscience was
totally open to the Truth. He believed in Allah, the One and Almighty, and he bowed
in submission to Him. But he was unable to call the Allah he believed in to be Allah,
and he did not know how to worship Him.
Amir ibn Rabia, from among the great Companions of the noble Prophet, would
later tell of what he had heard from Zayd ibn Amr: "I am waiting for a Messenger who
will come from the lineage oflsmail, from the family of Abdul Muttalib. I don't think
I will live long enough to see him; but I believe in him, I accept him, I accept that he is
the True Messenger. If you live long enough to see him, give him my salutations of
peace! Now let me give you markers of physical appearance so that you may not be
surprised when you see him." I said: "Go on, tell me." He continued: "He will be of
medium height. Not too long, not too short. His hair is not too curly or too straight.
His name is Ahmad. He will be born in Mecca. This is where he will be sent as a
Prophet. But his people won't be pleased with what he will bring and so they will send
him out of Mecca. He will migrate to Y athrib (Medina) and his religion will be spread
from there. Do not be unaware of him! I have roamed from land to land looking for
Ibrahim's religion. All the Jewish and Christian scholars I talked to told me: 'What
you are looking for will come later, and they all told me what I have just told you, and
they always ended saying: 'He is the last Prophet, and there will be no more Prophets
after him."'~
Quss ibn Saida
The image we have of Quss ibn Saida is one where he is mounted on his red camel in
a fair in Ukaz, addressing the public. He was an old man past his hundredth year, the
leader of the lyad tribe. He was looking forward to the future. He was informing the
people about the coming Messenger, speaking words that would affect their souls,
preparing them for true faith. The following is the poetic call he made out to people in
the fair:
"0 people!

--- Sayfa 34 ---
Come ye all together
All that have gone have gone ...
And the future will surely come.
The dark night ...
The skies and constellations ...
The sea full of waves ...
Stars that dazzle the eye .. .
Great standing mountains .. .
The rivers that flow ...
There is no doubt that there are new tidings from the heavens ...
And verily there are events on land that lead one to think ...
I look at people, they all go, but they never come back; do you think they stay
because they are content where they are? Or maybe that they are asleep where they
are?
I swear an oath of oaths to Allah that there is no doubt about it.
There is such a religion in Allah's possession which is better than the religion you
have at hand ...
Where are the fathers, the grandfathers, the forefathers? Where are your ancestors?
Where are the nations of Ad and Thamud who had built ornate palaces and marble
buildings that rose up high to the skies?
Where are the Pharaoh and Nimrod who, trusting their worldly riches, challenged
the people with the claim "Am I not your greatest Lord?"
They were much above you by means of wealth and power.
What happened to them? The earth ground them in its mill, made them into powder
and decimated them. Even their bones melted away. Their roofs blew away.
Now dogs live in their abodes. Do not be unaware of the truth, do not follow their
example!
All is mortal except for Allah. He has no partner or equal; He is an absolute Allah.
He is the only one to worship. He is above being born or giving birth to.
Yes, indeed ...
There is much to take lesson from what has gone before us.
Death is a river ... It has many entry points, but it has nowhere to flow.
Young and old, we all pass away.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
What happens to all will, too, happen to you and me."
And indeed, death would come to him too, before he could see the Messenger he
was waiting for, and this meeting would be postponed to another realm.
But such was providence that among the people who listened to his speech in the
Ukaz fair was the Last Messenger himself, whose coming he was waiting for. When
years later people who knew him came to visit the Messenger of Allah the
conversation would tum to Quss ibn Saida, and they would refresh their memories of
what he had said that day.~
This wise old man, who had given himself up to solitude on top of a mountain,
would always speak of these issues in his poems, and at every opportunity he kept
saying that within the Haram (Mecca) a Prophet would come from the tribe of
Hashim. It is reported that he said the following in one of his poems:
"Thanks be to Allah who never creates anything in vain.
It is Him who did not leave us alone after Isa, and kept giving us our needs
He will send us Ahmad from among us, and he will be the best of the sent
Messengers
As long as living creatures breathe, let Allah's salam (peace) be upon him."ll
Waraqa ibn Nawfal
Another man who was waiting for light to emerge from the horizon was Waraqa ibn
Nawfal, the cousin ofKhadija, the Messenger of Allah's first wife. Waraqa was one of
the few people who sought truth in Mecca in the Period oflgnorance. He believed that
the different shapes that the people had carved out of stones and trees and before
whom the people of the Period of Ignorance prostrated could not be God, and he never
shied away from articulating this at every given opportunity.
The Quraysh had a festival that they celebrated every year. They would come
together on that day, and they would offer sacrifices to the idols in order to show their
devotion. They believed that in doing so, they fulfilled their duty towards their gods
and this made them content. In other words, this was their way of appeasement. On
such a day they had gathered again and were murmuring prayers in front of an idol
expressing their devotion. Soon after, they started gossiping about the same four
people again. These were of course Waraqa ibn Nawfal, Zayd ibn Amr, Uthman
ibnu'l-Huwayris and Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh. According to these four, idol worshipping
had no value. They questioned: "How can this be? Look at your tribe! How can they
do such a thing! They have left the religion of Ibrahim, and they whirl around a piece

--- Sayfa 36 ---
of stone, they supplicate to an idol that hears not and sees not, that can't bring them
any good or evil!"
These four men of heart would set on a journey to other lands to look for traces of
the Hanif religion of Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, leaving their people for
whom they had lost all hope. During this journey, Waraqa ibn Nawfal went towards
Damascus. In one of the villages he took refuge in on his journey, he accepted
Christianity and devoted the rest of his life in learning this religion. Waraqa was now
learning his new religion from men of learning and preparing himself for the future.
Each new piece of knowledge encouraged him to learn more and he regretted the days
he had wasted without learning.
Naturally he had learnt a lot. Now he knew the Torah and the Gospel much better,
and he could read and write Hebrew. Among the things he read, there was one thing
that attracted his attention more than anything. He could never get it out of his mind
and he dreamed of the days to come with this knowledge. He now knew that the
Leader of the Universe, peace and blessings be upon him, would come and then
people would stand tall behind him in a Divine sense. However, there was no stopping
time and it was taking Waraqa slowly but surely towards his grave. On the one hand,
his vision was failing and he could hardly see the world he was living in, but on the
other hand, his hearts eye had opened to a new world of meaning. Time went by so
fast that he started to think that he would die before finding what he was looking for.
Even though he told what he had found to people at every opportunity, he feared he
would leave the world before setting eyes on the Messenger. He had no choice but to
wait. He could at least spend this period of waiting by speaking about him to those he
knew and this is exactly what he did. The daughter of Khuwaylid was among those
who listened to his advice and this was a great training for her for the period of
revelation.
Hijaz before Prophethood and the General State of the World
At the time, the world had two great powers, the Byzantine and the Persian Empires.
The Byzantine Empire was mostly Christian, and the Persians were mostly fire
worshippers. Now and then there were wars between these two states and their rivalry
and conflict never ended. The other two countries that made their presence felt were
Greece and India.
The Persian Empire had inner conflicts as well. There were great differences
between various groups, and each group was degenerating in their own way. The inner
structure was based on Zoroaster and Mazdakiyya, the state mostly influenced by

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Zoroastrianism. Although there seemed to be differences when it came to how their
lands were governed, these two Empires seemed to have much in common when it
came to the moral bankruptcy that each was facing. They disdained women; some
considered them as mere objects that people could make use of such as air, water and
the sun. This attitude was found particularly in the Mazdakiyya belief and spanned the
field of private possession; according to them there was no concept of private space
and privately owned possessions.~
At that time, the Byzantines were known as ar-Rum (the Romans) and their only
concern was power and force, and this meant that they would invade whatever land
they pleased, whenever they pleased. Even though the main belief was Christianity,
there were major differences between members of this religion, particularly conflicts
concerning different denominations.
In Greece, with the influence of philosophy, the main differences were being played
out in the field of intellectual discussions instead of crude force and there was a huge
divide between scholars and the people. The assemblies would witness long
discussions that did not benefit the public; they were a stage for inflamed orators to
push their point.
When it came to India, as written by historians, they too were expenencmg a
decline; there was no trace of a religious life left, morals were diminishing and social
life was suffering from various ills.~
In short, the general situation was one in which people were experiencing extreme
darkness. Although, according to some, there were means to make use of for the
benefit of the people, there were no leaders who had the intellect and the heart to put
these means into good use.
It may well be said that the means and the sources they had, encouraged them
instead to do evil and no one could conceive of doing good deeds.
The region of Hijaz had its share from this decline and a social structure had
emerged in which the only determinant was power. People were being assessed
according to their wealth and their connections; people who did not have influential
supporters were almost considered non-entities.
Law and justice left its place completely to crude force, and things were shaped
only according to what the powerful said. Society was divided into classes and the
only connection between these classes was one of giving or receiving service. The
treatment that slaves were getting was heartbreaking. The Ka'ba, which has been a
station for every Prophet starting from Adam, peace be upon him, had been filled with

--- Sayfa 38 ---
idols; in this land which should have been closest to Allah, everything was done to
alienate people from Him.
The ritual of the Hajj which had been carried out since the time of Prophet Ibrahim,
peace be upon him, had been degenerated and now people whirled around the Ka'ba
without any clothes on and clapped their hands. According to them, it was not fit to
come to the Ka'ba with clothes on in which they had sinned. For that reason "clothes
without sin" were being sold at the black market; and for those who could not afford
it, going round the Ka'ba naked had become an altemative.N
Women had become a downtrodden entity. One resulting attitude was that it was
considered shameful to have a female child, and those who could not carry the burden
of this shame chose to put an end to the lives of their daughters ).l Sometimes people
who could not control their shame and hatred would go so far as to bury their
daughters alive and then would boast about it to their friends.
The institution of marriage had been damaged to a great degree, and the gates were
set open to limitless sensuality. Houses of prostitution would declare their trade
openly with banners hanging outside, calling people in. It was considered an honor to
have children from aristocratic parents, and sometimes husbands would send their
wives to men of royalty so that they could have their children. Women would sleep
with various men, and when they got pregnant it was only them who knew who the
child's father was. When they declared the father of their child, this would be taken as
truth and no one could dispute it.E
Because women were exploited to a great extent, people had found a solution
through marrying offtheir children very early, thus transferring their responsibility to
their sons in law.
In other words, the world was thirsty for the Messenger of Allah and was in dire
need for guidance from Allah, and during this period, when darkness was at its
thickest, the time for his arrival had drawn near. The world was preparing itself to his
coming in every way, and the eyes were set on the horizon for the dawn of a new day.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
.!2 Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1160. It should be mentioned that centuries later a king named Sayf ibn
Dhi Yazan would indeed come, just as Satih and Shiqq had said, and joining forces with the
Byzantines and the Persians, he would take over all of Yemen under his rule. After his triumphs,
tribes from around the area come to congratulate and greet him. The Quraysh was among these
tribes, and one person among the Quraysh attracted Sayf ibn Dhi Yazan's attention, and that
person was Abdul Muttalib. He could not rest until he spoke to him, so he first approached him,
asked him his name, and then he told Abdul Muttalib all he knew about the Messenger of Allah
whom he was waiting for. What he said of course contained many good tidings for the happy
grandfather he would one day become. See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 2:328.
11Tabari, Tarikh, 11426
"l.!Jbid., pp. 427-428
llfbid., pp. 427-429
!£ Ayni, Umdatu 'l-Qari, 4:176
!2Suhayli, Rawthu'l-Unf, 1/72
!.!l.rt is said that this man was Abdullah ibnu's-Samir. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11149.
!2 In the coming pages we will speak about the meeting and conversation between our noble Prophet
and these two priests.
~ Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1131-38
:ll Bayhaqi, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 9/114 (18042). The Messenger of Allah would appear in between the
Paran Mountains and be honored with the mission of Prophethood, and then he would migrate to
Medina. Then came Badr, and then came Uhud. The Qurayza tribe that was always conspiring
against peace was surrounded; then some young people who had listened to Ibn Hayyaban at the
time came together and called out to their tribe: "0 you the sons of Qurayza, we swear by Allah
that this is the Messenger that Ibn Hayyaban once told you about."
Then some people who had lived at the time of Ibn Hayyaban responded: "Yes, verily you are telling
the truth. The developments are just as he said."
And then those who recognized this fact came together and gave themselves up to the Messenger of
Allah and became Muslims. Thus both their possessions and their lives were safeguarded. Ibn
Hayyaban had not been able to see the Personage he had been waiting for, but he had facilitated
the understanding of other people when it came to recognizing and submitting to the Messenger of
Allah and it was how these people had become Muslims.
ll Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/54
~Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 2/268
11 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 3/304
~Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1143. Amir ibn Rabia explains: "One day, after I became a Muslim, I told
the Messenger of Allah what Zayd had said. When he received Zayd's greetings, he composed
himself and responded to Zayd's greeting. Then he called Zayd 'an ummah unto himself, saying:
'I see Zayd walking into heaven with his skirts trailing behind him."'
l§.Halabi, Sirah, 11318-321. A respected man called Jarud ibn Ala from the tribe of Quss ibn Saida,
along with a delegation from Abdul Qays tribe, came to the presence of the Messenger in order to
see whether the person whose fame they had heard of was the Personage spoken of in the Gospel.
When they saw his face, they felt an immediate connection to him and when they asked him what
he had been sent with and got their answer, they had no more doubt; for the Alnnad whose good
tidings had been given in the Gospel was the man standing in front of them. Jarud had no more
hesitations and said the following: "I swear by Allah who sent you as the true Prophet, we already
knew of your characteristics from the Gospel. The son of Mary has already given your glad
tidings. Peace and blessings be unto you at all times and thanks be to Allah Who sent you. Stretch
forth your hand 0 Messenger of Allah! I swear and witness that there is no deity but Allah and
you are the Messenger of Allah."

--- Sayfa 40 ---
After these words of their leader, the whole delegation swore witness to the Unity and declared their
submission.
The Messenger of Allah who experienced this kind of plenitude in a period of scarcity was overjoyed
and asked them if anyone knew Quss ibn Saida since they were from the same tribe. They replied:
"Who does not know Quss ibn Saida? We all know him 0 Messenger of Allah."
When he asked: "So what does Quss ibn Saida al-Iyadi do now?"
"He passed away, 0 Messenger of Allah," they answered.
The Prophet then said: "I once saw him on a day in the 'limited' months in the Ukaz fair on a
crimson camel. I don't remember all he said, but he was saying the following with a very nice
poem: '0 people! Come together, lend me your ears and take good note. Each living thing will
die. None of those who die will return. The days of future will come."'
And then after saying this he asked whether any of those present then were present there, and then
added: "Are there any of you who remember his words that day?"
There was a commotion in the rear rows and an Arab came forward and said: "I remember
everything 0 Messenger of Allah."
Our noble Prophet was very happy to hear this. The man was encouraged by the joy of the Pride of
the Universe, peace and blessings be upon him, and spoke of what he had heard from Quss ibn
Saida that day. His address was repeated but it was clear that the Messenger of Allah wanted to
share more memories of Quss ibn Saida: "Do you remember his poem on that day?" he asked.
Abu Bakr put himself forward and said: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for you! I too was
a witness to all that happened that day. This is that he said ... " Then he went on to recite Quss ibn
Saida's poem on that day in Ukaz in the presence of the Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him.
ll Halabi, Sirah, 1/318-3 21. It is clear from the life of Quss that what is important is to engage in an
action that will be remembered though the years and even centuries. It is like leaving an address
for the future! The Messenger of Allah said: "I hope that The Righteous will make Quss ibn Saida
an ummah unto his own on the Judgment Day." Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 11141.
~Shahristani,Al-Milalwa'n-Nihal, 2/86, 87; Buti, Fikhu's-Sirah, 44,45
~ Abu'l-Hasan an-Nadwi, Maza Has ira 'I-A lam Binhitati '1-Muslimin, 28
;!!! 0 children of Adam! Put on your clothes which are your ornament when you go to the mosque
each prayer time. Eat, drink but do not be wasteful; for Allah does not love the wasteful (al-A'raf
7:31). Covering your awrat (private parts) is a fard (an obligation) during Prayer and
circumambulation just as it is in daily life. It is sunnah, the practice of the noble Prophet for
Muslims to put on their best and cleanest clothes when praying, without being too luxurious in
their choice. When sitting down and standing up and with the other members of the congregation
one should be gentle, graceful; this is part of the "best behavior" that a Muslim is expected to
show at the mosque. The previous verses reveal the order of turning faces towards the qiblah
(direction of the Ka'ba) and this order, too, points to orderliness. At the same time, we can also
understand the following from the verse: the mosque and its area should be in the best and most
central location in the city plan of an Islamic city. The real ornament of the mosque is that it
should be a place of continuous worship, that people should attend in big numbers, and that
Muslims should behave fittingly inside it.
l!. In a related verse the issue is described in the following way: "When they are given the happy news
that they will have a girl child, they become purple in the face for their anger and sadness. They
are ashamed of this news they have been given and they try to hide from their friends. What can
they do now? Should they leave it be and suffer shame, or should they put it in the ground. That's
what they contemplate. Take care how wrong their decisions were!" (an-Nahl 16: 58-59).
EBukhari, Sahih, 5: 1970 (4834)

--- Sayfa 41 ---
THE LINEAGE THAT GOES BACK
TO PROPHET IBRAHIM
T
he awaited Last Messenger would appear in the place where Prophet Ibrahim,
peace be upon him, had come to place what had been entrusted to him by
Allah. However, quite a lot of time had to pass for this to happen. After
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, his son Ismail, peace be upon him, lived a settled
life here, and he had twelve sons. It was clear that his son Nabit was different from the
others. The same kind of particularity could be seen in his son Yashjub, and this line
of distinction passed down with Yarub, Tayrah, Muqawwim, Udad and Adnan. It was
clear that this line had a special nobleness and a particularity that could carry the
weight of Prophethood. The same special character of Prophet Muhammad's
forefathers to the twentieth degree could be well observed, after Adnan, Maad, Nizar,
Mudar, Malik, Fihr, Ghalib, Luayy, Ka'b, Murra, Kilab, Qusayy (Zayd), Abdimanaf
(Mughira), Hashim (Amr) and Abdul Muttalib (Shayba),ll and a light that was the
harbinger of the Lord of the Universe could be seen on their foreheads.
Abdul Muttalib
His real name was Shayba and he was one of the four sons of Hashim. As is well
known, Hashim was our noble Prophet's great grandfather and he was one of the most
distinguished men ofHijaz by way of virtue. Showing great hospitality to the pilgrims
to the Ka'ba was a tradition that had started with him, and he was also the one who
established the winter-trade tradition in Quraysh.
One day, on his way to Damascus for trade, he stopped by in Medina. It was here he
married a woman named Selma from the tribe of Najjar. After that he made Medina
his home. However, his life in Medina would not last long and he died during a battle
there. At the time, his wife Selma was pregnant and she gave birth to Abdul Muttalib,
and due to the whites in his hair she gave him the name "Shayba." He was brought up
by his mother and uncles. Because he had been born after his father's death, his

--- Sayfa 42 ---
relatives in Mecca had not been informed of Shayba's existence. When his uncle
Muttalib learnt that he had a nephew in Medina, Shayba was already 7 or 8 years old.
Muttalib came at once to Medina and when he saw his nephew, he hugged him tightly
and after conversing with him for a long time, he asked to take Shayba with him to
Mecca. Although Selma and young Shayba rejected his invitation at first, he
convinced them later and brought Shayba to Mecca.
When the Meccans, who were unaware of Shayba' s existence, saw that Muttalib
had a boy at the back of his saddle, they thought that he must be a slave and called him
Abdul Muttalib, meaning "slave of Muttalib," and this came to be Shayba's name
among the Meccans.
After Muttalib died, Abdul Muttalib became the leader in Mecca, and this was the
start of a period of great responsibility. He had now entered a route that would prepare
the foundations for the coming of the Last Messenger whose good tidings had already
been sent. He was now a powerful leader whom the Meccans looked up to, to whom
they entrusted their worldly affairs, and to whose judgment they referred to when they
wanted to resolve disputes.
Zamzam
The dream that Abdul Muttalib had when sleeping at a place called Hijr under the
shade of the Ka'ba was the start of new things for him. In the dream someone called
out to him and said: "Get up and dig Tayyibah." Abdul Muttalib asked: 'What is the
Tayyibah?"
There was no answer to his question. He had lain down again in the same place and
he dreamt the same person come to him and said: "Dig up Madmuna."
'What is Madmuna?" Abdul Muttalib asked.
But his question was again left unanswered.
On the third day he dreamt of the same person again, and this time he said: "Dig up
Zamzam."
He wanted to get the answer which had been denied to him in the first two
apparitions, and so he asked quickly: "What is Zamzam ?"
This time, there was an answer: "Zamzam is a water spring that will never dry up
and whose source you will never be able to reach however deep you dig. You will
meet the water needs of the pilgrims with Zamzam. A speckled crow will come and
point to its place with its beak. There is also an anthill there at the moment!"
All these led him to serious contemplation, because he knew about the existence of

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Zamzam, for the Jurhum tribe had thrown all their precious belongings into this well,
and after covering its opening and hiding it, they had all fled. Now there was no one
who could remember its place, and the well had become a sort of fairy tale. But now
in his dream he was given the exact location of it, and he was ordered to dig up a
spring whose water would never end and whose source would never be reached. He
was naturally moved into action and he went to the place that had been described to
him in his dream. As it had been said, a speckled crow was flying up and down from a
particular place as if to point it out to him. When he moved closer he also saw the
anthill. He had no more hesitations left. The next day he took his son Harith with him
and there they started to dig for Zamzam.
Not long after, they unearthed a big round rock that was covering the mouth ofthe
well. When they lifted the well's lid, they saw, as had been told in the stories, that it
was full of precious gems and jewels. Abdul Muttalib and his son Harith took these
items one by one from the well and slowly they started to feel the dampness coming
from the bottom. When it was completely uncovered, the Zamzam was found. They
were now experiencing a blessing no one had experienced before. Such blessing and
good grace called for sincere thanks and Abdul Muttalib started to pray: "Allahu
Akbar! Allah is Great!" and rejoiced in his Maker's uniqueness.
His excitement attracted the attention of the Quraysh and they made a big circle
around him. They said: "This is the inheritance from Ismail, we also have a right to it.
You have to give us our share from it," asking him to distribute the gold and silver that
he had found in the well.
Abdul Muttalib said without hesitation: "No! I can't do that, for this has been
bequeathed to me."
But the others were insisting, they said: ''You have to have some understanding! We
will fight with you if needs be, but we will not leave you alone."
From among them, Adiyy ibn Nawfal came to the fore and said to Abdul Muttalib:
"How can this be! You only have your son on your side. How can you go against our
will?" thus challenging and threatening him.
These words of Adiyy affected Abdul Muttalib very deeply. He had to give an
appropriate answer to this man who understood power to be mere brutal force and in
the number of men. He opened his hands and turned his face to the skies and said: "If
Allah gives me ten sons, I will sacrifice one of them by the Ka'ba."
This was both a sincere prayer and a promise made to Allah in the shade of the
Ka'ba.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
The Quraysh continued their hostility. Abdul Muttalib made the following offer:
"Let us appoint someone to judge between us; you can choose the arbitrator yourself."
It wasn't a bad offer; they could appoint whomever they wanted. They said: "Let it
be the oracle ofthe Sad tribe."
This was a person whose word was heeded in the lands of Damascus. It was all the
same for Abdul Muttalib. He shook his head in agreement.
Abdul Muttalib took some of his close relatives with him, and along with
representatives of the various tribes who claimed to have a right in the well, they
headed for Damascus. The road was long, the circumstances harsh. The route passed
through desert most of the time. As a twist of fate, when they were somewhere
between Hijaz and Damascus, the entourage of Abdul Muttalib ran out of water.
Running out of water was the worst thing that could happen in the desert. They tried to
push on without water for a while but the desert seemed to have no end. Even though
they were in a dispute with the Meccans with whom they were walking, they asked for
water from them. But the Meccans had no intentions to share their water. They were
saying: "We, too, are in the desert and we fear that what happened to you may happen
to us and we may also run out of water."
It was clear that the Meccans were not going to help them. Abdul Muttalib turned to
his relatives and asked: "What is your opinion?"
'We obey your orders. We will do as you say," they said.
They had two options, either to stop and wait for death, or to disperse and look for
water. They chose the second option.
They decided to move with the motivation to find water. When Abdul Muttalib
went to his camel, he saw that as the camel rose, sweet spring water was flowing from
beneath him. He was as excited as when he had witnessed the Zamzam water come
out, and he shouted: "Allahu Akbar! Allah is Great," rejoicing in the oneness of Allah.
The Meccans surrounded him once again. Whoever saw the scene was alarmed. In a
place where drought was so severe and at a place where people and animals had come
to the point of dying of thirst, right in the middle of the scorching desert, the
appearance of a spring right on the surface of the ground was a blessing that indeed
called for jubilation and the shouting of Allah is Great.
Abdul Muttalib first made the mouth of the water wider with his sword, and gave
water to his animals and friends. After that he invited the Meccans who had come with
them and who had denied them water, saying:
"Come and drink from the water that Allah has given us and our animals to drink."

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Everybody was looking dumbfounded at each other. They couldn't believe their eyes.
It was impossible and yet it had happened. They first drank from the water as much as
they desired, and then they brought their animals to quench their thirst. They were a
little ashamed in the face of such grace, for Abdul Muttalib, to whom they had not
given their water although he had asked for it, was now sharing what he had with
them. It was clear that they were suffering from the pang of their conscience. They
turned to Abdul Muttalib and said: "We swear by Allah, 0 Abdul Muttalib, that the
judgment is already passed against us. We swear that we will not dispute your rights
concerning the Zamzam well. There is no doubt that it is your right. Allah has
bequeathed you both this water in the middle of the desert and the Zamzam in Mecca."
The dispute was now resolved and there was no need to go to a referee. They rested
for a while and then started the route back, reaching Mecca once again.I1
The Ten Sons of Abdul Muttalib and
His Efforts to Keep His Vow
Abdul Muttalib carried on his duty as leader for a long while and he had ten sons.
When his ten sons grew to a certain age and became young men who could now help
him, he remembered the vow he had taken when he discovered Zamzam-that he had
to sacrifice one of them, for he had sincerely asked Allah from his bounty and had said
that if his prayer was answered, he would sacrifice one of his sons at the Ka'ba. His
prayer had been answered, and he had to be true to his vow.
He first gathered his sons Harith, Zubayr, Hajal, Dirar, Muqawwim, Abduluzza
(Abu Lahab ), Abbas, Hamza, Abu Talib and Abdullah together and discussed the
issue with them. Since it was a vow taken by their father there was no way they could
object to it, and so they said they accepted it. However, it was not yet clear who
among them would be the one sacrificed. Abdul Muttalib asked them to write their
names on arrows and give them to him. It was done as he said. He then took the
arrows and went to the idol Huballl in the Ka'ba, and chose one of the arrows. He
looked at the name on the arrow to see that it was "Abdullah." Abdullah was his
youngest son whom he loved very much. But the verdict was final and one could not
change it. He went out and told those who were waiting for the result. Then he took
Abdullah by the hand and went to where the idols of Isaf and Naila were, with a knife
in his hand. This was no joke, and he showed complete submission like his forefather
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him. This was the fortitude expected to be shown by
the grandfather of the Messenger whose coming had been awaited for many years.
Abdul Muttalib was ready to sacrifice his son, doing his part in keeping his vow. His

--- Sayfa 46 ---
son Abdullah also showed great faith, just like Prophet Ismail, peace be upon him.
People from the Quraysh saw them and approached them to say: 'What do you want
to do, 0 Abdul Muttalib?" He answered peacefully: "I will sacrifice him." They tried
to stop him and said: "Do not do it! It is not something that can be done. If you do this
here today, people will start to come here to sacrifice their sons as well. Do you want
to root out human kind here or what?"
However, the objections offered no solution to help Abdul Muttalib keep his word.
He was not convinced. One man among them came to the fore and made the following
suggestion: "Do not sacrifice him, for you have an excuse. Let us bring our
possessions together and save him in return for his ransom."
Abdul Muttalib was not convinced by this suggestion either. Another voice rose
from the crowd: "Do not do it! Take him to Hijaz if you like. Bring him to a wise man
there, you can tell him the situation and then you can walk on the path he points out to
you. If he says "sacrifice" then you can sacrifice him, but if he shows you another
way, you will follow his instruction and thus you will have kept your word."
This suggestion seemed reasonable to Abdul Muttalib. He let go of the knife from
his hand and he went to a wise man with a group of men from Mecca. They found him
in Khaybar and told him about what had come to pass. Afterwards they asked him to
find a solution for them. The wise man said: "Go now and come back when I have
news."
And so they had to leave. Abdul Muttalib passed the night in prayer; he was praying
for an auspicious outcome.
They went to the wise man again the next day and knocked on his door. When the
door opened it was clear that the wise man now had an alternative for Abdul Muttalib.
The wise man asked: 'What is the ransom for a man's life among you?"
"Ten camels," they answered.
"Go now back to your land. Put the man that is to be sacrificed and the ten camels
together. Then start drawing lots. If the lot says the young man, repeat the lot with
added ten camels. Continue drawing lots till the lots say that it is the camels that are to
be sacrificed, only then does it mean that Allah is content with your deed and you will
have saved your friend's life."
This was a good offer, and it had been suggested by a man who was considered an
authority by everyone. So they hurried back to Mecca.
Before doing what the wise man had said, Abdul Muttalib turned to his Lord once
again and prayed that the steps he would take would lead to an auspicious outcome.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Then they put his son Abdullah and the ten camels together and started drawing lots.
Abdul Muttalib was standing at a comer, supplicating to Allah. The first lot pointed
to Abdullah. They added ten more camels and repeated the lot, and again it pointed to
Abdullah. Nine times they added ten camels and all lots pointed against Abdullah. In
the tenth draw, the lot pointed to the camels whose number had now reached a
hundred. Everyone rejoiced and they said to Abdul Muttalib: "Now you have won the
good grace of Allah, 0 Abdul Muttalib."
But Abdul Muttalib wanted to be better advised and so repeated drawing the lots to
be sure of the verdict. He repeated this three times and saw that the lots were in his
favor. All these meant something, and people were satisfied in their hearts that saving
Abdullah's life in return for a hundred camels was the right decision. They sacrificed
the hundred camels there and thus the sincere vow Abdul Muttalib had taken all those
years ago had now been put into practice.l2
Years later the Messenger of Allah would reply to a Bedouin who called him: "0
son of two sacrifices!"
''Yes, I am the son of two sacrifices,"ll thus verifying his epithet. Just like Prophet
Ismail, peace be upon him, his father Abdullah had also lain under the knife and had
offered himselfto Allah in complete submission.
The Blessed Home
Abdullah, the father of our noble Prophet was Abdul Muttalib's youngest son. It was
clear to all eyes that he was different from the other sons that he had. He was a man of
great virtue. That's why Abdul Muttalib loved him above all his children. Abdullah
also had a very beautiful face. After the lots were drawn and the hundred camels were
sacrificed, Abdul Muttalib took his son Abdullah by the hand and went to the land of
the Zuhra tribe. His intention was to marry Abdullah there. He went to the leader of
the Zuhra tribe, Wahb ibn Abdi Manaf, and told him that they were asking for the
hand of Amina, who was an honorable girl of great lineage. At the time, Amina was
known among the Quraysh for her virtue and her good family. The leader of the tribe
responded favorably and soon enough the son of Abdul Muttalib and the daughter of
Wahb were married. Their first home upon marriage was the hearth in which the Last
Messenger would be born, the Last Messenger whose good tidings had been given by
each Prophet starting from Adam, peace be upon him, and whose coming had eagerly
been awaited by all who had open and understanding hearts.
Abdullah was a tradesman, and soon after his marriage, he went on a trade caravan.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
When he came near Medina, he fell ill and had to stay there. Soon after, he returned to
his Lord. He was 25 years old when he passed away. The inheritance he had left
behind was five camels, some sheep and an Abyssinian slave girl by the name of
UmmAyman.
When news of his death reached Mecca, the family of Abdul Muttalib was thrown
into great grief. Amina would pour out her sadness into poetic verse, and would cry
after her husband who had died so young.l§ But this sadness had to be born, just like
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, who had come to the valley of Bakka to build the
Ka'ba, Abdullah too had come to the city where the awaited Prophet would migrate to
and spend the rest of his life; to the city from where the cause of Allah would be
carried to the comers of the world. In a way, he had come to Medina as a kind of
pioneer to leave his trace before the Sultans coming. In the meanwhile, Amina was
pregnant with him, whose coming the whole world was eagerly awaiting.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
l2. Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/55, 56; Tabari, Tarikh, 21172
11 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/278
12. When the Meccans faced a problem they could not resolve, for instance genealogy or fatherhood
issues, they would come to this idol in the Ka'ba where people would pile up their presents, they
would then draw lots and decide according to the result.
~Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/288-290; Tabari, Tarikh, 1/498
lZ Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2/604 ( 4036); Alusi, Ruhu 'l-Maani, 23/134
I§ Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/100

--- Sayfa 50 ---
THE INCIDENT OF THE ELEPHANT
I
n the meantime, Abdul Muttalib had another worry. The Yemen governor of the
Abyssinian king Najashi had gathered his army to come and destroy Mecca.
Najashi was jealous of the fact that people would go to Mecca to pray at the
Ka'ba and he had made a great temple in San'a as a challenge to the Ka'ba. He had
given all he had in order to make this temple as imposing and majestic as possible;
making sure that the best ornaments of the time would decorate the building. He was
being helped by the Byzantine Emperor in this endeavor. The emperor's aim was to
divert people from going to the Ka'ba and come and pray at this church instead. He
spoke of this openly in the letter he wrote to Najashi: "0 King! I had such a great
church made for you that no church like it has been made for a king before. I will not
stop until I have changed the Arabs' mind to come and worship in this church. "12
But of course it was not possible to stop people from coming to a place that had
been founded on sincerity and faith with the lure of an alternative temple.
In short, people had not heeded his efforts. Besides, a man from the Kinanah tribe
had heard that Abraha had had this church built in order to divert pilgrims from their
route, and in an act of insult, he had soiled the inside and outside of the church, and
then had heaped garbage in the middle of it. This had enraged Abraha and was the last
straw, so he ordered his army to gather at once: "There is no doubt that the Arabs did
this because they are aware that this will be an alternative to their house; I swear I will
bring their Ka'ba down stone by stone."
Such were the threats he kept making.:!!!
He had also sent a letter to Najashi and asked him to send his great elephant named
Mahmud in this campaign. He then prepared a 6000 strong-army and charged towards
Mecca. There were elephants in his army as well. He himself was leading the elephant
Mahmud that the Abyssinian king had sent. When they reached the place called
Mughammis near Mecca, he ordered his forces to rest and sent Aswad ibn Maqsud
and a platoon to Mecca for investigation. This platoon came close to Mecca and stole

--- Sayfa 51 ---
many precious items belonging to the Quraysh, Hudhayl and Tihama tribes, along
with two hundred camels that belonged to Abdul Muttalib. The Quraysh, Hudhayl and
Tihama tribes were thus informed about the threat that was now at their door.
But when they heard of the power of the army that was approaching, they
understood that there was little they could do, and they started to wait in despair.
Subsequently, Abraha sent the following message to Abdul Muttalib with his man
Hunata: "I have not come here to fight war with you; my reason for coming is to
destroy the Ka'ba. If you do not stand in my way, I will not harm you."
The messenger who gave Abdul Muttalib the news received an unexpected answer:
"Neither do we seek to fight with him; nor do we have the means to do so, and this
house is the house of Allah where certain things have been prohibited, and it is a
reminder from Prophet Ibrahim. If it will be protected, it will be protected by Him;
and if He will let it be destroyed, there is nothing we can do to stop it."
Hunata asked Abdul Muttalib to come with him all the way to Mughammis.
Abraha' s intentions were clear and when he set out to do what he wanted there seemed
to be nothing, by way of argument or physical power, which could stop him. However,
there was always hope for a situation that had not yet come to pass. Even in these
circumstances, people were thinking of ways to stop him.
Abdul Muttalib looked for faces that he might know and then learnt that an old
friend of his, Dhi Nafr, was there. His happiness was short lived because he learnt that
Dhi Nafr was among Abraha's slaves. Abdul Muttalib wanted to speak to Abraha and
ask him to decide against the attack. He then turned to his friend: "0 Dhi Nafr! Can
you not find a way to dispel this calamity from above our heads?"
'What can a slave, who doesn't know when he will be killed, do? There is nothing I
can do in this state I am in," replied Dhi Nafr, and then added: "Still, the stableman
who deals with the elephants is my friend. I can send word to him and then ask him to
find a way to let you speak with the king so that you can put your case to him."
There were still signs of hope and the stableman was told about the situation. Soon
after, the stableman were in the presence of the king: "0 King! This is the leader of
Quraysh; he wants permission to speak with you. He is also the owner of Mecca
caravans, he gives graciously to his guests, and he even sends food to the vultures
living at the top of the mountains. Let him speak with you so you may hear what he
has to say."
The request was accepted. When Abraha saw Abdul Muttalib, a heavily built and
handsome man, he welcomed him as an honored guest. He got up from the high place

--- Sayfa 52 ---
where he was sitting and came down to sit on the ground with Abdul Muttalib, and
then asked with the help of his interpreter: "What is it that you need? What do you
want from me?"
An unexpected answer was again on Abdul Muttalib's lips: "I want you to give me
back my two hundred camels."
Abraha was shocked. What kind ofleadership was this?
Abraha had come with an army that was impossible to resist, he was shouting at the
top of his lungs that he was going to lay the city to ruin, and this man was after his
own possessions, without worrying about what was going to befall the city. He said:
"To tell you the truth, I was at first quite taken by your stature," and then added: "But
as you speak, I understand that you are no such man. You are after the two hundred
camels that I took from you, and you say nothing about the army that has come to
bring down the house that represents you and your fathers' religion."
Abdul Muttalib did not lose his temper, and said with all sincerity: "I own only the
camels; verily, that house also has an Owner who will protect it."
In other words, what he meant was ''You believe now that you can do anything you
want; but it is not as easy as you think." For no one could harm the weak who sought
refuge in the real possessor of power and force, except for Allah the Almighty. Abdul
Muttalib was trying to remind Abraha of this power.
''No one can protect it against me," roared Abraha with fury.
Abdul Muttalib did not alter his attitude and in an assured manner said: "Well then,
we'll see, here is Him and here are you."
What he meant was "If you challenge Him, then you will have to bear the
consequences."
The meeting got very tense. Abraha was greatly infuriated by Abdul Muttalib's
responses, and yet he gave him back his camels.
Abdul Muttalib returned to Mecca and gathered the people together to tell them
about the gravity of the situation. He told people to go hide in the mountains in order
protect themselves from harm. He then came to the Ka'ba with the prominent figures
of Mecca. He held close to the mallet of the gate, and then they started to pray for
hours on end to the Gracious Lord in order to be able to protect the house that had
been entrusted to them by Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, and then they too left
the Ka'ba and went to the mountain top to wait.
In the meantime, Abraha had prepared his army and he had ordered them to march
and demolish the Ka'ba. But there were those in his army who did not obey his orders.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
One of the stablemen for the elephants, Nufayl ibn Habib, had whispered to the ear of
Mahmud the elephant, the prized gift from Najashi and from whom a lot was expected
in the battle. He said: "Keep sitting where you are and do not get up! Then you can
return safely to the place where you came from, for you are in a place where certain
things have been prohibited by Allah."
This man, who although was in Abraha's entourage, carried the characteristics of a
believer. He left the field having accomplished his mission, and then went to seek
refuge in the mountain.
It is of course not known how Allah, the Maker of All Causes, will make certain
things or people the causes for good outcomes. Mahmud indeed kept sitting in its
place and did not stand up despite all efforts. They tried to at least change its direction,
upon which it stood up and went galloping. They turned him in all directions, and the
one direction it did not run towards was the direction of the Ka'ba. They tried to force
the poor animal with all methods imaginable, but all to no avail. Mahmud was injured
and was bleeding in many places.
Suddenly, they witnessed something that they were not at all expecting. From the
direction of the coast, a black mass had formed and was now approaching them. When
the mass approached them a little closer, they saw that it was a group of birds. These
birds were coming towards them with great noise, and it appeared that they had
chosen Abraha's army, who had sworn war against the idea of Allah, as their target.
They were coming towards the army with little stones-the size of chickpeas-that
they were carrying. Each was carrying three stones, one in their beaks and one in each
foot. Each stone they dropped hit a soldier without a single miss, and the soldier that
was hit would buckle down immediately. A great fear descended upon the army. They
had never seen or heard of such a thing. The soldiers were running around screaming,
going every direction of the compass and yet none were able to escape the stones.
Abraha had taken his own share of the mayhem. The stone that had hit him as he tried
to escape had caused his body to disintegrate, and he gave his last breath as he had
turned back in his agony. In a very little while the army of Abraha, which no one
dared to stand up against, was being defeated against those who had gained power by
putting their trust in the One who is the possessor of all power. It was as if an unseen
hand had swept Abraha's army, like wiping the dirt off a table; and thus Abraha's
army was cleared out of Hijaz. This cleansing would be followed by another Divine
cleansing; heavy rain started and the floods that ran after cleared the land of all the
corpses, washing them away to the sea. Thus, the army of the unbelievers that had
opposed the cause of Allah would be cleared away completely from the lands of the

--- Sayfa 54 ---
Hijaz, transforming it into a livable space of peace, for it was soon, the Sultan of the
Realms, peace and blessings be upon him, would come to honor these lands.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
l2Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/91; Tabari, Tarikh, 21109
~Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/91-92

--- Sayfa 56 ---
THE HAPPY BIRTH
A
bdul Muttalib's trust in Allah and what had happened to Abraha's army had
become tales that people would tell each other. Minds were blown away,
and it was now clear to all that the Ka'ba built by Prophets Ibrahim and
Ismail, peace be upon them, through prayer and physical efforts would never be
destroyed. Now the world was getting ready to see the fruit of their prayer.
Amina was pregnant with the Last Messenger whom humanity was eagerly
awaiting, and her pregnancy was going very smoothly without the usual pains and
difficulties that other mothers experience. Apart from that, several good tidings were
being whispered in her ear. One day she heard the following: "Verily, you are
pregnant with the lord ofthe community, the ummah. When you give birth to him, say
'I entrust him to the One against the evil of the jealous' and then name him
'Muhammad. "'±l
Amina was much moved by what she had experienced. Yes, she would bring him,
whose father had died, to the world. But what did it mean that this orphan would be
the 'lord of the ummah'? She had not heard the name Muhammad before. It was not a
common name at the time. It had been given to only three people in Hijaz. They were
all people whose fathers had spent time with kings and all were the People of the
Book.
They had all died during their wives' pregnancy and before they died, they had all
told their wives to name the child Muhammad should the child be a boy, for they all
knew that the Last Messenger who would come towards the end of time would be
called Muhammad and that his star was about to be born.~ The child she had been
entrusted with was now the subject of her dreams, and what she saw alleviated some
of her heavy load. One day she would dream that a great light was emanating from her
body, one that enlightened the palaces of Basra and Damascus.:!1
The date was 20 April 571. Around 50 days had passed after the incident with the
elephants. The lunar calendar was showing the 12th of the month of Rabiulawwal. It

--- Sayfa 57 ---
was a Monday. The dawn was about to break and a birth was taking place that would
bring light to all darkness. With Amina were present Mother Shifa, the mother of
Abdurrahman ibn Awf, and Mother Fatima, the mother ofUthman ibn Abi'l-As. Then
the Last Sultan, Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, whose good
tidings had been sung for centuries, honored the world with his coming, with a very
easy birth. Amina's son had come to the world; but he was unlike any other children.
His lips were moving and he seemed to be saying something. Mother Shifa listened
carefully and heard him say the words "May Allah show mercy on you." The room
was full of light, and the East and the West were infused with this light. The light was
so intense that one could see as far as the palaces of the land of the Romans, the
eastern Roman Empire.~
Mother Fatima witnessed that all comers of the house were full of light. It was as if
the stars in the sky had descended on the earth.:!l
Word was sent immediately to Abdul Muttalib who was praying at the Ka'ba at the
time. He hurried to the house. When he held the Light that the universe had been
waiting for, his beard was washed with tears. The fatherless son of the son he loved
most, the son of Abdullah, had now come to life and was looking at him with
meaningful eyes. The mark between his shoulder blades had caught everyone's
attention; this was the mark of Prophethood of the Last Messenger as described by
many religious scholars. When it came to naming him, Amina told Abdul Muttalib
what she had dreamed of and they named him "Muhammad." Then to explain his
gratitude, Abdul Muttalib took his grandson to the Ka'ba. Now the Ka'ba was meeting
its twin. When asked why he had given his grandson this name, Abdul Muttalib would
answer: "I saw a chain made of silver in my dream. A pillar was rising from this
chain; one end was going towards the sky and the other to the depths of the earth.
There were two more poles, one rising towards the east and the other to the west. Then
it all seemed to transform into a tree. Each leaf was full of light. Everyone in the east
and the west were turning their face to this tree and were trying to hold fast to it. ":!2
He had asked the meaning of this dream to interpreters and they had said that
someone that would come from his line would be considered a pillar and be followed
by those in the east and the west; that the creatures of the heavens and the earth would
bless him and make him their leader. When Abdul Muttalib put these together with
what Amina had said, he had no more hesitations and started to call his grandson
Muhammad.
Seven days passed, and as IS the Arab custom, he took his son and had him
circumcised.£

--- Sayfa 58 ---
The woman who breast-fed the Messenger of Allah after his mother when he was
only a week old was Suwayba, the slave girl of Abu Lahab. Abu Lahab had given her
freedom as a token ofhisjoy when she brought him the news ofhis nephew's birth. It
is known that the uncle who becomes the eternal adversary of his nephew after the
Prophet starts to receive the revelation will be given a measure of solace due to this
humane action of his. A year after his death, Abu Lahab appeared in his brother
Abbas's dream. He seemed to be in a very bad condition. His brother asked: "So what
happened to you? What have you seen there?"
Upon which Abu Lahab pointed to between his two fingers and said: "After leaving
you I have not experienced anything good; I can only get a gulp of water because I
gave Suwayba her freedom."~
Wet nurse Suwayba had also breast-fed another son of Abdul Muttalib, our noble
Prophet's uncle Hamza before; thus Hamza and the Messenger of Allah had become
milk brothers.~
The News Coming from Everywhere
Not long after, different news started to emerge from different places regarding the
new birth. The newborn Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, was on
everyone's lips; for he was the Last Sultan of humanity and the ripest fruit of the tree
of creation. Just as he was the reason existence came into being; the future of
humanity depended on the message he was carrying. Creation was showing that it was
connected to his coming and drew people's attention to this blessed birth through
different incidents and their manifestations.
First of all, news spread in Mecca that the idols in the Ka'ba had fallen down during
the night of the blessed birth. They could not understand who had done it or why it
had been done. Eventually, phenomenal news from all over Arabia and beyond started
arriving. In each piece of news were hidden the messages of "Welcome" to the
Messenger and hidden in each object or event was present glad tidings.
A New Star
According to widespread belief, especially among Jewish scholars, the coming of the
Last Messenger had drawn close and the star that would herald his birth was about to
be born. For a while a type of firework had already seemed to have started in the skies,
for there were many shooting stars drawing arcs across the heavens.
So many shooting stars had never been experienced before, and there never would
be quite as many after that night. The stars were like missiles falling on the source of

--- Sayfa 59 ---
information for evil thoughts, protecting him and the message that would come with
him. Star reading and fortune telling that was common in the Hijaz up until his birth
would end in order that the revelation may not be mixed up with it; the oracles that
looked up to the skies for news would now have nothing to "read."
There was a Jewish merchant wondering around that blessed day in Mecca. In the
morning he asked the Quraysh: "0 people of Quraysh! Was a child born this night
among you?"
At the time no one had had the news yet and so they said: "Honestly, we do not
know."
After that the merchant swore to the uniqueness of Allah and advised them the
following: "You are misinformed! Go and have a good look and do not forget what I
will tell you: the Last Messenger of the ummah, Ahmad, has come to the world. Have
a good look! If he is not here, he is in Palestine. Between his two shoulder blades there
is the mark ofProphethood, a patch covered with black-yellow hair."
The Meccans were surprised at the merchant's words. They were looking at each
other in disbelief, for they were not aware of such a birth as yet. Then this gathering
dispersed and everyone went home. Soon enough each of them received the news that
Abdul Muttalib had had a grandson and that he was named Muhammad. What was
more, this boy had a mark between his shoulder blades, just as the Jewish merchant
had described. Everyone who heard of the birth came to the merchant. Before they
could even say "You had talked about the birth of a child ... " the merchant asked
hastily: "Was he born before or after I told you?"
"Before," they told him.
The man was really excited upon hearing the news and he asked them to take him to
this boy at once. When he came near Amina and saw the mark between the shoulder
blades of little Muhammad, he fainted. When he came to his senses, people made fun
of him.
'Woe to you! What's with you?" they teased.
And he answered: "The tribe of Israel has now lost the lineage of Prophethood. This
is how it's written. Now, the Prophethood rests with the Arabs. Rejoice, 0 Quraysh,
for he will reach such power with you that his news will fill all that is between the east
and the west. "22
A similar situation was occurring in Medina. The famous poet Hasan ibn Thabit,
who was an eight year old boy at the time, would years later speak of the excitement
with the following words: "I was a child of seven or eight at the time and I understood

--- Sayfa 60 ---
everything I heard. I saw a Jewish scholar standing on one of Yathrib's castles and
calling out: '0 people Y athrib! 0 people Y athrib!'
Everyone was surprised by his panic. Maybe a very important event had happened,
or a great calamity was at hand. Soon people gathered around him to ask: 'What is this
alarm about, what's with you?'
The following was what he said to those who had gathered around him: 'Tonight,
the star of the new born Ahmad was born. "'2.1.
The Panic in the Land of the Persians
The news that came from Persia, one of the two important empires at the time, was
quite interesting as well. The location of the palaces of Chosroes (Kisra) had been
shaken furiously, and the four walls of this palace, which was the pride and joy of the
Persians, had crumbled down. In one night, the water of the Sawa Lake, which was
considered to be holy, had disappeared. The Persian emperor had dreamt that night
that Arab horses were leading fat and powerful camels to the Tigris and fording the
river, and then spreading throughout his land. The king woke up with great alarm and
panic, and in the morning he put his crown on his head and shared this dream with his
viziers. He told them to find someone who would know the meaning of this dream.
Just then, the news came that the fire that had been burning for a thousand years in a
place called Istahrabad, and around which people would circumambulate, had been
put out during the night, never to bum again. The king turned to the first man near him
and asked what all this meant. The wise vizier said: "It seems something of great
importance has happened in Arab lands."
It was clear that something very important had happened; but it was not clear yet
what it was. He then sent word to the Hire governor Numan ibn Munzir to look into
this issue and also to find someone who would know what all this meant. The
governor understood the delicacy and gravity of the situation and sent Abdul Masih to
his uncle Satih, the famous scholar and oracle. Abdul Masih came to his uncle who
was worn out with age and was living out his last days. He too wanted to find out the
meaning of all this as soon as possible. Abdul Masih told all that had come to pass.
His uncle said the following: "0 Abdul Masih! The owner of the great staff has been
sent; he will execute the duty of receiving holy revelation. Samawa valley has been
flooded, Saw a Lake has dried up, and the inextinguishable fire of the Persians has died
out: this means the Arabian Peninsula is no more for Satih. The Absolute Ruler has
deemed it thus, and the string of Prophethood has thus been knotted down at both
ends. These lands will be ruled by rulers as many as the walls that have crumbled

--- Sayfa 61 ---
today. Believe me, all these will come to pass."21
And these were the last words of Satih. It seemed as if he had lived so long just to
be able to say these words, and having completed his mission, he left the world in
peace.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
±l Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 2/263
;g Ibn Seyyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 1/88
:!2. Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 41127; 5/262; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/293
~Qastalani,Mawahib, 11122
:!2.Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1/267
:!!!Abu Zahra, Khatamu 'n-Nabiyyin, 11140
£ Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 61. There are some reports that the Messenger of Allah had
been born circumcised or that he was circumcised by Gabriel during the incident of "opening of
the heart" when he was with his wet-nurse. However, it is not necessary to look for such a
miraculous event for the occasion of the circumcision of a Personage, peace and blessings be
upon him, who personified perfectness and was in all respects an example for the ummah. These
reports were studied by scholars and their authenticity has been found to be dubious (See Ibn
Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 2/265; Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1/91; Halabi, Sirah, 1/87, 88).
That's why we have stuck to the report that says that he was circumcised on the seventh day.
Supporting this report is also that the Messenger of Allah had his grandson circumcised on his
seventh day as well.
~Bukhari, Sahih, 5/1961 (4813); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11110, 111; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/108. Suwayba
visited our noble Prophet during the time he was in Mecca and our mother Khadija wanted to give
her her freedom. There are reports that Abu Lahab did not allow it. According to these reports
Suwayba attained her freedom only after the migration to Medina. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/108.
When we look at the reports concerning this subject, we see that the possibility of Suwayba being
a Muslim is very little indeed.
;!2 Hamza was breast-fed by Halima as-Sadia for a short while and thus he and our noble Prophet
became milk brothers. See Bukhari, Sahih, 2/935 (2502).
22Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11162, 163
l!.Qastalani,Mawahib, 11122
g Tabari, Tarikh, 21131, 132. History would indeed bear witness to this destruction, 67 years later,
during the leadership of Caliph Umar. The Sasanids who were ruled by fourteen kings would
submit themselves to the reign of Islam after the Battle of Qadisiyya.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
THE YEARS WITH THE WET NURSES
I
t was the custom in Mecca to send children to wet nurses in the villages so that
they may grow up to be strong and that they may learn a pure Arabic since Mecca
had a very hot and tiring atmosphere. Some tribes who lived away from the city
were able to preserve their pure culture unadulterated by the inequities witnessed in
the cities at the time of the Period of Ignorance. It was common practice for children
to be sent away to have a healthier upbringing, and this practice had turned into a
trade. There was a market for wet nurses in Mecca, people would gather here at
particular times, the wet nurses and the parents of children would meet there and then
the children would go with the wet mothers to the desert.
Likewise, Harith ibn Abduluzza and his wife Halima hint Abdullah ibn Harith had
come from the land of the Banu Sad with ten other women. The drought had been
going on for some time, and there was nothing left at hand. The children in their
entourage cried for a morsel to eat, but the mothers had no means to feed them.
Because they themselves had not been able to eat for some time, their milk had dried
up, and they were desperate for a little drop of anything in order to calm their children.
Their only hope was for rain to fall. The way to Mecca had seemed endless. The thin
donkey that Halima was riding and Harith's old camel had trouble walking, and they
kept falling behind their friends. When they finally made it to Mecca, their friends had
already done their trade and each of them had taken a child to look after for a while
and was now getting ready for the journey back. Halima and Harith started to look for
children to wet nurse too. Only Muhammad, Abdullah's fatherless son, was left in the
town. Those who had knocked upon their door had decided not to take him when they
learnt that his father was dead for fear that the family would not be able to pay the wet
nurse's wages. Of course they were unaware that he was the person to whom
everybody would tum to soon.
Halima and Harith came to the door as well, and like the others, they also went to
look for another baby, in fear of not getting paid. But they found none, and they did
not want to return empty handed after their long journey. Halima said to her husband:

--- Sayfa 64 ---
"I don't want to go back among my friends without having taken a child to breast-
feed. Let's go and take that orphan and then return."
"Do so if you want to, maybe Allah will give us plenitude and good fortune through
him,"~ said Harith, and so they returned to Abdul Muttalib's door.
When Amina saw that they had returned, she first told them that the boy they
wanted was no ordinary child. She then spoke about the ease she experienced during
her pregnancy, her dream and what she had been told to be the meaning of this dream,
for he was entrusted to Amina to keep not just for herself but for the whole of
humanity till the end of time. That's why he had to be shown extra care, and not a
single hair strand on his head could be injured.
The family of Harith felt great contentment when they took the child from Amina.
When Halima as-Sadia took him in her arms, she wanted to breast-feed him
immediately. She was surprised to see that her breasts that had dried up were now
filled with milk! First the Messenger of Allah and then the son of Halima, Abdullah,
suckled from the breast. Then they both went to sleep. Normally, Abdullah was a
restless child who would be impossible to put to sleep.
When they came near the old camel, they saw that the camel's udders were also full
of milk, for even it had benefited from this good fortune. They milked the camel and
drank, and the night they spent in Mecca was the happiest ever in their lives. The next
morning Harith had turned to Halima to say: "Know this well Halima, you have
chosen your suckling child very wisely, from a very auspicious family."
Just like her husband, Halima had also realized the plenitude bestowed upon them.
She said: "I swear by Allah, that is what I believe as well."
They finished their business in Mecca, and having found a suckling child, they set
off for their homeland. Amina looked at her son affectionately as he departed for a
long while, and she entrusted him to the hands of the Gracious Lord who has all the
power and honor, so that nothing bad should befall him.
When Halima as-Sadia mounted her donkey with the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him in her arms, she realized that the thin and weak animal that
she had come to Mecca with had somehow changed and now was walking very
briskly. Such was their pace that they had caught up with their friends who had left
Mecca a day earlier, and it was clear that they would not be left behind this time. Their
friends were trying to understand how it was that they did not seem to have any sign
of tiredness while they themselves were exhausted from the journey. The called out to
Halima: "0 daughter of the Zuayb tribe, what is going on with you? Were you not the

--- Sayfa 65 ---
one who was always left behind? Or is this not the same donkey you rode when
coming to Mecca?"
The now self-assured Halima answered with the joy of the grace she had been
bestowed: "I swear it is! It is the very same donkey I came to Mecca with."
And then she added: "I have verily chosen the most auspicious suckling baby ever."
They asked: "Is that the son of Abdul Muttalib?"
Yes, there was true goodness in this event and Halima and Harith, who were always
after good deeds, were now experiencing the goodness they had always hoped for.l±
The grace they had attained was not limited to the easing of their journey; on their
return they would see that their land which was normally dry and not very fertile,
would start to yield much better, and their sheep, whose stomachs would be full with
the good produce of their land would produce much more milk. The owners of other
herds would chastise their shepherds: "Woe to you! Go graze the sheep where Halima
grazes hers so that our sheep also return with their bellies filled with milk."
Halima as-Sadia was now someone whom everyone viewed with envy due to the
plenty she was experiencing.
Two years passed in this manner, with visits to Mecca every six months. The Pride
of the Universe had thus grown up. He was no longer suckling; the time that had been
agreed upon had come. Although they were reluctant to do it, they had to bring the
little Muhammad back to his mother. It was very difficult for Halima as-Sadia, who
had become like a real mother to him, to part from little Muhammad it was as if her
own flesh was being tom away from her. She wanted to keep him a little longer by her
side. This made her contemplate to say the following to Amina: "I fear he may catch
the Meccan plague, so let him stay with us for a little longer."
And so she made the offer to Amina. This was a difficult thing to accept for Amina
as his real mother so she didn't think favorably of this offer at first. But on the other
hand the plague was really taking its toll in Mecca, and in order to protect him she
accepted the offer. Happily, the Harith family returned to the land of the Sad tribe
once again with little Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him.
The Incident of Opening up the Chest
A little more time passed. The Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings be upon him,
was playing with his milk siblings and the children of the Sad tribe, and was looking
after the sheep as well. On such a day when they were playing with the sheep at the
back of the house, his milk brother came running to Halima excited and short of

--- Sayfa 66 ---
breath: "My brother from the Quraysh was taken by two men in white dresses; they
opened up his chest and then put everything together again."2.2:
The two men that the child saw were two angels, one of them Gabriel and they had
opened up the heart of Allah's Messenger whose message would later embrace the
whole world, and had washed it with Zamzam water.
The parents were in anguish. They ran to the place described. Little Muhammad
was waiting there with a pale face. Halima and Harith had been terribly frightened.
First Halima and then Harith hugged him and then asked: "What happened to you
son?"
"Two men in white robes came. One of them had a golden bowl filled with snow.
Then they laid me on the ground. They opened up my chest, took out my heart, cut it
into two. They took out a black thing out of it, threw it away and then washed out my
insides with snow till my heart became completely clean. Then one said to the other:
'Weigh this with ten ofhis followers.'
They weighed me with ten people and I was heavier. He repeated: 'Weigh him with
a hundred people.' I was weighed and then I was the heavier. They said: 'Weigh him
with a thousand from his followers; so I was and I was still the heavier. Upon seeing
that the man said: 'Leave him be, I swear by Allah that if you weighed him against all
his followers, he would still come on top. "'22
These developments put fear into the parents' hearts. When they returned home,
Harith said:
"0 Halima! I fear something will happen to the boy. Maybe you should take him
back to his family."
Halima was thinking the same thing. Yes, they had attained a blessing and plenitude
like they had never experienced before through his coming, but now things were
taking an unexpected tum and people whom they did not see or know had started to
take care of him. It was not possible to guess what things may lead to. The best
decision was to give what had been entrusted to them back to his family without
taking any further risks. They set on their journey without wasting time. When Amina
saw Halima at her door, she said: "What could have brought you here? It was only
yesterday that you were insisting for him to stay a little longer with you," expressing
her surprise at Halima's behavior.
''Yes, I have been blessed with richness and bounty due to the presence of this son
of mine, and I did my best to perform the duty entrusted to me. But I have certain fears
concerning him so I brought him back to you thinking it would make you happy as

--- Sayfa 67 ---
well," answered Halima.
But this was not an answer that would satisfy a mother like Amina: "Tell me truly
what is with you, tell me the truth! I will not let you go until you have told me what
has happened. Is it that you fear the Devil for him," she said trying to open up the
conversation.
''Yes," said Halima.
Amina first said: ''No, that is not possible. I swear the Devil cannot harm him. It is
true that my son's condition is very serious. Did I not already tell you about the news
and tidings that came with him?"
''Yes you did," said Halima.
However, Amina felt the need to repeat what had happened: 'When I was pregnant
with him, I dreamt that a light emanated from my body and with the clarity of this
light I saw the palaces of the lands of Damascus and Basra bathed in light, and when I
was pregnant with him, I did not experience any of the difficulties that are common to
pregnant women. When I gave birth to him, he put his hands on the ground and lifted
his head up to the sky. If this is what you feel, leave him with me and return to your
homeland safely. "2.2
Thus ended the life that the Messenger of Allah lived among the Sad tribe.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
22 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/300; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11110, 111
~Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/301; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11111; Tabari, Tarikh, 21127
2.2. Arras ibn Malik, the Prophet's Companion, says that this cutting up of his heart left a scar in the
shape of a line on the Prophet's chest. See Muslim, Sahih, 11147 (162).
22IbnHisham, Sirah, 1/301; Tabari, Tarikh, 21128. This quote is the amalgam of two accounts, one
that the Prophet has given as an answer to the question of one of his Companions, and the other
the account given by Halima and Harith on the day.
22 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/301, 302; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11112; Tabari, Tarikh, 21128

--- Sayfa 69 ---
THE DEATH OF AMINA
F
or a while, the beloved Messenger of Allah lived with his mother. Amina was
doing her best not to let little Muhammad feel the absence of his father.
Sometimes he would go around with Abdul Muttalib, and sometimes he spent
time with his uncles.
Amina loved Medina; she set off for the city both in order to visit her relatives and
to pray at the grave of her late husband. She took what he left behind, their slave Umm
Ayman and their only son, on this journey with her. They came all the way to Medina.
Memories of the past had been awakened and it was a bitter-sweet reunion. The
Messenger of Allah was praying at his father's grave whom he had never seen. He was
bereft. Maybe this was the first time he felt deep inside that he had lost his father. His
state affected his mother as well. Before long, Amina fell ill there. Her illness
advanced very quickly. A month or so had passed since she had come to Medina and
they had to return to Mecca at the first opportunity. They set off on the road despite
the difficulties.
When they came near the village of Abwa, Amina' s illness reached unbearable
proportions. She had no more power in her knees and she could find no energy to take
a single step further. They made a stop under a tree. It was clear that their time
together on earth was going to end here and Amina was about to take her leave. The
sad mother had locked her eyes unto her son from whom she expected great deeds in
the future. Her eyes gave way to tears and her heart was gulping down grief. She was
now going to leave her fatherless son a complete orphan in the middle of this desert.
The tears running down her cheeks had also made Umm Ayman and the Messenger of
Allah weep as well; it was as if the whole of Abwa was in mourning. There was a
great and indescribable flow of emotion between mother and son. At last, she took her
son's soft velvety hand into her own and after looking at her dearest son for a long
while, she said the following: "May Allah give you grace. You are the son of a father
who escaped death, with the help of Allah, from the King of Mannan in return for a
hundred camels! If what I saw in my sleep is true, you will be the awaited Prophet

--- Sayfa 70 ---
who will be sent to all creation by the All-Forceful and All-Giving One. You will
teach them the allowed and prohibited things and acts, you will consolidate what you
have been bequeathed by your forefather Ibrahim who was the epitome of goodness,
and with the help of Allah you will draw the people away from the idols that they have
long formed an attachment to."
She seemed very sure of herself as she said these final words. She seemed to be
speaking with the awareness that she was entrusting her one and only child, who now
had no one, to the Owner of all things. Then she added the following: "All living
things face death every minute of the day, each new thing will have to grow old, and
each great thing will also fade. I die today, but my name will remain forever, for I
gave birth to a pure child and I leave the best here as I leave."~
Having said this, she closed her eyes never to open them agam and then she
breathed her last. Sadly, with his father in Medina, another trace of the Last
Messenger would be left in Abwa.
Maybe Allah had taken his father and mother away to His realm so that they may
not feel the obligation of being the Prophet's parents and instead, be the Prophet's
"foster children" when it came to his teachings; making both of them and the noble
Prophet content.
On the face of it they seemed not to have had the chance to become members of the
ummah; but Allah the Almighty had raised them to the level of a spiritual ummah and
let them thus partake in the virtue, goodness and happiness of the other ummah.22
It is known that the mother and father of our beloved Prophet were living a life that
was in keeping with the Hanif religion of Prophet Ibrahim. They were people of the
''fatrat" period in which revelation had not yet been revealed. As can be understood
especially from the words of mother Am ina, they were among the few people who had
embraced this sound and pure belief and they had left the best child on earth to the
world ofhumanity and that's how they left this world to the abode of the Hereafter.
The calendars were showing the 5761h year after the birth of Jesus and the
Messenger of Allah was left all alone. He only had Umm Ayman with him. From now
on she would have to take on the role of mother and father for him, trying to ease the
heartache and loss.
That's why the Messenger of Allah would describe Umm Ayman as "A mother to
me after my mother," and would give her her freedom after a short while.22. Soon after,
the Illustrious Beloved of Allah would return to Mecca with Umm Ayman.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
i§Isfahani, Dalai/, 119, 120
22 See Nursi, Bediuzzaman Said, The Letters, "Twenty-Eighth Letter," New Jersey: The Light, 2007.
2Q A1-Hindi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal, 12/276 (34417)

--- Sayfa 72 ---
THE PROTECTION OF
GRANDFATHER ABDUL MUTTALIB
T
he death of Amina and the orphaned state of our beloved Prophet had grieved
Abdul Muttalib just as everybody else. He showed such great affection to his
grandson that it would help him forget the absence of his mother and father.
There was a divan that had been set up for Abdul Muttalib in the shade of the Ka'ba.
He would meet people here, he would see to the business of Mecca at this place.
Nobody else would sit on this divan except for him, including his sons, as a token of
respect; they would form a circle and sit around it. There was only one young man in
Mecca who did not abide by this rule, and that was the son of Abdullah, our beloved
Prophet. He would sit by his grandfather; he would hold him from the back of his
turban and pull him. To those who tried to prevent him from doing so, Abdul Muttalib
would say: "Leave my dear grandson to his devices. I swear by Allah that his future is
very bright, his situation very serious."
He would then stroke his grandson's back and then sit by him.2l It was clear that his
grandson's actions pleased him and he was not ready to let anyone interfere with his
behavior, for he expected many great things for him in the future.
One day Abdul Muttalib went to Yemen with a delegation from the Quraysh. At the
time in Abyssinia, Sayf ibn Dhi Y azan was king, a king whose coming had been
foretold by the oracles Shiqq and Satih. When the king saw Abdul Muttalib before
him, he started to pay special attention to him. This had caught everyone's attention
and everyone was trying to understand the reason behind this. At last Sayf took
opportunity of a moment when they were left together, and started to address Abdul
Muttalib in the following way: "0 Abdul Muttalib! I will disclose certain secrets to
you from my own special wisdom and knowledge. I will not repeat these to another
man. I feel the need to say these to you. I see his birth within your people. Let these
stay with you till Allah allows it, and do not speak of them to another person. It is true
that in the deep knowledge that we engage in and the pages of secret books which we

--- Sayfa 73 ---
do not share with the public but keep to ourselves, we see that a great good will come.
In this good and important event the honor and virtue of all humanity, but particularly
the honor and virtue of yourself and your delegate is hidden."
What the king told him had excited Abdul Muttalib. But the king had more to say.
So Abdul Muttalib asked: "Then what is this great event?"
The king answered: "A boy will be born in Tihama and there will be mark between
his two shoulder blades. Leadership will be this boy's. He will be your leader till the
Judgment Day. These days are the days of his coming. His name is Muhammad. His
father and mother will die and his uncle will look after him. We keep speaking about
his coming among us all the time. Allah will send him openly and will choose among
us his aides. Those who stand by him will be exalted with him; those who oppose him
will know defeat. Allah will protect him from evil that man may devise against him
and the world will be open for his conquest. He will be full of a sense of duty towards
the Gracious, as away from evil thoughts as possible. Fire worship will end with his
coming and worshipping idols will be history. His word is the last word. He judges
with justice. He orders the good, himself acts good. He keeps people away from evil
and tries to root it out. I swear by the Ka'ba and in its beautiful ornaments, you are his
grandfather 0 Abdul Muttalib! There truly is no untruth in this. I hope you have
understood what you have to understand from what I have told you and I hope the
message has reached its place."
This clear explanation had of course been understood by Abdul Muttalib, for there
were things he already knew beforehand. He first shook his head. There seemed to be
a sign of weariness upon him that showed the accumulation of his years. Maturely and
in a manner that demonstrated the weight and responsibility he carried, Abdul
Muttalib said: ''Yes dear king! I had a son. I loved him very much and I cared for him
meticulously. That is why I had him married to the most munificent girl in my tribe,
Amina, the daughter of Wahb. Amina gave birth to a baby boy and I named him
Muhammad. But both his father and mother have died. Now he is under my and his
uncle's protection."
Here Sayftook his tum to speak: "That is what I meant to tell you. Protect him well,
especially from ill-meaning and jealous men of religion. It is true that they will not be
able to hurt him. Had I the knowledge that I will not die till his coming, I would go
with all my army and set camp in Medina, and wait for him, for I see in the recited
book and previous scholarships that Medina will be the place he will establish himself,
where his Companions will come from and where he will be buried."~
They had finished their business in Yemen and had returned to Mecca. What Sayf

--- Sayfa 74 ---
ibn Dhi Yazan had said occupied Abdul Muttalib's thoughts. Maybe those looking
from outside were not aware of this but his world was filled with thoughts and dreams
about his grandson; he was contemplating the grace and difficulties he would be faced
with; he couldn't stop himself from thinking about all these. Just as for his own
people, Abdul Muttalib was a settler of disputes for people from other tribes as well.
Sometimes delegates from outside Mecca would come to him and ask for his advice.
On such a day as that a number of scholars from Mudlij came to Mecca. These people,
who followed the footsteps of Prophet Jesus, peace be upon him, knew of his coming,
just as Sayf ibn Dhi Y azan did. As they walked towards the Ka'ba, they fixed their
eyes upon a youth that they had come across. They were watching him in awe and
could not help in expressing their astonishment. They could not resist so they
approached him and told him that they wanted to speak to him and to get to know him
better.
Umm Ayman noticed what was going on, and feeling uncomfortable with such
great attention, she tried to intervene: "Do not touch that boy!"
The men recoiled from having done an unseemly deed in a country they were
strangers in and so they stepped back. But they could not help ask certain questions
that would satisfy their curiosity. One of them stepped forward and asked: "Whose is
this child?"
In the absence of a father, a grandfather or an uncle would be considered as the
rightful guardian, and so Umm Ayman answered:
"He is Abdul Muttalib's."
This was a name they already knew. He was the leader of Mecca. They had come to
the city to visit him. They asked Umm Ayman where they could find him. They were
directed towards the Ka'ba.
Before long they found Abdul Muttalib on his divan in the courtyard of the Ka'ba.
After greetings, they brought the subject to the boy and asked: "We met a beautiful
boy today while we were coming here. The woman with him said that the boy
belonged to you."
''Yes it is my boy," answered Abdul Muttalib.
''No it can't be," said one of them and added: "It can't be, for the father of this child
must have died before he was born."
It was clear that the men knew of something and it was necessary to speak clearly.
Just like the Yemeni king, it appeared they too knew something. That is why Abdul
Muttalib explained: "Yes, he has been entrusted to me by my son, that is to say, he is

--- Sayfa 75 ---
my grandson."
Now things were clearer. The doubt that was nagging at their minds had
disappeared. What they had seen explained that this boy was the Personage that they
had been waiting for. One of them came forward and said: "The boy's footprints are
the same as the foot prints to be found in "the Sacred Station of the Prophet Ibrahim"
That is to say, he comes from the lineage of Ibrahim. The beauty in his face, the color
of his eyes... His disposition and purity of stature... The exaltedness in his
character... The mark between his two shoulders, they all point to the fact that this
boy is the Awaited Messenger."
Another added: "We have been reading about the qualities of a Messenger who
would come from the lineage of Ismail and who would be the last of the Prophets in
various books. According to this information the place that this Messenger will appear
is Mecca."
Meanwhile, the orphaned Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, came to
his grandfather's side. All eyes turned to him at once and the gazes were measuring
the Pride of Humankind.
One of them whispered in Abdul Muttalib' s ear: "You have to take good care of this
child," and then added: "For if the jealous religious scholars understand that this boy
is the Awaited Messenger, and they do know that he will come, they may harm him."22.
Abdul Muttalib was now lost in deeper thought than before; for anyone who had
some knowledge of religion knew that the charge Abdullah left behind, was the
Awaited Messenger; and they all shared one worry: that they would not be able to
protect him from jealous religious scholars. This was another worry on top of all the
worries Abdul Muttalib had.
By now the Pride of Humankind was a little older than eight years of age. Abdul
Muttalib had grown old and was about to leave the world. One day he called his other
son Abu Talib to his side. With due dignity and gravity and said: "The fame and glory
of this son of mine will be great and I entrust him to you."~
And before long, Abdul Muttalib who was now around eighty two years of age,
breathed his last.
The Pride of Humankind who got news of his grandfather's death stood by his
lifeless body, and cried over the great man who had taken care of him with deep
affection.22.
It was clear that taking his father, mother and then his grandfather Abdul Muttalib
away from him, fate was turning the face of the Last Messenger to the affection and

--- Sayfa 76 ---
mercy of the Gracious Lord, and establishing a subconscious link that would allow
him to receive the revelation coming from Him in all purity.
Since he was the savior of mankind, he had to be educated by the Possessor of
Wealth and Power directly, rather than the directives of mortals, even if they be his
mother and father. This was the frame within which all events took place concerning
the Messenger of Allah.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
2l Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11118
~Ibn Hajar,Isaba, 21134, 135; Halabi, Sirah, 11187
22. Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 21272
~ Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, l/90
22-See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11119. There are sources that say that Abdul Muttalib was a hundred years
old when he died. See Samani, Ansab, 1/57.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
THE PROTECTION OF UNCLE ABU TALIB
T
hese words spoken by Abdul Muttalib were the testament of a father to son.
Abu Talib took his nephew Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, to
his side and embraced him with the affection of a father. Now the Messenger
of Allah would receive affection from Abu Talib like a father, and from Fatima, the
wife of Abu Talib and mother of Ali, he would be shown much warmth.££
Abu Talib was poor. He had no riches to spend but only the affectionate arms that
he had opened to his nephew at all time. His affection would resolve problems that
could not be cured by money and wealth. Since the arrival of Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, to their home, there was a different
kind of bounty felt throughout the house; there was a special kind of peace among the
members of the family. When he was not present at the table, the family would leave
dinner without having satiated their hunger, but when they ate with him, they could
see that food was always enough for all.
That's why Abu Talib did not want to sit at the table without the presence of
Muhammad the Trustworthy whom he loved more than his own children. When they
sat at the table, he would place him right next to himself, and showed him affection
and attachment that he showed to no other child.
Muhammad demonstrated a maturity that was well above his peers and never
complained of their meager means. He was never heard complaining of either hunger
or thirst. He would go drink the Zamzam water and when someone would offer him
food he would say he did not want it since he was already full.21
Because he was the trust given to him by his brother and the testament of his father,
Abu Talib would never let him out of his sight. He would spend the night watching
over him as he slept and when he went out, he would go out with him. Since all
scholars had warned about what people's reaction to Muhammad would be, there had
to be some truth in it.2l!
Just like the youth of the Quraysh, Abu Talib also worked m commerce. He

--- Sayfa 79 ---
sometimes took his nephew with him and tried to prepare him for the future. He was
twelve years old. He would go towards Ajyad and graze sheep during the time he
spent in Mecca,~ and was thus gaining experience about all aspects of life.
One day, Abu Talib started preparations to go on a journey towards Damascus. His
nephew was sad to learn about it that he requested of he could go with him. This
touched Abu Talib greatly and so he said: "I swear by Allah that I will not go without
taking him with me; I will never stay away from him from this day forth, nor will I
allow him to stay away from me."
The Pride of Humanity, who heard his uncle's oath, was filled with joy. He was
now going to leave Mecca for the first time for trade. Who knew what cities he would
pass, what kind of people he would meet, and what kind of incidents he would witness
throughout the journey.
The Damascus Trip and Priest Bahira
Then it was time to leave, both uncle and nephew took their leave and joined the
moving caravan. It was a long and tiring journey. Sometimes they would stop to rest
and see to their needs and then continue towards Damascus. When they arrived near
the town of Basra, between Jerusalem and Damascus, they had a stopover once again
to rest.
Just as the caravan had started to relax, they saw a man approach them from afar in
great excitement. The man had a disheveled look and seemed to have abandoned ties
with the world. Thus, the people in the caravan thought he could not possibly have
anything to do with them and they continued to rest. But then the man reached one of
them and said: "Priest Bahira in that yonder monastery is inviting you to dinner."
Only then did the people in the caravan realize that the man indeed had them in
mind, but they did not know anything about the reason for this invitation.
Bahira was a priest who had given up on the world and he was spending what was
left of his life worshipping his Lord in a monastery. He was a good Christian scholar.
In fact, he used to follow Judaism and then later he had chosen Christianity; but he
had not stopped there and had searched deep into religion and he was one of the
greatest scholars of his time.
In the church where he was, there was an ancient book that would pass from the
hands of one priest to another. He was one of the few priests who could actually read
and understand it. He had given up worldly life and was living the life of a holy man
in the church. He had no use for those who came to trade; he had no possessions or

--- Sayfa 80 ---
wealth. But as it happened, his eyes had caught sight through the cloisters. It was clear
that the diversion of his gaze outside was also part of what was meant to be. As per
usual, a caravan was approaching town. But this caravan stood out amongst the
previous ones; for a cloud was following the caravan and was protecting them from
the scorching sun. He had an epiphany. Cloud ... Shadows ... End of time ... The Last
Messenger. .. Ahmad ... The ancient book ... All these struck like lightening in his
mind and it increased his interest in the caravan. Was destiny coming to him on its two
feet? What if that was the case! Then it made no sense to wait around where he was.
The old man, who had closed his windows to the outer world, was rejuvenated and he
started doing things he had not done in years. There was the happiness of having
found something that had been lost to him in his eyes. Was what he now saw, coming
towards him; Paraclete, who was to appear in between the Paran Mountains?
The clouds had gathered around a particular point in the caravan and were
protecting the person underneath it from the sun. When the caravan stopped for a
break, and the person in question had retired under a tree to rest, the cloud would
follow him and settle upon that tree to shade him. Even the branches of the tree had
come to life, and they had come closer together to stop the sun from filtering through
in order to protect the person from the effects of the heat. In order to find out whether
what he was seeing had any connection with what he had read and what he knew, he
had to come closer and so Bahira approached their caravan and called out to them: "0
people of Quraysh! I have prepared dinner for you today and I want you all, young
and old, slave and free, to attend it."
The people in the caravan were very surprised! For they had passed through this
town many times before but they had never seen a priest at the monastery, let alone
Priest Bahira take any interest in them. One of them came to the fore and said: "I
swear by Allah, 0 Bahira, there is some strangeness about you today; you never did
such things before."
''You tell the truth," answered Bahira and continued: "It is just as you say; there is
some strangeness today. But you are guests. I have had the desire to extend my
hospitality to you. Come all together around this table and eat from it."
Of course such a sincere invitation could not be rejected. They had walked for
weeks, and they had longed for such an invitation. Those who had completed their
business in the caravan thus set out for the church.
In the meantime, the volunteers of the church had set into action and they were
preparing a grand dinner for the caravan. Everyone had come; however the scene that
he had wanted to attract to the church was still by the side of the caravan. He had not

--- Sayfa 81 ---
yet seen the face he had longed for among his guests. He was about to burst with
curiosity, and not able to resist any longer, he asked: "0 you people of Quraysh! Is
there anyone among the people of the caravan who did not come with you to dinner
and stayed with the caravan? Is there anyone who did not come?''
"There is no one who should have accepted your invitation but remained behind,
except for a little boy. He was the youngest among us by age and we left him behind
to look after our wares," they added.
"Do not do so!" Bahira said and added: "Call him as well; let him join you in this
dinner."
Even though he was a little boy he was meant to come as well, and so the Pride of
Humankind was invited as well. One of them had come running back to where the
caravan was and invited the one that all eyes had been looking for. He was coming. As
he stood up and walked towards the church, the cloud that was protecting him also set
into motion and it too was coming to the place of the gathering. Now it was as it
should be. Bahira's conviction grew stronger, and he was very excited thinking that he
might be able to get answers to questions that had been troubling him for some time.
When The Pride of Humanity arrived near Bahira with his shining, beautiful face, the
priest had been cleared of all doubt, and could now see the truth. His eyes were locked
on to Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him. He looked at him for a long
while. Then, an air of happiness got hold of him. There was no doubt that this was no
one but Ahmad whose good tidings had already been given in ancient books.
The food had been eaten and people were starting to get up and leave. What if he
also left without speaking? There had to be a way to speak to him, he had to verify
what he had seen through conversing with him. At last he found an opportunity to
address him: "0 you young man," he said and added: "I will ask you a few questions.
You will answer what I ask only in the name of Lat and U zza."
But the Pride of Humankind had been disturbed by the names that had been spoken
and said: "Do not ask me in the name of Lat and Uzza. I swear by Allah that I feel
anger towards them like I feel towards no other thing."
Bahira knew that the Quraysh swore by these two idols and he wanted to gage the
reaction of the Pride of Humankind concerning idol worship, and he had got what he
wanted. For the priest, all signs were supporting each other and he was now sure more
than before. He was aware ofthe uniqueness of the person he was in the presence of.
"Then promise me only in the Name of Allah and answer what I ask you," said
Bahira, thus preparing the ground for his questions. The answer he received relieved

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Bahira further: "Ask whatever you like."
Bahira asked Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, about the manner of all
things, from his sleep and dreams to his everyday life, and to his hopes. Bahira was
asking and the Pride of Humankind was answering with ease. Everything was very
clear; all was as described in the books that he read. The conversation was completed
and all signs pointed to the fact that the interlocutor was him. All that remained was
the mark of Prophethood. He asked to see it as well. However, the Pride of
Humankind thought it unseemly to bare his shoulders without enquiring about the
reason. Seeing that there was no way round, Bahira whispered in his ear. The Pride of
Humanity did not keep the curious old man waiting any longer. Just as Bahira had
given up hope of seeing him, he had been given the good grace of his presence so
close to him, and Bahira was thanking his Lord for this good fortune. There was no
room for hesitation any longer. Bahira had one more historical duty to perform and so
he turned to the uncle, Abu Talib and asked: 'What relation are you to this child?"
Among Arabs when there was no father, an uncle or grandfather would take the
place of the father, and so Abu Talib introduced himself by saying: "I am his father."
Bahira, who had till that time found everything in keeping with his expectations,
was startled by this unexpected answer from Abu Talib. He hesitated for a while and
he started to shake his head from side to side in agitation. His demeanor seemed to say
"No, this can't be!" For according to his knowledge, the father of this child should
have died before he came to the world. Bahira said: "No, you can't be the father of
this child. The father of this child cannot be living today. He must have died before he
was born."
It was through being his guardian that Abu Talib had given that answer. It was thus
time for Abu Talib to tell the truth: "He is my brother's son," he said in all
seriousness. Although Abu Talib was becoming wary of this questioning, Bahira kept
asking: 'What does his father do?"
Abu Talib gave a short answer: "He died when the boy's mother was pregnant with
h.
"
Ill.
This was as it should be. For Bahira, the comparison that he was trying to make
with the truncated historical knowledge continued and he said: "Now you have said
the truth."
He then took Abu Talib to one side and said to him, in a very grave manner: ''You
and your brother's son should return to where you came from, to your own land. You
should be careful about this boy when it comes to the jealous clergy around here. I

--- Sayfa 83 ---
swear by Allah that if they also see what I see in him, and if they recognize him
through his characteristics, they will do some harm to the boy, for there will be a great
event concerning your brother's son. Just take care and return where you came from
with great haste. "12
The priest spoke with years of experience, and taking his advice, Abu Talib was
also reminded about his father's testament about the boy and so decided to return
home before anything happened to him. He sold the wares he had brought with him to
Basra, and then taking his nephew's hand, he returned to Mecca.
Divine Guidance in His Protection
Abu Talib was now even more sensitive about his nephew. What Bahira said had had
elaborated on what he had already been told about his nephew, and he became even
more concerned about his safety. His nephew had grown up tall, and he was already
attracting attention. On top of that, he thought differently about people's habits and he
always judged the customs of society according to his own criteria. That's why he was
not fond of the idols at all. There was no tendency towards bad habits in him as there
was in his peers; on the contrary, he had a tendency towards leaving all bad habits
aside. In short, rather than taking for the granted the lifestyle that had been offered to
him on a plate, he was working up his own life philosophy; for he had been chosen
from the beginning to bring about humanity's salvation, and his every act reflected
this state ofbeing the chosen one.
In the place called Buwana, there was an idol that the Quraysh revered greatly.
They would come to this place on particular days of the year and would sacrifice
animals in the name of the idol, and gather around a circle to make a wish. One year
they would spend half, and the next a whole day, and they would shave their heads to
be in the presence of this idol and murmur their prayers.
On such a day as this, Abu Talib had taken his nephew Muhammad to Buwana,
taking care not to let him out of his sight. When he explained to him what they were
about to do, young Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, refused. How could
he do it? He was a man chosen to abolish all this. The only thing was that he had not
been entrusted with Prophethood just as yet. Still, he would not stray away from the
behavior that would be expected of him as he carried out his Prophethood duties, and
he did not say "Yes" to the dictates of custom on this occasion either.
Abu Talib had not been expecting this kind of behavior from his nephew and was
angry at the first instant. It was not only Abu Talib who was angry with Muhammad's
behavior. Our noble Prophet's aunts also intervened: "0 Muhammad! What do you

--- Sayfa 84 ---
intend to do by not joining your tribesmen on this festive day? We fear that something
bad will befall you because you keep steering away from our gods and because of
your attitude towards them."
It was true that they were his elders; it was not proper to be disrespectful towards
them. However, what they said carried no weight at all. It was impossible to
understand how they insisted on their error and expected him to follow them. The
Pride of Humanity got tired of what was being said, and he had to leave the gathering.
He left the house of his uncle and stayed on his own for a while, wanting to rest his
soul after having been in an environment where such denial of Allah's Unity had been
exercised.
A while later the Pride of Humankind returned with great alarm and fear. His aunts
were also frightened by the state in which he had returned. They asked in a worried
manner: "Has something happened to you? Why are you so frightened?"
"I am afraid something will happen to me," said the Pride ofHumanity.
"Allah the Almighty will not test you with the Devil. So far as I can see you only
have good qualities in you," said one of them.
The Messenger of Allah thought now was the time to let them know that he was
experiencing things that they were not informed about, and said: "Whenever I
approach your idols, I see a tall man dressed in white and he says to me: 'Do not
approach it and stay where you are 0 Muhammad!"'
This was the last conversation they had concerning the issue and the subject would
never come up again.2l
The Pride of Humankind who had lost his father before coming to the world, his
mother when he was six, and his grandfather when he was eight years old, was, by all
accounts, growing up with an education that was well above his power and he was
being directed by the Pride of the Universe in all his actions. Years later, the
Messenger of Allah would speak of this situation in the following manner: "My Lord
Himself educated me; and what a beautiful education that is! "ll
Even though he had not been entrusted with the mission of Prophethood yet, he
lived his life under clear protection and lived in purity. He would go wherever there
was a good deed, and he would help out with it. He would spend a lot of time in
contemplation, especially in order to stay away from scenes that hurt him. He stayed
away from all evil including alcohol, and he did not touch any animal that was
slaughtered in the name ofthe idols. While, to him, everything spoke ofthe Ultimate
Truth, he was greatly disturbed by how people worshipped idols that they had made

--- Sayfa 85 ---
with their own hands; when people swore by Lat and Uzza near him, he would make
his discontent known.
He was under Divine protection in all respects. One day, when he was herding
sheep outside Mecca, he had asked his friend to mind the sheep while he went to
Mecca. The friend had accepted the request. Just as he was about to enter Mecca, he
heard a sound echoing. This was the proclamation of a wedding procession. He
wanted to stay where he could observe the procession and then he felt a blow on his
ear, and then he lost consciousness where he was.
Then quite a long time passed and he came to his senses because of the scorching
rays of the sun. He stood up and returned to where he had left the sheep with his
friend.:U.
During the repairs of the Ka'ba, our noble Prophet was carrying stones along with
his uncle Abbas. The stones were usually carried over the shoulders, and the shoulders
of the Messenger of Allah had started to hurt. His uncle saw the situation and advised
him: "Put a piece of your mantle over your shoulder, and this will protect you from the
pain that the stones cause."
Muhammad the Trustworthy, tried to do as his uncle said. But the minute he
reached for his mantle his eyes began to water and then he fell where he was. When he
came to his senses, he was shouting, "My mantle, my mantle!" and clutching his
clothing. This was the last moment when he would attempt to show any part of his
body that would later be deemed prohibited, nor had he shown any such part before.~
How could it be otherwise? He was the last in a chain of Messengers and Prophets
who were equipped with the characteristics of chastity. Each Messenger had spoken of
his coming and had tried to prepare the people for this coming. Time and space had
started with him, and he was the ripest fruit of the tree of creation. His cause was not
limited to a particular region and a limited number of people. He was the complete
guide for all mankind till the Judgment Day. As such, he had to be protected from all
evil and be introduced to good deeds and trust not only after he was given the mission
of Prophethood, but also before this mission was entrusted to him. This is what the
events seemed to verify.
The Gift of Rain That Came with Him
Mecca, which had been exhausted with the heat, was now facing famine. The skies
seemed to have closed the gates to fertility, and the ground had cracked because of the
lack of water. There was no green foliage and the valleys had all dried up. The animals

--- Sayfa 86 ---
were dying and the people were living through the most difficult times of their life.
They came to Abu Talib with one a last hope: "0 Abu Talib," they said.
"The valleys have all dried because of the drought; the children have started to die.
Please come and let us go for rain prayer together."
There was nothing else to be done in this situation and Abu Talib also left his house
with his nephew to join the procession for rain prayer. Out of all the people gathered,
there was only one cloud above the head of Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon
him, which seemed to follow his footsteps. They came all the way to the Ka'ba. Abu
Talib leaned his back on the Ka'ba first, held his nephew's hand and then he lifted his
own hands up at the sky and started to supplicate to the Lord of the Ka'ba for rain.
Before long, the clouds that seemed to move from the four comers of the sky started to
gather above Mecca. Even before the prayer ended the courtyard of the Ka'ba received
its first drops of rain. A torrential rain started to fall. The valleys started to grow green
again and the living creatures regained new life. The Meccans who had been fighting
famine were smiling once again. Although many had not noticed, Abu Talib had been
greatly moved by the prayer that had been made and the bountiful answer to that
prayer; he had no doubt that their prayer had been answered due to the presence of his
nephew. He already knew that he had to be very careful about his future. This event
had consolidated his belief, and his respect for his nephew grew even more. He would
compose a poem concerning these feelings that he had, and he left the memory of the
Divine Grace that they had experienced in the Ka'ba for future generations in this
form.ll
Fijar Battles
The Messenger of Allah who was distinguished among his peers with respect to all his
actions had now reached the age of twenty and he had gained the respect of all
Meccans. His attitude towards events and his assessment of results were followed with
great attention; he had become a person of reference, and slowly had earned the name
of "the Trustworthy." In the meanwhile, a new battle had broken out between the
Kinanah tribe, among whom the Quraysh family numbered, and the tribe of Qays.22
These two tribes were attacking each other with no regard to normal war conventions.
The banner-holder of the Hashim tribe in this war was Zubayr ibn Abdul Muttalib,
another uncle of the Messenger of Allah, and the commander of the Quraysh was the
father of Abu Sufyan, Harb ibn Umayya.
In truth, the Meccans who dealt in mostly trade, had agreed among themselves to
provide an environment of peace especially in months when trade was at its highest,

--- Sayfa 87 ---
and they had declared these months as months when fighting was prohibited. This was
such a widespread practice that even the most aggressive tribes would abide by this
rule and they would keep their swords in their sheaths during these months.11
These battles were called Fijar, meaning going over the limit or sinning, pointing to
the fact that the rules concerning warfare had been broken. These were very difficult
times. The direction of the battle kept changing; the side that seemed to be winning till
noon could be losing towards the evening. Although he himself did not fight,
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, was helping his uncles
who were in the action; he was bringing them arrows.B!
At a time when this meaningless battle had exhausted the people to the extreme,
someone from the Quraysh came to the fore and invited both sides to peace. The offer
was accepted. The dead on both sides were counted. Whichever side had suffered
more deaths would be paid the equal blood money by the other side. After this, peace
started to reign again in Mecca.
Hilf al-Fudul (The Alliance of the Virtuous)
In the meanwhile, there was another unexpected development in Mecca, in one of the
"prohibited months," at a time when the sun had just started rising, a man had climbed
the Mountain of Abu Qays and was shouting at the top of his lungs. It was clear that
there was once again an important development, an event that would disturb the peace.
Soon, a great number of people surrounded the man. It was our noble Prophet's uncle
Zubayr who first approached this man, who was now furious and had obviously lost
his patience after having lost all that he had. Zubayr asked: 'What is the reason for all
this rage?"
The man was quite desperate. He started to speak with the zeal of a man who had at
last found someone to tell his woes, in the hope that the interlocutor may have a
remedy. As ibn Wail, from the Quraysh had taken this man's possessions and was not
paying for their price although years had passed. He had kept postponing the payment,
and now he was denying he owed the man anything, claiming to never pay him
anything. The desperate man had asked some people to intervene, but they had not
wanted to meddle in this business. It was clear that no one wanted to bring any
unwarranted trouble upon their heads out of nowhere. His last resort was to shout at
the top of his lungs the injustice that had been done to him and thus let everybody
know of it.
When the matter was seen to and it was discovered that injustice had indeed been
done, the leading men of Mecca who had a conscience got together in the house of

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Abdullah ibn Judan72. who had a special standing in Meccan society. They took an oath
that whenever a man was mistreated in such a manner they would see to it that his
rights are given back to him. In this Period of Ignorance when human rights were not
taken into consideration, when the powerful were always seen to be in the right and
when the weak were downtrodden, this agreement was a step equal to a revolution and
Our noble Prophet, the Reason of Pride for Humanity was among these men who had
taken this step.§2
As the meeting dispersed, everyone knew that there was now an assembly who
would address the case of anyone who had been wronged either from his or her own
family or from the outside. A fair assessment would be made without regard to power,
glory or status and whoever does the wrong, the assembly would fight for the right of
the oppressed. The first application of this rule would be for the oppressed man from
Zabid who had been crying out his injury on top of Mount Abu Qubays. All together
they went to the door of As ibn Wail and they asked for the man's due. When As ibn
Wail saw that the leading men of Mecca had come together to ask for the man's rights,
he could see that there was no way he could refuse, and so reluctantly, he gave the
man from Zabid his due.§.l
Now the Messenger of Allah was the "Trustworthy one" that people knew in
Mecca, he was a point of reference. The name "the Trustworthy" was given to no
other person after him. It was the society he lived in that thought the name was most
appropriate, and he was called more often with this name rather than his own. Along
with the wisest and the oldest in town, they were coming to his door for advice and
guidance, and his position was consolidated by the society itself.
Second Journey to Damascus
He had reached the age of twenty five. One day his uncle Abu Talib took him to one
side and said: "0 dear son of my brother, my nephew! You know that I am a man with
no possessions or money. Day by day our difficulties increase along with problems
that are most distressing. We have nothing left, we have no trade."
It was clear that a suggestion would follow these words since they had been chosen
very carefully.
When speaking, Abu Talib had the countenance of a man who was fearful of taking
a wrong step. It seemed he was on the verge of a very important decision.
"I have heard that the tribe has organized a caravan bound for Damascus. The
daughter of Khuwaylid, Khadija, is looking for a trustworthy man with whom she can

--- Sayfa 89 ---
be partners in trade and whom she can send on this caravan. Although I do not like the
idea of sending you to Damascus due to the jealous religious scholars whom we have
already been warned about, and whom I fear may harm you, I am desperate. Go to her,
I think she will choose you to head her business due to her trust for you and your pure
and clean nature."
It was easy said than done. This wasn't to be left to chance. This is where our noble
Prophet's aunt Atiqa intervened and said that someone who was the embodiment of
morals and good manners should not be put in a situation where he was offering
himself. Allah's Messenger's aunt Atiqa was married to Awwam ibn Khuwaylid, who
was the brother of Khadija hint Khuwaylid, and father of Zubayr ibn Awwam. She
was speaking as someone who knew both sides and she wanted to facilitate the
business.
The reality was that the bulk of the work fell upon the shoulders of Abu Talib. But
first they had to get the consent of Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings
be upon him. This proved not to be too difficult, to the faces that awaited an answer,
the Messenger of Allah said: "Let it be as you wish," with a very positive attitude.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
22Years later when Ali's mother Fatima died, the Messenger of Allah would honor their home with
his presence and would put the cloak he was wearing on Fatima and he personally would lower
her into her grave. When people asked him why she was getting a treatment he had not given
anyone else, he would say: "After Abu Talib, there has been no one who helped me as much as
she. I covered her with my cloak so that she may be dressed with robes of heaven and I lowered
her into her grave so that she may account for herself more easily in her grave." See Sahayli,
Rawthu 'l-Unf, 11112; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1/369, 370.
21. See Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1/729, 730.
2!! See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11119, 120.
22 See Bukhari, Sahih, 2/247, 248; Muslim, Sahih, 61125; Ibn Majah, Sunan, 21727; Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 11125, 126.
12Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11153-155; Samani,Ansab, 1/96,97, Tabari, Tarikh, 11194, 195
2.!.See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11158; Halabi, Sirah, 11164.
llMunawi, Fayzu '/-Qadir, 1/91
11 Suhayli, Rawthu 'l-Unf, 1/81
~ Bukhari, Sahih, 11143 (357); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 3/310 (14371); Ibn Sayyidinnas,
Uyunu 'l-Asar, 11105
71. See Haysami, Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 8/222.
1§. This was the last of the Fijar battles that had been going on for quite some time. It had happened
three times before and the tribes in question had led lives in a state of emergency for centuries.
71 The reason why our noble Prophet did not participate in this battle was because it was taking place
in the prohibited months and because he could not see either side as being more virtuous or closer
to religious truth.
1l! Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/326
7.2. Abdullah ibn Judan was a generous man. At this meeting, he had given a sumptuous feast to the
Meccans. He was a mature man, always ready to do good deeds. He was the father of Zuhayr, the
uncle of our mother Aisha. One day Aisha had asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! There is no doubt
that Ibn Judan liked to feed people and would always welcome his guests in the best possible way.
Will these do any good to him in the Hereafter?" and the Messenger of Allah had answered "No,
because never once in all his good deeds did he say "0 My Lord, cleanse my faults on the Day of
Religion and forgive me!" See Muslim, Sahih, 1/196 (214).
!illY ears later when he remembered this event, he said: "That day I was also a witness at the contract
in Abdullah ibn Judan's house. For me, that is more munificent than valleys filled with red
camels. Should I receive an offer for such an effort now, I would not hesitate and accept it."
§l See Ibn Sad, Tabaqat, 11128; Suhayli, Rawthu 'l-Unf, 1/91.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
FIRST MEETING WITH KHADIJA
W
hen he got his nephews consent, Abu Talib went straight to Khadija. He
felt he needed to speak about his nephew to Khadija himself, for
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, was the most trustworthy
and most qualified man in Mecca. Thus, when doing business with him this had to be
taken into account and his wages had to be arranged accordingly. He knew how much
money Khadija gave for such a job and he was going to ask for twice the amount.
Soon, Abu Talib had a meeting with Khadija. After the usual introductions and
preambles of conversation, he started talking about the caravan and spoke of the
virtues of his nephew Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him.
"Muhammad the Trustworthy," this name was not unfamiliar to Khadija. This was a
name that was always on the lips of her cousin Waraqa ibn Nawfal. Since her
childhood, his news had been whispered in her ear; when interpreting the dreams that
she had, they had always looked for his trace.§l
What a great blessing this was, she had been looking for him and waiting for him
and there he was, within reach. Khadija was really excited.
She felt that she had gained the best prize already, even before her caravan set off
for Damascus. She was about to engage in the most beneficial and auspicious business
deal she would ever make in her whole life. While she was lost in contemplation, she
was brought back to reality with the voice of Abu Talib: "0 Khadija! I heard that you
will pay the price of two camels for this job; my nephew Muhammad is the most
trustworthy of men, so I will ask for twice as much for him."
For a while she considered this offer. How could she bargain for such an auspicious
business, especially at a moment when worldly happiness had opened their gates?
What importance did camels hold? Right after Abu Talib finished his words, she said
the following: "0 Abu Talib! In truth you ask for a price that is easy and to my liking.
Had you asked for many times more than this, I would still have accepted and would
have given it to him without hesitation. I would have been ready to do this for

--- Sayfa 92 ---
someone whom I did not love, who was distant to me; but you ask it for someone
whom I love very much and to whom I feel very close!"!!1
Now that they had come to an agreement about the price, there were no obstacles
left for the caravan to start its journey. Abu Talib, in his position as uncle, was
reminding her of the words of priest Bahira whom they had met on their last trip to
Damascus, expressing his worry that he did not want to lose his nephew in an attempt
to maintain worldly needs.
Then the day came, the Messenger of Allah and the caravan set off from Mecca.
One aspect of the journey was attracting attention. A man called Maysaral!± was
watching every step of Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him,
never letting him out of his sight. This was a journey that would take three months.
The travellers got to know each other throughout the process and people had had the
chance to get to know the Messenger of Allah.
The Oath in the Marketplace
At the end of a long and difficult journey they at last came to Damascus. Everyone
was trying their best to sell what they had brought along and to get new wares for the
journey back. Muhammad the Trustworthy made his way to the marketplace with the
same intention. He made trade with a certain man, and they had agreed on the terms.
Just as they were about to close the transaction the man got capricious and wanted
Muhammad the Trustworthy to take an oath, and he wanted him to take the oath on
the idols of Lat and Uzza, the greatest idols at the time. It was impossible for
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, to swear in the name of these wretched
hand-made idols, things he had never in his life spoken in the name of. Naturally, the
Messenger of Allah reacted against such a request and said: "I will never swear in
their name; there is nothing I find distasteful as much as these idols," and he said that
he would seal the deal on his own terms or not at all.lll
For Maysara who was watching what was happening, this was important
information. When the Messenger of Allah left the place, the man approached
Maysara and asked him who this man, who refused to take an oath in the name of Lat
and Uzza, was.
"Do you know him? Who is this man?"
And before Maysara had a chance to answer, the man said: "Do not leave him; for
there is no doubt that he is the Messenger."!!§.
Priest Nastura

--- Sayfa 93 ---
At last they had finished their business in Damascus and they had set off for the return
journey. When the going got very tough, they decided to take a break and rest.
Everyone was trying to rest and do their accounts at the same time. The Pride of
Humankind was also resting in the shade of a tree. Before long, Maysara saw someone
running towards them from a distance. This was none other than the Priest Nastura
who had been watching them from afar. He came near Maysara and asked: "Who is
that sitting in the shade of that tree?"
This was an easy question for Maysara to answer. Without hesitation he said: "He is
Muhammad, the son of Abdullah. He is a young man from the people ofthe House."
The priest first shook his head. It was clear that he did not approve of the answer or
the manner in which it was given, for he had seemed to imply something specific
when he had asked who the man was. He had an attitude that seemed to say "you do
not know," so he asked another question: "Is there any redness in his eyes?"
''Yes there is," answered Maysara.
The priest seemed to have verified his position, and taking an oath, he said: "I swear
that under this tree none other than the Messenger has rested. "!E
It was clear that the priest had much more to say and that he wanted to speak more:
"There is no doubt that he is the Messenger that the people are waiting for and he is
the last of the Prophets."~
Maysara's astonishment continued. He was not able to make sense of what had
happened. He listened carefully with a sense of duty he had promised his mistress
Khadija; and he was trying to record truthfully all that was taking place. There was
much to be learned from the priest. Similarly, it was clear that the priest now had
found what he had been looking for so close to him, he wanted to gain as much
knowledge about the object of his desire as possible. That's why he was asking
questions to Maysara about the Pride of Humankind who was resting under the tree,
and he wanted Maysara to tell him about the strange incidents that had happened on
the journey. Duly, he told the priest about the oath incident during their trade. The
priest's excitement grew. It was clear that he could hardly contain himself. His
observation was now definite and he started to speak once more, this time very sure of
himself: "I swear that he is the Messenger we have all been waiting for. Please look
after him well, be a spare set of eyes and ears for him! "!!2
He then ran to where Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon
him, was. First he kissed him on the forehead with due respect and then went down to
the Prophet's feet to say: "I bear witness that you are the person that Allah speaks of

--- Sayfa 94 ---
in the Torah."22
The Same Cloud
After this break they prepared once more to set off on the road to Mecca. The weather
was very hot. On the way, Maysara had seen two angels in the shape of clouds and
had stared in disbelief. Two clouds in this hot weather. .. Two clouds who followed a
particular person ... Two clouds that went wherever he went and stopped whenever he
stopped ...
He on the other hand continued on his way in peace and security as if there was
nothing strange. All this had provoked such a love in Maysara that he had devoted his
whole being to Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, and he
considered himself a slave to him.l:l
When they reached Mecca it was the hottest time of the day and the sun was right
above their heads. Khadija, who had received news about the caravan's imminent
arrival, had climbed up a high place to watch their arrival. She too was looking at the
angels that had spread their wings over Muhammad the Trustworthy her partner in
trade, who they were protecting from the rays of the sun. Khadija wanted to share
what she saw with her close friends. She called them to her side and wanted them to
partake in the beauty of the scene. It was surely a sight to be savored. All those who
saw could not hide their amazement and surprise.2I
The Report of the Journey
Of course for Maysara this journey was very different from previous ones-he had not
seen an instance of injustice and he had felt no discomfort throughout the trip. They
had made good trade of the wares that they had brought to Damascus, and the wares
that they had got from Damascus had been sold in Mecca with great profit. It was
clear that Khadija had found the quality she had been searching for. She had made
trade with other people before, but naturally, The Pride of Humankind was different.
What mattered to Khadija was not the manifold profit that she had gained. She was
more interested in seeing Maysara and asking him what he had witnessed throughout
the journey, and when he eventually came, she started to question him hastily.
Maysara first told her what the priest had said. Then he talked about the two angels
he saw on the way back. He also talked about the incident of oath taking in Damascus,
about his master's reaction, and the man's response. He spoke much, telling and re-
telling what he had experienced throughout the trip, and he could not praise the
master's fortitude and self-confidence enough. This was exactly what Khadija was

--- Sayfa 95 ---
waiting to hear. She was trying to hide the intensity of what she felt inside. This
emotional reaction was only natural since all roads seemed to be pointing to him.
The Comments ofWaraqa ibn Nawfal
She stood up immediately and went straight to her teacher and cousin Waraqa ibn
Nawfal to share what Maysara had told her. Waraqa was also excited when he heard
what Khadija had to say. He, too, was now sure that he had found what he had been
looking for. He said to Khadija, who was waiting for a reply: "0 Khadija, if what you
tell me is true, there is no doubt that Muhammad is the Prophet of these people! I
knew already that these people had an awaited Prophet. Now is his time,"l!l he said.
Waraqa was one of the few people who could read the Torah and the Gospel from
their Hebrew original and who could also write this script. What he had seen in the
books had for some time put him in a state of waiting and he often asked "When?" to
himself, waiting for the Last Messenger to come. He was composing poems about this
longing and he often spoke of the sadness about the Prophet's tardiness in coming.
Waraqa's observations were very important for Khadija. Everything seemed to point
to the Prophet; what she had listened to till that day, Mecca bearing witness and what
Maysara had said... They all pointed to the crossroads where all this met ...
Muhammad the Trustworthy was the right address. She had no more hesitations.
The Messenger whose good tidings had been given for so long was now so near to
him. She had no thoughts of marriage, but this seemed to be the way to get closer to
him.
The Road to Marriage
Khadija had already been married twice and she had by now closed all doors to such
suggestions. She had reached a certain age and she no longer needed the support of
anyone. She had what one could call an international business by today's standards
and the people who worked for her were people from many different comers of the
world. She had men working for her in Greek, Persian and Ghassanid lands, along
with others in closer regions such as the Hira and Damascus. She was rich; she was a
woman who took good care of her business, a mature and beautiful woman of good
name whom everybody respected.
In those days there would be no man who could refuse such a woman among the
Quraysh. All men in her tribe would have been happy to marry her had they had the
power to do so. Many had come to her door, but she turned them all down, having
decided against marrying again.~

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Khadija had now made up her mind about marrymg the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him; maybe it was the dream of such a perfect match that had made
her tum down all previous offers till that day. She had made up her mind but she did
not know how to approach the subject.
A Friend Who Understands
Khadija's friend Nafisa, the daughter of Munya, who took notice of her friend's
thoughtful state and transformation, approached her one day and said the following
with great affection: "What is with you, dear Khadija? I have been with you long
enough and yet I have never seen you as thoughtful as you are now!"
Khadija hesitated before sharing her predicament with her. She first stayed silent.
But it was clear that it was not possible to attain her goal without taking any steps and
so she told her friend what was on her mind. She first said: "0 Nafisa! There is no
doubt that I see in Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, an exalted quality that I see in no
other man. He is straightforward, trustworthy, he comes from a very good family, and
he is the best man one can ever come across. On top of that, there are many good
tidings concerning him! It is a strange situation. When I look at what May sara has told
me, when I listened to what the priest said and witnessed what happened at the
marketplace, when I watched the cloud that protected him as he came back from
Damascus, I thought my heart would fly out of its cage; I was sure that he was the
awaited Messenger."
Nafisa was still trying to understand what was going on: "But what has this to do
with you losing your color and being in this contemplative state?"
It was clear that Khadija had to be clearer about what was ailing her. She turned to
her friend and said truthfully: "I hope to join my fate with his by marrying him; but I
do not know how I would go about doing this."
Now the situation was clear. Nafisa understood her friend's predicament and
responded in the following way: "If you'll allow me, I'll inquire as to how this
situation can develop and be arranged!"
This was what Khadija was expecting and she said excitedly: "Nafisa, if you can
indeed do this, do it in all haste, with no delay!"
Before long, Nafisa left that place and started to ask for directions as to where
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, was. She quickly
found him. She first saluted him and then said: "0 Muhammad!"
Our noble Prophet turned his whole body towards her and was listening to her. She

--- Sayfa 97 ---
continued: "What stops you from marrying? Why are you not getting married?"
This was a question that the Pride of Humankind had not been expecting and he
replied: "I don't have the means to get married."
It was true that the Messenger of Allah did not have the financial means to get
married. In order for him to take the responsibilities of others upon himself, he first
needed to have the means to see to their needs. But Nafisa told him that this need not
constitute a problem; for money and possessions were things that could easily be lost,
whereas nobility, honor, trust and character were values that were hard to find. Since
she had come so far in the conversation, she decided to pursue it further and asked: "If
this was no longer an obstacle for you, and if someone came to you with beauty,
wealth, honor, someone of your own caliber, would you not accept them as a spouse?"
Her questions made it clear that there was such a candidate, and understanding her
intention, the Sultan of Both Worlds asked: "So who is this person?"
"It is Khadija," answered Nafisa.
Of course he knew Khadija, the daughter ofKhuwaylid; he had taken her caravan to
Damascus only a few of days ago and had returned it to her with trade profits. But
marriage was not as easy as trade and so he asked: "But how can his be?"
But for Nafisa the question was not a matter of "how," she was just waiting to hear
his consent.
She was relieved to hear his response, for his words could be taken as consent. His
response seemed to denote "This is not a problem on my side, but how can such a
marriage be?"
The rest of the conversation came easier to N afisa, so she said: "You can leave the
"how" ofthis business to me."
Conventionally, silence meant a favorable response, and Nafisa left his side quickly
and ran to our mother Khadija. She herself wanted to give her the good news. She ran
and told her all that had been spoken. The news made Khadija breathe a sigh of relief.
When she learnt that he looked upon the matter favorably, she sent word to the
Awaited Messenger about her interest in him and the reasons why she wanted to marry
him. This is how she started her statement: "0 my uncle's son! Verily I am interested
in marrying you because of our close family ties.2l Your remarkable status within your
tribe, your beautiful morals and your steadfastness in protecting what is entrusted to
you and in speaking the truth. Tell your uncles that they may start the mamage
procedures!"
It was clear that she was trying to express her admiration for the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 98 ---
Allah in the sincerest and finest way possible. The Pride of Humankind did not want
to take such an important step without discussing the issue with his elders. After
receiving the offer, he went straight to his uncle Abu Talib and spoke about what had
taken place between himself and Nafisa.
His nephew, Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, was
very precious for Abu Talib and he did not know any other person as worthy as him.
However, Khadija was no woman to be written away either. She clearly lived a life of
honor and dignity. She was one of the leading people by way of nobility and honor.
He understood that his nephew looked at it favorably as well and he decided he had
nothing to say against the match, and so he blessed the union.
The Marriage
The time had come for the union that would shape their lives. Before long, the sons of
Abdul Muttalib, Abu Talib, Abbas and Hamza would set off to ask for the hand of
Khadija for Muhammad. Although the couple had given their consent, the usual rituals
between the families had to take place, and the match had to be made known to the
public through this process. First, Abu Talib took word: "Praise be to Allah, Who has
given us the honor to be of the lineage of Ibrahim, descendants of Ismail! Verily it is
He who has made our kin the server of the people, He who has honored us as
protectors of His house, put us in the service of the Haram, the Prohibited Place; it is
He who has made His house a place the direction to which all tum their faces, a place
where all feel secure. It is He who has favored us when it comes to judging people."
This address that he chose before he started to speak of the matter made clear the
earnestness ofthe situation. Attaining the respect of people could be acknowledged on
no clearer terms. Then he said the following to the seated members of the family:
"When it comes to Muhammad, the son of my brother, the son of Abdullah. Whoever
should challenge him, he shall be beaten. Although he may not have much by way of
money and possessions, he is above all by way of honor, nobility, courage, intellect
and virtue. Money and possessions are like shadows that disappear; they last only a
short while. However, there is great news about him, new and happy tidings about his
future that will leave everyone in awe! He is asking for the hand of Khadija who is
your sister, and as dowry, he wants to give her twelve ukiyya and one nash':12. some of
which is to be paid now and some later. "21.
In response to the request of the groom's family, the bride's family also had words
to say. After Abu Talib, Khadija's uncle Amr ibn Asad2§. stood up and said similar
laudatory words about Khadija's virtue. Khadija's father was not present; he had died

--- Sayfa 99 ---
in the battles of Fijar and the daughter of Khuwaylid had grown up an orphan just like
the Messenger of Allah. He said the following:
"Just like you say, praise be to Allah, Who has favored us among others in the
aspects that you have mentioned! There is no doubt that we are the leaders among
Arabs, and so are you. No one among the Arabs can deny your virtue or honor or your
right for pride. I bear witness by the same lineage that we come from and our shared
honor that I, 0 you people of Quraysh, wed the daughter of Khuwaylid, Khadija to
Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, with the dowry that has already been mentioned.
Abu Talib, who felt the responsibility of the moment over his shoulders, wanted to
hear the consent of the other relatives who were also present at the occasion, so he
said: "I want the other uncles to participate in this acceptance."
Upon this, another uncle who was present took word: "I call you to be witnesses, 0
Quraysh, that we have wed Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, to Khadija, daughter of
Khuwaylid," and thus he reiterated the transaction ofmarriage.22
The usual rituals had thus been performed, and now it was time for the wedding
ceremony. Soon that too would take place. The sheep and camels were slaughtered,
and people had gathered for the celebration. Thus a life of hardship but mutual
understanding and peace would start for the couple, a shared life of 25 years. Abu
Talib, who was going through very difficult times himself, was very happy; he was
sitting on the side, thanking Allah who had opened up such a gate of happiness for
him. It was of course not solely Abu Talib who was happy about this union. The
Meccans had sincerely approved of this match, such that some of them would put this
auspicious event in verse, reciting it to each other.
But of course on that day no one's happiness matched Khadija's. She knew so much
about him already, such that she had invited the nursing mother of Muhammad the
Trustworthy, Halima as-Sadia, to the wedding; she wanted to share with her the
happiness of the orphan who had grown up without parents. Her happiness did not
overshadow her generosity and she would not forget what she was meant to do. When
Halima was leaving in the morning, she had with her the forty sheep that Khadija had
given her as a gift for the sake of beloved Muhammad, to whom Halima had given her
milk.
After staying with Abu Talib for a couple of days, they moved to their own house
that they purchased from Hakim ibn Hizam the nephew of our mother Khadija, and
thus began their exemplary life that would continue for fifteen years till the first
revelation.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
From then on, Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, was a
model family man. When circumstances called for it, he would help his wife with the
housework, he would see to his own daily needs himself and he thus constructed a
relationship with his wife on the basis of mutual respect and love. Although she had
every means to leave the house work and the service of her husband to the servants,
Khadija enjoyed being of service to her husband and preferred to do much of the work
herself, performing her chores with joy akin to prayer. She had devoted herself to his
contentment to the extent that she could not bear to see a single hair strand of his be
injured in any way, she took great pains so that there was nothing to disturb him.
Other Inhabitants of the Home ofHappiness
Allah's Messenger and Khadija had joined their lives to set up a new household, but
they were not alone in this new life that they had started. They would not focus only
on themselves; they would hold the hands of others and would prepare these people
for life as well. Had their parents been alive, they too would have partaken in the
peace of this house; they too would have had the joy of loving their grandchildren
with their own children.
First of all, Umm Ayman, entrusted to the Pride ofHumankind by his father, moved
into this new house with them. She was trying to see to the needs of the orphaned son
of her master Abdullah, the son who had lost his mother as well.
The Messenger of Allah was equally a man who never forgot the good that had
been done to him. After marrying our mother Khadija and setting up a new house, he
had gone to his uncle Abbas and speaking about the dire situation that his uncle Abu
Talib was in, he suggested that they should jointly take on the expenses of his house.
Thus, Abbas took under his care one of Abu Talib's son, and the other son Ali, would
come under the care of the Messenger of Allah. This can be described as the third
phase ofprotection in the Prophet's life; now Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and
blessings be upon him, was a father to Ali and Khadija was an affectionate mother to
him. On the one hand, Ali was being educated by the most honorable member of
humanity and on the other hand, he was the recipient of the affection and love coming
forth from the noble Khadija.
There was another young man living in this house and his name was Zayd ibn
Haritha. Although he had been the son of a free family, the house they had gone to
with their mother had been raided and they had been taken as slaves and sold at the
slave market. In the fair of Ukaz, the nephew of our mother Khadija, Hakim ibn
Hizam, had bought him and then brought him to his aunt. Till the day of the wedding,

--- Sayfa 101 ---
Zayd had served Khadija and had become a member of this new household. However,
soon a change would occur in his status-he had been given in service to the Cause of
Pride for the Universe and he in tum had given Zayd his freedom.
Another young man in the house was Hind, the son of Khadija from her former
husband Abu Halah. The little Zubayr, too, joined this household for a while when his
father Awwam passed away, and he too had the good fortune of growing up in this
house.
A House Full of Peace
It was in such a house that peace could be established. The Pride of Humanity himself
was the source of peace. His whole mission was to bring peace to those who could not
even imagine peace in their dreams, to shower such people with complete peace and
serenity. The affectionate behavior of our mother Khadija was a great source that fed
this peace as well. She was assured in the righteousness of all the actions of the noble
Prophet from the beginning and always hastened to do as he bid. Whenever something
disturbed him outside, he would run to the home that was kept stable by our mother
Khadija, and this is where he would find his peace. Just as there was this
understanding between the two of them, there was also a sincere relationship of trust
between them, so sincere that everyone looked upon them with envy.
One day, when Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him,
asked leave from his uncle Abu Talib to go to Khadija, Abu Talib told his slave girl
Naba to follow him to report back on their relations. When she returned, Naba told the
following to Abu Talib: "What I saw was very interesting indeed. When she saw him
coming, Khadija came to the door, held his hand and said to him: 'May my mother
and father be sacrificed for you! In truth I would not do this for anyone but you, but I
know that you are the Prophet ofthe future. When you reach that state please do not
forget me, and my position near you! Please, pray for me, too, to Allah who has sent
you!' Muhammad the Trustworthy, who heard this praise from his wife and supporter
in all things, said: 'I swear by Allah that if indeed I am he, you have sacrificed many
things for me, and I will never forget your sacrifice. "'100 And indeed he would never
forget it.l.2l
The Fruits of This House
Soon this household started to bear fruit. First Qasim was born. He was the child that
gave our noble Prophet his name Abu'l-Qasim, the father of Qasim. But he did not
stay long in this mortal world. When he was only a toddler, he left this world for

--- Sayfa 102 ---
Paradise.
Two years passed after Qasim's death and our beloved Prophet's daughter Zaynab
came to the world. Zaynab was his first female child. A year later Ruqayyah, and three
years later Umm Kulthum was born. Our mother Fatima honored the world with her
presence the year that the revelations started. The last child that our mother Khadija
brought to the world was Abdullah. It had been two years that the spiritual meeting in
the Cave of Hira had taken place. Because he had been born into what was now an
Islamic world, Abdullah was also called Tayyib and Tahir to signal his purity.
However, Abdullah did not live long either and three months later, he too left the
world. It seemed that Allah the Almighty wanted to protect them from the possible
complications that would arise later.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
~Burak, Bekir, Hazreti Hatice, istanbul: Rehber, 2010, p. 15
l!i Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11156; Suhayli, Rawthul Unf, 11122
~ Maysara was working for our mother Khadija who had sent him to report on all the movements
and behavior of our noble Prophet.
§2.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11130
!!2 Yamani, Ummu 'l-Mu 'minin Khatijatu bintu Khuwaylid Sayyidatun ji Qalbi '/-Mustafa, 119
l!2Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11130
§§Ibid.
§2Jbid.
22. Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1151
2libn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11130, 131; Tabari, Tarikh, 21196
~Tabari, Tarikh, 21197
22. Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2110
2± Amr ibn Hi sham, who would later come to be known as Abu Jahl, the father of ignorance, was
among those who had asked for her hand in marriage. But Khadija had turned down his offer
without hesitation as she had turned down others. It is said that one of the reasons why Abu Jahl
took a stand against the Messenger of Allah was because of this marriage. When Abu Jahl heard
of the match, he is reported to have said with rancor, "Couldn't she find none other than the
fosterling of Abu Talib, the orphan of the Quraysh, to marry?"
~On her father's side their lineage converged with her forefather Qusay; and on her mother's side, it
reached Luaw, another grandfather of our noble Prophet.
220ne nash was twenty dirhams, and one ukiyya was forty dirhams. This brings the total dowry for
Khadija to five hundred dirhams. This corresponds to 1600 grams of silver today.
One day our mother Aisha asked the following to Abu Salama ibn Abdurrahman: "How much is the
dowry of the Messenger of Allah?"
"The dowry he gave for his wives was twelve ukiyya and nash. Do you know what nash is?"
"No."
"The nash is half an ukiyya, and that is five hundred dirhams. This is the dowry that the Messenger
of Allah has though fit for his wives." See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 11658; Ibn Majah, Sunan, 11607
(1886); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 6/57.
22 Five hundred dirhams, some of which is to be paid in tender and some later, as debt. This is the
dowry that the Messenger of Allah thought fit for our mother Khadija. Some reports say that apart
from the dowry that Abu Talib stated, the Messenger of Allah also pledged twenty camels, and
this probably corresponds to five hundred dirhams at the time.
2l! Some reports say that his name is Waraqa ibn Nawfal.
22 Yamani, Ummu 'l-Mu 'minin Khadija bint Khuwaylid, Sayyidatun ji Qalbi '/-Mustafa, p. 65
10° Fakihi, Akhbaru Mecca, 5/206
!2.1. Some reports have it that this happened at the night of the wedding. According to this view, in
order to be sure of Khadija's solicitation for his nephew, Abu Talib sent the slave girl Naba after
them in order to be sure of her treatment of him. Thus he would know the conversation that
passed between them. This is what he asked of her: "Go and listen to what Khadija says to him."
Thus Naba started to follow the noble Prophet and when he came to where Khadija was, he sat next
to her and they started to speak. It was Khadija who started the conversation: "May my mother
and father be sacrificed for you! I swear by Allah that I am doing all this in the hope that you are
the Messenger that will be sent. If you are indeed him, please do not forget my situation. Pray for
me too, to Allah who has sent you as Prophet!"
In the face of such effort spent in the way of Allah, the Messenger of Allah said: "I swear that if I am

--- Sayfa 104 ---
he I will do all I can and I will not abandon you. But if it is someone else, he will not abandon you
seeing what you have taken on for his sake!" See Yamani, op cit., p. 68. There was no
Prophethood yet, but value had to be recognized where it was due. Whenever it should take place,
these were only articulations of the truth, in the name of truth.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
REPAIRING OF THE KA'BA
AND THE JUDGE
A
nother ten years passed and the Pride of Humankind had reached the age of
thirty five. In those days, the most discussed topic was repairs to be done to
the Ka'ba. A thief had got in through the walls that had fallen apart and had
stolen certain precious things from it. A woman had set fire near it and the flames had
inflamed the cover of the Ka'ba and burnt it. The Quraysh took all this into
consideration and decided to repair the Ka'ba. A ship had recently run aground on the
shores of Jeddah and news had come that this ship was full of the material needed for
the repairs. Moreover there were workmen in the ship who could carry out the repairs.
Without much ado, a delegation headed by Walid ibn Mughira went and bought the
material that was needed, and they took the master workman Bakum of Greek origin
with them and then returned to Mecca. 102
When it came to distribution of the work, there was immediately some tension, for
all tribes wanted to gain credit for such an honorable job as repairing the Ka'ba. At the
end, each wall was designated to a certain tribe for repair.
But before rebuilding, they had to tear down the walls and no one had the courage
to do that. They feared that some curse would befall them. It was Walid ibn Mughira
who first mustered the courage to hit the first blow with the lever. He said: "0 Lord!
We mean nothing but good when doing this."
And he kept hitting with the lever with utmost care. No one else had the courage
that day to participate in tearing down the wall. They wanted to wait a few days to see
whether any bad things would happen to them; for if nothing happened, they would
take this as a sign that the Lord was content with what they were doing. If something
bad happened, they would give up the work and never think of it again. The next day
had come and everybody had woken up just like the previous days. It was clear that
the Lord was content with the work and so all the tribes took up the work that had
already been designated to them, and the task of demolition was completed.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
They had now reached all the way down to the foundations laid down by Prophet
Ibrahim, peace be upon him. When they touched the foundations, they saw that the
whole of Mecca started to shake, and fearing what would happen, they decided to
build the new building on top of these foundations. 103
The Ka'ba was rising stone by stone and when it came to the most important pillar
of the building, there was yet another disagreement between the tribes. Each tribe
wanted to place the Black Stone, the Hajar al-Aswad, which they deemed to be holy,
themselves. There was no way to resolve the dispute, such that they were looking for
ways to attack each other. This was a fearful situation because the wounds of the Fijar
battles were only just beginning to heal and such a conflict could bring the tribes near
another battle that could last hundreds of years.
It was at this moment that the oldest man of the Quraysh, Abu Umayya, stood up
and spoke to the Meccans who were waiting for the smallest provocation to attack
each other: "0 people of Quraysh! You should appoint a judge among you and thus
end this dispute! Let the first man that enters the doors ofthe Ka'ba be that judge and
let him judge among you and do as he says!"
First they debated this suggestion and then decided that it was fair. They did not
want to create animosity among the tribes for a task they had set out to do in the name
of good works. They had all accepted this suggestion and now they had to wait for that
first person to enter through the doors. It was a Monday. 104 After a long and silent
wait, everyone had become all ears, and they tried to guess to whom the footsteps
belonged to. The first face that the Quraysh saw entering the doors was the Pride of
Humankind, Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him. When they saw
him they all said: "Look! The Amin, the Trustworthy, is coming! We will be content
with his judgment."
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, enquired after why
they were all looking at him and why they had started to cry out after seeing him; he
was told of all that had happened. He then asked them to bring a big piece of cloth.
Soon after they brought it to him and were watching him with great curiosity.
First the Messenger of Allah laid the cloth on the ground, and then carrying the
Black Stone with his own hands, placed it on the cloth. He could see that people were
watching his every move, and so he said:
"Each tribe should hold a side of the cloth and lift the stone."
It was a clever solution, and no one could say anything against it. Thus, every tribe
would participate in placing the stone and lift it up all together. When the stone came

--- Sayfa 107 ---
to where it was to be placed, he approached it, took it into his exalted hands and put it
in its place. It was clear that Allah wanted His Last Messenger to place this stone. This
stone's origins were in Paradise and had come to the earth with Prophet Adam, peace
be upon him, and had inhabited the Ka'ba from the time of Prophet Ibrahim and
Ismail, peace be upon them, and He had arranged the timing. In truth, everything was
reverting to its original state with him. The whole incident had been managed by the
Messenger of Allah, the possessor of a higher intellect. With the stroke of a genius, the
work of the repairs which had stopped for days restarted and finished as planned. 105
Honoring One's Word
He had led such a life before meeting Angel Gabriel that those who had the
opportunity to spend even a moment in his presence had the opportunity to observe all
the virtues that can be found in humanity, and these would remain as unforgettable
memories in their minds.
Our noble Prophet had made trade with a young man called Abdullah ibn Abi
Hamsa and the young man had incurred some debt to him. They had agreed on when
and where the debt would be paid and then gone their separate ways. When the
arranged day had come, the Messenger of Allah went to the designated place and
started to wait. He waited there until the evening.
But Abdullah had forgotten his word and had not come to the appointment. The
noble Prophet continued to wait a second day. But the young Abdullah did not come
that day either. On the third day, Abdullah remembered his appointment with
Muhammad the Trustworthy and rushed to the place of the meeting. He was
embarrassed to have forgotten his appointment. When he came to the appointed place
he saw, as he had expected, the Pride of Humankind was waiting for him, for he had
turned his face towards where Abdullah was likely to come and had been waiting for
three days in case he would still come.
When he saw Abdullah coming towards him in haste, he was happy and relieved.
But in order to make a note of what had happened, he said the following: "You young
man! You put me in a very difficult position. I have been waiting for you here for
three days." 106

--- Sayfa 108 ---
102 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11145
103 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11146; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/200
104 Monday holds a special place in the life of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him. He was born on a Monday and he received his first revelation on a Monday in the Cave of
Hira. The day he started the migration to Medina was on a Monday, and the day he arrived in
Medina was on a Monday. The day in which he preferred the Hereafter and left for a higher
companionship was also on a Monday. See Suhayli, Rawthul Unf, 11129.
105 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11146; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/201; Suhayli, Rawthul Unf, 11129; Balazuri, Ansab,
1/99
106 Abu Dawud, Sunan, 4/299 ( 4996). Abdullah ibn Abi Hamsa would relate this incident of the
Meccan period years later, after he himself had become a Muslim, thus making a historical note of
an important incident.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
THE SETTING BEFORE HIS ARRIVAL
T
he period in which the Pride of Humanity lived was one in which ignorance
was at its peak. Wherever he looked, he could see something negative that
injured his soul. But this did not mean that there was no good or beneficence
around him. There were also people who spoke of virtues and doing good, who were
fighting ignorance and denial. They were performing an important task setting the
stage for his arrival. The eyes of Waraqa ibn Nawfal, Zayd ibn Amr and Quss ibn
Saida in particular were searching the skies for a sign from the Last Messenger who
would once again call people unto salvation. They also shared with those around them
their sadness in the tardiness ofthe Good Guest in coming. Especially when some of
them got together, their conversation always revolved around this subject. They spoke
of him through poetry, to any gathering they attended they always sang of his good
tidings.
The Echo in the Ka'ba and Waraqa's Interpretation
One day, Mecca witnessed a conversation between Zayd ibn Amr107 and Umayya ibn
Abi as-Salt. 108 Zayd had brought the subject once again to the Last Prophet and was
saying the following to Umayya: "Religions other than the will of Allah and Hanifism
are empty and without benefit on the Day of Judgment."
Then he would assume a very serious countenance and add the following: "Be
careful! Is the awaited Prophet going to be from you, from us or from the people of
Palestine ?"109
They were speaking of another world and what they were talking about was not to
be taken lightly. Those speaking were among the most knowledgeable people of
Mecca. Another person who witnessed their conversation was another Meccan
Abdullah ibn Uthman, also known as Abu Bakr, and to learn the truth ofthe matter, he
ran straight to Waraqa ibn Nawfal and asked him what all this meant. Waraqa's eyes
never left the skies; his chest would heave with the hopes of the future. Abdullah sat
near him and told him all that he heard in the courtyard of the Ka'ba. Then he asked

--- Sayfa 110 ---
him the truth of the matter: "0 son of my brother!" Waraqa started his words. He
seemed to be embracing Abdullah with this address, and he took on the sensitivity of a
person who was giving precious news whose value his interlocutor was well aware of.
He continued:
"The People of the Book and all scholars are in agreement on the fact that the
Awaited Messenger will come from among the Arabs. I know the science of
genealogy very well. Your people are the midriff of the Arabs," he added.
These words of Waraqa ibn Nawfal caught Abu Bakr's attention, he was showing
directions, he was thus telling Abu Bakr to look at his own family. Upon this Abu
Bakr said: "0 uncle! With what will this Messenger come? What will he say?"
Waraqa answered: "He will say what is said to him. When he comes, no oppression
will be left, no grounds for oppression will remain."ill
Later, another day, Abu Bakr would hear Zayd ibn Amr call out in the following
manner: "0 people of Quraysh! I swear by Him Who holds my life in His hands that
there is no one among you except for myself who follows Ibrahim. There is no doubt
that I follow Ibrahim and Ismail after him, and now I am waiting for a Messenger to
come from among the sons oflsmail; and I believe I will live to see him."
An old man who heard his words, Amir ibn Rabia, called out to him: "If you indeed
live to see him, don't forget to give him my greetings!"ill
If what these old wise men were expecting was true, this meant that the world was
pregnant with many surprises. They spoke in such assured terms that one could hardly
disbelieve them. They were all stressing the same point and were speaking, to the last
detail, about the coming of the Last Messenger.
Abu Bakr had started to look at things differently. He would go to the Ka'ba now
and then and he watched the pitiful state that the people were in. What he had heard
from the wise men was holding his sleeping hours captive. Even in his dreams, he was
following in the footsteps of the coming Messenger. How could it be otherwise?
Whichever wise man he visited, he sang the same refrain, and each dear friend he met
was repeating the same words.
While humanity seemed to have gone corrupt on the one hand, the wise men who
were writing prescriptions were describing the aspects of the coming Messenger, his
name and his appearance, his enemies and even the characteristics of the people who
would be around him.
The Dream in Damascus and What the Priest Said

--- Sayfa 111 ---
Abu Bakr had gone to Damascus for trade. There he had a dream: the moon had
broken into pieces and it was descending on Mecca and entering into all the houses.
The same moon then took the shape of the full moon and then came to his own home
and stayed there.
He woke up from his dream in a cold sweat. This was a dream that had given him a
joy that he could not forget and he was not able to contain himself. He went to a priest
that he trusted and told him what he dreamt. The priest was very happy to hear what
he dreamt, and when he finished he said: "No doubt his days are at hand."
Abu Bakr was surprised. He did not understand what this man, whom he had turned
to for an interpretation of his dream, was saying. He asked: "What are you saying?"
In fact the warmth in his looks explained everything. However in order to verify
what he thought the meaning was, he asked: "Do you mean the Messenger we have
been waiting for?"
The priest first shook his head in agreement and then gave the expected answer:
"Yes. You will become a believer with him and you among all people will be his best
aide! "ill
When he finished his business and was returning from Damascus, he could think of
nothing but him. At times he lifted up his hands and started to recite poetry. At one
point he asked to those around him: 'Whom among you will recite the poem of
Umayya ibn Abi as-Salt?"
One man among them asked: "Umayya has so many poems, which one do you want
us to recite 0 nassabata '!-Arab. ".ill.
"Take note! We have a Messenger."
One among them rose to the challenge: "Take note! We have a Messenger from
among ourselves and he will give us tidings of our future from our very own source.
We know that had science not been a value that is beneficial, we would've been put to
the sword."
"0 Lord! Please protect me from calling upon other gods for ever and fill my heart
with faith till the end ofthe world.
I seek refuge in the One from all evil, in the One that the pilgrims do pilgrimage for,
and for whom they consolidate values of religion! "ill
The road back passed through Basra, the hometown of Priest Bahira. It was
unthinkable that they should be there and not visit the famous cleric. Abu Bakr also
wanted to recount to him the dream that he had had, and he set off for the monastery
that the priest lived in. He told him the dream that he had in Damascus. The priest's

--- Sayfa 112 ---
eyes opened up wide and asked him the following question:
'Where are you from?"
"I am from Mecca," answered Abu Bakr calmly.
It was clear that the priest wanted to hear more.
'Where in Mecca? Who are your people?" he asked persistently.
"The Quraysh," answered Abu Bakr, surprised.
It was clear that this answer had not cut the priest's pace. He asked again: 'What is
your profession?"
"Trade," he answered.
It is at this point that the priest started to speak the words that would quell Abu
Bakr's surprise: "There is no doubt that Allah will make your dream come true, for
before long a Messenger will come from among your tribe, and you will be his aide
while he is alive and his successor when he dies!"
Abu Bakr was so astonished that he had forgotten what he had wanted to say. Such
direct references to him had embarrassed him and he was lost for words. He was
wondering who the Messenger could be. But of course, there was no need for
contemplation, it was clear that his close friend Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace
and blessings be upon him, was standing before everyone else as the candidate. Yes, it
could only be him ... But he had not heard anything from his friend that would verify
this. Yes, it was true that he stood against idols, he helped the poor, but he had not
uttered a word that could be construed as proclaiming that he was the awaited
Messenger. The best course of action was to wait and to watch him a little more . .ill.
With each passing day he was becoming a closer friend to him and was forging a
sense of belonging. Muhammad the Trustworthy was making himself so distinctive
that he was like a full moon that rose over a dark night; one could not stay away from
gazing at his face. The Meccans, too, were aware of this.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
107 Zayd ibn Amr was one of the people who had spoken of his coming before the Messenger of
Allah came. When he saw that he was late in coming, he went on the road in case he may have
come elsewhere and during his journey to find the Messenger he was killed by cutthroats. See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 2/58-60.
108 Umayya was sure that very soon a Prophet would come and he thought that it would be himself.
When it was clear that the revelation wasn't coming to him but to Muhammad, peace and
blessings be upon him, he was overtaken by feelings of tribalism and so he did not put his faith in
the Personage he had been waiting for. Concerning Umayya, the Messenger of Allah would say:
"His poetry had submitted its faith, but his heart passed away a denier." See Ibn Hajar, !saba,
1/251.
109 Suyuti, Hasaisu 'l-Kubra, 1/42
llilfbid.
ill Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11161; IbnKathir,Al-Bidayawa'n-Nihaya, 6/64
lliMuhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyathu 'n-Nadira, 1/413 (333)
ill This means a person who is an expert in the genealogy of Arabs.
ill Ali Muhammad, Al-Inshirahu wa Raf'u 'd-diki hi Sirahti Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, p. 34
ill. Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyathu 'n-Nadira, 1/413 (333)

--- Sayfa 114 ---
TOWARDS THE UNION
WITH THE BELOVED
T
he world was at a time when the dawn was about to break. From all over,
news about him was coming. The gates of the heavens were closed and the
oracles could no longer eavesdrop. Jewish and Christian scholars were jointly
declaring that the time was near and that the awaited Messenger was about to come,
and all these constituted a veritable expectation in hearts that were familiar with the
truth to a certain degree.
Looking for Solitude
In the meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah left the Ka'ba that had been alienated from
its meaning in the eyes of Allah, and he retired away from it with the little food he had
with him, looking for peace and quiet. The intensity of ignorance had grown and the
Ka'ba was filled with more and more idols. The Ka'ba, which had been established by
Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, who had come to destroy idols and idol worship,
had become a plaything in the hands of the Meccans. People had forgotten to worship
the Lord of the worlds and they seemed to be in a race to sacrifice themselves to these
virtual and false gods. This undoubtedly gave great concern for the noble Prophet. The
first building on earth, the Ka'ba, built to inspire inner peace, was now causing gloom.
That is why the Pride of Humanity was trying to get away from it, and while each of
his steps physically took him away from it, emotionally, he was leaving his heart with
it, and found it very difficult to leave.
When he left the Ka'ba, he preferred to go to a place where he could watch it from
afar. This was the summit of the Mount of Light (Jabal an-Nur). There was a cave
called Hira at the summit that had a good view of the Ka'ba. This was where the
Messenger of Allah would come when he left the Ka'ba, he stayed there for months on
end, and devoted his time entirely to worship. Maybe this was a fate that was meant to
prepare him for carrying the weight of a message whose decrees would continue till

--- Sayfa 115 ---
the end oftime.
The Messenger was sad; when he looked at the Ka'ba from within the cave, he saw
it to be sad as well, and the sadness of the Ka'ba left him even more desolate. Maybe
he got some solace from imagining it filled with faith, pure in the future. During his
stay in the mountain, he spent his time engaged in his special way of submission to
Allah, maybe he was speaking of the sadness he felt for the current situation of Ka'ba
and prayed to Allah that He may, once again, give them enough humanity to right
their ways. It seemed that the Mount of Light, was extending an invitation to the
possessor of light, and the mountain and the Messenger seemed to be waiting for the
light that would come from the heavens.
It seemed he was in a standing position saluting the Ka'ba in prayer from the Hira;
his face was turned from the people and facing only the Truth; he seemed to have a
different way of prayer and when his hands met his face, he seemed to be receiving a
sense of contentment, a taste different to any other prayer or occasion.
Dreams Coming True
It was clear, time had come really near. The dawn was about to break. He had seen
many signs that pointed to that moment. The dreams that visited him when he put his
head on the pillow, which came true when he opened his eyes, were becoming more
frequent and seemed to be carrying messages from beyond. These were the precursors
of revelation, and six months before the union with the beloved, they had turned into
consecutive signals making themselves felt more and more. During this period, our
noble Prophet would see that something he had dreamt of in the evening would take
place before his very eyes the following daylli and he kept thinking about the
connection between the two worlds. Maybe these were some kind of preparation for
the approaching revelation.
He would speak of the dreams he had usually with our mother Khadija and she
would interpret these in keeping with the expectations that had already taken root in
her mind, trying to support the Messenger of Allah in this process. Once, our noble
Prophet dreamt that a piece of wood was lifted from the roof of his house and that a
great hole had opened there. He then saw a staircase of silver being fitted there and
then two men entered. He wanted to call someone to his side in the sight of what he
had seen, but he could not, he could not call for help. Then these men came to him and
sat on either side of him. One of them put his hand in our noble Prophet's body and
took two ribs away from him. Then he turned to his chest and took his heart out and
put it in his hands. It seemed so real that he felt the hand to his bones.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
One man said to the other: 'What a beautiful heart this virtuous man has!"
Then he washed the heart and placed it in its place. He then put the ribs in their
place as well. Then they went back from the stairs that they had come from and
disappeared. They had also taken the staircase with them. The ceiling was in its old
shape and everything had returned to normal.
The awaited Messenger shared this dream in the first instance with our mother
Khadija.
In these critical times, his best support was Khadija, and she was always displaying
the attitude expected from her: "Rejoice!" she said first, and then she added with a
resolute voice: "There is no doubt that Allah wills only good things for you. There is
good in this; rejoice!"l!2
Indeed, a road had been set out for them and they were walking step by step on this
road. Our mother Khadija was well aware of this road and was thus speaking in a self-
assured manner, trying to support the Messenger of Allah on the way.
Creation Was Saluting Him
Apart from this, each tree, each stone, each living thing was gomg through a
transformation when they came face to face with the Messenger of Allah saluting him,
singing him praises before the moment of the union. This process which had started
with the first human, continued with the coming Prophets and the friends of Allah.
They all pointed to the fact of his coming, and so when he approached any creature,
they would salute him; for what approached them was the reason of all creation; for
had it not been for him, there would have been no existence.
After a day in which he had experienced similar events, he had returned to his home
of happiness and shared his concerns with our mother Khadija. Again, she gave him
fortitude: "Verily, Allah shall not abandon you and will not let evil touch you, for you
speak the truest of words; you keep safe what is entrusted to you and you always look
out for those around you. "ill
Khadija's Worry and Efforts
Every time the Messenger of Allah left, it was a source of sadness for Khadija. It was
clear that the Pride of Humanity breathed peace in Hira, however every time he left,
Khadija was worried; she was concerned that something might befall him. She sent
men after him to see whether he was safe, and told them to keep watch after him . .!..!2
When he left taking with him the food that our mother Khadija had prepared for

--- Sayfa 117 ---
him, he would sometimes return with more food. Sometimes our mother Khadija
would herself take to the road, walk for kilometres on end, and she would carry food
to him on her own for hours. 120 She would sometimes breathe mysterious atmosphere
of the Cave of Hira with her Beloved, and she thought it the greatest joy to share this
time with him at the cave after a long and tiresome trek. Sometimes their routes would
cross at the place now referred to as the Mosque of Ijaba (Response), and they would
camp at this place where they would meet.
Then the Messenger of Allah would leave once again for the cave and our mother
Khadija would return home. It would be unbearable for any woman that her husband
should stay away from home for such long stretches of time, but Khadija did not in
any way reproach the Messenger for this, on the contrary, she would try to share his
loneliness, preparing and encouraging him for the days to come.
The Voice of Gabriel
In one of these periods that he spent alone, Allah's Messenger heard a mysterious
voice say to him:
"0 Muhammad! I am Jibril."
This too may have been a preparation for revelation. The Messenger of Allah was
startled with worry and he directed himself once more to the world of solace that
Khadija would provide for him. He told her about the voice and where it seemed to be
coming from: "I swear I fear that great events will happen."
The person of fortitude was as her usual self. She said the following words that
would cure him of his worries and troubles: 'What do you mean? Our refuge is always
Allah! Allah the Almighty will never abandon you. You always protect what is
entrusted to you and never lose it, you look after your relatives and help them, and you
always speak the truest ofwords." 121
One day, evening had come and everyone had retired to their homes. On such a
lonely and quiet evening, the Messenger of Allah heard the voice of Gabriel again.
This time he was saying "Peace."
He turned once again to his point of solace. Khadija saw the panic on the beautiful
face and actions of the Messenger and asked: 'What is the matter? Has something
happened?"
He once again told his wife what had happened. When he finished she said
excitedly: "Rejoice; for peace can only be good." 122
In her excitement one could feel her dignity and resolution. With these comforting

--- Sayfa 118 ---
words, she probably meant, "Whoever addresses you in peace, means this can only
come to good, for peace is always connected to well being."

--- Sayfa 119 ---
lli Bukhari, Sahih, 1/6; Muslim, Sahih, 1/97; Ahmad ibn Hanba1, Al-Musnad, 21153
illBukhari, Sahih, 4/1894 (4670)
lliBukhari, Sahih, 6/2561 (6581)
1..!2 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/11
120 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1389 (3609)
121 Bukhari, Sahih, 1/4 (3)
122 Ibn Hammad, Az-Zurriyyatu 't-Tahira, 1/33

--- Sayfa 120 ---
THE UNION
T
he blessed moment of reunion fell on a Monday. The year was 610, the month
was Ramadan, the place was the Mount of Light. At this time and place,
lights had united and an inseparable link was forged between the heavens and
the earth. It was here that Archangel Gabriel descended and told Muhammad, the
Pride of Humankind, his duty as a Messenger of Allah.
On this mountain, two sureties had come together and a new custody was going to
be given to humankind. Now was the season when light would meet light, a period of
reflection was about to resonate on earth. The heavenly was going to embrace the
earthly and would order him to "Read!" This was the placing of a burden on the
shoulders of man, a responsibility that had been too heavy for mountains and rocks to
carry. The burden felt in the face of the majesty of such a mission was unbearable.
What was it that he was meant to read? He did not know how to read or write! He had
not received any education thus far. There had been no authority other than his Lord to
fill his horizon.
"I do not know how to read," the Messenger of Allah responded.
Gabriel came closer and embraced him once again. He squeezed Muhammad, peace
and blessings be upon him, with all his might, and then setting him loose, he said
again: "Read!"
The beloved Messenger would repeat the same words: "I do not know how to read!"
It was clear that there was more to this statement than what it seemed to be on the
surface. Gabriel approached him once again, and seizing him by his waist, he
squeezed him again. Then releasing him, he repeated: "Read!"
"But I do not know how to read! What am I to read?" repeated the Pride of
Humankind.
This time, it seemed that now they would get somewhere. Gabriel finally said to the
Beloved of Allah as he let him out of his grasp:

--- Sayfa 121 ---
Read in and with the Name of your Lord, Who has created-created
human from a clot clinging (to the wall of the womb). Read and your Lord
is the All-Munificent, Who has taught (human) by the pen-taught human
what he did not know. (al-Alaq 96: 1-5)
Things were clearer now; for when it was in the name of the Gracious Lord,
everything could be read. It was not yet made evident what was to be read. But
everything that one could see or hear was created to be read. Each thing that stood in
front of man was a sign confirming its creator, and man as a creature of
comprehension had to read creation in the right way in order to decipher this code of
significance. 123
This order also called for an assessment of what the beloved Messenger had
gathered by way of information till that day and to continue in the same manner in the
future. The Qur'an would be revealed piece by piece and this emphasized the need to
go back to the beginning every time a verse would be revealed, and read it as part of
this whole, for this book was not of mettle to be left aside, nor was it to be preserved
in precious material and hung in the highest of places as a show of respect. It had to be
a message that would resonate with the believer is all its aspects.
For this to happen, it had to be read properly with precision and turned towards with
sincere intentions of understanding. This book would open its doors to the extent of
one's sincere direction towards it and would offer its pearls to those who want it to the
same extent.
This order by Allah via Gabriel also spoke of a new beginning for the duty that lay
ahead for the Messenger of Allah. He was going to go to the people with this mission
and invite them to the true way of life. When accomplishing this task, the Messenger
of Allah was called upon to read human nature correctly in his dealings with people.
He was reminded that he had to know his addressee well, that he had to decipher the
codes of his soul because only then would he be able to speak in a language that they
would understand.
Having completed his first duty in the Cave of Hira, Gabriel disappeared
immediately. What he had just experienced was upon Muhammad the Trustworthy
with all its majesty. After a while, he realized that what he was mumbling to himself
was nothing other than what Gabriel had brought him just now, for what he had
brought had taken root in his heart letter by letter and he found himself repeating
them. Things were clearer now; he had been given the duty of guiding people to the
right path, the people he had seen to be in grave error till that day. His duty was upon
him; he was to go down from the mountain and amongst the people, and starting from

--- Sayfa 122 ---
his first interlocutors in Mecca, he would introduce people with a way of life that was
willed by his Lord. This was a duty that was like those given to those before him, but
different in the way that this message was now sent to encompass the whole of
humanity; the mission of Prophethood had been given to him and now he was going to
Mecca to carry out this noble task.
Turning Towards Mecca
The two lights that met on the Mount of Light had left one another having promised to
meet often, and the Messenger of Allah had directed himself towards Mecca with the
news he had been given. He was bent in two with the heavy mission he had taken on
and was excited to the point of rapture with the union he had experienced in Hira. His
whole body was taken over by the weight of revelation. He then heard a voice echo in
the heavens: "0 Muhammad! You are the Messenger of Allah, and I am Gabriel!"
When he lifted his gracious head up at the sky he could see Gabriel in all his
majesty and he was repeating the same thing: "0 Muhammad! You are the Messenger
of Allah, and I am Gabriel!"
It seemed as if the Messenger of Allah was nailed down to where he was; he could
neither put a step forward, nor could he return. After waiting for a while in that
position, he started to move his head. What did he see? Wherever he turned he saw the
same thing! Gabriel had enveloped the whole sky.
In the meantime, Khadija was worried because his return was delayed and she had
sent his men after him to bring her his news. Because they knew that he went to the
Cave ofHira, that's where they went, but they could not find him there.
Then the long hours of surprise and worry came to an end and the Messenger of
Allah turned towards Mecca. As he walked, he heard voices on the way saying: "Let
the peace of Allah be upon you 0 Messenger of Allah."
He turned to where these voices were coming from but he could not see anyone.
Before long, he understood that the trees and the rocks that he came upon were
saluting him and bearing witness to his Prophethood. 124
He returned home in excitement and said: "Cover me, cover me!" asking his
devoted wife to cover him. 125
He then put his blessed head on the knees of our mother Khadija. She was watching
the events unfold and she said affectionately:
"0 Abu Qasim (0 Father of Qasim)! Where were you? I swear I sent my men after
you, they did not leave a stone unturned in Mecca, but they could not return with news

--- Sayfa 123 ---
of you!" thus making her affection known to him. The Pride of Humankind said: "I am
afraid of myself Khadija! I am afraid of harm," and his wife once again took word to
soothe him: ''Never fear or despair! Allah will not abandon you, He will keep you,"
she said first, and then added: "For you always care about your relatives, hold the
hand of the afflicted and clothe those in need. You always have guests at your house,
with all your actions you are always after Truth and you are someone who has devoted
himself completely to the path of good. " 126
How could He leave alone someone who was doing His job of filling the moral
vacuum that might appear in a society! With this attitude, Khadija was presenting a
stance that can be a model for all Muslim women; she was presenting a model that put
good deeds above everything else. How could He leave alone those who had
persevered themselves in difficult days?
Before long, the Messenger of Allah told her what had happened first. Khadija, a
woman of experience, resoluteness and patience would confer all her worries and
deeds to Allah and so she was very calm. She knew that a trustworthy person such as
her husband, whom everyone sought advice from, was not himself without a protector.
She presented the resoluteness that was expected of her and supported the Great
Stature with whom the universe is proud, by saying: "Rejoice, 0 son of my uncle! Be
resolute and steadfast where you are! I swear by He who holds Khadija's life in His
hand that you are the Messenger that this people wait for."
For her, this was the expected conclusion, and so with faith she bore witness to the
truth of what he had come with right there! 127 Then she covered the Messenger of
Allah and left him alone in their house with the Gracious Lord, to go knock on another
wise door.
The Guidance ofWaraqa
There was someone else in Mecca who would be happy to hear this news. Khadija ran
to her uncle's son Waraqa ibn Nawfal with haste. She related to him word for word
what her gracious husband had told her. Each new sentence that came out ofKhadija's
mouth created great excitement within Waraqa, and at one moment, he couldn't
contain himself and started shouting: "Quddus! Quddus,"128 and then added: "I swear
by Him who holds Waraqa's life in His hand that if what you tell me is true Khadija,
this is the Great Honor that has also come to Moses and Jesus. There is no doubt that
he is the Messenger of this people. Go and tell him this, tell him to be steadfast."129
The seed from under the soil had cracked and now the new green seedling was
coming out. The awaited moment had come and the unlucky fate of humanity was

--- Sayfa 124 ---
about to change. He wanted to have a first hand account of this event which would
change the course of humanity, and with Khadija's guidance, they met in the
courtyard of the Ka'ba. The fact that he was many years older did not stop him from
obedience, and Waraqa kissed the forehead of the Messenger of Allah.
"0 son of my brother! Tell me what you have heard and saw," he asked, as if he
was asking for mercy.
The last Messenger of Allah started to tell him what had happened, without
excluding any details. Each word he heard was causing him even greater excitement,
causing eruptions in his spiritual world and Waraqa was pushed from one inner state
to another. The Good News that he had been reading about in books for years and the
Glad Tidings that he lived with the hope of witnessing was the very person that was
standing next to him.
When the Messenger of Allah finished his words, it was time for Waraqa to speak.
With a quavering voice and the excitement of a heart that had found what it was
looking for, he said the following historical words: "I swear by Him in whose hands
my life is, you are the Messenger of this people. The same Honor that came to Moses
has come to you. Do not forget that because of what you bring, you will be accused of
lying, you will be subjected to hardships and torture, you will face enmity like you
never have experienced before. I wish I were young on that day, living on that day, I
wish I could reach the day that they will drive you out of your home so that I could be
of some support to you."
What he heard at this door that he had sought for solace was very interesting indeed.
The future seemed to hold some hope but this hope seemed to come with its own
baggage, a heavy load full of days of hardship, ordeal and misery. The Great
Messenger was surprised. It was clear that this old man knew many things. He asked
with a curious tone of voice: "Will my people drive me out?"
The answer that came not only answered the question, but with more general terms,
it was listing what would befall him and was explaining the causes of the holy exiles
that those who will be with him will have to suffer through: "Yes, they will drive you
out. There is no person who comes with the truth that you are coming and not be
driven out ofhis home, and not have to leave his homeland!" 130
A Pause of Forty Days
The awaited meeting had taken place in the Cave of Hira but no more "meetings"
seemed to take place any time after. The Messenger of Allah had been waiting for this

--- Sayfa 125 ---
moment for years and at a moment when he thought "I have found it," he was alone
and longing for the life-giving breath of Gabriel. He constricted himself again to his
own company during this period. He was going to the Mount Sabir now and then, but
mostly he would go to the Mount of Light. He was so worried that with all its vast
plains the world seemed too small and time did not seem to pass.
When forty days of suspension passed after the first revelation, a revelation for
which he had waited forty years,ill he heard the Truthful Gabriel's voice in the
heavens: "I am Gabriel," he was saying. The Messenger of Allah turned towards
where the voice was coming from and lifted his head. What he saw was none other
than Gabriel whom he had seen in the Cave of Hira; he was on a platform between the
heavens and the earth and was saying: "0 Muhammad! You are the true Messenger of
Allah."
Yes, the connection with the heavens was reformed, and the two Trustworthy Lights
had met again. This was a development that gave light to the eye and peace to the
heart. The Messenger of Allah had been burning with the need for a new union; he
wanted to meet Gabriel once again. Such a period of suspension also signalled that the
revelation to come was going to come in such installments, for the Qur' an was coming
in order to direct people to a particular goal, to undo wrong practices that had taken
root in people's minds for centuries, and to plant its own seeds there.
So first of all, each revelation had to be internalized and practiced socially. This was
a gift that called for its own kind of thanks and the Messenger of Allah prostrated on
the ground and made the prostration of thanks. Afterwards, he set off for his happy
home. The weight of revelation was once more upon him. He was shivering although
it was a hot summer day, and he was sweating all at the same time. He turned towards
our mother Khadija and asked her to cover him once again. With the revelation that
was inscribed on his heart, a new process was beginning. Allah the Almighty was
taking him as interlocutor and saying to him:
0, you cloaked one (who has preferred solitude)! Arise and warn! And
declare your Lord's (indescribable and incomparable) greatness! And
keep your clothing clean! Keep away from all pollution. (al-Muddathir
74:1-5)
Five verses had been revealed thus far but this time it would not stop. Further verses
would keep coming, with the breath of Gabriel, humankind would experience a total
enlightenment. This union that took place after a short period of suspension called
attention to the fact that his mission of informing people was stated clearly. He had to
speak of his Lord's greatness to those around him, he had to live a clean worldly life,

--- Sayfa 126 ---
removed from all physical and spiritual tarnish, and he also had to advise this to
people around him by example.
The Surah al-Muddathir was the first surah to be revealed as a whole. The first five
verses of Surah al-Alaq had come in Hira, but the rest of the verses would be revealed
later. For this reason, some scholars make a distinction and say that by way of
Prophethood the first surah is al-Alaq, and by way of being Messenger, the first surah
is al-Muddathir. 132
The verses that were coming this time were clarifying the mission of the Last
Messenger. They asked of him to hold the hands of others and to declare the name of
his Lord to all. With the duty of Prophethood this responsibility had already been
given unto him. From now on he would talk about the existence and unity of Allah,
emphasize the necessity of believing in the Judgment Day and he would try to
establish the truths of faith in the whole society. In order to achieve this he wanted
certain things from the first people he shared his news with; he was underlining that
those who devote themselves to Truth should keep away from personal pleasures and
they should dedicate themselves to the well being of the public. He was calling
attention to faithfully leaving the outcome of events to Allah, without neglecting the
causes that would lead to these outcomes.
It was clear that alongside personal development, social development was also a
matter for concern. Now, accomplishments in both fields were needed. This meant
warning people to stay away from negative actions that would in any way cause
distress in those with a sound conscience, and to engage in actions that would win
them the favor of Allah.
Things needed to be very different from before, for this verse was calling the
Messenger of Allah to stand up, and giving him the responsibility of setting up a new
kind of society; it marked a stance against everything that did not have the consent of
the heart and the mind. 133
Another aspect that called for attention in the verses that came was the emphasis on
patience. Everything had just begun. But the road to be travelled was long and the
people who had given their heart to this cause were not yet numerous. Mecca was
vigorously against it and the attitude of the Meccans was a sign of what could happen
in the future. The road was long, the waters deep and provisions few; in order to come
out of this process alive and well one needed to hold on to the magical power of
patience, for that was the most effective answer to those who held the power in their
hands. It was about being patient while performing Prayers, not being attracted by
sinful acts, to tum one's face away from evil deeds and to face all the difficulties that

--- Sayfa 127 ---
enemies of religion will try to heap, and while doing all this, it was about never
stopping for one minute, passing each minute with an act that will please the Ultimate
Truth. This was the patience that was mentioned in the Qur'an and from the very
beginning, this Holy Book Qur'an was advising patience to believers.
Before long he was also informed that he was going to be protected by Allah
Himself from the evils that people may devise against him:
0 Messenger (you who convey and embody the Message in the best
way)! Convey and make known in the clearest way all that has been sent
down to you from your Lord. For, if you do not, you have not conveyed
His Message and fulfilled the task of His Messengership, and Allah will
certainly protect you from the people. Allah will surely not guide the
disbelieving people (to attain their goal of harming or defeating you). (al-
Maedah 5:67)
After this, communicating the revelation was reiterated to be our noble Prophet's
duty but that judgment only belonged to Allah. 134
Allah the Almighty who had given him the duty of Prophethood was giving him
assurance and was telling him that he had to strive to let everyone hear the Name of
Allah. 135
It was clear that such a mission would be met with discontent by some and that they
would try to extinguish the decrees coming from the Ultimate Truth with their mouths.
However even if it would not please those who were leading the deniers and those
who were fanatical in their blindness, Allah was reassuring him; they could do all in
their power, but Allah the Almighty would verily complete his light. 136 What He was
asking for the accomplishment of this feat was a strong and unshakable faith, a life led
within the criteria of piety, and purity of intent. ill So without consideration for what
others would say, one had to listen to the call of the All-Compassionate, and one had
to walk on earth only in His name.
There were many examples from history showing that Prophethood was not a new
phenomenon, and the examples showed time and again that those who opposed the
true faith would always lose. There were examples from Adam and Noah, from
Abraham to Jesus, peace be upon them all, the guiding figures who were the moons
and suns of the constellation of humanity. There were mentions of how they too had
had difficulties in communicating Allah's message, and thus our noble Prophet was
called to be prepared for what might be awaiting him.
The subject of afterlife was also touched upon, a gate was held ajar to another world

--- Sayfa 128 ---
in which the account of the life lived on earth would be given and thus people were
called to live lives for which they would be held answerable with no qualms.
In short, revelation was now a continuous phenomenon and it was a crucial element
in shaping the new society on the horizon of approval. As can be understood, this
process was one in which revelations were pouring down like rain. Thus al-
Muzzammil would follow al-Muddathir, al-Masad would be followed by at-Takwir,
from al-Ala to al-Layl, from al-Fajr to al-Mutaffifin, almost half of the Qur'an would
be revealed in Mecca. 138
No Offence and No Resentment
In the meanwhile, this process was closely watched by the Meccan polytheists and
they were happy because revelation had stopped for a while. According to them, the
Messenger of Allah was already shunned by the society in this step that he had taken
and now his connections with the heavens had also ceased, and so he was living a
double estrangement. One of the Meccans had stopped our noble Prophet on the road
to say to him: "0 Muhammad! I see that your devil has left you."
He thought that in doing so, he was making fun of the Messenger of Allah. But this
was an act that saddened the Messenger of Allah and it was this that had led the gates
of the heavens swing into action. Gabriel always came to his aid whenever he was in
need. This time was like any other time. Gabriel came again and brought the following
verses:
By the forenoon, and the night when it has grown dark and most still,
your Lord has not forsaken you, nor has He become displeased with you.
Assuredly, what comes after will be better for you than what has gone
before, and assuredly He will increasingly grant you his favors one after
another and you will be contented. Did He not find you an orphan and
give shelter (to you)? (ad-Duha 93: 1-6)
These were such beautiful compliments, the Compassion ofthe Compassionate was
holding the hand of His Beloved and He seemed to be gradually carrying him into the
future. Then what was the point of sitting and waiting?
Since it was proclaimed that each coming day would be full of better deeds than the
one before, then what needed to be done today was to encourage good deeds without
stopping, and share with others the compassionate beauty that Allah bestowed upon
the world and to advise them against what was ugly and bad. The Divine message also
concurred on this point:

--- Sayfa 129 ---
There must be among you a community calling to good, and enjoining
and actively promoting what is right and forbidding and trying to prevent
evil (in appropriate ways). They are those who are the prosperous. (Al
Imran, 3 : 1 04)
The community would be reshaped from this point onwards and they would be the
representatives of the middle way, and their mark would be the depth of their faith in
Allah, their readiness to do good deeds and their stance in the face evil. 139
At the same time this would be a dynamic that would help build stronger ties among
people in society. This was a condition of being social. In a society where people tum
a blind eye to wrong doings, where beauties are not shared, depression will soon be
felt, and such societies cannot survive in the long run. The Qur' an was using the
people oflsrael as an example in this process, showing that because they did not apply
these rules, there had been many divisions between them and they had been totally
scattered around. 140
This meant that indifference to wrong acts that one sees was an open invitation to
calamities and in that case the innocent suffered along with the culprits.
This meant that a salvation that included all could be achieved in a race for doing
good deeds, in the effort to make people love Allah, and Allah love the people.l.±l
The followers of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, would
represent the last chain and this representation had to be carried out in a manner in
which this new community would draw lessons from communities that had gone
before them, for the sun of time was nearly setting, so for humanity, time was standing
somewhere before it set. That's why one would take oaths in the late afternoon;
reminding the listeners that a deep faith was crucial in order not to waver in one's
way, and patience and steadfastness would be advised to the travellers on this road. 142
The Late Night Prayer
Although the Messenger of Allah had not shared with the Meccan polytheists the
union he had experienced in the Cave of Hira and what had followed thereafter, they
had heard some rumors and were speaking about it among themselves. This meant a
certain new situation for them-something out of their own control was happening in
Mecca and this development was progressing independently from all. From the very
first day the Meccans had started to make plans to obstruct this development by
spreading rumors, calling the Messenger of Allah whom they had themselves called
"Trustworthy," false and ugly words such as "mad," "oracle" or "magician." These
had of course reached our noble Prophet's ears and he had been saddened deeply by

--- Sayfa 130 ---
the campaign of defamation from the very first day. When he returned to his happy
home, he had covered himself up and then fallen into deep contemplation. Suddenly,
he saw the Truthful Gabriel ready by his side, 143 another revelation was coming:
0 you enwrapped one! Rise to keep vigil at night, except a little, half of it,
or lessen it a little; or add to it (a little); and pray and recite the Qur'an
calmly and distinctly (with your mind and heart concentrated on it). (al-
Muzzammil 73: 1-4)
Of course the Messenger of Allah could not stay indifferent when Allah the
Almighty sent him a message. From then on, his nights would be just as illuminated as
his days; his days as full of virtue as his nights. Since getting up in the night and
praying was an order from Allah, those who gave his heart to Him in the first place
would take this example upon themselves, and they would almost compete with each
other in making their nights as illuminated as their days. The Late Night Prayer was
now the glory of the believer; in these moments when one could cleanse one's self
from daily concerns, when one's heart and soul could take a rest to contemplate, in
these silent moments the warms beds would be left, and in feelings of awe and fear
one would direct one's self towards the Lord with opened hands and sincere
supplication. 144
For the Compassion of the All-Compassionate was raining on those who were after
finding Allah's grace in the nooks of the nights, and the All-Merciful Lord would
never tum down the hands that opened up to Him in supplication. 145
Then, a while passed and the following message was relayed when the Messenger
of Allah and the Truthful Gabriel met:
And in some part of the night rise from sleep and observe vigil therein
(through Prayer and recital of the Qur'an) as additional worship for you;
your Lord may well raise you to a glorious, praised station (of nearness to
Him and give you leave to intercede with Him, as He wills, on behalf of
His servants, in the Hereafter). (al-Isra 17:79)
The Late Night Prayer was now a concept and it signified the Prayer that was
performed when one got up in the middle of the night. But as an important detail, this
Prayer was deemed obligatory only for the Messenger of Allah. As for the Islamic
community, it was encouraged as a way of illuminating the way of the grave and the
afterlife, for the Late Night Prayer was mentioned as the greatest means through which
one could attain the Exalted Place.
The following verses of the same surah advised one to read the Qur'an piece by

--- Sayfa 131 ---
piece and with good diction. That's why the Messenger of Allah would raise his voice
a little more when reading the Qur' an both in the Prayers and outside of the Prayers,
carefully articulating each word. He would stop after saying "In the Name of Allah"
and then he would continue with" the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate." 146
He wanted his followers to show the same attention and sensibility and advised
them in the following way: "Read and rise! Just as you take great care for order in
your worldly deeds, read with the right measure! For your resting place will be
according to the last verse that you read. " 147
This meant that reflecting and representing the Qur' an was just as important as
living the truth that the Qur' an contained. The voice was a great gift given by Allah
and this gift had to be used in its full capacity when reading the Qur' an, a beautiful
and harmonious sound should be ushered forth: "Adorn the Qur'an with your
voices," 148 was a command that worked to that end. When he saw someone among his
Companions reading the Qur'an beautifully, he would pat his head and commend him
saying: ''You have been given a gift akin to the harmony in David's voice." 149
He did not like to see the letters of the Qur' an being scattered like so many bits of
sand with no harmony between them and would say: 'When you read it, consider the
meanings it contains and stop in order to contemplate them; let it activate your hearts
and do not be in haste as to finish it and put it aside." 150
And so all believers, like the Messenger of Allah, were getting up in the night,
performing Prayers in the name of their Lord and reading the Qur'an.
The sequence of the verses concerning the Late Night Prayer was also quite
interesting. First it had been said that only a small portion of the night would be
exempt from praying, and then it was said that allocating half the night for this would
be enough. For this reason, in order to practice their submission to Allah, some people
would stretch ropes between pillars and tying themselves to these ropes, they would
spend half the night in Prayer.lli
Later it was proclaimed that the Late Night Prayer was an obligatory Prayer only for
the Messenger of Allah, and that it could be enough for other people to pray for a
certain amount of time in the night. There was a period of almost one year between the
first command and its alleviation. In this period of time, the Companions of the
Prophet would pray till their feet would bloat, and would consolidate their submission
in the night till the light of day.
It seemed that at the very start and for those leading the way, such submission to
Allah had a special meaning. It meant that when everyone had submitted themselves

--- Sayfa 132 ---
to sleep, also known as the young brother of death, believers would submit themselves
to Allah in a need to prepare themselves for the difficult days to come, so that they
may learn patience and not waver while making their way on the true path.
For the ability to walk in this long path of submission full of obstacles was in direct
correlation to one's stands vis-a-vis the Truth. However, Allah the Almighty was
showing His Compassion, and taking sturdiness as His basis would allow each person
to practice their submission to the degree that was possible for them. 152

--- Sayfa 133 ---
123 Around 90% of verses mentioned in the Qur' an speak of such a "reading" and reveals that the
proofs that take man to Allah are not only the words that the surahs are composed of, but
elements of existence from the smallest to the greatest.
124 Ibn Hajar, !saba, 7/601; Manawi, Fayzu '/-Qadir, 3119
125 Bukhari, Sahih, 41187 4 ( 463 8)
126 Bukhari, Sahih, 114 (3)
127 Mawardi, A 'lamu 'n-Nubuwwa, 11275
128 Waraqa ibn Nawfal's words of surprise are reported as "Subbuh! Subbuh!" (All-Glorious) in
another account. See Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 2173.
129 Mawardi, A 'lamu 'n-Nubuwwa, 11275
130 Bukhari, Sahih, 114 (3); Muslim, Sahih, 1197, 98
ill Some say that this period was as long as three years, and when one considers that the whole
period of revelation was 23 years, this would be a very long period indeed. It is known that almost
half of the Qur'an was revealed in Mecca and there is not a single year in our noble Prophet's life
in Mecca when he did not receive revelations.
132 Some exegesis scholars say that the first surah to be revealed was al-Fatiha, and yet another group
says that the Surah al-Fatiha was revealed after al-Alaq and al-Muddathir. Whichever the case
might be, there is consensus on the fact that the first verse to be revealed was "In the Name of
Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate." See Suyuti, Itqan, 1/75-77.
133 He took this so seriously that the Messenger of Allah would never abandon this mission till the
day he passed away to exalted companionship, and this was his concern when he set up the army
ofUsama for this mission, the mission to further the cause of the true belief.
134 Ar-Ra'd 13:40, al-Baqarah 2:272
135 Concerning the subject see al-Maedah 5:55-56, an-Nur 24:55, as-Saffat 37:171-173, al-Mu'min
40:51-52, al-Mujadilah 58:20-21.
136 See Al Imran 3:139, at-Tawbah 9:32-33, Sad, 38:8-9, as-Saff 61:9.
137 See al-Baqarah 2:212, al-A'raf 7:128, Hud 11:49, al-Qasas 28:83, al-Mu'min 40:51, al-Arlbiya
21:105.
138 In Mecca, the following surahs were revealed in order of revelation: al-Alaq (Some reports say
that Surah al-Alaq was followed by Surah an-Nur), al-Muzzammil, al-Muddathir (Some reports
say that al-Muddathir was revealed after al-Qalam), al-Masad, at-Takwir, al-A'la, al-Layl, al-Fajr,
ad-Duha, al-Inshirah, al-Asr, al-Adiyat (some reports exchange the order of Surah al-Asr and al-
Adiyat ), al-Kawthar, at-Takathur, al-Ma'un, al-Kafirun, al-Fil, al-Falaq, an-Nas, al-Ikhlas, an-
Najm, Abasa, Qadr, Shams, Buruj, Tin, Quraysh, Qaria, Qiyamah, Hamaza, Mursalat (Some
sources say that Mursalat was revealed after Surah al-Qiyamah), Qaf, al-Balad, at-Tariq, al-
Qamer (some sources say al-Qamar was revealed after Surah Qat), Sad, al-A'raf, al-Jinn, Ya-Sin,
al-Furqan, al-Malaika/al-Fatir, Maryam, Ta-Ha, al-Waqia, ash-Shuara, Ta-Sin/an-Naml, al-Qasas,
Bani Israil/as-Saf, Yunus, Hud, Yusuf, al-Hijr, al-Ar!' am, as-Saffat, Luqman, Saba, az-Zumar, al-
Mu'min, as-Sajda, Ha-Mim-Ayn-Sin-Qaf/as-Shuara, az-Zukhruf, ad-Duhan, al-Jathiyah, al-
Al!qaf, adh-Dhariyat, al-Ghashiyah, al-Kahf, an-Nahl, Nuh, Ibrahim, an-Arlbiya, al-Mu'minun,
as-Sajda, at-Tur, al-Mulk, al-Haqqah, Saalah/al-Ma'arij, an-Naba, an-Naziat, al-Infitar, al-
Inshiqaq, ar-Rum, al-Ankabut and al-Mutaffifin. The rest of the surahs were revealed in Medina.
Apart from long surahs, some single verses were also revealed in Mecca. See. Suyuti, Itqan, 1138,
39; Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur'an, 201117, 118; Zuhri, Tanzilu 'l-Qur 'an, 1123-29.
139 See Al Imran 3:110.
140 See al-Maedah 5:78-79.
ill Concerning the subject see Bukhari, Sahih, 21520 (1368), 3/1314 (3393); Muslim, Sahih, 1169
(78), 1169 (80).

--- Sayfa 134 ---
142 See al-Asr, 103:1-3.
143 Some sources take this same event to be the cause of revelation for Surah al-Muddathir. See Ibn
Kathir, Tafsir, 4/441,442.
144 Abu Nuaym, Khilyatu 'l-Awliya, 6/267; Ibn Hajar, Fathu 'l-Bari, 11466
145 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 11444 (212); Ibn Majah, Sunan, 11435 (1366)
146 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 4/558; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11376
147 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 4/558; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 3/43 (766); Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 51177
(2914)
148 Bukhari, Sahih, 6/2742 (4653); Abu Dawud, Sunan, 11464 (1468)
149 The said Companion of the Prophet was Abu Musa al-Ash' ari. In response to this compliment of
the Messenger of Allah he said: "Had I known that you had been listening, I would have exercised
more, I would've tried to read much better." See Bukhari, Sahih, 411925 (4761); Ibn Majah,
Sunan, 11425 (1341).
150 Haysami, Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 7 /167; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 3/428
ill Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 6/239 (2492); Muslim, Sahih, 11541 (784)
152 As is well known, our noble Prophet was practicing religious duties to the greatest degree possible
and yet always asked for a lightening of this responsibility for his community. The Late Night
Prayer was obligatory at the beginning, and then he would see his community watch his every
move and he was afraid that it would be obligatory again and that not everyone would be able to
keep up with it, and so he advised: "0 people! Among religious duties, be only after those that
you are able to practice, for Allah will not be tired of writing in your good books, so long as you
are not tired of the duties you carry out, and the best religious duties are those that may be few in
number, but those that you practice continuously." See Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 6/309 (2571); Bayhaqi,
Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 31109 (5020).

--- Sayfa 135 ---
THE LEADING ONES
T
he Messenger of Allah was performing his Prayers on a Monday, having
directed himself towards his Lord in submission. In the evening, the person
who was praying behind the beloved Prophet was none other than his dear
wife Khadija. 153 She was the one that the Messenger of Allah had taught the Prayer
and ablutions just as he had been taught by Gabriel. Having taken her first lesson from
the Messenger of Allah she was praying her first Prayer with him. Thus at a time when
the world was falling prey to ignorance, a "first movement" had begun. Khadija was
like a loyal vizier by the side of the Messenger of Allah whenever he was confronted
she would come near him and would calm him with her affectionate words. She tried
to be beside him as much as she could and did all she can to lift the obstacles put in his
way.
Ablution and the Prayers
Before long, the Truthful Gabriel had come and was teaching the Messenger of Allah
ablution and the Prayers. Our noble Prophet had gone to upper Mecca and he found
the truthful messenger of the revelation, Gabriel, by his side. He was scratching the
ground ofthe valley with his feet. Before long a spring sprung there. From the water
that had sprung, Gabriel first took ablution.
In the meanwhile the Messenger of Allah was watching Gabriel in order to learn
how to take ablution. He then took ablution just like Gabriel showed him. Then it was
time for Prayer. First Gabriel, and then the Messenger of Allah performed the Prayer.
Then returning home, the Messenger of Allah taught the ablution and the Prayers first
to our mother Khadija. Just like Gabriel had taught him, he first took ablution and then
asked her to do the same. When the ablutions were over, he taught the Prayers just as
he had learnt. After teaching how Prayers would be performed, they performed their
first Prayer together.
The Big Decision of Little Ali

--- Sayfa 136 ---
The excitement that was lived in the home of Muhammad the Trustworthy, the visits
to Waraqa ibn Nawfal, the commotion after coming down from the Cave ofHira, and
the fluttering of Khadija all indicated that something was happening. Little Ali had of
course noticed this change. He was watching them perform the Prayer. He was about
ten years old. After the completion of the Prayer, he asked: "What is it that you're
doing?"
The Messenger of Allah replied: "I am praying to the Lord of the worlds."
Ali was hearing this for the first time and he asked with great curiosity: "Who is the
Lord ofthe worlds?"
The Messenger of Allah had him sit on his knee with the affection of a tender father
and told him what happened to him in the Cave ofHira and that he had been given the
mission of Prophethood, and then he said the following: "He is the one and only
Allah, He has no partner. He has created existence, and it is He who gives all their
needs. All is in the power of His hand; He is the one that makes live or die. He is the
All-Powerful. 154
These were like the heart burning advice of an affectionate father and they were
directly being addressed to little Ali's soul. Ali had such trust in the Messenger of
Allah that he would sacrifice his life for him, showing no hesitation. But in regards to
such an important matter, he could not decide before consulting his father, for the
position of the father was of course different. But there was one thing that the noble
Prophet would want from him, and that was that he should not speak of what had
passed between them to anyone.
That night Ali thought hard and long, and in such an important matter as faith in
Allah, he decided that there was no need to consult his mother or father! His decision
was final. In the morning he approached the Messenger of Allah and asked: "What
was it that you told me last night; what was it that you invited me to?"
It was clear that the little Ali was demonstrating a maturity well above his years and
he did not even feel the need to discuss it with his father before he became one of the
very first ones to embrace the faith. The Messenger of Allah sat Ali beside him and
invited him to bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, and that Muhammad was
His servant and Messenger. Thus ten year old Ali would be the first person to make
"the declaration of Allah's Oneness and Unity" after Khadija, and he would thus
choose Islam before many adults, declaring his submission to the All-Compassionate
Lord with a sincere heart. 155 The little Ali would no longer leave the side of the
Messenger of Allah his uncle's son Muhammad, for he wanted to be the first to hear

--- Sayfa 137 ---
the verses that were revealed to the Great Messenger.
Servanthood and Peace
In the first days Prayer was performed twice, once in the morning and once in the
evening, in two sections that included standing, sitting and prostration. The Messenger
of Allah was looking for somewhere peaceful to perform his Prayers and for that he
would usually go outside of Mecca and reveal to Allah all that was inside of him
amongst the peaceful date groves. One day, he had once again gone outside of Mecca
with this intention with his nephew Ali and they were praying together. Neither his
uncles nor his father knew yet that Ali had become a Muslim. Coincidentally, Ali's
father and our noble Prophet's protector of previous years, Abu Talib was passing
through there. The motions of his nephew and son caught his attention. When they
returned in the evening, he asked what the meaning of what he saw was: "0 son of my
brother! What is the content of what you have embraced as religion?"
"My dear uncle," so started the Messenger of Allah with a tone that seemed to
pierce through his heart, and continued: "This is the religion of Allah and his angels,
his Prophets and our forefather Ibrahim. Allah sent me charged with this duty towards
all His servants. You, my dear uncle, are the closest person to my invitation, the most
deserving of this advice; you are the person of highest merit who can benefit from the
light of the right way." Unfortunately, Abu Talib was not of the same view: "0 son of
my brother," he started his words and continued: "I cannot leave my ancestors'
religion and the tradition that they concurred upon. But I swear by Allah that when
you meet an obstacle as you go about your mission, I will help you."
He then added: "There is nothing to be said against what you have just said. But if I
accept it I will not be able to walk among people."
Then he turned to his son Ali and said: "My dear son! What is it with you? What is
this new state?"
"My dear father, I have put my faith in Allah and His Messenger. I have accepted
all that he has brought from the heart. I pray with him and I will be with him from now
on without ever leaving his side."
Abu Talib had no objections to that. When he turned to leave, he said:
"As for him, he will only invite you to do good; do not leave his side! For this is
good. I too know that what my brother's son says is true. Ifl were not worried that the
Quraysh women will make fun of me, I would have come and submitted to him as
well. "156

--- Sayfa 138 ---
This was great joy indeed! What joy to share time with him, to be in submission to
Allah by his side from the very first days, to supplicate at the door of the Ultimate
Truth at a period when there were no others! But it was a great twist of fate that one of
his closest relatives, his uncle, someone who had watched over him since when he was
a little boy, was deprived of this joy. A Companion of the Prophet called Afif ibn
Umar who saw this scene of joy and who later wanted to make up for his lost time
recounted the following with deep sorrow: "I was a tradesman. I had come to Mecca
during a pilgrimage season. Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib was my old friend, I used to
buy goods from him, and he would also buy things from me. I asked after him and
when I learnt that he was in Mina I went there straight away. I asked around and found
him. We conversed for a while. As we were engaged in our own conversation, a man
came. He first looked at the sun and then started to wait. Just when the sun started to
set he stood up and then started to perform the Prayers. Then a woman came and
started to pray as well, and then a child came and then started to pray with them. I
asked Abbas: 'What is this, dear Abbas? A new religion?'
'This is the son of Abdullah, Muhammad; he says that Allah has sent him as a
Prophet, he believes that the palaces of Persian and Byzantine kings will be opened to
him. The woman is the first person to have believed in him, Khadija hint Khuwaylid.
The boy is Ali, son of Abu Talib; he is his uncle's son and he is one of the first to
believe in him. "'157
The Arrival of Zayd ibn Haritha
Before long, another inhabitant of this home, Zayd ibn Haritha, approached the noble
Prophet. He could sense that something was happening but he could not tell what it
was exactly. He had seen neither Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be
upon him, nor his mistress Khadija in such a state before. In the front stood the
Messenger of Allah and behind was Khadija, and they were saying things he had
never heard before. He first waited for a while. They were performing the Prayers. He
saw them kneeling halfway, and then in prostration, and watched them astonished for
a while. 158
As soon as they finished their Prayers, he asked the Messenger of Allah what it was
they were doing. It was time. The beloved Messenger of Allah told Zayd all that had
happened with the affection of a father. Then he read to him some verses from the
Qur'an and invited him to the faith. How could it be that the Pride of Humankind
would ask for something and he would refuse? For his master, he had given up living
a happy life with his mother and father, he had admired his master's life even before

--- Sayfa 139 ---
the revelations and he had become his devotee. Now he was faced with an offer that
would give a new direction to his life and that would also lead to happiness in the
afterlife. Moreover, the person who was carrying the invitation was the rose of his
heart, the Messenger of Allah. Right there and then, he said the words attesting to
Allah's uniqueness and thus joined the train of believers after Khadija and Ali. He
would from then on be one of the most loyal Companions of the Messenger of Allah
along with Ali calling the people to Allah's cause.
The Submission of Abu Bakr
At that time Abu Bakr had gone to Yemen for trade and after a long journey he had
returned to Mecca. In the Mecca of that time, Abu Bakr was a rich man of high
standing. The Meccans would never resolve their matters of inheritance and blood
money without consulting him, always keeping his advice. When he approached
Mecca he saw that leading men of Quraysh including Uqba ibn Abi Muayt, Shayba,
Rabia, Abu Jahl and Abu'l-Bahtari were all waiting for him. Their standing like that
did not bode well. It was clear that certain developments had taken place in Mecca in
his absence and so he asked in alarm: "What happened here in my absence? Is there
some news?"
Their purpose was to acquaint him with what had passed, and they started to speak
with venom and hate: ''News indeed, 0 Abu Bakr! The orphan of Abu Talib thinks he
is a Messenger. Had it not been for you we would not have waited and seen to it
already. But now you are here, you will deal with the situation."
While they were saying all these, Abu Bakr was thinking of the past, somehow
fitting years into a few seconds. The words of Zayd ibn Amr that he had listened to in
the courtyard of the Ka'ba, the advice of Quss ibn Saida, the old wise man of the fairs
and the dream he had in Damascus, and the priest's interpretation ... Was it his time
already?
And what about the words of the old man in Yemen? The words of the old man of
Azd whom he had visited when entering Yemen were coming true. On seeing Abu
Bakr, he had asked many questions, and had spoken of the Last Messenger who would
appear in Haram, and also about the first people who would stand with him. On
getting to know Abu Bakr better, he had said without hesitation: "I swear by the Lord
of the Ka'ba that you are one of the first ones," Thus giving him the good news that
Abu Bakr would be a loyal Companion to the awaited Messenger. He had also recited
to him the poems he had written about the Last Messenger and had given them to Abu
Bakr. Thus Abu Bakr who had gone to Yemen was already returning with a lot of

--- Sayfa 140 ---
information. His mind was continuously occupied with what the old man had said. He
was impatient to share what the old man had said with Waraqa ibn Nawfal, and was
making haste for the road to finish soon, and now the leader of Quraysh had come on
his way and was speaking of developments that seemed to confirm what the old man
had said. A trustworthy man who for forty years had not spoken an untruthful word
could now not possibly speak lies in the Name of Allah. It was clear that the awaited
moment had come. He sent them away sweetly without alarming them. They believed
firmly that Abu Bakr with all his power would be able to resolve the matter. So they
left without causing any problems. Maybe they did not want to think much about a
matter that would actually lead them to contemplate further.
Abu Bakr felt he did not have time even to go speak to Waraqa ibn Nawfal. It
seemed that his expectations were coming true and the Personage whose presence was
whispered to him in his dream 159 had already been entrusted with the duty to speak of
his message, to declare the truth. He went straight to Khadija's house. Fate had
already put him on a course and he would walk on it with assured steps.
Before long, Abu Bakr knocked on Khadija's door. The person who opened to door
was the person he was looking for. How could there be even the trace of a lie on this
face? He was about to burst with curiosity but he held fast in order to be sure: "0
Muhammad! Have you left the traditions of your family and the religion of your
ancestors?"
The Messenger of Allah knew very well how to treat his friend of many years. He
said: "I am the Messenger of Allah, 0 Abu Bakr. Allah sent me in order to convey His
message to you and all humanity as Messenger. I invited you as well, with truth, to
Him. I swear by Allah, 0 Abu Bakr, Allah, to whom I call you to, is Truth. He is
without peer, he is the Unique One of Absolute Unity. We cannot submit to anyone
but Him. Come; put your faith in Allah."
Abu Bakr was still being cautious and wanted to verify his conviction. He asked:
"Then what is your proof in this matter?"
The Beloved of the Most Generous who had been given the mission to carry the
message, understood what ailed Abu Bakr, one needed to speak to him in the language
he would understand. He had to shock him into belief, so he said: "The old man you
met in Yemen."
Naturally he could have heard that he had gone to Yemen, but how could he know
about the old man? Or did he also know what had passed between them? If he knew
this much, then he also knew where Abu Bakr stood, and yet he was not dropping his

--- Sayfa 141 ---
caution. He gathered himself and said: "I met many old men in Yemen!"
This was an attempt to gain time, in a way asking, "Which old man do you mean?''
But in front of him was the Most Accomplished Guide who knew of the pulse cursing
in his veins, and without further ado he came to the point and said: "The old man who
gave you the verses."
There could be no greater evidence than this. Abu Bakr could think of nothing else
to say except: 'Who gave you this news, 0 Beloved?"
The answer was: "The great angel who came to those before me as well."
Only one thing remained for Abu Bakr to do. He stretched out his hands and said:
"Give me your hands, I will swear allegiance to you," he said most sincerely, and then
with a voice full of compassion he declared the light in his heart: "I bear witness that
there is no deity but Allah and without a doubt you are His Messenger." 160
Yes, Abu Bakr had submitted as well! This was a submission that would never be
severed. There were tears in his eyes for the joy of having recovered what he had lost,
tears of peace found at last.
Of course it was not only Abu Bakr who was crying out of joy. After the rose of his
home Khadija, his freed slave Zayd and his uncle's son Ali had come to him and
become Muslim, there was no one happier between the mountains of Mecca than the
Messenger of Allah! Abu Bakr who was already ready to embrace the faith had done it
so quickly and easily that the Messenger of Allah said the following in observation:
"Whomever I invited to Islam, except for Abu Bakr, had a moment of hesitation. He
on the other hand, when I offered it to him, accepted it without showing any
hesitation. "ill
The news of him becoming Muslim had spread quickly and caused shock ripples
throughout Mecca. How could it be! The person that they depended on to solve the
problem had changed sides. This proved that the matter was more important than they
had thought. Now in Mecca there was a Messenger who devoted himself to the faith of
others and a Companion who had sworn allegiance to him to the death. He was
reading the verses of Allah to the community that was building around him, teaching
wisdom and the book to hearts that were thirsty for truth.
He it is Who has sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger of their
own, reciting to them His Revelations, and purifying them (of false beliefs
and doctrines, and sins, and all kinds of uncleanness), and instructing
them in the Book and the Wisdom, whereas before that they were indeed
lost in obvious error. (al-Jumu'ah 62:2)

--- Sayfa 142 ---
They on the other hand, were opening their hearts to his statements that were
coming like cascades of wisdom, deepening their faiths, making progress on the road
to becoming accomplished human beings.
The true believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, their
hearts tremble with awe, and when His Revelations are recited to them, it
strengthens them in faith, and they put their trust in their Lord. (al-Anfal
8:2)
Zubayr ibn Awwam
Only a couple of days had passed after Abu Bakr had declared his submission to the
Messenger of Allah when a young boy of fifteen came to him. This young man was
Zubayr ibn Awwam, the son of the Messenger's aunt Safiyya hint Abdul Muttalib. For
the boy, this coming was a coming with no return for he would forge such an
attachment to the Messenger of Allah that one day the Messenger of Allah would say
of him: "Each Prophet has disciples who never leave his side and my disciple is
Zubayr ibn Awwam." 162
In the difficult days of Mecca, he would be the first one to unsheathe his sword in
the way of Allah to the Meccans who had formed a united front of oppression. One
day, there were rumors that the polytheists had arrested the Messenger of Allah and
put him in prison. The rumor spread quickly, a psychological war had begun and the
social engineers were purposely producing these rumors in order to influence people's
behavior. The young Zubayr got up immediately when he heard this news, and
unsheathing his sword, he went towards the place where the "supposed" arrest had
taken place. Who on earth had the courage or capability of injuring the Messenger of
Allah! Those hands that had been raised to injure him had to be broken, and tongues
that spoke against him had to be cut! He stormed through the crowds in Mecca and
came to the upper section of the town with haste. Just then, a voice from behind called
out to him, startling him to the bones: "What is this state? What is with you 0
Zubayr?"
The person behind this voice was none other than the Messenger of Allah for whom
he had set out on this mission of immediacy for fear that something had happened to
him. He looked to where the voice was coming from, and there he was, the Great
Messenger himself was standing there with all his majesty. Since the owner of the
voice was the Messenger of Allah this meant that the polytheists had once again lied
and tried to demoralize the believers.
First he took a deep breath and the only words that could come out of his mouth

--- Sayfa 143 ---
were: "I heard that you were arrested and imprisoned."
This was a sensitivity to be appreciated and acknowledged. The Messenger of Allah
shared with those around him the concern of Zubayr and then he raised his hands to
the skies and prayed, both for Zubayr and the sword he was holding in his hands. 163
The Idols in the Ka'ba
The Ka'ba, which is the first building on earth to have been built for Allah, had with
time lost its true character and had been filled with idols. People were trying to satisfy
their need for recognizing their positions as subject to Allah through standing in front
of pieces of wood and stone that they had constructed themselves. They would come
to these objects before taking important decisions and draw lots in front of them, they
would express their feelings of gratitude by sacrificing live stock for them, and when
they feared something they would go to them to seek solace.
For the most part, these idols consisted of statues of some of their renowned
ancestors. Famous idols such as Hubal, Naila, Isaf, Lat had been important characters
whose pictures had been drawn in order to inspire respect and who with time had
turned into false gods in front of whom people would sigh. The Messenger of Allah
had come to rout out the idea of polytheism and to reinstate the faith of taw hid, true
Unity and Oneness of Allah. Even before revelation came to him, he rejected these
false gods and he would never pray to them. Despite his uncles' and aunts' insistence,
he would not approach them and would not shy away from telling them that what they
were doing was wrong.
Now he was a Prophet with a duty-the Last Prophet whom everyone was waiting
for! He was going to be the one to give back the Ka'ba its original purity, he was
going to be the one to remove the false gods that had been put there, and he was going
to keep people away from consuming things that had been deemed prohibited. But
time was needed in order for all these to be realized. Given the choice between killing
mosquitoes and drying up the swamp, he chose the route of resolving the matter from
its foundations. The message that came with him was directed to not only dry up the
swamp that was engulfing the Ka'ba, but the swamp that was engulfing the entire
world. Therefore, there was no point in acting emotionally and driving the matter to a
worse Impasse.
When he entered the Ka'ba with those close to him such as Ali and Zayd, the stance
he took against the idols tested his patience in the face of the falsity of the time.
Coming to the Ka'ba with Zayd ibn Haritha, he would be disturbed by the presence

--- Sayfa 144 ---
of the idols and he would hit them with a piece of dampened cloth and say: "Woe unto
those people! How can they attempt to play god as if in competition with Allah and
make all these! " 164
His attitude was closely observed by the two young men, Ali and Zayd and
whenever opportunity presented itself, they too would always stand against these
pieces of stone and wood that could not benefit or harm anyone.
One day they had come to the Ka'ba. There seemed to be no one around except the
two of them. They thought of taking an lbrahim-like stand. It would have been
wonderful for them to see these idols in the rubbish heap but they were in no position
to do it just yet. But they needed to express the deep excitement they were feeling. It
was clear that they did not yet know how to channel these feelings so they went and
smeared the idols that the Meccans valued with dirt and dust! The polytheists of
Mecca, who the next morning found their idols covered in dirt, were anxious to find
out who it was that had done this to their gods. While they were looking for the
culprits, they were also washing the idols with water and milk, apologizing to these
pieces of stone and wood that had no intellect to think or tongue to speak. 165
Such an insult to their gods had never been done before. Such actions provoked
them and they wanted, more than ever, to hold onto their dilapidated ideas. This was
unapproved of! For those who lived in crystals palaces, one stone thrown at their
windows could shake the whole establishment.
Their fear provoked them to do and say inappropriate things about Allah. The
polytheists had started to voice their discontent and were openly making threats: "0
Muhammad! Either you stop saying bad things about our gods, or we too start saying
whatever comes to our mouths about your Lord."
The situation was getting very tense, at which point Gabriel descended with good
tidings. The verse 166 was clearly laid out for the believers:
And do not (0 believers) revile the things or beings that they have, apart
from Allah, deified and invoke, lest (if you do so) they attempt to revile
Allah out of spite, and in ignorance. Thus have We made their deeds seem
fair to every people; then to their (true) Lord is the return of all of them,
and He will make them understand what they were doing (and call them
to account for it). (al-An' am 6: 108)
These verses were the final words on idol worship till the time when this problem
would be solved for good, for Allah was saying that the things people are accustomed
to doing seemed right to them, and that one should not waste time by directing their

--- Sayfa 145 ---
energies to other people's idols.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
153 Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 311096
154 Ibn Ishak, Sirah, 21118
155 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 1163
156 Halabi, Sirah, 11436. Sometime would pass and the other son of Abu Talib, Jafar, would become
Muslim as well. When he realized one day that his son was performing the prayers, he would
encourage him by saying: "Pray by the side of your uncle's son, pray on his left side," and he
would show no surprise that his other son had become Muslim as well.
157 After recounting these, Afif ibn Umar said "I wish I was the fourth among them that day," and
would sigh with the sadness of having missed the opportunity to have embraced Islam in those
early days. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/18.
158 In the early days, prayer was two cycles, and it was performed before the sun rose and after the
sun set. The Muslims were purposely choosing hidden and quiet places in order to not be attacked
by the unbelievers, and in this period when people did not know how to appreciate submission to
Allah, Prayers were performed in secrecy.
159 Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, had dreamt of a moon that landed on Mecca. He
dreamt that pieces of this moon were entering the houses in Mecca; a piece of light was entering
from that moon through every door, and then it seemed to Abu Bakr that all this light had
gathered on his lap. He had shared this dream with scholars when he had woken up and the
interpreters were speaking of a coming Messenger, that his time was very close, and that he, Abu
Bakr, would have the joy of being his best Companion. See Suhayli, Rawthul Unf, 11165.
160 See Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-Nadira, 11415. In some reports of Abu Bakr's embracing
Islam, this incident is not mentioned and he is reported simply to have come to the mosque, and to
have asked whether what the people were saying were true, and that he embraced Islam without
any hesitation in the face of the answers that he received. See Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 3/171.
lli Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 2/91; Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-N adira, 11415
162 There are varying reports as to the age at which Zubayr became Muslim. Some say twelve, some
sixteen and some eight. See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/307.
163 Bayhaqi, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 6/367; Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 5/344
164 There is a report that when once our noble Prophet came to the Ka'ba with his nephew Ali and he
watched silently when Ali broke one of the idols on the roof of the Ka'ba. See Haysami,
Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 6/23.
165 Al-Hindi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal, 141107 (38084)
166 See Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, 224, 225. There is a report that this verse was revealed when the
leading men of Mecca came to Abu Talib before he died and asked him to be a mediator between
themselves and the Messenger of Allah. See Wahidi, op. cit., p. 225.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
THOSE WHO CAME LATER AND
THE YEARS OF HARDSHIP
E
veryone who felt peace in the company of the Messenger of Allah was always
thinking of others with whom they could share this peace. In this period when
the "invitation" was carried out secretly, people like Abu Bakr were using
their standing in society to introduce their old friends to the Great Messenger. He was
followed by the young Zubayr ibn Awwam. 167 He then introduced Uthman ibn Affan
and Talha ibn Ubaydullah to him. It was right after Zubayr's coming that Uthman and
Talha were coming to the Prophet's presence. When they entered through the door and
saw the beauty reminiscent of a rose, they melted like candles. They had seen more
than what Abu Bakr had told them, they were enraptured ...
The Messenger of Allah spoke to them about Islam and then read to them pieces
from the verses that had been revealed. He spoke of the rights that Islam recognized
and spoke of what distinguished a Muslim from other people in this world and the
next.
Who knew what kind of surprise gifts in the afterlife Allah the Almighty was
preparing for those who seized the opportunities as soon as possible!
It seemed the whole gathering was enveloped in light and both of them would
articulate what was happening inside them, then and there, and become Muslims. This
scene pleased the Almighty Allah. The Truthful Gabriel descended and brought the
following verses:
As for those who keep away from false deities and powers of evil (who
institute patterns of faith and rule in defiance of Allah)-away from
worshipping them, and tum toward Allah in penitence, for them are glad
tidings, so give the glad tidings to My servants. Who, when they hear
speech, follow the best of it (in the best way possible, and even seek what
is better and straighter). Those are the ones whom Allah has guided, and
those are the ones who are people of discernment. ( az-Zumar 39: 17-18)

--- Sayfa 148 ---
Abu Bakr' s efforts to share the beauties he was experiencing with his friends after
he himself became Muslim were thus noted. Abu Bakr was being applauded from
beyond the skies and within the heavens for his efforts, for these were efforts that won
the contentment of Truth for him, and for those who worked for Him, Allah was
promising contentment that could not be described. 168
Uthman had become Muslim but he had an uncle by the name ofHakam ibn Abi'l-
As who would not listen to any man. When he learnt that his nephew had become a
Muslim, he was very angry indeed. He caught Uthman and imprisoned him. Maybe he
just wanted to frighten him. He started insulting him: "How can it be that you leave
the religion of your ancestors and follow a new religion? Unless you break your ties
with this new religion I will not untie you."
Uthman, on the other hand, had closed his ears to his uncle's threats and was not
taking any steps backwards: "I swear by Allah that I will never return or recant this
religion."
With these words he was trying say "Do not trouble yourself; you will never be able
to get the concession you want from me."
In the end his strong-willed stance would yield results, and when his uncle
understood that Uthman would not give in even if he was threatened with death, he let
him go.J69
Talha, who was experiencing inner peace to the utmost degree, looked for any
opportunity to share with people what he was feeling inside. Allah, who knew of his
need, gave him this opportunity. He would speak about the trade he made in
Damascus, the fair at Basra and the good tidings given by the priest; he would share
the joy of actually experiencing here what had been talked about there with the
Messenger of Allah. He related to the Messenger the question raised by the priest:
"Has Ahmad come from among you?"
When he asked the priest 'Who is Ahmad?" he had said: "He is the grandson of
Abdul Muttalib, and the son of Abdullah. These are the days when he will appear. He
is a Prophet among Prophets and he is the Last Messenger. He will come out ofHaram
and he will immigrate to a land with a lot of date trees, an arid area surrounded with
black stones. Be careful and do not be late. Be the first to believe in him and to be on
his side."
Now he was at the address given by the priest. Before coming here he had stopped
by Abu Bakr and he had had a period of rehabilitation before his complete
transformation. He had been encouraged by Abu Bakr who advised him: "Do not

--- Sayfa 149 ---
waste time, go now and swear allegiance to him; for he invites only to Truth."
And now he had come and submitted. The Messenger of Allah who listened to this
recount very carefully could be seen to have been very happy .170
But things would not go according to plan as one wished. It was clear that the road
was long and there would be some very deep waters. Faith would at times have its
price and such difficulties awaited both Abu Bakr and Talha.
The news of Talha speaking the words of faith reached others as well. As they were
walking with Abu Bakr, they were attacked by the Quraysh who were already
contemplating enmity. Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid, a man named "the lion of Quraysh"
stood in their way. He was known to be a very courageous man. Even if they did try to
resist him, the outcome was obvious from the beginning. From the way he stood, it
was clear that he meant harm. They preferred to not start a fight at this early stage.
They tried to convince him through words, but it was no use and Nawfal tied both of
them up there and then.
The aim of this heavily built man was to stop them from performing the Prayers and
reading the Qur'an. But neither the fact that he had tied their arms, nor the threats he
showered upon them could stop them from praying or reciting the Qur'an. The man
was so notorious that even the sons of Taym could not stand by the side of their men
Abu Bakr and Talha. They stayed tied a while till the situation cooled down a little.
After this incident, Talha and Abu Bakr would be perceived as brothers and they
would be called Qarinayn, meaning "two friends who do not part."ill
This was a first but it would be followed by others. From now on, Talha was one of
those people, like other Muslims, who had to suffer unjust treatment from the Quraysh
and all their cruelty. His biological brother Uthman, who had been invited to Islam by
Abu Bakr and who had rejected it, was now like an enemy to Talha and he was
tormented by him in many ways. 172
Abu Dharr's Arrival and the First Bitter Experience
There were hidden ripples of excitement flowing through Mecca. There was now a
source that could remedy the century-old drought and all those who realized this
wanted to rush to the source to quench their thirst. People were equally keen to let
others benefit from this spring. People who had waited for this day for years were now
experiencing the excitement of having found what they were looking for. Abu Dharr,
the language master of the Jifari tribe, was one of these people. He had heard of the
changes happening in Mecca and was dying to meet the instigator of this change. First

--- Sayfa 150 ---
he sent his brother, who was a poet like him, to Mecca. When his brother was
speaking of what he saw there, he recounted: "In Mecca I saw a man who has come
with a religion akin to yours. Allah has sent him as Prophet, but people refer to him as
"sabi." I am only telling you what the people are saying. They call him a "soothsayer,"
"a magician," and "a liar." But I have heard his words and I'm sure he is none of
these; I swear by Allah that he speaks the truth." 173
This was a cause for celebration for Abu Dharr. His brother had gone and on his
return he had brought news of the Personage he had been waiting for. Now a fire was
burning inside him. Now how could he sit still after waiting for so many years? He
immediately set off for Mecca. When he arrived, he did not know who the Personage
he was looking for was. In those days, relating the message did not take place out in
the open and so he could see no one. He had to ask around. He asked the first man he
saw: "Where is the man you call sabi?"
The look the man gave almost made Abu Dharr regret his question. He could not
understand why everyone was so hesitant to speak. Then night came; he went to the
courtyard of the Ka'ba and spent the night there.
The next day, Allah the Almighty brought Ali to him. He wanted to help this
stranger who had come to Mecca from far away. But there was such great social
pressure on Muslims in the Mecca of that period that nobody could speak about their
faith openly. Both of them were pained for not being able to speak of what was on
their minds. Ali was thinking "What if I tell him and he doesn't believe and reacts
unexpectedly!" and Abu Dharr was thinking "What if he becomes angry with me and
goes away!" thus neither spoke of their real intentions, for they did not know one
another. They spent the night in each other's company, avoiding the main issue. It had
now been three days and three nights since Abu Dharr had come to Mecca; but he was
still waiting in the courtyard of the Ka'ba, not having found what he was looking for.
At last, taking the risk, Ali approached him and asked what Abu Dharr's purpose
was. He spoke of the Messenger of Allah in order to put Abu Dharr at ease. Yes, now
they had started to speak the same language. Abu Dharr was sorry to have stayed away
from him for three days when he was so near! Since his intention and aim was clear,
what was left for him to do now was to go to where the Messenger was. If they saw
that another person was seeking out Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings
be upon him, they would try to stop that person, they would try to convince him with
words or even worse, they could harm him. So, in order to reach his goal he had to
proceed with caution. To that end Ali said: "I will go before you and you will follow
from behind. If I sense a problematic situation, I will go to one side, pretending as if I

--- Sayfa 151 ---
am seeing to my needs, then you can just go your way. I will find you later, don't
worry. If I sense no danger, then you will come with me and we can go where we want
to together."
These were words that also showed what kind of pressure Meccans were exerting
on Muslims in those days.
Then the journey started. Where they were going was not very far; but even this
short road seemed very long for Abu Dharr, it just did not seem to end! Before long,
the door was opened and Abu Dharr came face to face with a countenance that
resembled the full moon, the one whose arrival he had been waiting for for years. The
Prophet gave him a look that warmed his heart.
"May the peace and greetings of Allah be with you, 0 Messenger of Allah," he
called out. Abu Dharr had already submitted himself, as his words of greetings
showed. Then he spoke of his expectations, what he lived through and his coming to
Mecca and then said: "0 Messenger of Allah! What is it that you will have me do?
What is it that you are inviting me to?"
The Messenger of Allah said: "I call you to worship Allah, not to worship anyone
besides Him and to leave all idols behind." Abu Dharr said there and then: "I bear
witness that there is no deity but Allah and I also bear witness that you are His
Messenger."
One could see from his stature that there were other things he wanted to say: "0
Messenger of Allah! I will now return to my land, to my family and will wait for the
day when the order to fight comes! Then I will come near you and will support you;
because I see this tribe of yours united against you."
To his observation our noble Prophet said: "You tell the truth," 174 and seeing the
storm within Abu Dharr, he said: "Until we start calling people to Islam openly and
good news reaches you, go back to your people and share with them what you know
ofthe Truth!"
This was a case of the Perfect Guide, who could fathom what was to happen in the
future, showing a way to his follower that would suit that follower's nature. But Abu
Dharr could not stand still with excitement and said: "I swear by He who holds my life
in His hand that I will not return without having gone to the Ka'ba and shouting out
Islam."
Just as he had said in the presence of the Prophet Abu Dharr went to the Ka'ba at
once and started to shout at the top of his lungs: "I bear witness that there is no deity
but Allah and I also bear witness that Muhammad is both His servant and Messenger."

--- Sayfa 152 ---
Everybody was staring at him and mockingly saying: "Look at this man. He too has
become a sabi."
Having heard that another man had crossed to the other side, people started to
gather around Abu Dharr to insult him. Then they took the matter further and attacked
him like wild animals. Abu Dharr had become the target of the blows of the crowd
that had no sense of humanity anymore.
Had it not been for Abbas, the uncle of the Messenger of Allah ill who was aware of
the sensitivity of the situation and who approached the matter with good sense, Abu
Dharr might have been killed that day. Abbas at first tried to protect Abu Dharr by
crouching over him to stop the blows and then he addressed the angry crowd in the
following way: "0 you people of Quraysh! What are you doing? The tribe of Jifari is
on your trade route; do you mean to cut your trade by killing him? Let him go!"
What Abbas was saying was true. It made no sense toi kill a defenseless man and
thereby risk their trade which was their only way of earning a living; and so they left
one by one throwing insults. Abu Dharr, who had been left all alone in the Ka'ba, had
blood all over him and so he went to the Zamzam to wash his hands and face, trying to
clean the blood off his clothes. Due to the emotional upheaval inside of him, he hardly
felt the force of the blows he had received. Having passed his day with such an event
and flow of emotions, he decided to come to the courtyard of the Ka'ba the next day,
go on a high platform, and cry out the same things. The day turned out to be a repeat
of the day before. They attacked him once again, and it was again Abbas who ran to
his help. 176
When he was faced with the same treatment second time around, he remembered
the words of the Messenger of Allah. It was clear that the atmosphere was not yet one
that would allow such behavior. It was clear that the circumstances of each period had
to be calculated and a strategy had to be formed accordingly. One could not expect
from a child that was newly born the behavior of a young man of twenty; one had to
treat them according to their development. After this bitter experience, Abu Dharr
went back to his village. His bitter experience had been a lesson for all believers. In
those days, the weak and the defenseless in particular had become a target and were
subjected to continuous insults. The Messenger of Allah was under the protection of
his uncle Abu Talib, and Abu Bakr had a standing within the tribe, so that was why
they were not subjected to such insults. When it came to other Muslims, they had
become objects of ridicule and the target of worst insults; they were being harassed
both verbally and physically .177

--- Sayfa 153 ---
Running towards Peace
What could all these change? After having attained such a value as faith, which force
or power could stand in front of man and manage to make him recant? Despite the
enmity of the Quraysh, the circle of faith was growing like an avalanche, with each
new day bringing new people to the presence of the Messenger. This was a race
towards peace, one making all the pain forgotten, and one where each new day
brought new births.
On another day, the young and dynamic Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas 178 came to the
presence of the Prophet. They were all very close friends of Abu Bakr, for he had put
himself on the line, taken their hand and brought them to the presence one by one ...
Before being introduced to Islam, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas had dreamt that he was in a
pitch-black night. Then a full moon rose. A path of light appeared and Sa'd started to
walk towards the light. Then he saw Zayd ibn Haritha, Ali ibn Abi Talib and Abu
Bakr in front of him. He turned to them and asked: "When did you get here?''
'We came just now," they answered, upon which Sa'd awoke from his dream.
Although days had passed, Sa' d could not forget the pitch-dark night, the full moon or
the names of the people that had been walking before him. Then he heard that the
Messenger of Allah was inviting people secretly to Islam. He went and found him in
the place called Ajyad. The Prophet was performing the Asr (Afternoon) Prayer.
When he finished his Prayer, Sa' d approached him and became a Muslim there and
then. At the time he was only nineteen years old. 179
He was related to the Messenger of Allah from his mother's side. That's why he
would call him "uncle" and would challenge others boasting: "Let me see if anyone
else has such an uncle as mine! " 180
Sa'd had become a Muslim but his mother was causing problems. Sa'd was very
sensitive when it came to his father and mother. He would do his best not to hurt their
feelings and would never go against their word. His mother knew his son's character
and said: "0 Sa'd! What is this new religion you are talking about?" and then added:
"Either you leave this religion of yours, or I will stop eating and drinking until I die.
Then you will have to think of what people say of you," trying to emotionally coerce
him.
He was doing everything in his power not to hurt his mother but his mother showed
no signs of ease: "0 dear mother, please do not act like this! For I will not leave my
religion," he responded.
Thus passed a whole day and night, and Sa'd's mother did not eat or drink. It

--- Sayfa 154 ---
looked like his mother was just as serious as Sa' d. The next morning there seemed to
be no change in the situation. But there was a change in the skies and the Truthful
Gabriel descended with the message:
But if they strive with you to make you associate with Me something of
which you certainly have no knowledge (and which is absolutely contrary
to the Knowledge), do not obey them. Even then, treat them with kindness
and due consideration in respect of (the life of) this world. Follow the way
of him who has turned to Me with utmost sincerity and committed himself
to seeking My approval. Then, (0 all human beings,) to Me is your return,
and then I will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you
to account). (Luqman 31 : 15)
Now Sa'd felt relieved. He now knew what he had to do. Going to his mother, he
simply said: "Dear Mother! If you had a thousand lives and if you died each one of
them every day, I will not leave my religion."
This was not something that a man of such tender character would normally say.
Then something unexpected happened and his mother, who saw that Sa' d was even
more determined than she was, stopped her hunger strike and started to eat and
drink.lli Sa' d had thus started to reap the benefits of acting according to revelation.
A Shepherd Who Kept His Promise and the Miracle of Milk
The Messenger of Allah had gone outside of Mecca with his close Companion Abu
Bakr to seek peace. On the way, they saw a shepherd by the name of Abdullah ibn
Mas'ud 182 and he was herding the sheep of Uqba ibn Abi Muayt. He knew both
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, and Abu Bakr,
because despite what people said, these two were great personages of Mecca. The
owner of the sheep, Abi Muayt, was not pleased with this, he would always bring the
conversation to them and speak ill of them, but ibn Mas 'ud was a person who could
decide for himself.
Everyone whom our noble Prophet met was an opportunity to spread the word, and
so he asked the young shepherd, who now seemed to be lost in thought: "Hello young
man! Do you have any milk with you?"
''Yes," said ibn Mas'ud, and then added: "I have milk with me but I cannot give it
to you, for I am just safe-keeping it."
This attitude was praiseworthy in a society where ignorance was dominant.
Someone who could resist temptation in such a dire situation was the perfect recipient

--- Sayfa 155 ---
for the message of Islam, for he was exposing his commendable nature through his
actions and such a nature would never lie.
In order to relate the message, one had to really get to know the addressee and to
speak to them with a language that they would understand. It was clear that the
Messenger of Allah wanted to speak to ibn Mas'ud in a language he would understand
as well. He turned to ibn Mas 'ud once again and asked: "Can you bring me a goat or
lamb that has not yet given birth?"
Ibn Mas'ud was surprised by this request, but said that he would. He went towards
the herd wondering what would happen next. He went and brought a goat that had not
given birth.
First the Messenger of Allah tied him and then he stroked the animal's chest
uttering prayers. When it was the Pride of Humanity who asked, Allah always
provided for, for he knew what to ask from whom and how. Ibn Mas'ud could not
believe his eyes when he saw that the goat's udders were filling up with milk. This
was impossible! He had never seen or heard anything like this in his life! Meanwhile,
Abu Bakr who was watching what was happening rushed and found a bowl in order to
milk the goat that was miraculously producing milk. The Messenger of Allah turned to
his loyal friend and said: "Drink."
Abu Bakr brought the bowl filled with milk to his lips and drank. Then the noble
Prophet took the bowl and drank as well.
The aim had been accomplished; there was no need to drink anymore. Now it was
time to make things return back to as they were. So our beloved Prophet called out to
the chest of the animal filled with milk, and said: "Be as you were!"
The dry chest that had become like a milk pump, started to shrivel up again, and
went back to its original state.
This time, ibn Mas'ud started to speak: "0 Messenger of Allah, will you teach me
the words that you uttered!"
The aim had been accomplished; the message had reached its target. It was clear
that now ibn Mas'ud too was a believer. The Messenger of Allah came a little closer
to ibn Mas 'ud. He brought his sacred hands to his head and stroked him saying: "You
are a very wise young man! " 183
Ibn Mas 'ud had now begun his journey of becoming Hibru 'l Ummah, "the scholar
of the community," and he was declaring the oneness of Allah with a sincere heart.
The same day that Ibn Mas'ud became a Muslim, the son-in-law of the Khattab
family, Said ibn Zayd, and his wife Fatima, the sister of Umar ibn al-Khattab

--- Sayfa 156 ---
embraced Islam as well.
The Race towards Peace Continues
Meanwhile, Amir ibn Rabia, Utba ibn Rabia's son Abu Hudhayfa, Abu Ubayda ibn
Jarrah, Uthman ibn Maz'un and his two brothers Qudama and Abdullah, Asma hint
Umays, Umm Ayman, and Ummu'l-Fadl, the wife of our noble Prophet's uncle
Abbas, and the brother of Ali Jafar ibn Abi Talib had all come and submitted to
Islam. 184 This religion was spreading fast among people who were lovers of virtue, and
all those who longed to live a decent life were running to this source. This was a
period that lasted three years. The conveying of the message was happening in a small
circle, and single acts of calling to Islam were the basis of the enlargement of this
circle. New revelations were coming, and the Messenger of Allah was sharing these
verses with this circle around him. Quiet places were chosen for these gatherings,
usually it would be the Prophet's home-the aim was not to provoke the Quraysh
further. This was the period of maturing in faith and theme of the verses that were
revealed were also converging on this topic. In order to continue on this path and to
carry the banner of Islam, one had to be unshakable in one's belief.
During this period, the Quraysh chose to watch silently from the sidelines. They had
thought that this development would be shaped according to what Zayd ibn Amr, Quss
ibn Saida and Umayya ibn Abi as-Salt had perceived and would remain unconnected.
But things were not progressing as they thought. Although there were no overt calls to
this religion, they could see that people they knew were joining Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him, in ones and twos-they were changing their ways to
become different people. Before long Bilal al-Habashi, Abu Salama, 185 Arqam ibn
Abi'l-Arqam, Ubayda ibn Harith, and the two daughters of Abu Bakr, Asma and
Aisha, Habbab ibn Arat, Umayr ibn Abi Waqqas, Mas'ud ibnu'l-Qariyy, Salit ibn
Amr, Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia and his wife Asma hint Salama, Hunays ibn Hudhafa,
Amir ibn Rabia, Abdullah ibn Jahsh and his brother Abu Ahmad, Khatib ibn Harith
and his wife Fatima hint Mujallal and Khatib's brother Al-Khattab and his wife
Fuqayha hint Yasar, Ma'mar ibn Harith, Uthman ibn Maz'un's son Saib, Muttalib ibn
Azhar and his wife Ramla hint Abi Awf, Nuaym ibn Abdullah, Amir ibn Fuhayra186
and Khalid ibn Said ibnu'l-As and his wife Umayna hint Khalaf all joined those who
were running towards the light.
Khalid ibn Said had dreamt that he was at the edge of a fire that looked like Hell,
and saw himself being dragged towards it. His father was standing behind him and
was pushing him towards the fire. Just when he was about to fall into the flames, the

--- Sayfa 157 ---
Pride of Humankind had come to his rescue and held him by the waist, pulling him out
and preventing him from burning in Hell. Khalid awoke from his dream and after long
contemplation he was convinced that this dream was true. He said to himself: "The
only way to avoid Hell is to act with the Messenger of Allah." First he went and spoke
to Abu Bakr who did not think differently to him. Abu Bakr said: "I believe that with
this dream, good is meant for you. There stands the Messenger of Allah, go and join
him! He is the one who will save you from Hell. But your father's situation isn't very
prom1smg."
Before long, Khalid ibn Said came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah who
was at a place called Ajyad. He said to him: "0 Muhammad! What is your call?"
The Beloved of Allah responded: "I only call people to Allah; do not adopt anything
as His peer, and you will accept that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger. You
will also leave these stones that do not hear or see, that cannot benefit or harm even
themselves, that do not know who stands in front of them in prayer, you will leave
worshipping them and worship only Him." Khalid did not hesitate and said: "I bear
witness that there is no deity but Allah and that you are the Messenger of Allah,"
becoming Muslim immediately .187
Khalid ibn Said, had also come willingly to submit himself to the Truth, but he had
a very stubborn father. When he learnt that his son had become a Muslim, he went to
him at once and scolded him: "How can you join Muhammad when you know that he
condemns the traditions and gods of your ancestors?"
He then took a piece of wood and hit his son till he bled. Although obedience to
one's father wasfard, obligatory, one could not say "yes" in the face of such pressure
to rise against Allah, and so Khalid said: "I swear by Allah that I have submitted in
faith to him and I will never return."
His father's reaction was again very harsh. He first uttered terrible insults and then
said: "Go wherever you will! I swear that I will not give you a penny from now on."
But what could anyone lose, having found Allah?
When Khalid was in the presence of the Prophet he felt that he owned the world.
That is why he said: "Even if you should deny me everything, I will not return from
this way. There is no doubt that Allah the Almighty will give me my daily bread as
long as I live."
Thus Khalid let his father know whose side he would stand by. But from the way
things looked, the angry father was not going to leave it at that; he gathered his
children together who thought like him and told them not to speak to Khalid.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Khalid was now helpless and so he came to the Messenger of Allah and then never
left his doorstep. 188 Before long Khatib ibn Amr, Waqid ibn Abdullah, Bukayr, Ibn
Abdiyalayl's four sons Khalid, Amir, AkiP89 and lyas also came and uttered the words
of shahadah ("There is no deity but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger") in the
presence of the Prophet submitting themselves to faith.
The people who were lovers of virtue in Mecca had gathered around the Messenger
of Allah. Now when he prayed it was not only Ali who was by his side, now Prayers
were performed shoulder to shoulder in congregation, one shoulder giving the other
strength. 190
This was enough to drive the Meccans crazy. The authority in the town could not
stand another structure forming independent of them, and was reacting to this new
development. Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and his friends had gone into a comer once again
and they were praying somewhere outside Mecca. It happened so that the route of a
number of Meccans passed through where they were praying. They had thought the
Muslims' actions strange and they started to mock them. It reached such proportions
that they started to attack the Muslims physically, and there was a short fight between
them. The intolerance of the Meccans was such that they would not leave alone a
group of people who were praying on their own and they were showing violence
against them _12.1.
Bilal al-Habashi
The Messenger of Allah had once again gone somewhere outside of Mecca with his
close Companion Abu Bakr. Here, they were discussing the new verses that had been
revealed and were praying together. Then, an Abyssinian slave named Bilal, who was
grazing sheep nearby, approached them. The two friends were like the sun and the
moon; it was impossible not to be mesmerized by the scene. Bilal thought he needed
to find an excuse to approach them further so he took a bowl of milk and offered it to
the two friends. Their effort of bringing the love of Allah would entrance him too, and
before many free men, he would get to know Islam.
One incident followed another, and they realized the change that had taken place in
Bilal and they started to pursue him. One day they heard that Bilal was behaving
rudely towards the idols in the Ka'ba and that he was speaking against them. How
could it be that a slave could speak disrespectfully about the pieces of wood and
stones that his masters had chosen to worship?
They also harassed Umayya ibn Khalaf about Bilal but he did not intend to put
himself at risk for a slave. Bilal was a slave among a numerous of Umayya's slaves.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
He had no feelings of obligation towards him and said: "Take him, he can be yours,
you can do whatever you like with him!"
Now Bilal was in the hands of Umayya ibn Khalaf, and at the mercy of Abu Jahl.
They took Bilal to the desert. They were pushing him down on the hot burning sand
and were subjecting him to all sorts of torture. They were putting heavy rocks over
him, and while inflicting him with physical pain and pressure, they were also trying to
extort psychological pressure, forcing him to recant his belief in Muhammad, peace
and blessings be upon him, who was the rose of his heart.
Abu Jahl's enmity seemed to have no bounds and he was expressing his hatred at
every opportunity. He, as a master, could not fathom how a slave could accept a power
other than him. A slave! How could Bilal even contemplate answering to such an
invitation without any regard for his position in society? Abu Jahl was pushing Bilal
face forward to the flaming sands and he was torturing him till his body would tum
red with the scorching sun. Bilal, who lost all strength, did not have any power left in
him to speak, and only one word passed his lips: ''Ahad! Ahad! One! One!"192
Bilal knew of that world as well. Rather than to live under torture all his life, he
could as well bear what was happening to him that day and then reach eternal peace.
That is why he was hanging on, and he was ready to die with dignity rather than to
live with shame. Despite the severity of the tortures, no one was able to make Bilal
recant the oneness of Allah that day. He was determined to stand fast where he was,
and he did not concede at all from his position. But such was the hatred that he was
facing that he was tied with ropes round his neck and he would be given to children to
parade in the streets and in between the mountains of Mecca. Bilal, who had been
called "My servant" by Allah and "my ummah" by His Messenger, was treated like a
clown. Can it ever be possible to understand Bilal without having walked barefoot on
the scorching sand, to understand the extent of his devotion without knowing the
troubles he had to face?
There was no one left in Mecca who had not heard Bilal cry out ''Ahad!" with his
love-sick voice. Although he was moaning with pain, neither Umayya, nor Abu Jahl
seemed ready to show any mercy! This was a job for Abu Bakr. The wealth he had
would one day disappear any way, and here was opportunity for him to make a great
investment for the after life! Thus he was going to save Bilal and also make the Great
Messenger happy. He approached them and asked: "How can you subject any man to
such torture?"
Then he bought and saved Bilal and then showed him the way to freedom.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
Bilal was reaping the benefits of his patience. Had he stayed silent by the side of
Umayya, he might have stayed a slave all his life and that is how he would breathe his
last. But now all his troubles were over and he would be welcome as a freeman by the
side of the beloved Messenger.
Habbab's Account
As it can be seen, during those days, declaring that one was a Muslim was inviting all
sorts of difficulties upon one's self. That's why the Quraysh did not know that many
of the Prophet's Companions were Muslims. Except for seven people, the other
Muslims had felt the need to hide their faith. The people who were openly Muslim
were the Messenger of Allah Abu Bakr, Ammar ibn Y asir and his mother Sumayya,
Suhayb ibn Sinan, Bilal al-Habashi and Miqdad ibn Aswad. 193
Habbab ibn Arat had been a free man and yet when he was small there had been a
raid and he was taken as slave along with his relatives and then he had been brought to
Mecca to be sold as a slave. He continued his life as the slave of a woman called Umm
Anmar from the Huza tribe and this was when he had met the Messenger of Allah and
he had become a Muslim in the early days. Because he had no protector he had to face
the anger of the polytheists, starting from his own masters. He was being tortured
under the scorching sun, and was insulted all the time .194
Habbab ibn Arat was owed money by As ibn Wail who was not settling the account.
Whenever Habbab went to him, he said:
"I will not repay my debt if you do not recant Muhammad's religion," even though
Habbab was only asking what was his due. On such a day Habbab said: "Even if you
should die, I will not recant him till we are raised from the day for judgment," thus
reminding him that at the end As ibn Wail would have to pay up in the next world if
not in this one. But of course to read between the lines, one had to have reason and
conscience. Maybe they did have intellect but it only worked in a certain, limited way.
That's why As ibn Wail turned to Habbab and said: "You tell me I will be raised after
I die? Well then, I will pay my debt on that day; for on that day I will have many
children and a lot of wealth. " 195
This was an incident that would shake the heavens and before long Gabriel
descended to the presence of the noble Prophet. In the verse he brought, Allah the
Almighty was fortifying the spiritual power of the believers and was speaking of the
inescapable end of arrogant people such as As ibn Wail:

--- Sayfa 161 ---
Have you considered the one who disbelieves in Our Revelations and says
(in insolence): "(Whatever you say, I will continue just as I am, for) I will
most certainly be given wealth and children?" Has he gained knowledge
of the Unseen, or has he made a (particular, private) covenant with the
All-Merciful? (Maryam 19:77-78)
Maybe that day Habbab ibn Arat breathed easy for a little while, but because he had
no other support in society, another day he went to the presence of the Messenger of
Allah and spoke ofhis own situation to him.
He was working non-stop and was contributing to society but the Quraysh who
knew that he had no supporters were not leaving him alone. He had a small hut; he
would work with iron in front of the fire all day long, and he would make swords and
shields. When he stepped outside his little hut at the end of the day, this time he would
face the fire coming from the Quraysh, and his pain would not cease. One day, his
master, who had heard that he had become a Muslim, came to him, and after beating
him up badly, he tied his arms and pressed the red hot iron onto his body and tortured
him till he lost consciousness. He had barely come out of this beating alive. Desperate,
he came to the presence of the Prophet and said the following: "Can you not ask help
for us, 0 Messenger of Allah? Can you not raise your hands and pray for us?"
The Pride of Humanity knew what his followers were going through, but he had no
resources. He also knew that while passing through such difficulties, one had to stand
firm. It was not only them who were suffering such troubles. This was a recurring
issue in the verses that the Truthful Gabriel brought as well; verses which spoke about
the trials of those that were before them and that winning Paradise was not an easy
task. 196 It seemed that Allah demanded a stance of patience and firmness from those
who had been the first to take on the cause, in order that they may prepare themselves
better and rise to the challenge when faced with the greater difficulties that they were
about to experience. That's why the Messenger of Allah started to say: "There were
those before you ... " and the color of his face changed, it seemed to have taken on a
pinkish tone, and he continued: "Those who would be cut in half from their heads with
an iron saw because they had believed, but this would not make them concede from
their religion. Great ditches would be dug and fires would be placed in them; and then
the believers would be thrown into these pits and they would be buried alive. But these
would not be enough to make them recant."
When speaking of these, the Great Messenger seemed to have risen above time, he
seemed to be speaking of the fate of those long gone as if he were watching those
scenes that very minute. These were scenes from the past indeed. Such great gifts

--- Sayfa 162 ---
could not have been received with little effort. Neither Paradise was cheap, nor was
Hell unnecessary... Some people in this life were investing in what was not
unnecessary; the believers had to bear certain difficulties in order to attain Paradise
and the beauties prepared by Allah. But this was not a common situation. That is why
the Messenger of Allah would tum his face to the future and would say the following
words of solace: "I swear by Allah that He will complete His light and see this to the
end. To the day that one woman will be able to set out from San'a and come all the
way to Hadramawt, without having to fear no one but Allah. But you are too hasty." 197
From San'a to Hadramawt? In those days such a journey would have been full of
perils for a man let alone a woman; people would be stopped by bandits and robbed of
everything they had. But if this was what the Messenger of Allah was saying then it
would definitely come to pass and such a peaceful world would indeed be established.
Some Companions such as Habbab had learnt to stand firm in the face of difficulties;
they knew more than ever that they needed to show great effort and zeal in building a
new world.
The Hope That Finds Expression in Dreams
Yes, there may be troubles today, but this did not mean that every coming day would
be a day of mourning. One day the snow would melt and a new spring would be
witnessed in human horizons, light would be scattered everywhere and a celebration
that the All-Compassionate Lord would be content with would take place.
Expressions similar to what our noble Prophet said to Habbab would be revealed by
Allah the Almighty in the Qur' an.
Today, some people are pouring all their resources into trying to extinguish the light
of the cause of Allah, but with the medium of the Truthful Gabriel, Allah the
Almighty has promised: 198
They seek (with renewed plans and stratagems) to extinguish Allah's light
(His favor of Islam, as if by the breath issuing) from their mouths.
Whereas Allah refuses but to complete His light, however hateful this
may be to the unbelievers. He it is Who has sent His Messenger with the
guidance and the Religion of truth that He may make it prevail over all
religions, however hateful this may be to those who associate partners
with Allah. (at-Tawbah 9:32-33)
And this good news was being shared by all those suffering oppression, being their
only sustenance against violence. It was Allah who was promising it, the Messenger of
Allah was promising it. If Allah and His Messenger said something, that always came

--- Sayfa 163 ---
to pass and the Companions did not have the slightest doubt on this matter, for they
were people so steadfast in their belief that even if the curtains masking the hidden
things of the universe were lifted, and had they been able to see the universes beyond
physics, the way they lived their life would hardly change because they were already
very firm in their belief.
They were at the skirts of the Messenger of Allah and in the protection of Allah.
Each new day a new heavenly feast was spread out in front of them, and they were
benefiting from this feast full of gifts laid out before them by the Peerless One.
They were enraptured by the conversation of the Prophet as if purified by being in
his presence. With the news that Truthful Gabriel was carrying, Allah the Almighty
was promising them an unending reward; in that promised world in which rivers ran
and different springs sprung, a life of pure eternal joy was awaiting them. However,
all of these rewards were not their sole aim; the contentment and pleasure of Allah
was their only goal, and they were virtuous enough not to have any other expectations.
In the verses that came to make them stronger in their spiritual life, Allah the
Almighty was giving examples from previous Prophets, saying: ''Most certainly we
help Our Messengers, and those who believe, in the life of this world and on the Day
when the Witnesses will stand forth (to testifY concerning people's response to the
Messengers)" (al-Mu'min 40:51), thus calling to attention that the disciples who
follow the Prophets partake in the difficulties that the Prophets face, but that
ultimately they would be the happy ones. He was giving examples from Noah,
Abraham, Jethro, Job, Saleh, Moses and Jesus, and then He was saying: "They showed
patience, received help and then came victorious; you too have to stand firm so that
you may experience the joy of tomorrow." The new addressees of the message were
expected to show persistence and patience. In these circumstances patience was the
greatest weapon of the believer, and despite all kinds of slander, one should never give
up this stance, for in the verses that came, the Great Lord was clearly saying to His
Beloved, peace and blessings be upon him, in order to add to his spiritual power and to
prop up the moral courage of believers: "So be patient; surely Allah's promise (that
He will help the believers to victory) is true, and do not let those who lack certainty (oj
this truth) shake your firmness" (ar-Rum 30:60).
Why should one be anxious? Allah did as He pleased with the world, and He would
give to whomever He pleased. Allah was explaining that there was no need to worry
about the troubles one was facing today and that in order not to fall into despair one
needed to have a very strong faith, for superiority in absolute terms could be achieved
only through a strong faith, "Do not, then, be faint of heart, nor grieve, for you are

--- Sayfa 164 ---
always the superior side if you are (true) believers" (Al Imran 3: 139). From the very
beginning the Lord of the worlds was promising that He would give the keys to the
world only to His servants who were pure of heart, "We (recorded in the Supreme
Preserved Tablet and then) wrote down in the Psalms after the Torah that My
righteous servants will inherit the earth" (al-Anbiya 21: 105).
Taqwa, a pious life stylized after Islamic values, was a characteristic as valuable as
currency, one which would not lose its value over time.
For whatever difficulties one may face today, the future would be shaped by the
ones who feared and obeyed Allah, "As for the abode of the Hereafter, We will assign
it to those who do not seek arrogant power on earth nor cause corruption and
disorder. The (truly desirable) outcome is for the Allah-revering, pious" (al-Qasas
28:83).
Then faith, pure deeds and piety were the things that would invite help and support
from Allah. That is why when they got together they would say: "Let's sit together
and open another chapter in becoming deeper in faith. " 199
In Ukaz, in Majanna, and in Zilmajaz the Messenger of Allah was saying similar
things when he tried to speak of the Lord to the people, giving them good tidings: "0
people! Come and say 'There is no deity but Allah' and save yourselves! Be sovereign
over all Arabs with these words! Let the Persians be subject to you through these
words! If you should die before seeing those days, you will be the kings of
Paradise. "200
The value of patience among Muslims and their belief that they would be rulers in
the future was so great that the polytheists were making fun of it. One day Aswad ibn
Abdul Muttalib and his friends sat down and were talking about this. Then some of the
Companions of the Prophet went past them. When they saw the Companions they
started to tease them. They were saying: "Look! The kings of the world who will be
the inheritors of Persian and Roman palaces are coming!" Then they started to clap,
trying to give validity to their offensive behavior. 201
But for the Companions, not what they said, but what Allah and His Messenger said
was important and they passed by them smiling, feeling sorry that these people were
in ignorance beyond their help. The world and its worries were simple things for them;
they had no doubt that in the next world there would be compensation for everything,
even for a tiny thorn that may have pierced their feet in this world. However, it was
not this compensation that guided their behavior. This was just a small support for
them when they needed help to overcome their difficulties. They knew that had this

--- Sayfa 165 ---
world had value in the eyes of Allah, then a non-believer would not be able to drink a
drop of water on this earth, for he would be bereft of all worldly comforts. But men
like Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab, Utba and Shayba were swimming in what this world had to
offer! This meant that Allah the Almighty was very merciful and that one could never
lose hope in benefiting from this treasure of compassion. For a believer who had
attained such an understanding of faith, what Allah and His Messenger were
promising meant something very different. IfHe was the one Who said it, then all of it
would come to pass one day, and all these troubles would end. Just as it was not
possible for the owls to always have a good time, the nights were not always pitch-
black either. There was space for nightingales as well on this earth, when the
determined time comes the day will break, and rejuvenating contentment will reign in
the presence ofthe morning breeze.
This persecution would end some day and life would be a rose garden, but for that
to happen tomorrow, one had to act according to the circumstances of today and one
had to take recourse to patience in all its forms.
Ultimately, for those living today, their sole duty was a relentless effort to instate
the positive. The order of the day was to run to people's help without wondering about
the outcome or consequences, for the consequence was up to Allah to create. They
were just doing their duty and were not meddling with the duties of others. They had
no doubt that support would come; the important thing was to become people worthy
of this help.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
167 Zubayr was the son of our noble Prophet's aunt Safiyya bint Abdul Muttalib. He was also the son
of the brother of Khadija. He was about fifteen years old when he became Muslim. See Ibnu'l-
Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/209.
168 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, pp. 382-383
169 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/55
170 Ibn Hajar, !saba, 21229
ill Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/85
172 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/59
173 Ibn Hajar, !saba, 11136. Abu Dharr used to perform Prayers even before he became a Muslim.
When speaking of those days he would say that he had started to perform Prayers three years
before he had met the Messenger of Allah, and that this Prayer that he started in the evening
would continue to the late hours of the night.
174 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/222
175 Abbas had not yet become Muslim.
176 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31165; 4/224,225,255
177 Ibid., 3/165
178 When he became Muslim Sa' d is thought to have been either sixteen or seventeen. See Ibn Sa' d,
Tabaqat, 31139.
179 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11266; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31139; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/216; Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-
Ghaba, 2/292
180 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/216
ill Ibn Hajar, !saba, 2/31; Halabi, Sirah, 11280
182 Abdullah ibn Mas 'ud was a contracted man of the sons of Zuhra. In the Period of Ignorance, his
father Abu Masud had come to an agreement with Abdullah ibn Harith and had started to look
after his business. According to the understanding of that day, his son Abdullah had to honor that
agreement as well.
183 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/58
184 Jafar ibn Abi Talib, was the person closest to the Messenger of Allah by way of morals and
behavior. See Tabari, Tarikh, 11539.
185 Abu Salama's real name was Abdullah ibn Abdilasad and he was the son of our noble Prophet's
aunt Barra bint Abdul Muttalib. He was at the same time the milk-brother of our beloved Prophet
along with Hamza. See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/567.
186 Amir ibn Fuhayra and our mother Aisha were sisters of the same mother. See Ibnu'l-Athir,
Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/254.
187 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/94; Ibn Hajar,Isaba, 11406
188 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/87; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/95; Halabi, Sirah, 2/421
189 Akil ibn Bukayr's name was Ghafil, meaning "unaware". When he came to the presence of the
Messenger of Allah and told him his name, our noble Prophet changed it to Akil, meaning "wise".
See Ibn Hajar, !saba, 3/575.
190 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/98
!21. In this turmoil Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas had picked up a piece of camel jaw bone to defend himself
and his friends and then he had hit it on the head of one of the polytheists. This hit had caused the
man's head to bleed. This was the first instance in which a Muslim had shed blood. See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 2/98.
192 It is reported that the old Waraqa ibn Nawfal also witnessed him crying out loud, "Ahad! Ahad!"
and that when he heard him say these words, he said: "0 Bilal! I swear that if you die in this state,
I will build a shrine on your tomb." See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11236.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
193 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 15/558 (7083); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 11404 (3832)
194 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 21102; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31164, 165; Ibn Hajar, !saba, 2/258
195 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31164, 165
196 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 71156 (2897)
197 See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1322 (3416). That day a Companion who listened to these from the
Messenger of Allah would swear years later that he was indeed living in such a peaceful state and
would thus thank his Lord.
198 In other, similar verses, there is an emphasis on those who do not like the cause of Allah, and
definitions of polytheists, sinners and criminals. This emphasis points to the fact that such people
and their obstructions are to be found at all periods, and this is a reminder that obstructions may
also come from people who are believers and yet sinners and criminals. See al-Anfal 8:8; Yunus
10:82.
199 Suyuti, Ad-Dhurrn '/-Mansur, 11365
200 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11216
201 See Halabi, Sirah, 11511, 512; Mabarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 123.

--- Sayfa 168 ---
THE START OF OPEN CALL
TO THE MESSAGE
T
hree long years had passed and the circle of faith could grow only so much.
Many people were aware of the change in Mecca, whether it was those who
had witnessed a friend or a relative accepting Islam, or those who themselves
had been invited to Islam, or those who had witnessed the hatred welling up inside the
hearts ofthe Quraysh. The issue was being discussed everywhere. There was need for
a new outreach in order for the addressees of the message to be better exposed. Before
long, the Truthful Gabriel came and brought new messages from the Compassionate
Lord. The verses that were inscribed in the heart of the Messenger were as follows:
And (0 Messenger) warn your nearest kinsfolk Spread your wings (to
provide care and shelter) over the believers who follow you (in practicing
Allah's commandments in their lives). But if they disobey you (your
kinsfolk by refusing your call, or those who have newly believed by not
giving up their former way of life), then say (to them): "I am free of
(responsibility for) what you do." (ash-Shuara 26:214-216)
It was clear that a new situation was at hand, and the act of calling people to Allah's
Word would no longer be carried out separately and in secret, but openly, with great
masses of people in mind. First of all the Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be
upon him, called Ali to his side and shared his worry with him: "0 Ali! Allah the
Almighty tells me to warn people starting from my close relatives. I had been trapped
in these chains and I was wondering when they, too, would work for the cause, and
now Gabriel has come to me and said '0 Muhammad! You should only do what your
Lord tells you to do; for this is what you are meant to accomplish.' But now there is a
new situation. Let us organize a dinner, and let there be lamb chops and bowls full of
milk. Invite the family of Abdul Muttalib to this dinner, so that I may relate the
message to them."
Ali did as he was told and prepared a rich dinner by the standards of the day. There

--- Sayfa 169 ---
were about forty guests at the dinner, including his uncles. The Messenger of Allah
was cutting and dividing the meat that Ali had placed and he was offering it to the
guests himself. After dinner came the time for drinks, and there were many more treats
to be eaten with the drinks as well. The guests had started to think that a surprise was
waiting for them as to the cause of such a feast. This is when our noble Prophet
wanted to take word but his uncle Abu Lahab was quicker and he burst out saying: "I
see that your man has bewitched you."
He was so full of rancor that his words would not stop there and he would add the
following: "Here are your uncles and your uncles' sons, say whatever you have to say!
Leave aside this sabi business! You should know that the patience of your tribe is at
an end. Stopping you has fallen to me! You should be content only by preaching to the
sons of your father! For if you insist on this stance that you have taken, know that the
youth of Quraysh will rise against you and the Arabs will support them. I have never
seen such a curse to his own kin like you!"
Everyone froze all of a sudden. All his efforts had gone to waste and he had not had
the chance to say a single word. Abu Lahab had insulted him, and had said words to
the Messenger of Allah one would be embarrassed to say in the presence of so many
people. He was an uncle to the Messenger but his words injured the very effort of
defending Allah's Word.
After this tense moment the guests started to leave and went home. The next day,
the Messenger of Allah consulted with Ali again, and said: "0 Ali! You heard what
that man said yesterday; people dispersed before I even had a chance to say anything.
Prepare another dinner today and invite the same people."
The same process started and a feast was prepared before the evening. When the
dinner ended, this time the beloved Messenger stood up, and after thanking Allah for
his beneficence, he turned to the guests and addressed his close relatives in the
following manner: "0 you sons of Abdul Muttalib! I swear by Allah that I do not
know anyone among the Arab come with a message as auspicious as your young man.
Allah the Almighty has told me to invite you to Him. Who among you will support me
and help me on this road, who will be my good companion?"
No one responded to his call from the congregation. There was an aggressive
silence. No one spoke a word. The silence was broken with the voice of a young man:
"0 Messenger of Allah! I will be your greatest supporter in this!"
All faces turned at once to where the voice was coming from. The owner of this
voice was none other than Ali. He was the youngest by age among those present.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Seeing his behavior, which was much more mature than his elders', the Messenger of
Allah first stroked his head and then said: "This is my brother and closest ally. Listen
to him."
The crowd from whom he had been expecting acceptance, laughed in the face ofthe
words of the Messenger of Allah. They then turned to Abu Talib, mocking him in the
following way: "No doubt now you will listen to your son and obey him as well!"
Another day had passed, and despite all these efforts, no progress had been made;
and once again everyone had gone to their own homes.
But today was different to yesterday, for now, the Quraysh had openly opposed the
Messenger of Allah and what he had brought. After trying to prevent him through
separate acts of opposition, they had now begun to see it as their duty to prevent the
mission of the Messenger of Allah. Fortunately, the Messenger of Allah had some
supporters even though they were few, and even though they were not all praying
behind him. On that day, his uncle Abu Talib intervened, and with a tone of voice that
spoke of affection and mercy, he said:
"Here is the state of your uncles! I am one of them, but I am closer to acting in a
way that may make you happy. Continue on your way as you have been ordered! I
swear I will continue to look out for you. But my sense of self prevents me from
accepting a religion other than that of Abdul Muttalib" and even though Abu Talib did
not accept what his nephew was bringing, he would nevertheless support him. This
attitude would drive that lover of fire, Abu Lahab, even more to hatred and he would
say: "This is even worse! You should finish him before others attempt to do so."
It had become a matter of defiance; the more he opposed, the more Abu Talib stood
by his nephew and strengthened his ties with him. Again to Abu Lahab he said: "I
swear that we will protect him from all evil that may touch him from the outside as
long as we live! "202
No one could say anything to someone as long as the respected Abu Talib was
taking his side, but this was not a good thing at all! He was opposing all and he was
insisting on his stance. A group from the Quraysh had seen his stance and before long
they knocked on Abu Talib's door: "0 Abu Talib," they said with discomfort. Even
when they pronounced his name, it was clear what kind of words would follow: "This
son of your brother, he keeps saying things about our gods that we find hard to accept.
He censures our understanding of religion, accuses our leaders with degeneracy, and
says our ancestors were in error. You either will make him recant what he is saying, or
leave him up to us to resolve this matter as we see fit!"

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Leave Muhammad? How could he leave an orphan entrusted to him by his father to
these hungry wolves? Abu Talib first tried to calm them down. Eventually, he
managed to appeal to their better nature, calmed their anger and sent them home. 203
But this wasn't a mission to be abandoned just because the Quraysh were
discomforted. Allah's order was in question and this order had to be obeyed. With
each passing day the difference between belief and denial was growing stronger, and
sides were becoming clearer. After a couple of days, the signs of revelation were
descending upon the noble Prophet once again. The Truthful Gabriel had descended
once again and was telling him to obey orders. Before long, another feast had been
organized.
After satisfying stomachs with a rich dinner, the Messenger of Allah stepped up a
second time and started to address the hearts. He was saying: "Verily, a true guide will
not lie to his people. I swear by Allah, for instance, if I should lie to all the people, I
would never do this to you; if I were to fool other people, I would not be able to fool
you. I swear by Allah that there is no deity but Him; verily, I am your Prophet in
particular and the Prophet of all humanity in general. I swear by Allah, you will die as
if you are falling into sweet sleep, and then you will be resurrected, like you wake up
from your sleep, and you will be held accountable for what you did today; you will be
rewarded with goodness as a result of your good deeds, and with scenes you will not
like, as result of your evil deeds, and this result will be either eternal Paradise or Hell!
0 sons of Abdul Muttalib! I do not know any other who has come to his own tribe
with something better than I have come to you with; I am offering you this world
along with the next. "204
Again, a lot of effort had been put in, without any visible results. But the extent of
the results hardly mattered in the steps that were to be taken, for in order to
accomplish something that Allah ordered, one simply needed to set out for the job and
take the necessary steps. That's why such dinners would continue to be held, and
through the doors opened through the stomachs, one would try to enter in the name of
the cause of Allah. Now our mother Khadija had started organizing dinners all the
time, and Ali and Zayd were inviting people to these dinners and serving them when
they came. Such that the huge fortune of Khadija, which had been the envy of many,
would gradually melt away with the strain of these dinners.
After such a dinner his uncle Abu Lahab would again contradict the Great
Messenger although he had spoken with utmost delicacy and care. Abu Lahab would
tum to the family of Abdul Muttalib and say: "0 you sons of Abdul Muttalib! I swear
by Allah that this is a very grave situation indeed. You have to think of a solution

--- Sayfa 172 ---
before others see to him. If you leave your business to him you will surely regret it. If
you try to protect him, then you will never get out of trouble yourselves."
This was a way for him to frighten the people away from what his nephew was
proposing, and unfortunately it was working. But there were those around him who
had a sense of pity.
Safiyya hint Abdul Muttalib, our noble Prophet's aunt and the sister of Abu Lahab,
stood up and said the following to Abu Lahab: "Can an evil that befalls on the head of
your brother's son make you happy? I swear by Allah that for a very long time
scholars have been saying that a Messenger would come from among the line of
Abdul Muttalib, this is him!"
Before our mother Safiyya finished her words, Abu Lahab spoke again: "No, no,
these are nothing but empty expectations! Listening to a woman's words always
brings shame. When the Quraysh and the Arabs get together and stand up against us,
what will our answer be? I fear then we would be harvested by them like ears of
grain."
Abu Lahab was center stage again. As they were leaving, one could hear the voice
of Abu Talib, who again found it hard to accept the harsh manner in which his nephew
had been treated, saying: "I swear by Allah, we will protect him against all possible
evil as long as we are alive."205
Now, for the Messenger of Allah each gathering was a new hope, each invitation
was another chance to soften the hearts. After yet another gathering he would address
his guests and say: "0 sons of Abdul Muttalib! Verily Allah has sent me to the whole
of humanity, and particularly to you to be a Messenger, and He told me 'Warn your
relatives first', and I invite you to two words which are easy to say and yet have a lot
of weight; come and bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, and that I am His
Messenger. "206
All these were efforts on his part to hold the hands of those near him and to protect
them from the torments of Hell. Even though they had united against him and were
contradicting him at every given opportunity, he was still knocking on their doors,
trying to find a time when their hearts would soften, for he felt to the greatest extent a
zeal for communicating Allah's Word. It was not a problem for him to go without
food or water for days, but the smallest mistake he made in transporting the Name of
Allah to a heart that was in need was the greatest failure for him. He had come to the
point where he felt desperate that people did not believe. The Qur'an mentions this
characteristic of the Prophet in various places-the sort of despair he felt at the doors

--- Sayfa 173 ---
of people who he had invited to Islam many times and who refused and deprecated
him-as a model of perseverance for those who came after him. 207
The Growing Circle of "Communication"
Meanwhile, with every passing day, new revelation were coming and feeding the
believers by way of faith, strengthening their resistance. Before long, a revelation had
arrived that stated: "So from now on, proclaim what you are commanded to convey
openly and in an emphatic manner, and do not care (whatever) those who associate
partners with Allah (say and do)" (al-Hijr 15:94). It seemed that the provision was
more general this time and it targeted Mecca in the first place and then the whole of
humanity. How could one not carry out such an order?
The Beloved of Allah went to the top of Safa hill and called out to the whole of
Mecca: "Ya sabaha! Ya sabaha!"
This was a kind of address that normally served to warn the people of the threat of a
great enemy. When such a call was heard, normally everyone would take their own
precautions and would wait ready for the enemy. That day, the Messenger of Allah
was trying this call to wake the Meccans to an awareness of what was awaiting them
tomorrow. No one could stay indifferent to such a call. Those who could come were
coming and those who could not were sending people to report back as to what
Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, had to say. There was a great
crowd at Safa now, and the Messenger of Allah called the attention of the tribes
present one by one: "0 sons of Fihr! 0 sons of Adiyy! 0 sons of Abdimanaf; and 0
sons of Abdul Muttalib!"
Everyone was paying great attention and waiting for the news that was to come. In
the meanwhile, there were also those who were asking who this man was who had
called people here. The answer they received was: "Muhammad!"
Abu Lahab was among those who had come. The Messenger of Allah first asked the
following question to those who were waiting eagerly to hear what he had to say: "If I
should tell you that there is an army coming towards you from behind this mountain,
would you say that I was lying to you?"
''No, we swear we have never seen you lie; we have never heard anything but the
truth from you," they said.
This was the answer he was expecting. He was going to build his argument on it:
"0 people of Quraysh!" he called out to them once again. "I am a clear warner for you
concerning a grave grief that is drawing near. Come and save yourselves from the fire

--- Sayfa 174 ---
of Hell! If you don't, I can do nothing for you in the eyes of Allah. You and I are like
the man who comes to his tribe with the warning of an army approaching his town. He
has seen that the enemy will come and harm his tribe and that's why he has warned his
kin. He has gone to the top of a hill and shouted: 'Ya sabaha! Ya sabaha. "'208
What more could he do? He was trying every possible way to help them but he was
not able to get the result he wanted. But this wasn't the crucial point. When doing all
this, he was not concerned about the end result, but rather, he concentrated on whether
he was following Allah's will and orders. The underlying principle of the persistence
of our noble Prophet, the Messenger of the Most Generous, was the awareness of
doing his duty to the best of his capacity. He could not bear the idea of seeing people
make their way towards Hell. Even though he was faced with insults and slander from
his listeners, he believed that one day their hearts would soften.
Even if not these people themselves, their offspring might one day understand the
value oflslam. On the Day of Judgment, Allah the Almighty would ask everyone what
they had done in life and the excuse of "We had not been told" was no longer valid
now. This is why the Illustrious Beloved of Allah started to say the following to his
relatives who had gathered in this crowd: "0 people of Quraysh! Do not leave your
soul in bondage but buy your soul from Allah, and protect it from Hell; for tomorrow I
will not be able to help or harm you in any way. Tomorrow I will not be able to help
you when you are in the presence of Allah!"
He then started to address the crowd more specifically, calling out to them by their
names:
"0 sons of Ka'b ibn Luayy! 0 sons of Murra ibn Ka'b! 0 sons of Qusayy! 0 sons
of Abdimanaf1 0 sons of Abdishams! 0 sons of Hashim! 0 sons of Abdul Muttalib!
Take care to protect yourselves from the fires of Hell! Or else I will not be able to
procure any help or harm for you; I will not be able to help you! Benefit now from
what I come to you with, ask me anything and I will give it to you, but tomorrow in
the presence of Allah, I will not be able to help you at all!
0 Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib! I will not be able to do anything for you either in the
presence of Allah.
0 aunt of the Messenger of Allah, Safiyya hint Abdul Muttalib! I will not be able to
help you either!
0 daughter of the Messenger of Allah, Fatima hint Muhammad, if you want
something from what I have at hand now, ask for it now! You protect your self from
the fire of Hell as well! Or else I will not be able to do you any good or harm on that

--- Sayfa 175 ---
day, in the presence of Allah. All I can do today is to speak nicely to you with respect
to our blood ties!"
All these were true and no one said anything against these words. The Messenger of
Allah had done his duty; he had put himself forward for the sake of his relatives.
Having listened to his advice, they were now returning to their homes, without having
given any response. A familiar face from among them came forward and approached
the Messenger of Allah. It was clear that he was enraged and was not at all happy that
the fate of the coming days had thus been revealed to him: "Woe unto you! Is this
what you called us here for; let your hands dry up!" He was saying and scolding his
nephew.
Not long after this, Gabriel had come to the Prophet's rescue and he was calming
the Illustrious Beloved of Allah with the following words:
May both hands of Abu Lahab be ruined, and are ruined are they! His
wealth has not availed him, nor his gains. He will enter a flaming Fire to
roast; and (with him) his wife, carrier of firewood (and of evil tales and
slander), around her neck will be a halter of strongly twisted rope. (al-
Masad 111: 1-5) 209
This was at the same time a warning that even if he should be close to the Prophet
by way of family, he would not be able to find salvation if he did not respond to the
invitation from the Messenger of Allah.
Now Mecca would get to know about these verses and be truly shaken. The address
that the Abu Lahab family was heading for was thus made public. Although they did
not seem to care at first, inside they were full of doubt: What if what was said was
true? What if there was a Hell? And what about Muhammad, what if he really was the
Messenger people were waiting for?
But because he had already once said no, he would stay by his word, and when his
day came, he would die like the Qur'an and the Messenger of Allah had foretold,
consolidating the judgment passed on him.
The wife of Abu Lahab, the enemy to Allah, was Umm Jamil and she was in no
way behind her husband when it came to enmity to the Messenger of Allah. He would
spread pins and needles on the path where the Messenger was likely to pass, and she
would pour rubbish on his doorstep. She had a nasty tongue and she would incite
others against him; she was organizing people against the Messenger of Allah and was
trying to tum enmity towards him into a popular cause. That's why when speaking of
her, the Qur'an would use the term "carrier of wood," making clear her sorry state in

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Hell as an example to those that would come after her.
Umm Jamil was terribly offended by what people were saying about her husband
after the revelations; she let a yell out and went to where the Messenger of Allah was
with her hands full of stones. She was hysterical! How could Muhammad speak of
them in that manner, and how could he portray their afterlife in such bad terms! At the
time, Abu Bakr, the loyal friend to our noble Prophet was with him. When he saw
Umm Jamil storm in an infuriated state, he said: "0 Messenger of Allah! This woman
has a foul mouth. If she finds you here, she will say bad things to you and torment
you."
But this was not how the Great Messenger saw the matter: "She will not be able to
see me," he said.
Abu Bakr could not understand what the Messenger wanted to say; but if such
words had been spoken by the Messenger of Allah they had to mean something. He
would wait and see.
By this time Umm Jamil had come and was saying furiously: "0 Abu Bakr! Where
is this friend of yours who recites poetry?"
Abu Bakr answered: "I swear by the Lord of this house that my friend is not a poet,
he doesn't know of poetry! You know this very well!"
It was clear that what he wanted to talk about was not poetry; he was more
interested in finding out whether she could see clearly, and so he asked: "Do you not
see someone standing by me?"
"Are you playing games with me? I swear I see no one by you," she said with
certainty. She seemed like she had no time to waste, and as she was leaving she said:
"The Quraysh know that I am the daughter of their master. The man who dares speak
against a person whose father is Abdimanaf can never have the courage to stand up
against him."
She was offering these words as a challenge. She had come, and was going back as
she came.
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, had witnessed all this in great
amazement and he turned to the Messenger of Allah and asked: "0 Messenger of
Allah! Why did that woman not see you?"
"There is an angel here who protects me from her with his wings," he replied. 210
The Period of Opening Up
The Messenger of Allah, who paid such great attention to the sons of Abdul Muttalib,

--- Sayfa 177 ---
was slowly widening his circle of communication. He was now going to the Ka'ba to
pray openly; he was inviting people to religion and reading them the Qur'an. Just like
the Prophets before him, he was saying: "0 my tribe! Come and become servants of
Allah; there is no deity but He."
Thus he wanted to lift the artificial barriers between people and their Lord. First he
would start with meeting the tribes that were close by. He was trying every possible
way, sometimes even going door to door to share the treasures of his heart with the
people. When asked why he wasn't sharing these with his own tribe, he would say:
"The Quraysh are preventing me from spreading the word of the Lord."
He wanted to communicate the Lord's message in a stable environment. Sometimes
he would address crowds, bringing people together through various occasions. He
would always look for environments where people were gathered in big numbers. On
one such occasion, the Messenger of Allah was standing on Mina and was calling out
to the people: "0 people! There is no doubt that Allah orders you to give up the
understanding of religion that you have received from your ancestors ... "
But before he could finish his first sentence, a voice full of hatred was heard from
among the crowd. Everyone turned to where the sound was coming from and they
could now see who it was. It was none other than Abu Lahab, the cursed one who had
left his business to go and destroy the good work that his nephew was putting together
bit by bit. The atmosphere got tense all of a sudden. But he was the Great Messenger
and neither Abu Lahab nor the obstinacy of Abu Jahl would be able to stop him. Each
obstacle placed on his way gave him a greater urgency each time. It gave him the
stamina to not only work on his own acquaintances but to also look for other people
with whom he could share the Lord's word.
On another day, he was addressing the people in a fair named Zilmajaz: "0 people!
Come and say "There is no deity but Allah" and you will have attained salvation."
But even when he was saying these he was not left alone. He had been followed
again, by none other than his uncle Abu Lahab who was showering his nephew with
handfuls of stone. On this road that he had taken in an effort to carry the word of the
Lord to the people his beloved feet were worn out with bruises and blood, but he was
still persevering to carry out his duty.
He had just uttered his first word when the atmosphere in Zilmajaz was again
disturbed by the voice of Abu Lahab. It was clear that he had become a sworn enemy
to the noble Prophet. He started addressing the audience of the Messenger of Allah:
"0 people! Do not lend your ears to this man; for he is a liar! "211

--- Sayfa 178 ---
But this itself was a lie; Muhammad was known amongst his people as the
"Trustworthy," he was the one they turned to when they needed something to be kept
safe.
Of course these efforts wouldn't be successful, but that day, it was to the detriment
of the audience and their introduction to Islam would be postponed to yet another day.
The Efforts to Prevent People from Encountering Islam
Meanwhile the pilgrimage season had arrived, and there was a new commotion among
the Quraysh. What they feared most was that the pilgrims coming from the outside
would speak to the Messenger of Allah and that he would start sharing the verses with
them.
They had to prevent this at all costs. Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him,
had to be prevented from talking to the pilgrims, and even if he should talk, there had
to be enough propaganda against him to discredit him. In order to find a solution they
came together at the house of Walid ibn Mughira. Their aim was to keep the
Messenger of Allah away from going amongst the people to spread the word, to
communicate the new messages; they wanted to prevent these messages so they would
find new places of abode in the hearts of others.
The old and experienced Walid started the conversation: "0 people of Quraysh!
You know that the pilgrimage season is upon us; Arabs will be coming tribe by tribe
to our town! You know about the situation of this man of yours. You should come to
an agreement concerning him, so that there are no differences of opinion between you
tomorrow! If one of you should act in a way to contradict the other, then your security
will have been lost."
''You start, 0 father of Abdishams! You should speak and show us the way, so that
we may have a starting point to discuss," the Quraysh replied.
This was the answer that Walid was expecting from them, but he insisted.
"Let us call him an oracle!" the Quraysh suggested.
''No, I swear that won't hold! For he is no oracle, and we have seen many oracles!
His aren't hidden, rhyming magic words like the oracles," Mughira objected.
"Then let us call him mad."
"He is not mad either! We have seen so many mad and crazy men, but he doesn't
appear like any of them! He doesn't seem to be suffocating, or sway as he walks due
to a muddled brain, he is not delusional," Mughira answered.
"Then let us call him a poet."

--- Sayfa 179 ---
"But he is not a poet! We know the rhyme, harmony, color and music of poetry; but
what he says is not poetry!" Mughira explained.
"Then let's call him a magician."
"The thing is he is not a magician either. We have seen so many magicians working
their tricks. He has none of these soothe whisperings, nor does he tie knot upon knot,"
Mughira opposed.
The Quraysh had thus gone through everything that came to their minds, but they
were making no progress at all. It was impossible to make this old man happy with
their choice.
They really wanted him to stop his objections, so that he would get to the point and
tell them what was on his mind. So some people called out: "So what is your opinion,
0 Abu Abdishams?"
But he didn't have much to offer either: "Give me some time to think about it," he
said, and started to think. He could think of no solution.
He thought of all the alternatives that had been suggested. Yes, one of them could
possibly work! He turned to the gathering and said: "I swear that in his words are a
special kind of sensation and attraction; their roots are solid and they are pregnant with
plentiful fruit! Whatever you may impute it with; the slander will be understood to be
false in no time. Among what you have suggested, the closest is 'magician'. He says
such loaded words that he puts father and son, man and wife, and tribes against each
other."
In order to make a record of this event and to make an example to coming
generations, the Truthful Gabriel immediately descended with the following verse:
He pondered and he calculated (how he could disprove the Qur'an in
people's sight). Be away from Allah's mercy, how he calculated! Yea,
may Allah preserve him from the evil eye! How he calculated! Then he
looked around (in the manner of one who will decide on a matter about
which he is asked). Then he frowned and scowled. Then he turned his
back and (despite inwardly acknowledging the Qur'an's Divine origin),
grew in arrogance, and he said: "This is nothing but sorcery (of a sort
transmitted from sorcerers) from old times. This is nothing but the word
of a mortal." (al-Muddathir 74:18-25)
As Mughira had said, there was nothing else to be said, and they decided on this
course of action and then dispersed. Now the general policy had been decided and
there was a consensus as to the method of how they would alienate the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 180 ---
Allah from society. From now on they would all speak the same thing, and they could
converge on their lie and try their best to slander the Messenger of Allah. In today's
terms, it can be likened to a false news item that is distributed throughout the media
and its various platforms. When the time came and pilgrims flocked to Mecca, the
Quraysh were welcoming their guests and speaking of the Pride of Humankind telling
the pilgrims-even though they didn't believe the truth of it-that he was a magician.
Thus, they thought they could prevent people from going to his side, and that they
could prevent the heavenly message to reach these people. 212
On the other hand, the heaviness of revelation was upon the Messenger of Allah and
the truthful Gabriel was descending with a new message again. In the revelations that
came, the Lord was informing his beloved of this insidious plan. He spoke ofthe inner
worlds of the people who were trying to set traps for the Messenger of Allah.
Concerning the mind set of Walid ibn Mughira, the Lord of the worlds was saying the
following:
Leave Me (to deal) with him whom I created alone, and I enabled for him
abundant wealth, and children around him as means of power; and I have
granted him all means and status for a comfortable life, and yet, he desires
that I should give more. By no means! Surely he has been in obstinate
opposition to Our Revelations. I will oblige him to a strenuous climb. (al-
Muddathir 7 4: 11-17)213
True, there was always tomorrow to be considered. But there were steps to be taken
today. Everyone was striving for their goal, and it had to be the ones who took their
steps in the Name of Allah who would see their perseverance to the end. That is why
when the season of pilgrimage came and people started to pour into Mecca, the
Messenger of Allah continued to go around to the fairs of Ukaz, Majanna and
Zilmajaz and said to all present: "0 people! Come and say 'there is no deity but Allah'
and be saved," trying thus to make his Lord's name be heard.
Despite all the efforts of the Quraysh, Abu Lahab's close persecution, and the
destruction of anything that the noble Prophet was trying to build, the season of
pilgrimage would come and go, and in the minds of the pilgrims, only the messages
that the Messenger of Allah had relayed to them would remain. This was the only
novelty that they had seen and witnessed in Mecca, and this novelty was of a scale that
could change not only Mecca, but the entire world.
Growing of the Campaigns against the Messenger
The Quraysh was building up its antagonism against the Messenger of Allah and they

--- Sayfa 181 ---
were using all possible means to drive people away from him. They were throwing
unspeakable insults and were resorting to all kinds of lies. Through all these
intentional methods they were trying to shake and test the strength of Muslims in
belief, to belittle them in front of others, and to scare the non-Muslims so that they
wouldn't associate with the Muslims.
The plan that originated at the house of Walid ibn Mughira had not yielded the
expected results, and so they were now resorting to all means possible. They were
saying whatever came to their mouths when they met other people concerning him.
This was an all and out smear campaign. All the Meccans who could put two words
together were gathering people around themselves and trying to create a public
reaction against the Messenger. They were calling him all sorts of things like "mad,"
"magician," "liar" and "poet," thus trying to mock him. Sometimes they said: "What
sort of Messenger is this? He eats food and goes about in market-places (like any
other mortal)?" (al-Furqan 25:7).
And sometimes they would say: "If only this Qur'an had been sent down on a man
of leading position of the two (chief) cities!" (az-Zukhruf 43 :31)
Such were the doubt they wanted to provoke, as if it was up to them to distribute the
grace of Allah.
But of course the soul possessor of this act was Allah the Almighty, and He knew
whom He would give the mission ofProphethood. 214
''You are a mortal man like us," they were saying, and finding it strange that the
Messenger was an ordinary man.
In order for the revelation to reach its peak, the Messenger had to be a being like
themselves and Allah the Almighty would give the duty of Prophethood to whom He
pleased, thus he would reward that person.215
Sometimes they would think of other ways to tease him and would say:
Why is a treasure not cast down upon him from the heaven (so that he
should no longer need to go about in market-places to earn a living)? Why
does he not have a garden (granted to him miraculously) to obtain his
food from? (al-Furqan 25:8)
What lay behind all these was people couldn't accept that the Messenger of Allah
had been chosen for this important task of receiving the revelation. People were driven
with ignorance, jealousy, obstinacy, fear and pride, and they were feeling the social
pressure to their core. Their denial knew no bounds and before long they directed their
slander towards the Qur' an. They would call it "the fairy tales of those gone before,"

--- Sayfa 182 ---
or "pointless ornamental words" or "the words of devil and the jinn," and sometimes
"words of mortals," trying to lessen the effect the words of Allah had on people. 216
Before swords were drawn out of their sheaths, the war of words continued for a
long time. On the one hand they were saying to their accomplices: "Do not listen to
this Qur'an, and speak random noise (during its recitation) so that you may prevail
over it" (Fussilat 41:26). Thus encouraging anarchy ... On the other hand they
pretended to be people who were sincerely upholding the truth through various tricks
they were devising. They were using all sorts of wordplay and they played all kinds of
games to defeat their opponents. Such that they sometimes even chose to appear as if
they had believed, and then they would start denying, to give the impression of people
who had not found what they had been looking for in Islam; trying thus to boost up the
spirits of the people on their side and to dispirit the Messenger of Allah and those who
were with him. 217
Even though it was them who were wallowing in darkness, error and denial, they
were attributing these realities to the Muslims. There were those who took things
further such as Nadr ibn Harith who was known as the devil of Quraysh. This man
would from time to time go to distant countries, sit together with kings and thus had
extensive knowledge about different cultures. So in the Mecca of those days, Nadr
was a man who was intellectually advanced compared to the level of general
knowledge in his society. Whenever our noble Prophet would go to a gathering to
speak of Islam, he would stand behind him and say: "0 people of Quraysh! I swear I
speak better than him. What quality does he have that he should be able to speak better
than me?" trying to lessen the influence of the Messenger of Allah. 218
On another occasion, N adr had bought a female slave and was using her to dissuade
people who were about to embrace Islam. Whenever he saw anyone going towards the
house of the Messenger of Allah he would send her to stop them on their way; he
would tell her to offer these people the best of welcomes to prevent them from going
on their way to the Pride ofHumanity.219
This was the extent of the denial, it was showing its face in different guises every
day, and these were one by one determining the agenda ofthe day. When they were
face to face with the Messenger of Allah they made up strange requests, acting as if
they were ready to accept the faith, trying to confuse minds. They would suggest that
in order to prove his Prophethood he would have to put a ladder to the sky and climb
it; or that he should prepare a feast for them from the fruits of Paradise. It was clear
that even if he had done all that, even if they saw the heavens open its gates, they
would still not have believed; it was just a dialectical game for them and they were

--- Sayfa 183 ---
having fun!
Their faith lethargic, their v1ew of existence short-sighted, their character
conniving, their horizons blocked and their minds enslaved by their desires; they were
running away from faith in the full knowledge of it! For the most part they conceived
themselves as gods; they wanted to showcase their errors as acts of virtue. In short,
they could not accept that their life style was wrong; they did not have the courage to
say "What we are doing is wrong!" This would have been a sign of real virtue indeed,
and they were in no state to show this fortitude of character. That's why they thought
of those who were pointing out their wrongs as their greatest enemies, and they were
declaring war against them. But with the believers were Allah and the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him ...
Despite the oppression they faced from the polytheists, with every new verse the
Qur'an was embracing the believers and reminding them they should stand fast in
their attitude. The Messenger of the Almighty, peace and blessings be upon him, was
sharing these verses at every given opportunity and enforcing their faith. It was stated
that the path to good deeds always contained many obstructions, and that the Devil
and evil thoughts would always try to lead those who choose the right path astray, and
that thus the believers should keep their ranks before the forces against belief put their
plan into action. Often, there were examples from previous communities, and after
stressing that it was not easy to make progress on the way of Truth, it was stated that
the result would definitely be in favor of those who believe and who shape their lives
according to the criteria of piety.
Sometimes the verses that came were consoling the Messenger of Allah:
We certainly know that your breast is constricted by the (blasphemous)
things that they say. But glorify your Lord with His praise (proclaim that
He is absolutely above having any partners, and that all praise belongs to
Him exclusively) and be one of those who prostrate themselves before
Him (regularly in the Prayer, which strengthens their humility), and
(continue to) worship your Lord until what is certain (death) comes to
you. (al-Hijr 15:97-99)
Another time He would say: "We suffice you against all those who mock. Those
who adopt some deity along with Allah, in time they will come to know" (al-Hijr
15:95-96) Indicating that it would be the believers who would have the last laugh.
When it was Allah who was giving the good tidings, how could one not trust Him?
Each event that they lived through took them one step closer to Allah. He made His
affection known, almost as if He was stroking their heads: ''Messengers indeed were

--- Sayfa 184 ---
mocked before you (0 Messenger), but what they used to mock overwhelmed those
who scoffed (at the Messengers to humiliate them)" (al-An'am 6: 10).
The enmity that the Muslims faced was not an enmity directed towards their own
selves or characters per se; the real intention ofthe polytheists and the deniers was to
abolish the cause and Name of Allah on earth. Because it was the believers that they
could see at the front lines, as the spreaders of the Lord's worth, they were getting the
brunt of their wrath; but accordingly, the reward for all these difficulties would be
equally great. When comforting His Beloved, the All-Compassionate Lord would say:
0 Messenger! We know indeed that the things (lies, mockery, and
slanders) that they say grieve you: yet, it is not you that they deny (they
cannot very well call you a liar since they themselves have called you 'the
trustworthy one'); rather, it is the signs and Revelations of Allah that the
wrongdoers obstinately reject. (Do not be grieved at what they do!)
Indeed, Messengers before you were denied (regarding the Message they
brought), but they endured with patience the charge of falsehood and the
hurt done to them, until Our help reached them: There is none that can
change Allah's words (alter His decrees and His execution of them), and,
indeed, some account of those Messengers has already come to you. ( al-
An'am 6:33-34)
What great affection! What great kindness! What great consolation!

--- Sayfa 185 ---
202 Ibn Athir, Al-Kamilfl 't-Tarikh, 1/584, 585; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, pp. 83-84
203 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21100-101
204 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/542
205 Halabi, Sirah, 1/459
206 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/542
207 See Hud 11: 12; al-Kahf 18:6.
208 Bukhari, Sahih, 4/1804 (4523); Tabari, Tarikh, 1/541
209 Abu Lahab's wife was Umm Jamil, sister to Abu SufYan.
210 Halabi, Sirah, 1/466
211 Ibid., 21154
212 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21105.
213 Walid ibn Mughira had ten sons. Khalid ibn Walid, the skilled commander who would become a
Muslim after the Hudaybiya, was one of them.
214 Al-An' am 6:124
215 Ibrahim 14: 10-11
216 For further detail see Haylamaz, Re~it, Giiller ve Dikenler (Roses and Thoms), istanbul: I~1k,
2003, 1/206.
217 Zurkani, Manahilu 'l-Irfan, 2/296
218 Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur 'an, 14/4 7
219 Shawkani, Fathu '/-Qadir, 4/335

--- Sayfa 186 ---
REVELATION THAT BECOMES
ONE WITH THE PEOPLE
N
ow a new and original process was taking place in Mecca. With revelations
taking into account the nature of humankind and its needs, a new society
was being built, and thus the revelations were to be lived by each individual
as a living Qur'an in their pure disposition. The community of that period was very
intimate with the heavens and there was now a great Divine lens above them, they
were being closely followed. Each step they took was registered and responded to and
the right way of behavior was being made known to them in a way to take humanity to
a future state. When people came to the presence of the Prophet and said: "Give us
good tidings," Gabriel would descend and bring the following message:
Allah sends down in parts the best of the words as a Book fully consistent
in itself, and whose statements corroborate, expound and refer to one
another. The skins of those who stand in awe of their Lord tingle at (the
hearing and understanding of) it. Then, their skins and their hearts come
to rest in the Remembrance of Allah (the Qur'an). This is Allah's
guidance, by which He guides whomever He wills, and whoever Allah
leads astray, there is no guide for him. (az-Zumar 39:23)
Faith in Allah and the Reality of Divinity
Faith was the most important and indispensable dynamic for a believer. A person who
attained real faith would not bow in the face of the threats of the Quraysh, nor would
he fear the blows from another power. The coming decree would have a meaning only
on the basis of real faith. Thus, the most basic question was the question of faith; steps
taken for the future could be taken only on this basis, and other difficulties could
easily be overcome when one was rooted fast on this basis. That was why people had
to reach a maturity in their faith, one which was steadfast. A believer who had not yet
attained the characteristics pertaining to faith could be disheartened by the obstacles

--- Sayfa 187 ---
on his way and stop in his tracks. What was expected of the believer was not to walk
towards the future just for his own sake, but to undertake the passage of others on this
route as well. That is why the verses that came during the Meccan years were dealing
mostly with these issues, and the Messenger of Allah who was communicating these
verses was thus bringing up a new generation.
The verses that dealt with faith in Allah had two main goals. Firstly, it was to
eradicate the old understanding of divinity, and secondly, it was to explain the truth of
divinity in a manner deserving of its eminence.
The Meccans had indulged in the idea of idolatry so much that they could not
conceive of Allah as being One. They even regarded oneness as some kind of
deficiency and inadequacy when they discussed it between them. A group including
Abu Jahl and Walid ibn Mughira came to Abu Talib and they spoke about this matter,
letting Abu Talib know how strange they found this idea of "oneness."
Upon this, revelation came and revealed the landscape of these people's inner
worlds:
They deem it strange that a warner from among them has come to them,
and the unbelievers say: This man is but a sorcerer, a fraud (who makes
fabrications in attribution to Allah). What! Has he made all the deities into
One Allah. This is a very strange thing, indeed!" (Sad 38:4-5)
The leaders of Quraysh had come together and they were approaching Husayn ibn
Ubayd220 to speak to him. Their aim was to obstruct our noble Prophet's path by
placing Husayn in between: "Speak to this man for us, so that he may stop speaking
about our gods."
Husayn himself was discontent about the situation and so he accepted this mission
and set on his way. The others were following behind him. Then they came all the way
to Allah Messenger's door. The first to speak was Husayn: "0 Muhammad! What is it
with you that you are speaking against our ancestors; this talk has reached our very
own ears. Your father was a very good man!"
The Beloved of the Almighty was very good at knowing his addressee and so he
knew how to bring him to his heels. He first said: "0 Husayn! How many gods do you
worship?"
"Seven on earth and one in the heavens, so eight in total."
'Which one do you ask for help when some ill befalls you?"
"The one in the heavens!"
'Which one do you supplicate when you lose something?"

--- Sayfa 188 ---
"The one in the heavens!"
"Then how is it that you see fit to worship gods other than Allah Who you
supplicate for your needs, Who sees to all your needs on His own, how can you see
others as His equal, how can it be that it is always Him who you tum to for your
needs, and yet you distribute your thanks among others? 0 Husayn! Come and submit
to Allah who is One!"221
When the invitation was so sincere and the expressions so clear and logical, how
could one produce an alternative way of thought! The crucial thing was to share the
truth of Allah with characteristics and beauties pertaining to Him on a sound basis and
that was what the Messenger of Allah was doing that day in Mecca.
Another day, they had come to our noble Prophet and asked him to describe his
Lord. Their aim was not to get to know Allah through His Messenger but to noisily
challenge him and to mock what he had to say. The old habits of the Quraysh were on
the rise again; they just wanted to have fun.
But for the Messenger of Allah each meeting meant another opportunity to speak
about Allah. Since the gathering had commenced with His name, it had to continue in
His name, and this had to be used as a vehicle to carry His name to greater numbers of
people.
Of course it would be him who could speak of Him in the most beautiful way. Our
noble Prophet shared with the crowd the verses that the Truthful Gabriel had brought
him:
Say: He, Allah, the Unique One of Absolute Unity. Allah, the Eternally-
Besought-of-All (Himself in no need of anything). He begets not, nor is He
begotten, and comparable to Him there is none. (al-Ikhlas 112: 1-4).
Despite everything, the polytheists chose to tum their faces and go on that day as
well, and they acted as though they had not heard any of these words.
They were so conditioned that had they been invited to Paradise with staircases of
gold and chrysolite, they still would not have accepted it, and would submit their
selves to the darkness of the night with closed eyes.
Mecca was also witnessing discussions from time to time. One day Abu Bakr was
sitting with the leading men and was speaking about the Exalted One, trying to correct
the wrong views concerning Him. A lot of falsehood was being articulated. The
polytheists were saying: "Our Lord is Allah and the angels are His daughters; at the
same time they are means through which we can get closer to Allah," and thus they
had a difficult time trying to find the right direction. The Jewish people were insisting:

--- Sayfa 189 ---
"Our Lord is Allah and U zayr is His son," and they did not accept that Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him, was the Messenger of Allah. They too had thus
veered from the right path, and could not find their direction. Abu Bakr was
addressing these issues arguing: "Our Lord is Allah. He is the One who has no second,
and He has no peer. When it comes to Muhammad, he is the servant of Allah, and His
Messenger," Thus making his own way in this plethora of ideas. Then, the Messenger
of Allah received the good tidings of a new verse that the Truthful Gabriel brought.
This verse revealed clearly that the path of faith as articulated by Abu Bakr was the
true one:
As for those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and then follow the Straight
Path (in their belief, thought, and actions) without deviation, the angels
descend upon them from time to time (in the world as protecting
comrades and in the Hereafter, with the message): "Do not fear or grieve;
but rejoice in the glad tidings of Paradise which you have been promised.
(Fussilat 41 :30)
Another day a man would come to the presence of the Prophet and say: "0 father of
Qasim! They say that according to the information you receive, Allah holds the whole
of creation on one finger, the heaves on another; and the trees on another, and the
earth on yet another, And then He says, 'I am King ... '" 222
Before the man could finish his words, the Messenger of Allah gave a bitter smile,
for attributing words to the Exalted One could be nobody's right or business; He could
not be spoken about as if one were speaking about some king in some foreign country.
Before long Gabriel descended with the following message:
They have no true judgment of Allah as His right, such as His being Allah
requires, and (such is His Power and Sovereignty that) the whole earth
will be in His Grasp on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be
rolled up in His Right Hand. All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted
above what they associate with Him. (az-Zumar 39:67)
Life after Death
Adiyy ibn Rabia, had come to the presence of the Pride of Humankind, and was
asking him when the Judgment Day would come and how it would happen. Naturally,
the Messenger of Allah was answering only as his Lord informed him. But the aim of
the man was not to find an answer to his question, but to put our noble Prophet in a
difficult position. That is why he said: "Even ifl should witness that day with my own
eyes, I will not believe you or acknowledge you, 0 Muhammad!"

--- Sayfa 190 ---
Meanwhile he was crumbling a piece of dried bone in his hands and saying: "You
mean to say that Allah will bring together these crumbled pieces, and make them live
again?" trying to mock him in his own way.
There and then the heavens shook and Gabriel came to the rescue: "Does human
think that We will never assemble his bones (to resurrect him)?" (al-Qiyamah 75:3).
Ubayy ibn Khalaf, who had heard that this verse had came to our noble Prophet,
said: "0 Muhammad! Do you mean to say that after this bone rots and disintegrates,
Allah will resurrect this bone?" crumbling the piece of bone in his hand.
Our noble Prophet answered: "Yes, Allah the Almighty will resurrect this as well.
He will first take your life away and resurrect you, and then will throw you into the
fires ofHell."
The Qur'an would speak of this scene in the following terms:
Has human not considered that We have created him from (so slight a
beginning as) a drop of (seminal) fluid? Yet, he turns into an open, fierce
adversary (selfishly disputing against the truth), and he coins a
comparison for Us, having forgotten his own origin and creation, saying,
'Who will give life to these bones when they have rotten away?' Say: "He
Who produced them in the first instance will give them life. He has full
knowledge of every (form and mode and possibility of) creation (and of
everything He has created He knows every detail in every dimension of
time and space)." (Ya-Sin 36:77-79)
Another day a Companion of the Prophet by the name of Abdullah had come to the
Ka'ba and wanted to pray. After he finished his circumambulation, he saw a couple of
people coming from afar. These were men from the Thaqif tribe and the Quraysh-
men with big bellies but limited intellects-and it seemed they were looking for a
place to speak in secret. It was clear that on their agenda was the Pride of Humankind,
peace and blessings be upon him, and his Companions, and how they may do evil to
them. They sat down and spoke at length. Then one person from among them
whispered: 'What do you say? Does Allah hear what we speak now?"
"Maybe He heard some of it," said one ofthem. The other one offered: "Maybe He
heard the things we said out loud. I don't think He heard the ones we whispered to
each other." Upon this another said: "One who can hear some of it has surely heard all
of it!" Then they disbanded to different places.
Following on, Abdullah also left. He came to the presence of the Messenger of
Allah and told him what he had seen and heard. Before long Gabriel descended again.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
He was carrying the following message:
You did not seek to veil yourselves (when sinning) without ever
considering that your ears or your eyes or your skins would one day bear
witness against you. Moreover, you supposed that Allah did not know
most of what you did habitually. It is that supposition of yours which you
entertained about your Lord that has tumbled you down into perdition,
and so you have come to be among the losers. If they endure it (or do not
endure it), still the Fire will be an everlasting dwelling for them. If they
ask for favor (to be saved from it, or do not ask), still they are not of those
who will be shown favor (and saved). (Fussilat 41 :22-23)
The verses would continue to descend: "And Allah's is the sovereignty (absolute
ownership and dominion) of the heavens and the earth, and Allah has full power over
everything" (Al Imran 3: 189); "Have they never travelled about the earth that they
may see what was the outcome for those before them (who obstinately disbelieved in
Our signs)? They were greater than them in power. By no means is Allah One Whom
anything whatever in the heavens or on earth can frustrate (in His decrees). Surely He
is All-Knowing, All-Powerful" (Fatir 35:44); ''And to Allah belongs (absolute
dominion and full knowledge of) the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the
matter of the Hour (of Doom) is (in relation with the Divine Power) but the twinkling
of an eye, or even quicker. Surely Allah has full power over everything" (an-Nahl
16:77); ''And so, Allah is He Who is the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant, and He
gives life to the dead, and He has full power over everything" (al-Hajj 22:6); "Say:
"Go about on the earth and see how Allah originated creation. Then Allah will bring
forth the other (second) creation (in the form of the Hereafter). Surely Allah has full
power over everything" (al-Ankabut 29:20).
As can be seen here, at the end of each statement that seems impossible for man,
there is an emphasis on Allah's power and will, and that He is the possessor of all
things; and that things that may not seem possible today are ordinary things for Him. 223
To create the whole universe when there was nothing; to arrange its air and water, and
to regulate its temperature with the light, and to thus create an environment in which
life can flourish, and then to create a perfect system with its creatures, plants and
inanimate things ... These were all the things that did not exist in the beginning. How
can the power that created all of these yesterday be seen as powerless to do so today?
Anyone who can think a little can see that the difficulty of forming systematic armies
is more difficult than getting the army together after a recess, and just the same, the
second creating for Allah was easier than the first. The Truthful Gabriel would say the

--- Sayfa 192 ---
same in the message he brought:
He it is Who originates creation in the first instance and then reproduces it
(in the world) and will bring it back (in the Hereafter): and that
(reproduction and bringing back) is easier for Him. (ar-Rum 30:27)
At the same time, Allah the Almighty possesses such power that there is no
difference when comparing the difficulty in creating the smallest iota or whole
systems. This distinction was important for mankind to know and thus when the
Qur'an spoke of resurrection in later verses, it used the following expressions: "Your
creation and your resurrection are but as (the creation and resurrection) of a single
soul. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing" (Luqman 31 :28).
The issues were not explained only theoretically. This was part of the methodology
of the Qur'an; alongside theory, examples of practices were also given and people
were expected to be convinced through seeing and hearing. When the Qur'an spoke
about the truth of resurrection after death, it addressed all those who thought in the
following way: "Look, then, at the imprints of Allah's Mercy-how He revives the
dead earth after its death: certainly then it is He Who will revive the dead (in a similar
way). He has full power over everything" (ar-Rum 30:50).
Indeed, everywhere one looks one can see new deaths and new resurrections but
these can only be seen by those who look with a discerning eye. The coming of spring
after it shakes the blanket of snow that covers the earth during winter, the springing up
of plants everywhere in a matter of weeks, being adorned with new flowers and
leaves, the reappearance of life forms such as flies after having disappeared from sight
for a very long time; many of these examples of resurrection are there for everyone to
see. The important thing is to see these by lifting up the veils from one's eyes, and to
be able to see the power behind these and then to believe in Him!
For this, mere looking is not enough; one also had to see what one is looking at. The
Qur'an that brought up its community on a basis of conscious seeing was taking the
believer by the hand and having them go through different stages, always reminding
them what it is that they should look at and what it is that they should see, and
bringing the subject always in the end to the issue of resurrection:
But do they, then, never observe the sky above them (to ponder Our
Knowledge and Power; and reflect) how We have constructed it and
adorned it, and that there are no rifts in it? And the earth-We have
spread it out, and set therein firm mountains, and caused to grow thereon
every lovely pair of vegetation. (All this is a means of) insight and
reminder for every servant (of Allah) willing to turn to Him in contrition,

--- Sayfa 193 ---
and We send down from the sky blessed water with which We cause to
grow gardens and grain to harvest, And tall and stately date-palms with
ranged clusters, As provision for the servants, and We revive with it a
dead land: even so will the dead be raised and come forth (from their
graves). (Qaf50:6-11)
Yes, all these were portions of education by the All-Gracious. This education was
now making itself felt in all walks of life, and the issues that were brought to attention
in accordance with what was being experienced were thus being apprehended by
people. Now they had softened with an education that was built on fear and hope, and
they were all expecting the grace of Allah to touch them. Due to their belief that they
were going to return to their Lord, their hearts were shivering, they were investing in
the eternal days that were to come instead of these ephemeral days they were
momentarily living, and they were using all their resources in this direction. 224
Divine Destiny, Providence, Power and Will
The polytheists of Mecca would sometimes sit together and discuss religious issues,
even though they had little training or interest in this field.
One day they were sitting together again and were discussing the issue of fate with
religious scholars who had come in from Najran. Although they did not know about
the heart of this matter, they were all offering their views and they were trying in their
own way to explicate on the topic of fate. When they failed to come to an agreement,
they decided to take the issue to Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be
upon him. The scholars ofNajran started the conversation: "0 Muhammad! According
to you, even sins are happening within the context of fate. Whatever happens in the
seas and the skies, everything that happens, happens within the same framework of
fate! We understand all the other incidents but it cannot be that sins also happen
within fate."
The Messenger of Allah first said to these people who were failing to look at the
matter as a whole: "Or are you enemies of Allah?" and then read the following verses
brought by Gabriel:
The disbelieving criminals will be in utter loss away (from Paradise) and
burning in the Blazes. On that Day they will be dragged in the Fire on
their faces: "Taste the touch of Hell!" Surely We have created each and
every thing by (precise) measure. (al-Qamar 54:47-49)
Allah who created everything and gave everything a means through which to
sustain their lives had said the above verse, what more could be said to the faces of the

--- Sayfa 194 ---
Meccan polytheists and people ofNajran!
Just as this verse had silenced those who had transgressed their boundaries, it would
also serve to silence those who came later and were rash like them, and thus it would
remain a compass that would show the way. 225
Another day a man had come to the Messenger of Allah with an interesting view
mocking the concept of fate, saying: "I worship Allah in my own way, I perform the
Prayers."
But his aim was neither to perform the Prayers nor to be up all night trying to carry
out his religious duties! He was trying to say that the things he did were things he did
on his own volition, and was saying that fate did not come into it. The Messenger of
Allah understood the underlying meaning in his words and gave his answers
accordingly: "So this means Allah willed that you should perform the Prayers!"
"But I also sit down!" the man refuted.
"Then He willed you to sit!"
'What if I walk to that tree and cut it, then what?" the man questioned.
''You are able to do so because Allah willed it so!" the Messenger answered
patiently.
What a strange approach this was! The man was trying to discuss Divine Power
with his limited intellect, so he was basically trying to measure Divine Will with a
scale that could not handle such weight.
The connection with the heavens was continuing and then the verses brought by
Gabriel would again come to the rescue and the true aspect of the matter would be
revealed once again. 226 Not a leaf could move without Him willing it so; whatever
Allah wished happened, and when He wished it not to happen, it would not happen. 227
The sovereignty of the skies and the earth was His, and He would create whatever
He wished; He would give a female child or a male child to people as He wished. 228
When He wanted to punish or harm someone, there was no one that could stand on
His way to prevent it.229 Who can ever tum back the calamities that He has ordained to
happen! On the other hand, who can stop the grace that He has decided to give
someone, who can prevent His grace from reaching its address? 23° For, when Allah the
Almighty wants something to happen, He only has to say "be" and it happens. 231
When Abu Jahl heard the verse with the meaning "It is nothing other than a
Reminder (and instruction) for all conscious beings; for any of you who wills to take a
straight path (and follow it without deviance)," he constructed the following argument:
"Don't you see how it has been left to us? If we want we can choose the direction and

--- Sayfa 195 ---
ifwe don't, we don't!"
But this wasn't an issue that could be left to such idle interpretation, for the verse
that followed explained things in the following way:
It is nothing other than a Reminder (and instruction) for all conscious
beings; for any of you who wills to take a straight path (and follow it
without deviance). But you cannot will (to do so) unless Allah wills, the
Lord of the worlds. (at-Takwir 81 :27-29)
In short, whatever the Abu Jahls of this world may say, all things belong to Him,
and He gives His things to those He wants and deprives those He wants; He exalts the
servants He wants, and will let those He wants wallow in a contemptible situation, for
He is the Omnipotent. 232
Education ofResistance
It was not enough for people to attain the heights of faith, it was also important that
they show resistance and perseverance in the face of obstacles that they may encounter
on the route they were journeying in the name of faith. Accordingly, the Qur'an would
provide examples from Prophets and their Ummah, community of followers, that had
come before, showing what kind of difficulties they had had to face; thus warning and
preparing the Ummah of Muhammad of the difficulties that the believers may face in
the future. The Qur'an was saying:
Alif, lam, mim. Do people reckon that they will be left (to themselves at
ease) on their mere saying, 'We believe,' and will not be put to a test? We
certainly tested those who preceded them. (This is Our unchanging way)
so that Allah will certainly mark out those who prove true (in their
profession of faith) and He will certainly mark out those who prove false.
(al-Ankabut, 29: 1-3)
This meant that in order to be able to stand against the difficulties that lay ahead in
the future, it was not enough simply to say "we have believed." Surely faith was a
very important issue but faith also had many degrees, and a believer who had set off
on this road had to attain the perfected state so that he may be able to reach the
required state, and that he may enjoy the fruits of having captured the horizon of
contentment, in the home where he has found salvation!
Yes, Paradise and the grace of the Gracious were waiting for the believers in future
but one had to work hard for them. Because the world was not the place where one
would get the reward for one's work, most of the reward would be received in the
eternal life after death, so the difficulties with which one could have that reward

--- Sayfa 196 ---
would be experienced here, in this world. Just like how Hell isn't unnecessary,
Paradise isn't cheap either! In order to attain such a gift, one had to go through
difficulties and tribulations, run the course of patience and to show that despite
everything, one could stand fast to where one was. The message carried by Gabriel
was saying the following:
(Given the history of humankind in this world,) do you think that you will
enter Paradise while there has not yet come upon you the like of what
came upon those who passed away before you? They were visited by such
adversities and hardships, and were so shaken as by earthquake that the
Messenger and those who believed in his company nearly cried out:
"When comes Allah's help?" Beware! The help of Allah is surely near!
(al-Baqarah 2:214)
The bright dawn of morning was very close, and one could see the spring in the
horizon. The days were in the throes of the excitement to breathe spring ... But one
had to be like Abu Bakr, like Khadija, or like Ali to experience it. Each new dawn
experienced in history had been carried over the shoulders of such people with such
faith. 233 When this state was reached, what would have mattered if the world
exploded? Time itself showed that they genuinely did not have such worldly cares.
Power Lies Not in the Number ofFollowers, but in Truth
Because in the Mecca of those days everything was decided according to brute force,
people felt powerful according to the number of men they had with them, and they
wanted to showcase the strength of their numbers to the people who opposed them.
Sometimes pages from history would be recalled and important personages from a
tribe's past would be called forth to wage psychological war. There were great
rivalries and disputes between the sons of Abdimanaf and Sahm. In order to outdo the
other, each side was resorting to strange methods trying to prove that their tribe was
stronger. They had taken the matter to such extremes that they spoke greatly about the
names and adventures of their glorious ancestors in the past. In this war of words, the
sons of Abdimanaf would be left behind and the sons of Sahm, who were more
numerous in the period of ignorance, would win.
This was another new development in Mecca which needed Divine decree
regarding it. Before long, Gabriel descended brought the verses:
Competing in increase of worldly goods (seeking and then boasting of the
acquisition of things, wealth, pedigree, and posterity) distracts you (from
the proper purpose of life), until you come to the graves. No indeed! You

--- Sayfa 197 ---
will surely come to understand (when death comes to you). Again, no
indeed! You will surely come to understand it (when you are raised from
the dead). No indeed! If only you knew with certainty of knowledge (then
you would not disorder priorities). (at-Takathur 102: 1-5)
Another day when Abu Jahl saw our noble Prophet praying he came to him and
said: "Did I not tell you not to do this?"
The best answer to be given to such an aggressive man was silence, and having
finished his Prayers the Messenger of Allah left. Watching him leave from behind,
Abu Jahl said the following to those near him: "I swear you all know that there is no
other man around here that has as many men!"
By this he meant: "It does not matter how many people may gather around you, I
will be able to defeat all of them" He was speaking without taking the Divine Power
into account. He did not realize that power was with not in numbers but in Truth. The
Messenger of Allah, whom the polytheists of Mecca thought friendless, had Allah as
his friend, and Allah sent down the following verses to console the heart of His
Beloved:
Does he (who would impede the servant in his Prayer) not know that
Allah sees (all that people do)? No indeed! If he does not desist, We will
certainly seize and drag him by the forelock, A lying, sinful forelock!
Then let him summon (to his help his) council, We will summon the
guards of Hell. By no means! Pay no heed to him (in his attempt to
prevent the Prayer), but prostrate and draw near (to Allah). (al-Alaq
96:14-19)

--- Sayfa 198 ---
22° Father of Imran ibn Husayn.
221 Ibn Hajar, !saba, 1/337; Ibnu'1-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/34, 35
222 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 386
223 A1-Mu1k 67:1
224 A1-Muminun 23:60
225 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, pp. 419-420
226 See a1-Hashr 59:5; Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 438.
227 Abu Dawud, A dab, 10 1
228 Ash-Shu'ara 42:49
229 Ar-Ra'd 13: 11; a1-Fath 48:11
230 A1-Ahzab 33:17
231 Ya-Sin 36:82
232 A1 Imran 3 : 26
233 See as-Saffat 37:171-177, a1-Qamar 54:45, Sad 38:110, an-Nah1 16:41, Yusuf 12:7, Ibrahim
14:14, ar-Rum 30:4.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
TRYING TO PERSUADE ABU TALIB
0
n the other hand the Quraysh had gone to the door of Abu Talib once again
to articulate their discontent concerning these efforts on the part of the
Messenger of Allah: "Look Abu Talib! We do not dispute that you are our
elder by way of age and experience; you are above us all in status! We had come to
you before, asking you to stop what your nephew is doing, but you did not do as we
asked! We swear by Allah that we have come to the end of our patience, having to
listen to our gods maligned, our leaders being accused of being in error and our
ancestors being spoken of in bad terms! When will you stop him? You can leave him
to us, and we can see to the issue between us."
Abu Talib was tired of having to face this angry mob that kept bothering to him,
and sent word to his nephew Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be
upon him: "0 son of my brother," he said and then told him what the Quraysh had said
to him. At the end of his words he added the following in despair: "Please think both
of yourself and me; do not place a burden on me that I cannot carry."234
This message of his uncle Abu Talib worried the Messenger of Allah and for a
minute he thought that his uncle had changed his view on the matter, and that he was
no longer going to help him and instead leave him all alone. His heart was broken and
he was devastated, shedding tears from the inside. This was a moment when he felt
loneliness to the utmost. Maybe Allah the Almighty wanted to leave no other door
open to him except Him. That is why he said to his uncle Abu Talib: "My dear uncle!
I swear by Allah that should they give me the sun on one hand and the moon on the
other so that I may leave my duty; I will still stand fast till Allah makes me victorious
or I am annihilated on this road, I will never leave it."
The Pride of Humankind was in deep emotion. As he stood up to leave, he was
shedding inner tears. But he had spoken so deep from the heart, so sincerely that his
resolution could be heard even though his voice was shaking. His attitude had moved
Abu Talib deeply. How could he leave this entrusted, orphaned son of his brother in
the hands of hungry wolves? He called out after him: "Come here, dear son of my

--- Sayfa 200 ---
brother!"
This, now, was an embracing tone. The sad Messenger turned to where the voice
was coming from, drying his eyes. The eyes had understood even before the tongue
and Abu Talib said the following: "Go, 0 son of my brother! Go and do as you please!
I swear I will never leave you in their hands! "235
He then supported him with his poems and declared that he would stand by his
nephew till the day he died. The Meccans who saw that Abu Talib had no intention of
handing over his nephew and who insisted on protecting him now changed their
strategy and came to him with a different offer.
Among them was a handsome young man by the name of Umara ibn Walid. They
took this young man with them and came to him and said: "Here Abu Talib! This is
Umara ibn Walid the strongest and most beautiful of Quraysh's youth. Let this youth
be your helper, adopt him as your son. In his place give us the son of your brother who
changes your religion and the religion of your ancestor, who opposes his tribe and
who does not think well of out leaders, and let us kill him. Since the blood money for
one man is one man, let this young man be the blood money."
What an ugly and indecent proposal! On the one hand was the Last Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, whose coming had been awaited for centuries, and
on the other hand was a young man whose only quality was his physical attributes!
How could he stand in for him! That's why without hesitation Abu Talib said: "I
swear you are offering an evil proposal! You expect me to consider your boy to be
better, to take him into my house, and then give you my own son so that you may kill
him? I swear this will never happen!"
Seeing that Abu Talib was not making any concessions, Mut'im ibn Adiyy changed
his attitude a little and said: "I swear, 0 Abu Talib that your tribe has acted very
mercifully towards you, it has not forced you to do a thing that you did not want to do.
But today I see that you are not accepting any of their offers!"
These men wanted to kill the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessing be upon him,
in broad daylight and when Abu Talib did not allow it, they were calling him
stubborn! There could not be a greater arrogance and they needed to receive an answer
they would understand, and so Abu Talib said, this time rather forcefully:
"I swear by Allah that you have never shown mercy! Look at you, now you want
me to despair and you want people to plot evil against me! Do whatever is in your
power to do!"
This conversation meant that the swords already half-drawn would leave their

--- Sayfa 201 ---
sheaths entirely. The enmity which had to this day been personal and local would now
be institutional and would show its face everywhere in Mecca. The target of this
enmity was not only the Messenger of Allah but those people and tribes who had
accepted Islam. These tribes were declared as the enemy and a war was raged against
them. The polytheists were subjecting the believers to torture, and doing all sorts of
unimaginable things in order to make them recant their faith. Abu Talib saw that
things had gone beyond reason and out of hand, so he spoke to his brothers regarding
how they could protect their nephews and nieces. Almost all of the family of Abdul
Muttalib and the sons of Hashim responded favorably to his offer, but unsurprisingly,
Abu Lahab rejected it and decided to side with those who were against his nephew.
Abu Talib, who had found the support he had expected from his tribe, was very
content indeed; the fact of their coming together after this difficult process led him to
write verses applauding his relatives and singing praises of Muhammad, peace and
blessing be upon him. 236
The Pressures on the Sons in Law
The Quraysh was increasingly acting in a very sinister way; apart from the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessing be upon him, they did all they could to injure Khadija as
well. They were putting pressure on the husbands of the three daughters of the
Messenger of Allah who had married before revelations had started. They were saying
that if they divorced the daughters of the Prophet, peace and blessing be upon him,
they would marry them to girls of their own choice.
The daughters of our noble Prophet, Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum, were married to
the two sons of Abu Lahab, Utba and Utayba. Utba and Utayba were not of a nature
that could withstand such pressure, and when they got the guarantee that they would
be married to any girl they wanted to, they left Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum. The
families that had thus been destroyed were another source of grief for the Messenger
of Allah and his loving wife Khadija.
Under normal circumstances, the separation of one of their children would have
been enough sadness for parents, but in this case the Messenger of Allah and his wife
Khadija were grieved by the destroyed families of both their daughters, and this had
happened without any sound reason. The only reason was that they were both the
daughters of the Messenger of Allah.
Only Abu'l-As, the husband of our mother Zaynab, had not bowed down to the
pressures. He was living a life of honor, enough not to let other people meddle in his
domestic affairs. If there was a decision to be made, he would make it according to his

--- Sayfa 202 ---
own judgment. If there was peace within a home, then no outside force should try to
destroy that. He had a peaceful home, and the fact that his wife had a different outlook
on life did not disturb this peace; on the contrary, her views were helping to maintain
the home as a peaceful place. That's why he had closed his ears to all pressures, and
was doing only what he had to do.
No Results without Sweat
On the other hand the Qur' an continued to correct the false practices and viewpoints
that were developing in society, preventing diversions from the right path by revealing
the truth of the matters that were discussed. Just as in history, that day too, the people
who represented the front of denial conceived of themselves differently and were
always trying to make a laughing stock of the believers. The verses that came gave
examples from the lives of previous Prophets and presenting their lives with examples,
thus giving the believers the message of patience.
One revelation that came was speaking about the difficulties that Prophet Noah,
peace be upon him, the second ancestor of mankind, had to suffer and was relating the
following words ofNoah's tribe to Noah:
We do not see you but as a mortal like ourselves, and we do not see that
any follow you save those who are but the lowliest of us, without an
opinion worthy of consideration; and we do not see you (and your
followers) having any superiority over us; rather, we take the view that
you are liars. (Hud 11 :27)
Even though times had changed, the logic of denial always remained the same; they
were giving the same kind of reaction today that had been given yesterday. In the
Mecca of that day, the faulty idea of "Whatever our behavior may be today, tomorrow
we shall surely be forgiven" was prevalent. 237
And those who wanted to have a basis in religion for their faulty ways would
transform this idea into "Except for a limited number of days, the fires of Hell will not
touch us. "238
They would take it even further and claim that no one would be able to enter
Paradise except for themselves. 239 This was the attitude of those who would try to
banish those who were not as rich as themselves, or have a status in society as
themselves from the presence of the noble Prophet. 240 Their aim seemed to be to attain
gains without having to work or sweat for them.
The polytheists of Mecca would come from time to time to listen to the lectures of

--- Sayfa 203 ---
the Messenger of Allah; they would listen to the Qur'an he was reciting and try to
understand what was going on in these circles of faith he had set up. Despite their
attendance they had no intention of taking any steps towards faith; their aim was to
understand the levels of faith one could reach in order that they may hold fast to their
position of denial. Thus what they saw and listened to did not benefit them in any
way; they continued to refute the Prophet and insisted on their mocking attitude. It
was not enough that they had stumbled on the route of a clear view of Allah; they
were still claiming that they were in the right: "If these people should end up in
Paradise, then surely we will have more space than them," thus allocating space in
Paradise for themselves. Soon after Gabriel descended with the verse concerning their
claim:
What is the matter with those who disbelieve, that (with the intent of
mockery) they hasten on toward you with staring eyes fixed on you, from
the right and from the left, in crowds? Does every one of them covet
admission into the Garden of bounty and blessing (regarding himself as
supremely deserving Paradise without the effort of faith)? By no means!
We have surely created them out of that (simple matter) which they know
very well. (al-Ma'arij 70:36-39)
Imputations concerning the Prophet's
Lineage in the Future
It had been years since Qasim, our noble Prophet's son had passed away. Then he had
had daughters, they had come of age, and except for Fatima they had all married and
set up new homes. Abdullah, his second son called Tayyib and Tahir who had been
born after the revelations had just started to crawl on all fours, and that was when fate
took him away from his father as well and invited him to Paradise to forever remain a
child.
Having lost his support circle such as his parents and then his grandfather, he was
now also feeling the pain oflosing his two children.
The polytheists mercilessly used this sad day to attack the Messenger of Allah. This
attack was again headed by Abu Lahab. Uqba ibn Abi Muayt, Ka'b ibn Ashraf and As
ibn Wail had joined him, and they were saying that now the Messenger of Allah had
no male child and that his line would thus dry out. Abu Lahab was running around the
Quraysh on the morning of the evening that Abdullah had died and was crying out:
"Tonight Muhammad's line has been cut."
For him, a person's family line could be continued only through male children. He

--- Sayfa 204 ---
also believed that the name of a man whose line was thus cut would be swept from the
earth in no time, and that is why he himself was very keen on having male children.
What could one expect from a mentality that hardly regarded female children as
human! They were speculating even on dead bodies in order to use every opportunity
to their own advantage. Before long, Surah al-Kawthar would be revealed to the
Greatest of Messengers, peace and blessings be upon him, and the plots of the Meccan
polytheists would be revealed to be empty.
We have surely granted you (unceasing) abundant good; So pray to your
Lord, and sacrifice (for Him in thankfulness). Surely it is the one who
offends you who is cut off (from unceasing good, including posterity). (al-
Kawthar 108:1-3)
In this verse, it was made clear that the people whose line would be cut and names
forgotten would be those who opposed the Illustrious Beloved of Allah, and the good
news of al-Kawthar was being given to the Messenger of Allah and he was ordered to
continue to perform the Prayers and ritual sacrifice in the Name of Allah.
Bad Neighbors and the Circle of Threat
It was a twist of fate that the worst enemies of the Messenger of Allah were his close
neighbors. The house of Abu Lahab was right next to his. Other neighbors whose
houses were next to his were no better than Abu Lahab; Hakam ibn Abi'l-As, Uqba
ibn Abi Muayt, Adiyy ibn Khamra and lbnu'l-Asda al-Huzali-they all felt an enmity
towards the Messenger of Allah and just like Abu Lahab, they were trying to seize
every opportunity to hurt him. 241
One day, one of them had thrown sheep droppings on our noble Prophet as he was
praying; another had put droppings in the water that Allah's Messenger would use for
his ablutions. After a while, in order to protect himself from their evil behavior, our
noble Prophet had built a wall separating his own space from theirs. However they
insisted on their behavior and he would pick the dirt that they threw to his house with
the end of a stick, and showing it to them he would say: "0 sons of Abdimanaf! What
kind of neighborly behavior is this?" 242
Uqba ibn Abi Muayt would take things further and at a time when Abu Jahl was
with him they decided on a course of action to further hurt Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him. 243 Speaking among themselves they
would point to the Messenger of Allah and say: "Which one of you would have the
bravery to put the rumen of a camel with its contents on Muhammad as he prostrates
in the Prayer?"

--- Sayfa 205 ---
The most criminal minded of them stood up. This was none other than Uqba. He
had a rumen brought to him and then started to wait. When the Messenger of Allah
was approaching prostration, he went to him and placed the rumen in between his
shoulder blades.
The Beloved of Allah was thus being harassed by his neighbors at a point when he
was closest to Allah. On the other hand Uqba and his guests were enjoying what they
had just done, scratching their bellies and laughing. They had laughed so much that
they were leaning on each other not to fall down. For a long time the Messenger of
Allah did not lift his head from prostration. After a while, his daughter Fatima had
seen the scene and had come running to her father. On the one hand she was berating
those who had done this and on the other she was trying to clear the dirt from her
father's shoulders. He was the most beloved servant of Allah, had He wanted He could
have destroyed them there and then, and then they would have gone straight to Hell.
But our noble Prophet was always expectant of people's repentance; he was hoping
that if not today, they would embrace the faith in the future. But this incident had hurt
him very deeply and he supplicated to his Lord: "My Lord! I leave the Quraysh unto
You!""44
Such that he repeated this supplication three times. After that he called them out
name by name.
"My Lord! I leave Abu Jahl, Utba ibn Abi Rabia, Shayba ibn Abi Rabia, Walid ibn
Utba, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Uq ba ibn Abi Muayt, all of them unto You! You are the
One who will give them what they deserve!"
His words were so sincere that the way he had left his business to Allah had
frightened those present. They knew that prayers made in this holy place would be
accepted, and that something would indeed befall them, and especially when it was the
most beloved servant of Allah who was articulating this prayer! 245
Umayya ibn Khalaf had another habit; when he met the Messenger of Allah he
would insult the Messenger of Allah with hand or facial gestures, trying to make fun
ofhim.246
Before long verses came that spoke ofhis behavior:
Woe to everyone who slanders and vilifies, who (sees himself above
others because he) has amassed wealth and (without expending it in
Allah's cause and for the needy) counts it (in greedy love for it). He
thinks that his wealth will make him last forever! By no means! He will
most certainly be hurled into the Consuming Disaster. What enables you

--- Sayfa 206 ---
to perceive the Consuming Disaster? It is Allah's fire, set ablaze, which
penetrates deep into hearts (and burns within, as it burns outside). Surely
it will close in upon them in extended columns. (al-Humaza 104: 1-9)
Making it clear what kind of judgment was awaiting such behavior.
The other brother ofUmayya, Ubayy and Uqba ibn Abi Muayt were helping him on
this matter and they were acting in concert. One day when the Messenger of Allah was
praying, they approached the Messenger of Allah and listened to what he was saying.
Then they decided to throw dust on our noble Prophet. These people were happy to do
all this torture. Once they found a rotten bone and crumbling it into dust, they threw it
on the Pride ofHumanity. 247
Abu Jahl was the most professional when it came to enmity; sometimes he would
come and listen to the Qur' an from the Messenger of Allah and then he would go back
to his friends to repeat and mock what the noble Prophet had said. This man had
adopted damaging the Beloved of the All-Merciful as his sole duty.
He would also brag about this behavior in other circles and laugh about it. He had
been trying to obstruct the Prophet since the day he had seen him pray, trying to get in
between Allah and His servant in this act of worship which was an expression of
devotion. One day, Abu Jahl had seen our noble Prophet praying at the Sacred Station
of Prophet Ibrahim, and approached him, saying: "0 Muhammad! Had I not forbad
you to pray?"
But of course a man like Abu Jahl would not be content with these words and so he
added: "0 Muhammad! What is it with you that you dare threaten me? I swear that I
am the man with the strongest backing in this community."
It was clear that Abu Jahl interpreted our noble Prophet's stance vis-a-vis Truth as
an affront to himself. There then came verses that depicted this adversarial behavior of
his, saying what a waste he was making of his life: "Thereafter he went back to his
family in gleeful conceit. So: well have you deserved (this doom), well have you
deserved (it). Again, well have you deserved it and well deserved" (al-Qiyama 75:33-
35).
He had felt maligned by these verses and he wanted to take this confrontation to an
outright duel: "0 Muhammad, you should stop trying! You are wasting your energy!
Neither you, nor your Lord can do anything against me, or be powerful over me! I am
the person with the most supporters in between these mountains." This was the point
where his arrogance reached its height, and Gabriel came to the rescue. He was
saying: "Then let him summon (to his help his) council, We will summon the guards

--- Sayfa 207 ---
of Hell" (al-Alaq 96: 17-18).
Abu Jahl had devoted himself to enmity towards Allah to such an extent that he was
in no state to understand these admonitions. It can be said that his animosity was
growing every single day, and he was growing even bitter to see that the circle of faith
was growing. One day he said to his friends: "Does Muhammad put his face on the
ground near you as well?"
''Yes," they said, and then upon that he swore: "I swear by Lat and Uzza that ifl see
him in that state, I will pounce on his neck, bury his head in the ground and crush his
head with a rock."
There were no boundaries to his frenzy! He had put it into his head that he had to
crush the Prophet, once he said: "0 people of Quraysh! As you can see, Muhammad
continues to censure our religion and accuse our ancestors of having been in error. He
speaks ill of our gods, and says unseemly things about our leaders. I swear, tomorrow
I will go to him and then taking the biggest stone I can I will crush his head when he is
down prostrating and finish him. After I do that, you can either give him to me, or try
to stop me, either way it doesn't matter. Whatever the sons of Abdimanaf may do,
they may do all they can and please, for I don't care!"
In the social structure of that day such defamation was unheard of; such things
could start unending blood feuds between families resulting in the deaths of thousands
of people. The Fijar battles were still very much alive in people's memories. That's
why people said to Abu Jahl: 'We will not concede anything to you. Go and do as you
like at your own expense!"
Upon which Abu Jahl was also angry with them and so left that place.
Next day, just as he had sworn, he took a very big stone and then made his way to
the Ka'ba. He arrived and started to wait. Before long the Messenger of Allah who
had no knowledge of what had happened, came and started his Prayers. People who
knew of Abu Jahl's intentions also came and started to form a circle around him. They
were curious to see what Abu Jahl was capable of doing. Abu Jahl was very much
intent on carrying out his oath. He started to move towards the Messenger of Allah.
But then, when no one was expecting it, Abu Jahl turned back, his hand trying to ward
off some danger, he started to run towards where he had come from. He had by now
thrown away whatever he had in his hand, and his face turned pale with fear. The
crowd was looking very closely but they could not see what had caused Abu Jahl to
act in such horror. Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him,
continued with his Prayer as if nothing had occurred, oblivious to anything that may

--- Sayfa 208 ---
be causing Abu Jahl such fright. They asked Abu Jahl what had happened: "What is it
with you 0 father ofHakam? Where are you running?"
The pale Abu Jahl, who for a second regretted his behavior, said: "I approached to
do to him what I had promised you all I would do, but when I came close, there
appeared a big camel. I have never seen such a big camel so intent on tearing me apart
with its toe-nails; had I not run away it would surely have eaten me alive."
They asked the same question as to what had happened also to the Messenger of
Allah. He said: "That was Gabriel, had he come any closer; he would have finished off
Abu Jahl. "248

--- Sayfa 209 ---
234 Ibn Ishaq, Sirah, 2113 5
235 Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 2110 1
236 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21104
237 Al-A'raf7:169
238 Al-Baqarah 2:80
239 Al-Baqarah 2:111; al-Maedah 5:18
240 Al-An'am 6:52; al-Kahf 18:28
241 Among them only Hakam ibn Abi'l-As would later become Muslim.
242 Halabi, Sirah, 11474
243 In another report this event takes place in the Ka'ba and the antagonist is Abu Jahl. See Mawardi,
A 'lamu 'n-Nubuwwa, 11142.
244 In another report his words also include "Show Mudar the years of famine like the years of Yusuf,
and send them your strong torment". See Ayni, Umdatu 'l-Qari, 7/26.
245 Abdullah ibn Mas 'ud who had witnessed what happened that day but was not able to do anything
on that day says that he cannot remember the seventh name that he has spoken and swears that in
the first battle that took place, the Battle of Badr, all these names had been killed one by one. See
Halabi, Sirah, 11470.
246 Ayni, Umdatu 'l-Qari, 21175
247 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 2/51
248 See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3143; Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 11688. According to another
report Abu Jahl said: "Between me and him there appeared a great chasm filled with huge flames.
It looked like it had opened its arms to swallow me up". To which our noble Prophet said "Had he
approached me a little more, the angels would have torn him apart," thus strengthening the faith
of the believers. There are different reports as to how Abu Jahl came to the Messenger of Allah
with the intention of killing him. These may have happened at different times or could be the
different accounts of the same event that happened once. That is why we have tried to give an
overview of these reports here together.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
SCENES OF VIOLENCE
T
hey had tried everything till that day and yet had had no success. It was clear
that in this war, it was not enough to respond to the Word with words in order
to defeat the Muslims. They had to resort to other means. Brute force was
something that those who were defeated by way of argument would only resort to, and
this was what the Meccans of that time had to resort to as well.
There had been separate incidents in which brute force had already been used by the
Meccans; Uthman had been locked in a cellar wrapped in straws by his uncle, Sa' d ibn
Abi Waqqas had been emotionally blackmailed by his mother to recant his faith,
Mus' ab ibn Umayr had been locked up and beaten by his mother, left without food
and water for days and then banished from his home and from his inheritance, and
then there was of course the torture that Umayya ibn Khalaf and Abu Jahl had
subjected Bilal al-Habashi to.
But the problem did not seem to be resolvable through these separate acts; there
needed to be more fundamental measures, and there needed to be an institutional
movement to prevent the spread oflslam. The first target was of course the Messenger
of Allah. One day the leading men of Quraysh had come together at a place called Hijr
in the Ka'ba and they were speaking about the developments in Mecca.
Naturally, the subject came to the most important issue of the day: "I do not
remember us showing the breadth of patience we have been showing this man," said
one of them, and then another added: "He accuses our elders with degeneracy, and
speaks ill of our gods, and we still tolerate him; this is really strange."
At that instance, the Messenger of Allah whom they were talking about was coming
to the Ka'ba. He first approached and saluted the Hajar al-Aswad, the Black Stone.
When he approached the group filled with animosity, they started to harass him with
words. He was clearly disturbed by what he had heard; they were pronouncing words
that were unseemly in such a holy place as the Ka'ba, they were showering insults on
the most beloved servant of Allah.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
The harassment continued during his second and third circumambulation of the
Ka'ba. Then they took the matter further and enraged the Great Messenger such that
he turned to these people and said: "Do you hear me 0 Quraysh? I swear by Him in
whose hands my life stands, you will meet a terrible end."
The majesty in his look and address had affected their souls so deeply that they all
fell silent. They changed their attitude all of a sudden and even the hardest of them
started to melt. They were saying: ''You go your own way, father of Qasim! You are
not an ignorant person!"
This meant "We will leave you to your own resources, but please do not say
maledictions on us. You go your own way and we go our own." So the Great
Messenger left and went on his way to speak of Islam to another soul who was in
need.
The next day they had come together again and were speaking about the same issue.
"Remember what he has done to you, and what you have done for him! The man
has said all sorts of things that displease you, and yet you fear him and let him be!"
It was at that moment again that the Messenger of Allah came to the Ka'ba again.
Their gazes had met. It was obvious that the Quraysh were hatching plans again. He
was about to start his circumambulation with salutation when they surrounded him:
"Was it you who spoke ill of our gods, who accused our ancestors of being at fault?"
They were thus challenging him and yet the Messenger of Allah said: "Yes it was
me who said all that," not changing his stand.
But these men meant harm. They all pounced on him, and they kept pulling at his
dress, his arms, and throwing blows at the noble Prophet. They had turned into a pack
of wolves. Uqba ibn Abi Muayt had wound his turban cloth round the noble Prophet's
neck, trying to strangle him. At that moment something unexpected happened; despite
all the commotion in the courtyard of the Ka'ba, one could hear a loud clear voice that
tore at the ears: "Will you kill a man just because he says 'Allah is my Lord'?"
This was a voice as strong as the voice of the believer from the family of Pharaoh
which had reverberated in Egypt, and this was a voice that had to be repeated at every
period when the true cause was being attacked. All faces turned at once to where the
voice was coming from. It was the voice of Abu Bakr. This voice sounded throughout
Mecca. It served its purpose, but this time the Meccans started attacking him and tried
to take their vengeance out on him. This was the most difficult day in Mecca so far.
When at the end of the day Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, returned home,
there was not a single place on his body that had not been hit and his clothes were all

--- Sayfa 212 ---
in blood. 249
The Sad State of the Weak and the Unfortunate
Now Mecca was coming unto the Muslims in a more planned way. They were firstly
targeting the weak, people who could not resist them because they had no one to back
them up. They had made their plan. The head of each tribe would locate such people
in their own tribe, and would subject them to torture till they would recant their belief.
Especially when Abu Jahl heard someone say 'There is no deity but Allah' he would
run there and especially if this was a person with no family or friends, he would
torture him or her in order to make him or her recant. As a result of Abu Jahl's
vigilance and tortures, Suhayb ibn Sinan had lost his memory and had started speaking
nonsense.
They had tied iron shackles to Abu Fuqayha' s feet, they would bring him out to the
desert during the hottest hours and would place rocks on him, and he would groan
under this load till the evening. He too had lost his memory and reason due to these
tortures.
There were bum marks on the body of Habbab ibn Arat, his master was torturing
him so that he may recant, and whenever he approached him he was pressing hot
metals unto Hab bah's body. One day they got hold of Hab bah from his hair and then
squeezing his throat, they placed him on the fire of the shop; they were thinking they
were "teaching him a lesson." It was an unbearable sight; they were holding him there
for so long that the fluid from his body would quench some of the fire and so he found
some respite.
A female slave named Zinnirah who faced the same tortures lost one eye, 250 the
female slave of the sons of Zuhra Umm Ubays would groan with pain under the lashes
of As wad ibn Abi Y aghus.
The female slave of Umar, who had not yet become Muslim, had her share of the
torture, and she would be beaten till he master got tired. When he paused in his
torment he would say: "Had I not got tired, I would have shown you!"
"Tomorrow, your Lord will do the same to you," she would say to the son of Al-
Khattab, but her words would be of no avail on that day.
Two slaves, mother and daughter, serving the sons of Abduddar had both been
tortured; the mother had lost consciousness to the degree that she did not know what
she was speaking. In this difficult time it was again Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased
with him, who ran to the rescue of the weak; he would buy these slaves from their

--- Sayfa 213 ---
masters and give them their freedom. Father Abu Quhafa who witnessed his attitude
said:
"I see that you are buying the weak and the unfortunate and giving them their
freedom. Why don't you choose the stronger ones among the slaves, at least then they
can help and support you." But he would say: "My only aim is to win the pleasure of
Allah." Thus bolting the doors against a sense of worldly benefit to himself.
The verses, which came not long after, verified how right Abu Bakr was in his
choice, and pointed to him as the example of the way in which one could reach the
horizon of Allah's contentment. 251
Ammar ibn Y asir who became Muslim with his mother and father was the slave of
the Banu Makhzum. The leading men of the tribe, headed by Abu Jahl, would take
him out to the field on the hottest hours of the day and they would torture him till they
themselves were tired out. One day the Messenger of Allah saw this scene and said:
"A little more patience, 0 family of Y asir, undoubtedly Paradise will be your resting
place."
Indeed, the old father Yasir had walked to Paradise during these tortures. The old
and weak mother Sumayya had desisted and not denied her Lord, and not said a word
against the Messenger of Allah and had become the target of Abu Jahl's spear and
become a martyr, the first in Islam. 252
The worst thing of the matter was that all this was happening right in front of
Ammar. The hot stones were being placed on and off from her body. Ammar had been
subjected to such great physical and mental oppression that he too lost consciousness.
"Unless you blaspheme against Muhammad, and speak good graces about Lat and
Uzza, we will not let you go," he was warned.
He was let go when he pronounced the names ofLat and Uzza.
It was true that Ammar had been set free, but he was feeling the greatest remorse of
his life, for he had pronounced the names of false gods instead of Allah and His
Messenger whom he loved and held dear above everything else. He was exhausted. He
came to the presence of the Prophet having been defeated. He was too ashamed to
look at the Pride of Humanity in the face. Before long one could see the traces of the
coming revelation on the Messenger of Allah. The Truthful Gabriel had come with the
verse:
Whoever disbelieves in Allah after having believed-not him who is
under duress, while his heart is firm in and content with faith, but the one
who willingly opens up his heart to unbelief-upon them falls Allah's

--- Sayfa 214 ---
anger (His condemnation of them), and for them is a mighty punishment.
(an-Nahl16: 106)
This meant that those who were subjected to violence were not to be held
responsible for the things their tongues had said but which that their hearts had not
approved. Ammar breathed a sigh of relief; he had found peace in the presence of the
Messenger and had almost forgotten all his pains and loss. 253

--- Sayfa 215 ---
249 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 14/526. The Qur' an speaks about Abu Bakr like the stance of the man in the
family of the Pharaoh with the following words: "(At just that moment) a believing man from
among the household of the Pharaoh, who until then had concealed his faith, (came forward and)
said: 'Would you kill a man only because he declares 'My Lord is Allah!' when he has indeed
come to you with clear proofs from your Lord?' If he be a liar, then his lie will be (reckoned)
against him; but if he is true (in his proclamations), then something of what he threatens you with
will befall you. Surely Allah does not guide (either to truth or to any achievement) one who
(transgressing all bounds) is wasteful (of his Allah-given faculties), and a liar"' (al-Mu'min
40:28).
250 Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyathu 'n-Nadira, 2122 (424). Allah the Almighty gave her back her sight
the next day. This was spoken of as "magic worked by Muhammad" among the Quraysh.
251 Al-A'la 87:14-19
252 Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 21162
253 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu '1-Ghaba, 1/809

--- Sayfa 216 ---
AT THE HOME OF IBN ARQAM
T
he polytheists came when Muslims prayed and always mocked them, always
harassed them in the Prayers. That's why the Messenger of Allah and his
Companions chose peaceful and remote places in order to be able to pray in
peace, reading the Qur'an in silence. But the polytheists soon found out that this was
the Muslims way of worship now and so they wanted to continue to harass them
wherever they were.
It had been two years since revelations had started. The Companions had gathered
once again at a remote place outside Mecca and they were performing their Prayers. A
group of Meccans came and they started to tease them with words concerning their
prayer. They were clearly trying to provoke the Muslims. They took it so far that what
had started with mere words turned into physical confrontation. Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas
had given into his emotions for one moment and had started a fight with one of the
polytheists; he had damaged the man in the head and the polytheist was covered in
blood. The polytheists had been looking for an excuse, and this event gave them the
opportunity they had been looking for.
The way things were developing did not look good for the Muslims. The Messenger
of Allah who heard of what had happened was looking for a solution to the matter. He
had been looking for a place where Muslims could pray comfortably and where the
revelations that came would be shared in peace and the loyalty and bond to the
Prophet could be established without harassment. One needed time so that the new
buds and eggs could flourish and hatch, and one needed a peaceful place for this
development. He did not want Muslims to waste time and energy confronting the
polytheists, always being at their firing range.
Arqam ibn Abi'l-Arqam now had the opportunity to use his means for truth. He had
a house on the hill of Safa and he had invited the Great Messenger and his
Companions there. They could pray there peacefully, they could read the Qur'an and
share the revelations that came. This was a very reasonable offer and so our noble
Prophet accepted his invitation. A new process was thus beginning and the Messenger

--- Sayfa 217 ---
of Allah accepted the offer of Ibn Arqam, and moved to the house on the hill of Safa.
This meant a new lease on a peaceful life that would last three years.
They were leaving bad neighbors behind, and with these new surroundings, a new
color had come to Islamic development, there was a new momentum. Muslims were
coming here secretly and were sharing the verses that had been revealed to the noble
Prophet. They were engaging in deep conversation about faith and piety and they were
burning with the need to help and hold the hands of others.
Ammar ibn Yasir and Suhayb ibn Sinan
Ammar' s father Y asir ibn Amir had come to Mecca leaving Yemen with his brothers
Harith and Malik in search of their fourth brother who had disappeared. They had
waited for a long time, but they had not received any news from their brother. After a
while, Malik and Harith returned to Yemen but Y asir stayed in Mecca. 254
Y asir had made a contract with Abu Hudhayfa and he was looking after his
business. He made a good impression in a very short while and Abu Hudhayfa married
him to Sumayya, one of his female slaves. Before long, Sumayya gave birth to a baby
boy and they named him Ammar. The good fortunes of the Y asir family continued.
Abu Hudhayfa also gave Yasir his freedom, and he continued his life as a friend ofthe
sons of Makhzum.
Years passed by and little Ammar had grown up and was responding to the call of
the revelations. He had met with Suhayb ibn Sinan who had come from the lands of
ar-Rum, the Romans, at the door of Ibn Arqam's house. Suhayb ibn Sinan had been
enslaved in the land of the Romans, and a man named Kalb from Mecca had bought
him and then brought him here. After a while Kalb had sold him to Abdullah ibn
Judan and now he worked under him. He had heard of the "meeting at Hira" and with
the need to experience a "meeting" himself, he had directed himself to the house of
Ibn Arqam. Along the way, fate had made him cross paths with another young man,
Ammar ibn Yasir, who had similar intentions. Ammar asked first: "Where are you
going?"
Suhayb responded to the question with another question: "And where are you going
yourself?"
Ammar said: "I want to go to Muhammad and listen to his words," to which Suhayb
said: "I am after the same thing," and so they entered the house together.
Being in the presence of the Prophet meant breathing in the atmosphere of faith.
Being in his presence already meant assuming the position. The springs of wisdom

--- Sayfa 218 ---
were flowing, and he was drinking the invigorating conversation with his
Companions. Having reached such a sweet spring, one naturally drank from it. The
two friends would pronounce the words of tawhid together and would become
Muslims in unison. 255
Ammar' s father Y asir and mother Sumayya who noticed the change in their son
also became Muslim as a result of the deep faith they had for Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, and thus joined the wagon of the
believers.
Mus'ab ibn Umayr
Mus' ab ibn Umayr was the son of a rich and aristocratic family. His parents were very
over-protective of him. Particularly his mother Hunas, she would look after Mus'ab
with meticulous care and never wanted him to leave her side. In his years of youth,
Mus' ab had become a very handsome young man. He looked after himself well; he
wouldn't wear the same clothes twice, and he would always use beautiful scents. He
had become someone everyone was following with interest. Windows were set ajar on
the streets where he walked, and people would race to peek through their curtains in
order to take one glimpse of him before he was gone. He was a man of good standing,
it was always considered an honor to have him at a gathering, and he would always be
respected. Both doors and hearts were open to him.
Then one day, word came around to him regarding the Messenger and he was filled
with unstoppable curiosity. This was an interest he could not account for. Then one
night, he found himself at the house of Ibn Arqam. There, the Pride of Humankind
was reading the Qur' an, holding conversation, prayers and supplication. He listened
for a while ... There was no way one would not be affected by this voice. He was in
the presence of a very sweet spring of wisdom. He almost could feel that what was
entering his ears was making its way deep into his cells. There was a bitter-sweet
feeling in his heart, but his mind had become alert with what he had seen and heard.
His reaction did not escape the notice of the noble Prophet. He approached Mus' ab
and placed his blessed hand on his chest which started to pound with excitement.
As his blessed hand moved, Mus' ab could feel faith seeping through to his very
bones. That night, Mus'ab experienced an acceptance that was well above his years.
This was a maturity that would change the course of things. Mus'ab was unable to
contain himself; he felt light as a feather, and wanted to jump up with joy. He now
understood more than ever that the luxurious life that he led, the one that people
looked on with envy, could no longer give him peace. Here, everything was pure and

--- Sayfa 219 ---
simple. Now Mus'ab, like Bilal, was indulging himself to the sweet spring that was
seeping out of the house oflbn Arqam; he just couldn't stop himself from visiting that
place. On the one hand he was breathing in the beauty of the words ofthe Messenger
of Allah and on the other he was getting angry with the Meccans because they did not
realize the value of such a treasure and were taking a stand against him. How could
they not see and appreciate such value? It was unbelievable!
But there was another problem awaiting Mus' ab. Yes, he had become a Muslim, but
how was he to tell this to his family, especially his mother? He did not hesitate from
anything as much as he hesitated from them. He would have had no fear had the whole
of Mecca charged against him, but he was dreading the reaction that his mother would
give him. That is why he decided to hide his faith, and decided that he was not going
to say anything to anyone and thus he was going to avoid confrontation with his
mother.
But it was impossible to hide anything in those days in Mecca; everyone had
practically become a spy of the Quraysh and people were like parasites, carrying
information to and from one another.
One day Uthman ibn Talha had seen Mus'ab entering the house oflbn Arqam. The
next time he saw Mus'ab, he was praying. Uthman now had no doubt that Mus'ab had
been swallowed by this new current. He could not believe it, how could a rich man
like him sit and speak with poor men like Ammar, Bilal and Habbab? How could he
abandon the traditions of his ancestors, the idols? He ran to Mus'ab's mother at once
and told her of the situation. Someone had to say stop to this "flow!"
There was no one left in Mecca who had not heard about the rebirth of Mus' ab! As
he had expected, he was faced with fierce opposition from his mother. The once much
loved young man of Mecca was now being beaten every day because he said "Allah"
instead of"Lat" and expressed his admiration for the "Muhammad" instead of"Uzza."
He was locked away in a hidden place so that he wouldn't be able communicate with
the "others" and there was a man guarding his cell to ensure that he won't. Despite his
body being locked up in his own home, Mus'ab's mind and heart was with the
Messenger of Allah. Yes, the requests of a mother were very important indeed, but a
mother was not supposed to lock up her son's heart. He himself could never hurt her
because she had her right over him, but he could not bring himself to accept the fact
that she was trying to cut his ties with the rose of his heart. It made no sense to be left
without water when one had just found a fountain.
The Attempt of Abu Bakr

--- Sayfa 220 ---
Time had passed. There were thirty eight believers in total around our beloved
Prophet. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, was not able to contain himself
after feeling the prosperity in his heart which the light of the coming revelations gave
him, and like Abu Dharr, he had wanted to shout out the Name of Allah at the Ka'ba.
At first, the Messenger of Allah pointed to the imbalance of numbers and said they
were too few to take such a risk, but later he could not tum Abu Bakr down. He also
could not leave his closest friend alone so they came to the Ka'ba together. People had
left the stage to Abu Bakr and were listening to him invite people to Islam. Thus he
was also fulfilling the attribute of being the first public preacher. However the
Quraysh had no patience when it came to new developments which they did not have
complete control over and so they started to attack him on all sides. They attacked
everyone who was there and were hitting them with whatever they could lay their
hands on. They had pushed Abu Bakr on the ground and were stepping all over him.
Particularly one man, Utba ibn Rabia, who had an unending enmity towards Abu Bakr
was hitting him with the sole intention of killing. Abu Bakr's face was covered in
blood, his nose almost level with his face, and his body was devoid of any movement.
They left him for dead. Soon after, Abu Bakr's relatives heard about what had
happened and so they came and took his motionless body home. When they saw the
gravity of the situation, they went back to the Ka'ba and took the following oath: "We
swear that if Abu Bakr dies, we too will kill Utba."
Back in Abu Bakr' s house, all the relatives had gathered together and were waiting
for him to give a sign of life. They kept talking to him hoping he would respond.
Finally, towards the evening Abu Bakr started to come to his senses. Thanks be to
Allah, he was alive! The relatives gathered round him breathed a sigh of relief, for a
blood feud that could have lasted for years had thus been averted. Abu Bakr was a
man who knew very well why he was alive. His horizon was filled with his
Messengers love. He had devoted his entire wealth and life to him and his cause, and
he had been ready for these days from the very start. He stumbled, trying hard to
gather himself together, but no matter how hard he tried, he could not stand up. The
first words that came from his trembling lips were: "How is the Messenger of Allah
doing?"
It was impossible for the people around him to understand the logic behind this
question and the depth of his love for the Messenger. It was strange for them that a
man who had been in the throes of death was thinking of someone else the minute
after he came to his senses. Naturally, they did not take his question seriously and
tried to avoid it by giving him some food and drink. But they did not realize that it was

--- Sayfa 221 ---
not from food or drink that Abu Bakr received his sustenance. If something bad had
happened to his beloved, how could he possibly think of food, how could he possibly
quench his thirst without having received good news of his well-being?
Having seen that he was still alive, his relatives left and Abu Bakr was now alone
with his mother. When he opened his eyes again he saw that his mother was waiting at
his bedside with a bowl of soup in her hand. Again, with the little effort he could
gather, he asked with his lips trembling: "How is the Messenger of Allah? How is
he?"
"I really have no news about your friend," answered his mother puzzled. As a
mother her heart was aching for his son, a son that her Lord had given to her after
years of longing and supplication and who was now suffering grave injuries. But Abu
Bakr was desperate for an answer. He pushed with all his might to stand up, but it was
to no avail. He was faced with a situation he could not resolve on his own and so he
begged his mother: "Dear daughter of Al-Khattab, can't you go to Umm JamiP6 and
ask after him?"
Her heart was beating with affection towards her son. Of course she would go.
Without further ado, she raced off to Umm Jamil to please her son. She first said:
"Abu Bakr is asking you to tell him how Muhammad is doing."
At the time, answering such a question and revealing one's faith meant opening the
doors to all sorts of troubles. Yes, Umm Jamil had submitted to Islam, but in order to
safeguard herself from the evil that Quraysh could do, she was not open about her
faith. First she said she knew neither Abu Bakr nor Muhammad. But the fact that
Ummu'l-Khayr had come to her door meant that there was a serious situation and so
they decided to go to the house together. Abu Bakr was lying motionless at home.
When Umm Jamil approached him and saw his state, she could not contain herself any
longer. Despite trying so hard not to give too much away in the presence of Ummu'l-
Khayr, she burst out saying: "Surely this is the work of those who are in error; they
have subjected you to this. I hope that before long Allah will take your revenge."
Abu Bakr did not react. Instead, he repeated his question: "How is the Messenger of
Allah? Where is he?"
Umm Jamil pulled herself together and returned to her cautious self. She quietly
said: "Your mother's here, she can hear what you are saying."
Abu Bakr knew his mother well and said: "No harm will come from her. She will
not divulge our secret," upon which she gave Abu Bakr the good news: "He is alive
and well."

--- Sayfa 222 ---
But he did not seem satisfied with this piece of news only. He asked again: "Where
is he?"
"At the house of Arqam," answered Umm Jamil.
By the looks of it, it seemed like his pain would not stop until he had seen his friend
with his own eyes, and then pulling himself together, he said to those around him: "I
swear by Allah that I will not eat or drink till I have gone to where the Messenger of
Allah is, and have seen him with my own eyes."
There was nothing to do except to wait until things had calmed down. When
evening came, the two women supported Abu Bakr from both arms so he could stand
up and took him to the house of Ibn Arqam.
When he entered and saw the luminous beauty of the Beloved of the All-Merciful,
he embraced him and started to kiss the beautiful face and of the Illustrious Beloved of
Allah. Although by worldly standards he physically looked pitiful, in spirit he felt as if
worlds had been given to him. He was experiencing indescribable happiness. This was
the manifestation of how one could love Allah's most beloved creation above one's
own parents and one's friends, a proof that he had reached perfected faith. Was this
not how the Messenger of Allah had described it?257
Meanwhile, the Companions who were alongside the Prophet were looking at the
wounds of Abu Bakr and crying. The Messenger of Allah was also much moved by
what had happened. Ibn Abi Quhafa was the one who had noticed this. The Messenger
of Allah had a very sensitive nature and he didn't want his Beloved to be saddened
any further by seeing Abu Bakrs situation. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,
stopped sobbing for a minute and said: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for
you, 0 Messenger of Allah! My injuries are not serious. Only the foot of that man of
error stepping over my face has given me pain."
What kind of love was this? It was love so deep and mutual that he was saddened
by the fact that his beloved was saddened to see him in such a situation, and so he was
trying to assure him that he was doing well.
He had come so close to the Messenger of Allah and he wanted to use this as an
opportunity to reiterate his firm stance. He pointed out his mother who had been
watching over him, and with a sincerely pleading voice, said: "This is my mother, 0
Messenger of Allah. Her love for me is very deep, and she is a very good daughter to
her parents. You are munificent. Why don't you invite her to Islam yourself. You can
pray for her and with your mediation Allah may protect her from Hell!"
This was pure sincerity, pure selflessness. The Messenger of Allah could not say no

--- Sayfa 223 ---
to such a sincere request. He opened up his hands and pleaded to the Gracious Lord to
give faith to Abu Bakr' s mother. It seemed that the special time had indeed come and
with the grace of the Lord, Abu Bakr's mother, Ummu'l-Khayr became a Muslim
there and then. 258
Abu Bakr, a man who thought about the happiness of others in this world and the
next before he thought of himself, was overjoyed. His mother becoming a Muslim had
eased all his pains. They stayed together at the house of Ibn Arqam with the
Messenger of Allah for about a month. This incident which seemed tragic at the start
had led to yet another happy event-Hamza, our noble Prophet's uncle and milk
brother, had also embraced Islam that very day. 259
Hamza Em bracing Islam
Hamza was two years older than his nephew Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon
him, and he was also his milk brother. His mother Hala was the daughter of our
beloved Prophet's mother's aunt. He had been watching all that was taking place from
afar, weighing what was being said about his nephew in his own mind, but he could
not make his mind as to which path to take. Two years had passed since revelations
had started. 260 It was pilgrimage season again. On one of those days, Abu Jahl had
come to the Messenger of Allah who was at the hill of Safa and had insulted him, once
again, with very strong words, and yet, the Messenger of Allah remained quiet and did
not even bother to answer back to him. Realizing that he could not provoke him, Abu
Jahl returned to the Ka'ba, to a place where people from the Quraysh who thought like
him were.
The servant of Abdullah ibn Judan had witnessed all of this from where he was.
Before long, the Messenger of Allah also left the hill and went to his joyful home.
Meanwhile, Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib was returning from hunting, with his bow
and arrow in each hand. Hamza was a heavily built and strong man; everyone in the
Quraysh feared him, they could not hide their awe for his courage and they always
tried to side with him. He would hunt with the devotion of prayer, and when returning
from hunting, he would salute everyone with his gear, and he would finish off his
hunting day with a visit to the Ka'ba. As usual, on his return from the hunt, Hamza
saluted the people he met on the way, asked how they were doing and comforted
them. He then met Abdullah ibn Judan's servant. For him, staying silent in the face of
oppression was oppression itself and he felt he needed to share with Hamza what he
had witnessed concerning his nephew. He first addressed him with respect: "0 father
of Umara! Do you know what happened between your nephew Muhammad and

--- Sayfa 224 ---
Abu'l-Hakam ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl)? There, right there, he saw him and came over
him, he slandered him with very strong words, grossly maltreated Muhammad. He
tried to provoke him so that they may have a confrontation, but Muhammad did not
even look his way, he did not even speak to him."
All of a sudden, Hamza became furious; his veins were throbbing, and his face
steamed with anger. It was true that his nephew had come with a new religion, one
that he did not endorse, but he loved him very much. He had not said much about what
had been done to his nephew till that day; maybe he was unaware of the extent of the
trouble that the Quraysh had caused our noble Prophet. He couldn't believe it! How
could someone torment a man who had committed no crime! He grabbed his bow and
arrow and set off. It was clear that he was heading straight for Abu Jahl with such
rigor that he had forgotten to greet the people around him as he would always do. It
was clear that Hamza was on the hunt again! This time it was no lion! All those he
saw along the way were worried about the raging mood they had seen him in, and they
were wondering how this would end. He was not stopping by anyone, he was not
saluting anyone, he had his prey set in his mind and he was walking towards it with
very quick steps. At last he came to the Ka'ba. His eyes were fixed searching for his
prey, and he saw him sitting among some people. He ran over to him quickly. The
people sitting were looking up at Hamza with fearful eyes. Seeing Hamza breathing
furiously down onto him, Abu Jahl stood up at once. He was already regretting what
he had done, but it was too late. Hamza approached Abu Jahl, raised his bow and
pointing it at his chest, he roared: "How dare you attack him? How dare you say bad
things to him? I am from his religion; I say what he says. If you have power, then
stand before me if you can!"
Abu Jahl was petrified. The sons of Makhzum who saw him in this state tried to
stop him. But Abu Jahl prevented them saying: "Leave Abu Umara! Truly I have
slandered his nephew grievously today."261 Maybe he was trying to make Hamza come
back so that he could have a good word with him. But he was too late. Some people
present tried to provoke him with words: "So Hamza! Have you become a sabi as
well?"
Hamza's answer was not late in coming: "After things have become clear for me,
who can stop me from saying that he is the Messenger of Allah and endorse what he
says is the truth! I swear by Allah I will not give him up, and if you are men of your
word, let me see you stop me!"
Hamza was determined and he headed straight for the place where his nephew,
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, was.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Upon entering, he told him how he was feeling and his state of mind. He gave him
the good news that from that day on he would always be on his side. This was in truth
a difficult choice to make, for it was hard for an uncle to regard his nephew as his
senior, to accept his nephew in all his aspects. It meant that he had to forget the forty-
two years of his life, to leave all his experiences aside and then to start life anew. This
required great determination and Hamza was able to show that determination that day.
Showing this determination was not easy at all; when the evening came and he
returned to his home, his mind and thoughts subjected him to a thorough investigation.
Of course when a man like Hamza embraced Islam the Devil would not let him be! He
had appeared by his side and started whispering: "Look at you! Weren't you the lord
of the Quraysh? And you leave the religion of your ancestors and become a sabi? It is
far better to die than to do what you have done!" Thus trying to place doubts in him.
But the lion hunter Hamza was now the Honorable Hamza, and a will like his would
not submit so easily to anyone, even the Devil. The whispers of the Devil did not stop,
how could he let such a man go? It would be a clear defeat for the Devil if it did. That
night, Hamza did not sleep a wink, and he went to the Ka'ba in order to refer his
worries to his Lord. He supplicated to Allah so that He may save him from doubts.
Indeed, after Hamza had directed himself sincerely to his Lord, Allah the Almighty
had taken away all his doubts and Hamza returned home with inner peace.
With the first lights of the day seeping through the horizon, Hamza went straight to
his nephew Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, and told
him what had befallen him since yesterday. The Messenger of Allah turned to his
uncle with affection and spoke with him for a long while. There was no problem in the
world that such a strong faith could not overcome.
That day, as he was leaving his nephew, his last words were: "I say with the
sincerest feelings inside that you present the good and the Truth, 0 son of my brother!
Continue to communicate your religion without having to worry! I swear by Allah that
even the light of day is not important to me any longer! For I now have reached my
first religion! "262
The coming ofHamza meant a lot for the Muslims. The faces that were longing for
a smile could now smile a little; the feelings that had been crushed had somewhat been
replaced with happiness. This was a great gift from Allah indeed, a day that started of
on a bad start had ended up with the lion hunter Hamza embracing Islam, and here he
was praying in the same line, with our noble Prophet. From now on he would always
act with him, help him carry his weight. From now on, when the Quraysh plotted
against the Messenger of Allah, they would have to take into account the presence of

--- Sayfa 226 ---
Hamza as well, and they would have to devise new plans.
Thus, the family of Muttalib was going through a rejuvenation; while those who
were ready to embrace Islam such as Ali and Hamza were finding a new life in the
presence of the Messenger those heartless souls such as Abu Lahab and his sons Utba
and Utayba were turning their faces from faith with their hearts that had been sealed
against the remembrance of Allah. A new verse would summarize the situation as
follows:
Is he (who derives lessons from Allah's acts in the universe and so) whose
breast Allah has expanded to Islam, so that he follows a light from his
Lord (is such a one to be likened to one whose heart is closed up to any
remembrance of Allah and therefore to Islam)? So woe to those whose
hearts are hardened against the remembrance of Allah (and who learn
nothing from His signs and Revelations)! Those are lost in obvious error.
(az-Zumar 39:22)
Utba's Plan
There was a new development every moment in Mecca; on the one hand the verses
Truthful Gabriel was bringing were seeping through the town like ripples, on the other
hand the Quraysh were confronting the believers with new traps. They had tried all the
tricks in the book but had not been able to succeed, and now they were experiencing
the defeat of having lost someone like Hamza to the believers. They could see that
while the Muslims were getting stronger by way of numbers and by the ways in which
they were putting Islam into practice; on the deniers kept losing blood.
Utba, who acted as their chief and ideologue, stood up one day and made a
suggestion to his friends. At the time the Messenger of Allah was sitting in the Ka'ba,
worshipping his Lord. Utba pointed to our noble Prophet and said: "0 Quraysh, what
do you say? Shall I go over and speak to Muhammad? Let me make some offers to
him, who knows, maybe he'll accept some ofthem."
"Of course, 0 father ofWalid! Go and speak to him!" his friends supported.
Utba had thus consulted with his tribe and then stood up and went straight to the
Messenger of Allah. He approached our noble Prophet with great calm and peace; he
seemed to be a different man from the Utba who had previously been foaming at the
mouth with rage! He said to Allah's Messenger: "0 son of my brother!"
There was no trace on him of a man who was going to enter faith, so why was it that
he was approaching the Messenger so softly? He continued: "You know that your

--- Sayfa 227 ---
station among us and your tribe is very distinguished. But you have come with such
suggestions to your tribe that you have made them go against each other, you have
accused your elders of being in error, and you have been censuring their understanding
of religion and their gods. In short, you have gone against everything that has been left
by your forefathers. Now listen to me, I will have some propositions for you! Maybe
you will accept them and then we can meet halfway."
The Messenger of Allah was listening to him very carefully; he was curious to see
what kind of a proposition Utba would put forward-what could it be that it would
end the enmity between them, making way for peace?
"Speak, 0 father ofWalid," he said, "I am listening to you."
"0 son of my brother, if you mean to make financial gains with the belief system
you have been offering us, let us gather as much wealth among us as we can, and
make you the richest among us. If with what you bring you mean to raise your honor
and status in the society, let us make you our leader, and let us not take any steps
without asking you. If what you are hoping to get is the throne, let us make you our
king. But if all this is the working of the jinn or some kind of a dream you do not seem
to be able to do away with, let us put our resources together and save you from it, for
if not treated, a man will stay under the influence of the jinn."
The new plan of the Quraysh was clear. Our noble Prophet was at peace, but what
were these men after! Utba took another step towards him and said: "Tell me 0
Muhammad, are you or your father Abdullah the better man?"
Our noble Prophet did not answer this question; he gave the best possible answer by
staying silent. Utba, who had not received the answer he had wanted, continued to say
the diabolical words: "If you should say that he was a better man than you, well, he
worshipped the gods you so denigrate today. If you consider yourself to be the better
man, then speak so that I can hear what you have to say."
Now it was the Prophet's tum to speak. The Messenger of Allah who had stayed
silent till that point, asked: "Have you said your piece, 0 father ofWalid?"
What else could he say?
''Yes," he said quietly, and then the Sultan of Speech took the word: "Then you
listen to me now."
"All right," Utba said.
With great respect he went down on his knees and said:
Ha. Mim. (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from the All-
Merciful (Who embraces all beings with His Mercy), the All-

--- Sayfa 228 ---
Compassionate (Who has special mercy for the believers). A Book whose
communications have been spelled out distinctly and made clear, and
whose verses are in ordered sequence, a Qur'an (Recitation) in Arabic for
a people who have knowledge (and so can appreciate excellence in the
use of the language); (Being sent) as a bearer of glad tidings (of the
recompense for faith and righteousness), and a warner (against the
consequences of misguidance). Yet most of them (the Meccan people)
tum away, and they do not give ear to it (being inwardly averse, and deaf
to its excellence). They say: "Our hearts are wrapped in coverings against
what you call us to, and in our ears is heaviness, and between us and you
is a veil. So take action (such as is in your power), as we are taking action
(such as we wish to take). (Fussilat 41: 1-6)
The Messenger of Allah was reading and Utba was listening. When he came to the
thirteenth verse, Utba could not take it anymore. He was shaking as if he had got the
shingles. He brought his fingers to the munificent lips of the Messenger of Allah and
said: "Stop, 0 Muhammad. Please stop for the love of Allah you believe in."
Our noble Prophet said: "So here it is Utba! You have heard what you have heard; it
is now up to you to do as you like."
Utba was experiencing a great shock, what he had just heard had touched him to the
bone. He was now embarrassed to have gone to the Prophet with petty propositions in
the face of such a sturdy stance. Having received a great blow, he stood up and slowly
walked to where his friends were.
Those who watched him coming defeated started to speak among themselves. Abu
Jahl could not contain himself and said: "I swear that the father of Walid is coming
with a face much different than the one he went away with!" pointing to the change in
him.
Utba had reached them by then and they said: "Tell us, 0 father of Walid, what
happened?" Upon him was still the shock he had just experienced. His eyes were fixed
to a point and he managed to say: "I swear I have heard such words that I had never
heard the like before. I swear it is neither poetry, nor magic nor soothsaying! 0 people
of Quraysh! Come listen to what I say, let us lift the barriers between this man and
what he wants to do! Leave him to his work! I swear by Allah that in the words I
heard from him there is great news! If the Arabs win over him, people other than you
will have decided the matter, but if the day comes when he wins over the Arabs, then
his wealth will be your wealth, his honor will be your honor and then you will be the
happiest of men."

--- Sayfa 229 ---
The faces of those listening had turned sour, it was clear that they had not liked
what they had heard. They could hardly contain themselves listening to such
nonsense: "By truth father ofWalid! He has bewitched you too with his tongue," they
said interpreting the matter. As they turned to leave, Utba called out: "This is my view
of him; you can do as you please."263
Then Utba went straight home. It was clear that he wanted to be left alone; for the
verses that he listened to had struck him like lightening.
Later, Abu Jahl, the man who taught tricks even to the Devil, came to his door. He
feared that Utba may start to believe and so he meant to pursue the matter. He knew
very well Utba's weakness, he would use his pride as a weapon. He said: "0 Utba! I
heard that Muhammad was very nice and welcoming to you. I have heard that he has
given you much to eat and drink, and that you were won over by this treatment. This is
what people are talking about!"
Utba was angry. It seemed that Abu Jahl had hit the target once again. He stood up
and said: "You all know that I do not need his food. I am the richest among you. But I
have to say that what Muhammad has said had shaken me, for what he said was not
poetry. Neither was it like soothsayers' words. I do not know what to say. He is a man
who only speaks the truth. When I was listening to him I feared that what had befallen
the tribes of Ad and Thamud would befall us as well."264
The Proposition of the Delegate
Utba's plan had not worked. Before long the leading men of Mecca came together at
the Ka'ba for a consultation regarding the new developments to devise new strategies,
for the followers of Muhammad were increasing in number. The flood of faith had
surged out of control, and it threatened to take hold of them as well, such that they
would not be able to find a branch to hold onto.
The evil masterminds were all there-Utba, Shayba, Abu Sufyan, Nadr ibn Harith,
Abu'l-Bakhtari, Aswad ibnu'l-Muttalib, Zam'a ibnu'l-Asad, Walid ibn Mughira, Abu
Jahl, Abdullah ibn Abi Umayya, As ibn Wail, and Umayya ibn Khalaf. They had
come together with the setting of the sun and were assessing the situation at the Ka'ba.
One of them said: "Send word to Muhammad and speak to him! Speak all that is on
your mind so that he may not have an excuse afterwards." Upon that they sent word:
"The leading men of your tribe have got together and they are calling you, come at
once," they said.
The Messenger of Allah hoped that this may be a sign that they wanted to accept the

--- Sayfa 230 ---
faith, so he came to the Ka'ba at once. He wanted them to believe so much! He was
tired of their stubbornness. He was hoping that with this invitation he may open a new
door. He came and sat next to them. They said: "0 Muhammad! We have called you
to sit down so we could have a good talk. Verily we have never seen a man who
caused such strife and difference of opinion among the Arabs, someone who speaks so
ill of his ancestors, who disparages the religious beliefs and gods of his forefathers.
All these negative developments have happened after you appeared."
The attitude they assumed even when they started the conversation showed that his
hopes were left to yet another spring. On top of these words, they repeated their usual
slanders. They had accused the Messenger of Allah with their very own ills and then
had left it at that-as if they were innocent! Then they brought the word to Utba's
proposition and said similar things. They said: "If with this word you want to gain
wealth among us, let us come together and collect wealth for you! If you want to be a
man of high standing among us, let us appoint you our leader! If what you want is
your own rule, then let us make you our King. If it is the jinn that are harassing you,
and what you experience is some sort of bad dream you can't get rid of, then let us
have you treated, you may or may not be saved from it, but we will have done our
duty."
This was just too much! This was a scene that showed the difference between the
two worlds. Those who ran after the world and worldly goods thought that they could
stop the opening towards the afterlife; but they had failed once again. The Messenger
of Allah who had listened to what was said with patience, said: "I suffer from none of
the things you describe! My intention is neither to take your possessions, nor to rule
over you! Allah sent me as Prophet to you and gave me a book from Him and then He
told me to warn you of the future. I am fulfilling my duty of communicating this
message to you and I advise you. If you accept what I offer you, this will be your
greatest gain in this world and the next. If you do not accept it and close your ears to
it, then I will do what Allah has told me to do and wait for him with patience to judge
what has been between you and me."
There could not be a clearer statement than this. This basically meant "I leave your
world to you; I am trying to save your afterlife." They tried to divert the subject to
another dimension. One of them came to the fore and said: "0 Muhammad! If you'll
just allow us to speak to you about something, you know there is no one here that is
poorer than us, more in need and less in possession. I mean to say no one that is more
deserving of financial help. Supplicate with your Lord who sends you these
revelations that He may flatten these mountains and that water may spring like the

--- Sayfa 231 ---
rivers of Damascus and Iraq! Also, pray that he may resurrect our ancestors that have
gone before us like Qusayy ibn Kilab so that we may ask him whether what you say is
true, for we know that he is a man who speaks the truth. If he approves and does what
you say, we will accept you as well; we will have understood your standing with
Allah, then we will accept that He has sent you as a Prophet."
The men were clearly making fun of the Messenger of Allah. This was nothing but
arrogance and disrespect towards the Pride of Humankind. With the manner in which
they were making fun of, they were not only making fun of the Messenger of Allah
but Allah as well. Which of these statements could one possibly respond to? Even if
he had, who was there to understand the response that our noble Prophet would give?
These men did not even possess a single ounce of intellect! The best answer was
surely silence.
The atmosphere froze. Despite everything, the noble Prophet was hoping that they
may believe and so he wasn't closing the door entirely, for in such situations one had
to show patience in the face of the madness of the times, to the severity of the
addressees and the oppression of the environment. At least people could thus see the
attitudes of both sides and judge for themselves and then one day could take the side
of those who were with the Truth. Even if they should not come and submit
themselves, there could be people in the families of these people who may one day
come and become Muslims. The great had to show their stature. The Messenger of
Allah spoke once again: "Allah did not send me to you to do these," and then added:
"I have brought you what I am meant to bring to you and I have fulfilled the duty of
communicating Allah's message. If you accept it, this will mean happiness for you in
this world and the next. If you do not accept but reject, then I will wait with patience
till Allah the Almighty judges among us."
It was clear that the pure soul of the Messenger of Allah had been thoroughly
discomfited. How could he hide his discomfort at such a scene! He was trying to be
brief in order to escape the feeling of suffocation that these people were giving him.
But the men wanted to hold him longer in conversation; they were having fun in
their own way. One of them came to the fore again and started to say the following in
the same manner: "If you are not going to do these for us; then ask your Lord to give
you these things! He can send down an angel that verifies these things that you have
been talking about, and that angel can give us information about you! Ask of Him to
give you gardens and orchards like Paradise, palaces and mansions of gold and silver
and put you in the class of the rich! You walk in the market like us, and you try to earn
a living just like we do! If you were to become rich we would understand your worth

--- Sayfa 232 ---
for Allah, and if you are His Prophet like you claim to be, then we will have seen your
standing with Him."
It was clear that the men had no shame anymore. They were just having fun. The
atmosphere was like that of a village green. People were thrusting themselves forward
and saying whatever that came to their mouths. The Prophet of Mercy was keeping
silent in patience. Even if he had an emotional response, his reason had the upper hand
and he had to show patience. That is why he said: "Subhanallah! Allah is above and
removed from all you say! I am only a Prophet! It would not be fitting for someone
like me to ask something like that from his Lord! I was not sent to you for this! I was
sent as a warner and a Messenger of good news. If you accept, you will gain both this
world and the next. If you do not accept, then I will be patient till Allah the Almighty
judges among you."
This time, like little children, everyone started asking something: "Put the skies
under our feet so that we may believe you."
"0 Muhammad! Does your Lord know that we are now sitting with you and that we
are asking these from you? Come, let Him tell you of all these and teach us the truth of
the matter."
'We have heard that a man called Rahman in Y amamah is teaching you all these.
You also know that we will never believe Rahman."
"0 Muhammad! You will have to bear with us because we will no let you be till
you finish us, or we become victorious over you!"
'We worship the angels and they are the daughters of Allah."
'We will not believe you till you have brought Allah and the angels in front of our
very eyes and show them to us."
A great commotion had ensued and everyone was speaking in disharmony on top of
each other. This was no longer a meeting where people conversed; it was just a rowdy
gathering. The Messenger of Allah stood up to leave. With him, Abdullah ibn Abi
Umayya also stood up and said the following to the most beloved of Allah's servants:
"0 Muhammad! Your tribe has suggested certain things to you, but you did not accept
any of them. They then requested things from you so that they may learn your
standing with Allah and then follow you and accept you, but you did not answer their
call either. They had propositions that could help you consolidate your standing but
you didn't say yes to those either! They even told you to bring about the torment that
you have been warning them about, but you didn't do it either! I swear that unless you
climb a ladder up to the skies, and then bring things from there so that I may see them

--- Sayfa 233 ---
with my eyes, and then bring four angels to bear witness, I will never believe you. In
fact I think I will not believe you even if you manage to do all this!"265
The person saying these was our noble Prophet's cousin, the son of his aunt Atiqa.
From his closest, he was hearing things that he wouldn't expect to hear even from
those who were distant to him. The Great Messenger stood up and then left for his
peaceful home. He had come with such high hopes and with what sadness was he
returning! He was left all alone. There was no one to defend him except for his Lord.
The Truthful Gabriel came to his aid at last. Allah the All-Mighty was saying the
following in the verses that came:
They say: "We will not believe in you (0 Messenger), until you cause a
spring to gush forth for us from this land (which is short of water); or you
have a garden of date-palms and grapes, and cause rivers to gush forth in
their midst abundantly; or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces,
as you have claimed (could happen), or bring Allah and the angels as a
warrant (before our eyes proving the truth of your message); or you have
a house of gold, or you ascend to the heaven. But we will even then not
believe in your ascension until you bring down upon us (from heaven) a
book that we can read." Say, (0 Messenger): "All-Glorified is my Lord
(in that He is absolutely above what you conceive of Him)! Am I anything
but a mortal sent as a Messenger?" (al-Isra 17:90-93)
Thus as the Qur'an constructed a new society, it was right in the middle of all that
was happening and at the aid of the Illustrious Beloved of Allah with Divine Will. The
Messenger of Allah had experienced much discomfort, but now Gabriel had come and
was declaring the sturdy ground on which he was standing, and teaching him the
attitude he should adopt towards people.
In fact, even his enemies who tried to kill him knew that the Prophet was the
Messenger of the time close to the Judgment Day; they knew that he was the awaited
Messenger. But above and beyond this knowledge was their pharaoh-like pride, pitch-
dark prejudice and stubbornness which prevented them from going and submitting
themselves to Islam.
At a time when he was feeling somewhat conscientious, Mughira ibn Shuba
recounted the following: "We were sitting with Abu Jahl. Muhammad the Trustworthy
came where we were and communicated the message of Allah. Abu Jahl said
arrogantly: '0 Muhammad! If you are doing all this to get witnesses for the afterlife to
say that you have communicated these messages, do not tire yourself out, I will bear
witness, now don't disturb me anymore.'

--- Sayfa 234 ---
Saddened, Muhammad left our side once again. I asked Abu Jahl: 'Do you really
believe him?'
He replied: 'I know that he is a Prophet. But there has always been a rivalry
between us and the Hashimis. They keep bragging about their duty of serving the
pilgrims, taking care of the Ka'ba's cover, offering Zamzam to the visitors. If now
they also say 'The Prophet has come from among us' I don't think I can take it. "'266
Another Proposition
One day the Messenger of Allah had come to the Ka'ba and was circumambulating the
house of Allah. There he encountered with the leading figures of the Quraysh such as
Aswad ibnu'l-Muttalib, Walid ibn Mughira, Umayya ibn Khalaf and As ibn Wail. It
seemed they had made certain plans again and wanted to make new suggestions to our
noble Prophet. They said: "0 Muhammad! Come, we shall worship your God; but
then you shall worship ours as well. Thus we will have come to an agreement! If the
God you worship is munificent then we will have benefited, but if our gods are
munificent, then you will have benefited as well."
What was it that they were trying to achieve with this? Had the Messenger of Allah
accepted such a thing, would they have really worshipped Allah? Worship, being an
obedient servant to Allah, required continuity; how could one explain the logic of
turning one's face towards one direction and then another after a year or two? The
Truthful Gabriel once again came to the rescue in order to silence all the deniers on
this issue. The verses he brought said the following:
Say: "0 you unbelievers (who obstinately reject faith)! I do not worship
that which you worship. Nor are you worshipping what I worship. Nor
will I ever worship that which you worship, and nor will you ever worship
what I worship. You have your religion (with whatever it will bring you),
and I have my religion (with whatever it will bring me)." (al-Kafirun
109: 1-6)
The Opinions of the Enemies of the Messenger of Allah
Despite the conspiracies that the Quraysh worked against our noble Prophet and
despite the slander campaigns and attacks that targeted his life, even his enemies did
not have a negative opinion of the Messenger of Allah for he led a life that won him
the title "the Trustworthy"-they could not discount this fact.
On the other hand, the things that he talked about were not things one could easily
close one's ears to. He was calling people not to kill, not to commit adultery, not to

--- Sayfa 235 ---
steal, not to covet other people's possessions ... These were all things that people who
wanted the well being of the society had to adopt themselves.
Being kind towards parents, visiting relatives and thus strengthening kinship bonds,
staying away from selfish acts and seeing to the needs of the weak... These were all
beautiful advice one could not overlook.
But then there was faith in Allah, the Qur'an, the interrogation one would be
subjected to in the after life, and the idea of the existence of angels who kept account
of every step one took-this disturbed them greatly. They were against any stance that
would hinder them from leading their lives as they wanted to. It was not easy; they
would have to leave aside the life they had led till then, and then they would need to
enter a new road that would negate their past life! Being able to do that required
virtue!
One evening, the people at the forefront of the deniers' side, Abu Jahl, Abu Sufyan
and Akhnas ibn Shariq had all come secretly to where the Messenger of Allah was to
watch him pray and read the Qur'an. They were full of curiosity but they didn't want
others to see what they were doing, they were watching our noble Prophet in the dark
of the night. This was a beautiful scene of unison-the most beloved of Allah's
servants was in the presence of the Truth, and it was a moment that was truly a feast to
the eye. They listened for a long time with admiration, the melody they heard were
like drops of mercy that came down in the summer heat. They had lost themselves in
these sounds, such that they did not even realize how the whole night went by and the
Messenger of Allah said the last word. When the sound of the Qur'an stopped they
immediately started to make their way home. Before long their paths crossed. Feeling
embarrassed, they said: "Let us not do such a thing again! If someone weak of resolve
among us should see us so, doubt will find a way to their hearts and they will come
and submit," and so they disbanded.
It was easy to say, but it was impossible for them to forget the scene they had just
witnessed and the sweet melodies they heard that night, there was no way they could
pretend it did not happen. What harm could it do if they went once again? Surely their
friends would not come this time and they would be able to listen to the Qur' an on
their own! The funny thing was, not only one, but all of them had thought of the same
thing. The next night they came again separately and listened to the recitations till the
end, but when it was time to leave, their routes met again at the same point. How
could it be! They had promised not to do so only the night before! Even though one
could not see in the dark the faces that had turned red with shame, their tone of voice
revealed their embarrassment. They disbanded once again making the same promise

--- Sayfa 236 ---
that they were not going to come to listen to him again. It was the third night, and
when the streets were sufficiently deserted, the three men set out again to listen to the
Messenger of Allah. Each was sure that the others would not come this time. When
the dawn broke they left again making towards their homes but they bumped into each
other again at the same place. This was very strange indeed! They had raised the
banner against him, had made promises to each other not to go to listen to him, and
despite all they said, they were longing to listen to him. Now they started to censure
each other and they swore to the death this time in order that such a thing should never
happen again.
The next morning Akhnas ibn Shariq got hold of his staff and ran to the house of
Abu Sufyan: "Tell me 0 father of Hanzala! What is your opinion, having listened to
Muhammad?"
Abu Sufyan did not want to reveal his thoughts before understanding the intentions
of his interlocutor. He responded to the question with a question: "And what do you
think?"
Akhnas did not feel the need to hide what he thought: "I think what he has is real
and true."
Abu Sufyan was relieved: "I swear by Allah 0 father of Salaba! I have heard many
things to this day, and I have also understood the meanings of what I have heard, I
mean to say, I know what is meant with those words."
Before he could finish his sentence, Akhnas said: "So do I, I swear."
With that, they were accepting the truth of what the Messenger of Allah had come
with. But to speak about it this openly, to declare it was no easy matter! After their
short talk, Akhnas ibn Shariq left the home of Abu Sufyan and headed straight for Abu
Jahl. He wanted to speak about the same things with him.
"0 father of Hakam," he started his words and then continued: "What do you think
of the things that you have listened to from Muhammad?"
'What things have I heard from him?" asked Abu Jahl wanting to make light of the
matter. But Akhnas seemed determined: "0 father of Hakam, what is your true
opinion of Muhammad. Is he an upright man or is he telling lies? Look, there is no one
who can hear you here!"
Abu Jahl understood that he would not be able to get rid of him with these sideway
remarks. He had to speak directly of the matter. First he took a deep breath and then
he said: "I swear by Allah that Muhammad tells the truth; he never lies! But when I
think of the sons of Qusay's being banner holders, their service at the wells of

--- Sayfa 237 ---
Zamzam, their duty of taking care of the Ka'ba's veil and the way they serve food to
the pilgrims who come from afar, I think if they also have the claim that Prophethood
is theirs, can you imagine what will become of the Quraysh? We and the sons of
Manad have always been rivals in honor to this day; they held feasts, so did we. They
took over the burden of serving people, we did similar! They shared their facilities
with others, and we started to give others from our wealth as well. Now we are always
on a par with them and now if they should say: 'We have a Messenger who brings us
news from the skies,' what will we say? How can we top that? I swear we will never
believe him and we will never accept him! "267
Even though their hearts were sealed with the thick veil of denial, when they were
left alone with their conscience, they felt disturbed by the things they had done and
they started to speak within the framework of mercy. One day, possibly the day that
Abu Jahl had awoken from the right side of his bed, he met our noble Prophet on his
way. When he saw that he was sad, he showed mercy and said the following to
console him: "0 Muhammad! We do not repudiate you; we just say that what you are
saying are lies!"
Our noble Prophet was aware of the situation, the reaction that these men had given
him till that day was pointing to this fact already, for Gabriel had come to him with
these words:
(0 Messenger!) We know indeed that the things (lies, mockery, and
slanders) that they say grieve you: yet, it is not you that they deny (they
cannot very well call you a liar since they themselves have called you 'the
trustworthy one'); rather, it is the signs and Revelations of Allah that the
wrongdoers obstinately reject. (al-An'am 6:33)
And it wasn't only Abu Jahl who held this opinion; people such as Harith ibn Amir
had openly declared war against our noble Prophet and yet when they went to the
solitude of their homes, they would confess to themselves: "Muhammad is not a
person who would lie; I also believe that he only tells the truth."268
This was true virtue; one had to live such a life that even your greatest enemies had
to acknowledge your virtue and speak of it to other people.
These people who had targeted his life did not want to injure him when for a minute
they consulted their conscience, and they really feared that he may curse against them,
even though he never once uttered words of curse.
Once, they had thrown the tripe of the camel on him for fun and yet, when after that
he had started to supplicate to his Lord, they stopped having fun because they were

--- Sayfa 238 ---
frightened that he may put a curse on them. That's why they were always afraid when
going into a confrontation with him, and when they came face to face, the fear of
death would envelop them.
For instance, Umayya ibn Khalaf was so afraid that the conspiracies he had devised
against the Prophet would come around to harm him in such a way that he was unable
to leave Mecca from fear, and when he did, he tried to steer as far away from the
Messenger of Allah as possible. On the day he was leaving for Badr with pressure
from Abu Jahl, his wife stood in front of him and said: "0 father of Safwan! I believe
you have forgotten what your brother in Medina has said about you,"269 meaning the
tidings that our noble Prophet had brought. He replied: "No, I never forgot it! I want to
go with the Meccans only to protect my pride and avoid humiliation."
They knew very well what could happen to them as a result of their behavior that
had so injured the heart of the Beloved one, peace and blessings be upon him, which
was the recipient of Allah's grace. 270
Requests for Exclusivity
Around the Messenger of Allah were both rich Companions like Abu Bakr, Uthman,
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and Talha and poor Companions like Bilal al-Habashi, Ammar
ibn Y asir, Zayd ibn Haritha and Habbab ibn Arat. The latter were mostly people who
had a slave status, or former slaves who had been given their freedom.
The difference in status posed no problems between the Messenger of Allah and his
Companions. People were equal like the teeth of a comb. Neither an Arab could be
considered better than a Persian, nor white skin considered better than black skin!
But this is not how the Quraysh thought. According to their understanding which
was colored with the deepest darkness, people from the lower strata of society could
not share the same space with upper classes, they could not sit together. In fact, they
did not even see people oflower class as "people"; for them, these people existed only
in order to serve them.
They could see that their way of life was being questioned by the Messenger of
Allah who valued these people and had them sit by him. They were coming to our
noble Prophet with strange proposals: "We are the masters of your tribe; if you want
us to come to your gatherings, we must be the only people who are with you!"
This was a proposal made by vain people who considered themselves better than
others. But this proposal would be met with refusal by the Messenger of Allah. 271
People could gain value only according to the depth of their faith. A denier or a

--- Sayfa 239 ---
polytheist who did not know Allah would have no value in Allah's regard even if he
should be the wealthiest or the most intelligent human being in the world. Being
intelligent should normally mean an open faith, but since they had no faith, it was
difficult to say that they had reason. The reality was that they had no intention to use
their intellect in order to believe. They were just trying to articulate their reaction to
something that disturbed them, and they were trying to use the excuse that they had
not been invited to an appropriate gathering that would supposedly enable their
acceptance oflslam.
Before long the Truthful Gabriel descended and said the following:
And do not (in the hope of persuading the chieftains of the unbelievers)
drive away any of those (poor believers of humble social standing) who,
in the morning and afternoon, invoke their Lord, seeking His 'Face' (i.e.
the meeting with Him Hereafter and His eternal, good pleasure). (al-
An'am 6:53)
It was clear that the advancement of faith would not go very far with people who
had never experienced hardships in life, rather, this mission could only be carried out
with people who had experienced what poverty was and those who could share their
wealth instantaneously with others. Those who swam in wealth did not know what
poverty meant, or what it meant to help others who were not as fortunate as
themselves. People who had given their life to this cause could not be turned away
with the hope of attracting the polytheists and hoping for their submission to Islam.
This would mean petty calculation for such a great cause. Keeping people separated
according to their class would be clear injustice and oppression and the Messenger of
Allah was removed from inflicting such injustice. He would not bow down to the
demands of a couple of polytheists who had come with such a pointless suggestion
and he would always be on the side of those who kept invoking Allah day and night
with their actions and feelings; he would watch over them and not care about others,
for he knew that the grace of Allah was with them. How could it be that he should
distance people with sincere faith from his presence, he who had already said:
"Paradise longs to be together with the following three people: Ali, Salman and
Ammar. "272

--- Sayfa 240 ---
254 Ibn Ashur, Tafsiru 't-Tanwir wa 't-Tahrir, 1/2321
255 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/307; 2/460
256 Umm Jamil was Fatima bint al-Khattab, who had become Muslim before Umar, was married to
Said ibn Zayd. See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 7/215,297.
257 Muslim, Sahih, 1/67 (44)
258 Ibn Hajar, !saba, 8/200 (12006); Halabi, Sirah, 1/456
259 Haysami, Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 9/267
260 In some reports it is stated that Hamza became Muslim six years after the start of the revelations.
See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/9.
261 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21128-129
262 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21129
263 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21130
264 Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/221
265 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21132-136
266 Suhayli, Rawthu 'l-Unf, 1/280
267 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 1/269; Suhayli, Rawthu 'l-Unf, 1/280
268 Wahidi,Asbab al-Nuzul, pp. 218-219
269 Our noble Prophet had given the news that he too would be killed in Badr. Bukhari, Sahih, 411453
(3734).
270 Bukhari, Sahih, 411453 (3734); Halabi, Sirah, 2/378; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, pp.
119-120
271 The interpretations that claim that our noble Prophet had considered this option hoping that they
may come to Islam would contradict the "ism at" (infallibility) character of Prophets.
272 Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 5/667 (3797); Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3/148 (4666)

--- Sayfa 241 ---
A PAST ACCOUNT
T
here was a clear difference between the past and the present, just like the
difference between the West and the East. In order to validate this difference,
the Truthful Gabriel descended and spoke of something that had remained in
the past:
When any of them is given news of the birth of a girl, his face becomes
overcast, and he is (as if choking inwardly) with suppressed anger. He
hides himself from the people because of the evil (as he wrongly supposes
it) of what he has had news of (So he debates within himself:) Shall he
keep her with dishonor or bury her in earth? Look now! How evil is the
judgment they make (concerning Allah, and how evil is the decision they
debate)! (an-Nahl 16:58-59)
This was the state that ignorance had put one in! This old practice was still alive in
memory, and with some people who were wallowing in ignorance, these atrocities
were still being practiced. Some because they feared hunger, some because they
preferred male children, and some because they considered it a shame to have fathered
a girl, for they disregarded their daughters and treated them horribly, sometimes to the
point that they would kill them. 273
The above verse was speaking of this practice as something of the past and was
showing to what degrees man could become enmeshed in violence as a warning that
would remain till the Judgment Day.
One of those who had tasted from the water of faith had come to the presence of the
Illustrious Beloved of Allah. It was clear that he had a problem that he could not
resolve. He wanted to get it off his chest: "0 Messenger of Allah," he started. In the
meanwhile the Pride of Humankind had turned towards him both face and body and
was listening attentively: 'We are the people ofthe Period oflgnorance; we are people
who worshipped idols that we ourselves made and then we killed our daughters." It
was clear that what he was about to say had affected him deeply. He was speaking in

--- Sayfa 242 ---
fragments: "I also had a daughter. One day I could not stand against the pressures of
the Jahiliyya and called her to my side. She came running; she was so happy that I had
taken an interest in her! I held her hand and took her to a well that was far away. She
was sitting by the well with her hands in mine and I pushed her over into the well. As
she fell, she cried out 'Father, Father!"' Our noble Prophet was now enveloped in such
deep sadness that he began to cry. He cried so much that his holy beard was soaking
wet. One of the Companions, who saw how sad our noble Prophet had become, stood
up and said to the man: 'What have you done! You have put the Messenger of Allah
in great grief1"
But the Messenger of Allah thought otherwise. He pointed with his finger: "Leave
him! For he is questioning a wrong he committed in his past." Then he returned to the
man and said: "Will you tell me what happened once again?"
The man started to retell the incident from the start. The grief he had soared to such
heights that the Messenger of Allah had no more tears left in him to cry. Then he said
to all those present: "Verily as long as you are loyal servants to Allah the Almighty
this day, He will leave what you have done during the Period of Ignorance in the
past."
The man had spoken what was hurting him inside and received an answer that
consoled him. Who knows what promises he made to himself in order to have his
wrongs forgiven. Our noble Prophet turned to him and said: "Come, now its time to
start everything anew! "274

--- Sayfa 243 ---
273 A1-An'am6:101; a1-Isra 17:31
274 A1usi, Ruhu 'l-Ma 'ani, 14/169; Darimi, Sunan, 1114 (2)

--- Sayfa 244 ---
THE VERSES OF COMMUNICATION
0
n the one hand the activities at the home of Ibn Arqam, known as sirran
tanawwarat, becoming enlightened in secret,275 continued and on the other
hand people were being invited to Islam one by one. Despite this manner of
proceeding, the polytheists continued to take advantage of every opportunity against
the believers and they were always trying to harass them. The verses that came always
spoke of the good tidings that awaited them in the future. This was the only support
that the believers had and the Messenger of Allah was feeding them with new
messages every day, teaching them the way. Almost five years had passed since the
meeting at Hira. He was communicating the verses of Allah to people and was putting
them into practice in his own life. A feast of grace had been set up at the house of Ibn
Arqam and the Companions were partaking in this feast. Those who frequented this
feast had colored themselves with the color of attachment, and were trying to bring
this color into the life of others as well. They wanted to broaden the circle of
participants at this feast.
One day, the atmosphere at the feast had changed when there were the traces of
revelation coming down to the Messenger. The coming verses said the following:
So from now on, proclaim what you are commanded to convey openly
and in an emphatic manner, and do not care (whatever) those who
associate partners with Allah (say and do). We suffice you against all
those who mock, those who adopt some deity along with Allah. In time
they will come to know. (al-Hijr, 15:94-96)
This was an order that would put an end to the process that had been taking place
the last three years. It seems that there were different phases concerning the
communication of the Word of Allah and one of these phases seemed to have been
over, another door was opening on the path of sharing the Word of Allah with people.
Now faith had already been consolidated and the Muslims had reached forty in
number. They were now being represented in society in the best possible way. From

--- Sayfa 245 ---
now on the mocking attitudes of the polytheists did not matter much. On one side were
thousands of people who were to be familiarized with Allah, what did a handful of
people who did not know what they spoke of, matter? The masses could not be
sacrificed because of the deceptiveness of these people and the words of Allah had to
reach each and every person, so their process of entering Islam had to be facilitated.

--- Sayfa 246 ---
275 This means enlightenment in private in order not to provoke others, especially those who disliked
this process of enlightenment because they were unaware of its beauties.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
THE COMING OF UMAR AND LEAVING
IBN ARQAM'S HOUSE
I
t was a Wednesday evening. The Messenger of Allah had raised his hands for
prayer in the house of Ibn Arqam in supplication to his Lord. He was so sincere
and insistent that it drew the attention of those that were near him. He held up his
hands high and wide at the sky, his eyes fixed to the heavens. This is what he was
asking for: "0 Allah! Whichever is dearer to you, let your religion be exalted with
him; Umar ibn al-Khattab or Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl)!"276
Umar ibn al-Khattab was the more aggressive of the two men; he was very
courageous and he feared no one. It was these attitudes that he had inherited from his
father. That is why his brother in law and sister had kept away from him after they had
become Muslims. They were performing the Prayers and reading the Qur'an without
letting anyone know, and they were secretly communicating the message of the
Qur'an.
Umar was watching the developments from afar, and even though he did not
become Muslim by throwing off the weight of social pressure, he at least thought that
the people who chose this religion were people of virtue. One evening, he had come to
the Ka'ba to spend the night there. Meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah came there and
started to read the Qur'an. He was reading Surah al-Haqqa.
Umar was hearing it for the first time and he was attracted by the beauty of the
words. He had to find fault with it somehow in order to shake off its effect, and like
the Quraysh, he said: "He's a poet." But the voice continued: "And not a poet's speech
(composed in a poet's mind). How little is what you believe!" (al-Haqqa 69:41).
This was strange indeed! What he had thought of had immediately been answered.
This time he thought, "He's a soothsayer." But the voice continued: "Nor is it a
soothsayer's speech (pretending to foretell events). How little it is that you reflect and
be mindful! (It is so limited by the poverty of your minds)" (al-Haqqa 69:42).
The Messenger of Allah had thus read the chapter to the end and Umar had listened

--- Sayfa 248 ---
to it in great astonishment and curiosity. He thought long and hard. There was great
calm and flow in his mind. But these weren't enough to put Umar into action and to
make him change sides. The next morning he was with his old friends again, back to
his old habits.
Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl) was a man who took pleasure in opposing the
Messenger of Allah at every opportunity and preventing each development that would
be in favor of religion. Our noble Prophet had tried hard to invite him to Islam; he had
gone to his door many times but had always been met with insults, and at times, a spat
on the face. Still, the Messenger of Allah continued to try to communicate Allah's
message to Abu Jahl, kept him in his prayers so that Allah may place faith in his heart.
But these prayers would be answered for Umar and Abu Jahl would be the one to
lose out. The day following our noble Prophet's prayer, Umar had turned towards the
hill of Safa. He was going in the direction of Ibn Arqam' s house with his sword
hanging by his waist, with the intention of doing some harm to the believers gathered
there. On the way he met another Companion, Nuaym ibn Abdullah who was hiding
the fact that he had become Muslim. The scene he saw worried Nuaym; Umar was so
enraged that one could almost see him breathing out steam through his nose. He had to
be stopped and the Muslims had to be protected from his malice.
He asked: "Where are you going, 0 Umar?"
"I am going to kill the sabi Muhammad who puts the Quraysh against each other,
who slanders and censures their ancestors and gods."
Nuaym had been right about his worries; Umar had bad intentions and he had set
off to put these intentions into practice, heading towards the house of Ibn Arqam. He
had to do everything he can to convince him to tum away. The first argument that
came to his mind was that his sister and brother in law had embraced Islam: ''You
have deceived yourself Umar! You are leaving the sons of Abdimanaf to themselves
and are on your way to kill Muhammad? First go to your own house and handle that
business."
Umar was shocked. This could not be! No member from his household could have
become a Muslim without his knowing! He asked immediately: "What is there in my
own home? Do you mean ... ?"
Yes, there were those in his family who had visited this sweet water spring and had
drank from it till their hearts desired. But Umar had been unaware of this and was now
pressuring Nuaym to reveal who it was. At last Nuaym chose the lesser of the two
evils and gave the names of his relatives in order to change Umar's direction and buy

--- Sayfa 249 ---
some time.
''Your brother in law and cousin Said ibn Zayd277 and your sister Fatima hint al-
Khattab ... I swear that they too have become Muslims and are following Muhammad.
They entered his religion. You should first see to your own business," he said to
Umar.
A bolt of lightning struck in Umar's head. How could it be that people from his own
home had gone and been swept by this tide? He had to do something about it
immediately and so he changed direction. He went with flying speed. But this time his
target was not the Messenger of Allah but his sister and brother in law.
He was just about to knock on the door when he heard a deep voice resonating from
the inside. This was a voice that was reminiscent of the night he had spent at the
Ka'ba. Although the owner of the voice was different, it was obvious that it came
from the same source. This was the voice of Habbab ibn Arat: "Ta-Ha. We did not
send down this Qur'an to you so that you may have hardship ... " (Ta-Ha 20:1-2), the
voice continued.
Even though he was not aware of it yet, the great Umar's heart had already started
to melt.
But it didn't look like he would submit so easily. He gathered himself and started to
pound the mallet of the door. He was also shouting at the top of his lungs, telling the
people inside to open the door. The household was seized with worry when they heard
Umar's voice at the door. It was clear why he had come. They hid Habbab, who was
teaching them the Qur'an at the time, somewhere in the house. Umar's sister Fatima
hid the verses of the Qur'an under her knees. When it was fit for Umar to see the
house, they opened the door, their hair standing on end.
Umar was a very clever man; he had already become suspicious when the door
opened late. He asked at once: 'What was that voice I heard a minute ago?" They tried
to convince him that he had heard nothing.
''No, I did," he said and then came towards them in rage.
He was mumbling in anger and he said: "I heard that you entered the religion of
Muhammad and that you are now his followers," and not able to contain his rage, he
pounced on his brother in law Said ibn Zayd and hit him. When his sister Fatima tried
to stop him, he also hit her. It was difficult to stand the blows of someone like Umar;
she was covered in blood. But this was the start of another attempt for her. There was
nothing she felt she could lose anymore. Now her brother knew everything anyway.
Fatima was made of the same mettle as his brother as member of the Khattab family.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
There was no sense in hiding it anymore so she stood up to her brother and exclaimed:
"Yes, we have become Muslim! What is there in that? We have submitted in faith to
Allah and His Messenger. Now you can do as you like." This was the third blow for
Umar. It would have been unthinkable that someone should talk back to him like that
under normal circumstances. Least of all a woman! How could his sister talk back to
him like that and show such attitude? There was an aggressive silence. Umar looked
long and hard at his sister; although she was covered in blood, there was nobility in
her stance. She looked like an injured lioness and yet she was still after her honor.
There was a dare in her stare: "What if you kill us? We have found true peace with
Muhammad." This dare seemed to have worked on Umar. For Umar to understand, it
seemed that his brother in law and sister had to be subjected to violence by him. It was
fate's work that Umar would start to melt at the house of his sister after having
opposed Islam till that day. He sincerely regretted what he had done. The change in
Umar surfaced when he called out to his sister: "Give me the pages that you were
reading as I was coming here, let me look at what it is that Muhammad has come
with." They were surprised. They hesitated as to whether or not to give them to him,
for Umar could take the verses and rip them, start slandering the Qur'an and say
unseemly things about the beloved Prophet. That is why Fatima said: "We fear that
you will do some evil."
"Do not fear," said Umar, and then he assured her that he would give the pages back
without damaging it in any way.
His sister, who had been beaten till blood was drawn, was overjoyed and she could
sense that his brother was slowly coming towards Islam. She knew him well ... Umar
was beginning to unravel. That is why she took another step: "0 my brother! You are
still in the dirt of shirk, 278 the unclean cannot touch the Qur' an."
Fatima told him about the ghusl (the major ablution), for what he was about to hold
was the Word of Allah and it had be held in a way that would be pleasing to Allah.
This was a great test for Umar. But after this blow, he had already caved in and
made his last decision. He went and took ablution like his sister described. The gloom
of a while ago had left its place to the peace of Paradise, one could see the happiness
on their faces.
Meanwhile, Fatima had given Umar the pages on which chapter Ta-Ha was written,
and he started reading. At one point he could not contain himself and said: "What
beautiful words! What sweet expressions!"
Habbab ibn Arat who could hear Umar reading the Qur'an and observe his response

--- Sayfa 251 ---
to it from where he was hidden could hardly stop himself from crying out the takbir,
the proclamation of the greatness of Allah. The prayer that had been made only last
night from Ibn Arqam's house was fresh in their memories. How amazing that a
prayer should be answered so quickly! Here was one of the Umar's already at the
presence of the Qur'an! This was what Habbab was observing from where he was
hiding. Before long, he could not stop himself from coming out from where he was
hiding. He walked up to Umar and said: "0 Umar, I believe you have been the
recipient of the prayer ofthe Messenger of Allah! Only yesterday I heard him say '0
Allah! Please validate your religion with one of the two Umars. Umar ibn al-Khattab
or Amr ibn Hisham.' I swear by Allah you are him, 0 Umar."
Umar was experiencing two surprises at the same time. First of all, what was
Habbab doing here? And secondly, where had he been till now? Why had he hidden
and why was he coming now to say these things? The second surprise was the
greatness of the Messenger of Allah whom he had come armed just hours ago to kill.
There could be no greater difference in the outcome. He had come with the intention
to kill him, and he was, unbeknownst to him, praying for his deliverance to his Lord,
that he may come into the faith. What magnificence is this!
The great Umar was now humbled. He turned to Habbab and said: "0 Habbab! Can
you tell me where Muhammad is? I want to go to him right now."
"He is with his friends in a house on Safa hill right now," Habbab said.
Now the destination of Umar was clear. In fact it was the same destination as the
one he had set out that morning, but amazingly now, the intention was different.
Before long, Umar was knocking on the door oflbn Arqam. The Companions of the
Prophet looked through the keyhole and when they saw that it was Umar they ran to
the noble Prophet in excitement and fear:
"0 Messenger of Allah! Umar is at the door and he is armed."
Hamza came forward:
"Let him come in, 0 Messenger of Allah! If he means well, then we will embrace
him, but if he has bad intentions we will take his sword and kill him with it!"
The Messenger of Allah was not thinking otherwise. It was him who had said that
prayer was the greatest weapon, and it was him who had prayed for Umar. Naturally
Allah the Almighty would not leave His Beloved alone in such dire circumstances and
would answer his call. Our noble Prophet was feeling deep gratitude for the
acceptance of his prayer and said to them: "Let him come in."
He then stood up from where he was sitting. He wanted to welcome Umar standing.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
The door opened and the heavily built Umar came in. The Messenger of Allah
welcomed him with affection. Such warmth and love could only be found in Paradise.
The Pride of Humankind first embraced Umar and then said: "Where have you been
until now, 0 son of Al-Khattab! I swear by Allah that I had started to think that you
were not going to come until some trouble would touch you."
"Here I am, 0 Messenger of Allah! I am here to submit in faith to Allah, His
Messenger and what comes from Him."
From the house of Ibn Arqam on Safa hill, a takbir started echoing towards Mecca,
and these words proclaiming Allah's greatness continued to resonate through the
night. The Companions who had witnessed the supplication of the Messenger of Allah
the night before, including the Messenger himself could not contain themselves and
they were also calling out the takbir, proclaiming the greatness of Allah in unison.
This was a fitting way to welcome the great Umar into the faith! The coming of Umar
signified the start of a new period. The Companions of the Messenger of Allah who
now had another force like Hamza beside them, were leaving the house of Ibn Arqam
with their takbir into Mecca from Safa hill. 279 The coming of Umar had given extra
zeal to the Companions, with him a Muslim by their side they would now be walking
with more pride; they would now be performing their Prayers more easily and they
would not worry about being heard as they used to when they were reading the
Qur'an. Just like ibn Mas'ud had said, Umar's coming to Islam meant a conquest for
religion. 280
Umar had indeed become Muslim, but it seemed he did not feel comfortable unless
he let everyone know the change he had just gone through. That is why he turned to
the Pride of Humankind and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Why are we hiding our
faith even though we are in the right? They are in error and they have no qualms about
making it public."
Our noble Prophet was a man of patience and caution. Just as he had cautioned Abu
Bakr, he also said to Umar: "0 Umar, you see what we already have to put up with.
We do not have enough numbers to be able to do as you suggest yet."
"I swear by Allah who sent you in Truth that I will go to all the circles I used to
attend before and will declare my faith to them," and thus he left the house of Ibn
Arqam. The first place he went to was the Ka'ba. First he circumambulated it to show
the error in the way people had been worshipping in the Ka'ba. Then he went to the
Quraysh. It was clear that they had expected him to come. Abu Jahl came forward:
"So you have become sabi,"281 he said mockingly

--- Sayfa 253 ---
Umar roared: "I swear there IS no deity but Allah and that Muhammad is His
servant and Messenger."
They could not stand to hear these words, even if it did come from someone whom
they had called friend only yesterday, and they all pounced on him.
But Umar was a force to be reckoned with. Utba was the first to attack him and he
took him down in no time. He had put his finger in Utba's eye, and Utba was crying
out of pain, his cry echoing throughout Mecca. It was clear they would not be able to
beat him easily; it seemed that Umar was even more powerful than before. The crowd
around him dispersed at once. Umar was now walking in the streets of Mecca,
representing the pride oflslam and no one was able to challenge him.
He visited all the circles he used to visit in order to keep the promise he had made in
the presence of the Messenger of Allah and he even let the deaf know about the
beauties of Islam. Still, the Messenger of Allah was worried. When he saw him come,
he asked delicately what had happened. Umar started to speak with the satisfaction of
someone who had carried out his duty: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for
you, 0 Messenger of Allah! There is nothing to be worried about! I swear by Allah
that I visited all the circles I used to frequent before I was honored with Islam and I
declared my faith without fear for anyone."282
Hira Visit
After our noble Prophet was given the duty of being a Messenger, he continued to visit
the Mount of Light which he used to visit often before revelations started to come. At
the Mount of Light, he would breathe a certain degree of peace in the Cave of Hira.
Sometimes his Companions, who loved being in his company, would come with him,
and thus they would do their visit together.
On such a day Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali, Talha, Zubayr, Abdurrahman, Sa'd
and Said ibn Zayd they had climbed Hira altogether. At that moment, the Mount of
Light started to shake. The Messenger of Allah was worried about the Companions
beside him who he believed would take the flag of Islam to the future. He said to the
mountain: "Stay where you are 0 Hira, for what stands on you is a Messenger, one
loyal and one witness. 283
He had thus directed his acute gaze towards the future, telling what would become
of his friends towards the end of their lives."284

--- Sayfa 254 ---
276 Hakim,Al-Mustadrak, 3/574 (6129)
277 Said ibn Zayd was also the son ofUmar's uncle.
278 Associating partners with Allah.
279 Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 21187
280 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/270
281 A belief system that attributes power to the stars and worships them. Because the revelations were
coming from the heavens, the Quraysh were naming the Muslims thus, trying to make light of the
matter.
282 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 11439
283 Muslim, Sahih, 4/1880 (2417); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 11188
284 This was a miracle and the following years proved that apart from Abu Bakr who would prove
himself to be siddiq, loyal to the utmost degree, all others would become martyrs. On the day of
Jamal, the camel, Zubayr had understood that Ali was in the right and so had decided against
fighting. He was killed by Ibn Jurmuz as he was praying in the valley of Siba. Ibn Jurmuz went to
the Caliph Ali in order to be applauded by him, bringing to him what he considered good news.
Ali on the other hand was shocked by this terrible news that he had brought. He looked as if his
whole world had collapsed and then said: "This sword was the sword that had been drawn in order
to keep troubles away from the Messenger of Allah on that day," and then added: "He who killed
the son of Safiyya should make his place in Hell ready." See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya,
7/250; Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur 'an, 16/321.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
THE MIGRATION TO ETHIOPIA
F
ive years had passed since the coming of the first revelation. It was the month
of Rajah. The house of Ibn Arqam as a temporary sanctuary had met their
needs to a certain degree, for there was now a place where believers could
speak about issues concerning their faith in a peaceful environment. But this
environment was limited to the one house only; people who left the house were being
followed and especially those who were weak and had no protection were being
subjected to increasing violence. With each passing day the Meccans were becoming
even more merciless and they were giving no space to the Muslims to live according
to their belief. Hence, there was need for a more fundamental solution. In the
meanwhile, Allah the Almighty had shown a way to the believers through the Truthful
Gabriel:
0 My servants who believe: Keep from disobedience to your Lord in
reverence for Him and piety. For those devoted to doing good in this
world, aware that Allah is seeing them, there is good (by way of
recompense), and Allah's earth is vast (enabling worship). Those who are
patient (persevering in adversity, worshipping Allah, and refraining from
sins) will surely be given their reward without measure. (az-Zumar 39: 10)
The verse was not giving a clear order of migration to everyone, but spoke of the
ease and comfort such a journey may afford for living a religious life. Since the world
was a vast place; then one had to take advantage of such vastness. Accordingly, the
Messenger of Allah would offer the following suggestion: "I wish you could go to
Abyssinia, for that is a safe place; and there is a king there under whom no one is
oppressed!"
Abyssinia was a known place for Mecca as there was quite a lot of traffic between
the two places due to trade. There was a general knowledge about Abyssinia in Mecca
due to these visits. That is why the believers were encouraged to go to this land, the
land ofNajashi.

--- Sayfa 256 ---
The First Hijra
A mere gesture of our noble Prophet would set masses into motion. He was now
saying that it was safer to go and live in Abyssinia, and he was encouraging the
believers to go in that direction. That is why preparations were now underway and
fifteen people, including four women, set for the road in order to escape being the
target of violence in Mecca and to be able to live their religion more freely. 285 Among
them was the son in law of the Messenger of Allah, Uthman. Naturally, this journey
would be made without the knowledge of the Quraysh. In the darkness of the night
they set out away from Mecca towards a new world. This was the first migration. It
was not clear what would happen but such concerns were hardly important. When it
was Him Who led, what could they possibly worry about! They came to the shores of
the peninsula, some on animals, and some on foot. It was Divine will that had decreed
that they should go on this journey. They met two ships that were waiting at the shore,
and with the price of half a dinar, they bought their passage into Abyssinia.
On the other hand in Mecca, the absence of leading believers who left for
Abyssinia, such as Uthman and his wife Ruqayyah, Mus'ab ibn Umayr, Abdurrahman
ibn Awf, Abu Salama and his wife Umm Salama286 and Uthman ibn Maz'un, was
greatly being felt. The Quraysh sent men after them to seek and find them. But they
were too late, for when they reached the shore, the ships had already set off and the
believers had already set sail for a peaceful land.
At last they reached Abyssinia, a place where neither the judgments of Abu Jahl and
Abu Lahab, nor the insults of Utba and Shayba, nor the harassment of Uqba and
Umayya could follow them! At once all the obstructions that they had faced to live
their belief when they were in Mecca had disappeared; they could now pray in peace
and read the Qur'an in rapture. 287
The Messenger of Allah had for a long time not been able to receive any news of
those who had gone to Abyssinia, and he was wondering what had become of them.
At last a woman who came from those parts said that he had seen Uthman and
Ruqayyah. The news brought joy to the Illustrious Beloved of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, and he said: "Verily Uthman and his wife are the third
household to have migrated after the household of Ibrahim and Lot. "288
Return
This first journey happened in the month of Rajah. Two more months passed. On a
day in Ramadan, the Messenger of Allah came to the Ka'ba again and he was
worshipping his Lord. A crowd gathered around him once again to observe what he

--- Sayfa 257 ---
was doing. The Messenger of Allah then started to read the Qur'an wholeheartedly.
He was reading Surah an-Najm. These eloquent words that came to the ears attracted
the attention of those present and they were listening to him in pure concentration. Till
that day, there had always been someone who made noise as the verses ofthe Qur'an
were being read, always someone who would divert people's attention. 289
This was probably the first time people could listen to it uninterrupted to appreciate
its beauty and wonder. Everyone had forgotten their original intentions and was
completely enraptured by the sweet melody of the Qur'an. This Divine articulation
was cleaning away the dirt and the rust in minds, and it was transforming them into
new people. When the Messenger of Allah read the verse of sajda, in which the
prostration was mentioned, he went down to prostrate. Amazingly, all those listening
to him also went to prostrate with the Messenger of Allah without questioning what
they were doing! It was as though it had not been them who had declared war on this
word and to the Messenger of Allah who was delivering it to them. It looked as if the
Lord of the Ka'ba had shown a scene from what was to come to the Meccans.
Of course there were others who were watching this scene from afar, and because
they had not been close enough, they could not interpret the meaning of what they
were seeing and were censuring the Meccans who had prostrated themselves with the
Messenger of Allah. This was a censure that called the people to the status of kufr,
disbelief that they had been in, and before long many of them would say that they had
been bewitched and they turned back. But news of this scene had reached Abyssinia in
a very different manner and out of context, only as what had appeared to the
onlookers. According to the news that spread, the Meccans had now all become
Muslim! Then what reason was there to be away from the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him! If the Meccans had become Muslim, that meant the town
no longer held any dangers or oppression for them.
Yes, they were very happy indeed, but they marveled at the news. How could the
hatred and rancor that they had encountered change so drastically within the space of
two months? How could these cold, hard hearts have softened and gone down in
prostration in the presence of their Lord? But they reasoned that when Allah willed,
everything was possible and so they decided to return to Mecca at once.
They once again boarded the ship and reached the opposite side of the shore. Unlike
before, now they were walking with the excitement and the prospect of reuniting with
our noble Prophet, with Mecca, the Ka'ba, their brethren in belief, their families and
their homes. But when they came within an hour's journey to Mecca they finally
understood how things really were in Mecca! They had been the victims of a huge

--- Sayfa 258 ---
misunderstanding! This was a difficult situation indeed! They wavered for a while
between going back to Abyssinia and going to Mecca for a little while. Then some of
them decided to go back to Abyssinia and some decided to push on towards Mecca.
Yes, those who chose to return to Abyssinia had been saved once again, but they
had not been able to see the Messenger of Allah to whom they had come so close!
They had not been reunited with their friends in the Ka'ba to converse with them. But
at least they had been spared the wrath of the Meccans, and before long, they were
back to a land where they could perform their Prayers in peace. Some of those who
came to Mecca had found refuge with people who could give them protection for a
while. But the others had returned to days of hardship that were even worse than
before. The Meccans knew that they had tried to escape and now they were trying to
inflict even more injury, verbally and physically, wherever they saw them.
The Situation ofMus'ab ibn Umayr
When he heard that the Meccans were migrating to Abyssinia, Mus'ab ibn Umayr had
also found a way to escape his imprisonment and joined those who had migrated. He
was thus among the first who had migrated in the way of Allah, and was now free of
the aggression of his mother and the censure of his father. But now the period of peace
he had experienced in Abyssinia was over and he had returned to Mecca.
This was a great opportunity for his mother who tried to lock him up again when he
came home. But they were both very adamant, and they were both shedding tears. His
mother was crying because she felt she was losing her son for what she considered
was an empty cause, and he was upset about his mother who had closed her heart to
the Truth and who was insistent on making life very difficult for him. This strife
between a young man of faith and his enraged mother was the struggle between dead
set denial and steadfastness in faith.
The situation would continue till she expelled her son from the house. Hunas ibn
Malik was a woman who could not consider someone who did not listen to her word
as her son. One day she had totally become enraged. She had once again insisted, but
Mus' ab had not prostrated in front of the various idols, and he had not denied Allah.
Her rage overshadowed her feelings as a mother and she said: "Do as you please. I am
no longer your mother."
She deprived Mus'ab of everything. As she expelled her son from her home and
bolted the doors, she also bolted her heart against faith. Just as it was difficult for a
mother to be separated from her son, it was equally unbearable that a son should leave
his mother alone to her devices on this "eternal journey." Mus'ab was not going to

--- Sayfa 259 ---
forsake his own mission for worldly cares. What did wealth and possessions mean to
him? He had no concerns for worldly goods or his future. His one and only care had
become the faith of people; that people should believe, starting from his own mother.
He pleaded with his mother: "Dear mother! Please listen to me once! Come and
believe that there is no deity but Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and
Messenger."
The invitation was sweet and soft, but the response to it was equally hard and
without compromise: "I swear by the stars, never! I have lost neither my mind nor my
conscience that I should enter your religion."
His efforts were yielding no results, and so he bid his farewell and left his mother's
home. He had been expelled from what was before his warm hearth, but now he was
going to set up camp in the warmest of hearts! He came to the presence of the
Messenger of Allah submitted himself and never left again.
From now on Mus'ab was like the other Companions; he dressed in rough clothes
that he could find, sometimes with a full stomach, but too often suffering from hunger.
He had now entered the ranks of the poor and slaves like the Habbabs and Bilals. His
skin, which he was used to adorn with beautiful scents and lotions, had now become
crinkly and was peeling off in places.
One day he was coming to the gathering from afar. The Messenger of Allah was
watching him approach with some of the other Companions. Mus'ab's worn-out but
peaceful state had brought tears to the eyes, heads were bowed down, and everyone
was sad together! For Mus'ab was in old and worn-out clothes. This was a heart-
rending sight to see for those who knew his state before Islam. Bilal had always been
poor. Habbab and Ammar had never been rich; they were used to poverty! But Mus'ab
was never like that. The Messenger of Allah was deeply moved by what he saw and
started to say the following: "I used to see Mus'ab before as well. There was no man
more powerful than him in Mecca when he was with his mother and father. He left all
that for Allah and His Messenger and came here."
Mus' ab did not care the slightest bit about all that had befallen him since he had
embraced Islam, for clothes could not give man peace. If there was no faith in a heart,
what enveloped the body was continued torment. He had one goal, to hold firm onto a
medium that reached out beyond the skies in the name of faith. He was getting deeper
in this understanding day by day, he was continually making progress. He was
memorizing the verses that came day by day, he was learning the fine aspects of his
religion from the Perfect Guide, peace and blessings be upon him, and he was trying
to live according to the principles he was learning.

--- Sayfa 260 ---
The Coming of Abdullah ibn Suhayl
Abdullah was the son of Suhayl ibn Amr, a man known among the Quraysh for the
effectiveness of his discourse and poetry. Suhayl was a legendary orator and everyone
would come to seek wisdom from him. Abdullah had heard about the Messenger of
Allah at first from his uncle Salit ibn Amr. With the efforts of his brother in law, Salit,
his two other uncles Khatib and Sakran had all become Muslim, and before long his
uncle by marriage, Abu Sahara and his sister Umm Kulthum had gone and submitted
themselves in faith to the Messenger of Allah as well. He had noticed the change in
his brother in law and sister and this had made him curious about Islam.
It seemed there was a new sweet water spring in Mecca and everyone who came to
this realization was running there to drink from this water of life. Although his father
Suhayl was discontent with this development and would voice his discontent with
satirical verse, his trust in his uncles led him to conclude that his father was in the
wrong this time, and this led him to question the habits he had practiced till that day.
One day, he decided to run to this source and to drink from this life giving spring,
and opposing his father he went to the presence of the Messenger and crying out the
word of unity, he became a Muslim.
But his father Suhayl was not someone who would give up so easily. When he
learned that his son Abdullah had gone and become a Muslim, he was enraged and he
declared that he would use any means to bring his son back. He did as he said and
upon next seeing his son, he tied him up in chains. The beatings Abdullah received at
every hour of the day became his daily food, and the many insults he received became
auxiliary to his sustenance.
This physical torment was unbearable for Abdullah. His father was coming onto
him with such anger and zeal as not to allow one word about faith. Each time he came,
he was preventing Abdullah from speaking. His state was very much similar to
Ammar's; while the people who had tortured and censured Ammar were strangers, the
person who was hurting Abdullah was his own father.
He had heard of the migration to Abyssinia from where he was in chains. His uncle
Sakran was among those who had journeyed to Abyssinia. He was adamant not to stay
in the state he was in for ever, always being beaten by his father, and he was
determined to find a way to go to Abyssinia.
And he did as he planned. When Suhayl found out that his son had escaped and
joined the ones who journeyed to Abyssinia, he was mad with rage, throwing threats
around and telling people all the things he would do to his son when he captured him

--- Sayfa 261 ---
once agam.
Abdullah was also happy to hear the false news that the Meccans had become
Muslim. He imagined that his father too must have softened, and so he also returned to
Mecca from Abyssinia. When he received the news, Suhayl became impatient to
subject his son to all the torment he had been devising. When Abdullah arrived in
Mecca, Suhayl pounced on him and tied him up, never to be set free again. Now life
meant only torture for Abdullah. He was thrown into a vault and was writhing there
from hunger and he could not cope with the insults and violence that his father was
throwing upon him. He had heard what Ammar had gone through and he knew the
leniency that Allah gave people in such circumstances, and when torture reached
proportions that he could no longer bear, he decided to use that lifeline. He was going
to say "yes" to what his father was saying and thus breathe a sigh of relief.
And that is exactly what he did. When Suhayl saw that his son was "brought to
reason" with the torture that he had subjected him to, he slowly started to lift the
pressures that he was putting on him. But he was still being very cautious, for he was
observing his son's reactions and trying to weigh his sincerity in accepting his word.
After a while he was convinced that his son had completely come around and he
started to trust him once again. This continued till the Battle of Badr.
Second Hijra
The troubles that the Muslims faced grew with each passing day and at last the Great
Messenger said that the solution might be in migrating to Abyssinia once again. He
had received news about how those who had gone before were treated and that is why
the Messenger of Allah was encouraging his followers to go to Abyssinia to
experience a peace that had not yet been instated in Mecca. But those leaving wanted
to see the Great Messenger among them. That is why Uthman said the following: "0
Messenger of Allah! We went with the first group and here we are going to Najashi
once again! We wish you were coming with us!"
''You thus migrate to both Allah and me, thus you'll get the reward of two hijra's."
"This suffices for us, 0 Messenger of Allah."
Now it was time to set off. But this was a road that the polytheists also knew, and
they had taken their precautions this time to be careful to not let them escape. This
time, a bigger group was planning to go, so they had to be extra careful in order for
people to not learn about their plan and they had to move very cautiously without
leaving things to chance.

--- Sayfa 262 ---
Then one evening they set on the road again and the journey towards the shore
started. This time there were a hundred people, eighteen of them women. 290
Despite all the precaution, the Quraysh were worried to hear that the Muslims had
left. They knew the result of Muslims' migration last time and the way Najashi had
treated them. This time the number of people going was much greater. The Quraysh
were thus facing a big problem, for an issue they had not been able to solve by
themselves had now taken on an international dimension, becoming harder to solve!
The whole thing was spiraling out of their control. Their backs had already broken by
having lost both Hamza and Umar, for the two of them had given much strength to the
other front. Now the issue was also developing on grounds that were totally removed
from them. They gathered together to discuss the issue in a way to find a permanent
solution. They agreed that it was essential that they should convince Najashi to tum
the Muslims over to them. They chose two men from among themselves to see to this
business. These were Amr ibnu'l-As and Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia. 291 Both of them
were men who knew how to speak in front of kings and who knew Najashi well. The
Quraysh did not want to leave things to chance so they kept explaining to the two men
about how they should behave. They were also preparing very special gifts for Najashi
and the influential people around him. They were even making plans as to how these
gifts should be offered. They suggested that first gifts should be given to the king's
men, they should be won over and then Najashi's gift should be given so that he may
be persuaded to tum over the Muslims to them.
According to the plan, first the circles around the king, the viziers and clerics would
be persuaded and then these men would support the plea of the men of Quraysh. Then
Najashi would agree with the general sentiment and hand the Muslims over to them.
The Letter to Najashi and His Reply
Meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah sent a letter to Najashi with Amr ibn Umayya and
requested him to provide protection for Jafar ibn Abi Talib and his friends who had
gone to seek refuge in Abyssinia. This meant that the relations between the Muslims
and Abyssinia were not only superficial, but that there was correspondence based on
knowledge between the two parties. There was continuous flow of information, and
the Messenger of Allah was trying to prevent any risks that the migrating Muslims
may face. The letter read:
"In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
From Muhammad, Messenger of Allah, to Najashi of Asham.

--- Sayfa 263 ---
May Allah's peace be upon you! This letter occasions me to give thanks to Allah
who is Mu'min, The Supreme Author of safety and security Who bestows faith and
removes doubt, and Muhaymin, the All-Watchful Guardian. I bear witness that Jesus,
son of Mary is a soul and word from Allah that He has given to Pure and virtuous
Mary. He the Almighty created Jesus who Mary was pregnant with, from His own
soul and breath, just as He created Adam with the power of His own Hand, and
exalted breath. I invite you to Allah and the friendship of Allah Who is One, and has
no likeness; I invite you to follow me and believe in what I bring from Truth, for I am
the Messenger of Allah. I send you my cousin Jafar ibn Abi Talib and a group of
Muslims with him. When they come to you, show them your hospitality and let them
stay in your land, do not make things harder for them. Verily I invite you and your
army to Allah. I have done my duty and have communicated the Word of Allah to
you, given you my advice; accept this from me!"
After he took and read the letter of the Messenger of Allah Najashi wrote a letter
back expressing his feelings and sent it to Mecca. The letter contained the following:
"To Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, from Najashi of Asham, ibn al-Abjar.
May Allah's peace, bounty and grace be upon you, 0 Messenger of Allah! There is
no deity but He, and He has shown me the right way with Islam! Your letter and what
you say about Jesus has reached me 0 Messenger of Allah! I swear by the Lord of the
heaven and earth that Jesus did not say anything other than what you yourself say. We
have benefited much from what you have sent us and what your cousin and those in
his company have told us. I bear witness that you are the Messenger of Allah, truthful
and consolidating what has come before you. I am now your follower; I have
submitted to the Lord of the universes in the presence of your cousin. I send you my
son Ariha ibn Asham ibn al-Abjar. I am king of myself only; and if you decree that I
should come to you, I will do that, too, 0 Messenger of Allah! I know that all that you
say is true."292
As can be understood from Najashi's letter, he had responded to the call of the
Messenger of Allah saying that he would offer protection to the Muslims that came to
his land, and what's more was that he was saying he was ready to leave his throne if
the Messenger decreed it so. This correspondence alone, as a multifaceted strategy, is
precedent for people who want to walk along the same path.
The Effort of Abu Talib
Sending the two men was a propaganda campaign on the part of the Quraysh in order
to create an atmosphere that would be favorable to their claims. It seemed probable

--- Sayfa 264 ---
that their campaign would yield results. When he heard this campaign of the Quraysh,
the heart of a loving uncle, Abu Talib, was moved again. But this time he was going to
act not only for the sake of his nephew Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him,
but also those who were in Abyssinia who had put faith in him, including his own son
Jafar. Using the power of poetry, the following is the poem that Abu Talib wrote to
Najashi in Abyssinia expressing his concerns:
"I wish I'd known.
Why does Amr act in enmity towards my son Jafar although they are relatives?
Will Najashi receive Jafar and his friends with goodness?
Or will his hospitality be prevented by something that encourages evil?
I wish I'd known.
But I know, 0 King!
I know that you are a man wary of evil, an honorable and generous man.
I know those who seek refuge with you always find peace in your presence.
I know that Allah has given you great worldly and spiritual wealth; you are also the
possessor of all the routes of goodness.
And I know that you are a generous man who likes to give.
So don't let these aggressive relatives of ours take advantage of your virtue and do
evil against you!"
As can be seen, it wasn't only his nephew Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon
him, or his son Jafar that Abu Talib was trying to protect; he was also thinking of
those who had put faith in him, and he was hoping to reach beyond the seas with his
voice. While the Meccans were trying to make those who had migrated come back,
Abu Talib was thinking that his son would be safer in Abyssinia, and leaving aside a
father's longing for his son, he wanted him to stay there. He was letting his wishes be
known through poetry, the most effective means of communication at the time, trying
to influence Najashi before he would make his decision.
The Envoys and Najashi
At last the Muslims had arrived in Abyssinia once again and they had started to
perform their Prayers in peace, reading their Qur'an to their heart's content. Before
long the two envoys of the Quraysh arrived with their hands full of gifts. First they
started to give presents to the clerics and influential people in the palace, just like the
elders of Mecca had advised them to. To everyone they spoke to, they asked them to

--- Sayfa 265 ---
support them with their cause in persuading the king to send the Muslims back to their
country. This is what they were saying: "Certain runaway youths from our country are
now in the country of the king; these are people who have abandoned their religion
and yet not adopted your religion either, they have a new religion neither you, nor I,
know of. We will go to the king and ask him to hand them over to us. What we ask of
you is that when we bring up the subject you should support us, and to let him hand
these people over to us without letting them speak. The whole of Mecca is waiting to
see how this business will develop."
They were approaching the matter rather stealthily, making themselves appear
innocent. They were also provoking the listeners against Muslims by saying things
like: "These are people who have caused chaos in their homeland and have set people
against each other; now they have come here to cause anarchy in your land. They will
deceive your children and will degenerate your religion, they will shake your
authority," posing as concerned people who had come to warn them. That is why all
the people they spoke to said: "Ok, we will help you."
They had thus visited every important personage in the kingdom and now it was
time to go to Najashi, give him his presents and approach the subject. The necessary
appointments had been made and Najashi accepted the representatives of Mecca for a
hearing.
After salutations and the usual well-wishes, Amr ibnu'l-As and Abdullah ibn Abi
Rabia came to the point. They were saying: "0 King! We heard that some runaway
youths from our land have left the religion of their tribe and come and sought refuge in
your country. The truth is they have not accepted your religion either; they follow a
religion neither you, nor I, know of! In due respect for our grandfathers and glorious
forefathers, we ask you to hand them over to us, for the eyes of our ancestors are upon
these young people; they know what they are doing; they see where this business is
going."
As they said these to Najashi, the eyes of Amr and Abdullah were searching for the
faces of those who were present to see their expressions and how their preplanned
pitch was going. They did not like what they saw on Najashi's face; they could see
that he was not listening to them wholeheartedly, as if he viewed the matter
differently. But since they had taken the matter so far, they did not want to return
empty handed. That is why they were making eye contact with the clerics and the
viziers and trying to gain their support before the king said a final "No." They were
also planning to provide the king with certain information about the Muslims to
prejudice the king against them before the possibility of the King summoning them to

--- Sayfa 266 ---
his presence. They said that the Muslims did not greet people like others, that they
would not recognize the authority of the king and would not prostrate before him. This
was when one of their supporters, a priest, came to their aid, and said: "0 King! They
tell the truth! The eyes and ears of their tribe are upon these people; it would be best if
we hand these people to them so that they settle their own accounts."
Najashi, who had been silent till that point, was now angry. Matters of state
required seriousness. It would not be in keeping with the principles of justice to judge
according to the claims of a couple of people without giving those accused to speak
for themselves. If he had not cared for the principles of justice, his land would not
have become one where innocent people sought refuge in. With these in mind, he
started to say the following: "No, it cannot be! I swear I will never hand them over to
you. These are people who have chosen to come to this country among others, and
they have preferred my justice so I cannot hand them over to these two men listening
solely to what they have said. I have to listen to them; if the situation is as these two
men say, then I will hand them over. But if the situation is different, then I will not
hand them over, instead, I will provide them with more opportunities to stay in my
land and help them live their according to their belief."
Dead silence ensued. This was much different from what the representatives of
Mecca had hoped for. They had played so many tricks in order to put pressure on
Najashi and yet none of them had worked, for the king was acting only as it pleased
him. But they were not going to give up so easily.
Meanwhile, Najashi had summoned the Muslims living in his land to his presence
as he wanted to hear them speak their piece as well. When the invitation from Najashi
came to them, the believers who were informed about the situation started to talk
among themselves: "What will we say to this man when we go to his presence?"
"I swear by Allah that we will say what we know; we will say what the Messenger
of Allah has told us beforehand having already seen what will come to pass!"
At last they came to the court of the king and started to wait. There was a difference
even in their entrance and this had not escaped the attention of those present; they
were saluting people, but unlike others, they were not prostrating themselves in front
of the king! Najashi turned to them and started to ask the following: "Tell me, 0
people, why have you come here, what is your situation and why have you chosen
me? You are not men of trade, and you do not bring a petition either in the name of
your country or for yourselves. Who is this Messenger of yours who has appeared, and
what is the truth of this matter? Why have you not saluted me like other people? What
is your view of Jesus, son of Mary? What is this religion of yours for whose sake you

--- Sayfa 267 ---
have abandoned the religion of your tribe and not entered mine or any other religion
that you may have encountered here?"
Jafar ibn Abi Talib Takes Word
Meanwhile Najashi had called his clergy near him and had made them lay basic texts
of religion open before him. It was clear that he was going to compare the novelties
that Islam was bringing in the name of religion with what his own understanding was,
and then reach a conclusion. That is why a very appropriate reply had to be given to
him to cover all his questions and hesitations. After a brief pause, Jafar ibn Abi Talib
stepped forward and said: "0 King! We saluted you with the salutation of the
Messenger of Allah. This is the salutation of the inhabitants of heaven; with it we find
new life in our inner worlds. We only go down to sajda in prostration before Allah, we
seek refuge in Him from having to prostrate to others," thus clarifying two of the
points Najashi had raised.
Then he changed the direction of the conversation and said to the King: "I beseech
you to ask these men ofQuraysh the following three questions."
"Ask," said Najashi.
"Are we slaves who have fled their masters that they are here to hand us back to our
masters?"
This was an unexpected question indeed and Najashi turned to the Qurayshis:
"Were these slaves, 0 Amr?" he asked.
Although they wanted to kill the Muslims, there and then, they had no choice but to
tell the truth. Unwillingly and rather forcefully, they said: ''No, in fact they are
generous people."
The first round was over. Jafar asked the second question: 'Will you ask them, 0
King, whether we are people who have shed blood unlawfully and then fled, and
whether by asking you to hand us over, they are seeking the implementation of
justice?"
It was clear that Jafar was now engaged in a real fight with words. Spoken word had
a magical power and he wanted to make use of that. Words were transforming into
effective weapons and the castles that the men of Quraysh were trying to build in the
name of kufr, disbelief, were collapsing one by one. Najashi once again turned to the
envoys and asked: "Have they killed unlawfully?"
''No they have not shed a single drop of blood," answered Amr.
Wasn't real virtue the virtue even your enemies would have to acknowledge? Now

--- Sayfa 268 ---
it was time for the last question.
"Can you ask them, 0 king, whether we stole people's goods and that it is for that
reason they come to interrogate us, to ask for the goods we've stolen?"
The king turned to the envoys once again. They had not killed anyone, they had not
degraded the honor of anyone, and they had not rebelled against their masters-what
could anyone possibly want from these people? That is why Najashi changed his
attitude as he was asking the last question: "Ifthese people owe you money, then you
can collect it from me."
The meeting was spiraling out of control for the Qurayshi envoys from the very
beginning: "They do not owe us anything," they replied.
Now it was the King's tum to ask the questions: "Then what is it that you want
from these people?"
This was a question that made the silence even more aggressive. There was only
one thing they could say: "We used to believe in the same religion and would be
united around the same belief, but these people have left that unity and we have come
looking for them."
Now they had come to the point. The king turned to Jafar and asked: "What was the
understanding of religion that you used to subscribe to, and what religion are you
following now?"
"0 King! We used to be a community that was ignorant and a plaything in the
hands of the Devil, we used to worship idols and eat the flesh of the dead! We used to
engage in all kinds of debauchery, we did not care about family ties or neighborly
rights. Whoever was strong among us would oppress the weak. Then Allah sent a
Prophet from among us whose family we all knew very well, and whose truthfulness
and trustworthiness was already praised among us. He invited us to know Allah as the
Unique One of Absolute Unity, not to worship anyone but Him, and to leave our
ancestral habit of worshipping idols that we had made with our own hands from stones
and clay. He also invited us to speak the truth, to keep our promises, to strengthen the
ties between relatives by visiting each other, to have good and warm relations with our
neighbors. Equally he warned us against all things haram, or prohibited, against
shedding blood, debauchery, gossip and lies, against exploiting the rights and assets of
the orphans and against slandering women who live virtuously. He also invited us to
worship Allah, who is the Unique One of Absolute Unity, and not to worship any
other god beside Him, to perform the Prayers, to give zakah, the prescribed purifying
alms, and we have accepted what he said and we have submitted to him in faith. We

--- Sayfa 269 ---
have devoted ourselves to doing what he has brought to us from Allah, to worship
Allah who is One, and not to hold anything equal to Him. Now we consider what he
says haram as unlawful and what he has allowed halal as permitted. But our tribe
started to become hostile to us, and they subjected us to all sorts of torture. They tried
to make us recant our faith, to prevent us from turning our faces towards Allah and
pushed us to engage in all the said debauchery. They did everything in their power so
we should go after these hand-made idols once again, and they thought it fair to resort
to any means in their efforts. When their torture became too much to bear and they
tried to get between us and our religion, we sought refuge in your land. We preferred
your country among others, we hoped we would not be subjected to any oppression
under your rule, 0 King," said Jafar elaborately.
Right after this eloquent speech, Najashi said: "Do you have anything with you
from what Allah has sent?"
It looked like the words of Jafar had been effective and Najashi had given the first
s1gn.
Jafar stepped forward and said: "Yes, we do."
When he asked: 'Will you read it to me?"
Jafar started to read from the beginning of chapter Maryam, Mary.
This was a Divine voice that delved deep into the bone... Such that before long,
tears started to come down from Najashi's cheeks ... People started to look at each
other; even the clergy were shedding tears along with Najashi. Beards had been
watered with the tears, and blessed drops from the wells in the eyes were now falling
onto the pages of the books that had been opened in front of them. When Jafar reached
a certain point, Najashi intervened: "I swear that these are part of the same light that
came to Jesus, it is clear they come from the same lamp. What you say is all true, you
are right, your Messenger is Trustworthy." He then turned to the two envoys of
Quraysh and said: "You can now go back to where you came from; I will never hand
these men over to you."
The envoys were experiencing a great shock, so were the clerics and viziers who
were present. The Qurayshis left the court with their heads held down. But they were
not ready to give up, and it did not prove difficult to find other discontent people who
would support them. Amr ibnu'l-As assessed the situation and turned to his friend and
said: "I swear tomorrow I will bring forth such things that I will give them a run for
their money."
Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia, however, was more cautious.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
"There is no need! Do not do such a thing! Even though they may have acted in
opposition to us, they are our relatives," he urged.
They spoke for a while more and then decided to go to the king again the next day.
The same ritual salutations started the next day and the two envoys were now in the
presence of the king. Amr ibnu'l-As came forward: "0 King! Undoubtedly they say
many things about Jesus, the son of Mary."
Jesus was everything to them and these words of Amr brought to mind many
questions. What were these things that the Muslims were saying? Now the people
present had to know what it was that the Muslims were saying. So Najashi sent word
to the Muslims and summoned them to his presence. When they came, he asked
immediately: "What is it that you say about Jesus, the son of Mary?"
This was again a job for Jafar ibn Abi Talib, he came forward and said: "We say
what the Messenger of Allah told us; verily Jesus is the servant of Allah, and a
Messenger that He has sent to the people. He is a part from His own soul, a word of
His that He sent to Mary, possessor of good morals and virtue."
This was the reply that Najashi was expecting. He stood up in excitement, took a
staff into his hand, drew a line on the ground, and then said: "I swear that the
difference between what you say about Jesus, the son of Mary, and what we know
about him is even less than this line that I have drawn here."
Some of the clergy that heard these words started to mumble and tried to voice their
discontent. As if he could not hear the mumbling around him, Najashi turned to Jafar
and said: "I swear that you can stay in my land safe from those who plot against you
and mean you harm. Those who try to harm you will find me in front of them! I swear
that I would refuse mountains of gold should it cost anyone of you even a headache!"
After saying these inspirational and touching words, Najashi turned to his viziers.
His looks seemed to say 'While these envoys are here, they impose on me and I
cannot judge fairly" and then said: "Give back the gifts that these men brought, I don't
need them! When Allah gave me my power, he did not ask for ransom, so how can I
accept the ransom that these men offer?"
This was a great defeat for the Quraysh. As the defeated were leaving the
courtroom, their frustration could be read from their demeanor-it was as though their
backs had been broken by this treatment. What had they expected, and what had they
found! From then on Abyssinia would be a land where Muslims could perform the
Prayers in peace, where they could read the Qur'an out loud, where the new messages
of Islam could be shared with ease. Soon after however, Najashi's country would be

--- Sayfa 271 ---
attacked and the Muslims would be worried. In that period, the Muslims would lift
their hands up to the skies for Najashi, providing him with spiritual support so that
Najashi would come victorious over his enemies and the peaceful environment of the
country would continue. When the Muslim migrants found out that Najashi had beaten
his enemies, there was great joy among them and they would thank Allah who had
given them the opportunity of a peaceful life once again. 293
Happy News from Abyssinia
The journey of mortality continued in Abyssinia as well; there were people here who
passed away, just as there were fortunate newborns in this new land. There were new
developments here every day, and these were being communicated to Mecca one by
one.
Khatib ibn Harith had two sons who were born here named Muhammad and Harith;
however soon after came the news that Khatib had died in Abyssinia. 294
Other news of death came from the brothers Muttalib ibn Azhar and Tulayb ibn
Azhar; the two Companions of the Prophet who were the cousins of Abdurrahman ibn
Awf had died in Abyssinia and two worlds would thus remain in this land in the name
of Islam. 295
Abyssinia would also witness the birth of a new generation of children born to
Muslim families. After Khatib, Salit ibn Amr also had a son born here from his wife
Fatima hint Alkama, to whom he gave his own name Salit. 296 The second good news
for the ibn Amr family came from Salit' s sister Sahla. Before long she too had a son
born to her, from Abu Hudhayfa, and they named him Muhammad. 297
The happy news of births continued; Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia and Asma hint Salama
had a son and they named him Abdullah. 298 It was the will of Allah that all the children
born here were male. Before long Abu Salama, our noble Prophet's nursing-brother
and his aunt Barra's son, had a son from Umm Salam and they named him Umar. 299
The good news of a female child came from the family of Ubaydullah ibn J ahsh and
Ramla hint Abi Sufyan. Ramla would from now on be called Umm Habiba, mother of
Habiba, for this was what they had named their daughter. The family of ibn Jahsh had
come to Abyssinia in good numbers; the brothers Abdullah, Abu Ahmad and
Ubaydullah, and their sister Zaynab and the wife of Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh and Abu
Sufyan's daughter Umm Habiba, and Hamna hint Jahsh.
The reality was that this was the world of tests, and Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh would be
influenced by the attraction of the new culture he had come in contact with and

--- Sayfa 272 ---
become a Christian, and thus change sides in Abyssinia where he had in fact gone to
live his own faith. Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh had even forced his wife to become a
Christian but she had refused. 300 Unfortunately, Ubaydullah's life would soon come to
an end and he would die a Christian.
This was an unfortunate situation indeed, but there was the will of Allah in
everything. Maybe with the example ofUbaydullah ibn Jahsh, Allah the Almighty was
showing that no one could be sure of their future and how they might end up. Also,
another lesson in this incident was that when faced with the world, one had to hold
fast to one's own culture. Each new culture that one came in contact with offered new
risks so in such an environment, those who stood fast where they were would be the
successful ones. Although there was a loss such as Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh for the
Muslims, in time, hundreds of people would embrace Islam in this land. 301

--- Sayfa 273 ---
285 There are also reports that there were twelve men and four women on this journey. See Tabari,
Tarikh, 11547.
286 See Muslim, Sahih, 2/631 (918). After the death of Abu Salama she would have the honor of
becoming the wife of our noble Prophet and take the name "mother of the believers."
287 Tabari, Tarikh, 11547
288 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 4/50 (6849). Another report says: "Verily Uthman is the first among this
ummah to have migrated with his family." See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11203. Tabari, Tarikh, 21222.
289 Fussilat 39:26
290 There are reports that say that there were a hundred and two people, nineteen of them women. See
Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11207.
291 Some reports say that the second envoy was not Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia but Umara ibnu'l-Walid.
See Isfahani, Dalai/, 100.
292 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/83-84
293 See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21176. Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 11207. Isfahani, Dalai/, 100. Najashi had given
two ships to the Muslims so that they had the option to flee if they feared they could not protect
themselves and that they were welcome back if he should win the battle, and that they should
return to Medina should he lose. See Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2/329 (3175).
294 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11410
295 Ibid., 4112 9.
296 Ibid., 2/365.
297 Ibn Abdilbarr,Istiab, 411431
298 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/434
299 Ibid., 2/567
300 See Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 4/21-24; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/213; Ibn Hajar, !saba, 7/651-653; Ibn
Abdilbarr, Istiab, 4/1929-1931; Ibn Asakir, Tarikh, 45/430; Zubayr ibn Bakkar, Al-Muntahab min
Azwaji 'n-Nabi, 1150/53.
301 Tabari, Tarikh, 11547

--- Sayfa 274 ---
REVELATION CONTINUES ...
The Miracle of Splitting the Moon
M
eanwhile in Mecca, the Quraysh were doing everything they can to put the
Messenger of Allah in difficult situations. One day the leading men of
Mecca had come together in Mina and they had asked for a miracle from
the Messenger of Allah who was there with his Companions. They had even described
the miracle they wanted to see, and that they would enter Islam if he would be able to
do as they said. The Messenger of Allah who wanted them to enter Islam had his
hopes high with this request and had got word from the Meccans that they would
submit to belief if he would be able to split the moon into two: "Yes, if you are able to
cut the moon into two then we will believe you," they said.
Our noble Prophet lifted his hand up to the sky and with his index finger made a
movement pointing to the moon. Those who were around him were looking at where
he was pointing.
Then all of a sudden, the moon split into two. It was so clear and obvious that one
half of the moon went over the Mountain of Abu Qubays and the other half had gone
over another mountain called Quayqian.
Upon such an incredible miracle illustrating the power and greatness of Allah, the
Messenger of Allah turned to those near him and said: "Bear witness!"
The polytheists now regretted what had they asked for and they were greatly
surprised. How could it be that someone standing right next to them should point to
the moon and it should split in two and then make it come together again? They had
made a promise, but they had no intention to become Muslim, how were they going to
get out of this one? There were men among them who could trick even the Devil and
one of them stepped forward to say: "This is nothing but the magic of ibn Abi
Kabsha! 302 He has painted your eyes over with this magic. Ask the people who come
from around; have they seen it as well? If they have seen it as well, then Muhammad
is telling the truth. But if others haven't seen what has happened, then this means that

--- Sayfa 275 ---
Muhammad has bewitched you."
This was surely a way out for them. Then they sent word around and found people
who were not present with Muhammad there at that time and they asked them about
this miracle. The answers they got did not please the polytheists at all because
everyone they spoke to said that they had experienced a strange event, that they had
seen the moon split into two and go over two different mountains and then come back
together again. The only way out that they had been counting on was proving to be a
dead-end. They could not deny what they had seen with their own eyes because other
people had witnessed it too. There was only one alternative left; they were going to
hold onto their old slanders, and continue to be the victim of their own stubbornness:
"This is nothing but the magic of Ibn Abi Kabsha! 303
But you can't paint over the sun with clay! Those who chose to close their eyes
would only make night descend upon themselves. Before long, the Truthful Gabriel
descended and brought the verses that registered forever the truth that the polytheists
tried to distort because they could not deny it: "The Last Hour has drawn near, and the
moon has split. Whenever they see a miracle, they tum from it in aversion and say:
"This is sorcery like many others, one after the other" (al-Qamar 54: 1-2).
The Revelation of Chapter Abasa
Despite the fact that the polytheists saw all kinds of miracles and still denied the truth,
the Pride of the Universe, peace and blessings be upon him, had a great devotion to
communicating the Word of Allah, or tabligh, rather than waning in disappointment,
his devotion still continued and he was doing all in his power to help others. That is
why although they turned their faces away each time, he did not stop speaking to the
leading men of the deniers' faction, hoping that their hearts too would one day soften.
He had left his personal life aside; he was living for his community. When he met a
lost soul who did not recognize the Lord, he was anxious that he or she would leave
his company without having submitted to the faith. Before long, the Qur'an would
speak of this attitude of the Prophet and make a historical point of what he had done
for his community: "Yet it may be that you (0 Muhammad) will torment yourself to
death with grief, following after them, if they do not believe in this Message" (al-Kahf
18:6), "It may be that you (0 Messenger) will torment yourself to death because they
refuse to believe" (ash-Shuara 26:3).
On such a day, people such as Utba ibn Rabia, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Abu Jahl, Walid
ibn Mughira were sitting and talking among themselves. 304 In the hope of opening
their hearts to faith, the Messenger of Allah honored their gathering by approaching

--- Sayfa 276 ---
them, but these men, who did not have their share of honor, ignored him. They
changed their attitude and showed their discomfort at his presence openly. He had
come to them only to make them offers that would help their worldly life and afterlife,
insisting on saving their eternal life. They could not bear listening to him. Maybe at
that very moment they were speaking against him, for they had all stopped talking.
How could they disdain faith so much? But everything was possible when Utba, Abu
Jahl and Walid were in question. As the saying goes, had they been able to, they
would have drowned the Messenger of Allah in a spoonful of water! There was no
space for them where he was. They were looking at him with hatred, breathing rancor.
Had they not feared a blood feud, they would've killed him there and then, but
tradition prevented them. That's why they turned their backs and hung their faces and
then left. This was a sign that the light of belief that came to a place would quickly
disperse darkness; it was a sign signaling truth had come and error which was doomed
for extinction had gone towards its own end.
Before long, Gabriel appeared with a new revelation. He read chapter Abasa. 305
He (a disbelieving, haughty man) frowned and turned away, because
(while he was talking with the Messenger) the blind man approached him.
What would inform you (0 haughty one) but that he might grow in purity
(by doing good deeds)? Or that he might grow mindful (of Allah's
Message), and the reminder benefit him? As for him who deems himself
to be independent (not needy of Divine guidance because of pride in his
wealth and status), you (0 Messenger) attend to him (so that he may
accept Islam and reform), though you are not accountable if he does not
grow in purity (through acceptance of faith and fulfilling its obligations
and responsibilities). But as for him who came to you eagerly, and he was
in awe of Allah, You divert your attention from him (to the other). No
indeed! It surely is a reminder and an admonition (that suffices for all who
come to it with an open heart). So whoever wills receives admonition and
takes heed. (Abasa 80: 1-12)
Obstinacy, vanity, bigotry and denial were contradicting the Messenger of Allah
who never spoke before having the approval of Truth. The greatest blindness was not
the veils put in front of the eyes, but the closing up of the heart in a way to obstruct a
person's view ofthe truth:
Do they never travel about the earth (and view all these scenes with an
eye to learn lessons) so that they may have hearts with which to reason
(and arrive at truth), or ears with which to hear (Allah's call)? For indeed

--- Sayfa 277 ---
it is not the eyes that have become blind, it is rather the hearts in the
breasts that are blind. (al-Hajj 22:46)
It was clear that the ones who had soured their faces and left the gathering, who had
expressed their vanity and illusions of grandeur were once again the leading men of
Mecca and they were being described with the metaphor ofblindness.306

--- Sayfa 278 ---
302 Ibn Abi Kabsha was the nickname of the husband of the Messenger of Allah's nursing mother,
Halima as-Sadia. The Meccans were calling him thus to ridicule him.
303 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 111543
304 Some reports say that Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib was among these names. However, it is highly
improbable that such a thing should have passed between an uncle and nephew that were so close.
305 This reading is validated by the ways in which the words "Abasa" and "Tawalla" have been used
elsewhere in the Qur'an. These have been used to describe deniers and Pharaohs who prefer to
stay in their status of darkness and denial. See al-Muddathir 74:22, Ta-Ha 20:48-60; al-Baqarah
2:205, an-Najm 53:33, al-Ma'arij 70:17, al-Ghashiyah 88:23, al-Layl 92:16, al-Alaq, 96: 13.
306 At-Taji, Wahyu 's-Sirah, p. 222

--- Sayfa 279 ---
GENERAL BOYCOTT
F
irst, the fact that both Hamza and Umar had become a Muslim meant two
great defeats for the Quraysh. Second, the envoys they had sent to Abyssinia
with great gifts had returned empty handed. Naturally, the Meccans had
become enraged and the men were already sharpening their swords. On top of all this,
they were receiving news of people who were migrating to Abyssinia and this was
dispiriting them. It seemed that before long, things were going to get completely out of
their hands and carried to another untouchable platform. On the one hand there was
the protection of the families of Hi sham and Abdul Muttalib and so they could not do
anything permanent concerning the Messenger of Allah, for people had united to
protect Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, with their
lives. On the other hand each day someone from the deniers' side was crossing over to
them and Mecca was experiencing dissolution of its front. They had to find an
immediate and effective solution to this problem.
One night they met at a pre-arranged place and made a decision that was worse than
death. They decided that they would sever all ties with the families of Hashim and
Abdul Muttalib and banish them from Mecca until they handed Muhammad, peace
and blessings be upon him, to them. They would cut all their routes, they would not
marry their children with them, and they would dry up all their sources for food and
drink. Since Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, did not seem to give up,
the innocent would be punished along with the culprits. This decision meant that the
Quraysh was going to starve the people whose only crime was to have submitted in
faith to Allah. They were going to leave these people to die in the difficult conditions
of the desert, thus solving the problem without having given cause to blood feuds that
could possibly continue for centuries. This was similar to what one imagines
concentration camps to be like today ... Ultimately, this was a boycott in which the
Meccans would wait for them to perish in the open field, in the silence of the
mornings and loneliness of the nights, under the scorching sun and the suffocation of
the desert. They also wanted their act to be sanctified so they wrote their decision item

--- Sayfa 280 ---
by item on a page and hung it on the wall of the Ka'ba in mutual agreement. The man
who wrote these articles on paper was a man named Mansur ibn Iqrima. 307
What Waraqa had warned the people about was now coming to pass. Seven years
after the coming of the first revelation, on a night in the month of Muharram, the
Muslims left Mecca and the Meccans despite the deprivation this would cause them!
Abu Talib was again there to help. They set up tent outside Mecca, in the place of
Shih Abi Talib, with meager means. Tents were made up of patchwork fabric hanging
tentatively on sticks. Abu Talib's efforts were a sight to see even though he wasn't a
Muslim. In order to prevent something bad happening to his nephew, he was devising
ingenious ways to protect him, sometimes even making his own sons sleep in his bed
instead.
Shih Abi Talib was a piece of bare land outside Mecca. This state of exclusion
continued for three years. The troubles kept multiplying and each day saw the cries of
someone in some tent. The encampment was hit by disease and the wailings from the
camp were echoing into Mecca.
These were hard times indeed. The person who felt the brunt of these troubles was
the most beloved of Allah's servants, the Messenger of Allah. 308 But whatever the
circumstances, he had to continue his mission of tabligh and he had to feed the people
with Divine messages. Such a whirlwind of troubles could only be overcome with a
strong faith and this faith had become the banner of the community that had gathered
around our noble Prophet. The traces of this faith could even be seen in those who had
not accepted Islam but yet had chosen to be on his side. His followers were also
showing great steadfastness in the face of all the hardship.
The tabligh had to reach other people as well. The Messenger of Allah was trying to
meet people from the outside as much as possible, and was trying to communicate the
Word of Allah to those he came in contact with, especially during the haram months,
the months of prohibition. The same effort went for the Muslims who carried the
excitement of faith in their hearts and they were putting their faith into action without
cease.
Three long years of fighting hunger, aridity and disease!
What oppression was this that it knew of no respite even when it came to women,
the elderly, the children, and the sick! The cries of the hungry children were echoing
in the mountains of Paran ...
When the Messenger of Allah performed his Prayer in the company of his Lord, he
would always hear the cries of the children and the sighs of the mothers, and this

--- Sayfa 281 ---
pierced his heart. The enmity and rancor of the Quraysh had reached such proportions
that even the Muslims' presence seemed an affront to them, they did not want to live
in the same city with them. Mecca was oppressing them with all its might and they did
not give the believers the space to even breathe. The mastermind behind this
oppression was again, the Pharaoh of his community, Abu Jahl. They were now only
allowed to go down to Mecca in the prohibited months and they could only buy a few
provisions with their meager means. The Quraysh was meeting the caravans that came
to Mecca before they came into town, trying to persuade them not to sell their wares to
the Muslims. Sometimes, although they did not need it all, the Quraysh would buy
everything that came with caravans, leaving no options to the people in need outside
Mecca. The Muslim camp had nothing left. They had endured such hardship that they
were making use of anything and everything. For example, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas who
had gone to a remote place to see to his needs noticed a piece of leather. He had taken
it, washed it and then cooked it on the fire to eat it. This aliment had enabled him to
walk without having to bend over double from hunger for three days, and he had
thanked his Lord for this easing of the pain. Such was the dedication of the followers
of the Messenger of Allah. 309 Many of them were trying to stay alive by eating leaves
and tree bark and their excrement had become like that of sheep.310
In this difficult period, Khadija was one of the people who gave people a degree a
comfort. She wasn't of a nature to watch what was happening and do nothing. The
means she had were dwindling fast, but she knew about the market and by using her
nephew Hakim ibn Hizam as middle man, she was having him send what she had
secretly to Shih Abi Talib, providing some respite for the hungry. On such a day,
Hakim had set out in the dark of the night and was bringing a handful of grain to his
aunt. This did not escape the attention of Abu Jahl and he stopped him. How could an
individual stand up against the machinated authority of ignorance? Even though he
was his brother, Abu Jahl had no tolerance for different voices. He first displayed a
very tough attitude: "Bringing food to the sons of Hashim are we?! I swear that you
will not be able to escape me and I will not allow you to bring them food. You will
see; I will shame you in front ofthe whole of Mecca."
Upon them came Abu'l Bakhtari. He was from the family of Hashim. He had not
submitted in faith but he had a heart. He first wanted to learn the cause of the quarrel:
"What is happening between you two?" he asked. Abu Jahl answered: "He was
attempting to take food to the sons of Hashim."
"And so you're trying to prevent him to take food to his aunt?" reacted Abu'l
Bakhtari.

--- Sayfa 282 ---
"Get away from the path of this man," he continued, trying to put an end to Abu
Jahl's oppression, but a fight between him and Abu Jahl ensued. It came to a point
where Abu'l Bakhtari was about to break Abu Jahl's head with a jaw bone he had
found on the ground.
Meanwhile, Hamza was watching this scene from afar. This act of Abu'l Bakhtari
would hearten people who thought like him, and prepare the ground for the process
that ended up with the lifting of the page of articles that hung on the wall of the Ka'ba
and the ending ofthe boycott.lli
In the meantime, the Messenger of Allah went to his uncle Abu Talib and said: "0
uncle! It is true that my Lord Allah the Almighty has sent a little worm to the page of
articles they hung on the wall of the Ka'ba, and the little worm has eaten up all the
oppression, boycott and slander inscribed there except for His own Exalted Name."
Abu Talib was surprised to hear this. He knew that his nephew would not have been
able to go to the Ka'ba and see this page, for he would not be allowed anywhere near
that page. There was only one explanation: "Has your Lord given you this news?"
Abu Talib asked.
''Yes," said the Messenger of Allah.
He had not seen or heard his nephew lie even once. Hearing him say it was enough
to believe it. But he had a different plan now. He went and informed his brothers at
once. A period of oppression was about to end. This excitement could not stay within
the bounds of Shih Abi Talib, and before long they made their way to the Ka'ba.
Everyone who saw them coming could see that Mecca was pregnant with a new
development and people were eagerly watching the events unfold.
Abu Talib called out to the Meccans and said, based on his trust of what his nephew
had told him and the trust that he had for the news that the Gracious Lord had given,
the following:
"The son of my brother Muhammad says that your paper has been eaten up by a
worm sent by Allah, and he never lies. He says that everything to do with oppression,
extremism, cutting family ties and transgression has been cleansed and that only the
Name of Allah remains. Here's your opportunity; if what my nephew says turns out to
be true, then you will change this bad attitude of yours; and if it turns out to be false
then I will hand my nephew over to you and you can choose to kill him or let him
live."
The Quraysh were unaware of the real dimensions of the matter and so they were
overjoyed. Abu Talib was offering his nephew just at a time when they had thought he

--- Sayfa 283 ---
had gone completely out of control. So there was nothing to be worried about. They
said: "All right, you have done what mercy complies one to do."
And then they went to the wall of the Ka'ba in order to see the situation. When they
opened the case in which they had placed the paper, a case they had sealed threefold,
they saw that it was just as Abu Talib had described. They froze in astonishment. With
the droop of their heads the case they were holding fell to the ground along with the
eaten up piece of paper. They were experiencing yet another great defeat. Now it was
Abu Talib's tum to speak: "Since everything has been revealed, there is no point in
this imprisonment and siege," and lifting the cover of the Ka'ba, he entered it, and this
is how he started to pray: "0 Allah, help us against those who oppress us, who forbid
us to meet with people, who attack us with no right and who do injustice to us."
Then they all left and went to the place where they had experienced the greatest
hardship for three years. But nothing would be the same from now on, for the prayers
spoken at the Ka'ba had been accepted and had set people with conscience into action.
This had been the last drop and it seemed the journey would be rough until the
conclusion was reached.
On the other hand, Hisham, our noble Prophet's, peace and blessings be upon him,
cousin, was saying the following to Zuhayr: "0 Zuhayr! Although you have heard
what situation your uncles are in, you are eating and drinking here in peace. You are
having a good time with your family and kids, dressed in the best clothes. How can
your heart be content with this? They, on the other hand, can neither buy anything, nor
have a moment's peace with their family. I swear that had they been the uncles of
Abu'l-Hakam, and had I called him for that, he would have listened to me and have
run to the help ofhis uncles."
Zuhayr had understood what was meant by these words but still asked: "0 Hisham!
What do you mean to say? What can I do as a man on his own? Had there been
another man with me, I swear I would go and rip that text apart."
"But you are not alone! You have another man with you," said Hi sham.
"And who is that?" asked Zuhayr.
"Me," answered Hisham.
"Then come, let us find a third man," said Zuhayr.
Without losing any time they went to Mut'im ibn Adiyy and said similar words to
him. They were growing fast like an avalanche. They looked for the fourth man.
Abu'l-Bakhtari was waiting for them. Before long, Zam'a ibn Aswad joined them as
the fifth man. Then these five donned their weapons against the hatred and rancor of

--- Sayfa 284 ---
years and made for the Ka'ba with the men from the families of Hashim and Abdul
Muttalib following them, with a view to ending the issue. There was not much the
Quraysh, who saw them coming, could do.
As soon as they came to the Ka'ba, they circumambulated it seven times and as
planned, Zuhayr spoke: "0 people of Mecca! We cannot allow the sons of Hashim
perish without a chance to buy anything, all their ties to the external world cut while
we eat in peace and strut about in good clothes. I swear that I will not leave without
tearing that piece of paper upon which the conditions of the boycott is written."
Abu Jahl was watching what was happening from the side with great attention. He
shouted out: "You lie! I swear you will not be able to do anything to this paper."
In response to his reaction, Zam'a said: "It is you who lies! We weren't happy with
it in the first place. You had it written."
And then the Ka'ba witnessed the support of Abu'l-Bakhtari: "Zam'a tells the truth,
we cannot stay silent anymore in the face of what is happening."
Mut'im ibn Adiyy and Hisham were supporting their friends: "Of course, they are
telling the truth; you are the liar! We seek refuge from Allah from what has been
written here and the treatment they have caused!"
All of a sudden the Ka'ba had seen the Meccans' much longed-for reaction and was
now overwhelmed in joy with this long-overdue act.
This was a moment when denial was experiencing one of its defeats. Abu Jahl was
enraged: "This is a conspiracy that was planned during the night."
Abu Talib and his friends had now come back to the Ka'ba and were watching what
was taking place with great curiosity. For them, what the crowd would witness at the
end was not going to come as a surprise. But they wanted to see their astonishment
with their own eyes.
The defenses of denial were falling one by one! Then Mut'im ibn Adiyy, made for
the case in order to put an end to this inhumane treatment that had lasted for three
years. But what did he find? Only a little slip of paper with the words "In the Name of
Allah" had remained and beside it was a little worm whose work this seemed.
Thus a period of oppression that had lasted three years was ending, and with the
destroyed paper, the boycott itself was lifted. 312

--- Sayfa 285 ---
307 In this period when troubles were heaped one upon the other, the Messenger of Allah would curse
this man, and the hand with which Mansur had written the articles of the boycott eventually
became paralyzed.
308 When years later the noble Prophet came to Mecca for Hajj, he came to this place before the ritual
sacrifice. He remembered the bitter years he spent there and spoke of certain scenes that he had
witnessed to the friends around him. See Bukhari, Sahih, 21576 (1513).
309 Abu Nuaym, Khilyatu 'l-Awliya, 1193
310 Ibid.
ill See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21195; Tabari, Tarikh, 11550. Abu'l-Bakhtari was not Muslim and he died
without having accepted the faith. But he too would get his share of our noble Prophet's loyalty.
He was among those who had come to fight against the Muslims in the Battle of Badr. When he
saw him coming, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said to his Companions: "Do not
attack Abu'l Bakhtari unless he attacks you first." See Ibn Abi Sayba,Musannaf, 7/357 (36682).
312 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/219; Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 11208

--- Sayfa 286 ---
THE YEAR OF SADNESS
A
lthough this period of inhumane treatment and the boycott had ended, there
was still more sadness to be experienced. Maybe Allah the Almighty was
turning His beloved servants' eyes completely towards the Hereafter,
directing their attention to their real "homeland" with various troubles that the
believers had to face. The fact that now after the lifting of the boycott they could enter
Mecca did not mean that the oppression and torture would end. The Meccan
polytheists who had lost the battle of the front yesterday were opening new fronts
everywhere today, thereby looking to recuperate their losses. The Muslims had left
their three years of exile behind, but these years had left a great impact on them; the
cries of the hungry children were now haunting the parents in their sleep. Disease was
rife and was decimating the community. Two important pillars such as Abu Talib and
Khadija had had their share of the disease. It was not so easy to start in Mecca anew,
and Mecca was bent on living in its previous state of debauchery.
The Last Recourse to Abu Talib
The exhaustion of all his years was now upon Abu Talib, he had come to a point
where he found it difficult to even walk. He had one foot in the grave, so to speak. He
had carried the burden of his whole tribe, not only his own. He had stood up for his
nephew even though everyone had opposed him. It was clear that he was no longer in
a state where he could carry such weight. It was the month of Ramadan. Abu Talib
was ill and it looked like he would pass away to eternity from this disease. The news
of his illness spread through Mecca, and the numbers of people who came to visit him
increased day by day.
On the other hand the front of denial was not sitting idle. They knew of his situation
and around twenty five people from the leading men of Quraysh came together,
including Utba and Shayba, Ibn Rabia, Abu Jahl, Umayya ibn Khalaf and Abu Sufyan.
They came to speak to Abu Talib one last time. They discussed their situation before
they went to Abu Talib: "Hamza and Umar have become Muslim; we lost them. The

--- Sayfa 287 ---
cause of Muhammad is spreading among the tribes. Come, let us go to Abu Talib, and
let us ask him to hand the son of his brother to us! It seems we will not be able to
overcome this difficulty otherwise," said one ofthem.
"Truth be told, I fear this old man as well; I fear as he dies he will say what
Muhammad says and then we will never be able to stop the chattering mouths of the
Arabs!" explained another.
"Best is if you wait now; tomorrow when his uncle dies you can finish him!" told
the other.
They were forwarding such ideas, but the prevailing sentiment was that they should
go visit Abu Talib in his death bed. They went to him with the following offer: "0
Abu Talib! No doubt you know our situation and what has befallen us! What we fear
is clear! What we experienced with your nephew is no secret; it's all out in the open!
Tell him to stay away from us, and we shall stay away from him! Tell him to leave us
to our religion and understanding so that we may leave him in peace."
For Abu Talib the issue seemed to have softened.
If everyone lived according to their own understanding, then nobody would be hurt
and his nephew would be safe from harm. He called to his side the Messenger of Allah
with such thoughts in mind: "0 son of my brother! Look, these are leading men of
your tribe. They have come here and they assure you that they will not harass you
anymore," he said.
"I want just one word from them; with it, they will be sovereign over all the Arabs
and with this word the Persians will also come to live like them."
Abu Jahl misconstrued the words of Muhammad to mean that he had accepted their
offer and came to the fore: "One word? Of course, you will get your word; I swear by
the memory of your father that we will give you not one, but ten words."
Things had to be made clearer and so the Messenger of Allah said: ''You will say
'There is no deity but Allah' and you will leave aside everything you worship except
H .
"
Ill.
This was what he had demanded from them at every opportunity, so naturally, it
displeased them. They started to clap in protest and then said with sour faces: ''You
mean to say that you want to make one God out of all the gods?"
Another one of them came to the fore and said: "I swear that this man will not give
you anything you want! You should continue what you want to do and do not leave
your ancestors' religion till this issue between you and him is resolved."
Soon, the traces of revelation were upon him and the Truthful Gabriel was bringing

--- Sayfa 288 ---
a new message:
They deem it strange that a warner from among them has come to them,
and the unbelievers say: 'This man is but a sorcerer, a fraud (who makes
fabrications in attribution to Allah). What! has he made all the deities into
One Allah. This is a very strange thing, indeed!' (Sad 38:4-5)
This clearly showed that each of their steps was being watched. Everything they
thought they hid in their inner worlds was being revealed to them out in the open, right
before their eyes. The rest of the verse stated:
The leaders among them went about inciting one another: "Move on, and
remain constant to your deities. Surely that (to which this man calls) is the
very thing that is certainly intended (deliberately plotted by him and those
who follow him). We have not heard of this in recent ways of faith. This
is surely nothing but a concoction. From among all of us has the
Reminder been sent down on him?" No! Rather, (on account of their self-
glory) they are lost in doubts concerning My Reminder. No indeed! They
have not yet tasted My punishment (so that they might abandon their
arrogance and recognize the truth). (Sad 38:6-8)
Abu Talib's Last Advice
Everyone would taste it, everything had its moment. The old and dying Abu Talib
turned to the representatives of the Quraysh and said the following:
"0 people of Quraysh! You are among the chosen ones from Allah's creation, and
you hold a most central place among the Arabs. The masters that are to be obeyed,
valiant people who care nothing for danger and generous men have always come from
among you. You should know that you have been preferred among the Arabs and have
been brought to a special position. When it comes to your honor; you live by it! Then
it falls upon you to share with others these gifts you have, and people will have to seek
different ways to partake in this bounty.
Now people are against you and there is a war between you. I would advise you to
respect this constitution, for in it is the contentment of your Lord, ease of sustenance
and consolidation of your position! Look after your relatives and never stop visiting
them, for visiting relatives eases the sadness of your bereavement and it also means
strength in numbers, and you will have someone there for you.
Stay away from excess and rebellion, for in both these you will find the causes of
the perishing of centuries, and you know the histories of those before you.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
Help those who seek help from you and never send away anyone who comes to you
with an opened hand, for in these two you will find the honor of life and death.
Speak the truth and keep safe what is entrusted to you, for in both these there is a
special kind of love and greatness.
Lastly I advise being graceful towards Muhammad, for he is the most trustworthy
person in Quraysh, the most upright man among all Arabs, the most virtuous man that
embodies all that I have just enumerated. He has come to you with such a thing that
although the heart recognizes it, the tongue denies it for fear of being censured! I
swear, I almost see the Arabs come running, I see good people from around coming,
coming and following him and their hearts thus finding solace.
If things continue this way, while these strangers will benefit from him, leaders of
Quraysh will be left behind, their stars will wane. The weak oftoday will become the
mighty of tomorrow; the proudest of you will become the most needy, and those who
are distant to him today will be closest to him in the future! Look, the Arabs have
already opened their arms to him, they have run to his help; they have opened their
hearts to him and have made him the crown over their heads.
0 Quraysh! Take care to recognize this value that has risen from among you! Be his
helpers and protectors of his cause! I swear by Allah that whoever follows his path he
will reach maturity, and whoever takes what he had brought as his guide, becomes the
happiest of men! I wish my life were a little longer, and my death was a little delayed,
I wish I could help him fight the difficulties he faces!"ill.
This advice that everyone needed to heed would have made sense only to those who
were ready to receive them. It was clear that the polytheists had not liked what he had
said at all. No doubt they too had other plans in order to further their stance in denial,
and they would put these plans into action, digging a bigger whole for themselves.
Once again they complained, lifted their heads in arrogance, and left Abu Talib's
presence.
Last Hope
When the leading men of Quraysh left Abu Talib's side, he turned to his nephew and
said with the experience of his years: "I swear, 0 son of my brother, you have not
asked them to do an impossible thing."
This was a statement that heartened the Messenger of Allah. At last his uncle was
showing signs of accepting Islam, for he had set his door ajar for faith. The
affectionate Messenger who wanted to make use of every opportunity turned towards

--- Sayfa 290 ---
him with great hope; he just couldn't accept his beloved and protective uncle leaving
him without having taken any steps towards faith: "0 uncle! Then you say that word
so that with it I may be able to vouch for you on the Day of Judgment."
This was a great opportunity for a soul who had devoted himself to saving other
people's faiths; he wanted his uncle to believe so much! But faith was a matter of
destiny, for even if one was a Prophet, no one was able to hold another fast to the right
path as long as Allah did not will it, he could not make this route easier to get on to for
people he wanted. Revelations said the same thing: "You cannot guide to truth
whomever you like but Allah guides whomever He wills. He knows best who are
guided (and amenable to guidance)" (al-Qasas 28:56).
The Sad Farewell
The Messenger's strife was the result of his love for his uncle, but it did not yield any
results. This last push had been a new and last hope. When he saw that his nephew had
such high hopes, Abu Talib said: "0 son of my brother," even this address had the
tone that said "Do not have such high hopes." Then after a pause he continued: "Had I
not feared that people after me may attribute senility to the son of their forefathers, or
the Quraysh saying that I said these words because I feared death, I would have said
those words. But I can say them to make you happy."
Our noble Prophet would still try to make something of each moment and would try
to make his uncle give him a definite response.
The leading men of denial once again came to the side of his uncle. The Messenger
of Allah started to walk towards his uncle Abu Talib in his sick bed. Another uncle
made for the bed as well and sat where the Messenger of Allah had meant to sit. His
aim was to prevent the Messenger of Allah from influencing Abu Talib in his last
moments and from inviting him to Islam. Even at a moment when Abu Talib was in
his death throes, denial kept up its stem front; it did not want to allow any steps that
might lead to belief. They couldn't even tolerate the Messenger looking at his uncle's
eyes with affection. On top of that, the Messenger of Allah was trying to invite him to
faith at every opportunity. Even in these last moments, the struggle between faith and
denial was being played out to the full. Abu Talib was asked: "0 Abu Talib! Are you
now giving up the religion of Abdul Muttalib?"
''No. I am staying on the religion of Abdul Muttalib," he answered. 314
He was now closer to death. Sitting closer to him was his brother Abbas. He was
trying to see the movement of his lips, and then the greatest patron of our noble

--- Sayfa 291 ---
Prophet closed his eyes to life.
However, the Messenger of Allah would not stop praying and seeking forgiveness
for Abu Talib who had been prevented by the pressure of denial to come to the path of
faith: "And me, I will continue to ask forgiveness from Allah for you as long as I am
not prohibited to do so."ill
This statement of the noble Prophet was going to be validated by the good news
brought by Gabriel. The verse that came first spoke of the situation which made the
scene eternal. Then it gave an example from his ancestors thereby showing the correct
attitude to be taken under such circumstances:
It is not for the Prophet and those who believe to ask Allah for the
forgiveness of those who associate partners with Allah even though they
be near of kin, after it has become clear to them that they (died polytheists
and therefore) are condemned to the Blazing Flame. The prayer of
Abraham for the forgiveness of his father was only because of a promise
which he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was
an enemy of Allah, he (Abraham) dissociated himself from him. Abraham
was most tender-hearted, most clement. (at-Tawbah 9: 113-114)
After the burial, Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib approached the Messenger of Allah and
said to his bereaved nephew: "0 son of my brother! I swear by Allah that Abu Talib
said the word you wanted him to say at his last moment."
The Messenger of Allah wasn't thinking the same way.
"I didn't hear it," he said. 316 Upon that Abbas approached his nephew and said that
he needed to be softer and more balanced towards his uncle. He was a man of balance
anyway; he was the representative of the straight path, and everyone needed to take
him as an example. That is why he said to his uncle: "I hope that my vouching for him
on the Judgment Day will help him, and that his torment in Hell will ease and that the
whole process will be made lighter for him."317
Farewell to Khadija
Only three days had passed since the death of Abu Talib. The Messenger of Allah had
tried very hard for him to leave a sign, an address, as he left this world but he did not
hear words to that effect from the lips of his uncle. The Quraysh who considered Abu
Talib's absence as an opportunity was now putting even greater pressure on the
Muslims. The beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was very sad. His
greatest supporter and protector had left this world and he had not heard anything from

--- Sayfa 292 ---
him that would give him hope that he would win eternal peace in the afterlife as
corollary to the warmth he had extended to him in this life.
This was one of the darkest moments. He was also extremely worried about the
state of his beloved wife whom he had left in her sick bed. He returned quickly
towards his tent, for Khadija, another one of his great supporters, was suffering from a
grave illness. The Messenger of Allah was now going to visit his wife who was
writhing with fever in her bed, in the throes of her last journey. He feared that he was
going to be bereft of another support like Abu Talib, his closest and most loyal friend.
He approached and slowly lifted the veil covering the entrance of the tent. To see
Khadija in that state saddened him immensely, her sighs of pain were hiding tears of
farewell ... Once the richest woman of Mecca, today Khadija was in hunger and pain,
bent in two, suffering from the effects of the life of exile she had endured.
Her sadness was deepened by the anxiety that she would be leaving the Messenger
of Allah alone with their daughters. Her soul was leaving but her heart was still
captive to the Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, who was now
being left friendless, and captive to her children whom she was entrusting to the
Sultan of Prophets, peace and blessings be upon him, and the Gracious Lord. She was
born too early, and yet had been awakened to the Truth early as well, and now she was
going to be reunited with her two children who had gone before her. There was a
sweet smile on her face before she left; it was clear that she was already having the
visions of Paradise that Gabriel had brought good tidings of. However even this sweet
smile had turned into a deep grief when she saw the beloved Prophet who lifted the
veils of the tent with affection and mercy. Both of them were grieving for the state that
the other was in.
This was a scene that would hurt the Sultan of Affection and Mercy, peace and
blessings be upon him, most deeply! Tears had started to flow from his glorious face
and wet his noble beard He was crying his beautiful heart out for his wife, best friend
and kindred spirit.
The Messenger of Allah approached her with feelings of gratitude and at a moment
when words just couldn't express their feelings, he started to say the following: "This
is because of me, 0 Khadija! You had to endure these hardships because of me and
you were deprived of a life that was deserving of your standing."
He meant to say, ''You were not a woman who deserved this. Instead of being
reciprocated with generosity for your generosity, you have been reciprocated with
hardship and torment," and added: "But do not forget that behind every difficulty
Allah has meant abundant good."318

--- Sayfa 293 ---
And now after Abu Talib, the second most important support figure in the life of
our Beloved Prophet was no longer alive. Khadija was around sixty-five years old
when she said farewell to the world and all worldly strife, to relocate to her eternal
resting place decked with pearls, a place where there would be no chaos or hardship.
Her spiritual life that commenced on the holy Night of Power alongside the sun that
rose in Hira also ended on the holy Night of Power. The Messenger of Allah himself
went down into her grave and placed her there in her space in the Hajun graveyard,
and he was the one to cover her with earth_.:l..!2.
Difficulties one after another had rained down on the Great Messenger like hail. He
no longer had a place of refuge where he could retire to when faced with difficulties,
no support that held troubles at bay with the safeguard she provided with her years of
experience. After his uncle who had been a loving father and a kind-hearted
trustworthy protector, now he was losing his beloved spouse and her affectionate
support. This encouraged the Quraysh and they started coming on to the Messenger of
Allah with greater force. One day, a debauched member of Quraysh had thrown dirt
on the Messenger of Allah and he had returned home, head bowed, in this state. One
of his daughters was very sad when she saw her father in this state and she was crying
as she cleaned the dirt off her father. With affectionate eyes that inspected the future,
he said: "Do not cry my dear daughter! Allah will not abandon your father. "320
This year in which he would experience sadness after sadness would later be called
the years of huzn, or sadness, for during this period the false stance of the polytheists
and their reaction towards the Prophet had reached unbearable proportions and at the
same time, two supports that had always been on the side of our noble Prophet had
taken their leave from this world. These were developments that threw the sad
Messenger into deep grief, such grief that it would give its name to these years.
The Scene That Even Touched Abu Lahab
With the passing away of Abu Talib and our mother Khadija, the Messenger of Allah
was in deep grief and he was spending most of his time at home. He was spending
time with his children, contemplating their lost. He knew what it meant to lose one's
mother. That is why he showed great affection towards his daughters, spending much
more time with them during this difficult period.
Even if he were Abu Lahab, Abduluzza was also an uncle and he could see that the
Quraysh was oppressing his nephew more and more each day. This scene had even
softened his stone cold heart that would be fuel for Hell and he came to his nephew
and made the following offer: "0 Muhammad! Do as you like; continue to do

--- Sayfa 294 ---
whatever you used to do when Abu Talib was alive! I swear by Lat that no one will be
able to touch you as long as I live!"
This was indeed an unexpected development. It was clear that many things that
seemed impossible could be possible when Allah willed it, even hearts that seemed to
have turned into stone could be moved with affection. Then one day a man called
Ibnu'l-Ghaytala had insulted our noble Prophet and Abu Lahab who heard this had
gone and put him in his place. Ibnu'l-Ghaytala was surprised. It was only yesterday
that he had signed a document that had spelled the death of his nephew, sending him
to three years of exile! He ran to the Quraysh and said: "0 people of Quraysh! Abu
Utba has become a sabi as well!"
This was sensational news for that day. If Abu Lahab had also gone to Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him, and submitted in belief, this meant that the world
had become a prison for them. They ran to him and wanted to verify the situation:
"No! I have not abandoned the religion of Abdul Muttalib. I am just looking after the
son of my brother and I am trying to protect him," answered Abu Lahab.
This made the Quraysh breathe a sigh of relief: "That is well; thus you are fulfilling
the obligations of a relative," they said and left him.
A few more days had passed. The voices of rancor rising from the Quraysh had
somewhat lessened, there was an easing of atmosphere in Mecca. But this wouldn't
last long, for it was the calm sea before the storm. Abu Jahl and Uqba ibn Abi Muayt
had come together to visit Abu Lahab. It was clear that Abu Jahl and Uqba would be
their old selves again. They were very good at imposing their views on others and
changing the agenda according to their will in a way to enhance the position of the
deniers. They approached Abu Lahab and asked: "Has the son of your brother told you
where your father is?"
"And where is he?" Abu Lahab responded.
"He is saying that your father is in Hell."
They were choosing the rights words in order to provoke him.
Unfortunately this provocation worked. It was exactly the thing that would work on
Abu Lahab. He already knew what had been said about himself and his wife; but
despite all these and in the face of the oppression that the Messenger of Allah was
facing, he had felt the need to give him some degree of respite. He could not let people
speak ill of his father and so he had to go to his nephew at once and cut his ties with
him. He ran to him and exclaimed: "I swear that if you continue saying that Abdul
Muttalib is in Hell, I will be your eternal enemy!"

--- Sayfa 295 ---
This was a statement that declared that their roads would diverge once again.
Nothing less could be expected from someone like Abu Lahab. After this, the hatred
of the Quraysh would rage again and the short-lived period of peace would end. 321

--- Sayfa 296 ---
313 Halabi, Sirah, 2/49-50
314 "Staying on the religion of Abdul Muttalib" is central to the issue of the faith of Abu Tali b.
315 Bukhari, Sahih, 11457 (1294)
316 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21265, 266
317 See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1409 (3672). Our noble Prophet is reported to have said the following about
the state of Abu Talib: "I am expecting a great good for him from my Lord" (Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat,
11124, 125), "If it had not been for me, he would be tormented in deepest Hell now" (Muslim,
Sahih, 11195, 209) and "His torment in Hell comes only up to his heels" (Muslim, Sahih, 11195,
210).
318 Haysami,Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 9/218
319 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/18
320 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21264
321 See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11211. That day the Messenger of Allah would repeat similar words to
Abu Lahab and stand behind what he knew. The same subject would be treated time and again
through its different aspects in verses that came later; and all this information makes it clear that
people who died during the period of stagnation, that is before the revelations came would be of
the saved people, or ahl al-najat, including the mother and father of the prophet. See al-Isra 17:15,
al-An'am 6:130-131, 156-157, al-Qasas 28:47-59, Ta-Ha 20:134, ash-Shuara 26:208-209, Fatir
35:37, an-Nisa 4:156. There are also reports that the Messenger of Allah had resurrected his father
and mother and they had submitted in faith to him, for more information on the matter. See
Akc;ay, Mustafa, Ebeveyn-i Resul Risaleleri, istanbul: Yeni Akademi Yaymlan, 2005.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
A PAINFUL PERIOD
Rukana and Two Miracles
0
ur noble Prophet was trying everything in order to bring people to the right
path. He would approach the subject through the different fields of interest
that people had and then would incorporate Islam into the discussion. He
was thus trying to help people get to know their Lord, for this to work, he needed to
know his addressees very well, for one of the most important conditions of tabligh,
communication, was to know the addressee very well; to know the feelings, views,
expectations and hobbies of the person one was speaking to, and this route was no
doubt best practiced by the Messenger of Allah.
There was a wrestler by the name of Rukana ibn Y azid, a wrestler who had not yet
been defeated by anyone. The Messenger of Allah would see this man often. One day
they had met in the outskirts of Mecca and got into conversation once again. The
noble Prophet started to stay: "0 Rukana, I wish you would dress the dress of piety
and come and accept my offer."
Rukana said: "If I knew that what you were inviting me was true, of course I would
follow you."
There was true sincerity in his words, and since things had got so far, one could not
leave it there and steps had to be taken further. That is why the Messenger chose to
speak in a language that Rukana would understand: "Ifl win in a wrestling match, will
you believe that what I come with is true?" asked the Messenger of Allah.
But what he was proposing was physically impossible. How could a man who had
never wrestled in his life win a match over a wrestler whose strength had already been
proven and unmatched? That is why Rukana did not hesitate in his answer: "Yes, I
will believe you."
Of course the aim here was not a win over physical strength; the point was to show
Rukana a miracle that would set him thinking. He was going to speak with a language
he would understand, and he would tell him that he was a Prophet whose power was

--- Sayfa 298 ---
completely from Allah. The Messenger of Allah said without losing time: "Come on,
let's wrestle then."
Rukana, extremely self-assured, stood up and the wrestling started. But at the very
first move Rukana found himself lying flat on the floor. It was as if he was facing not
Muhammad the Trustworthy but a whole army. He had no time to devise any strategy.
It was as if his hands and feet had been tied. How did this happen in the blink of an
eye? That is why he suggested: "Let's wrestle again!"
His offer was accepted, but the result was no different. It was again Rukana whose
back was on the ground. There was no need to hide his astonishment: "0 Muhammad!
I swear by Allah this is a strange and impossible thing! How can you win over me?"
Rukana had started to unravel. The Messenger of Allah did not want to leave things
here. There was need for another miracle and he said: "If you like, I can show you
even stranger things! But then I will ask you to fear Allah and to follow me."
"Then what is it?" asked Rukana
"This tree you see there, I will call to it and it will come to me," said the Messenger
of Allah.
"Then call it."
Our noble Prophet stood to attention and called the tree with great care. Rukana was
watching what was taking place with eyes wide open. The tree that the Messenger of
Allah had called had indeed moved and was now approaching him, and when it came
in front of him, the Messenger of Allah said: "Now go back to where you came from."
And the same tree went back to its place.
Rukana's mind had been blown away. He had realized that he was faced with a
force he would not be able to overcome, however he did not have the will to take the
final step.322 That is why he preferred to go back to his tribe. He went back to his own
tribe, and yet he was still under the influence of what he had seen. First he told them
what he had experienced. Then he would say the following when people asked about
the strange state he was in: "0 sons of Abdimanaf1 You can bewitch the whole world
with this friend of yours; I swear by Allah that I have not seen a greater magician than
him!"323
Abu Bakr's Attempt at Hijra
Our noble Prophet and his followers were now left without the support of Abu Talib
and Mecca had started to react to them more strongly. It wasn't just the Great
Messenger that they were targeting; they were now attacking all those who acted with

--- Sayfa 299 ---
him. Abu Bakr got his share of this ill-will. On the one hand it was clear that there was
not going to be peace of mind for them in Mecca, and on the other hand there was the
good news of those who had gone to Abyssinia.
Before long Abu Bakr asked the Messenger of Allah permission for hijra,
migration. He was granted permission for this reasonable choice. Though the
oppression where they were grew day by day, the world was wide, and so one day he
set off for Abyssinia with his nephew. His one wish was to be able to perform the
Prayers without facing harassment, and to read the Qur'an to his heart's content
without obstruction.
After they made some way on the road to hijra, they came across Ibn Dughunna, an
old friend and a respectable man among the Quraysh. When he saw that Abu Bakr was
on the road he asked: 'Where are you going?"
"I have been forced by my tribe to leave my homeland," answered Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him.
Ibn Dughunna was surprised. A man virtuous and of good morals like Abu Bakr, a
man who embraced everyone and who was known with his truthfulness, how could he
have been driven out of his country? He expressed his surprise in these words: 'Why?
I swear by Allah that you help those close to you more than any of us; you look after
the needs of the poor. Return at once, because from now on you are under my
protection."
Abu Bakr's heart had indeed been left in Mecca; how could he face the hijra to
Abyssinia while the beloved Prophet was left there! Someone like him had to return to
Mecca at once and be at the side of the Messenger of Allah when he was in need. This
would be the expected behavior of a siddiq, the eminently truthful one among the
Companions, and now a historic opportunity had arisen and he accepted Ibn
Dughunna's offer. They returned together. Ibn Dughunna held Abu Bakr's hand and
came to the Ka'ba to tell the Meccans: "0 people of Quraysh! There is no doubt that I
have taken the son of Abu Quhafa under my protection. No one should harbor ill
feelings towards him any longer."
The Quraysh could not disregard the pleasure of Ibn Dughunna, however they had
one condition: Abu Bakr was not to pray or read the Qur' an in open spaces, and he
was not to invite people to his religion.
So Abu Bakr had reserved a comer of his home as a place of worship; this is where
he would pray and read the Qur'an in tears and then supplicate to his Lord. Some
people who had noticed the sincerity in his worship would gather around him, marvel

--- Sayfa 300 ---
at what he was reading and watch him. This comer had become a place where
children, women and slaves would come together.
This was the most effective way of tabligh for Abu Bakr, for it was the way of
tamsil, representation. Shortly enough, Abu Bakr had started to win people's hearts for
Islam even without realizing. But the Quraysh realized it quickly enough. They went
to Ibn Dughunna at once and informed him: "You have not given protection to Abu
Bakr so he may injure us. But he is so effective when he reads the Qur'an and prays
that we fear that our children and women will change their religion." In fact, in saying
this, they were thus accepting the power and the beauty of what Abu Bakr was doing.
But in their prejudice and darkness, they were unable to reach out to that goodness and
beauty. What they really feared was their weakness in the face of truth and that is why
they tried to avoid coming face to face with truth, and they did not want people around
them to face it either.
Before long they came to Ibn Dughunna again: "Go to him and tell him to go to his
home. Let him behave however he likes in his own home. He should stop praying and
reading the Qur'an where other people can see him."
They had managed to influence Ibn Dughunna as well. He came to Abu Bakr and
said the following:
"0 Abu Bakr! I have not given you protection so that you may injure your tribe.
They do not like the space where you read the Qur' an and pray. You disturb them with
this attitude. Enter your home and continue your worship there."
However for Abu Bakr, it was better to seek help from Allah rather than to live
under the protection of a guardian. If he was not going to be able to communicate his
religion and help people, if he was not going to be able to pray and read the Qur' an in
public, what use was Ibn Dughunna's protection? What Ibn Dughunna had offered
was something like an offer to keep a lion in chains. But humanity was awaiting his
service, and so Abu Bakr refused these chains and he chose the route of service even if
it meant hardships. He thought long and hard. Maybe if he did as he was told he would
no longer face difficulties in practicing his religion. But the values he believed in
made it clear that religion was not an individual belief system. Had it been so, then
why would the Messenger of Allah endure such hardships? Among personal
responsibilities there was also the responsibility of giving others a hand and bringing
them face to face with the truth. He behaved as he should in such circumstances. He
went to Ibn Dughunna, returned his "protection" and declared that he was now under
the protection of no one but Allah. 324

--- Sayfa 301 ---
In the Mecca of the day, such a declaration meant that trials and tribulations would
be showered upon you. He had now got out of his circumscribed space and was
continuing the worship of his Lord mostly in the vicinity of the Ka'ba. Clearly, this
was not going to be easy. The old animosity of the Quraysh had been rekindled and
seeing that Abu Bakr did not have any protection that they recognized, they were
pursuing him ever more closely.
One day Abu Bakr was praying in the Ka'ba. One of the degenerates of the Quraysh
approached him, took a handful of dust from the ground and with insulting words
threw it on the head of Abu Bakr who was in prostration, alone and one-on-one with
his Lord. At the time, another leading man of Quraysh was passing by. He saw Abu
Bakr trying to clean the dirt away, and Abu Bakr saw the man's deprecating look. 325
What harm could there be in what he was doing? Who could approve of such
oppression? He called out to him hoping that there may be some traces of humanity
left in the man: "Have you seen what this degenerate man has done to me!"
However, the answer he got was no less degenerate than the man who threw the
dust: "It's you who did this to yourself," the man said. He meant to say that by leaving
the protection of Ibn Dughunna he had invited such acts upon himself. Maybe there
was nothing else he had to say, and was saying these just to have said something. The
doors he turned to other than Allah's were all closed to Abu Bakr. So he lifted his
hands to the skies and started to supplicate to his Lord: "How merciful You are, dear
Lord! How merciful You are my Lord! How merciful You are my Lord!"326
With this he meant the vastness of the mercy of his Lord who did not deal with
these degenerates and send upon them His Wrath, these degenerates who tried to make
the day look as gloomy and dark as the night. He was declaring his awe at how the
Lord enveloped all with His mercy despite their rebellion.
News from the Land of Byzantine
The world was not a peaceful place in those days either; wars continued between
tribes and states, and this caused the deaths of many innocent people. There was a
similar situation between the Byzantines and the Persians. There was news one day in
Mecca that the Byzantines had been defeated by the Persians and that they had lost
land all the way to Damascus. It was also said that in the face of such defeat and the
pursuit of the Persians, the Byzantine king Heraclius had to flee all the way to
Constantinople. Those who witnessed the event were saying that the Byzantines would
not be able to gather new forces and fight again. This was good news for the
polytheists of Mecca. They were on the side of the Persians because the Persians were

--- Sayfa 302 ---
polytheists like them, believing in many gods, and they wanted the Byzantines to lose
because as the People of the Book, they were closer to the Muslims. This is what they
said: "The Byzantines say they are the People of the Book; but today the Persians have
come victorious over them. You say that you will be stronger than us because of the
book that has been revealed to your Messenger! Do not forget; just as the Persians
who defeated the Byzantines, the People of the Book, we too will always win over
you."327
Another piece of news was coming from beyond the skies and it said:
Alif. Lam. Mim. The Byzantine Romans have been defeated in the lands
close-by, but they, after their defeat, will be victorious within a few (nine)
years-to Allah belongs the command (the absolute judgment and
authority) both before and after (any event)-and at the time (when the
Romans are victorious), the believers will rejoice, because of Allah's help
leading them to victory. He helps whom He wills to victory. He is the All-
Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Compassionate (especially
towards His believing servants). (ar-Rum 30: 1-5)
The news coming from the heavens was not as the polytheists would have it; it said
that even though the Byzantines may be defeated today, in the near future they would
gather their forces again and win a victory over the Persians, and that day would also
mean a victory for the Muslims. This added to the importance of the issue. The
Meccan polytheists who saw Abu Bakr would say: "0 Abu Bakr! We hear that your
friends say that the Byzantines will come victorious over the Persians again."
''Yes," said Abu Bakr without showing a moment's hesitation. When Allah and His
Messenger said something, it would surely come to pass.
But of course this was not what the men thought. They wanted to poke fun.
'Will you bet with us?" they said
Abu Bakr had no hesitations so he said: "Yes."
Betting had not been addressed by revelations yet so they made a bet for six years.
Whoever would win would give ten camels to the other side. Abu Bakr was the loyal
friend to the Messenger of Allah and so he went to him and told him what had
happened.
When the Messenger of Allah learned what had happened, he advised him: "Extend
the period and increase the number of camels."
"A couple of years" mentioned in the verse actually meant a period up to ten years.
Getting this assurance from the Messenger of Allah Abu Bakr went to the Meccan

--- Sayfa 303 ---
polytheists and said: "Would it be all right if we extend the period to nine years and
increase the number of camels?"
They were so sure that that they would have accepted it had it been not nine but
nineteen years; and so they made a bet concerning what would happen in nine years
for the price of a hundred camels. This was a serious bet indeed. 328
Marriage with Our Mother Sawda
Our noble Prophet had passed the age of fifty and the responsibility he had to carry
was getting heavier day by day. His beloved wife Khadija had passed away and he had
been left alone with his daughters. The wife of Uthman ibn Maz'un, Hawla hint
Hakim, was observing what he was going through from afar and came to him one day
advising him to get married to a woman who would be of good support to him in his
home. She herself came with two options: Sawda, daughter of Zam'a, and Aisha,
daughter of Abu Bakr. This was a reasonable suggestion; on the one hand the
polytheists were putting him under pressure and torment and on the other hand the
now motherless children of Khadija were in need of caring.
Both were names he knew well. The Messenger of Allah stayed silent and Hawla
perceived of this silence as an acceptance and so she set to work, visiting both
candidates. First she wanted to evaluate their intentions. She first went to Sawda, the
daughter of Zam' a. Sawda had immigrated to Abyssinia with her husband Sakran, and
when he passed away there, she had returned to Mecca. She was a middle aged,
dignified, mature, well-settled and trusted woman. She had led a life of difficulties and
yet had never conceded from her beliefs. She did not mean to exhaust the fruits of
Paradise on earth and she was determined to be patient in the face of all difficulties
that may befall her, and now, unexpectedly, the possibility of becoming the "mother of
believers" had been offered to her. This offer also meant that Sawda, widowed and
alone, would now be looked after. In return for that, she would share the loneliness of
our noble Prophet in these most difficult times. The sorrow of her husband's death
was still in her bosom, and yet this offer was of a nature that could quell her pain and
troubles. This was an offer to put her head down on the same pillow with the
Messenger of Allah for whom people were sacrificing all that they had. How could
she not say yes? However, she could not make this decision alone. She sent Hawla to
her father to ask for his blessing.
Approaching Sawda's father, Hawla gave a salutation that was common in the
period of ignorance.
'Who is it?" asked the old man.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
"Hawla, daughter of Hakim," replied Hawla, and the following conversation
ensued: "What do you want? Why have you come?"
"Muhammad, the son of Abdullah has sent me; he wants to marry Sawda."
"It is very fitting indeed! But what does your friend say to it?"
"She is positive."
"Call her to me."
This meant that the father had given his blessing. They went to Sawda and told her
to go and visit her father. After a little while she was at her father's presence. Her
father asked: "This woman says that Abdullah's son Muhammad asks for your hand in
marriage. I know that he is a gracious match. Do you also want me to marry you to
him?"
This was a question whose answer was known from the start and Sawda said yes
without hesitation. She was invited to the home of the Messenger of Allah and the
marriage took place. After a couple of days, her brother Abdullah ibn Zam'a returned
and learnt about the marriage and the fact that his sister had been married to
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, without his consent!
He could not accept this! He did not want to accept this! He expressed his reaction by
throwing dust all over himsel£.329
On the other hand the brother of Sakran, Suhayl ibn Amr, who had lost his brother
and many of his relatives to Islam and to our noble Prophet, was objecting to this
marriage. He was expressing his reaction to another member of his family going over
to the side of the Messenger of Allah through poetry. Apart from his brothers Salit,
Khatib and Sakran, his daughter Umm Kulthum and son in law Abu Sabra had all
submitted to the Messenger of Allah.
As if all this was not enough, his son Abdullah had gone and become a Muslim as
well. Just as he had thought that he had "saved" him, he was about to lose his control
over his younger son Abu Jandal. Each day the support Suhayl had around him was
dissolving and this worried him immensely. But his acts of anxiety would yield no
results and the Messenger of Allah would marry our mother Sawda with the mandate
of her and Suhayl' s brother Khatib ibn Amr on one Ramadan evening in Mecca. Our
noble Prophet was thus uniting his life with another woman for the first time after the
passing of our mother Khadija. 330
In the mean time, Hawla had come to the house of Abu Bakr and had sad the
following to his wife Umm Ruman: "0 Umm Ruman! Why is Allah's munificence so
great upon you?"

--- Sayfa 305 ---
'Why?" Answered Umm Ruman, for she was unaware ofthe situation. Hawla was
waiting for such an answer: "The Messenger of Allah sent me to you; he wants to be
married to your daughter Aisha."
There could be no greater happiness than this for Umm Ruman, but she had one
hesitation: "But is this fitting for him? Verily she is his brother's daughter."
It was understood that when two people were very close, such a marriage would not
be fitting. In the face of such reaction Hawla also hesitated and returned to the
Messenger of Allah to tell him what happened. He said: "Go to her and say 'I am your
brother, and you are my brother; but our brotherhood is the brotherhood of Islam and
there is no obstacle in me marrying your daughter'."
Hawla came to Abu Bakr's home again and did as she was told. Upon that Umm
Ruman said: "Mut'im ibn Adiyy wanted her for her son Jubayr; I do not know where
the matter stands at the moment! I swear that Abu Bakr does not tum back from his
promise."
So they had to wait for Abu Bakr' s return. He came and learnt about the situation.
What happiness it would be indeed to be related to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him! However, he had had a conversation with Mut'im. He first had
to clear that situation and then take the necessary steps. He went to Mut'im's house
without losing time. When Mut'im's wife Umm Sabiy saw that Abu Bakr was
approaching, she said: "0 son of Abu Quhafa! When we are in-laws with you I am
sure you will invite our friend to your religion and make him accept it."
There was a mocking tone in her statement. What she really meant was, "as long as
there is a difference of religion between us, we can never be in-laws." Abu Bakr
turned to Mut'im and asked: "Do you agree with what she says?"
''No, she speaks her own mind," Mut'im answered.
When they spoke some more it became evident that the ibn Adiyy family's views of
Aisha were not clear. So there was no promise made, and no request for a promise to
be made either.
This therefore presented Abu Bakr with the opportunity to become relatives with
the Messenger of Allah after having already been very close to him. This was
something Abu Bakr had not even dreamt of, because in being relatives, he was going
to be even closer to him and he was never going to leave his side again. He left the
house of Mut'im and came home. He gave the good news that Hawla was expecting.
So, a new period started for the family of Abu Bakr. 331 This meant an engagement and
the marriage would take place seven months after the hijra to Medina.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
A Collection ofDebt
Despite all that was happening, the commercial life in Mecca continued as it was. One
day a man called Kahla had come from a region called Irash and had sold his camel to
Abu Jahl. Although a long time had passed, Abu Jahl had not given the man his
money. The man from Irash had been fed up with all the trips he had to take to get his
money and one day he started to cry out at the people of Quraysh: "0 people of
Quraysh! Who will help me against ibn Hisham? I have no supporters and I have
come from far away. He has stolen my rights and is not giving them back to me!"
At the time the Messenger of Allah was also at the Ka'ba. One of them pointed to
him: "Do you see that man? They have a quarrel with him because of what he had
brought and says. Go to him so that he may help you."
The man had been so injured that he was ready to cling onto anything for hope.
He went straight to our noble Prophet and told him of his situation. How could it be
that someone should ask something from the Messenger of Allah and he should
refuse! He stood up with the man from Irash and made his way to the home of Abu
Jahl, a route he had trekked many times to explain to him the beauties of faith. The
Quraysh were watching the developments and did not want to miss out on what was
about to take place, for they knew that Abu Jahl could not be talked out of his
convictions so easily. They appointed someone from among them: "Go and see what
will happen, and then come immediately and report to us," they said.
At last, the Messenger of Allah reached Abu Jahl's door with the man from Irash.
The Messenger of Allah started to knock.
'Who is it?" shouted Abu Jahl with a tone full of anger.
"Muhammad," answered our noble Prophet. "Come out so that we may speak."
The door opened abruptly, but as soon as he opened the door, a change occurred in
Abu Jahl. It was as though it had not been him who had shouted from the inside with
great anger. For some reason, he had softened, and his face had gone completely pale.
The Messenger of Allah softly said: "Give this man his due right."
"All right, you just wait there, I am bringing it," said Abu Jahl. It was as if it had
not been Abu Jahl who had resisted paying his debt. Both the man from Irash and the
Qurayshi who was to report back was astonished and did not know what to say. Abu
Jahl went inside and came back with the money due for the camel, and paid the man
from Irash. The man that the Quraysh had sent returned as well. The Quraysh were
asking him questions so as to have a little bit of fun: "So tell us, what happened?" they
said mockingly.

--- Sayfa 307 ---
"I have seen very strange things," the man started to say.
"I swear he just went and knocked on the door of Abu'l-Hakam. He only said 'Give
this man his due right' to Abu'l-Hakam who stepped outside. He then went inside his
house saying 'All right, just wait a little' and then he came and gave the man the price
of the camel."
The Quraysh could not hide the curiosity on their faces-how could it be that a man
with such a shrewd and devilish intellect, just willingly hand over the money he had
resisted giving for years? They could not believe what they had heard. At last Abu
Jahl came towards them. They asked him as soon as they saw him: "Woe unto you!
What is with you? We swear we have never seen you do such a thing like that before."
Abu Jahl, who was still visibly shaken by what he had seen, started to speak: "Woe
unto you! That man was banging on my door so hard that the noise he made was
piercing through my very heart. Then I stepped outside. What should I see but a camel
standing on his hind feet. I have never seen such camel toe nails in my life, nor such
camel teeth, nor such a big camel head! I swear that had I not given them the money
there and then, he would have eaten me up alive! "332
Mecca was witnessing another miracle. Our noble Prophet's stance in the name of
Right was not a new thing; this was an act that recalled the coming together around
Hilf al-Fudul before the revelations had started, and it would be inscribed in memories
never to be erased again.
Twenty People Coming from Abyssinia
With the hijra of the Muslims from Mecca to Abyssinia, the news of the Messenger of
Allah had even reached that faraway place, and a group of people decided to make
their way to Mecca in order to experience his presence themselves. 333
They found our noble Prophet praying in the Ka'ba and they sat by him and
engaged with him in a long conversation. The Qurayshi people that gathered around
them were watching curiously what was taking place. Having expressed their desire
and received what they wanted from the Messenger of Allah invited them to be
servants to Allah and started to read them verses from the Qur' an. They could not hold
back their tears as they listened to the verses. They were being invited to Allah, and
they accepted. They spoke their faith and bore witness to all that had come from the
Right; their acceptance seemed to say 'this was what was spoken about in our books
as well'. When it was time to leave the presence of the Messenger of Allah they got
up, but they were hindered from their way by a group of people including Abu Jahl

--- Sayfa 308 ---
who exclaimed in dismay: "Woe unto you! You are such a bad group of men!
Although you have been sent here by people from your own religion, you are being
tricked by the words of this man and are turning away from your own religion,
abandoning your people. What is it that he has told you that with two words you
change your religion and accept what he says? Truly, we have not come across a more
foolish group of men than you."
What strange situation this was indeed! He was right next to the source of light and
yet he was wallowing in deepest and darkest pits. One could only pity such a man. The
best answer would have been silence, but still, they kindly said the following: "May
Allah's peace be upon you! We cannot compete with you in ignorance; our
understanding and choices belong to us and yours to you. We only wish well for you!"
Just then, another revelation had come to speak of this situation: 334
Those to whom We granted the Book before it do believe in it. When it is
recited to them, they say: "We believe in it. Surely it is the truth from our
Lord. Even before this We were such as submitted (to the Divine Will)."
These will be granted their reward twice over because they have remained
steadfast (in following their religion free of falsehood and so keeping
themselves above all prejudices to believe in and follow the Qur' an and
Muhammad); and they repel evil with good and out of what We have
provided for them (of wealth, knowledge, power, etc.) they spend (in
Allah's cause and for the needy, and purely for the good pleasure of
Allah). When they hear any vain (useless or aggressive) talk, they tum
away from it, without reciprocating it, and say (to those who are engaged
in it): "To us are accounted our deeds, and to you, your deeds. Peace be
upon you! We do not seek to mix with the ignorant (those unaware of
Allah, true guidance and right and wrong)." (al-Qasas 28:52-55)
The Qur'an was so much within society and so united with the human element. It
was responding to the needs of the Muslims and was being revealed in parallel with
the developments so that people may be able correct their behavior accordingly. These
people were Christian, and due to the scholars and monks among them, they were
showing great nobility and were far ahead from other people in accepting the faith.
That is why they loved the Muslims more and felt closer to them and when they
listened to the Qur'an, they were moved to tears by what they heard concerning the
Truth. 335

--- Sayfa 309 ---
322 Rukana would become Muslim after the conquest of Mecca and would die during the period of
the caliphate of Muawiya. See Ibn Abdilbarr,Istiab, 2/507.
323 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21235, 236
324 Bukhari, Sahih, 2/804 (217 5)
325 It is said that this person was either As ibn Wail or Walid ibn Mughira.
326 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/218
327 Suyuti, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 227; Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 354
328 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 10/162; Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 5/344 (3194). Nine years would
pass and the Byzantines would indeed gather strength and open war on the Persians, and then
defeat them. The Battle of Badr that would take place between the believers and the Meccan
polytheists would happen around the same time.
329 Abdullah ibn Zam'a would also later become a Muslim and would articulate his regret at his
behavior that day at every given opportunity. See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 24/30 (80).
330 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/53. Years later Sawda was worried that our noble Prophet would divorce her
and said, "Do not abandon me! It is all right if you devote the time allocated for me to Aisha," and
thus would relinquish her rights to live with the Messenger of Allah, and hand them over to Aisha.
Thus their marriage would remain valid, though nominally, till the Judgment Day. See Ibnu'l-
Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 71157, 158.
331 Hakim,Al-Mustadrak, 21181 (2704)
332 Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 2/419
333 Some reports say that these people were from Najran.
334 There are reports that these verses were revealed about Najashi and his friends. See Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 2/421.
335 Al-Maedah 5:82-83

--- Sayfa 310 ---
JOURNEY TO TAIF
D
espite the extraordinary efforts of the Messenger of Allah and his
Companions, ~othing seemed to be ~rogressing in Mecca and the Meccans
had closed their doors to new openmgs. Tabligh, on the other hand was a
duty to communicate, one that had to be carried out continuously to people elsewhere
in the world who needed Islam as well.
The Meccans were filled with hatred against Islam, one that grew day by day, and
they gave the Muslims no space to take any further steps. One could hear the grating
of the teeth of those who wanted to get rid of the physical presence of the Messenger
of Allah now that the protection of Abu Talib was no longer present. Allah had made a
promise that one day this cause would cover the whole of the earth, and there was no
doubt about that. But this did not seem very probable in the Mecca of that day. There
was need for a new opening and to make that opening possible, on a day in the month
of Shawwal, our noble Prophet took his Companion Zayd ibn Haritha and made his
way for Taif.
Taif was a place well-known for its orchards, gardens and greenery. It was about
ninety kilometers to Mecca and here lived some relatives of the Messenger of Allah
from his mother's side. At the same time this was a place close to the region where
Halima as-Sadia, our noble Prophet's nursing mother, was from and the region where
Allah's Messenger had spent his first formative years.
The Messenger first went to the people of Thaqif on the way to Taif; a road he had
set off on to meet new faces who would accept the messages sent by Allah, to meet
warm faces that he could not find in Mecca so that he may be able to walk towards the
future with sturdier steps, with believers who wanted to take Allah's cause further.
The people of Thaqif were known to be the leading tribe of Taif and they were well-
respected.
The first people they met were the three sons of Amr ibn Umayr; Abdiyalayl,
Mas'ud and Habib. One of them was married to a woman from the Quraysh. The

--- Sayfa 311 ---
Messenger of Allah approached them, saluted them and then started to speak with all
his sincerity. He was inviting them to know Allah as One and to further his cause; he
was asking them to help him in his mission of Prophethood. But Taif seemed just as
difficult as Mecca. The first of the three brothers whom the Messenger of Allah had
met with affection took word and said rather rudely: "If Allah has sent you as Prophet,
I will take the veil ofthe Ka'ba and throw it on the floor."
The most beloved servant of Allah had come to him to save his world and afterlife
but he was intent on making fun of him. A man of great bashfulness, the Messenger of
Allah preferred to stay silent once again in the face of such arrogance and insolence.
But such ill-mannered behavior was not going to stop there. The other brother came to
the fore and remarked: "Could Allah not find another man to send as Prophet?"
It looked like things were going to get more complicated. The third brother, who
also wanted his share in arrogance, said: "I swear I will not speak to you anymore! I
am sure you will make me regret what I said to you! But if you are lying in the face of
Allah, then it is not proper for me to speak to you anyway."
These degenerate people were mocking the Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings
be upon him, and having a good time.
The Messenger of Allah was extremely upset. He had come all that way hoping that
they may understand something, for he just wanted to set open the doors of Paradise
for them. But now he didn't even feel the urge to answer their questions. Had he really
sought to "respond" to their mockery, a Divine response would have been given on his
behalf and they would have been finished, but he was the Prophet of mercy and his
bosom was big enough to embrace all, even his enemies. He was hoping that they too
may one day come and join the true cause. Even if not them, he believed there would
be there someone from their progeny who would join to cause, and so today, one
needed to be patient for that bright future.
The Messenger of Allah had only one thing to ask: "It may be that you have made
your choice; but let what has passed between us stay between us."
He did not want this news to reach Mecca, for it would encourage the Meccans and
this would set into motion even those who had not acted against them, making Mecca
a place even harder to live for Muslims. 336
His sadness was reflected in his walk. On the face of it, it seemed that he was
returning empty handed, however, he knew that one was not meant to do one's duty
with the expectation of seeing an immediate result. He had done what it was upon him
to do, he had communicated his duty of tabligh, and it was up to Allah to create the

--- Sayfa 312 ---
result. Our noble Prophet was the most careful in not meddling with actions that was
up to Allah to carry to fullness, just as he was foremost in executing his duty without
flaw.
However, these people who were not aware that they had turned away good fortune
that had come to their very door would not be content with what they had already done
and getting some street children to their dirty work, they would shower this auspicious
guest with stones.
The Messenger of Allah stayed in Taif for ten days. During this period he wanted to
meet with many people but most of them did not have the heart that could accept him,
and they preferred to stay away from him and his ideas due to their fears, and they
quite unashamedly said: "0 Muhammad! Leave our land, you may go wherever you
like! "337
Zayd had made himself a shield and was trying to protect the Messenger of Allah
from the stones that were raining down on him. The hovering stones did not seem to
stop. This was a behavior that could cause Divine stones to be showered on the
offenders themselves and extinguish them for eternity. The Messenger and Zayd were
pursued thus for about three kilometers. Blood was dripping from the feet of the
Beloved of Allah, the Greatest Messenger. Zayd's head and eyes had been wounded,
and he was also covered in blood.
The Refuge in Taif and a Manifestation
They had at last gone far away from this troublesome place and they had taken some
time to rest under a tree. First, the Messenger of Allah started to perform his Prayers.
It was these Prayers which he called the "light of my eye," and so he prayed two units
under the tree. It was clear that in such situations when everyone had turned their
backs on him, he had to tum towards the real holder of power with all sincerity. In
order to be cleansed from worldly weaknesses and to clothe oneself in graceful
aspects, one first had to be fitted with the right position. Maybe all this was a message
to the ummah to stop them from acting rashly; for he was a model to be followed in all
respects, and when he would be faced with situations where he needed to be angry, he
was to show his ummah how one was to act in such situations.
When he completed his Prayer, he opened his hands high and wide, and started to
supplicate his Lord. Zayd was watching him in awe. It was as if he was looking at a
great statue made out of light. He listened closely. The Messenger of Allah was saying
the following prayer: "My Lord! I offer to Your Knowledge the weaknesses I have,
my inability to find solutions and the way people look down on me.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
You are the most Merciful among the Merciful!
You are the Lord ofthe weak and the powerless!
You are my Lord!
Who do you leave me to?
To bloody and cruel enemies, or my brash and ruthless relatives to whom You
please to submit my work?
If You are not angry with me, then I do not care for anything in the world; the
Wellbeing that You bestow upon me is more important to me than anything else in the
world.
I seek refuge in You that You may not treat me with Your wrath, that You may not
manifest Yourself to me with your rage.
I seek refuge in You, You who arrange all worldly and otherworldly things, You
with whom all darkness turns into light, I seek to enter Your face of light.
I will be at Your gate until I have earned your Contentment!
There is no support other than You, nor any other power one can count on! "338
The Messenger of Allah had not finished his prayer when the Truthful Gabriel and
another angel, the angel of mountains, descended to his side. It was clear that the
supplications of the sad Messenger had shaken the High Heavens and Allah had sent
down two of His angels for help. Gabriel was saying: "0 Muhammad! Verily Allah
the Almighty knows what your tribe said to you and what they did after turning their
faces away from you, and here, in order that you may do as you please to those who
did these against you, He sent you the angel whose orders the mountains obey!"
The angel keeper of the mountains saluted our noble Prophet and said: "If you
should want it, 0 Muhammad, I will pull down these two mountains over the people
ofTaif1"
It was then that one would witness, once again, the true character of the Prophet of
Mercy. Despite everything, his decision would set an example for his followers. That
is why the Messenger of Allah said without a moment of hesitation: "No, never! I still
hope that Allah the Almighty will create from their offspring servants who worship
Him and who hold no false gods!"
One's true nature could be observed on such crucial occasions; the response ofthe
noble Messenger also showed what kind of a man he was.
Then, the angel of the mountains, who had been sent down to pull the mountains
over the heads of the people of Taif, started to speak in awe: "You truly are merciful

--- Sayfa 314 ---
and gracious like your Lord has named you! "339
The Bunch of Grapes and Addas
There were two people who had watched the Messenger of Allah perform his Prayers
and supplicate to his Lord, and they were the two sons of Rabia, Utba and Shayba, the
brothers who were always plotting something against the Beloved of Allah.
But on that day, even Utba and Shayba had registered the inhuman treatment that
the Messenger of Allah had been subjected to and they had been watching the noble
Messenger in a manner that showcased their sympathy. They called their slave Addas
to their side and said: "Gather some of these grapes, put them in this bowl and take it
to this man to eat," the man being the Messenger of Allah.
Addas stood up to do as he was told and approached our noble Prophet with the
grapes he had picked. He offered them to him.
As he reached out for the grapes, naturally the Messenger of Allah said "In the
Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate" and then started to eat.
Addas, who had never heard of anyone utter these words before, had been stunned
where he stood. He gazed hard and long at the Messenger of Allah and then managed
to say: "I swear by Allah that there is no one who says these words in these parts."
His words and warm demeanor had attracted our noble Prophet's attention as well.
It was clear that Addas was not an empty soul; he at least knew what he said had
meant, or rather, he wanted to learn more about such invocations. That is why the
Illustrious Beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, asked: "Where are you
from and what is your religion, 0 Addas?"
"I am from Nineveh and I am Christian," he said.
When he heard the answer, the Messenger of Allah said: "That is the land of my
good brother, Yunus ibn Matta," and sighed.
Addas was now looking at the beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
very intently and asked: "Where do you know Yunus ibn Matta from? I have never
come across anyone who knows of him since I've left Nineveh! How is it that you
know of Ibn Matta? As far as I know, you do not know how to read or write, and you
come from a tribe who is illiterate!"
"He is my brother, he was a Messenger as well, and I am a Messenger," responded
the Messenger of Allah.
Everything had been asked. Nothing further could be said. At this point, Addas
kneeled down beside the Messenger of Allah and kissed his holy hands. Addas could

--- Sayfa 315 ---
not contain himself, this time he kissed the beautiful face of the beloved Prophet many
times until satisfied, as if he was satisfying his hunger or thirst! For the beloved of
Allah, this moment was one which would take away all the troubles of the day, for
another person had come to him, another person had saved his eternity, what more
could he want?
However, on the other hand, Utba and Shayba had seen their slave kiss the hands
and face of the Messenger of Allah and this quickly made them revert back to their
ruthless attitude. They had sent their slave over in sympathy but now he was making
gestures of great devotion to Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him.
One of them turned to other and said: "Did you see that, he has also won over your
slave!"
When Addas came over to them, they started questioning him: "What is it with you
that you started to kiss the hand and face of that man?"
Addas responded very calmly: "0 master! There is no man as munificent as this
man on earth; what he said to me could only have been known by a Messenger."
'Woe unto you 0 Addas! Do not let this man make you recant your religion; for
your religion is better than his," they said. 340
Setting off for Mecca and the Submission of the Jinn
At the end of a bitter day, our noble Prophet had attained a sweet present, and yet left
that place in sadness for Mecca. When they reached the place called Nahla, time had
advanced and the Messenger of Allah had stopped to perform his Tahajjud, the Late
Night Prayer. The Messenger of Allah was going to stay here for a couple of days. He
started to perform his Prayers and recited the chapter of Jinn.
Meanwhile, seven Nusaybin jinns came to where he was; they were watching him
pray and listening to the Qur'an he was reading. They were gesturing to each other to
stay silent. When the recitation ofthe Qur'an ended they returned to their own nation
and carried the news: "0 tribe! We have listened to such a strange and beautiful book
today; it invites to what is good and beautiful, and we have submitted to it, for this
book comes after Moses and confirms the judgments before it. With its call towards
truth, it invites us to the straight path. 0 tribe! Come and respond favorably to this
Messenger of Allah! Submit in faith to Allah so that He may forgive your sins and
protect you from His painful wrath! From now on we will not worship anything other
than our Lord; for He has not had or adopted a child. We see now that the degenerate
among us have been saying unseemly things about Him! We had thought that the jinn

--- Sayfa 316 ---
and man would not lie about Allah! But we see now that some people come together
with the jinn and spread confusion in the world! They also believe, like you, that He
will not be able recreate life again! We have gone around the heavens and checked;
there are now guardians everywhere, they do not let any news to be leaked; they send
shafts of light immediately. We wanted to stay a while and learn a few things, but we
saw that whoever should try that, pieces of fire are sent upon them and they are not
allowed. We have listened to the truth and have put our faith in it, and we know that
whoever believes in his Lord, there is no more fear or worry for him."341
The Truthful Gabriel had come again and had made the Messenger of Allah privy to
what had taken place. This was a second surprise after Addas, and after human folk,
the Messenger of Allah had now got in touch with the jinn, and now there were those
among them who believed in him as well, for he was a Messenger who had been sent
to the jinn as well as for human beings. Two separate invisible supports had thus come
to him-first the Truthful Gabriel and the angel responsible for the mountains had
been sent to help him, and now a door had opened up to the world of the jinn for the
Messenger of Allah to guide them to the right path.
Each coming verse enforced the efforts of the Muslims. The content of these verses
was like medicine for the believers who lived in those times: 342
Whoever does not respond (affirmatively) to him who calls to Allah, he
cannot frustrate (Allah's will) on the earth, and no guardian will he have
apart from Allah (once Allah has disowned him): those (who seek to do
so) are in obvious error. (al-Ahkaf 46:32)
On the other hand, Tamim ad-Dari, who was a good Christian, was in the region of
Damascus to see to some of his business. Night fell during his journey and he started
to say the following to himself: "Tonight I am under the protection of the vastness of
this valley."
He wanted to lie down and sleep. Just as he finished his sentence, he heard a voice
he couldn't locate the source of, and this voice was saying: "Seek protection in Allah
and ask for help from him, for the jinn cannot protect anyone against Allah."
He was surprised and said: "0 you! Say for the love of Allah, what do you mean? Is
what you say true?"
The owner of the voice said things that would surprise him further: "The Prophet of
the illiterate, the Messenger of Allah has come and we have submitted in faith to him,
we prayed behind him in the place called Hajun. The tricks of the jinn are at an end
and now there stand balls of fire between them and the heavens. From now on they

--- Sayfa 317 ---
cannot do any harm or good to anybody. You better go and submit in faith to the
Messenger of the Lord of the worlds and become a Muslim."
Hajun ... Prayer. .. Lord ofthe worlds ... Messenger. .. Muhammad ...
These were not strange words to him. He knew of Muhammad very well for the
Gospel spoke of his coming, Jesus had awaited his coming. There was more than what
met the eye, and when morning broke, he ran to a priest in Hawran in Damascus who
was well known for his scholarship. He told him what had happened. The priest
listened with great attention and then said:
"They have told you to truth. Haram is where he will come from and he will
migrate to Haram too. He is the most munificent of all Messengers, and there will not
be anyone above him."343

--- Sayfa 318 ---
336 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21266, 267
337 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/211,212
338 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/268; Ibn Abi Sayba, Musannaf, 6/68 (29528)
339 Halabi, Sirah, 2157, 58
340 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/268, 269
341 We have summarized the content of the verses without aiming to provide a word by word
translation. For further detail, see al-Ahkaf 46:29-31; al-Jinn 72:1-15.
342 The speech of the jinn is given in chapter Jinn in the following way: "We have come to know that
we can by no means frustrate Allah (in His will on the earth), nor can we frustrate Him by flight"
(al-Jinn 72: 12).
343 Isbahani, Dalailu'n-Nubuwwa, 11155; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Asar, 11145

--- Sayfa 319 ---
MECCA AGAIN
A
lthough Taif had not given the expected result, with Addas and the jinn
entering Islam, the heart of the Messenger of Allah was somewhat subdued,
and he set off for Mecca again. When the road had approached Mecca, he
decided to go to the Mount of Light like back in the days and then he made his way to
Hira. The Mecca that had closed its doors to him was there right in front of him, the
Baytullah, House of Allah, was sad and the believers were orphaned! A silent
conversation between them took place. They understood one another very well, for the
Messenger of Allah who was known as the "twin brother of the House of Allah" was
also orphaned and sad. Zayd, on the other hand, was wondering how they could enter
Mecca and could find no solution. He couldn't contain himself and at last he asked:
"They have banished you 0 Messenger, how do you propose to enter Mecca?"
The Prophet of Mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, was self-possessed as
always, one could see that he could foresee the outcome of his actions: "0 Zayd!
There is no doubt that Allah will send a way out, open a new door; there is no doubt
that He will protect His religion and He will make His Prophet victorious!"
Later, obeying the need to make use of "causes and means," the Prophet of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, sent word to some people in Mecca because he did
not want to face any problems while returning to his village. The first person he
thought of was Akhnas ibn Shariq, but he responded saying: "I have made a pact, a
man like me who lives under a pact cannot offer protection for anyone else," thus
refusing his request. The same message was then taken to Suhayl ibn Amr known as
the wordsmith of the Quraysh. But he responded saying: "The sons of Amir cannot
offer protection to the sons of Qab," making it clear that he was not yet ready for
siding with the noble Prophet. Maybe they were afraid to give a positive answer. But it
was clear that Suhayl was a name that our beloved Prophet considered often and from
whom he expected many things.
The positive answer came from Mut'im ibn Adiyy.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
When the request of the Messenger of Allah reached him, he gathered his children
together and advised them in the following way: "Put on your weapons and go and
wait for me at the pillars of the Ka'ba, for I have given protection to Muhammad."
Then he himself came to the Ka'ba and said to the people from atop his camel: "0
Quraysh! Know well that I have given protection to Muhammad; do not harass him!"
Thus letting the whole of Mecca know that whoever harassed Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him, would have him to answer to. Then the Messenger
of Allah came to Mecca with Zayd. The first place they wanted to visit was the Ka'ba,
and after saluting it, they performed two units of Prayer and then turned towards their
happy home. During all this, Mut'im ibn Adiyy was protecting him, not allowing
anyone to do him any harm. 344
On the other hand, Abu Jahl was worried for his own campaign and soon enough he
approached Mut'im to ask: "Have you only given him protection or have you become
Muslim as well?"
Mut'im turned to his friend and said: ''No, I have not become Muslim; I have just
given him protection."
This was the answer that Abu Jahl was expecting and so he said: "Then we will not
touch someone to whom you have given protection! "345
His name was so trusted that his enemies were ready to protect him against his
worst enemies at the expense of their whole family. It was clear that to have a say in
society and to have one's requests answered, one had to be able to show a sense of
humanity in order to have enough "credit" in society. The name of this credit was trust
and its source was purity. This credit carried a value that could not be compared to any
earthly value, for had they offered the most precious treasures to Mut'im that day, he
would not have taken such a risk, he would not have put himself against the whole of
Mecca. But the trust he felt for Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be
upon him, his innocent stance in the face of all that had been done to him moved the
likes ofMut'im, and made them feel the need to say "stop" to what was being done to
our noble Prophet.
Turning to Nearby Tribes
Mecca was closing its doors one by one. The beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, had not received the answer he expected from Taif. But so long as he was
alive, tabligh was an indispensable duty, and this was where the contentment of the
Lord lay. That is why the Messenger of Allah wanted to make best use of the

--- Sayfa 321 ---
approaching pilgrimage season to be able to reach out to greater numbers of people
and to fulfill his duty to communicate. Accordingly, he started to visit the tribes one
by one.
He introduced himself to every tribe he went to, and carried Allah's orders to them,
inviting them to faith. But these tribes seemed to have made an agreement with the
people of Mecca, for the Messenger of Allah was not getting the answer he expected
from them either. Each one of them came to him with a different request, and each one
had different expectations. They were saying: "If we take this man from the Quraysh
and give him protection, the Arabs will eat us alive."
And some would address our noble Prophet by saying, "If we should make you a
promise now, will you give us power when Allah has made you victorious over your
enemies tomorrow?" thus trying to bargain with him.
Naturally, the Messenger of Allah did not think much of these suggestions and so
responded: "The result of the matter is up to Allah alone, this cause will be taken up
by whomever He wills." This time the same man would say: 'We will risk ourselves
by giving you protection against the Arabs and then when Allah makes you victorious
you will share this power with others? Then we will not enter this enterprise."
Those days, there were elderly members of tribes whose hearts were with the Ka'ba
but who were too old to physically go to Mecca. They would ask those who had made
the pilgrimage to Mecca about their journey and what they experienced. As they
recounted the interesting events of the pilgrimage, they would also mention someone
by the name of Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, who had invited them
to believe in Allah, who had claimed to be the Messenger of the period closest to the
Judgment Day. They told them how he expected them to listen to him and help him
communicate the Word of Allah. One of the old men put his hands over his head and
started to say the following with a great sense of loss: "0 sons of Amir! Do you
realize what kind of an opportunity you have missed, what kind of a chance we have
let go from our hands? I swear by He who holds my life in His hands that this is the
news that Ishmael had told us, and it is true. How could you not have realized this?"346
Without stopping to think about the results, the Messenger of Allah was continuing
his mission of tabligh. During this period, although few, people still came to him and
became Muslims. Suwayd ibn Samit was one of them. He was a poet and people from
his tribe would call him kamil, or perfect, due to his powers of poetry. When he spoke
to the Messenger of Allah he said: ''Your verses must be like mine."
The Messenger of Allah asked: "So what is it that you know?"

--- Sayfa 322 ---
"The wisdom ofLuqman," he answered.
'Will you share it with me?" The Messenger of Allah asked.
Upon which Suwayd started to say what he knew. The Messenger of Allah said:
"These words are very beautiful indeed! But what I have carry even more virtue, for
they are from the Qur' an that Allah has revealed to me, and they are a source of
guidance and light."
Then he started to read from the verses of the Qur'an, and when he finished, he
invited Suwayd to Islam. He was a very reasonable man.
He said "These are truly very beautiful expressions," and then became a Muslim
there and then. 347
Another day, some people from the tribe of Aws from Medina had come, and they
were seeking logistic support from some of the Khazraj concerning a battle that was
about to start. 348 Hearing about it, the Messenger of Allah went to this delegate and
said: "Would you like me to show you a much better way than the purpose you have
come with?"
'What could that be?" They asked. The Messenger of Allah answered: "I am the
Messenger of Allah; He sent me as Prophet over all His servants. I call you to worship
only Him, and not to hold any other gods beside Him. He sent me the Book."
And then he talked about the essentials of Islam and recited to them verses from the
Qur'an and asked them to believe in all that he had spoken about.
Among them was a man called Iyas ibn Muadh and he came to the fore to say: "0
people! This is truly better than what we have come here to seek."
Voices of disagreement rose from the delegate, one of them even threw some dirt
on Iyas. The man opposing him said: "Leave that now! Is that what we came here to
do?"
Iyas had to keep silent in the face of this negative reaction that he received. He
could not find anyone supporting his view on the way back to Medina either; the
delegate had failed to take advantage of the opportunity that had been so close at hand.
Iyas became ill shortly afterwards and in that period, as a believer, the words
proclaiming the greatness of Allah from his lips would never cease.349
Tufayl ibn Amr was also a respected and trusted poet from the Aws tribe. He was
running some of the important business of his tribe in the region of Yemen. One day
his travels took him to Mecca. In the Mecca of the day, there was a very big organized
stance against the Messenger of Allah such that even before Tufayl entered Mecca the
Meccans stood in his way and tried to convince him not to speak to our noble Prophet.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
They welcomed him very warmly, offering him hospitality, but at the same time
this was what they were saying to him: "0 Tufayl! Here you are in our land, welcome!
There is a man that comes from among us; he has put us in a very difficult situation
indeed! He has broken our backs into pieces and has disturbed our harmony. There is
some sort of magic in his words; they make you follow involuntarily. It severs father
and son, man and wife, and brother and brother! The truth is we fear that you and your
tribe may be influenced by this man who has given us so much trouble. Do not go and
speak with him!"
The fact that they had gone to all this trouble to speak about him meant that this
man was very influential indeed, and so Tufayl took this precaution and went to the
Ka'ba determined to close his ears to anything he might have to say. It so happened
that at that very time, the Messenger of Allah was at the Ka'ba performing his Prayers.
Tufayl kept watching him for a very long time; he was amazed at how he was reading
the Qur' an so deeply! Whether he wanted to or not, Tufayl heard some words of the
Qur'an and he had been deeply impressed with what his eyes saw and what his ears
heard. He started to think to himself: "Why am I closing my ears? I am a man with a
strong will who knows the fineries of poetry and can tell the difference between
beautiful and ugly words; why shouldn't I listen to what this man says? If what he
says is beautiful than I'll accept and take it; if what he says is not beautiful then I will
stay away from him and see to my own business."
The minute he let himself fully hear what the noble Prophet was saymg, the
faculties of his heart had awakened and the ice covering his heart had started to melt.
Such that when the Messenger of Allah finished his Prayers and recitation of the
Qur'an, he found himself going after him. He followed the Messenger of Allah to his
house and then entered with him. All doors had been set ajar for him and he was
reborn into a very warm new world. In this warm atmosphere he opened up. He spoke
of what had happened to him and the reason why he came there, all that the Meccans
had told him outside of town, how he had closed his ears to his words and how he had
been transformed when he saw him at the Ka'ba. His last words were: "Tell me the
truth of the matter ... "
Another star was being born. The Messenger of Allah was overjoyed. He started to
tell him of the beauties of Islam and then read him the Qur'an. These were the most
beautiful expressions Tufayl had ever heard! He had never heard anything like it in
beauty and measure till that day. He declared the oneness of Allah there and then and
became a Muslim.
The change that occurred in every single Companion who came to the presence of

--- Sayfa 324 ---
the beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was occurring within him as
well; with every step he took he realized he had to take further steps for what he
believed in. He said to our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him: "My
position among my tribe is very good and people do listen to me when I ask them to
listen. When I go to them now I will tell them about Islam, I will invite them to Islam.
Will you pray to Allah that He may give me a sign that may impress my tribe when I
speak to them, will you pray that He gives me strength?"
This sincere request could not be refused and the Messenger of Allah started to pray
right there. After the Prayer, Tufayl left the presence of the beloved Prophet and set
off on the road to his tribe so that he may invite them to the right path. When he
neared his village, a bright light, like the ray of morning sun, appeared on his face. He
was worried and was mumbling to himself: "0 my Lord! There is something strange
with my face, now they will think I am disfigured," fearing things will go wrong from
the very start. All of a sudden this light climbed up to the tip of the staff he was
carrying. This now was a miracle that would strengthen his case when he presented it
to his tribe. It was like a lantern lighting his way.
When he came home, he first told his mother and father what he lived through and
invited them to Islam; they had faith in their son and they became Muslims right away.
But his tribe did not show the same degree of awareness, and despite all his efforts,
they had closed their doors to him and they showed no signs of softening.350
One of the people who had to endure the propaganda of the polytheists was Dimad
al-Azdi. He had leftY em en and come to Mecca on some business, too. He was trying
to help people by reading words onto certain objects, a method called rukya. The
minute he set foot in Mecca, some degenerate people stopped him to tell him not to
approach the Messenger of Allah and then they said: "There is no doubt that
Muhammad is mad."
When Dimad heard this, he said to himself: "I should go to this man. Maybe Allah
will cure him through my hand."
And one day his road crossed with that of the Messenger of Allah. He called out:
"0 Muhammad! I cure people by speaking some words unto them; are you in need of
this?"
This was a strange introduction and a strange offer indeed. It was he who needed to
be cured by reading, so the beloved Messenger said: "There is no doubt that thanks is
only due to Allah. We seek help only from Him. Whomever He wishes to be on the
right path then no one can harm him, and whomever has chosen the way of error and

--- Sayfa 325 ---
distanced himself from Him, then no one can guide him to the right path. I bear
witness that there is no deity but Allah and I also bear witness that Muhammad is His
servant and Messenger. When it comes to the essence of the word ... "
It was clear that our noble Prophet was going to continue but Dimad intervened:
"Can you repeat what you have just said?" he asked.
The Messenger of Allah repeated not once but three times. This was enough for
Dimad who said: "I have seen many oracles and magicians in my time and I have
listened to many poets but I have never heard the likes of these words that you say in
beauty! These are expressions like endless seas! Come, give me your hand, I will
submit to you," and holding the beautiful hand that had been outstretched towards
him, he declared the oneness of Allah and became a Muslim there and then. 351
There was a group of six who had come from Medina to Mecca and the Messenger
of Allah visited them as well with a last hope. After saluting them he asked: "Who are
you?"
'We are a group from Khazraj," they said. Khazraj was a known name to him.
That's why he asked: "The Khazraj that is friend and ally to Zufar."
Zufar, the ally of Khazraj was an important man in Medina who sometimes spoke
about a Messenger who would come.
''Yes," they verified. They were being smcere. Then the Illustrious Beloved of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, asked: "What do you say if we sat down and
spoke for a while?"
"All right," they said.
Upon that the Messenger of Allah sat down with them for a long while and spoke to
them. He shared with them some ofthe verses ofthe Qur'an.
This group consisted of As'ad ibn Zurara, Awf ibn Harith, Uqba ibn Amir, Qutba
ibn Amir, Rafi ibn Malik and Jabir ibn Abdullah who would later be called the Ansar
(the Helpers). They had all been very much affected by what they had heard. They
remembered the words of their ancestors. Their ancestors had said that a Messenger
from the lineage of Ibrahim would come from between the Paran Mountains. When
they lost their battle with their Jewish neighbors, they made threats by saying "now we
may have been defeated, but soon we will gain power with a Messenger who will
come and then we will finish you!" Now they were going to be the first to believe in
this Messenger, and thus they were going to enter historical records as the best men of
the Arabian Peninsula. Since the awaited Messenger had come, there was no sense in
waiting. That is why they listened to this man who called them to caution and they

--- Sayfa 326 ---
submitted in faith sincerely.
While in Mecca there was a scarcity of people whom one could call to the faith
despite months of efforts, here was a group of six from Medina who had chosen Islam
in a matter of hours. This made the Messenger of Allah extremely happy and grateful.
The only sad thing was that it was now time for them to leave. It was beautiful to sit
down and talk with this Personage whom everyone had been waiting for, but it was
time for them to return home to Medina.
Before they left each other's company, they agreed to come there next year and
meet again with the Messenger of Allah and this time they were going to find new
friends and bring them to the Messenger of Allah. Medina was thus saluting
civilization. On his return to Mecca, the Messenger of Allah was smiling for the first
time in a long while. 352

--- Sayfa 327 ---
344 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/212
345 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/555; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, pp. 127-128
346 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/556; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, pp. 129-130
347 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/557; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 130
348 It was the eleventh year of the revelations, the conflict between the tribes of Aws and Khazraj in
Medina had reached a peak, and war was immanent. The Aws tribe was fewer in numbers, and
had resorted to getting help from outside thereby getting the upper hand.
349 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 5/427 (23668); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/438
350 Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/213-214; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/99
351 Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/193-194; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/241
352 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21276

--- Sayfa 328 ---
ISRA AND MIRA.P 53
1
0 years had passed since the meeting in Hira. The calendars were showing the
241h day in the month of Rajah. There had been many efforts during this time,
but Mecca had resisted in unimaginable ways. There had only been a handful
of people who accepted the call to faith. However, when one considered the amount of
energy put into this cause, one would have expected them to come running, which had
not been the case. The Messenger of Allah was not living for his own sake. He was
doing all that was in his power so that even his greatest enemies may have the chance
to taste the beauty of submission to faith, knocking on their doors every day, just in
case they change their minds.
However these efforts that needed to be applauded were being met by incredible
hostility-the attitude of the Meccans after the deaths of Abu Talib and Khadija, what
he lived through in Taif and the way people received him on his return with a sour
face-all these had troubled the Messenger of Allah deeply and he found consolation
only by seeking refuge in Divine grace. Had these breezes of mercy not existed, the
suffocation in Mecca would have been unbearable. Then one evening, when the
Messenger of Allah was at the house of his cousin Umm Hani, it was as if the roof of
the house had opened and the Truthful Gabriel had descended upon them. 354 It was
clear that this coming was very different from previous ones. With him he had a
mount named Buraq, a mount a little bigger than a donkey but a little smaller than a
mule, one that previous Prophets had also used. It seemed there was a Divine
invitation and Gabriel had come to escort this most auspicious of guests, the Sultan of
Messengers, Glorified Leader, comforter of the afflicted, the commander in the Divine
Assembly, Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, for he was the special
invitee of the Truth and he was being called to the heavens to meet his Lord. This was
to be a gift from Allah to comfort the sadness that the Messenger had been through. In
order that he may observe with his eyes and ears the truths that he felt in his
conscience, Allah the Almighty was going to take His servant, Muhammad, peace and
blessings be upon him, from Mecca up to His presence.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
And who knew what kind of a mysterious journey He would put him on. But before
he could set on this journey, there needed to be an operation, similar to the one he had
experienced when he was still with his nursing mother Halima as-Sadia. The Truthful
Gabriel cleaved his chest and washed its inside with the water of Zamzam; then he
filled it with faith and wisdom that he had in a golden bowl and then closed it. Then
Gabriel, the truthful guardian of the skies, took the hand of the truthful guardian of the
earth, Muhammad Mustafa, peace and blessings be upon him, and they set off together
on an indescribable journey beyond.
Isra
The Buraq that he was riding was moving very fast, every step he took was at a further
point in the horizon and he was moving at the speed of lightening. The minute he
mounted the Buraq, space had changed and they had found themselves in the Masjid
al-Aqsa in Jerusalem. The Messenger of Allah tied the Buraq where previous Prophets
had tied it. Then he turned towards the mosque to pray. The chosen servants of Allah
who had performed the duty of Messengership till that day had gathered together there
as well and were waiting for the Personage who was the seal of this chain to arrive. He
was greeted and embraced with greetings and salutations. Then they lined up into a
row to fulfill the most important business-to perform two cycles of Prayer. They
were waiting for the imam, the leader of the realm of Prophets. So the Abrahamic line
would be sealed with Muhammad and he would take on the mission for the rest of
time. This was the reason why this place had been chosen rather than another. The
issue of representing Truth was now to be taken from this place that had been the
home of many Messengers and now faces were going to be turned towards Mecca.
The step by step process during the Mira} and the Prophets encountered one by one
along the way can also be seen as foreshadowing the union of the Ummah and the
positive hopes for the future.
The Sultan of the Prophets walked towards the gathering and took his place at the
front of the row. This sequence and order symbolized the fact that when the time
came, humanity would go back to the first pure line that Allah had created them in. It
was the picture that illustrated that the children of Adam would be united as one again
on Adam's earth, and the consolidation of the leadership of the Personage whose
intercession everyone called upon when seeking forgiveness. Since all the other
Prophets were praying behind him, it meant that the ummahs of those Prophets would
one day pray behind him as well! After the Prayers were completed, three bowls were
set in front of him-one contained milk, the other water and the other a drink. He was

--- Sayfa 330 ---
called to choose one of them. Without hesitation, the Messenger of Allah chose the
one that contained milk. This excited the Truthful Gabriel who said: "By choosing this
you have chosen true guidance; and your Ummah will follow true guidance as well."
This was the result of reading reality well, and the choice reflected his nature. The
voice that echoed there and then said the same thing: "Had he chosen water, he and his
Ummah would have drowned. Had he chosen the drink both he and his Ummah would
have been corrupted. Since he has chosen milk, both he and his Ummah will always be
on the right path! "355
Miraj
Surprises did not end with what had happened in the Masjid al-Aqsa. Gabriel then
invited the beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, to a journey that would
take him beyond the skies. All of a sudden space transformed and a journey full of
mysteries started. He was rising up above the skies level by level and at each level
there was another ritual to be observed.
When the Truthful Gabriel knocked on the door of the first level of heaven, he
heard a voice from behind and they had the following conversation with its inhabitant:
'Who are you?"
"Gabriel!"
'Who do you have with you?"
"Muhammad!"
"Is he a Prophet?"
''Yes, he is a Prophet!"
It was as if there was a voice recognition system in place. The passwords were
correct, the doors of heaven had opened; the skies of the world had been left behind
and in front of the Messenger of Allah stood Adam, the first ancestor of mankind.
First, Adam saluted and congratulated him. He was praying for his well-being. But
there was something strange about his behavior, for when he would look to his right
he would laugh, and when he looked to his left he would crying. Our noble Prophet
looked closely and saw that there was a big crowd on both of his sides. Without letting
him wait in suspense, the Truthful Gabriel started to speak: "This is Adam; the crowds
you see to his left and right are his progeny. The people to his right are the people of
heaven, which is why Adam smiles when he sees them. The ones to his left are the
people of Hell and that is why he cries when he catches sight of them."
The same ritual was repeated at every other level of the heavens and at each gate,

--- Sayfa 331 ---
another Prophet would be met, and the Messenger of Allah would be praised and
congratulated by all of them. In the second level of heaven, he met the cousins John
and Jesus, in the third he met Joseph, in the fourth he met Enoch, in the fifth he met
Aaron, in the sixth he met Moses and in the seventh he met Abraham- all of them
would salute and congratulate the Seal of Prophethood, the Messenger of Allah.
During this journey, the Messenger of Allah saw Moses crying and asked Gabriel the
reason. When the question was directed to Moses he said: "I am crying because this
young man was sent as Messenger after me, and yet the people from his Ummah to
enter Paradise are more numerous than those from mine."
Mira} was the name of journey that was full of mysteries and there was more to be
seen on this journey. The Bayt al-Mamur (the Oft-Frequented House) was right in
front of our noble Prophet in all its multitude of color and splendor with Abraham
leaning against it. Such that, each day, seventy thousand angels entered it without ever
returning, for this was the projection of the continuously circumambulated and visited
the Ka'ba up high in the heavens.
Paradise
On this journey, the Messenger of Allah would witness scenes from Paradise and Hell,
and on his return would share with his Ummah what kind of behavior on earth would
result in what kind of treatment in the Hereafter. All of a sudden, Paradise had
unraveled in front of him in all its beauty. All kinds of precious stones such as pearls
and corals, and other colorful ornaments were everywhere, along with mesmerizing
patterns and designs. He was now witnessing beauties that no eye had seen or could
see, hearing melodies no one had heard of and experiencing such grandeur that no
mortal could imagine ... The emerald hills of Paradise had been opened one by one in
front of his very eyes and he was mesmerized by the gales coming from it, he was at
the zenith of amazement.
All of a sudden, he heard a very sweet voice.
'What is this voice?" he asked Gabriel.
"The voice of Paradise," his trusted guide answered. When one listened closely, one
could hear what it was saying: "0 Lord! Grant me what you have promised me. Here,
my chambers, my silks and precious materials, pearls and corals, golds and armchairs
and furnishings, pots and pans, rides and drinks, honey, milk and water, these have
increased in number, now grant me what you promise and send me those who are to
come here!"

--- Sayfa 332 ---
In response to this sincere request another voice was heard: "Yes, all believers, be
they male or female, all Muslims, all those who believe in Me and acknowledge my
Messenger, those who always engage in positive acts and do good, those who hold no
other deity, those who do not bend before any other power but Allah, will soon come
to you! Whoever fears me and acts within the bounds of permitted behavior, then he or
she is safe; I give whatever is wanted from Me. Whoever wants an advance from Me,
then I shall grant his wish. He or she who leaves his or her business up to Me, I will
see to his or her business to completion, for there is no doubt that I am Allah, apart
from whom there is no deity! I do not tum back on My Word! Verily, only the
believers will reach salvation. What a perfect and beneficent creator is Allah!"
Paradise, who heard this coming from the Gracious Lord, would be consoled and
say: "I am content, my dear Lord."356
The beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, looked inside with greater
attention, he saw brave young men sitting on thrones in palaces built on rivers of gold!
Servants were circling around them, and each of their desires was being met instantly.
They were accompanied by angels and they were swimming in gifts from Allah. They
did not tire or become weary with all these gifts because every time they were served
with something, it would offer itself in a different color, shape and smell. This made it
possible for them to savor another taste each time. In particular, his eyes caught one
group of people, they were people who lived each day anew, who reaped the days
harvest the same day. Our noble Prophet asked Gabriel: "Who are these people?"
"These are people who have strived in the way of Allah, who have given their all in
order to exalt the Name of Allah. The reward of one good deed that these people do is
like fertile grains, for each good deed is rewarded seven thousand times. As a reward
of what they have given to please Allah, Allah replaces whatever they have given in
return, for He is the one who gives most beneficently," replied the Truthful Gabriel. 357
For the Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings be upon him, the sight of Paradise
was truly amazing! There were rivers with many canals; some flowed with milk and
some with honey. Two of the prominent rivers were called the Nile and Euphrates.
Maybe this was the mention of the region that the message oflslam would reach in the
short run, thus giving a glimpse of the future. Who knows? But these good tidings and
many others were given to the Prophet of Mercy in Mira}. Who knows how many
more wonders he saw and experienced. It seemed impossible that a person would want
to come back from this magical place where he had been so wondrously received, to a
dull and gloomy place that was full of troubles. But his aim was to embrace the whole
of humanity with mercy and affection, and to bring everyone here from his Ummah

--- Sayfa 333 ---
who were reluctant to say the second half of the words professing the oneness of
Allah, people who did not recognize him and yet declared that there is no deity but
Allah. Without an ounce of self interest, the Prophet of Mercy chose his community
over himself, chose hardship over pleasure, chose to endure worldly tribulations over
heavenly comfort.
He said, "Whoever says 'There is no deity but Allah,' he will enter Paradise."358
From the very beginning he had been created for this mission. Though he had been
the first to have been created, his blessed arrival had been last. He provided the last
rhyme to the melody of Prophethood, and because he was the Last Sultan, the coming
together of his body and soul had been left to the end when it came to Prophethood.
The best was left for last, as they say.
Hell
Of course there was not a warm welcome for the Beloved of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, everywhere. When he left Paradise and came to another valley,
he heard frightening and deafening cries, and asked about their source: "This is the
sound of Hell," said the Truthful Gabriel. He was all ears. Hell was fuming: "Dear
Lord! Give me what you have promised! Look at me! I have enough fetters and ropes,
flames and fires, pus and blood; the depth at my bottom has become unfathomable and
the heat of my fire is unbearable! Send me what you have promised me with haste!"
The echo of the same voice that had responded to Paradise was heard: "Simmer
down! Yes, men and women who hold gods other than Me, each denier who denies
me, each oppressor who does not believe in judgment or the book will come to you;
there is no need to be impatient!"
And it was met with the same calm response: "All right, I am content 0 Lord!"359
When the Merciful Prophet searched eagerly where the cries were coming from, he
saw Hell appear and he had to witness scenes that his blessed and beautiful heart could
not bear. What he was witnessing was just a scene from Hell that he might be able to
carry over to his believers so that they may stay away from prohibited acts. There
were balls of fire that had been ignited by people and stones ... One could hear a deep
grumbling and an insatiable voice that cried: "Isn't there more?"
Those who were tasting torment in this terrible scene were not able to get out from
it. When their bodies became ash or evaporated from the torment, the process started
again. To experience this endless pain, the bones were dressed with flesh once again
and the cycle of punishment continued. Cries came from the depths of Hell: "If only

--- Sayfa 334 ---
we were back on earth!"
"If only we had used our reason and listened to what we had been told, we would
not have been in this situation!"
"Dear Lord! Please lessen my pangs just for one day!"
"I wish I had become earth for good!"
Groups of people had gathered at certain places of Hell, suffering in torment; there
were angels of Hell keeping them in their place with faces like iron. There were
people who had melted and finished by balls of fire that had approached them from
only the length of a spear, those who were swimming in their own sweat and blood.
There were such people who had melted and wasted away when balls of fire like the
sun approached them from a spear's distance. Rivers of blood and puss were flowing,
and there were the unfortunate who were struggling to get out but could not. The
miserable ones who came to the edge were being stoned by those waiting there, and
the mouths they opened in supplication were being filled with stones and they would
have to return to blood and puss. He had seen people who were tortured, their heads
being banged with iron and stones, and asked Gabriel who they were. Gabriel said:
"These are people who have not been able to show steadfastness when it came to
obligatory Prayers."
On the other side he had witnessed people who had not given their alms on earth
and they were gulping down oleander, a poisonous shrub, and were crawling on the
floor in agony. He had thus seen the punishment for not complying with Allah's
orders. There were other specific things he would see: people who exploited the rights
of orphans were in a comer and were swallowing masses of fire and then excreting
them, those who had failed in safekeeping what had been entrusted to them were
groaning under heavy loads, people who had tried to spread dissension around the
world had their mouths twisted and their tongues had become crooked, similarly
pitiful was the situation of those who had denounced innocent people and given them
up to oppressors.
On the other hand there were people whose bellies were a couple of times bigger
than their bodies; they could not stand up or move from where they were. When he
was asked who they were, he was told that these were people who had made it a habit
to make money out of money through interest.
He further noticed some people who, while there was good and fresh meat beside
them, were eating the rotten carcasses on the other side; they had left the good ground
and were wallowing in a swamp. When he looked closely he saw that these were

--- Sayfa 335 ---
people who had not satisfied themselves with permitted relations within the bounds of
marriage but had gone after prohibited relations of adultery. Here, the majority was
composed of women who had fallen into a circle of debauchery and dissolution and
who had also dragged several others along with her, who had also earned the hatred of
women of virtue. These women were hung from their limbs which they had
highlighted on earth in order to lure people and they were crying from pain.
Sidratu 'l-Muntaha
After the horrific visions of Hell, the Beloved of Allah came face to face with the
Sidratu 'l-Muntaha360 (Lote-tree of the Uttermost End), a beauty that was impossible to
put into words. It was like a parade ground for colors of all hues. This was a sacred
place, somewhere between possibility and necessity and now the Truthful Gabriel was
no longer by the Messenger of Allah, for the world of possibility had now been left
behind. This was the privy chamber, the harem, and there had been no spiritual
presence since the creation of mankind that had been blessed by an entry into this
chamber. That is to say, the Pride of Humankind and the Pearl of Creation, our noble
Prophet, was the one and only, the first and the last guest of this chamber. Just as there
had been no one here before him, there would be none after him, for he was the Seal
of the Assembly of Prophethood.
The Messenger of Allah was now witnessing the ink of the pen of fate, he could
hear the sounds the pen made when writing the taqdir, that which had been ordained
to happen. 361 Here was also the manifestation of the mystery of "Qaba kawsayni aw
adna. " He had come closer and closer and when he had gone far enough that there
was no more space to be covered, he had reached la makan, non -space. 362
Despite all these, the Messenger of Allah was not diverted from his purpose; there
was no change with him. All had become light all of a sudden and he had seen that the
Sidra was encompassed with a beauty that could not be perceived with limited sight
and put into mere words. 363
Everything that was mortal had been enveloped in light; the Messenger of Allah
who had become a statue of light himself and was watching the Light of Grace. The
Beauty of Allah that is promised to the believers in Paradise was observed here and in
this horizon where space became non-space, the Messenger of Allah would meet the
Gracious Lord without any mediation. The Great Lord who had exalted Abraham with
special intimacy and Moses with His word would throne his Beloved, the last golden
chain of the constellation of Prophethood with seeing Him; thus showing time and
space how the Messenger of Allah stood with the Lord.364

--- Sayfa 336 ---
The Order without Mediation: Daily Prayers
This was the first time where revelation occurred without mediation, where the most
important duty was being declared in such an environment: the Daily Prayers. This
was a Prayer that was initially to be performed fifty times a day. This was to be the
Mira}, the spiritual ascension ofthe Ummah.
As it is with everything, the time came for the Messenger of Allah to return home.
When he approached Moses, he asked: "What did the Lord call as obligatory for your
Ummah?"
It was clear that such proximity brought obligations with it.
"Prayer to be performed fifty times a day," answered the Beloved of Allah.
Moses, who had had very bitter experiences with the Israelites, said: "Speak to your
Lord so that He may lessen this obligation because your Ummah would not be able to
manage it, for I have had the same experience with the Children oflsrael."
Before long, his blessed hands were lifted up in supplication: "0 Lord! Lessen this
obligation of my Ummah!"
When such a Beloved who had been showered with great compliments asked for
something, it was duly answered! The Divine message that came said that the Prayers
were now to be five times less.
Moses, peace be upon him, said that our noble Prophet's Ummah would not be able
to manage that either. Our noble Prophet supplicated again and another five were
lifted. After that, the supplication and removal of Prayer five at a time repeated until it
came down to five times of Prayer in total. Moses, peace be upon him, thought even
this was too much but the Messenger of Allah was of the view that the doors of Grace
should not be pushed too hard. At that moment a voice full of mercy echoed: "0
Muhammad! These five times are obligatory for one day and night; and my ruling will
not change. But each Prayer is like ten Prayers; and so they will have the merit of fifty
Prayers. Whoever wants to do a good deed but does not do it, he or she still gets it
merit. Whoever intends to do good and manages to do good, he or she gets ten times
the reward. Whoever stands up and means to do evil and does not do it, he or she does
not get the blame of the evil he or she meant to commit, and if he or she falls into the
trap of his or her bad intentions and acts upon it, then only the blame of one evil will
be recorded. "365
Reflections upon Return
Leaving all this beauty and splendor behind and going back to the land of difficulty

--- Sayfa 337 ---
and strife was something that only a merciful Messenger like him could do, for he had
seen, and he was coming back to show his Ummah what he had seen; he had heard and
he was returning to us to let our souls hear what he had heard and experienced. He had
seen the beyond including the horizon of Sight. He was now returning to share with
those who followed him, the harmonious beauty he had seen, in order that he may
open the doors of such sight to ready and capable souls. He had gone as himself, had
seen and heard as himself and he was returning as himself.
Just as his departure had been a clear lesson for all, his return also contained
meaningful messages. Furthermore, the Messenger of Allah had completed this long
journey that he had set on in the middle of the night and had returned having crammed
all these events he had experienced in a very short period of time. The first people
whom he told of his journey were naturally those closest to him. As soon as he
performed his Morning Prayer, he turned to his household and started to recount all
the events that had happened to him in one moment of the night.
When she heard of what had happened to him, our mother Umm Hani was
dismayed and asked him not to tell anyone the details of what had happened. She even
physically pulled the cloak of our noble Prophet who had stood up and tried to stop
him. This was because she feared that his enemies, who were always looking for an
opportunity to attack, would exploit this story and attack the Messenger of Allah
ruthlessly: "0 Messenger of Allah! Do not tell of these to the people, for they will
repudiate you and they will torment you."
Our noble Prophet calmly responded: "I swear by Allah, I will speak of this as
well."
He was making it clear that he had no intention to keep secret this clear gift from
Allah.
When Umm Hani saw that he was leaving the house in order to share his news with
the people despite the risks, she called her servant and said: "Go and follow the
Messenger of Allah and then report back to me when you have seen how the people
take his news," as she was curious to know what kind of an impact the story of Mira}
would have in Mecca.
Then the Messenger of Allah went to the Ka'ba and started to tell the people of the
phenomena of Isra, the night journey, and Mira}, the ascension to the heavens.
Naturally, the news was met with great surprise by everyone who heard it. How on
earth could this be? How could someone leave Mecca in the middle of the night, then
go to the Masjid al-Aqsa, and then be transported beyond the heavens, only to return

--- Sayfa 338 ---
to Mecca in the same night? And this was no simple journey either; when one added to
the story the events that had been experienced during this journey, it became
something that was incomprehensible for them. All these needed power beyond that of
a mere mortal ...
The Testimony of Two Caravans
But of course Allah had the power to make anything happen. It was He who had let
His most beloved servant, whom He had given the duty of Messengership, experience
this journey. With this ascension, Allah the Almighty was showing His power and at
the same time making it clear that there was only a very thin membrane between these
realms nestled within each other.
When it was Him who wished it so, there was nothing that could prevent something
from happening. Allah the Almighty wanted to make His Beloved, whom He had sent
as mercy to all the realms, victorious despite all the negativity he was facing. He was
thus letting His Messenger taste a pleasure that no Messenger before him had tasted,
and making it clear to his Ummah the Prophet's significance and standing at His side.
"Tell us the sign or proof for your story, 0 Muhammad," the Meccans said.
'We have never heard of such a thing before," they added. This was a Divine gift
and one needed a very strong faith and complete trust and submission in Allah in order
to grasp its meaning. But he needed to speak in the language of the people who only
trusted what they saw and mistrusted everything else. That is why the Messenger of
Allah said: "The proof of this is the caravan of such and such tribe in such and such
valley."
And then he told them the following detail: "When it saw me, one ofthe camels in
the caravan had a fright, left the caravan and started to run. I showed them where their
camel had gone and helped them find their camel. My direction was Damascus, so I
turned towards the direction of Dajinan. There, I came upon a caravan owned by such
and such; they had also stopped to rest. I even drank water from their water skins
which they had covered with a cloth; I covered them with the cloth again after I drank
from it, and that caravan is its proof. Right now they are about to enter Mecca from
the place called Bayda in Tanim, and at the very front is a grizzly camel. On the
camels are two sacks, one black and the other speckled."
These were strange details indeed! How could such detail be observed on a journey
so dazzling and so blurring of sight, how could he remember all these and tell them
one by one to listeners? Were these really all true? It could not be, for this was just too

--- Sayfa 339 ---
much! They were sure that this time, what Muhammad the Trustworthy was saying
was not going to tum out to be true, and he was sure to be embarrassed. This was a
great opportunity for them and they were now going to close the books on
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, never to listen to him again.
They headed for the place mentioned in excitement, they were wondering what the
color of the first camel to appear from the hill of Bayda would be, and whether it
would have the kind of load that Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be
upon him, had described.
Before long, a caravan slowly appeared at the top of this hill in Tanim, and at the
very front was, as described, a grizzly camel! They were in utter amazement.
However, they had not given up yet, for this could be a coincidence. They waited for
the caravan to approach. They wanted to see the color of the sacks that the camel was
carrying. Good Lord! The camel really did carry two sacks and as described, one was
black and the other was speckled! The Meccans truly felt defeated. But as expected,
they still had no intention of giving up, for there had been talk of another caravan, and
in order to believe what Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon
him, was saying, they had to verify that too. They went to Mecca and found the
caravan. They asked them about the camel who had run away because he had been
startled by a stranger and about the water skins. A spokesperson for the caravan
explained: "It is true! As we were progressing, one of the camels had a fright and ran
off. We could not see it anymore. Then we heard the voice of a man who told us
where our camel was, and so we found it and tied it up. As for the water skins, before
we slept we had closed their mouths and when we woke up we wanted to drink; and
although their covers had not been lifted, there was no water in the water skin, and we
could not understand what it meant."366
The Quraysh and Their Endless Requests:
Description of the Masjid al-Aqsa
The Quraysh now had nothing to repudiate with the Messenger of Allah for all the
doors they had waited to open to give them some proof against our noble Prophet had
closed and now they were faced with the choice of either acceptance or denial. In
order to escape acceptance, they needed to find excuses. They did not want to accept
it, but it was not reasonable to deny it when there were such clear proofs. That is why
one of them came to the fore and said in an "as a matter of fact" tone: ''You say
you've been to the Masjid al-Aqsa; then tell us about it! How many doors and
windows does it have?"

--- Sayfa 340 ---
They had now breathed a sigh of relief with this question. Since he was saying that
he had been there, he should be able to tell them about its windows and doors. They
were trying to be consistent; their hearts were not to be satisfied with anything but
hard evidence.
But the Messenger of Allah had not made a journey that was primarily spatial, so he
did not have any statistical information about windows and doors. He was now having
a difficult time with these people who did not believe despite the proof they had
already seen and who were trying to pose further challenges on his way; he was quite
suffocated with their attitude, a state that reeked of pure denial.
But he had the All-Gracious Lord on his side and He would run to his help and
bring the Masjid al-Aqsa in front of his very eyes like a motion picture. It was as if the
Ka'ba had transformed into a huge screen and all comers of the Masjid al-Aqsa were
reflected there. The Messenger of Allah started answering the questions that the
polytheists asked simply by looking at the Masjid al-Aqsa screen in front of him and
thus silencing all their objections.367
This was a scene that made evident the true extent of the rancor and hatred of
denial. At the moment they thought "Now he's done for!" the Messenger of Allah was
launching another charge, leaving the polytheists baffled behind. They had no
intention to believe no matter what they were shown; they were doing all these to see
whether they could catch a weak point so that they may be able to stop him, devising
all sorts of intrigues so that they may drive people away from him. But it was to no
avail.
At that moment Abu Jahl was passing by the Ka'ba. When he saw the crowd, he
approached as he also wanted to say something to injure the Messenger of Allah. He
approached and asked mockingly: "What is it again this evening? Is there something
new?"
The Messenger of Allah turned his glorious face towards him and said in a dignified
manner: "Allah the Almighty transported me to Bayt al-Maqdis in the night."
Abu Jahl was confused: "And then you came back to us, did you?" he said, for this
journey normally took many months of hardship on the road. Our noble Prophet
answered without hesitation: ''Yes, and I have also performed the Prayers with my
Prophet brothers."
Abu Jahl first let out a scream of joy in the face of what he had just heard. This was
an unmissable opportunity for him. This, he thought, signaled the end for Muhammad.
With a softer voice he turned to our noble Prophet and asked: "If I gathered your tribe

--- Sayfa 341 ---
here, would you tell them what you have just told me?"
Didn't he know, there was nothing to hide for the Messenger of Allah! He was to
talk about it anyway, for he felt obliged to speak about a gift that Allah had given him.
That is why he said: "Yes."
Now having been given the surety, Abu Jahl was overjoyed. He was calling out to
people at the top ofhis lungs: "0 sons ofQab! Come here at once!"
The Difference of Abu Bakr
There was no one left in Mecca who had not heard his call. They approached Abu
Bakr at last. They were quite sure that now, after what they thought were bold
"assertions," Abu Bakr would part ways with Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and
blessings be upon him.
"0 Atiq! 368 What your friend Muhammad kept saying up until this day were things
that were simple and things that could, if not altogether, partly be true. But come now
and hear what he has to say."
Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man and for fear that the polytheists had injured the
noble Prophet in some way, he said: "Woe unto you! What happened to my friend?
Has something befallen him?"
"He is at the Ka'ba now. He is telling people how he went to Bayt al-Maqdis," they
said sarcastically. One of them added: "He says he has gone there during the night and
that has returned among us in the same night."
Now he could see what they were up to. Abu Bakr looked at them bitterly and said:
"0 you people! "What is there in that? Do you mean to say that this is not true? I have
believed things that are much beyond the scope of this! I believe and attest that he
brings news from beyond the skies day and night!"
They had come with such hopes and this is what they had got from him! At a
moment when they thought they had him back, they had lost him once again. At a
moment when they were ready to utter cries of victory, they were being beaten once
again, and a final stroke came from Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, that
would infuriate them even further: "If he is saying all that, it must be true."369
This answer had not stemmed from an understanding that he had inherited from his
ancestors, nor was it a stance he had chanced upon; they were the words of Abu Bakr
himself. For him, the truth of a matter rested not with the people of Hijaz, but what
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, the light of his eye and
the architect of his heart said. That is why he didn't even respond in surprise to say

--- Sayfa 342 ---
"What happened?"; "Did it really happen that way?"; "You may have misunderstood
him"; "There must be an explanation, and you are misinterpreting it." He had not
resorted to these defenses and had shown no hesitation whatsoever and had not given
the polytheists such pleasure. After that day, he had been called Siddiq, the loyal and
faithful one.
Soon after, Abu Bakr ran to the Ka'ba as he wanted to hear the truth of the matter
from the Messenger of Allah himself.
"0 Messenger of Allah! Have you told them that you went to Bayt al-Maqdis in the
night and then came back?" he asked.
''Yes," replied the Messenger of Allah. Abu Bakr wanted to ask another question,
not because he doubted him, but rather, his aim was to help out his faithful friend and
lessen the pressure from the polytheists.
'Will you speak to me about it? I have been there before and seen it."
As the Messenger of Allah described the mosque, Abu Bakr said: "I swear it is
exactly as you describe it; I bear witness you are telling the truth, 0 Messenger of
Allah."
It was namely this attitude that elevated him to the level of Siddiq, the loyal and
faithful believer. The Messenger of Allah said: "0 Abu Bakr! From now on you are
Siddiq. "370
This Prophetic order became an inseparable part of Abu Bakr till the day he met his
Lord, and this attribute would always be mentioned with his name attached to it till the
Judgment Day.
Determining the Times of Prayer
Through the Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings be upon him, Mira} had been
witnessed and now Prayers had become obligatory for all believers. What this meant
was that now, through Prayer, the door was ajar for each believer to perform their very
own ascension and have a one on one with their Lord. Before long, the Truthful
Gabriel was at the side of the Messenger of Allah again. The order to perform the
Prayers had been given but there was still not much information about the details of
the Prayers, at what times they should be performed and how long they should be.
Since the meeting at Hira, there had been a Prayer that was performed at two different
times of the day with two cycles, and afterwards, the Late Night Prayer, Tahajjud, had
been deemed obligatory. But now the situation was different.
Gabriel had come to explain the matters pertaining to the Prayers. The time was

--- Sayfa 343 ---
nearing noon, and just as the sun began to set, Gabriel started to pray. Our noble
Prophet stood behind him and also prayed. The Noon or Zuhr Prayer had thus been
performed. Then came the Asr, Afternoon Prayer. When the shadows of objects were
as long as themselves, Gabriel started his Asr Prayer. Again, the Messenger of Allah
followed Gabriel in prayer. When the sun set they prayed the Maghrib, Evening
Prayer, and when the light in the night sky completely disappeared, they prayed the
Isha, Night Prayer. When the darkness of the night started to leave its place to light,
they started the Fajr, Morning Prayer. Thus they completed the Prayers of a whole
day.
But this was not all. At noon Gabriel came again. Now the sun had risen quite a bit
and the shadows of objects were as tall as the objects themselves. Again the best of
congregation had gathered and they prayed Zuhr Prayer together. Just like the day
before, the Asr Prayer me was to be performed when the shadows would grow twice
as much as the objects. Maghrib would be prayed when the sun set, Isha was to be
performed when two thirds of the evening had passed, and Fajr Prayer was to be
performed a little before the sun rose.
After these two days of Prayer exercise the Truthful Gabriel turned to Muhammad
the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, and said: "0 Muhammad! Prayers
are to be performed between the times that I have shown you yesterday and today."lli
The phenomena of the night journey and Mira} had made the distinction between
faith and denial even clearer. While the deniers turned towards their dark worlds and
followed their own traps, those who believed renewed their determination to speak the
truth to the most stubborn of people, and wanted more than ever to be foot soldiers of
the cause to find new faces who might embrace the faith.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
353 Isra and Mira} is a miracle whose report is deemed to be true and solid by all scholars. The
Messenger of Allah went on this journey with his body and soul. He left Gabriel behind and went
further to be showered with graces no person had ever attained. Yet he returned back to his
Ummah to bring to them the prayers to be performed five times a day as a token of the miracle
and grace that he received, showing the way for believers to experience a personal Mira}. When
we look at the Qur'an we see that the verses concerning this event are ambiguous verses, for this
is an issue to do with faith and impossible to grasp without a believing vantage point. Maybe to
emphasize the role of freedom of choice, Allah the Almighty used a style that can be understood
only with the perception of a believer, and the ambiguity of the verses provide a way out for those
who cannot reconcile this event with their reason. Those who reject the meaning conveyed by a
clear verse will be deprived of the grace of that verse, and this deprivation will lead to further
dispossession.
354 In some reports this event starts not at the house of Umm Hani but in the Ka'ba. In all probability,
that evening when he was at the house of Umm Hani the Messenger of Allah went to the Ka'ba,
and after praying for a while this incident happened at the place called Hatim.
355 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/242, 243
356 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 8/3
357 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 3/18; Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 15/7
358 Bukhari, Sahih, 5/2193 (5489)
359 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 1511
360 Usually the Sidratu 'l-Muntaha is pictured as a tree that is situated on the seventh heaven, to the
right of the highest Paradise under which rivers of heaven, that are promised to those who fear
and obey Allah, spring. When speaking of it, our noble Prophet said "Should a horseman ride his
horse for seventy years in its shade, he would not be able to travel through it; one of its leaves
could easily cover a whole nation." See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 1511.
361 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 3/33; Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 11147
362 Muslim, Sahih, 11159 (290)
363 When speaking about this the Qur'an says, "The sight (of the Messenger) did not swerve (so that
he looked elsewhere and saw something different), nor did it go wrong (so that he might have
seen an illusion). Indeed, he saw one among the greatest signs of His Lord" (an-Najm 53: 17-18).
364 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 27/48
365 Muslim, Sahih, 11145 (162, 163)
366 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/248, 249
367 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11215
368 One of the names given to Abu Bakr either because of his beautiful face, or the offerings his
parents had pledged when his mother was pregnant, or because he had been given the good news
that he would not enter Hell at all.
369 Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-N adira, 11403 (3 22)
370 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3/65 ( 4407); Haysami, Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 9/41; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/244;
Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-Nadira, 11403 (322)
371 Nasai, Sunan, 11256 (513); Tabarani,Mu jamu 'l-Aws at, 21192 (1689)

--- Sayfa 345 ---
AQABA ALLEGIANCES
N
ow was not the time to stop. The Messenger of Allah had turned his face
away from Mecca once again and was contemplating new openings in other
lands. Twelve years had passed since the meeting in Hira. It was the
pilgrimage season once again. He was expecting news from the six Ansar from
Medina who had come to him and become Muslim the year before.
The First Aqaba
The time he was waiting for came and our noble Prophet went to Mina in order to
meet those traveling to Mecca and to tell them about Islam. He had, in a way, set up
camp there, and treated everyone he met as fresh hope, inviting everyone he saw to
faith in Allah. There were also those who were looking for him in this crowd. These
were the young people from Medina who had become Muslim the year before. They
saw him from afar and ran towards him. The place they met in Mina was called
Aqaba. But now they had doubled in number. The only name from the year before
who had not been able to make it was Jabir ibn Abdullah. Added to those from last
year were Muadh ibn Harith, Zakwan ibn Abdulqays, Ubada ibn as-Samit, Yazid ibn
Salaba, Abbas ibn Ubada, Abu'l-Hatham at-Tayyihani and Uwaymir ibn Saida. They
had become Muslim and they had come to Mecca for a permanent union. This meeting
meant a new opening for Islam, for the grip that was tightening in Mecca would find a
release in Medina, and maybe the cause of Allah would take root in a place other than
where it had originated. In short, what had been foreshadowed was now taking its
course, and the words ofWaraqa ibn Nawfal were turning out to be true.
They spoke at length, and afterwards the Messenger of Allah asked for their
allegiance. He said: "Come and give allegiance to not holding anything equal to Allah,
not to steal, not to commit adultery, not to kill your children, to have control over your
hands and feet and not to slander anyone, to obey me in all that is good and beautiful!
Whoever stays true to his word from among you and remains loyal, remember that it is
Allah who will reward him, and whoever faces difficulty in keeping his allegiance and

--- Sayfa 346 ---
is persecuted, this will be atonement for him, for those who keep secret what has
befallen them will be judged by Allah. He may forgive if He pleases, and He may
punish if He pleases."
The Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, was standing before
them and calling them to virtue, because whatever they had suffered from, it had
always resulted from not heeding the issues that they had been warned and informed
about. Now, by accepting the Messenger of Allah's call for virtue, they had the chance
to attain a quality of life they longed for. Each issue had been addressed carefully and
in detail, and now it was time to farewell. However, there was something on the minds
of the Ansar from Medina. They had learned some of Islam's rulings while they had
been in the company of the Messenger of Allah but Islam was a religion that was
being renewed every day, a religion that came to the people with a new message as the
need arose. Also, because they had failed to come to an alliance as the tribes of
Khazraj and Aws, they could have difficulties in letting the other tribe lead the
Prayers, and even this could constitute a problem among them. In the short period of
time they had spent with the Messenger of Allah they had not had the time to learn
about the verses that had been revealed to that day, so they needed a murshid, a
teacher, a guide. They spoke of this need to the Messenger of Allah before they took
their leave. His benevolent eyes searched around for someone who would go with the
Ansar to Medina and to make out of their town a civilized city before the official
migration would take place: "Mus'ab!" called out the Greatest Messenger.
It was decided that this guide would be Mus'ab ibn Umayr, the once wealthy son of
a family who disowned him as their child merely because he had become a Muslim.
Em hers in Medina
It was a sad departure for Mus' ab because he would now have to part from his
Beloved. But duty came before everything else and he set on the road for Medina with
all excitement and without hesitation. There, he would represent the Messenger of
Allah and he would teach the religion that the people of Medina had only recently
been introduced to. This was an honorable duty indeed; it was now Mus'ab who
would make Medina ready for the impending "Divine migration"; he would lay the
foundations of the civilized city of Medina. Yes, he was alone, but he was going with
the power of the cause he was representing. It was As' ad ibn Zurara who opened his
doors to him in Medina. He took him in his home and they started to look for ways
together to share the beauties in their hearts with the people of Medina. This was
where they were performing their Prayers five times a day, they were reading the

--- Sayfa 347 ---
verses of Allah to a new face every day and were struggling to go deeper in their
religion. There was now an ember in the Name of Allah in Medina and there was a
hearth for faith.
Mus'ab was the perfect representative. People who saw him admired him
immensely. His faith, sincerity, modesty and perfect morals attracted the attention of
everyone in Medina! Each day one of the leading men of Medina would come to him,
and Mus' ab would speak about the finer aspects of religion. He put all his efforts into
Medina, he had almost become like a one man Ummah. Of course, as was expected,
he also had to face certain difficulties, but these were familiar things for him. Wasn't
it the Messenger of Allah himself who had had to shoulder the greatest of difficulties?
No one wanted to submit easily! But those who came to him with swords in their
hands would return with faith in their hearts. Mus'ab would speak to the future
Companions of the Prophet who first came to him in fury in such soft tones, the
sternest of them could not resist his nice behavior, and before long they came and
submitted themselves.
"My friend, first listen to me, and then you can cut my throat if you like. I will not
resist you," Mus'ab would tell them.
Indeed, in the face of a person taking life so lightly and who cared for nothing but
for speaking the truth to people, all ice seemed to melt, and the circle of faith around
Mus'ab grew day by day.
One day, As'ad ibn Zurara took Mus'ab to the neighborhood where his family
lived. They came to a well and stopped for a break. Sa'd ibn Muadh and Usayd ibn
Khudayr from among the inhabitants had heard that they were coming and they did
not approve of these latest developments. They were talking among themselves. Sa'd
pulled Usayd to one side and asked him to banish both of them from their land. Usayd
took his spear and approached them. As'ad and Mus'ab who saw him coming could
guess what was about to happen. But their concern was different to many others, for
once faith had taken root in a heart, that heart wanted to share its wealth with other
people even if they should come with the intention of murder; that heart needed to
show its difference. As'ad whispered into Mus'ab's ear and told him who Usayd was.
In tabligh, communicating one's faith, knowing your interlocutor was very important
indeed. Usayd was the lord of his tribe and Mus'ab had to speak to him accordingly.
Usayd started his rebukes the minute he addressed them. He was very angry: "Why
do you come here and suggest these things to the weak? If you want to stay alive,
leave this place immediately!"

--- Sayfa 348 ---
Mus'ab was as gentle as ever: "Will you sit down a while and listen? If you like it,
you'll accept it. If you don't like it we will do as you please."
This was a reasonable reply, so reasonable that one had to be fair in the face of such
behavior. Usayd was a reasonable man. The situation was clear for him; he thought
things would not change even if he did listen. Then what harm could there be in this?
If he liked it, he would leave and if he did not like it, they would leave. He set his
spear aside and sat down to listen to what Mus'ab had to say. Wisdom was flowing
from the lips ofMus'ab like sweet honey. Usayd was very impressed. He was about to
submit to the faith as well. He was unable to control the exuberance he felt in his
heart. The expressions on his face were mere reflections of the changes happening in
his heart. Even before Mus'ab was finished with what he had to say, he intervened and
started to say: 'What a wonderful thing this is ... What beautiful words ... " and then he
added: "What must someone who wants to enter this religion do?"
Mus'ab spoke to him of ghusl, the major ablution. He spoke of how one's clothes
had to be clean, he spoke of the words of taw hid needed to declare the oneness of
Allah, and he spoke to him about the Daily Prayers.
Usayd got up and left. He just seemed to disappear! When he came back to the
gathering, one could see water dripping from his wet hair. U sayd had believed and he
spoke the words of taw hid from his very heart. Faith had changed him so fast and so
much that he started to feel Mus'ab's anxiety there and then: "There is someone I
know, if he also believes, there will be no one left who doesn't believe in this town.
Wait, I will send him to you," he said.
Usayd went straight to Sa'd ibn Muadh. Sa'd and his friends had gathered together
and were waiting for Usayd. When they saw him coming they said to one another: "I
swear he is not coming in the same way that he went!" Sa'd had understood. When
Usayd came, he was asked hastily:
'What did you do?" Usayd responded saying that he had encountered no problems:
"By Allah, I spoke with those two men. There is nothing wrong with them. First I
dismissed them. Then they said 'We will do as you please'."
Usayd's aim was to have Sa'd and Mus'ab meet each other and so he was trying to
convince Sa'd that they were now holding the ropes and that he could go speak to the
men if he so wanted. In order for him to see the beauty in all its clarity, Sa'd needed to
be in Mus'ab's presence. People didn't like the atmosphere to be so friendly. There
were those who wanted to keep the enmity going. They started to say things that
would provoke Sa'd. They wanted to make him feel that things were getting out of

--- Sayfa 349 ---
control and these developments had to be stopped right then and there.
As mentioned, Sa' d was the lord of his tribe and he could not allow such disorder.
His veins were throbbing because ofthe nerves. He was also very angry at Usayd. He
had sent him there to see to this issue once and for all and now he had come back
speaking about the beauty of what he had encountered. He had to solve this problem
himself. He took his spear and went straight to Mus'ab. He was so angry that he was
breathing through his nostrils and was saying everything that came to his mouth. He
first blew at his aunt's son As'ad who had brought Mus'ab to their town: "Had there
been no family bond between us, you would not have escaped my wrath!"
He was throwing threats at Mus'ab and he continued shouting for a while. It looked
like the tempests raging inside him were not going to calm down any time soon. But
there was no change in Mus'ab's attitude. He was showing the same maturity as
always, for he did not care about death. He was only looking for ways to give life even
to people who came to kill him: "Please listen! If you like it, you'll accept it. If you
don't, then you can do as you like," he said with the same sweetness. The decision lay
with Sa' d again.
''You are right," he said, for there was no man on earth who could make him do
something he didn't want to. Just like Usayd, he put his spear aside, sat down and
started to listen to Mus'ab. He was struck at the very start with the invocation "In the
Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate" that Mus'ab had spoken!
Light upon light was settling on his face. Even before Mus'ab had finished what he
was to say, he started to ask questions similar to Usayd: "What does one need to do
when one wants to submit and enter this religion?"
Mus'ab told him the same thing he had told Usayd. Everything was clear and out in
the open, and to grasp the truth wherever one finds it, was true virtue. Denial had no
logic to produce excuses! It had nothing left, nor could it have any excuses anymore.
In the company of Mus' ab he too would set about the task to find the key that would
unlock the hearts of his tribe. He too was not returning back to his tribe the way he
had gone to seek Mus'ab.
They understood now the state Mus'ab was in ... Sa'd also started to feel the same
anxiety, for he had found a value that he had not realized till that day and now he felt
the need to share it with everyone he knew!
Something had to be said to the curious looks given by the members of his tribe.
Sa'd had no intention to let even one person from his tribe loose. He first asked them:
"How do you know me among you?"

--- Sayfa 350 ---
They all confirmed his good character. Sa'd meant to tum his standing among his
tribe into credit for faith. He shared with them what he got from the source and then
invited them to faith. He put everything he had in it and then added: "If you do not
believe Allah and His Messenger, I will not speak to any of you, man or woman."
When leading men like Usayd and Sa'd accepted, naturally, the others followed. In
Medina everyone looked to one another. It would not be becoming of them not to
follow when men who had been their guides till that day had submitted: "Come, let us
go to Mus'ab! Let us submit as well!"
Amazingly, these voices were now being heard in Medina! 372
Medina was a very fertile place. The news ofMus'ab was spreading with the speed
of light. In a very short time, there were no households left in Medina that had not
converted to Islam. Mus'ab was going from house to house, sharing the wealth ofhis
heart and preparing the people to become Ansar, the Helpers. Gradually, the whole of
Medina had embraced its name to the fullest and had become a Medina, a civilized
city.
The light of faith could not contain itself within Medina and had started to spread to
its outskirts. Mus'ab was going to the surrounding tribes and carrying the same
beauties to them. The Messenger of Allah had done the very same thing; on the one
hand he had addressed Mecca, and on the other he had not neglected speaking about
Islam to the surrounding tribes. Mus'ab, who was perfectly trying to represent him,
could do no different.
One day, Mus'ab wrote a letter to the Messenger of Allah. There was a request
made to him and he was asking his beloved Prophet how he should act. In his reply
Allah's Messenger described the Jumu 'ah Prayer to him and the Muslims in Medina
gathered in the house of Sa'd ibn Haysama and performed the first Jumu 'ah Prayer in
Medina. About a year had passed since they had given their allegiance to the Great
Messenger in Aqaba. Now when they got together, they formed a big congregation.
These were good developments, but the pain of severance was difficult to bear. They
knew what the Messenger of Allah was suffering immensely in Mecca and were
asking themselves:
"For how much longer will we leave him under oppression between the mountains
of Mecca, how much longer will we have him suffer?"
Medina was much nicer, more sincere and embracing. This separation and suffering
was not the way to go; they had to find a way to have their routes meet, and this
separation had to end. There were two ways to do this; either they were to go to Mecca

--- Sayfa 351 ---
and be his congregation, or they were going to invite the Beloved, peace and blessings
be upon him, to Medina to be their leader. When each option was weighed out, both
held difficulties. But these difficulties had to be risked and a solution had to be found,
for this separation had to end.
The Invitation from Medina
It was the pilgrimage season once again, and as ritually expected, there was a flow of
people towards Mecca. There were also Muslims from Medina among those who were
coming to the Ka'ba for the pilgrimage. These were seventy five people, including
two women. They came to Mecca after a long and arduous journey. This was the most
joyful day for them. But for the Mecca of that day, it was impossible for this many
people to come and meet with our noble Prophet in the Ka'ba. They had to find
another solution and this meeting had to take place without encountering any
problems. That is why they first chose Qab ibn Malik and Bara ibn Ma'rur among
them and sent them to the Ka'ba. With the influence of a dream he had, Bara had been
performing his Prayers facing the direction of the Ka'ba. His friends had censured
him, for this meant dissension from our noble Prophet's practices who faced the
Masjid al-Aqsa. He was looking forward to asking the Messenger of Allah about the
truth of the matter. What was strange was neither of them had seen the Messenger of
Allah before and they did not know what he looked like. They started to speak among
themselves on the road, wondering how they would recognize him. They asked a
Meccan. The Meccan responded: "Do you know his uncle Abbas ibn Abdul
Muttalib ?"373
Yes, they knew Abbas who came to Medina now and then for trade: "Yes," they
said. The man said: "Then it is easy! He is the man who sits next to Abbas in the
Ka'ba! Go there and you will see."
Now they were walking without hesitation. Then they came to the Ka'ba. Abbas
was sitting down and the Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, was
with him. They approached them and saluted them. When they saw how warm and
sincere they were, the Messenger of Allah turned to Abbas and said: "Do you know
these men, 0 Abu Fadl?"
''Yes," said Abbas, "This is Bara ibn Ma'rur; head of his tribe, and this is Qab ibn
Malik!"
The light of joy was upon the face of the Messenger of Allah because these names
did not represent just themselves. There were seventy more people like them behind
them and they had come representing them. They asked how they were to meet. The

--- Sayfa 352 ---
location was once again Mina, the place called Aqaba, like in previous years. They
went back to their friends and let them know of the situation.
But the other people they had come with from Medina did not know of this. That is
why they would camp with them the first night and they would meet with our noble
Prophet in the late hours of the night.
When the time of the meeting had come, they got up without making a sound and
came to the place of the meeting. Our noble Prophet was once again accompanied by
his uncle Abbas. When the Messenger of Allah saw seventy five people in front of
him, he was overjoyed beyond words. Mus'ab, the one and only representative and
guide of the Messenger had left and now he had returned with seventy five people!
Never in the thirteen years of strife in Mecca had so many people been welcomed into
Islam at once. The troubles in Mecca seemed to have transformed into a shower of
blessing in Medina. This was the product of one year, and now they were speaking of
the process that led them here. Mus'ab had another piece of good news that would
make his Beloved, peace and blessings be upon him, happy. This was in fact the good
news that was awaited from every believer! He was very emotional as he recounted
his good fortune: "0 Messenger of Allah! There is no household in Medina left in
which Islam is not spoken about," he said with great modesty.
For a believing soul to live and be present in any part of the world meant that that
place had already been conquered in the name of the cause. The Messenger of Allah
had provided the goal, and Mus'ab had received the message. That is why people had
come running after the steps he had taken; he had reaped the harvest of the sincerity he
had sown.
They had a joint request; they were inviting the Rose ofthe Hearts, Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, to Medina. The reasoning was valid;
Medina seemed much more favorable for an Islamic way of life. Its people were also
warmer and more welcoming to a religious way of life.
Yes, there was an invitation, but there was a great price to be paid in order to accept
it. Our noble Prophet's hijra alone would not solve the problem; everyone who
believed would have to immigrate to Medina. For the ones who stayed in Mecca, the
Quraysh would devise various plots and they would suffocate them with their
harassment. This presented them with a great problem; they would have to leave their
houses and possessions, relatives and friends here. For some, immigration would also
mean leaving parents and children behind, and leaving the fields and orchards in the
hands of the Quraysh. In short, this would be like leaving for the grave, for everything
with worldly connections would be left in Mecca. On the other hand, one would have

--- Sayfa 353 ---
to start anew and with nothing in Medina, they would have to set up new homes and
start new businesses. While one lived one's religion freely, one also had to find a way
to earn a living so that one's family and children would not have to suffer poverty and
scarcity. It wasn't just a couple of families; there were about 180 of them! If these
problems weren't solved soon, there would be very serious social problems and this
could cause further problems in the future.
It was clear that the Messenger of Allah now had decided to leave Mecca. For
thirteen years he had strived for the faith of his community but he had always been
met with violence. But now before him were people who were actively supporting his
cause. His uncle Abbas, who watched from afar what was happening, felt the need to
say something to these people who were inviting the Messenger of Allah to their land.
He said: "0 people of Khazraj! 374 As you know, despite everything, Muhammad is
among us and we are protecting him despite all interferences. But now he means to
join you and go with you to your land. Accept this only if you will able to be true to
your word, if you will be able to protect him against those who contradict him as you
protect your own life and possessions. But if you will leave him alone after you leave
this place and hand him over to his enemies, if you will hurt him in the end, then give
up the idea right now and leave him with us. Despite everything, he lives here with his
own tribe with honor and dignity and performs his duties as should be."
With this statement, Abbas wanted to remind them what their invitation meant. He
wanted them to understand the real nature of what they were getting themselves into
and to make sure that they would protect his nephew with a strong will despite all the
obstructions they may face. He could see that he would soon be separated from his
nephew and he was not going to hand him over to other people without seeing the
same kind of determination in their eyes.
The people coming from Medina were equally brave and they turned to Abbas to
say: "We have listened to what you say and we know what you mean."
They then turned towards the Messenger of Allah and said: "0 Messenger of Allah!
What do you want from us in the name of your Lord and for yourself?"
Then the Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, took word. He first
thanked Allah and then read verses from the Qur'an. Then he started to speak about
the general aspects of Islam and compared the customs of yesterday with today. He
then added: "I want absolute obedience both at times of welfare and wellbeing and at
times of trouble; both when you have little to eat and in times of abundance. I want
you to give alms! You will never hold any other thing equal to Him, perform the
Prayers and give alms! You will advise people to do good and warn against the doing

--- Sayfa 354 ---
of evil! You will take all your steps for Allah without fearing that some people might
censure you. When I come to stay among you, you will protect me like you protect
your children and your women and help me."
Bara ibn Ma'rur, held the Messenger of Allah by the hand and said: ''Yes, I swear
by He who has sent you with Truth that we will protect you as we protect our children
and women. We promise you and we swear allegiance to you 0 Messenger of Allah! I
swear by Allah that we are people who know what war is and we can hold our
weapons, this is our heritage from our ancestors who always lived on the battlefields."
Here, Abu'l-Hathsam came to the fore. It was clear that he too had something to
say: "0 Messenger of Allah! We have a problem with a tribe over there and we keep
warring with them. While we fight with them on this issue, should Allah give you
victory and should your cause start to be accepted by all, will you then leave us and go
back to Mecca?"
The Messenger of Allah started to smile. Then he said: "No. On the contrary, the
rule is blood for blood, possession for possession! Now I am a part of you, and you are
a part of me. I will fight who you fight, and I will live in peace with those you have
come to an agreement with!"
As'ad ibn Zurara also came to the fore, held the hand ofthe Messenger of Allah and
said similar things. Things were much clearer now. As'ad was told by his own tribe to
let go of our noble Prophet's hand, so that they may too hold it and swear allegiance to
him. Upon that the Messenger of Allah asked them to form a representative delegate
often. While doing so, he was making references to Moses and Jesus, telling them that
both Prophets had chosen certain people with whom they took their cause further.
Each delegate would represent a tribe; they would organize their friends, and they
would also act as a catalyst when they returned to Medina to ensure that Islam spread
faster in their town. These people were As'ad ibn Zurara, Sa'd ibn Rabi, Abdullah ibn
Rawaha, Rafi ibn Malik, Bara ibn Ma'rur, Abdullah ibn Amr, Ubada ibn as-Samit,
Sa'd ibn Ubada ve Munzir ibn Amr from the Khazraj and Usayd ibn Khudayr, Sa'd
ibn Haysama and Rifaa ibn Abdulmunzir from the tribe of Aws. The Meccan Muslims
were represented by the Messenger of Allah himself. Things were now going to be
wrapped up.
Abbas ibn Ubada came to the fore and said to his friends: "0 people ofKhazraj! Do
you realize what you are doing by swearing allegiance to this man?"
''Yes," they said. His aim was to make people realize the responsibility of their
word and to make them hold on to it faster and stronger. He continued: "You stand

--- Sayfa 355 ---
now against all, the red and the black, declaring war on all! If you think you can hold
onto your word when your possessions and family become targets, then all is well;
then happiness in this world and the next will be yours. But if you fail to show loyalty
when you face difficulties tomorrow, then this will spell your defeat in this world and
the next."
'We are entering this cause at the expense of our property and at the risk of
bringing trouble on the heads of our family; we invite him in full knowledge of this,"
the responded.
They then turned to our noble Prophet and asked: "If we prove ourselves to be loyal
to our word, what will we gain, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
He answered without hesitation: "Paradise."
It was now time to take the last step. With great respect they said: "Give us your
hands, 0 Messenger of Allah. We will swear allegiance to you. "375
They then came to the Messenger of Allah one by one, held his hand in musafaha, a
gesture in which both hands enveloped the hands of other, and thus sealed their
allegiance. The two women from Medina, Nasiba hint Qab known as Umm Umara
and Asma hint Amr who had come all the way with the group, also sealed their
allegiance from afar through a gesture. 376
The Voice in Min a and Allah's Messenger's Attitude
The deed had been done and the people who had invited our noble Prophet to Medina
were returning home happy with the knowledge that they had accomplished their task.
They would now return to their land and wait for the coming of the migrants; thinking
of possible ways to make them comfortable.
In Mina, a voice was heard: "0 people of Jabajib." The voice was addressing the
people of Mecca. "Muhammad and these accursed sabis who follow him have shaken
hands and come to an agreement to fight against you," the voice was shouting. Upon
that the Messenger of Allah said: "This is no doubt the devil of Aqaba, Azab." Then
added: "0 enemy of Allah! I will also make time for you; I will deal with you too."
Then he turned to his Ummah and told them to return to the place that they had
camped in the night.
Abbas ibn Ubada, who saw that the Messenger of Allah was alarmed to a certain
degree said, showing that the duty of the Ansar has thus started: "I swear by Allah
who sent you with Truth, 0 Messenger of Allah! We can head towards Mina with the
first light of day and we will see to him who has spoken against you."

--- Sayfa 356 ---
The Prophet of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, would not act according to
winds of development and he did not take any steps without Divine order. That's why
he turned towards Abbas and said: "We have no permission to do so; that is not our
job." Then he addressed the crowd: "Now go back with the permission and blessing of
Allah to your land. "377
So many things had happened in the one night but the Meccans were not aware of
any of it. Neither did they need to know. Things had been taken care ofvery carefully
so that others would not hear of it. Otherwise the Quraysh, who were always looking
for an excuse to attack, would have been set into action would intervene in the
Muslims' strategy.

--- Sayfa 357 ---
372 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/283
373 There are different reports as to when Abbas became a Muslim. Some say that he became a
Muslim after the Battle of Badr, some historians claim that he had become Muslim while still in
Mecca but had hidden his faith in order to provide logistical support for his nephew Muhammad
the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him. When we look at his role in important events,
this second theory seems to be more plausible. For during the migration, Abbas also asked for
permission, but the Messenger of Allah had told him "your staying in Mecca will be more
beneficial" and forbade him to go. He even told him that with his migration, this issue would
come to an end; and indeed Abbas came to Medina right before the conquest of Mecca. When our
noble Prophet heard that Abbas had been forced to join the Meccan army in the battle of Badr, he
told his Companions not to attack Abbas, thus revealing that he had been left in Mecca with a
strategic purpose. See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/163, 164.
374 The Khazraj tribe was more powerful than others and it was their name that came to mind when
one spoke of Medina, and Abbas meant the whole of Medina when he was referring to Khazraj.
375 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/287
376 Ibid.; Al-Misri, Siratu 'r-Rasul, p. 179
377 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 21296, 297

--- Sayfa 358 ---
THE PERMISSION FOR HIJRA AND
THE PANIC OF THE QURA YSH
M
eanwhile, the Truthful Gabriel had come and brought the permission for
hijra. This community who already believed in the necessity of hijra had
already received a verse that dealt with hijra before. The verse speaking of
the people who would meet a sorry end in the afterlife because they had not taken the
initiative of hijra during their life time despite the pressures placed on them was
known to all of them and they would recite it in their Daily Prayers. 378
The Messenger of Allah spoke of a dream he had and said the following: "I saw
myself leaving Mecca and going to a city covered with date trees; first I thought that
this city must be Yamama or Hajar, but then I understood that it was Yathrib."379
This meant that the oppression and violence in Mecca would end and he would
continue his life in a healthier environment. The Companions were now relieved with
this Prophetic news and were waiting for the order to leave. They would come to our
noble Prophet's presence now and then, and ask him when the journey would start.
Everything would go according to plan and no steps would be taken without Divine
permission. The verse brought by Gabriel was addressing the same issues and wanted
the Messenger to share it with his Companions:
I am no novelty (either in my person or in the message I have brought)
among the Messengers, and (being human) I do not know (unless Allah
informs me) what (will happen in the future in the world and therefore
what will) be done to me and to you. I only follow what is revealed to me,
and I am only a plain warner. (al-Ahkaf 46:9)
This meant that even if he should have had the dream, there needed to be extra
permission to leave for Medina; they were not supposed to take any steps without it
and they could not decide on their own. 380
But because the address had become known to a certain extent, they had already
started to make preparations. Now they knew where they were headed.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
Then the permission came. Now the Messenger of Allah would comfortably speak
to his Companions about Medina, and tell all the Muslims in Mecca that their goal
now was to reach Medina, that they should now immigrate there. That is why he
addressed his gracious Companions as thus: "Verily Allah has given you other friends,
and He has given you permission to migrate to another land; now you will go there
and experience safety! "381
The Companions would start one by one to set on the road and they would leave
Mecca without provoking anyone. They knew that there was the Ansar and a blessed
city waiting for them with open doors.
On the other hand the Quraysh had felt that something was afoot but had not been
able to understand what was going on. They were experienced from previous years;
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, would always go to
speak to people who came from outside oftown, and would invite them to his cause.
But what had he done this year and with whom had he spoken? This was the question
that was on the minds of the Quraysh. They knew this crowded group from Medina
did not seem to be good news. They were asking everyone they came across and yet
they couldn't get the answers to their questions. At last they decided to send a number
of people from among them to Medina. A group had also been set up to check the
roads that went to Medina. The Meccans who had gone all the way to Medina would
address them as thus: "0 people of Khazraj! There is no doubt that you have visited
this man of ours. We have heard that you invited him to your land and have sworn
allegiance to him even if it should mean fighting a war with us! Do not forget that if
you do that you will not find a sterner and fiercer tribe among the Arabs to fight
against and you will be our sworn enemies!"
The people of Medina who had to listen to these threats were trying to understand
what was going on and replied: "What do you mean? We do not know anything of
what you speak! We have made pact with no one."
They then came to Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul who was getting ready to assume
leadership in Medina. He showed the same surprise: "This is false news! Had
something like that happened I would have known! If something like that happens
while I am still in Yathrib382 they will first have to fight me," he was saying.
The believers who witnessed this conversation, on the other hand, stayed silent;
they were looking at each other wondering what dimensions the issue would reach.
On the other hand the horsemen who were following the people from Medina had
caught up with Sa' d ibn Ubada and Munzir ibn Amr who had been left a little behind

--- Sayfa 360 ---
and had arrested them as prisoners. But Munzir escaped making use of a negligent
moment. They tied Sa'd up so that he wouldn't escape like his friend and they dragged
him into Mecca. Sa'd was the lord of Khazraj; and here he was with his hands and
arms bound, and another rope round his neck, forcibly brought to Mecca. They were
also throwing him insults, pulling at his hair. Before long Mut'im ibn Adiyy and
Harith ibn Harb, heard ofthe situation and came to where Sa'd was to save him. Sa'd
had helped Mut'im and Harith before by giving them protection as they were passing
through Medina with their caravans, aiding them thus to reach their destination in
safety. This favor done years ago was giving results today; at a time when he needed it
most, Allah was protecting him through a polytheist, against polytheists. 383
Important Advice
Hijra was very important but it had to be done solely for the pleasure and contentment
of Allah. In such an important business as this, the purity in intentions was of prime
importance. If the intentions were for a more comfortable life, better trading
opportunities, marriage with a believing spouse or any other thing, such hijra would
involve merit at all, for when one set off with such intentions, they would only be able
to meet these goals and nothing further.
There were rumors that one of the Companions was going to go to Medina in order
to marry a woman named Umm Qays. 384 The man in question was a believer and yet
he had to keep his intentions pure on this journey; the pointer in the heart had to show
Allah's contentment, and there had to be no divergence from it, for this path was the
path of all believing people, including previous Prophets. This was a branch of jihad
itself because it was a physical and inner struggle, and no one could imagine the value
of this good deed. So the people setting on this road had to be well-advised. The
Messenger of Allah declared: "Actions gain value only through one's intentions.
Whatever one intends, he will get it. Whoever does the hijra for the contentment of
Allah and His Messenger, and then his hijra is directed towards Allah and His
Messenger, and whoever is doing hijra in order to live in a better environment or to
marry a woman, and then his hijra will be according to what he has set his heart on."385
The Pangs ofHijra
A new process had started. In a short while, everyone who could set off for the road
would start their journey and would reach a new region, a new world. But this would
not be as easy as they thought.
The hijra of the Muslims was not easy for the Quraysh to accept; when they learnt

--- Sayfa 361 ---
of the Muslims' plan, they did all that was in their power to stop them, to prevent them
from getting out of their control and go to another land.
The Quraysh already resented the fact that they had failed to change the course of
events in the previous two hijras to Abyssinia so they wanted to do all they could to
prevent Islam from spreading in other regions. That is why they would stand guard on
the road and try to tum people back from their journey. They arrested and imprisoned
some of them and subjected them to torture, trying to make them recant their faith.
Sometimes they even pursued them all the way to Medina. In short, Mecca was
displaying all the characteristics of a repressive regime, and as deniers they made it
clear that Hell itself was not in vain.
Abu Salama and His Family
The first person to immigrate to Medina was Abu Salama, who had also immigrated to
Abyssinia before. This time, he had set out with his wife Umm Salama and son
Salama and was making his way towards Medina. But the Quraysh had heard of their
hijra and they held them up: "We understand why you would want to leave! But why
do you take your wife and child with you?" they said inferring that they would not let
his wife and child leave with him.
They had already taken hold of the camel's noose and had taken Umm Salama and
the child hostage. They were about to break up the family. While Abu Salama's
relatives only wanted to take young Salama, the tribe of Umm Salama wanted both her
and her child. There was a great quarrel between them; at the end the sons of
Abdulasad took hold of Salama, and Umm Salama was taken by the sons of Mughira.
Abu Salama was left alone to mourn for the break up of his family at a time when he
had thought that he was going towards freedom. He was helpless; there was nothing
he could do even if he should return. His family had been taken away from him all of
a sudden and they had all been taken to different places as captivities. From then on,
our mother Umm Salama would go to the place of Abtah where she would utter
laments about her son and husband from whom she had been severed with there. This
would continue for a whole year. One year later, when she was uttering the same
laments and crying, one of her relatives took pity on her and said: "Why are you doing
this to this poor woman, let her go where she needs to go to in order to reunite with
her husband and son."
The other relatives would then be moved to show some mercy, following with the
sons of Abdulasad who would also release Salama. She was overjoyed, for now it was
time to reunite with her husband and to return to their old days of peace. She mounted

--- Sayfa 362 ---
her camel and started to make way towards Medina. She had set out on this perilous
journey as a woman alone, asking the way to people she saw on the road. After many
days and nights, she reached Tanim. Here she saw Uthman ibn Talha and asked him
for directions as well: "Where are you traveling to on your own like this, 0 daughter
of the sons ofUmayya?" he asked.
"I am going to Medina to be with my husband," she said.
Uthman was surprised. Many men had been intercepted on these high roads and had
to face great dangers: "Have you traveled all this way on your own?" he asked.
Our mother, who had stores of submission and trust in Allah, answered modestly:
"Yes, I swear I traveled with no one else but this child and Allah."
This was strange indeed; this meant that when one had a sincere request and
complete submission to Allah, deeds that seemed impossible were possible, like spring
gales made possible in the middle ofthe desert.
But now Uthman wanted to take on the responsibility: "I swear I will not leave you
without having taken you to where you want to go."
He took hold of the camel's bridle and set about the task of bringing Umm Salama
and her son to Abu Salama. When they paused on the journey, he was letting Umm
Salama's camel go down on its knees and then he would retire to the side so that Umm
Salama would have her privacy. When they at last reached the home of the sons of
Amr ibn Awf at Quba, he showed her the place where her husband was staying: ''Your
husband lives in that village; with the grace of Allah you can find your way from here,
and then he went back to Tanim."386
Suhayb ibn Sinan
Suhayb ibn Sinan had been living with his family in Mosul near the river Tigris when
he was taken captive by the Byzantines and then he was bought by the sons of Kalb
and brought to Mecca. He now had a slave's collar round his neck. Later he was
bought by ibn Judan and freed. But he stayed with Abdullah ibn Judan until his master
died.
He had come to the house of Ammar ibn Yasir with Ibn Arqam and had become a
Muslim when he heard our noble Prophet's call. Because he was weak and had no
one, he was one of the believers who had to face much oppression. Now the
opportunity of hijra was placed before him and he was hoping this would be the way
out for him. He too set out on hijra and made his way to Medina.
The Quraysh who heard of this had no intention to allow this to happen; they stood

--- Sayfa 363 ---
in his way and said: "You were a poor and weak man when you came among us!
Whatever you have earned you have earned here! Now you mean to take your
possessions and leave our town, how could this be! We swear we will not let you do
this!"
Suhayb looked at them for a long time! They were thinking that when they took his
possessions ransom he would not dare leave. People who had no values other than
worldly ones could not conceive of a cause that could make one sacrifice all worldly
goods. That is why he turned to them and said: "0 people ofQuraysh! You know very
well that I am among your best archers; you will not be able to come near me till I
have made use of the all the arrows I have here, and so long as I have a tiny bit of my
sword left, I will not let you come near me! If not myself but my possessions are what
you are after, then I will tell you where they are and you can do what you please with
them."
"Tell us where your goods are, and then we will not stand in your way," they said.
There was no way to understand these people; all they cared about were worldly
goods! He asked astonished: "Will you let me go ifl leave you all that I have?"
''Yes, we will let you," they said mockingly. Maybe they thought that such an
option was impossible. But Suhayb was very serious and said: "Then I leave all my
possessions with you."
They were shocked; how could a man leave all that he had aside just so he could
run to Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him? They
themselves would have fought to the death in order to save a scrap from their
belongings. This was strange indeed and there was no way to understand it with the
logic of the Quraysh. The news of the bravery of Suhayb reached the Messenger of
Allah. When he heard it he said: "What great profit Suhayb has gained! What great
profit Suhayb has gained!" and the Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him spoke
of his sacrifice to other people as well. 387 The message that the Truthful Gabriel
brought was of a nature that declared the meaning of this trade:
And (in contrast, there is) among the people one who sells himself in
pursuit of Allah's good pleasure. Allah is All-Pitying towards His
servants (and therefore commends to them reverent piety and fear of His
punishment). (al-Baqarah 2:207)
The Hijra ofUmar
Umar was a very brave man who had no equal in Mecca. With an issue as important as

--- Sayfa 364 ---
hijra, everyone else was moving in secrecy while he had openly declared that he
would immigrate to Medina and challenged anyone brave enough to meet him at such
and such place for a confrontation. This naturally was not a stance expected from
everyone, it was a difficult position to take, but it suited a lion-hunter like Umar very
much. They had made the decision to go to Medina with Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia and
Hisham ibnu'l-As and they decided to meet the next day at the place called Tanadub
to set on their journey. If any ofthem should fail to come to the meeting place, those
who could would still start the journey and thus the others would not be deprived of
the chance to immigrate. The Quraysh was doing all it could to prevent the Muslims
from going.
Then the time came and Umar started out from his home. But his first destination
was not Tanadub as they had agreed, but the Ka'ba. Before long he set out for the
Ka'ba with his sword, arrow, bow and spear.
Those who saw him but did not know that he was about to go on hijra were
watching to see what would happen. People had gathered in the courtyard of the Ka'ba
to see what he was about to do. He started to circumambulate the Ka'ba, and he
circumambulated it seven times.
Then he came to the Maqam Ibrahim (Sacred Station of the Prophet Ibrahim) and
prayed two cycles of Prayer. Then he approached the gathering of people and said to
them regarding the oppression they had thought fit to inflict upon Muslims: "Woe
unto these black faces! Allah will take these noses and rub them in the ground."
And then he added: 'Whoever among you wants to make his mother weep for him,
to orphan his children and leave his wife a widow, let him face me behind this valley,"
thus challenging those who had formed a front against faith. 388
They knew very well that they could not stand against someone like Umar so easily.
They could show their strength only against the weak and the unprotected and when
he set out for the valley he had spoken about, all they could do was to watch him
leave. When Umar reached the place that they had agreed upon with Hisham and
Ayyash, only Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia was there. There were about twenty people
waiting for Umar' s arrival; these were the people who had preferred to accompany
someone like Umar rather than to do the hijra on their own since they were weak and
powerless. 389 They waited for Hisham ibnu'l-As for a while as they had agreed, but it
was in vain. The Meccans had understood that he was going to immigrate and they
had stopped and imprisoned him.
Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia

--- Sayfa 365 ---
Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia was a Companion ofthe noble Prophet who was one of the first
to become a Muslim. He had become a Muslim before settling in Ibn Arqam's house
and when oppression in Mecca had reached its peak, he had immigrated to Abyssinia.
He was of the group who had come back to Mecca upon hearing the false news that
Meccans had become Muslims. Now he had been set in motion and set on the road for
a new and second hijra. After meeting with his hijra Companion Umar at the
appointed place, they started their long and tiring journey; a journey that at the same
time promised peace and comfort. His friends were sad that Hisham could not come,
but there was not much they could do about it.
After a journey that took days, they at last reached Quba and they stopped for a
while to rest. Here they noticed that there were two horsemen following them, and
thinking that they too may be on the hijra like themselves, they decided to wait for
them. They were happy to think that two more Muslims would be escaping the
oppression in Mecca and were now close to step into the civilized atmosphere of
Medina.
But before long they realized that they had been mistaken because they saw that the
men coming were Abu Jahl and his brother Harith ibn Hisham. These men did not
mean to immigrate! Our noble Prophet had gone to the door of Abu Jahl many times
but every time he responded negatively, insulted the Messenger of Allah and thus had
turned his face away from this happiness that had come all the way to his door. A
Pharaoh who had spat insults every day for thirteen years could not be expected to
have mended his ways in a day! Then why had they come all the way here? Was this
because they wanted to take Umar up on the challenge he had uttered in the Ka'ba?
They would understand the matter shortly. Abu Jahl was looking for Ayyash. Abu
Jahl, Hisham and Ayyash had the same mother, they were brothers. Ayyash was also
Abu Jahl's uncle's son. It was clear that he had come with a plan to injure his step-
brother exploiting what was dearest to him. He was saying: "Your mother has sworn
never to comb her hair again when you left; she has also sworn to say in sunlight and
wait and not go into the shade until she dies!"
Ayyash was a very soft hearted man and he was touched deeply by what Abu Jahl
had just said. That is why Abu Jahl was speaking of this, trying to have a big impact
on his brother. Umar, who saw the state that his Companion was in, understood the
situation very well and said rather realistically: "0 Ayyash! These people are trying to
find an excuse to put you in a difficult situation about your religion-stay away from
them! I swear by Allah that when fleas attack your mother's head she will have to
comb it. When the heat of Mecca hits her she will have to go under a shade."

--- Sayfa 366 ---
He knew that one could never trust what Abu J ahl said, he was sure that he was
plotting something.
But this is not how Ayyash thought; he was looking at the situation more
emotionally than logically. He felt he had to return to his mother at all costs, make her
recant her oath and save her from that situation. He also had business he had not
finished in Mecca; after dealing with all of these, he would set out for the hijra to
Medina once again.
When he saw that his friend was choosing to return, Umar took another step and
made the following offer: "If you are worried about the belongings you left in Mecca,
then do not fear, you know that I am one of the richest among the Quraysh. I will give
half my wealth to you; just do not go back with them!"
But it was clear that Ayyash had made up his mind and there was no point in
insisting.
Umar could clearly envisage what would happen to him. Maybe this was because he
knew his opponent Abu Jahl very well, for a Pharaoh like Abu Jahl would not come
and sweat all this way to tell Ayyash about his mother's oath. He took another step to
help his Companion. Since he was going to go anyway, he wanted him to have
something to hold on to should anything happen. That is why he said: "Here, take this
camel of mine and go with it; for it is a noble and fast camel. If you feel evil meant
towards you from either of them on the way, just get on it and ride it away as fast as
you can."
"All right," said Ayyash as he got on Umar's camel and started the return journey
back home. When they made a little way, Abu Jahl addressed Ayyash: "0 son of my
mother! My camel is very tired, it can barely walk. Can I get on your camel and ride
behind you?"
This seemed like an innocent request and Ayyash said naively: "All right, come, get
on it."
The camels were stopped, and Abu Jahl got behind on Ayyash's camel. They rode
like that for a while. Then Abu Jahl made a sudden move and tied Ayyash from
behind. In the meanwhile, his brother Harith whom he was in league with came and
tied Ayyash tightly in a way he would not be able to escape.
Ayyash was now very sorry that he had not heeded Umar's words, but it was too
late. How could one trust someone like Abu Jahl who was the Pharaoh ofthe Ummah
and journey with him? He was sorry that he had not balanced his naive and lenient
attitude with caution, but this regret did not serve him now.

--- Sayfa 367 ---
When they came to Mecca it was day time and Abu Jahl planned to exploit Ayyash
for his own ends, and would say to the Meccans: "0 people of Mecca! Look here, we
have captured our own deluded brother, and so you should go get your own relatives!"
390
Abu Jahl's efforts in the name of denial were quite extraordinary! He always
worked against the Muslims. The only way to tum his efforts over his head was to
strive more in the way of faith! The Messenger of Allah who heard of what had
happened to Ayyash was very sad and raising his hands to the skies, he prayed for all
the Muslims who were oppressed including Walid ibn Wali and Salama ibn Hisham
and added Ayyash's name to them, asking the Lord for deliverance. 391
The Decision at the Daru'n-Nadwa (the Council Hall)
Despite all the pressure and obstruction, the hijra to Medina continued. Three months
had passed after the hijra which had started with Abu Salama. Among the Muslims,
only slaves and imprisoned ones, along with the Messenger of Allah Abu Bakr and Ali
remained in Mecca. It was none other than the Messenger of Allah himself who had
postponed Abu Bakr and Ali's hijra. Now it was their tum. If they also went and
settled in Medina, the Quraysh would be in continuous trouble with the Aws and
Khazraj tribes who were very experienced in war. Their trade on the route to
Damascus and Yemen both in winter and summer months would be at risk and they
would never find peace again. Things were not irreversible at the moment; they could
solve the problem right now. That's why they needed immediate precautions.
It was the twenty-sixth of the month of Safar, and it was a Monday. Late this
morning they gathered together to discuss their final strategy. As usual, they went to
the Daru'n-Nadwa, their advisory assembly place inherited from Qusay ibn Kilab. The
people who had got together to make this important decision included Abu Jahl,
Jubayr ibn Mut'im, Tuayma ibn Adiyy, Harith ibn Amir, the brothers Utba and
Shayba ibn Rabia, Abu Sufyan, Nadr ibn Harith, Abu'l-Bakhtari, Zam'a ibn Aswad,
Hakim ibn Hizam, the brothers Nubayh and Munabbih ibnu'l-Hajjaj and Umayya ibn
Khalaf.
They wanted to solve this issue that had continued for fourteen years; they were
treating the issue in such secrecy that they were not allowing people younger than
forty years of age to attend; they were doing all they could to prevent what was being
spoken inside to reach outside those walls. An old man with rugged clothes whom
they didn't know, who said that he was from Najid, came to them and were waiting to
join them at the door.

--- Sayfa 368 ---
'Who is it?" They asked anxiously.
"An old man from Najid, I am among your uncles' sons! I have heard that you have
gathered here together for a very important business and I came thinking that I may be
of some use. I will leave if you do not want me."
"If he is our uncles' son, then he is from us! He wouldn't come from Najid to spy
against us! Anyhow, he is not from Mecca," they said and so they let him in.
And then the conversations started. Abu Jahl was leading the discussion. He started
the sitting: ''You know the position of this man of yours; if he leaves you and goes
elsewhere to gather strength and attack you, this will cause you much headache. Tell
me what you think we can do to avoid this situation and let me see whether you can
come together to devise something."
Abu'l-Bakhtari took word: "Tie him up in chains and imprison him; lock the doors
on him and wait. One day he too will grow old like other poets before him and die."
The old man from Najid intervened: "I am not of your opinion. This will never
solve your problem! If you imprison him like you suggest, his cause will go over the
walls you build around him and reach his friends. Then they will attack you and take
him away from you and build their strength outside. This is not a solution, you should
think of something else."
Aswad ibn Rabia then spoke: "We have to tear him away from our society, kick him
out of the country, and let him go wherever he wants! Then we will be rid of him! We
will not care where he goes or settles after we have got rid of him."
This idea did not please the old man either, he took word and said: "I swear this is
not a solution! Do you not see the beauty in his words, the intellectuality in his logic
and the grace in his actions? These will affect the hearts of people and he will reappear
among you one day. If you do that, the day will come when he will move the masses
with his virtues and you will find yourselves facing the tribes that have given him his
word! He will come and want to have what you have, and then you will not be able to
do anything against him. You should find another solution."
There was something strange indeed with this old man's position; the Meccans had
come together to find a solution to the problem but this man from Najid was even
more eager than the Meccans! They were happy to have included him in this
assembly.
Abu Jahl, who was chairing the meeting, was also pleased with the contributions of
the old man from Najid. For him, the solutions suggested were not valid either. But he
himself could not think of another option. The eyes turned towards Abu Jahl who was

--- Sayfa 369 ---
consolidating the old man's stance. He was waiting for his tum to speak: "I also have
an opinion on this matter that you are trying to resolve," he said.
'What is it, 0 Abal Hakam ?" they asked. He continued: "I believe the ultimate
solution lies in raising a group of able young men from each tribe who are active and
good marksmen. They should attack him with their swords and kill him at one strike,
and thus we will be rid of him! When he is killed in this way his blood will be on the
hands of all the tribes, and the sons of Abdimanaf won't be able to confront all these
tribes. They will only have the option of demanding blood money; we will pay it and
the issue will be solved."
The old man from Najid entered the conversation at this moment and this time, he
was nodding his head in agreement, and the last thing he said was: "The word spoken
by this friend is the right one! I cannot think of any other solution!"
They had now made their decision and were going to put their plan of killing
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, into practice. They left the Daru'n-
Nadwa in secrecy just as they had gathered there and each went to his own home. 392

--- Sayfa 370 ---
378 An-Nisa 4:97
379 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1326 (3425); Muslim, Sahih, 411779 (2272)
380 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 395
381 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/314
382 Y athrib is another name for Medina.
383 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/298-299; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/40, 52; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-
Makhtum, p. 142
384 Qastalani, Irshadu 's-Sari, 1155
385 Bukhari, Sahih, 113 ( 1)
386 See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 111442. Our mother Umm Salama never forgot the help Uthman
gave her and his sensibility; and she spoke of his behavior to all as an example of virtue at every
given opportunity.
387 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/173; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/338
388 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11819; Halabi, Sirah, 2/183, 184
389 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/271; Bayhaqi, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 9113 (17534)
390 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11322
391 Bukhari, Sahih, 11277 (771); Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 4/308, 309
392 Halabi, Sirah, 2/189, 190

--- Sayfa 371 ---
THE HOLY MIGRATION
0
n the other hand, the Messenger of Allah now had the permission for hijra,
and he was about to leave Mecca. One of the verses that the Truthful
Gabriel had brought was continuously on his lips, at every opportunity he
was supplicating: ''My Lord! Cause me to enter in a manner sincere and faithful to the
truth, and cause me to exit in a manner sincere and faithful to the truth, and grant me
from Your Presence a sustaining authority!" (al-Isra 17:80), and now these prayers
had been answered and the Messenger of Allah was about to set out for Medina for the
holy hijra. The Truthful Gabriel told him of the traps that the Meccans were setting:
"Do not always sleep in the same bed, 0 Messenger of Allah."
And then he told him the strategy he should use when he left Mecca in order to
escape Quraysh's traps. In short, the hijra started in between the conspiracies of the
Quraysh and the precautions provided by Allah, the All-Knowing. 393 Our noble
Prophet asked Gabriel, after he had brought him the good news of the hijra:
'Who will be my Companion on the hijra?"
"Abu Bakr," he replied. 394
Abu Bakr had been eagerly waiting to be the Prophet's Companion on this journey.
Then, unexpectedly at noon time, when everyone else was relaxing in their homes, the
Messenger of Allah came and knocked on Abu Bakr's door; he was asking leave to
enter. This was strange indeed! The most beloved servant of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, was at Abu Bakr's door, waiting to enter.
"May my mother and father be sacrificed for you! There must be something really
important since he comes at such an hour," Abu Bakr mumbled to himself.
Before long he ran to the door and welcomed in the Messenger of Allah. He was
waiting anxiously, for the Messenger of Allah would normally come in the cool hours
of either the morning or the evening. Before long, the Messenger of Allah asked the
members of the household-Abu Bakr's daughters Asma and Aisha-to leave the
room. Abu Bakr said: "Do not fear, 0 Messenger of Allah! They are my daughters;

--- Sayfa 372 ---
they are like your family! May my mother and father be sacrificed for you! Is there
something wrong?" He asked trying to understand the reason of his visit.
The reply was not late in coming: "I have been given the permission to leave Mecca
and go on the hijra."
Abu Bakr was now even more excited and asked: "Are we to go together, 0
Messenger of Allah?"
The following words flowed from the Messenger's lips towards the face that was
waiting eagerly: "Yes, together."
Abu Bakr was overjoyed! He had prepared for that day and was waiting for the
order to go. When he had asked for permission to migrate with the other Companions,
he had received the reply: "Do not make haste! One hopes that Allah will give you a
Companion!"
Afterwards, they started the preparations for two. For four months he had been
preparing two camels for this long trip. He had been expecting these very words from
his Beloved. This was the start of the next phase that would change the course of
events. Being the Companion to the Messenger of Allah on this historic journey!
Could there be a greater fortune than this? Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,
had been unable to control himself and was crying out ofjoy. 395
Before long, he brought two camels to the Messenger of Allah and said: "0
Messenger of Allah! I have prepared these two rides for our journey."
But the Beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had to be an example in
all respects and so said to Abu Bakr: "Only under one condition: I will pay the price of
the camels." Thus making it clear that on such an important journey as this, one could
not make use of something, the price of which one had not paid.
The Precautions concerning the Hijra
Since everything had already been communicated, it was time to set on the journey;
Abu Bakr would prove that he was siddiq and would take precautions to make the
road safer as befitting to his name. One had to be on guard at all times. Going on such
a long journey with camels was not going to be easy. So, they first made an agreement
with a polytheist by the name of Abdullah ibn Urayqit who knew the road well.
Abdullah had the same mentality with the Quraysh in regards to Islam, but Abu
Bakr and the Messenger of Allah trusted him in the matter of the road. Abdullah ibn
Urayqit could have been tempted by the money that they had put on their heads and
could give the Quraysh information about the direction they were going to go. But the

--- Sayfa 373 ---
Messenger of Allah knew very well the character of the people he dealt with. Even
though he was a polytheist, Abdullah was a man who did not care much about the
gains of this world and was a man of his word.
He was a man who knew the road they were going to take very well. Even in such
risky circumstances, what mattered were the capabilities of the person in question.
They were to meet at Thawr three days later and Abdullah was going to bring the two
camels that Abu Bakr had bought for the hijra, and thus the journey would start.
Abu Bakr had told his daughter Asma to prepare their food and to send it to Thawr
while they would be staying there. Asma was preparing the food with great care, and
sent it after she put it in a small bag and sealed it carefully. She had not been able to
find a rope with which to tie the bag and so with the directive of her mother, she had
removed her own belt from her waist, and ripping it into two, she tied the bags with
these strings, and for this reason she was later called "Dhi'n-nitakayn" meaning the
"owner of two belts."396
There was another precaution that Abu Bakr took; he called his shepherd Amir to
his side and asked him to herd the sheep after them so that their tracks would be
covered by the tracks of the sheep. 397 He knew very well that the Meccans were very
good at following tracks and so they could easily use this to their advantage.
Abu Bakr's son Abdullah would come to them together with Amir and bring them
the food that Asma prepared along with the news of the Meccans during the period
they stayed there.
Abdullah would come to the cave at night and would leave in the early hours of the
morning, and during this time, Amir would come to graze the sheep in Thawr, and this
scheme was to be followed every day during their stay there. Thus, the travelers on
this blessed road would also have met their need for milk. 398
Another precaution that one had to take was on the part of our noble Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him; he had left his nephew Ali in his place so that he would
take care of the things that had been entrusted to him by people and return them to
their rightful owners. His greatness was such that he was not going to let even the
people who tried to kill him, lose their properties. He was very careful about the things
that were left in his care and was appointing his beloved nephew to see to it that
everyone got what was rightfully theirs.
These measures were not unnecessary; they were all approved by the Messenger of
Allah for he was sent as mercy to all his Ummah. He knew very well that Allah would
protect him even if he didn't do all these and take all these measures, for Allah the

--- Sayfa 374 ---
Almighty had told him that He would protect him from all dangers that could come
from people, and he kept reciting this comforting verse of the Qur'an in his Prayers. 399
The matter was different indeed; the Messenger of Allah was a guide, a model for
people, a model according to which they could rearrange and reshape their lives. If he
had declared his hijra like Umar, then the whole of his Ummah would have felt the
need to follow his steps exactly, and this would have meant encouraging people to
take a step that they might not have been ready to take. He would thus take into
account the weakest of his Ummah and would arrange his business according to these
conditions.
That is why he took all the precautions possible and gave the most excellent lesson
about taking the means for the end into consideration. On the other hand, the Quraysh
thought that they were about to reach their solution. The people they had chosen from
among themselves including, Abu Jahl, Hakam ibn Abi'l-As, Uqba ibn Abi Mu'ayt,
Nadr ibn Harith, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Zam'a ibn Asad, Tuayma ibn Adiyy, Abu
Lahab, Ubayy ibn Khalaf and the Nubayh and Munabbih ibn Hajjaj brothers, had
come together and surrounded the house of the noble Prophet. Thus, two
representatives of each tribe were involved and the others were waiting to let out cries
of victory. These unfortunate people who had been blinded by rage had surrounded the
Messenger of Allah's house, and were counting the minutes to deal the final blow.
Abu Jahl was speaking and mocking the words that our noble Prophet had used when
inviting people to the cause of Allah and saying the following to those who were
present: "Remember when Muhammad told you that if you followed him you would
be victorious over the Arabs and the Persians? He told you that if you did not follow
him your lives would be in danger and that you would lose your heads. He told you
that you would be resurrected after your death and would bum in the fires ofHell!"400
Now they were waiting for the moment when they would resolve the matter quietly.
But Allah the Almighty was powerful over everything and He knew all that was
happening. All things in the heavens and earth were subject to the force of His hand
and He would do what He wanted when He wanted, and no one would be able to say
or do anything against it. Things being thus, the traps that the Quraysh set and the
death commando they had prepared had no importance! This would be proven soon.
Under normal circumstances, when the Messenger of Allah performed the Evening
Prayer, he would lie down for a while, and when the Ka'ba became peaceful and quiet,
he would go there and worship his Lord alone in peace.
But this evening things were different; when the Messenger of Allah heard of the
situation, he called Ali to his side and said: 'Wrap yourself up in this green mantle and

--- Sayfa 375 ---
lie on my bed. Do not fear, lie down and sleep, for they will not be able to harm you at
all."
Then the Messenger of Allah recited the first nine verses of the Surah Y a-Sin and
then stepped outside his home. The Quraysh were keeping vigil outside. At that
moment he was reciting the verse: ''And We have set a barrier before them and a
barrier behind them, and (thus) We have covered them (from all sides), so that they
cannot see" (Y a-Sin 36:9).
He then threw the earth and dust he picked up from the ground over those who had
surrounded his house, and accompanying this act he was saying: "Let these faces tum
black and become blind!"
The earth he threw touched every one of them and miraculously, it was as if they
had gone blind. He was walking among them and yet none of them could see him.
Yes, these people had set up a plan to deprive the most beloved servant of Allah of his
home and had come to kill him; he who had done nothing to them except inviting
them to the Truth. However, Allah the Almighty who had sent him as a Prophet of
mercy to all realms also had a plan. It was clear that even if something as wrong as
denial may be exacerbated there was no way to stand before the will of Allah, and
what He says would always come to pass. 401
The Messenger of Allah had already left. After a while someone else approached
the people who had been waiting outside his home. When he saw them in that state he
asked: "Why are you waiting here?''
They answered without hesitation: "We are waiting for Muhammad."
The man was enraged. The men they had chosen to kill Muhammad, peace and
blessings be upon him, were acting like tame cats; they had not even noticed the earth
that had been thrown upon them! While Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and
blessings be upon him, had gone his way, they were lazily waiting at his door,
contemplating plans to kill him! This was stupidity loud and clear! When berating
them, the man said: "Woe unto you! You dummies! He has already thrown earth over
you and has gone his way."
'We swear we did not see him," they said.
They were dumbfounded and helpless! It was as if their ability to see had been
taken away from them and they had not been able to see the Messenger of Allah
although they had been looking straight at him! They touched their heads to see
whether what the man was saying was true. Yes, they were covered in earth, and
looking at each other in disbelief they started to shake the dust from their clothes.

--- Sayfa 376 ---
Before long, the news spread among the Quraysh, the other leading men who had
been awaiting news of Muhammad's death were devastated to hear that the Messenger
of Allah had already gone on hijra! All the elders of the tribes ran to his home. When
they opened the door and entered, they held their breath for a second, for the bed was
not empty! The men who had waited outside were saying: "Here is Muhammad under
that blanket! You have caused uproar for nothing."
But this respite did not last long, for Ali sprung up to his feet after hearing so many
people enter the room he was sleeping in. This was the second shock for them. They
asked with rage: "Where is Muhammad?"
Ali answered rather calmly: "I do not know anything in regards to your question."
It was them who had lost once again; they had been even more enraged by the
answer they got and they were throwing threats around. They did not want to leave
Ali, so they harassed him for a while and then they took him to the Ka'ba. They
imprisoned him hoping that he would tell them the whereabouts of the travelers,
hoping that he would give them some kind of a clue to go by. 402 But they understood
that they would not be able to get the answers they wanted however much they forced
him. Not letting Ali go would be against their interest because he had been left behind
to distribute the things that had been entrusted to the noble Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, and now he was going to give everything to their rightful
owners.
The Pharaoh of the Ummah, Abu Jahl, showed once again how deserving he was of
his title when he said: "I will give a hundred camels to he who brings me Muhammad,
dead or alive!" 403
They were about to lose sight of our beloved Prophet and Abu Bakr altogether at a
moment when they thought they had them in their hands. It was clear that they were
not going to able to gain control of the situation on their own, and so they supported
Abu Jahl's example and the prize on their heads, dead or alive, was officially decided
as hundred camels each. 404
Abu Jahl was a clever man, although he did not know how to use his reason. He
went to the house of Abu Bakr without losing any time. Abu Bakr's daughter Asma
opened the door. He first asked her where her father was. She said that she did not
know. According to Abu Jahl, there was no way Asma would not know where her
father was, and her reply enraged him. He slapped Asma so hard that Asma's earring
almost fell to the floor. According to the traditions of the time, it would be unthinkable
to slap such a young, and at the same time, pregnant woman.

--- Sayfa 377 ---
But this was Abu Jahl. Anything would be expected from him! Asma would not be
able to shake off the effects of this event for years, and when his name was mentioned,
she would say: "He is a terrible man who has exceeded all boundaries."405
Turning towards Thawr
It was the 27th day of the month of Safar. The blessed immigration had started from
the house of Abu Bakr in the dead of night. The direction, however, was not the
direction of Medina as the other Companions had taken, but Thawr, in the direction of
Yemen. They went for about eight kilometers and they were going to climb Thawr
which was high, full of great rocks and rugged roads. While doing this, the Messenger
of Allah was trying to tiptoe so that the people following him would not have traces to
pursue them with. He had to maneuver with precaution; he was going to stay there for
a while and watch what was happening in Mecca from there, for the Messenger of
Allah knew that they did not want to give him breathing space even outside Mecca; he
knew that they would try to stop him reaching his goal the minute they realized that he
had left his village. The Quraysh knew that the Companions of Muhammad had gone
to Medina and they had been pursuing those who directed themselves towards that
city. Abu Bakr's sensitivity and effort was not lacking; he was taking great care of the
Messenger of Allah fearing something might befall him, sometimes keeping his back
and sometimes walking in front.
Our noble Prophet noticed his anxiety and asked: "0 Abu Bakr! Why do you
sometimes walk in front of me and sometimes behind?"
"0 Messenger of Allah; I walk behind you to make sure that there is no danger
behind you, and I walk I front of you to avoid possible armed guards placed on your
way."
"0 Abu Bakr, do you think there's anything dearer to you than me?"
An answer that was befitting of the Loyal and Faithful One was not late in coming:
"No, 0 Messenger of Allah! I swear by He who has sent you with truth that rather
than a hair on you being injured, I would give my life, and take all the troubles that
may befall you on my own head!"406
Abu Bakr's Sensitivity in the Cave
Abu Bakr wanted to be the first to enter the cave. He wanted to extinguish whatever
evil it may harbor and thus protect his Beloved, peace and blessings be upon him,
from any harm. This was sensitivity peculiar to Abu Bakr. All his efforts stemmed
from his care for the Pride of Humankind that he shouldn't be harmed in any way.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
That is why he tore off his clothes, and was covering the holes in the cave to prevent
wild animals from entering. However, there were two holes left that he could not
cover, but he had a solution for these as well: He put each of his feet in the two
separate holes and thus invited the noble Prophet in. Years later Umar would speak of
these efforts and say "I would have given all I had, and done anything to have Abu
Bakr's night at the cave with the Messenger."
Inside the cave, the Messenger of Allah placed his glorious head on the blessed
knees of Abu Bakr and started to rest his eyes. Abu Bakr sat there, completely still,
with both of his feet covering the two holes of the cave. After some time had passed,
Abu Bakr felt a sting on one of his foot. It was the bite of a snake. Despite cringing
with pain on the inside, Abu Bakr did not move or make a sound in order to not
disturb his beloved Messenger. What great love! What great devotion!
Eventually, the tears that came down from his eyes and the cold sweat pouring from
his forehead alerted our noble Prophet and he asked: "What is with you, 0 Abu
Bakr?"
"May my mother and father be sacrificed for you, 0 Messenger of Allah, a snake
has bit me," was all Abu Bakr could say. He was rather embarrassed to be saying this
at all, for he did not want to discomfort the Messenger of Allah with such things. He
didn't want to waste his precious time with such an issue he thought was insignificant!
Upon that the Messenger of Allah placed a little bit of his saliva gently on the wound
and then asked his Lord to heal his faithful Companion. All of a sudden, with the will
of Allah, things returned to normal as if the incident had not taken place at all. There
was no pain left in Abu Bakr. 407
In the meanwhile, a spider had set to work and was weaving its web at the entrance
of the cave. Two pigeons had come to nest at the entrance as well. A tree also started
to blossom and was acting as a curtain for our noble Prophet. It was clear that Allah
the Almighty was not going to leave his Beloved to anyone else's devices, and was
going to protect him Himself. The track followers had climbed Thawr, and they were
scanning the cave. When they saw the pigeons, the blossoming tree and the spider
web, one of them naturally said: "Look at this spider web! It looks as if it was weaved
even before Muhammad was born."
The others were thinking no differently. Even though the spider's web provided
only a very thin curtain between them and the Messenger of Allah it had protected him
and now the Quraysh were returning empty handed. 408
Inside the cave, Abu Bakr had seen that the polytheists had closed in on them at a

--- Sayfa 379 ---
spear's length; he could hear them speak and was breaking out in a cold sweat. He
could see the feet of these men and almost hear them breathe and gasp like enraged
cows, and he whispered: "0 Messenger of Allah! If one of them should kneel and look
inside from the viewpoint of his feet, he will see us easily!" It was once again up to
the Messenger of Allah to calm his friend down in the cave, a faithful friend whom he
had called "my brother."
'Why do you fear about the outcome of two people whose third is Allah, 0 Abu
Bakr?"4o9
It was the Messenger of Allah who was saying this. He was the most beloved
servant of Allah, and Allah the Almighty had promised him protection from the evils
of men. 410 He was speaking sure of himself for he knew that even if the Quraysh did
not understand, Allah the Almighty would help His Last Messenger like He had
helped all his Messengers; He would support him, give him peace of heart and help
him with armies that eyes could not see.
Abu Bakr knew this as well, but knowledge was not enough to dispel the anxieties
that one felt when one actually had to live through this process. All his worry was that
something would happen to the Messenger of Allah, for he knew that any harm that
fell upon his own head would be limited to one person only, but if something should
happen to the Pride of Humankind, peace and blessings be upon him, this would affect
the whole ofhumanity.lli
At last, the people who had come to the entrance of the cave returned and now the
road promised a degree of safety. They waited there for three days. During this time,
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, stepped out to keep vigil. When all was
peace and quiet, his son Abdullah would come to them and bring them news of what
was happening. Later came Amir and their guide Abdullah ibn Urayqit; bringing with
them the camels that were to take Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr to Medina.
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, got hold of the camels and offered the
one that was most beautiful and well looked after to our noble Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for you! Get on it, 0
Messenger of Allah."
But he received a response he wasn't expecting: "I cannot get on a camel that does
not belong to me."
Abu Bakr would now act in accordance with his name siddiq and say: "May my
mother and father be sacrificed for you! He belongs to you, 0 Messenger of Allah."
But this wasn't a solution either. The Messenger of Allah was persistent: "No, only

--- Sayfa 380 ---
after I have paid the price you have bought it for."
Abu Bakr was forced to tell him the price. Upon that, the Illustrious Beloved of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I buy it from you for the same price,"
and thus at an important turning point such as the hijra, another resounding message
was offered to the Ummah.
The news that came from Mecca revealed that the attempts to look for the
Messenger of Allah was somewhat abated. This meant that it was time to set off. It
was to be with the first light of the month of Rabiulawwal, another Monday morning.
They would leave the cave very early and first would go towards west on the side of
the coast, and then through the direction of the Red Sea they would tum towards
Medina, their ultimate destination. This was an unusual route between Mecca and
Medina. This difficult route would start from Thawr and pass through U fsan, Amaj,
Qudayd, Harrar, Sanayya, Marjah, Ziludaywayn, Zikashar, Jadajid, Ajrad, Abayid,
Faja, Aij, Air, Rism and Quba412 and would take a whole week.
Looking at Mecca for the Last Time
The Messenger of Allah turned towards Mecca one last time; it was clear that he was
saddened to leave Mecca which had been a passing point for Prophets and in which
the first building on earth had been constructed; a building which was known to be his
twin. It was as if he was leaving his heart in Mecca as he left for Medina. He had
waited for forty years for revelations to come, and during that period he had often
climbed Hira, and prayed that the Ka'ba would one day embrace the kind of worship
that it deserved, and contemplated the future. It was not easy; the most beloved of
Allah's servants and the last in the chain of Prophets, the Illustrious Beloved of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, had to leave the house of Allah, setting sail to
another land.
These were the last looks he would cast upon Mecca, and it was as if our noble
Prophet was speaking to it. Abu Bakr was watching him intently, observing this silent
conversation. The following words flowed from his lips: "Mecca I swear, I was forced
to leave you! There is no doubt that you are the land that is most pleasing to Allah; He
has special gifts for you! I swear by Allah that had your people not forced me to get
out, I would not have taken a single step outside! "413
After that, the Messenger of Allah led his group on to the journey, followed by his
loyal friend Abu Bakr and the Meccan polytheist guide Abdullah ibn Urayqit. They
took the coastal route and started to make their way towards Medina.

--- Sayfa 381 ---
The Reaction of Abu Quhafa
Of course these events also touched Abu Bakr' s father, Abu Quhafa. When the old
man came home, he saw that his son was not there, and he asked where he was. All
the answers he got converged on the fact that he had gone. This was no joking matter;
he had left Mecca, trade, family, relatives, old friends, parents and at that age, he had
chosen another land as his home. It was impossible for a heart that had not yet chosen
faith to understand the reasoning behind this. When faith entered a heart it made one
do things that seemed incredible in terms of the strength needed, and people who did
not feel this strength could not understand. If it so decreed, one could give up their
mother and father, one could face terrible difficulties; one could abandon one's family.
There is no doubt that when it was hijra to Medina with the noble Messenger in
question, Abu Bakr did not think once about his mother and father, or his children. As
he would say years later as he was preparing for the Tabuk campaign, he had left them
with the care of Allah and His Messenger. What better protection was there than that?
On the other hand, Abu Quhafa was finding it hard to understand the reasons why
his son had left and was asking the following question to everyone he saw: "So he has
done this? He has left his family and children?"414
Yes, he had gone ... and without even a sideway glance! What made the son of Abu
Quhafa leave? What was this selflessness, his sense of sacrifice?
Abu Quhafa bombarded his granddaughter Asma with questions; he was worried
about Abu Bakr's wealth: "I swear by Allah, he has taken his wealth with him, hasn't
he?"
Asma answered calmly: "No, my dear grandfather. He has left us with very good
means." Abu Quhafa had lost most of his sight due to old age, and Asma, wanting to
take advantage of this situation, covered pieces of stone with a cloth, and then taking
her grandfather by the hand, she would take him to the stones and let him touch them
to convince him that they had enough money. 415
Suraqa's Pursuit
Even though many people had already given up trying to get the reward money for the
Messenger of Allah some still persevered. There was a man from the sons of Mudlij
and he was telling those sitting at the village square that he had seen the two men upon
whose heads the Meccans had put a price of hundred camels each. Their eyes opened
wider thinking that this would be their great chance and they turned their gaze towards
Suraqa ibn Malik. The man who had seen the travelers understood who he needed

--- Sayfa 382 ---
speak to and approached him: "0 Suraqa! I have seen indistinct figures walking by the
shore. I believe they are Muhammad and his friend!"
That is what Suraqa had guessed as well; the news strengthened his anticipation and
now he had no more doubts. But this was not a matter to be discussed in public. That
is why he did not give away his opinions on the matter: "They can't be the men you
think they are! I saw what you have seen as well a little while ago; they are such and
such men," he said trying to divert the man from his target.
His approach dispirited the man and destroyed his dreams of getting the two
hundred camels, and the chance to live a life of wealth. In order not to give way to a
fight, he kept sitting where he was.
Now the atmosphere had changed, and the conversation moved away from the
travelers. Suraqa stood up and went to his home. He told his servant at once to prepare
his horse for the journey, and to go to such and such valley and wait there for him with
the horse. Then he took his spear and made for the valley he had told his servant to go
to. Thus, he had got rid of the others, as he wanted to get the promised reward all to
himself. Before long, he reached the place where his servant and his horse were, and
he started a quiet journey.
On the other hand, it had been three days since the travelers had left Thawr. The
journeymen of this blessed immigration saw, unexpectedly, a cloud of dust
approaching from behind them. Abu Bakr was filled with the same worry that he had
in Thawr. This time, there was no cave to take refuge in and they had no means to
defend themselves.
"0 Messenger of Allah! The man following us is about to catch up with us!"
But the Beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was calling with the
same stance and trust in Allah: "Do not worry! Allah is with us."
They would not be able to cause harm to someone who was only doing his duty,
and the Divine mercy was the safest place they could seek refuge in. But Abu Bakr
was worried more than ever, and thinking that they had come to the end, he was
shedding tears. The Messenger of Allah saw his state and asked: "Why are you crying
0 Abu Bakr?"
"I swear I am not crying for myself; I fear he will harm you in some way, 0
Messenger of Allah."
When the silhouette came close enough, it was clear that it was Suraqa who was
following them. While Abu Bakr continued to be worried, the Messenger of Allah
turned around and looked intently on Suraqa. It was clear that he was trying to

--- Sayfa 383 ---
maintain eye contact with him, and hold him captive with his eyes to render him
incapable. There was also a drift towards the Divine hearth. The lips of the Messenger
of Allah were moving and he was praying: "0 my Lord! Concerning this man who is
approaching us, give us succor the way You see fit," continuously, keeping his gaze
fixed on Suraqa.
When the Prophetic gaze touched Suraqa, the feet of the horse he was riding got
stuck in the sand. Consequently, he was thrown meters away from where he was, and
one could see a cloud of smoke emerging from where he was seen last! First he
thought this was an accident. But it did not look like one. When one looked at the
causes, one could see nothing that could have caused it. Had what he had heard about
him been true? Was Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him,
truly a Prophet? What if it were true? Suraqa contemplated the thought for a while.
There seemed to be no other answer. He started to size up the Pride of Humankind,
peace and blessings be upon him, with his eyes. He said to him: "Pray to Allah for me
so that I may be released from here," and then added, "I promise if I can get away
from this, then I will stop following you."
The request was made to a Prophet; how could it be that he should be faced with a
request and he should not answer? Even if the person who had asked was his sworn
enemy!
Suraqa was freed from the ditch like nothing had happened. It looked as if the prize
put on the heads of the travelers were holding his feelings captive, and when he got on
his horse again, he wanted to gallop it once more towards the rewards. But the same
gaze followed him and the front legs of the horse got stuck in the sand once again. A
great cloud of dust rose from where he fell. He was in great shock; the front feet of the
horse had stuck even deeper this time although there was no reason for it to do so, and
he was unable to get them out!
He could not understand what was happening, he had ridden his horse around here
for years, but this was the first time such a thing had happened to him. Maybe it was
not Abu Jahl but Abu Bakr this time that was right. Then he knew that it was futile to
try to do evil to these men who were under Divine protection. Now he was calling out
sincerely from the heart: "0 Muhammad! I understand that what has befallen me is all
due to your prayers. I have camels in such and such place; take whichever you want of
them, but please pray that I may get out of here. I promise, truly, that I will not follow
you any longer."
The Messenger of Allah first said: "I do not need your camels," and then he prayed
for his release. Suraqa was up again with his horse. 416

--- Sayfa 384 ---
As he stood up covered in dust, who knows what was happening in his inner world,
for it was not difficult to see the change in his demeanor when he stood up for the
second time. Abu Bakr was watching the developments with alarm and awe; and was
thanking his Lord to see that the Messenger of Allah had been protected once again.
After his stumbling horse, Suraqa was about to go on his knees in front of the
Messenger of Allah. One could see the traces of submission in him; he was slowly
coming to his presence. The Messenger of Allah looked at him as if saying "You too?"
''Yes, me too, 0 Messenger of Allah," responded Suraqa, and then promised him
that he would go back and divert all his enemies who might mean to follow him into
the wrong direction. 417
Each had to show their loyalty in their own way, through their own self-sacrifice.
Now he was also bound on the road of Allah, and was one of the few protectors of the
Great Messenger. Then the Messenger of Allah gave him the following good tidings:
"I wonder how you will be when you take possession of the two bracelets of Chosroes
of Persia, 0 Suraqa! "418
Suraqa had paid no price for his own release and he had also been honored with
Islam, and now he was receiving good news about his future! This was the news that
one of the two most powerful states at the time would soon be defeated and that the
bracelets that symbolized the power of the king would be Suraqa's. He could not
believe it!
''You mean Chosroes, the son ofHurmuz?" Suraqa tried to clarify.
Our noble Prophet replied: "Yes."
This also meant the appointment of a new goal for the Ummah, starting with Suraqa
himself.
And so Suraqa, who had set off with the intention of killing the noble Prophet, had
now become a Muslim in his presence, and what's more, he had also received the
decree of the Messenger of Allah and was returning to Mecca as a new man. 419
This man who meant to take our noble Prophet's life only a short while ago would
now become a hero of the instantaneous bonding that took place in the Prophet's
presence. He would take a stance that would divert people from following Allah's
Messenger and he would tell everybody that there was nobody to be caught in the
direction where he came from.
The Wonders on the Road ofHijra
During their trip to Medina, Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, was doing his

--- Sayfa 385 ---
best to avoid the slightest harm coming to our noble Prophet and giving his all in order
to make him comfortable. When they stopped for a break, he would look for a tree
under which the Messenger of Allah would be able to sit, and as our noble Prophet sat
he ran around to find and prepare food. 420
Sometimes Abu Bakr would come across people he knew from his trading days, and
they would ask him about the man beside him. He would say without hesitation: "He
is the man who has taught me the right way, and he tried to explain the matter with a
method that could be understood either way." Thus in saying so, Abu Bakr was
abstaining from lies, telling the truth and ending the matter there. 421
Our noble Prophet on the other hand, wanted to make use of all situations for faith
and he spoke to all the people he met on the road, telling them about their Lord.
Sometimes he spoke to a shepherd, and sometimes he spoke to people from whom
they asked for food. Then, gifts of Allah would be showered upon them and the people
they sat down with would witness miracles. Maybe with his attitude, the Messenger of
Allah was showing that in whatever circumstances and wherever one may be, a
believer must always engage in the effort of speaking about his Lord, must find a way
to bring the topic back to Him, and he was showing examples of how one could tum
prisons into palaces.
In the meantime, a shepherd who was grazing his sheep had seen our noble Prophet
and Abu Bakr going towards Medina and he wanted to go to the Meccans and tell
them about their whereabouts. But although he had reached Mecca in a short amount
of time, he could not remember what it was he had gone there for. He waited for a
long time to remember what he had come for, but it was clear that he was not going to
be able to retrieve his purpose; so he went back to his sheep. 422
Miracle of the Milk
They came across another shepherd on their way, and they asked him for milk. The
man said: 'With me there is nothing to milk but this goat that got pregnant at the start
of winter. But because she miscarried, she has no milk."
Upon that Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, turned to our noble Prophet
and said: "Will you pray for it, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
The Messenger of Allah started to pray, for he was not going to tum down his dear
Companion's request. In the meanwhile the goat had responded to Abu Bakr's call and
was approaching them. The animal came to the Messenger of Allah and he started to
stroke its udders, praying all the same time. The udders quickly filled with warm milk.

--- Sayfa 386 ---
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, went and brought a pan and started to
milk the animal. When the shepherd started to drink the milk from his own goat, his
tied tongue loosened and he started saying: "I swear by Allah, who are you? I swear
that I have never seen anyone like you till today."
The Messenger of Allah approached the man and said: "Do you promise not to tell
anyone else if I tell you who I am?"
The man said: "Yes."
"I am Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah."
The man's eyes got wider all of a sudden and asked in astonishment: ''You mean
you are that man whom the Quraysh call sabi?"
''Yes, that is what they call me," said the Messenger of Allah.
This was an epithet that they had thought fit. The fruits of this short conversation
were about to grow: "I bear witness that you are the Messenger; and I also bear
witness that what you have brought is Truth. What you can do, can only be done by a
Messenger; and I give my allegiance to you!" said the man.
Our noble Prophet saw that the man had very quickly embraced Islam with great
excitement, and he felt he had to advise him, for the time was not one that could
contain such excitement. That is why he said: "You will not be able to take on this
load now! When you hear that our cause has spread, come and join us then! "423
Umm Mabad
Umm Mabad was an old and heavy-set woman; she would sit in front of her tent
which was in the land of the sons of Huza, and she would offer food to passers-by.
The route of the Messenger of Allah and his Companions passed by her spot as well.
When they had covered some 130 kilometers, they had come to where her tent was.
They asked to buy something to eat from Umm Mabad. But it was such that, that day
the woman had nothing to sell with them, for no rain had fallen for a long time and all
the greenery had dried up. There was great drought.
Our noble Prophet pointed to the sheep that was by the tent and asked: "0 Umm
Mabad, what is with this sheep that is by the tent, why does it stand there?"
"It could not go with the herd because it is too weak for hunger," she said sadly.
"Does it have milk?" asked the Messenger of Allah.
"It can barely stand, how can it have milk?" asked the woman. Upon that our noble
Prophet asked: "Will you let me milk him?"

--- Sayfa 387 ---
He wanted to do the impossible. The sheep's skin had stuck on its back and it spent
most of its days just lying on the ground, how could such sheep have milk?
She said laughing: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for you; if you can find
a drop of milk in it, do milk it!"
Now that the Messenger of Allah had permission from the owner of the sheep, he
approached the animal and started to pray. He was speaking the Name of Allah and
supplicating his Lord to give milk to these milkless udders, at the same time stroking
the udders. Umm Mabad could not understand his efforts and yet she continued
watching from afar.
All of a sudden, the sheep was invigorated and it stood up; one could see that the
udders were filling up with milk! Our noble Prophet who saw this asked for a pan and
started to milk the sheep. The dried up udders only a couple of minutes ago were now
like springs of milk. The Messenger of Allah first of all offered the milk that collected
in the pan to Umm Mabad. Maybe he wanted her to understand that what she
witnessed was not a dream but reality itself. Umm Mabad drank till she was full from
the milk. Then, she gave the milk to her children who had not been full for months on
end; and they also drank till they were full. When the last person in the house was
satiated with milk, our noble Prophet returned to his task of milking and milked the
sheep till the bucket was full.
Now everyone was full and there was still an extra bucket of milk left to go around.
It was time to leave. Umm Mabad entered Islam there and then. The truth was,
someone like that needed no further proof. When her husband came back from herding
the sheep that had not found anything to eat at all, he saw the bucketful of milk and
asked: "0 Umm Mabad! What is this bucket full of milk? The sheep were not here;
even if they were, none have milk to provide."
The great woman who had witnessed the milk miracle related to her husband one by
one what had happened: "I swear by Allah that someone very holy came here today,"
and then she told the rest of the story.
Abu Mabad was excited: "Can you describe him to me?" Maybe he had made a
connection somewhere. Umm Mabad started to describe the Messenger of Allah as if
she had taken his photograph: "He was a man whose beautiful face shone with light.
His figure was beautiful and healthy. He had no protruding belly, his head was not
small or faulty; he was of medium-built. His eyes were black, the rims long. There
was a velvety quality to his voice. His shoulders were broad, his beard thick. There
was a dignified aspect to him when he was silent; and there was a great sense of

--- Sayfa 388 ---
bonding when he spoke. He would start his words with the Name of Allah, and would
continue exalting Him. When one viewed him from afar he was the most beautiful and
charming of men; when one approached him, he was the embodiment of beauty and
goodness. He spoke slowly in a way not to jar one's ears; not too much, and not too
little. His reason flowed like a poem. He was neither tall enough to be looking down
on people, nor short enough to be lost in a crowd; in appearance, he was like a third
branch between two branches. He would shine out in the company of three and he
would be the most handsome of them. His friends scurry around him like a mother;
when he speaks they listen to him with great attention; when he asks for something,
they run to get it. They hover about him and they never show the slightest reluctance
when seeing to his needs; they seem to race each other to serve him."
Abu Mabad was listening to her with eyes wide open; while he was out, the sun of
happiness had visited his home without his knowing. He said to his wife who had
described the guest who had visited their home in such great detail: "I wonder if this is
the man of Quraysh that we have heard about ... " and then he continued: "I wish I had
seen him, I wish I could be friends with him! If one day I have the power, I will stop
by in Mecca and shout at the top of my lungs and tell the world about his virtues. It
doesn't matter if they do not understand where this voice comes from, for what
matters is not who the voice belongs to but what that voice says."
After having said that, Abu Mabad stopped and started to express his feelings
through the medium of poetry, speaking about our noble Prophet. Before long, a voice
would echo in Mecca, this voice was speaking about the two friends that had visited
Abu Mabad's tent, and how they had brought bounty with them, how Abu Mabad had
become Muslim. All attention was turned to the identity ofthese two friends; the man
was saying Muhammad and Abu Bakr, and speaking about the dried up sheep that
gave bountiful milk, the voice praised the virtues ofthese friends. 424
When Abu Bakr's daughter Asma heard of her father's news, she went at once to
that place, for they had not got any news of the Messenger of Allah or her father Abu
Bakr till that day; they only knew that they had left Mecca, but they did not know
where they had gone or what had happened to them on this journey. Having listened to
the words of this man, they had understood that the Messenger of Allah and his loyal
friend Abu Bakr was making their way toward Medina. 425
Burayda ibn Husayb
During this journey, the Prophet of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and his
faithful friend passed by a village that consisted of about eighty households, and they

--- Sayfa 389 ---
bumped into someone. This man was Burayda ibn Husayb. Our noble Prophet
addressed him first: "Who are you?"
"I am Burayda," he answered. The Messenger of Allah smiled and turned to Abu
Bakr: "0 Abu Bakr! Here our cause has reached a good end and now we can be at
peace." Then he asked: "And where are you from?"
"I am from Aslam," he said. Our noble Prophet turned to his loyal friend once
again, and said: "Then we have reached peace and well-being."
He was playing with the replies he received and interpreting them in a hopeful and
fortunate manner. It seemed he wanted to ease the tiredness of the road through these
beautiful allusions, so that his Companions may smile a little. He then turned to
Burayda again and asked: "And who are your people?"
"I am from the sons of Sahm (arrow)," he answered. Our noble Prophet's blessed
face turned towards his Companions again and he said: "The arrow has left the bow,
and has hit its target."
It was clear that the Messenger of Allah was making use of a situation that Allah the
Almighty had brought to him, in a world where there was no space for mere chance.
He was able to read the messages that were hidden beyond things, and he was sharing
them with Abu Bakr in a light-hearted way. 426
Then they sat down and spoke at length; Burayda was interested to know more
about this person who had spoken to him in puns. That is why he asked: "And who are
you?"
"The son of Abdullah and the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad," said the noble
Prophet.
Indeed, this purity, the greatness in stature could only be found in a Messenger. His
attitude changed at once; the good fortune he had been looking for had come to him.
Sincerely, he said: "I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, and that
Muhammad is His Messenger."
Burayda had thus become Muslim, and he wasn't the only one. Before long the
people with him in his tribe would also accept this new religion without any coercion.
He was saying the following to give thanks: "May Allah be praised with those from
the sons of Sahm who have come and become Muslim on their own volition."
He would stand behind the Illustrious Beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, and perform the Evening Prayer; and thus in opposition to the suppression
experienced in Mecca, he would show that even the road to Medina was full of
beautiful gifts.

--- Sayfa 390 ---
The next morning, Burayda came running to the noble Prophet out of breath. He
was exuberant and with this excitement he said the following to him: "0 Messenger of
Allah! Someone like you should not enter Medina without a standard bearer!"
When saying that he had unraveled his turban and wrapped it around his spear. Our
noble Prophet would not say no to such a heart-felt request and thus Burayda would
walk in front of the Messenger of Allah till he reached Medina. 427
The Sensibility of Abu Aws
As they were passing the place called Aij, they knew they had neared Quba, and the
difficult journey was about to end. But the camels they were riding had become tired;
their steps had become slower. Abu Bakr was riding the same camel with the
Messenger of Allah so that the other might pick up some strength.
Between Juhfa and Harsha they came upon a man called Abu Aws Tamim ibn
Hajar. Aws, who had seen this state of theirs, gave them a camel at once. He also gave
his slave Mas 'ud to attend them and was telling him to keep at their side till they
reached Medina: "Go with them and keep to this road which no one else knows!
Never leave them for a second till you reach Medina. "428
When they came to the place named Rim, they met a familiar face.
These were Zubayr ibn Awwam and his friends who were returning from the region
of Damascus where they had traveled for trade. Both sides were very happy to see one
another, especially Zubayr, who was our noble Prophet's aunt's son. This meeting was
the best means through which the travelers of the blessed journey could forget the
difficulties and exhaustion of the road. Zubayr took out white dresses prepared for
Abu Bakr and the Messenger of Allah and gave it to them to wear. 429
The Excitement of the First Meeting
Meanwhile, Medina was experiencing a great sense of excitement, waiting for our
noble Prophet's arrival. That is why they had gathered at the place called Harra, and
they were gazing at the road. The general name of this place was Quba.
They knew the day that the journeyers had left Mecca and they could estimate the
day that they would arrive in Medina, so with the first light of day they would go out
of town to wait for them. They would wait there till the hottest time of the day, and
when they saw that he did not come, they would retire to the shade and wait there till
the afternoon. They did not know how long they had spent at Thawr, and so they did
not know how much they would be delayed. This wait continued for three days. It was

--- Sayfa 391 ---
the eighth day of the month of Rabiulawwal, again a Monday, and the third day of
waiting. When noon came, they had once more retired to the shade. At that moment
they heard the voice of a caller. They looked towards where the voice was coming
from; it belonged to a Jewish man from Medina. Allah the Almighty had given the
mission of giving such good news to the Ansar (the Helpers) and the Muhajirun (the
Migrants) with this lucky Jewish man. Maybe He was also pointing to a fact with this,
that the Jewish people comprised the majority of the population in Medina.
The Jewish man was shouting at the top of his lungs: "0 sons of Qayla! Here, the
friend you have been waiting for has come!"
Medina was engulfed with a wave excitement and had become one beating heart.
They ran to and fro in order to meet and welcome him, their cries declaring the
greatness of Allah resounding through the town. The journey that started on the first
day of Rabiulawwal in Thawr had ended, after a long and tiring week, in Quba.
The Ansar of Medina got their guns; they were taking their precautions lest any
problems should arise. They gathered to meet the Great Messenger with a great
ceremony in Harra. 430
The Break in Quba
Since the Beloved's arrival in Quba, people were racing each other to be his host, for
they all wanted to invite him to their homes. He would choose to stay with the sons of
Najjar, for the sons of Najjar were the relatives of his grandfather Abdul Muttalib.
People had formed a human chain on the road and were welcoming and embracing the
Messenger of Allah a treasure who the Meccans could not bear to the degree that they
had wanted to kill him. Some people were standing on rooftops in order to see his
beautiful face, some were hanging from windows!
'Which is he? Which is he?" They were calling out. The same words were flowing
from everyone's lips: "0 Muhammad! 0 Messenger of Allah!"
It was as though the Ansar had been living a life of drought and had been left thirsty
for years, and it was as the Messenger of Allah who was the water of life and good
fortune that was about to rain down on them. It was clear that when they pronounced
his name they were feeling him to their very bones.
People had come in great numbers to the see the noble Messenger. He had come all
this way to be with them, how could they stay where they were and not embrace him?
Some of them had even dreamt of meeting him for years, and dreamt of this special
day; they were exuberant with celebratory songs. He was now very close.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
Where they were staying as guests was the neighborhood of Kulthum Ibn al-Hadm.
But just as in Mecca, he would not stay put and would reach out to people. That is
why he went to the house of Sa' d ibn Haysama and spoke with the youth there at
length. It was well known that the house of Sa'd ibn Haysama was where the
unmarried young men gathered. That is why some even say that this was the house
that our beloved Prophet stayed at in Quba. 431
Not all of the Ansar had seen the Messenger of Allah yet and that is why the people
who had come to welcome him did not know for certain which one he was. They were
going to meet him for the first time! Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, was
standing, and the Messenger of Allah was sitting in silence. The people coming to
meet them directed themselves towards Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr, modest as he was, was
very embarrassed because of this misunderstanding; that is why he pointed to the
Messenger of Allah by shading him with part of his garment. People now knew who
was who, and they all said with the one voice "welcome 0 Messenger of Allah. "432
Ali, who had been given the duty to give all entrusted belongings to their owners in
Mecca, had also made his hijra three days later on foot433 and today he would meet our
noble Prophet and Abu Bakr once again in Quba. 434
Ali, who had taken care to travel by night, had large wounds on his feet. The
Messenger of Allah who saw him in this state first opened his arms to embrace him
and then shed tears of compassion. Then he put his saliva on the wounds, and prayed
for a cure. Before long all of Ali's difficulties were over. 435
The Messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr stayed in Quba for four days436 and they
built a masjid there. Later this masjid was known as the Quba Masjid, and it was the
first masjid in Islam.
When it was Friday, the Messenger of Allah brought people together in this masjid
and had them pray the Jumu'ah Prayer for the first time. 437
The First Sermon
The Addresser of Mankind had gone on the pulpit in Quba and was about to address
his Ummah. This would be his first sermon in Medina. He first thanked his Lord and
then praised Him as appropriate, using words fitting for the All-Praiseworthy One.
Then he turned towards the congregation and said the following: "0 people! Invest
for your afterlife, for yourself; tomorrow you will know all this! I swear by Allah,
when tomorrow one of you leaves their sheep without a shepherd and he is left alone
with his Lord, Allah the Almighty will ask him without a curtain in between: 'Did my

--- Sayfa 393 ---
Prophet not come to you and reveal you the message? Have I not given you all this
wealth? Then tell me, what kind of investment have you made for today?'
The person who is faced with this address would look left and right and would find
no branch to get hold of! Then he will look in front of him and see Hell in all its
horror! Whoever among you can save himself from Hell even one bit, should strive to
do so! If he cannot do so by his actions, then let him say a good word! For here each
good deed is rewarded ten times, and even seven hundred times. Let the mercy and
bounty of Allah be upon you!"
This address was the first part of the sermon. The Messenger of Allah sat down on
the pulpit for a while and then stood up again to continue: "Verily, thanks belong only
to Allah; I give thanks to Him and I tum only towards him for succor. We seek refuge
in Him from the evil of our own self, and we also seek refuge in His mercy from our
own evil deeds. There is no doubt that whoever Allah leads to the right path, there is
no one that could lead him astray, and for those who insist on staying ignorant and
those whose hearts have been sealed, there is no one who could help them get back on
the right track! I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, He is one and He has no
partner. The most beautiful word is the book of Allah! Whoever Allah the Almighty
has rewarded with faith after denial, whose heart He has adorned with the light of
faith, whose will He has bound to His own words rather than the beguiling words of
men, then that person has attained salvation. There is no doubt that the Word of Allah
is the most beautiful, the most harmonious. Love what Allah loves, and place in your
hearts the love of Allah! Never tire of the Word of Allah, never stay away from
remembrance of the Divine so that your hearts may not harden! For Allah the
Almighty prefers some of His creation and selects them among others! Allah has
informed us about the best of deeds and has placed them before us. He has chosen
some among His servants as guides. He has revealed clearly the best and soundest of
words. Whatever has been given man that is permitted and prohibited has been stated
and nothing remains hidden on that account. Come, and compete in being servants to
Allah, and never hold other gods beside Him! Fear Him as someone with taqwa, piety,
would. Always hope to be included in His mercy, and tremble in the face of His
wrath! Prove your loyalty to Allah by speaking the truest of words! Let love between
you grow with the mercy and bounty of Allah! There is no doubt that Allah the
Almighty does not like those who do not keep their word and to them He shows His
wrath. Let the peace of Allah be upon you! "438
After this address that fed the heart and soul of listeners, the Messenger of Allah led
the Friday Prayer. After the Prayer another journey started; this was a shorter journey,

--- Sayfa 394 ---
and the arrival point would be a more permanent home. The sons of Najjar had their
arms wide open and they had come to get the beloved Prophet. They set off once
again, the Messenger of Allah in front, Abu Bakr following. The sons of Najjar were
hovering like moths around him; they had almost formed a wall around them. 439
Four more days had passed and again, on a Monday, our noble Prophet had turned
towards Medina with his loyal friend by his side. This destination would start a
process that would last for ten years. 440
The Coming of Abdullah ibn Salam
Abdullah ibn Salam was a great Jewish scholar. His ancestry went back to Joseph and
to Jacob, peace be upon them. He had been born among the Children of Israel, in one
of the three big Jewish tribes living around Medina, called the Banu Qaynuqa. His
father Salam and his grandfather Harith were both great Jewish scholars as well so he
had been raised as a good man of religion, and there was hardly a soul who had not
heard of his name in the Hijaz. He had participated in the discussions about the last
Messenger to come, and he had been giving similar advice. The Torah, which he never
dropped from his hands, was speaking about these same issues, and was giving good
tidings of his coming. Even though he did not know that the Prophet they had been
waiting for had already appeared in Mecca, he was already pointing towards Mecca
and saying that his coming was very soon.
They were even saying that after appearing m Mecca, he would immigrate to
Medina, and they had been trying to use this news as a weapon against their enemies
in the battles they had been losing lately, and now Abdullah ibn Salam was about to
meet the Personage he had been speaking about in his conversations. Fate would let
him meet the Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings be upon him, before his friends.
Abdullah ibn Salam was one of the people who were looking forward to the coming of
the Messenger of Allah with enthusiasm. In fact, he knew his characteristics, his
name, his general stature and when he would come to Medina. When news of Allah's
Messenger's arrival in Quba reached him, he had been collecting dates up a tree, and
his aunt Khalida hint Harith was sitting under that tree. Upon hearing the news he
started to scream out the Unity of Allah at the top of his lungs. His aunt was surprised
at his sudden zeal and would say: "Woe unto you! You wouldn't have cried out so
loud had you heard the coming of Moses, the son oflmran!"
"My dear aunt! I swear by Allah that he is the brother to Moses. He is on the same
religion as he. Whatever he was sent with, Muhammad has been given the same
mission," said Abdullah, thus trying to let his aunt also know who Muhammad, peace

--- Sayfa 395 ---
and blessings be upon him, was. Upon his explanation she said: "0 son of my brother!
Is this the last Messenger who will appear before the end of the world, whose coming
we have been waiting for?"
There was no doubt about it and so he said without hesitation: "Yes!"
His aunt was also excited. She seemed at a loss for words: "So it is him ... " She was
saying, and then she added: "Then what are we waiting for?"
Abdullah ibn Salam was thinking of the same thing, for each passing moment was a
moment wasted and so he went to Quba. When he came to the presence of our noble
Prophet he saw his shining face. Without even realizing, his lips started to move and
he was saying: "I swear by Allah that there is no lie in this face!"
He was sitting surrounded by his Companions in conversation. The first words that
Abdullah heard him say were the following: "Let greetings and peace spread among
you, feed people, visit your relatives, when people sleep at night, perform the Prayers
and thus enter Paradise! "441
These were the vehicles for the way to Paradise... Abdullah ibn Salam was
mesmerized by the magic in his words, and the depth of his countenance. The face he
saw could only belong to a Prophet. He no longer felt the need to hide. Medina was a
civilized town, and ibn Salam started to say the words bearing witness the oneness of
Allah: " ... And I bear witness that you are the True Messenger of Allah, and there is
no doubt that you have come with the Truth!" When he became a Muslim, the
Messenger of Allah changed his name from Husayn to Abdullah and from then on he
would known as Abdullah ibn Salam.442
Two Jewish Brothers and Two Impressions
Naturally not everyone was equally interested in Truth as Abdullah ibn Salam. There
were two brothers in Medina by the name of Huyay ibn Akhtab and Abu Y asir. Both
of them were scholars of the Torah. These brothers had knowledge about the
Messenger who would come and when they had heard that the Messenger of Allah had
come near to where they lived, they set off on the road with curiosity and came all the
way to Quba. It was nearing noon.
They found out where he was staying and before long went to the home of the sons
of Amr ibn Awf. They were tom between belief and denial. What if this were really
the Awaited Messenger? They knew that he was not of their tribe, and so they were
walking hoping that he would not have the characteristic they knew the Awaited
Messenger should have.

--- Sayfa 396 ---
Before long they were faced with the reality! They did not know what to say. They
sat down and listened to his conversation: the way he sat, the way he stood up, the
way he spoke, his majesty and the purity in his face were all very striking! But they
couldn't convince themselves that this was he. They were trying to hide their reaction
and seemed to have accepted everything. When the sun started to set and the gathering
dispersed, they took the opportunity to leave Quba as well. On the way, they spoke
about what they had seen.
When they arrived home, as soon as little Safiyya saw her father and uncle come in,
she ran towards them and hugged her father around the neck. But it did not seem like
it was her father she was hugging, and her uncle was also different! They seemed
defeated and tired. She tried to listen carefully to what they were saying. Her uncle
Abu Y asir said: "Is it really he?"
"I swear it is!"
"Have you looked closely and recognized him for sure?"
''Yes."
'What do you think of him?"
"I swear I will oppose him as long as I live! "443
The person who pronounced this last sentence was none other than Huyay ibn
Akhtab whose daughter, Safiyya, would later become the wife of our noble Prophet
the very man he was now opposing, and as was clear, he was sacrificing himself to
pure obstinacy although he had clear information about what he had seen, for he just
could not take that extra step and submit himself.
Salman al-Farisi
Another person who was also eagerly waiting for the arrival of the Awaited
Messenger in Medina was Salman al-Farisi. He had left the lands of Persia, and in
order to find true religion he had first gone to Damascus, and then to Mosul, Nusaybin
and Ammuriya. Each place he stopped by was taking him closer to what he was
looking for. He remembered the words of the priest in Ammuriya who said: "There is
no one left here whom I could entrust you to but the shade of a Messenger who will
revive the Hanif religion of Ibrahim is already upon us. The place he will immigrate to
is full of date-trees. He has three signs that cannot be mistaken: he has the mark of
Messengership between his two shoulder blades, he accepts gifts and eats of them, and
he never accepts alms. If you have the strength, go and wait for him."
Thus the priest had set him on the road and Salman decided to go to Medina to wait.

--- Sayfa 397 ---
In order to leave for Medina, he first needed to find a caravan that was going in that
direction. Before long, he found a caravan. He offered to give them all he had in return
for a trip to Medina. Thus, the journey waiting for the coming Messenger had started.
But during the journey he was deceived, and although he had paid his fare, he would
be sold as a slave to a Jewish man. What mattered for him was to reach the address he
had intended, and indeed, he was now among the date trees of Medina even though he
was a slave.
The day the Messenger of Allah honored Quba with his presence, Salman was busy
picking dates from a tree, his usual task as a slave. He saw someone running towards
him. This was the cousin of his master. The excitement in his coming spoke of some
important news; there must have been a new development. He came shouting "0 so
and so!"
His master was excited as well. What could be the reason for all this fuss?
He reached them at last. He was out of breath but he tried to collect himself, and
said: "May Allah curse the sons of Gayla. I have just visited them a little while ago.
Everyone has gathered around a man who has come from Mecca and who they say is
the Messenger; they are all listening to him eagerly!"
This was quite incredible! What was Allah not capable of! The Personage he had
been pursuing for years was coming to Salman at the place where he had lost his
freedom. He was extremely excited. He was waving, and moving and cheering in joy.
So much so, that he was about to fall on top of his master from the shaking tree. He
just could not wait to see the Messenger.
He quickly got down from the tree and turned towards the cousin of his master and
was just about to say: "What are you saying? What are you talking about? What kind
of news is this?" when he was struck harshly on the face by his master. They did not
perceive slaves as human beings back then. His excitement had angered his master and
so he had slapped Salman out. In the meantime, he was also berating him: 'What is it
to you?" and then added, "Go back to your work!"
Salman was helpless. He climbed the date tree once again and tried to do his work.
While his hands were engaged in his work, his mind had taken him to the presence of
the Messenger of Allah and he was trying to determine whether the man who arrived
in Quba fit the description given by his master in Ammuriya.
Evening did not seem to come. When the sun set, he took a few things with him and
set off on the road.
The moon was shining over Medina. The expected Messenger was finally standing

--- Sayfa 398 ---
before him. He did not look like the priests in whose company he had spent many
years. Quba was glimmering with his light. He was speaking to those gathered around
him. He put whatever he had in his hands and said: "I have collected these as alms for
you. I know that you are a sound man. You also have friends with you who are in
need. You need this today more than ever."
Salman was watching very closely. The Messenger of Allah had not touched what
he had brought. He turned to his Companions and said: "Eat with the Name of Allah."
What Salman had tried to get at was something different. In his mind were the
words of his master in Ammuriya and he was trying to understand whether the
description he was given was right. As foretold he did not eat from alms, so the first
sign of Messengership was present. The following flowed from his lips: "This is the
first sign! I swear he does not eat alms!"
And he returned. The following day he had collected some things again. He came to
him and he knew very well what he would do, so this time he said: "I see that you do
not take alms. You emanate trust and grace, and I like this very much. This time I have
brought you not alms but a gift."
The Messenger of Allah took it m his hand and ate from it along with his
Companions.
The time seemed right and the second sign had been shown. He could not hide his
excitement and the following flowed from his lips: "And this is the second sign! He
accepts gifts and eats from them."444
From then on Salman would spend all his time with the Messenger of Allah except
for those times when he had to be with his master. 445

--- Sayfa 399 ---
393 Ayni, Umdatu 'l-Qari, 17 /46; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 2/400
394 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3/6 ( 4266)
395 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/569; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/11
396 See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1087 (2817). When he heard of what she had done, the Messenger of Allah
would pay her a compliment and say "As a reward for your two belts, Allah will give you two
belts in Paradise."
397 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1419 (3692)
398 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3112
399 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 4/683; Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1/258
400 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/8; Tabari, Tarikh, 1/567
401 Al-Anfal 8:30
402 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/568
403 Al-Hindi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal, 12/779 (35744)
404 Tabari, Tarikh, 1/570
405 Abu Nuaym, Khilyatu 'l-Awliya, 2/56; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/14
406 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 317 (4268), Mishkatu 'l-Masabih, 21556; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-
Makhtum, pp. 155-156
407 See Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-Nadira, 1/450. In this report Umar, may Allah be pleased with
him, even says that Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, died of this bite, and was brought
back to life by the grace of Allah through His Messenger.
408 Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/76, 77; Haysami, Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 3/231
409 The same issue would be addressed in the Eternal Message of the Qur'an that the Truthful Gabriel
brought and Allah the Almighty would say: "If you do not help him (the Messenger), yet for
certain Allah helped him when those who disbelieve drove him out (of his home during the Hijra),
the second of the two when they were in the cave (with those in pursuit of them having reached the
mouth of the cave), and he said to his Companion (with utmost trust in Allah and no worry at all):
'Do not grieve. Allah is surely with us. ' Then Allah sent down His gift of inner peace and
reassurance on him, supported him with hosts you cannot see, and brought the word (the cause)
of the unbelievers utterly low, and Allah's word (His cause) is (always and inherently) supreme.
Allah is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise" (at-Tawba 9:40).
410 "0 Messenger (you who convey and embody the Message in the best way)! Convey and make
known in the clearest way all that has been sent down to you from your Lord. For, if you do not,
you have not conveyed His Message and fulfilled the task of His Messengership, and Allah will
certainly protect you from the people. Allah will surely not guide the disbelieving people (to attain
their goal of harming or defeating you)" (al-Maedah 5 :67).
ill Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/62; Najdi, Abdullah, Muhtasaru Sirahti 'r-Rasul, p. 168
412 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/189
413 Halabi, Sirah, 21195, 196
414 Ibn Taymiyyah, Minhaju 's-Sunnati 'n-Nabawiyya, 8/542
415 See Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3/6 ( 4267). Years later when Asma spoke of the event she would say
that they had had no money left from her father and that she had done such a trick to alleviate the
fears of her grandfather. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3115.
416 Isbahani, Dalai/, 1/62
417 Muslim, Sahih, 4/2309 (2009); Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 159
418 IbnAbdilbarr,Istiab, 2/581 (916)
419 See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3116; Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1/687. Years would pass and during the period of
Umar's caliphate this news would also be realized. Umar would beat Persia and he would bring

--- Sayfa 400 ---
the bracelets of Chosroes to Suraqa and say to him with a voice all could hear: "Raise your hands
and say the following: 'Allah is great! Thanks be to Allah who took these away from Chosroes,
the son ofHurmuz who would walk upon the earth boasting 'I am the Lord of the people,' thanks
be to Him who then gave them to Suraqa, from the sons of Mudlij who live in the deserts of
Arabia."' See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/414; Bayhaqi, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 6/357(12812).
420 During this trip they mostly drank milk that they asked for from the shepherds they encountered
on their way. See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1419 (3692).
421 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1433 (3699)
422 Qadi Iyaz, Shifa, 1/688
423 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3/8, 9 ( 4273)
424 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 311 0; al-Misri, Siratu 'r-Rasul, p. 207
425 Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 159
426 Ibn Abdilbarr,Istiab, 11185, 186
427 See Bayhaqi, Dalai/, 2/221; Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11209; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-
Makhtum, 160. After Burayda became Muslim, our noble Prophet sent him to the tribes of Aslam
and Jifar, and after the Uhud Battle, he came to the Messenger of Allah. Before long, with his
effort, the whole population of the village would become a Muslim. After the death of our noble
Prophet he stayed in Medina for a little while longer. Afterwards, Burayda went towards
Khorasan and he died in Marw during the time of Yazid ibn Muawiya. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat,
4/242.
428 Later the Messenger of Allah would send slave Mas'ud back with the camel, explaining to him
what kind of mark they should put on their camels from now on. Abu Aws became Muslim after
our noble Prophet arrived in Medina, for he would later have another mission. He would send the
same Mas'ud on foot to Medina to inform them about the polytheist army that was coming
towards Medina from Mecca before the Uhud Battle, thus providing very important intelligence.
See Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11173; Ibn Hajar, !saba, 11157.
429 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1421 (3694)
430 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/233
431 Ibid.
432 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/20; Al-Misri, Siratu 'r-Rasul, p. 211
433 Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/460
434 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/21, Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, p. 161
435 Halabi, Sirah, 2/233
436 There are various reports that the Messenger of Allah stayed in Quba for fourteen days or ten
nights.
437 Before our noble Prophet immigrated Salim Mawla Abi Hudhayfa had led the Friday prayers in
Medina, for at the time he had been the one who knew Qur'an the best. See Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li
Ahkami 'l-Qur 'an, 1/392.
438 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/30, 31
439 Ibid., 3/22-23
440 There are also reports that say that the Messenger of Allah stayed in Quba for four days.
According to these reports, our beloved Prophet came to Quba on a Monday, and after staying
there till Friday and having performed Friday Prayers, he left and came to Medina. Another report
says that the time of our noble Prophet's arrival in Medina was within the last twelve or two days
of the month of Rabiulawwal. It can be understood that the Messenger of Allah arrived in Quba
on the eighth day of Rabiulawwal, having started his journey of Hijra on the first Monday of the
month. Having stayed there for four days or a week, he entered Medina on the twelfth of
nineteenth day of the month which was a Friday. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3122, 23; Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 1/233.

--- Sayfa 401 ---
441 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 5/451 (23835); Ibn Majah, Sunan, 1/423 (1334); Hakim, Al-
Mustadrak, 3/14 (4283)
442 There are reports that Abdullah ibn Salam had already submitted in faith to our noble Prophet
before his hijra to Medina. See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1211 (3151).
443 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/52
444 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 5/441 (23788); Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/511, 512
445 Some reports say that a group of 80 Christians-32 from Abyssinia and 8 from Byzantine lands-
had been waiting for Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, in Medina in order to
submit to him. These people included As'ad ibn Zurara, Bara ibn Ma'rur, Muhammad ibn Salama
and Abu Qays ibn Sirma. In order to purify themselves, these people already had the habit of
taking the major ablution, ghusl, and were already living according to the Hanif religion carried
over from Prophet Ibrahim. When the Messenger of Allah appeared, they had run to his presence,
and bearing witness to his Prophethood they had become his helpers. See Baghavi, Maalimu 't-
Tanzil, 1/343; Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 6/256.

--- Sayfa 402 ---
PERMANENT HOME: MEDINA
T
hen one afternoon, the Messenger of Allah came upon Medina like the full
moon, from where the sons of Najjar lived. 446 He was in the front, followed
by Abu Bakr. Now Yathrib would become one with the Messenger of Allah
and would take the name Medinatu Muhammad, meaning "the city of Muhammad,"
and from then on, it would remain as Medina.447
Now there was real celebration in Medina, some young people had gathered
together and were dancing in a circle, 448 and others were singing songs of welcome to
our noble Prophet.
Now everything looked brighter, there was a joy in Medina the like of which had
not been experienced before. There was a smile on every face.
One could hear the voices of children reach to the skies in Medina, in a way that
made one forget what had transpired in Mecca: "Here, the Messenger of Allah has
come," they were saying, and then they were singing the following song: "0 White
Moon rose over us, from the Valley of Wada, and we owe it to show gratefulness,
where the call is to Allah. 449 0 you who were raised amongst us, coming with a work
to be obeyed. You have brought to this city nobleness, Welcome! Best caller to
Allah's way."450 And thus the cradle of civilization, Medina, was embracing the
Messenger of Allah with such lovely melodies.
On the other hand, there were some people who were playing the daf, tambourine.
'We are the neighbors of the sons of Najjar. How fortunate we are that Muhammad
is our neighbor," they all said.
The Messenger of Allah would respond: "Allah knows that I love you, too!"451
The First Residence
The excitement that had been felt in Quba was being felt here among the inhabitants
of Medina as well. People had lined the roads and were all inviting our noble Prophet
to stay at their home. Each household who saw him approach their house was hoping

--- Sayfa 403 ---
that he would stop there, inviting him even more heartily.
But instead, the Prophet of Mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, responded to
all the invitations by saying: "Let the reigns of my camel free, for it has the duty to
decide," and thus he had left the decision as to the where he would reside in Medina to
fate in great submission. This would also prevent the plans of those who might have
had other intentions. The blessed camel named Qaswa was walking through the streets
of Medina with a great number of people eagerly following in his trail. It passed by
the houses in Medina in the following order: the house of Utban ibn Malik, Abbas ibn
Ubada, Ziyad ibn Walid, Farwa ibn Amr, Sa'd ibn Ubada, Munzir ibn Amr, Sa'd ibn
Rabi, Harija ibn Zayd, Abdullah ibn Rawaha, Adiyy ibn Najjar, Salit ibn Qays and his
father Abu Salit. They stopped with excitement at each house that the camel
approached, and the Messenger of Allah was invited inside. To each invitation he
would repeat, pointing at the camel: "Let him pass freely, for it is its duty to
decide. "452
The daughters of the sons of Najjar were also very excited. They were welcoming
the Messenger of Allah and were saying from where they were: 'We are the children
of the neighbors to the sons of Najjar; how fortunate we are that now the Messenger of
Allah is our neighbor."
The Messenger of Allah turned to them and asked: "Do you love me?"
The word love was hardly sufficient for what they felt for him. They cried out:
"Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah! Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
In response to this sincere declaration of love, the Messenger of Allah said: "I swear
I love you too! I swear I love you too! I swear I love you too! "453
Then suddenly Qaswa stopped in front of a house and looked around it. Then he
moved a little and continued to walk. He then turned back to where he had first
stopped. It was clear that he was striving to fulfill the role that fate had given him. He
waited for a while more and then sat where he was. 454
The Ansar, people of Medina, and the Muhajirun, the Migrants of Mecca, were all
looking at each other, for the house that the Messenger of Allah was going to stay at
had thus been decided. Tears were flowing down Abu Ayyub Khalid ibn Zayd's
cheeks, for closest to where the camel had sat down was his own home. The
Messenger of Allah asked: "Whose is the closest house?"
"My house, 0 Messenger of Allah," said Abu Ayyub. "This is my house and here is
its door."
"Then let us stay at your house," said the Messenger of Allah and thus started a

--- Sayfa 404 ---
guest stay of seven months. 455
This house had an interesting feature about it. It was the house that had been built
by the King ofTubba, As'adu'l-Khimyari, 456 who had decreed that the Last Messenger
should live in it when he came to Medina. As'adu'l-Khimyari left his throne and
kingdom in Yemen and came to Y athrib which he knew was to be the place that the
Last Messenger would immigrate to. When he came, he saw that he was not the only
one who knew about his coming but that there were many sincere hearts that were
waiting for him there, and so he decided to stay. Before long, he had a house built with
the purest of intentions with the aim of hosting the Last Messenger. 457 His intentions
were beautiful, his efforts sincere, however his life was short and limited. When the
throes of death came upon him, he called the man he held to be the most wise and
trustworthy to his side and left a letter, he wanted him to give the letter to the Last
Messenger whom he would not live long enough to see. If that man should fail as well,
he wanted him to give it to another trustworthy man and to leave this as a will to the
generations to come. Waiting for his coming, the King of Tubba would himself set on
his last voyage. 458 His sons, Lamis and Wahabi, were not quite as devoted as their
father and they sold this house that their father had passed on to them. The house kept
changing hands through wills and at last had ended up in the hands of Abu Ayyub.
The king ofYemen, As'adu'l-Khimyari, had not been able to host the Last Messenger,
but Allah the Almighty had not let his sincere efforts go to waste, and now he was in a
way hosting His Messenger in the house that he had built for when he would
immigrate to Medina. There were no coincidences in the universe. The meaning ofthe
Prophet's words "Let the reign of the camel free, for it has the duty to decide," thus
became clearer.
After the Messenger of Allah settled in his home, Abu Ayyub considered himself
the most fortunate man in Medina. He wanted to share his happiness with the
Companions of the Prophet, and he started to recite a poem. He was saying:
"I know a man called Ahmad.
He is a Messenger sent by Allah to everyone and the most honorable of all that is
created.
If my life should run parallel to his, then I will be a loyal aide to him,
And I will be like the cousin at his side
Today, I declare war on his enemies with my sword
So that I may repel the difficulties that may befall his bosom ... "459
This poem was the poem that had been written by As'adu'l-Khimyari who had built

--- Sayfa 405 ---
his house years ago so that the Last Messenger of Allah may come and live in it.460
Memories had been awakened, and they were now speaking about the gifts that
Allah had sent them; such an important coincidence now made the common
knowledge of all Muslims. Maybe it was this contextual allegiance that made Medina
so ready and prepared in accepting our noble Prophet after all the bad reaction he
received in Mecca.461
The Messenger of Allah was now the guest of Abu Ayyub, but the excitement was
shared by all the Ansar, for he was now the guest of them all, preferring the warmth of
Medina after the aggressive atmosphere of Mecca. Now the house of Abu Ayyub had
become a place of regular visits; each evening there would be at least two or three
people from the Ansar at Ayyub's door bringing plates of food, so that they could
show their hospitality to the Messenger of Allah and to people who came to visit
him.462
Moving Upstairs
The Pride of the Universe, peace and blessings be upon him, had settled in Abu
Ayyub's house, but Abu Ayyub was not happy with their arrangement, for the
Messenger of Allah had chosen to live on the ground floor. Abu Ayyub and his wife
were speaking about the discomfort they were feeling about this situation and saying:
"How can this be, the Messenger of Allah is downstairs, and here we are walking
above his head!"
Then they decided to speak to our noble Prophet about this matter that troubled
them, and they went to him to invite him to live on the upper floor. Abu Ayyub said:
"0 Messenger of Allah, may my mother and father be sacrificed for you! Know that
you being downstairs and us being upstairs is very difficult for us to bear; please move
upstairs and we will live downstairs." But this was not how our noble Prophet thought.
They had spoken about this matter with him many times but the Messenger of Allah
kept saying: "0 Abu Ayyub! I have preferred the lower floor because of the many
people coming to visit us," thus rejecting these offers every time.463
One day Abu Ayyub came to the Messenger with the same offer and when he was
rejected he said: "I cannot live upstairs when you are downstairs," insisting once
again. But the result did not seem to change. Then one day, Abu Ayyub accidentally
kicked a jug full of water upstairs and the contents poured through the ceiling
downstairs. Even before the water reached downstairs they ran down with Umm
Ayyub and tried to prevent the water from spreading with the towels they had in their
hand. They had been terrified that the water should pour down over the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 406 ---
Allah and they turned quite yellow with regret. It was clear that this could not go on
like this. This time he asked more insistently: "0 Messenger of Allah! There is no way
we can live upstairs anymore when you are downstairs! Please come upstairs!"
This was now beyond a request, it was more like begging: "I do not like to be above
you, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
In the face of such sincerity and insistence, the Messenger of Allah decided not to
hurt Abu Ayyub's feelings anymore and that night he moved upstairs, 464 and from then
on till the construction ofthe Masjid an-Nabawi, the Prophet's Mosque, he would stay
there.
The most fortunate of hosts, Abu Ayyub and his family, were being so sensitive in
seeing to our noble Prophet's needs, were taking such great care not to hurt his
feelings that, when they sent the Messenger of Allah something to eat, they looked at
the dishes that were returned from his quarter, trying to understand what his favorite
foods were. They also felt great joy at eating from the plate what had remained
uneaten by the Messenger of Allah, trying to eat the food that had been touched by
him. One day, they had cooked a meal with a great deal of onions and garlic in it and
sent it to the Messenger of Allah to eat.
Once again they were waiting for him to finish so that they may eat his remains and
thereby ask for more bounty for their home. But that day, the food they sent had been
untouched. They feared that they had sent the Messenger of Allah something wrong.
Abu Ayyub went to the presence of our noble Prophet and gently asked: "0
Messenger of Allah, may my mother and father be sacrificed for you! You have sent
the food without having touched it! Was it haram ?"
But his fears were assuaged: "No! But I do not like this dish. I have smelt onions
and garlic in it. You know that I am in supplication to my Lord."
Abu Ayyub responded immediately: "Whatever it is you do not like, I do not like it
either!"
Our noble Prophet took another step in order to prevent a possible
misunderstanding: "But you should eat from it!"
Even though they had heard the Messenger of Allah say that they can eat it, they
never cooked that dish again. 465 This was the sensitivity that the Companions showed
to our noble Prophet's orders and recommendations: They would follow him in his
requests and even read rulings into his requests and do their best to make the most
beloved of Allah's servants content.

--- Sayfa 407 ---
The Ties of Brotherhood
The Beloved of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had arrived in Medina safe
and sound but his arrival was now calling for many provisions to be made. The people
who had come with him were not a handful, and there were also people who had
remained in Mecca although they were Muslims.
Each of those who came had come with their families, or was sending for their
families afterwards. There was no alternative. They were now a hundred and eighty
families, and the families were not small; each family was large in size with many
children. How were all these families going to be housed and how would they be
provided for? One could find short term solutions but this was not a stay that would
last two or three days.
In order to find a solution to all these problems, one of the first things that the
Messenger of Allah did was to forge the ties of brotherhood between the Muhajirun,
the Migrants of Mecca, and the Ansar, the Helpers of Medina. This was like a sister-
family project in today's terms, and thus the housing and other social problems for
forty five families had been solved. He had come together with his Companions in the
house of Anas ibn Malik and was saying the following: "Become brothers in pairs for
the love of Allah!" 466
The idea of brotherhood to further the feelings of unity among the Muslim
community was not being raised for the first time that day. Even during the Meccan
years our noble Prophet had already declared people like Zubayr ibn Awwam and
Abdullah ibn Mas'ud brothers, and thus he had sought a way to alleviate the burden of
all kinds of difficulties in a period of great oppression. He would be the first to put the
idea in practice, so he raised the hand of his nephew Ali and said: "This here is my
brother."
He was not leaving his nephew Ali, who had stayed with him since his childhood
days and who had grown up with the upbringing of the Prophet, so the Messenger of
Allah was declaring him to be his brother.
Then he declared his uncle Hamza the lion-hunter467 and Zayd ibn Haritha who had
been enslaved due to the wrong conceptions of the period of ignorance, but who had
later been freed and had the good fortune of serving our noble Prophet, brothers. It
was clear that he wanted to keep these two men by his side.
In this excitement of brotherhood that was sweeping Mecca, every member of the
Ansar was looking out for the Muhajirun who would be declared to be his brother.
Before long, Abu Bakr and Harija ibn Zuhayr; Umar and Itban ibn Malik; Abu

--- Sayfa 408 ---
Ubayda and Sa'd ibn Muadh; Abdurrahman ibn Awf and Sa'd ibn Rabi; Zubayr ibn
Awwam468 and Salama ibn Salama; Uthman and Aws ibn Thabit; Talha ibn
Ubaydullah and Ka'b ibn Malik; Sa'd ibn Zayd and Ubayy ibn Ka'b; Jafar ibn Abi
Talib469 and Muadh ibn Jabal; Mus'ab ibn Umayr and Abu Ayyub Khalid ibn Zayd;
Abu Hudhayfa and Abbad ibn Bishr; Ammar ibn Yasir and Hudhayfa ibnu'l-Yaman,
and Bilal al-Habashi and Abu Ruwayha470 had become brothers.
Before long, this number reached a hundred and fifty471 and then it encompassed all
the one hundred and eighty six families of the Muhajirun.
This brotherhood would underline mutual self-sacrifice. The Migrants of Mecca set
about trying to earn their own despite the protests of their Ansar brothers who wanted
to meet their needs without them having to work to earn a living.
Sa' d ibn Rabi took Abdurrahman ibn Awf who had been declared his brother to his
home. He was so happy, it was as if the Messenger of Allah had come to his home and
was trying his best to make him welcome. First he spoke to him: "My dear brother! I
am one of the richest men in Medina: Here, let half of my wealth be yours. I also have
two wives; I can divorce one of them and then after her waiting period you can marry
her."
These were strange offers for Abdurrahman ibn Awfindeed! He was thinking ofthe
treatment they had got in Mecca, and then looking at how Medina was embracing
them. He was embarrassed at the sight of such self-sacrifice on the part of the Ansar
who had only newly become Muslims. Then he thought of the verses of the Qur'an
that spoke of the Ansar who opened their homes to the Muhajirun! Allah the Almighty
knew what was in their hearts and was describing them thus:
Those who, before their coming, had their abode (in Medina), preparing it
as a home for Islam and faith, love those who migrate to them for Allah's
sake, and in their hearts do not begrudge what they have been given, and
(indeed) they prefer them over themselves, even though poverty be their
own lot. (They too have a share in such gains of war) Whoever is guarded
against the avarice of his own soul-those are the ones who are truly
prosperous. (al-Hashr 59:9)
But they had not come to Medina in order to have the world!
"Let your wealth and wives be blessed for you," Abdurrahman said first, and then
he added, "Just show me the way to the market!"
For a believer, not being greedy was an important principle, and he wanted to earn
his own living.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
Abdurrahman did not say yes to the offers of Sa'd and the following day he was in
the market of the Banu Qaynuqa, and from then on he would always be at the market.
As he put it, each item that he laid his hands on almost turned into gold or silver.472 It
was clear that Allah was making the road of those who read the situation well, and
those who held up His will and contentment, fore and foremost, easier to travel.
One day they came to the presence of the Messenger. Before long the Messenger of
Allah asked: "So tell me, what is this about?"
Abdurrahman ibn Awf had put on the scent of za 'faran and thus had come to his
presence.
"I married a woman from the Ansar, 0 Messenger of Allah," answered
Abdurrahman.
The Messenger of Allah asked, in order to ascertain how far Abdurrahman had
come since his arrival in Medina: "Have you given her dowry?"
''Yes, I gave her gold ofthe weight offive dirhams."
This explained that Abdurrahman had done very well for himself and that he had
some commercial standing in the town. This news had to be shared with other people
so that it may provide moral support for those who were walking the same path as
him. Now it was time to declare this marriage and our noble Prophet said: "Then give
a banquet even if it should be only one sheep. "473
As in the case of Sa' d ibn Rabi and Abdurrahman ibn Awf some people had
concluded that this brotherhood would also extend to the rights to inheritance and had
come to the presence of the Messenger of Allah and said: "Divide up the date orchards
between us as well."
It was the Ansar of Medina who had come up with this suggestion.
First he said "No," and then added: "Act together in working and sweating out for
your daily keep, and then share the fruits of these labors among you."474 The meaning
of this was clear. From now on everyone would do their best to work and produce
something, and the Migrants of Mecca and the Helpers of Medina were now going to
share the products of their labors. They said: "We have heard, and we obey!"475
Meanwhile the following verse had come to explain that this brotherhood did not
extend to inheritance:
And to everyone We have appointed heirs to what the parents and near
kindred might leave behind. (As those heirs have defined portions in the
inheritance that must be given them,) so to those with whom you have

--- Sayfa 410 ---
made a solemn covenant, give them their due share. Allah is indeed a
witness over everything. (an-Nisa 3:33)
The Difference of the Ansar
The Muhajirun were doing what would be expected of them, and the Ansar was
looking for ways to make them feel as welcome as possible. Even if their brothers who
had come from Mecca did not want them to, they insisted on sharing all they had. One
day they were speaking of the following: "Allah has shown you the right path through
this Personage who is the son of your sister. He on the other hand has taken on the
burden of all and is trying to solve all the problems. But he does not have the means to
do so! Then you should gather as much money as you can and give it to him so that he
may be able to carry out his mission to see to the needs of the poor."
This summarized the situation well, for this was indeed how things were. Such was
the sharp perception of the Ansar, and before long, they showed that these were not
mere words. They gathered as much money as they could and went to the Beloved of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! You are the
son of our sister! Allah the Almighty has led us to the right path with your help! You
on the other hand have taken on the burden of all and are trying to solve all the
problems. But you do not have the means to do so! We got together to discuss this and
decided to collect this; we hope with it we will have helped you a little bit and
strengthen your hand in doing good. Here, accept this from us!"
What fine sensibility was this! The traveler on the path of truth had to be modest
and self-sufficient and not ask for anything from anyone. Now this was like field work
and an example had to be set on the ground. Before long, Gabriel came and brought
the verse that meant:
That it is of which Allah gives the glad tidings to His servants who
believe and do good, righteous deeds. Say: "I ask of you no wage for it
(for conveying Allah's Religion to you which will bring you this favor),
but (I ask of you for) love for my near relatives (on account of my
mission)." Whoever scores a good deed, We increase him in good in
respect of it. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, All-Responsive (to gratitude).
(ash-Shura 42:23)
So the cause would be taken further by not requesting anything from others, by
engagement without expecting anything in return. This is how the person you were
dealing with would take you seriously. This also signaled the fact that there would be
no holes or seams in the mission that might provide a point of criticism for the

--- Sayfa 411 ---
polytheists and the deniers, for avoiding any sense of benefit to the self meant much
more than worldly good and wealth, and provided a much stronger dynamism. 476
The Construction of the Masjid an-Nabawi
The Muslims were now settled in Medina but there were still many problems to be
solved. First of all, they needed a place where the believers could come together to
share the verses of the Qur' an, where they could perform the Prayers and listen to the
advice and tabligh of the Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him; where the
issues of the day would be discussed and resolved; in short a place where they could
come to the awareness of being a community, and this meant they needed to build a
masjid.
They no longer had the Ka'ba where they could seek refuge in. That is why they
were performing the Prayers, when their time came, wherever they happened to be.
First they decided where they needed to build the mosque. It was where the camel
of the Messenger of Allah had first sat, and it belonged to two brothers Sahl and
Suhayl who were under the protection of As'ad ibn Zurara who was the envoy of the
sons of Najjar. There were sheep sheds, old buildings and a few graves in this piece of
land. 477
Our noble Prophet called the sons of Najjar who were his relatives and requested to
buy the land from them for its price. They on the other hand said: "We swear we do
not want any payment for this, we believe Allah will give us our compensation."
They wanted to be one of the pioneers in taking the cause further. But the
Messenger did not want to be a burden on them with such an important issue. He
called out to Abu Bakr and they bought the land for ten dinars. 478
Thus, the problem of land had been solved and now it was time for construction.
Everyone was ready to help; some were preparing the mud-bricks, some were carrying
stones and some were putting the material together, thereby building piece by piece a
new civilization! As'ad ibn Zurara was putting the stones and the mud-bricks that had
brought together, acting as the master bricklayer in the Prophet's Mosque.
They were distinguished in all their actions and were taking pleasure in their
arduous work. They would pray: "0 Lord! We do not know of a better thing than the
abode of the afterlife that is Yours! Help those who uphold your religion as the Ansar
and the Muhajirun."479 Such were their prayers, and they were singing their
supplication heartily, giving the whole place an atmosphere of celebration.
The Messenger of Allah was among those who were working in the construction;

--- Sayfa 412 ---
despite all the objections, he insisted on carrying the mud-bricks and stones, showing
that in all matters he was among his community, leading them. He joined in the
supplications of the Ansar and the Muhajirun now and then and said: "My Lord! The
afterlife is the only place where deeds are rewarded! Show mercy to your Ansar and
Muhajirun, and forgive their sins! Our Lord! It is not the porters of Khaybar who carry
these; these are the best and purest ofmen."480
His efforts spurred the Ansar and the Muhajirun on and they were responding with:
"How can we sit when the Great Messenger himself is working? Then this means we
need to work harder, show more determination!"481
In the meanwhile, the Messenger of Allah caught sight of Ammar. While everyone
carried the mud-bricks one by one, he was carrying two pieces of mud-bricks on his
back. He had lost his mother as the first martyr of Islam and had endured unspeakable
torture at the hands of the polytheist.
Our noble Prophet approached him and stroked his head and then dusted off the dirt
from his clothes. Ammar did not stop for a second as the Messenger of Allah was
doing all these. The veils hiding the unknown had been opened and he was now seeing
certain scenes concerning the future, and with affectionate looks, the Messenger of
Allah started to say the following: "Have pity for Ammar, the son of Sumayya, for he
will be martyred by a most furious crowd! "482
Before long, a masjid had been built with mud-brick walls; the ceilings made of
date fiber, its columns made of date trees and its floor of earth and sand, and the
Prayers were performed there. This masjid had three doors and its comers were a
hundred zira. 483
Here, the Prayers which hitherto had been two cycles were now performed as four
cycles, and it was explained that in times of travel they could again be performed as
two; but it was set as four under normal peaceful conditions. 484
The Voice from the Pulpit
The Masjid an-Nabawi had been built completely and the Friday Prayers were being
performed here. In order to read his sermon and to be able to see into the eyes of his
audience, our noble Prophet would stand up on the stump of a date tree and address
his Companions from there.
The pulpit was very simple in design. One day, a Companion came from outside
Medina and saw the pulpit that the Pride of Humanity, peace and blessings be upon
him, was using. He turned to the Ansar and said: "If the Messenger of Allah should

--- Sayfa 413 ---
allow it, I would like to make him a pulpit; he can stand on it if he likes, or lean on it
as he delivers the sermon."
Before long, this request of the man was made known to the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, and he spoke to the man. He said similar things to
the Messenger of Allah as well: "0 Messenger of Allah! Shall I make you a pulpit so
you can get on to deliver your sermon on Fridays? In that way everyone will be able to
see you and you will have relayed your message to everyone!"
This was a beautiful offer from a sincere heart, and there was much to be gained
from the construction of such a pulpit. That is why he said: "All right, make one."
Now the permission had been given, and so the man set about making the pulpit.
After a while, he had completed a large pulpit with three or four steps, and the old date
tree stump had been set aside.
At the time of the Friday Prayers, our noble Prophet was about to mount the new
pulpit when a voice was heard from the old pulpit, it was like the sigh and moan of a
camel! This sound was heard by all those present in the masjid. It was as if the stump
was crying from sadness. Our noble Prophet first turned to where the voice was
coming from. It was clear that the stump was upset because of being forgotten and set
aside, from the thought that it would not be able to see the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, again. With this attitude it was giving a lesson to those
who possessed real consciousness and yet stayed away from the message of
Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him.
It was clear that this moaning would not stop. That is why our noble Prophet turned
towards the date tree stump. He sat down near it and started to stroke it with his
blessed hands. Then all of a sudden the sighing stopped and the stump was silent. The
sadness of separation had been removed by being reunited again and that is why the
stump fell silent. Then the Messenger of Allah knelt down a little and whispered: "If
you like I can put you back where you were, or I can plant you somewhere in Paradise
so that you may be watered by its springs, so that you may sprout new greens and the
beloved servants of Allah may eat from your fruits." It looked like it was saying yes to
the second offer. The Messenger of Allah then turned to his Companions and said: "It
preferred to be planted in Paradise. "485
Then he put this stump near the pulpit and prayed towards it. 486 It was clear that he
was responding to loyalty with loyalty, giving an important lesson to his Ummah.
Everyone who saw it would remember what had happened that day, and with the
memory of a stump that had cried for being separated from its Messenger, they would

--- Sayfa 414 ---
speak of this miracle to others as well.
The First Call for Prayer
Mecca breathed violence and hatred and one could only pray in a congregation in
quiet and remote places. But Medina was much more welcoming and one could easily
gather together for the Prayer. Here they had also built the Masjid an-Nabawi, and the
masjid was waiting to embrace the Beloved of Allah and his Companions for
communal Prayers.
The times for the Prayers were known but there was as yet no system to remind the
people of these times and to call them to the Prayers. What were they to do? First they
discussed blowing the hom as the Jewish people did but then they decided against it.
Then they discussed the possibility of a bell like the Christians but this was rejected as
well. They were waiting for a new type of calling. Then, at a time when they were
again discussing the call for Prayer, Abdullah ibn Zayd came to the presence of the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and told him about his dream:
"0 Messenger of Allah! I dreamt of a man in a two piece green suit come to me, and
he had a great bell in his hand. I said to him: '0 servant of Allah! Will you sell this to
me?'
'What will you do with it?' he asked.
'I will call the people to Prayer with it,' I answered.
'Do you want me to tell you what would be better?'
When I asked him what it was, he told me to call people to Prayer with the
following words:
Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the
Greatest.
I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, I bear witness that there is no deity
but Allah.
I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, I bear witness that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.
Come to Prayer, come to Prayer.
Come to salvation, come to salvation.
Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest.
There is no deity but Allah.
Hearing these words, Messenger of Allah said: "Verily this is a true dream." It was

--- Sayfa 415 ---
clear that he had liked what he had heard.
Then, one could feel the presence of Gabriel at the gathering. A new piece of news
seemed to be coming. When the signs of revelation faded and the gathering was calm
again, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, called Abdullah to
his side and said: "Get up and teach these words to Bilal! Let him call out to people
with these! For his voice is stronger than yours."
Before long, Bilal was calling the people to Prayer with these words.
On the other hand Umar was about to leave his house in order to go and pray with
our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. He wanted to share with him a
dream he had the previous night, for this dream could solve the issue of the call for
Prayer which they had been discussing for days. Just as he was thinking of this, he
heard Bilal's voice, a voice which touched one's heart's strings. He was surprised
because Bilal was repeating the very words that had been spoken to him in his dream.
Or had all that been not a dream but reality? Or was he still dreaming? He gathered up
his dress and started to walk quickly to the Masjid an-Nabawi. When he came to the
presence of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, he said the
following to him: "0 Messenger of Allah! I swear by He who has sent you with Truth
that I dreamt ofthe very same!"
The Messenger of Allah had an attitude that seemed to say that he had witnessed
even more than what Umar had said and he turned to him to say: "In this, revelation
has come before you," and then added: "Thanks be to Allah for this and for Umar's
dream. "487
From then on, the issue of calling the believers to Prayer had been solved, and for
five times a day, the skies would be blessed with the glorious Names of Allah and His
Messenger. This practice that became the symbol of Prayer came to be known as the
adhan.
Ashab as-Suffa
Medina, the new home of the Beloved of Allah and his Companions, would witness
another new practice. The Messenger of Allah had started to gather people at the
Masjid an-Nabawi with whom he would share the verses that were revealed to him
and with whom he could discuss deeds that would be pleasing to Allah. While the rest
of the people were engaged in trade or farming in their gardens or orchards, the only
goal of these people was to make sure that the gains of religion would not be lost and
to take the culture they had received from our noble Prophet to other people so that the

--- Sayfa 416 ---
tabligh would continue to be communicated in a sound manner. When engaged in this
scholarship, they would tie stones to their stomachs so that they would not feel their
hunger, but more often, they would faint where they were from not having eaten for a
long time. For them, the development of religion was more important than anything
else. That is why when the Messenger of Allah spoke with his Companions he would
advise them to look after these people, sometimes he would assign their sustenance
among them and he too thought more of these people than his own family. 488
The number of Ashab as-Suffa (the People of the Chamber), among whom someone
as important as Abu Hurayra numbered one, would change but could rise to thirty, and
these people used the Masjid an-Nabawi as their home, for they did not have any other
roof under which they lived, nor any relatives who could help them. But they never
asked for help from anyone and they would be content with whatever circumstances
they found themselves in; their priority being living a life that was close to the noble
Prophet.
The Qur'an uses the following expressions when speaking of the Ashab as-Suffa
and their posture:
That (which you spend) is for the poor who, having dedicated themselves
to Allah's cause, are in distressed circumstances. They are unable to move
about the earth (to render service in Allah's cause and earn their
livelihood). Those who are unaware (of their circumstances) suppose
them wealthy because of their abstinence and dignified bearing, but you
will know them by their countenance-they do not beg of people
importunately, and whatever good you spend, surely Allah has full
knowledge of it. (al-Baqarah 2:273)
Naturally these people knew best which verse had been revealed where and how,
and how the Messenger of Allah had pronounced it and where, for they devoted all
their time to this scholarship, and they lived a life of complete worship. When
someone had a request concerning religion, one of them would be chosen and he
would be sent as teacher to those people. In short, the Ashab as-Suffa were the heirs to
the Messenger of Allah. When there were complaints that they were reporting too
many sayings of the Prophet, one of them, Abu Hurayra, may Allah be pleased with
him, would come to the fore and say: "Which surahs did the Messenger of Allah recite
in the Afternoon Prayer?" The man would answer: "I do not remember."
Upon that Abu Hurayra would ask: "Were you not present at the Prayer?"
The man replied: "I was." Upon that Abu Hurayra said: "But I do remember; he
read such and such surahs."489

--- Sayfa 417 ---
Thus he was giving a lesson with his actions. The man in conversation with Abu
Hurayra added: 'While our Muhajirun brothers are busy in the market and our Ansar
brothers are tending to their gardens and orchards, Abu Hurayra was following the
Messenger of Allah very closely, hearing what other missed out, memorizing what did
not reach the perception of others."490
All this strife could not be endured by all. The sons of Qurayza and Nadir were
standing against them, and the means that their men of religion had, were striking.
Even if they should be among the Suffa, they were mere mortals and they could easily
be tempted to live a life with at least a little bit of comfort.
The issue of worldly comfort was not one that touched only these few, there were
other people within the community who had been dazzled with the wealth of Croesus
and who continued to aspire to gain plenty. In order to prevent all these eventualities,
the Truthful Gabriel came again. In the verse he brought, the Great Lord was saying
the following which would be advice to all His servants:
If Allah were always to provide for (all of) His servants in great
abundance, they would certainly have transgressed all bounds on the
earth, but He sends it down in due measure as He wills. Surely He is fully
aware of His servants, and sees them well. (ash-Shura 42:27)
Encompassing Mercy and the Open Doors ofForgiveness
The vastness of Allah's mercy was a match for His wrath, a known fact for the
believers who had listened to the verses and the sayings of the Messenger of Allah.
But not all had grasped this to the same degree. Those who had been distant to the two
basic sources of the Qur'an and Sunnah, or those who had not yet become a Muslim
were embarrassed at the faults they had committed in the past and they felt the anxiety
concerning Divine wrath to their very bones. The Messenger of Allah was clear in
explaining that when one accepted Islam, one's ignorant actions of the past would be
cleansed altogether, like a newbom. 491 But the mechanism of conscience had come
into play, and it disturbed even the most sincere of Muslims. The general tendency of
the Companions was to engage in actions that would atone for their past behavior and
they were doing their best to clean their records, so to speak, and to seek forgiveness
from their Lord.
A few people had understood the truth of the matter and yet had not managed to
cross over to the side of belief. They had heard what a great sin it was to worship idols
and to kill people, but they were unable to leave their vices and emerge victorious

--- Sayfa 418 ---
from their self-made prison cells into the shore of faith. Satan would approach them
from the right side; seeming to be truthful, reminding them of their previous sins and
making them feel unwelcome in the new faith. When they considered their past in
which they had drank and engaged in debauchery, when they considered the honors
they had trampled upon, they would think:
"Muhammad says that worshipping idols and killing people will not be forgiven. If
this is so, how can we submit in faith and go and immigrate to Medina? We have
worshipped idols our whole life and we have taken the life of another, an act Allah
calls haram."
On the other hand some people like Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia, Hisham ibnu'l-As and
Walid ibnu'l-Walid were faced with obstacles of their own; although they had become
Muslims, they were not allowed to immigrate. In fact, they were under serious
pressure and they were being subjected to torture so that they may recant their faith.
The believers were feeling very sorry for these people who could not hold out much
longer and who had to give into the will of the polytheists, and thought that these souls
were lost. They were even saying: "Allah the Almighty will never accept their
repentance!"
Again, at such a needy moment, the Truthful Gabriel descended and related to our
noble Prophet the following verse in order to relieve the hearts and minds of those
who were waiting with hope:
0
My servants who have been wasteful (of their Allah-given
opportunities and faculties) against (the good of) their own souls! Do not
despair of Allah's Mercy. Surely Allah forgives all sins. He is indeed the
All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate. (az-Zumar 39:53)
Allah the Almighty was Himself handing out hope to His servants, telling them in
whatever state of sin they may be in, people would not returned empty-handed when
they come to His door, for His door was the door of Mercy and Compassion.
The Companions were men of loyalty, for they had been educated by the Person of
Loyalty himself, and they were also teaching loyalty to the world. Umar was one of
the Companions who would do just as well, so when he heard these verses, he wrote to
Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia, his friend who had come with him all the way to Quba and yet
had been ensnared by Abu Jahl's trick to be taken back to Mecca to face torture, and
he also wrote to Hisham ibnu'l-As and Walid ibnu'l-Walid who had not been able to
leave Mecca at all, and he spoke to them about this verse so that he may strengthen
their moral state.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
He felt that one should not leave these people who were being put under such a test
alone, at a time like this, one had to feed them with sources from the Divine, and be
alongside them. These people who were under continuous oppression received Umar's
letter and a new life was instilled into them. It made them more eager to find ways to
immigrate to Medina, a victory they would surely manage one day. When he read the
letter, Hisham came at once to a place called Zituwa, and spoke of the joy he felt that
day. He then got on his camel and made for Medina. 492
The Death of As'ad ibn Zurara and Buds of Dissension
As'ad ibn Zurara (Abu Umama), who was one of the Ansar who had come to the
Aqaba allegiances and who had been chosen as the representative of the sons of
Najjar, fell ill as the Masjid an-Nabawi was being built, and he was in his sick-bed at
home. Before long, the news ofhis death came. This was the first incident of its kind
after migration. Medina was enveloped in great grief. Most of all, naturally, it had
grieved the Messenger of Allah. But this was fate and nothing could be done against
it. From Allah he had come, to Allah he returned. On the other hand, people who were
looking for a weak point to attack, saw this as an opportunity to say: "Had Muhammad
been a real Prophet, his Companions would not die."
This was a strange thing to say indeed! Were they implying that the Companions of
previous Prophets had drunk an elixir of immortality and had lived for ever? The
people who said this knew very well that Prophet Moses and Prophet Aaron, peace be
upon them, were mortals too and that the children of Israel all had their ends. Their
aim was not to question their mortality but to saw seeds of contention where they
could.
This also brought to light the intentions of some people that had been hidden for
some time. When speaking of his sorrow the Messenger of Allah would say: "What a
terrible fight of interest some Jewish people and hypocrite Arabs are engaged in after
the death of Abu Umama! They are saying 'Had Muhammad been a real Messenger,
his Companions would not have died'. Allah is above all their disputes! I cannot claim
to govern either myself or my friends when it is the will of Allah! "493
The words of our noble Prophet were full of reproach towards the opportunist
hypocrites who were trying to exploit the death of a Companion. It was Allah who
gave both life and death and those who spoke so also knew this very well. The men
from the sons of Najjar who had finished the business of the burial came to the
presence of the noble Prophet and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! You know that Abu
Umama was our representative; now that he has died, please choose another man

--- Sayfa 420 ---
among us as representative."
The Messenger of Allah first embraced them with looks of affection and mercy.
Then he said: ''You are the sons of my uncle; I am one of you! From now on I myself
will be your representative."
The tribe of the Banu Najjar was overjoyed. They had lost their most honorable
man, but now Allah the Almighty was giving them the most auspicious member of
mankind as his successor. 494
The Conversation at the Graveyard
Kulthum ibn al-Hadm from among the Companions had also died. The Messenger of
Allah was in the graveyard called Baqi al-Gharkad to perform his last duty to his
friend. Salman al-Farisi was also with him. Maybe he was looking for the third sign in
the Pride of Humankind, having seen that he did not accept alms but received gifts,
maybe he was looking for the seal of Prophethood on the Messenger's back.
The Messenger of Allah's clothing consisted oftwo pieces. He had put one piece on
top of the other and there was a little opening at his shoulder where one could see his
neck. This was the opportunity that Salman had been hoping for. . . The mark of
revelation that his last master had talked about ... He approached our noble Prophet in
order to see the last sign. The Messenger of Allah noticed that Salman was hovering at
his back and he felt that he was looking for something. Our noble Prophet, as a man of
ease and convenience, did not mean to give him a hard time so he brushed the cloth on
his back a little aside for him to see. Good Lord! Yes, yes, the mark was there! The
seal of Prophethood was clearly there! Just as his master from Ammuriya had
described ... Everything stopped for Salman, he lost himself. He couldn't control
himself so he went over to the Prophet and started kissing him. He just could not
contain himself. At the same time, he was crying profusely. He could not hold back
his tears. This was the meeting that he had been dreaming of for years. Fate had
brought him to this point and he was overjoyed at having found what he had been
looking for, for many years.
The Messenger of Allah called him to his side and had him sit in front of him.
Salman spoke of his experiences to the noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him. How he left Iran, how he came to Damascus, his search in Mosul, his stay in
Nusaybin, the priest he met in Ammuriya and what adventures he had been through.
He then shared with the Messenger of Allah what his last master had told him. He had
searched far and wide and now he felt the joy of having found it. What he had
recounted pleased the Messenger of Allah very much. He then asked Salman to tell his

--- Sayfa 421 ---
story once more to the Companions.495
An Atmosphere of Jealousy
It was impossible to act on generalizations when it came to social issues in those days
as well. Among the polytheists and the People ofthe Book-Jews and Christians-in
Medina, there were those who knew our noble Prophet and had sympathy for him; and
then there were those who took a position against him and made plots to kill him.
During his first years in Medina, these people did not form an organized opposition
but remained separate instances of enmity. The Qur'an also drew attention to this and
said:
Yet they are not all alike: among the People of the Book there is an
upright community, reciting Allah's Revelations in the watches of the
night and prostrating (themselves in worship). They believe in Allah and
the Last Day, and enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid
and try to prevent the evil, and hasten to do good deeds as if competing
with one another. Those are of the righteous ones. (Al Imran 3: 113-114)
Abdullah ibn Ubayy was chief among them; before the Messenger of Allah came to
Medina, he had prepared himself for leadership in Medina to bring people together
who were living in chaos and the people thought this would be fitting. But with the
coming of the Muhajirun to Medina, his plans collapsed and so he started to hate the
Messenger of Allah who had thus prevented his rise to power, for when the people
saw the Personage who would be the cure for their ills, they had changed direction and
turned themselves towards him whom they thought would find solutions to problems
that had accumulated for centuries.
Abdullah ibn Ubayy this was a great loss indeed; just at the moment when he
thought he would have the power he wanted, he had lost, and he was full of rancor
towards those who had caused this defeat. But he did not make his feelings known
openly and he appeared to be in consensus with the general opinion. In appearance he
was a Muslim, but inside he felt enmity towards religion and he tried to sow seeds of
contention whenever he thought possible. As can be understood from the expressions
used in the above verse, some people who differed from the majority started to
organize themselves against this understanding that had come to their land from
outside, so at night they would get together to make plans to fight against it and to
gather support. Among them were men from the tribes of the Banu Nadr, the Banu
Salaba, the Banu Qaynuqa, the Banu Qurayza, the Banu Rusty, the Banu Haritha, the
Banu Amr and the Banu Najjar and they were men like Huyay ibn Akhtab, Ka'b ibn

--- Sayfa 422 ---
Asraf, Abdullah ibn Surinam, Finhas, Qab ibn Asad and Labid ibn A'sam.
They were all jealous people who could not stand the position that our noble
Prophet had vis-a-vis religion. 496 They were hatching plans of chaos and disorder for
Medina because the Messenger of Allah had not come from among them as they had
expected, and even though the number of his believers was rising every day.
Divine Direction in Method
One day Abu Bakr met a man by the name of Finhan, and after a long conversation,
they grew quite amicable. This was a development that gave hope to Abu Bakr
because this was a man who knew the Torah and the Gospel well; in the synagogue he
would tell the children stories of Moses, encouraging them to become scholars of
tomorrow. If this man were to become Muslim, many people around him would be
introduced to Islam and they would embrace Islam in great numbers. Abu Bakr met up
with Finhas again on another day and started to speak about faith and its aspects.
He spoke of the afterlife and he decided no longer to hide the truth: "0 Finhas! Fear
Allah, come and be a Muslim. You know well that Muhammad is a Messenger who
has been sent by Allah with truth. This is also written in the Torah and Gospel you
have at hand."
Finhas did not seem to agree. He started to mock the very foundations of the
argument. This was what he was saying to Abu Bakr who was inviting him to truth: "I
swear Abu Bakr that we do not need Allah! We do not ask of Him as much as He asks
from us. We are richer than Him. Look, ifHe were richer than us, He would not ask of
our wealth as your friend also preaches. He prohibits interest for you but gives us
interest! If He were richer than us, He would not give us interest."
These were words that would provoke anyone, even someone as sweet tempered as
Abu Bakr. Finhas had tried to make diamonds seem like coal, and as if this was not
enough, he was insulting the Divine Being. He was, in his way, interpreting the verse
"lends to Allah a handsome loan"497 which speaks of giving loans without charging
interest, as "giving loans to Allah." He was taken by surprise when Abu Bakr slapped
him across the face even before he could finish what he was saying. Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, then said the following: "0 you enemy to Allah! I swear
by He who holds my life in His hands, that had there not been a treaty between you
and us, I wouldn't let you live."
It was well known, Abu Bakr was the most refined man with a very soft temper, but
when it came to his stance against people who mocked Allah and His Messenger his

--- Sayfa 423 ---
stance would be above those of the most valiant of men.
The words of Finhas had reached the ears of Umar soon after and he too had been
infuriated. He got hold of his sword and set off to settle the score with Finhas. Umar's
rage would not be a mere slap like Abu Bakr' s; if people spoke ill of Allah and the
Messenger of Allah Umar would prevent their blasphemy, and would let those who
trespassed their limits recognize their error. But the conditions were not suitable at the
time. The Truthful Gabriel came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah and let him
know of what had transpired. He also had brought with him the Word of Allah,
saymg:
Tell those who believe that they should pardon those who do not hope for
the coming of the Days of Allah (when He will make them understand
what their unbelief means), seeing that He will recompense people for
what they have earned. (al-Jathiyah 45:14)
This meant that one had to keep calm and not waste time with the deniers, for their
judgment would be delivered in the greater tribunal by Allah, the Greatest of Judges.
One should just do what was one's duty in a way that is fitting for a Muslim and Allah
will surely give the reward.
But Umar did not know of this verse yet. Our noble Prophet sent someone to him to
inform him. Indeed, before long, a Companion stood in the way of Umar who was
taking resolute steps to see to Finhas and he told him that the Messenger of Allah was
waiting to speak to him and that the matter was urgent. Umar was known to always
adjust his position according to the truth, and he was at the presence of the Messenger
of Allah at once. The Messenger of Allah first said: "Put your sword down 0 Umar!"
How could the Messenger of Allah ask for something and he refuse?
"I swear by He who has sent you with Truth that you are telling the truth, 0
Messenger of Allah!"
Then the Sultan of Messengers started with: "Your Lord says ... " and then he read
him the new verse that Gabriel had brought.
Umar had now calmed down. In matters whose consequences touched the whole
community, one should never take personal steps without conferring with the leader.
This would cause tremors in the foundations of the edifice that they were trying to put
together stone by stone and they would then never be able to get the results they
wanted. Umar responded by saying: "I swear by He who sent you with Truth that I
will not be provoked like this again and never wear my rage on my sleeve."
The purity of intention in the presence of the Messenger was thus spreading in

--- Sayfa 424 ---
circles like a ripple towards his Companions and was taking hold of everyone who
should happen to come near him! 498
On the other side, the side of the deniers, there was no such source for purity. In
truth, everybody acted out what was in their nature. Finhas, who had been slapped by
Abu Bakr for not being able to hold his tongue, came to the Messenger of Allah in
order to make a complaint. It was clear that he had been hurt. But he did not seem to
have drawn any lessons from what had happened and without telling our noble
Prophet what he had said himself, he told him that Abu Bakr had attacked and beat
him. Upon that the Messenger of Allah called Abu Bakr to his side and asked: "Why
did you do such a thing?"
Abu Bakr was embarrassed. But he had to give a lesson to the arrogant man. As if
what he had said was not provoking enough, he had now come here and was asking
for retribution from the very man whom he had slandered!
Under normal circumstances, Abu Bakr did not like to defend himself, but here he
had to speak of the matter as it was. That is why Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with
him, said the following: "0 Messenger of Allah! This man, who is a true enemy to
Allah, has committed a great sin. He spoke words about the Creator that cannot be
countenanced, for he believes, I fear to say it, that Allah is poor and that they are rich.
I was enraged and so I beat him for Allah."
When he heard the truth spoken, Finhas was disturbed and he decided to deny what
Abu Bakr was saying and said: "I did not say those things."
How could he know that the Messenger of Allah also knew what had happened?
After all that he had done now Finhas was accusing Abu Bakr of lying as well! When
someone trespassed boundaries, there was nothing to stop them. Before long, the
verses of the Qur' an that spoke of the truthfulness of the Loyal Friend started to
descend; the skies were speaking and the Truthful Gabriel was bringing the revelations
to the Pride of Humankind:
Allah has indeed heard the saying of those who said, "Allah is poor, and
we are rich." We will record what they have said, as well as their killing
the Prophets against all right; and We will say (to them): "Taste the
punishment ofthe scorching fire!" (Al Imran 3:181)
As can be seen, the verses spoke directly about what Finhas had said, revealing the
torment that hypocrites and liars would experience in the afterlife.
The Medina Charter

--- Sayfa 425 ---
The problems that Muslims faced in their new home were being handled one by one.
Another issue that needed to be addressed was the demographics of Medina,
ethnicities and differences of religion. There was a need to establish the foundations of
a framework within which all these different lifestyles could live together. At the time,
Medina had a population of about ten thousand people. There were around one
thousand five hundred Muslims, four thousand Jewish people, and four thousand five
hundred Arab polytheists. The shared values among these populations had to be
brought to the fore and the town of Medina had to become a shared living space on the
basis of these values. There was a great need for this in Medina; the wars that had
continued for hundreds of years 499 had weakened the social bonds. Society had to be
interconnected once again and this need was more obvious here than anywhere else.
Just as there were conflicts between different groups, there were also conflicts
within the groups themselves; there were quarrels between the Aws and Khazraj, and
among the Jewish tribes the Banu Qaynuqa, the Banu Nadr and the Banu Qurayza,
there were similar problems, and social life continued amidst all these insecurities.
This chaotic situation could give rise to unlikely alliances; for instance the tribe of
Aws and the Banu Nadr and the Banu Qurayza could come together against the Banu
Qaynuqa; the Khazraj could be in alliance with the Banu Qurayza against the Banu
Nadr and the Banu Qaynuqa.
This divided nature of allegiances could also be seen in the way that the town of
Medina was physically located, for each tribe had built walls in order to secure
themselves away from the other.
At that period, there were thirteen guarded city walls in Medina. All these problems
compounded the situation and there was no sense of safety in the town and commerce
had almost come to a standstill. This situation also alarmed the traders that came from
outside of town and they did not enter Medina unless they really had to. It can even be
said that the various segments in Medina were hoping for an external neutral power to
come and put them on the negotiating table. This expectation laid the groundwork for
our noble Prophet. When speaking of this matter, our mother Aisha would point to
similar events and say that the chaos that reigned in Medina before hijra had prepared
the ground for the coming of the Messenger of Allah.500 The Messenger of Allah
would read and handle the situation very well; and he would realize the goal of the
people of Medina by bringing them together on the basis of the least common
denominator.
First of all, he had the physical borders of the city of Medina determined; and the
area within those borders would then on be called the Haram. After that the first

--- Sayfa 426 ---
census was carried out in Medina and the city was being restructured. Not everyone
was happy with this restructuring, especially the polytheist Arabs who were very
apprehensive; they feared that the polytheists in Mecca who were after the Muhajirun
and the Ansar would come and harm them as well. There were already rumors that the
Meccans were preparing a military campaign against Medina to capture the Muslims
that they had let slip from their hands.
Our noble Prophet's attitude was directed towards lifting any worries there may be.
Just as in Mecca, he was trying to instate the state of affairs of "Your religion unto
you, and our religion unto us" and was showing how they could share Medina without
having to fight. According to this system, whatever their language, religion, race or
tribe, people were going to share in the same space as long as they respected the other
and thus an atmosphere of tolerance would naturally come about. Nobody was going
to have to change their religion, nor would any members of any religion be under
oppression. This included the freedom of expression of views, whatever one's belief
was, and everyone had the freedom for tabligh, for communicating that belief to
others. What was being offered to Medina was not sovereignty but a mutual sharing
on the basis of participation. Although only a short period of time had passed since his
arrival in Medina, the atmosphere of peace and safety provided by the Messenger of
Allah could already be felt, and the inhabitants of Medina in all their different
elements were united in their request to appoint the Messenger of Allah as the
authority to solve disputes that may arise.
The First Agreement between Aws and Khazraj
The first treaty in Medina was between the tribes of Aws and Khazraj. That is why the
people who had come to the meeting were putting their ideas forward, and promised
that they would keep the ruling that would be offered. For the first time in centuries,
A ws and Khazraj were being bound with an agreement and the century long dispute
between the two tribes that had now both become Ansar was coming to an end. They
came together at the house of Anas ibn Malik and they declared their agreement with a
written document. The non-Muslim Arabs were also included in this agreement made
between the Aws and Khazraj, and they were considered to have also signed the
document with Aws and Khazraj. Their status would thus be recognized even in the
battles that would occur later on, and those who had stayed true to this agreement
would be considered exempt from the ultimatum mentioned in Surah at-Tawbah.501
The written document contained the following:
"In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate ... This charter is a

--- Sayfa 427 ---
charter on the part of Muhammad who is Messenger, concerning the Muslims and
believers of the Quraysh and Y athrib, and other people who are bound to them, and
those who have come later to accept the same terms and those who act in unison in
matters of common defense. All these are a united people in the face of other people."
After this opening sentence, the Messenger of Allah first mentioned the Muhajirun
and then the tribes of the Banu Awf, the Banu Saida, the Banu Harith, the Banu
Jusham, the Banu Najjar, the Banu Amr, the Banu Nabit and the Banu Aws and when
their names were recorded, they accepted to contribute to pay blood money, and they
also accepted to pay the ransom of Muslim slaves according to the criteria of
praiseworthiness, justice and reasonableness accepted among Muslims. All tribes
would do their best to spread the good and virtuous in society, and to abolish what is
bad and ugly; thus an understanding would develop in society based on the values of
virtue and justice which does not hide faults and which moves in unison to deal out
punishment to the perpetrator of the crime. If despite all these precautions a
disagreement should take place, then the issue would be resolved by agreeing to the
judgment passed by Allah and His Messenger. 502
The Second Treaty with the Jewish People
After the agreement between the A ws and Khazraj was instated, it was time to seek a
similar agreement with the Jewish people who comprised an important 40% of the
population in Medina. The Messenger of Allah assembled with the leading men of the
Jewish tribes in the house ofBint Harith to that end. After long deliberations there was
agreement almost on all issues, and now it was time to set them in writing. The text
contained the following: "In the possible event of battle, the Jewish people would
contribute to the battle effort just like the Muslims. Each tribe; the Banu Awf, the
Banu Najjar, the Banu Salaba and their branches Jafna, the Banu Saida, the Banu
Jasham, the Banu Aws and the Banu Shutayba would be able to practice their religions
freely just like the Muslims."
This held true for the sub-tribes that were under each of these tribes, represented by
these bigger ones.
No Jewish tribe would enter a war on the side of the Muslims without the
permission of our noble Prophet. In the event of war, solidarity would be of the
essence and each community would see to their own war provisions. Neither side
would harm the other, and they would help the other side who might be under
oppression. The Quraysh or their allies would not be welcomed in any way.
Medina would be under joint protection, and working together would be the

--- Sayfa 428 ---
principle. The agreement also emphasized that everyone was responsible for the piece
of land that was allocated to them. Battles that may spring up because of religion were
exempt from these articles. According to the agreement, people who sought refuge
with the Jewish people would be treated according to the rules accorded of the Jewish
people, but this did not include giving protection to a person who killed or injured
someone, so basically, criminals would not be allowed to escape justice.
Again, according to this agreement, all the principles put down would be obeyed at
all times, and any action against them would be abstained from.
The Muslims would solve their problems according to the decrees of the Qur'an, the
Word of Allah, and the Jewish people would solve their issues according to the
decrees of the Torah, and neither side would intervene in the judgments of the other.
Should there be a disagreement despite all these provisions, this would be solved
according to the commandments of Allah and the arbitration of Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings be upon him.503
The text of the agreement reveals that at the time there were around eleven Jewish
tribes in Medina, and that they all signed the agreement with the Messenger of Allah.
The fact that he attained such a position in a town which consisted of only 15% of his
followers is a sign of our noble Prophet's brilliance. He assessed the situation very
well and rather than focusing on dominance, he emphasized sharing, thus forging a
common pact. His efforts are very important historically as well, for the text of this
agreement and the decrees that acted as a kind of constitution for the parties involved,
were a development that had not yet been witnessed in history.
Bringing Back Members of the Family
Potential problems that Muslims may have to face in the new city of Medina had thus
been taken care of one by one, now it was time to send for the members of families
who had been left behind. As is known, while the honorable Muhajirun had gone on
the hijra, they had not taken their families with them, and they had not considered this
a problem. All they had cared about was that they had been told to immigrate and they
had hastened to comply with this command. They did not care that they would be
leaving their homes back in Mecca, that their families may be left without food or
their affections, that their wives would be sad to see that their husbands were not
returning home in the evening ... All these eventualities and the like did not constitute
as an excuse for them, for their eyes were focused on nothing but faith, and when there
was a command, they would move mountains and comply with that command. This
was what being a Companion was all about.

--- Sayfa 429 ---
But now they were in Medina and they performed their Prayers comfortably. The
Masjid an-Nabawi had been built, there were now bonds of brotherhood between the
Muhajirun and the Ansar, and the problem of accommodation had largely been solved.
There was good cohesion between the migrant and the local population, and potential
problems had already been averted. It was time that their families whom they had left
in Mecca should also enjoy this atmosphere of peace; it was best that they be brought
here and live safe from the evils of the polytheists.
This atmosphere of safety that they lived in Medina paved the way for their effort to
bring those who had been left in Mecca, and slowly, families were being reunited in
Medina. Our noble Prophet and his faithful Companion of the road, Abu Bakr were of
those who had left their families in Mecca. The daughters Khadija had entrusted the
Messenger of Allah with504 Umm Kulthum and Fatima, and our mother Sawda; Zayd
ibn Haritha's wife Umm Ayman and son Usama, and daughters Aisha and Asma and
the son Abdullah from the family of Abu Bakr were among those who had been left in
Mecca. The Messenger of Allah commissioned Abu Rafi and Zayd ibn Haritha to
bring the family members that were left behind to Medina, giving them two camels
and five hundred dirhams.
The Boy That Came from Quba
Zubayr ibn Awwam had married Abu Bakr's daughter Asma, and she was pregnant
with Abdullah. When the order for hijra came, she had set off on the journey even
though the birth was quite close. She had covered around five hundred kilometers and
come to Quba. Although they were a stone's throw away from Medina, her labor pains
increased and they had to give a break there and then. Before long, Asma gave birth to
a boy. This was a great excitement because it was the first child to be born since the
Muhajirun's arrival to Medina. This was also great news for our noble Prophet as well
because this boy signified that they had arrived in Medina safe and sound, and also the
coming to the world of the son of Zubayr.
Without losing time, they brought the boy to the presence of the Messenger of
Allah. Another full moon had risen on his blessed face. He took the baby in his arms
and named him Abdullah. He was now to be known as Abdullah ibn Zubayr. He then
asked those near him to bring him a piece of date. His request was answered. He took
the date and after chewing it a little, he gave the sap to baby Abdullah. The first
nourishment that Abdullah ibn Zubayr had received was thus the sap of the date that
the Messenger of Allah had chewed with his blessed mouth, and then he prayed for
him for blessings and a good fortune. 505

--- Sayfa 430 ---
Marriage with our Mother Aisha
Our noble Prophet had been living alone for a while after the death of our mother
Khadija. Before hijra to Medina, he had married our mother Sawda through the
recommendation of Uthman ibn Maz'un's wife Hawla and also had been engaged to
Aisha in the meantime. It had been Hawla who had organized this engagement as
well.so6
Meanwhile, the Cause of Pride for Humanity, peace and blessings be upon him, had
dreamt of Aisha twice, dressed in silk and presented as his wife. They had been
engaged now for three years. Our mother Aisha came to Medina with her brother and
continued to live with her father Abu Bakr.
Abu Bakr sent Abdullah ibn Urayqit as road guide with Zayd ibn Haritha and Abu
Rafi whom the Messenger of Allah had sent to Mecca to bring our noble Prophet's
daughters, our mother Sawda along with Umm Ayman and Usama; he had given him
two or three camels and told him to give them to his son Abdullah. Abu Bakr was also
sending a letter with the guides. The letter said to his son Abdullah that he should take
his mother and sisters Aisha and Zubayr' s wife Asma with him to Medina.
Before long all requests had been carried out and the members of these three
families that had been left behind were on the road of hijra. When they came to Mina
they met Talha ibn Ubaydullah who, too, was on the hijra and then they set off
together.
When the camel that our mother Aisha rode became distempered and was left a
little behind, her mother Umm Ruman was greatly distressed and she called out in
anxiety for her daughter. She was speaking of her love for her and telling of her grief
that she should be so lost at a time when as a mother she was hoping to see her
married. But the people after her caught up with her and put her back on the road to
Medina. When they came to Medina they naturally settled in Abu Bakr's home. The
Truthful Gabriel had come again, and inferring Aisha, he said: "Marry her, for she is
meant for you."
Before long Abu Bakr came to his presence: "0 Messenger of Allah! Is there
something that prevents you from being under the same roof as your family?"
"Sadiq, my Loyal Friend!" said the Messenger of Allah. He was thinking of the
financial security that the women had to have in such an important thing as marriage.
But this was not important for Abu Bakr! How could a value such as the Messenger of
Allah be compared to any worldly security? For this reason Abu Bakr would offer his
own means and help the Messenger of Allah build a house of one room.

--- Sayfa 431 ---
Then, a small room was built for our mother Aisha right by the Masjid an-Nabawi.
This also meant that the guest-stay in Abu Ayyub's house for seven months was
coming to an end. A similar room was built for our mother Sawda, and before long,
she would concede the time our noble Prophet would spend with her, to Aisha.
Eight months had passed since hijra. It was the month of Shawwal. In those times
people believed that marriages that took place between two religious festivals would
not have good fortune and so they did not approve of such unions.
Now, in the house of the Messenger of Allah there was another soul who would
observe our noble Prophet in times when his Companions were not with him, a soul
with a very sharp intellect. Thus, Allah the Almighty would have His Beloved, peace
and blessings be upon him, followed by a different pairs of eyes so that he may be a
guide to his Ummah in the affairs of the private realm ofthe family was well.
The Medina Plague
The Muhajirun who had come from Mecca were having a difficult time adjusting to
the climate in Medina; and now a disease had appeared and some of the Muhajirun
were seriously ill. The illness even forced them to perform their Prayers sitting,
Prayers that they had never abandoned even in the face of fierce pressure from the
Meccan polytheists.507 Seeing them thus, the Messenger of Allah said: "Know this
well, those who pray sitting will get only half the reward of someone praying
standing," thus encouraging them to pray while standing. 508
Among the sick were Abu Bakr, Bilal and Amir ibn Fuhayra. The three shared the
same space, and they spent this time of illness together. The verses concerning the
head covering of women had not yet been revealed, so our mother Aisha would
regularly come to visit her father and ask: "0 father! How are you?"
The state they were in spoke for itself, for they were writhing in malarial fevers and
speaking deliriously about their longing for Mecca. When she paid closer attention,
she heard her father Abu Bakr say: "To those who sleep in their homes with their
families, death is closer than their shoe strings."
She had asked her father how he felt, and yet he had not recognized her, not heard
what she had said. She said to herself: "I swear my father does not know what he
speaks of," and then turned to Amir ibn Fuhayra and asked him the same question:
"How do you feel, 0 Amir!"
He wasn't quite himself either. He was speaking of gardens and orchards, saying
that he had been introduced to death without having had ample time to look at the

--- Sayfa 432 ---
world with different eyes.
"I swear Amir does not know what he is speaking of either," she said.
Aisha, who had not been able to get an answer either from her father or his servant,
now tried his chances with Bilal.
But Bilallooked even worse; he was lying on the floor with the fever, trying to lift
up his head and mumbling the following: 'Woe is me! Will I ever be able to walk
along such and such valley, surrounded by the grass of Izhir and Jelil? Will I be able
to drink from the Mijanna water springs, and see the mountains of Shama and Tafil?"
It was a sad sight indeed; they were all filled with the longing of their homeland, the
memories of its mountains and stones... The air of its highlands, the scent of its
flowers, the freshness of its springs, and even the plainness of its grass... The illness
had intensified their longing for all these things that they had left behind. Our mother
Aisha, who saw them in this state, let the Messenger of Allah know of their situation.
This was the way to solve all problems. She was saying: "They seem to have lost their
reason because of high fever and they do not know what they speak."
The Messenger of Allah was very saddened to hear this. He lifted his hands up to
the skies and said, concerning those who had caused the Muhajirun to be in this state:
"Dear Lord! I leave unto you Utba ibn Rabia, Shayba ibn Rabia and Umayya ibn
Khalaf. They forced us to leave our land and come to this place of plague, You take
care ofthem," he supplicated to his Lord.
This was only one aspect of the matter. Then he turned round and started to plea for
his Ummah. He was saying: "Dear Lord! Let Medina be dear to us, as dear as you
have made Mecca to our hearts! Let this place be a place of health and let there be
bounty to its measurements and weights! Then take this illness from us and hurl it
somewhere in the direction ofJuhfa!"509
When the most beloved servant of Allah asked for something, of course Allah the
Almighty granted it! That night, when the Messenger of Allah laid down on his bed,
he had a dream. There was a black woman with disheveled hair, and she had left
Medina and was going towards Juhfa, a place which is also named Mahay. This was a
clear sign that this disease was going to leave Medina and would appear in Juhfa.
From that day on the Muhajirun were free of the intense fever and they had no more
problems concerning staying in Medina. 510
But not everyone had strong wills such as Abu Bakr and Bilal. Arabi, who had
contracted a similar disease, came to the Messenger and said: "0 Muhammad! Annul
my allegiance!"

--- Sayfa 433 ---
The fierceness in his address already showed where this was leading. What he was
asking for was not something anyone in their right minds would say "yes" to. Our
noble Prophet said to the man who was going to a dead end on his own volition: "No,
I can't do that."
Someone who cut his ties with the Messenger of Allah in this world would not be
able to have salvation in the next. He did not want to lose a single soul from his
Ummah. But the man was insisting. He tried a second and a third time. When he saw
that he was not going to get the answer he wanted from the Messenger of Allah he left
Medina without taking his leave. When he heard of this, the Messenger of Allah said:
"Just as fire cleanses the dirt and rust from silver, so does Medina cleanse itself."lli
Abdullah ibn Salam's Enthusiasm for Tabligh
Abdullah ibn Salam had become Muslim but his tribe did not yet know it. When he
returned to his family he had asked them to become Muslim and they had accepted.
But he wanted to reach out to greater numbers of people. He wanted to inform the
people of his hometown according to their general character. He came to the presence
of the Prophet with a plan that he had devised: "0 Messenger of Allah! The Children
oflsrael, my tribe, are a stubborn and fickle people. They do not yet know what I have
become. I want you to hide me aside when they come to you, and let them ask you
questions about me and my ancestors! No doubt they will praise my ancestors as well!
Right then I will appear and tell them that I have chosen Islam. You will see that they
will censure me and my ancestor in the worst language possible; they will list many
slanders, and find a thousand faults with me."
According to Abdullah ibn Salam's plan, first our noble Prophet would have them
promise that should Abdullah submit to Islam, they would too, and then have them
acknowledge the Qur'anic content that is found written in the Torah. Here was a
sound strategy and the Messenger of Allah accepted Abdullah's offer. Abdullah's plan
was carried out to the letter. The men of his tribe came. After the usual pleasantries the
Messenger of Allah brought the subject to Abdullah and his ancestors.
"How do you rate Husayn ibn Salam among you?" he asked.
What doubt could they have? They had considered not only Husayn but his whole
family as leaders for years and they had always sought their opinions as authorities:
"He is both our master and the son of our master ... He is the best among us, the most
learned. He is at the forefront when it comes to both virtue and knowing the Book of
Allah."

--- Sayfa 434 ---
After they had so confirmed his good character, our noble Prophet asked: "If
Abdullah bears witness that I am the Messenger of Allah, and believes in the book that
has been revealed to me, will you submit to the faith, too?"
This offer was somewhat disconcerting but there was no way for this to happen. A
Jewish scholar such as Husayn would never do that, should never do that! They
naturally wondered what lay behind such a question. But this was a meeting in which
they had to hold their own and they had to show no signs of doubt: "Yes," they
answered, but trepidation could be seen on their faces. They had come with such
different intentions, and now look what they were being subjected to.
Then the Messenger of Allah called Abdullah, and he came out from where he was
hiding and came to his presence. The eyes that saw him were dressed in hatred and
their faces became pale. How could this be! How could someone like Husayn rebel
against the authority of his tribe, go and pray behind someone else and accept him as
Prophet? They did not want to believe what they saw. This had to be either a joke or a
bad dream one needed to wake up from. But it unfortunately for them, it was all true
and the Messenger of Allah asked Abdullah: "0 Abdullah, the son of Salam! Do you
believe that I am the Messenger of Allah, whom you find written in the Torah and the
Gospel, and whom you have given your word to believe, whom you have been
commanded to obey when my message reaches you?"
There was an aggressive silence. Abdullah answered the question ofthe Messenger
of Allah with: "Verily, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
This was impossible! They were pushed to the comer completely! They had to find
a way out, and they decided to go beyond the pitch. They said altogether: 'We do not
know or recognize you as the Messenger of Allah."
The truth was, they knew he was the Messenger of Allah even more firmly than
they knew their own sons, and they knew for certain that what had been revealed to
him was true. Were these not the same men who had said that, had Husayn believed
they would believe as well? There was no more to be said; what they had just put on
was a show of hypocrisy and shiftiness.
It was now Abdullah ibn Salam's tum to be berated by them: "You are the vilest
among us, the son of the vilest!" and they tried to outdo each other in slandering him.
But one could not plaster the sun with mud! Those who close their eyes to the rays of
the sun would only make it night for themselves ... They knew this, too.
What had passed that day was being watched by the Lord of the worlds and He sent
down the following verses:

--- Sayfa 435 ---
Say: "Do you ever consider that if this Qur'an is from Allah, and you
disbelieve in it while (many) a witness from among the Children of Israel
(those who had knowledge of Revelation) had already testified to the like
of it and (also) believed, whereas you are too arrogant to believe: (is this
not plain deviation and wrong)? Surely Allah does not guide the
wrongdoing people." ( al-Ahkaf 46: 1 0)
The person from the Children of Israel who believed was Abdullah ibn Salam and
those who had chosen denial even though they had seen the truth were the shifty elite.
Abdullah ibn Salam had foreseen all these and it had happened just as he had
expected. With the satisfaction of having revealed a truth, he turned to the leading men
ofthe Jewish community and addressed them thus: "0 you Jewish people! Fear Allah
and accept what has been brought to you. I swear by Allah that you know very well
that this is the awaited and heralded Messenger that you keep reading about in the
Torah, whose name you know very well. I bear witness and affirm that he is the
Prophet of Allah."
Now the faces had changed. The easiest way out was denial and again, that is what
they chose: "You are lying," they said.
It was now clear that the Jews would not see reason and so Abdullah turned towards
the Great Messenger and said: "There, 0 Messenger of Allah. It is as you can see. I
told you that they were liars and hypocrites, men full of slander."
Then Gabriel came and brought another message:
Those to whom We gave the Book (before) know him (the Messenger
with all his distinguishing attributes including the direction he will turn to
in the Prayer) as they know their own sons. Yet a party among them
conceal the truth and they do it knowingly. (al-Baqarah 2: 146)
The verse does not speak ofthe name of the Messenger of Allah but says "he"; the
People of the Book as a whole understood the Personage spoken of in the Torah and
the Gospel when one said "he," and that was Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings
be upon him, and they knew him better than their own sons.
Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, would one day ask Abdullah ibn Salam:
"Did you recognize the Messenger of Allah as you would have your own son?"
Abdullah answered without hesitation: "I recognized him better than I would my
own son."
How could this be? How could someone speak so sure of himself? But then
Abdullah was representing the truth and he would not hesitate to speak it anywhere.

--- Sayfa 436 ---
Umar, on the other hand, wanted to verify Abdullah's self-assuredness and asked
again: "How do you mean?''
And the answer came again like iron marbles: "I may doubt my son because maybe
my wife may have deceived me. But I do not have the slightest doubt that the
Messenger of Allah is the last Prophet."
This answer made Umar so happy that he got up and kissed Abdullah ibn Salam on
the forehead. 512
Religious Bigotry
Abdullah ibn Salam was continuously harassed by his tribe. They were plotting plans
to change his mind under the influence of other Jewish scholars. Especially leading
men like, Huyay ibn Akhtab, Qab ibn Asad, Abu Rafi, Ashya and Shamwil ibn Zayd
were trying very hard to get the better of Abdullah ibn Salam. They wanted him to
cover up the truth that was clear as daylight, and they were saying that they would not
be responsible for what would ensue if he did not comply with their requests, trying to
make him recant his belief. They were harassing him again one day, and when Husayn
reminded them what they already knew, they said: "It is impossible that the Messenger
should be an Arab. Your friend can at most be the chief among them."
As such, they were in a way conceding that the Messenger was the awaited Prophet;
but they could not get over their strong tribal prejudices, they could not accept that he
may have appeared somewhere out of their jurisdiction.
Long discussions had not yielded a result and everyone was quite inflamed. They
were now in a mood of "come what may" and started on a strategy through which they
would address the Messenger of Allah and show Abdullah that they were right.
Abdullah had no hesitations. They came to the presence ofthe Messenger of Allah at
once.
They first asked him about Dhu al-Qamayn. They were sure that he would not
know of him. Thus they were hoping to prove to the likes of Abdullah that they were
right. Our noble Prophet told the story ofDhu al-Qamayn the way it had been revealed
to him, just as he had told about it to the Quraysh! For when Nadr ibn Harith and
Uqba ibn Abi had come to ask help from them, they had helped the Quraysh by
suggesting questions to them which may put the Messenger of Allah in a difficult
situation and to make him give up his cause.
They had got the same answer they were after and there was nothing they could say
next. But they did not intend to tum their backs and go either. They acted with the

--- Sayfa 437 ---
notion "no one else has a right to a place where I myself am not present" and then they
asked the following rather appalling question: "0 Muhammad! This is Allah, He
created all creation. Then who created Allah?"
These men who professed to believe in Allah and to worship him could find it in
themselves to ask such a question. What need Allah had to be created?! How could a
created being be God? Did they know nothing of His power? It was as ifthey had no
idea about what had passed between the Prophets and their Ummah, including Moses
and his Ummah! It was clear that they did not read the Torah either!
The Messenger of Allah was very sad and hurt by this blatant ignorance. The color
of his face changed and he found it difficult to stay standing up. How could they
slander the Lord so? And these were people who knew Him well! What did they think
the Lord of the worlds was that they were trying to impose limits on Him through their
own limited intellect, and with the sole aim that they might put their interlocutor in a
difficult position?
Gabriel came to his aid in order to calm him down, he said: "With peace and calm,
0 Muhammad," showing him the way, and what they had asked about was answered
in Surah al-Ikhlas: "Say: "He, Allah, the Unique One of Absolute Unity" (al-Ikhlas
112:1).
But the people who had come to him were not submitting themselves. The believers
would see such shifty positions on the part of the deniers in this struggle between
belief and denial which had already been going on for centuries. Our noble Prophet's
stance had to present an example to those who would come later. He was saying:
"Before long people will be questioning among themselves and will take it to such a
degree to ask 'Ok, so Allah created existence, but then who created Allah?"'
For those who would be faced with this question the Messenger of Allah advised
reciting the Surah al-Ikhlas, just as Gabriel had given him peace by this chapter on that
day. Such questioning was the way of the Devil and this was a great opportunity to
show a strong stance by way of seeking refuge in Allah from the Devil.
the Banu Qaynuqa now knew no bounds and they continued in their arrogance:
"Tell us then Muhammad, how is it with Him? How are His hands, his biceps?"
There was complete silence. It was clear that they had closed their ears to what was
being said to them and they had no intention of taking anything our noble Prophet said
to heart. What were they talking about? Did they consider Allah to be a being just like
their next-door neighbor, or were they saying all these just to anger the Messenger of
Allah? The Prophet of Mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, could no longer

--- Sayfa 438 ---
contain himself. .. His veins were throbbing with anger, his feelings were written on
his face. Slandering Allah was the one thing his heart could not bear. Gabriel was by
his side again. He repeated the same advice. Then he brought the following verses:
They have no true judgment of Allah as His right, such as His being Allah
requires, and (such is His Power and Sovereignty that) the whole earth
will be in His Grasp on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be
rolled up in His Right Hand. All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted
above what they associate with Him. (az-Zumar 39:67)
This was not the first time that a tribe was reacting to any kind of novelty that was
introduced to them, nor would it be the last. Time and again Abdullah ibn Salam
would come to the presence of the Messenger of Allah after similar arguments and he
would hope to convince his addressees with the answers he got from the Messenger of
Allah. The community he was addressing knew very well that only a Prophet could
know the answers to these questions.
Once again, he was in the presence of the Prophet with such a group. He was going
to ask a question to him again and thereby convince his audience. He held down his
head and addressed our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him: "I will ask
you three questions and only a Prophet could know the answers."
This was going to be a real questioning and the Messenger of Allah was ready to
answer:
'What is the first sign of the Judgment Day? What is the first food that the residents
of Paradise will eat? In what ways does the child resemble the mother and father?"
Then Gabriel came and whispered the answers of the questions that Abdullah was
asking in the ear of the Messenger of Allah. He started his words by saying: "Gabriel
has just told me the answers to these questions."
The people in his presence were surprised. "Gabriel?" they asked themselves, and
wanted to test the truth of what they had heard. The answer was the same: ''Yes,
Gabriel."
This was a joke! How could it be that Gabriel could bring revelation to someone not
of their race? They felt great animosity towards Gabriel by nature. When they heard
his name, they would say: "He is the enemy of Jews among the angels."
Feeling enmity towards Gabriel was tantamount to feeling enmity towards Allah
and His Messenger. The Messenger of Allah would answer with the following verses:
Say (0 Messenger, to them): "(The Lord of the worlds, my and your
Lord, declares:) Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel (should know that) it is

--- Sayfa 439 ---
he who brings down the Qur'an on your heart by the leave of Allah, (not
of his own accord), confirming (the Divine origin of and the truths still
contained in) the Revelations prior to it, and (serving as) guidance and
glad tidings for the believers." (al-Baqarah 2:97)
And then the Messenger of Allah started to answer the questions asked: "The first
sign of the Judgment Day is a great fire, a fire that consumes all men in the east and
the west. When it comes to what the residents of Paradise will first eat, it is the left
over of fish-liver. If the sap of the man overcomes that of the woman, then the child
will be a boy, if the sap of the woman comes forefront, then it will be a girl." They had
received the answers they were looking for. It was impossible to think the opposite. In
order to set an example, Abdullah ibn Salam spoke the shahadah, the words declaring
the oneness of Allah: "I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and you are His
Messenger. "513
But it was impossible to expect such finesse of the souls of those present, and so
they went home the way they came.
But not all Jewish people were as stubborn as these ones, for there were those
virtuous souls who were after the truth just like Abdullah ibn Salam and those who
knew how to receive it when they chanced upon it. They came to the presence of the
Messenger of Allah and keeping their covenant with Moses, accepted Islam. They
were men with good standing in their community such as Sa'laba ibn Sa'ya, Usayd
ibn Sa'ya and Asad ibn Ubayd. But even their conversion would be found fault with
and most would stay indifferent to them. They were saying: "Those who believe in
Muhammad and follow him were the worst among us. Had they been faithful
members they would not have left the religion of their ancestors and gone after
another."
They thought that by burying their heads in the sand they would be secure. But
there was a real world out there and they were deceiving themselves by staying
indifferent to it.
Those who expressed sincere loyalty to Allah and kept their ranks right behind His
Messenger and those who acted hypocritically could not be equal. The former were
competing with each other to do good and the latter were trying to cover up the truth,
and with this responsibility, they would face the other world. A verse would reveal
their status in the following way: "Yet, they are not all alike: among the People of the
Book, there is an upright community, reciting God's Revelations in the watches of the
night and prostrating (themselves in worship)" (Al Imran 3: 113).

--- Sayfa 440 ---
Addressing the People of the Book
Although the majority of the population in Medina was Jewish, there were also
Christians in the town. When the Muslims came together with either community, the
subject would inevitably tum to religious issues and there would be mutual
interchange of ideas. The relations with members of other religions were arranged and
organized by Divine guidance. Allah the Almighty spoke of how Muslims, of course
His Beloved in the first place, should address members of other religions: 514
0 People of the Book (Jews and Christians)! Why do you dispute
concerning Abraham (whether he was a Jew or a Christian), when both
the Torah and the Gospel were not sent down save after him? Will you
ever not use your reason? (Al Imran 3 :65)
One day the Jewish and Christian scholars of Najran had come to visit the
Messenger of Allah. When the subject discussed came to the requests and commands
of Allah, the Messenger of Allah spoke to them about Islam and invited them to the
Truth: "Do you mean, 0 Muhammad, that we should worship you like the Christians
worship Jesus?"
This was their reaction. It was a strange perception indeed for they had just been
invited to worship Allah who is one, and yet they were changing the course of the
conversation, trying to play with words. They had changed their understanding of
religion through time and they had started to worship leading men among themselves
as Lords.m
Just then, a Christian scholar whom they called "chief' came to the fore and made it
clear that they did not think any differently from the previous one: "Do you have such
a request when you invite us to Him?"
"Allah forbid!" started the Messenger of Allah and then added: "I seek refuge in
Allah from worshipping or calling others to worship any other power than Him. That
is not what He the Almighty sent me for, that is not what I have been commanded
with."
It was difficult to understand; how could it be that these men, who claimed to be
men of Allah, should say these things to someone who invited them in the Name of
Allah? The Truthful Gabriel came again and he would give them the best answer
possible:
It is not (conceivable) that Allah should give a human being the Book,
authority with sound, wise judgment, and Prophethood, and then he
should say to people: "Be servants to me, apart from Allah." Rather (he

--- Sayfa 441 ---
would say): "Be pure, dedicated servants of the Lord in that you teach the
Book and in that you study it." (Al Imran 3 :79)
How could a Prophet or a friend of Truth invite people to denial after having found
such a precious ground as Islam? In order to clear the air a little, Adiyy ibn Khatam
turned to our noble Prophet and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! They do not worship at
all," and the Messenger of Allah replied: "Of course they do not worship! But they
consider halal as haram, and haram as halal, they tell people their own desires; and
people accept what they say and follow then. For them, this constitutes worship."516

--- Sayfa 442 ---
446 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1421 (3694); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/236
447 Our noble Prophet strongly wished that the city be called Medina rather than Yathrib, for the latter
word meant something along the lines of punishment and judgment for sins and iniquity. For that
reason our noble Prophet said: "Whoever calls Medina Yathrib should repent, because it is clean,
it is clean, it is clean." See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 4/285; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 3/296.
448 Abu Dawud, Sunan, 2/699 (4923)
449 See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/197. Some reports say that these songs were sung as
they entered Medina after the campaign of Tabuk. See Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 4/38.
450 See Muhibbut-Tabari, Ar-Riyadu 'n-Nadira, 1/480. Some scholars say that these songs were sung
not on the first occasion on our noble Prophet's entry to Medina but on return from the campaign
of Tabuk. When taken together these reports could mean that these verses were sung on both
occasions. See Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 311 0; Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku 'l-Makhtum, 162.
451 Ibn Majah, Sunan, 1/612 (1899)
452 Reports say that the Messenger of Allah repeated this statement seven times.
453 Ibn Majah, Sunan, 1/612 (1899)
454 The place where the camel had sat belonged to two orphaned brothers called Sahl and Suhayl and
was being used as a sheep shed.
455 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3122
456 As'adu'l-Khimyari was a powerful king. First he had come to Medina with his army to lay siege
to it. He had then taken the two Jewish young men who had confronted him with the statement
"You cannot lay siege to this city because this is where the awaited Messenger will immigrate to"
with him and returned to his homeland. He had now become a person of faith. Later, he would
come to Mecca and be the first person to have a cloth made for the Ka'ba, thus starting this
tradition. This king then came to Medina and found four hundred men of religion waiting for him.
When he asked the reason for it they said, "The honor of this land is due to a Messenger that will
appear by the name of Muhammad; this is where he will immigrate to." Later this King would
stay in Medina and he would build a house here for the Last Messenger to come and stay there
when he immigrated. This king had thus declared his allegiance to our noble Prophet without
having seen him, and the Messenger of Allah would say of him, "Do not say negative things about
Tubba, for he was a Muslim. It was also him, As'adu'l-Khimyari, who had clothed the Ka'ba with
its first dress," (Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 4/340; al-Hindi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal, 12/80, 81) thus
pointing to the man's virtue and would even go so far as to say, "I do not know whether he was a
Messenger too or not." (al-Hindi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal, 12/81).
457 When As'adu'l-Khimyari came to Medina, there were about four hundred religious scholars there
already and they were waiting for the Last Messenger whom they knew would be coming. They
were saying: "We see in our books that the last Messenger Muhammad that Allah will send will
migrate here, and we are waiting here to welcome him." When he saw their sincerity, Khimyari
had a house made for each of them and also saw to their needs, trying to be of service to hearts
that were in waiting for the noble Prophet. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 3127 4.
458 Halabi, Sirah, 2/278, 279
459 IbnKathir, Tafsir, 4/183
460 Although the sources are a bit questionable, there are also reports that Abu Ayyub al-Ansari had
given this poem in written form to the Messenger of Allah (See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 3/274); or that this poem was brought to our noble Prophet by a Messenger called Abu
Laila when people heard his coming.
When the Messenger of Allah met Abu Laila he said: "Are you Abu Laila who brings the letter of
the King of Tubba?"
To which he would say: "And who are you?" The noble Prophet replied: "I am Muhammad. Bring

--- Sayfa 443 ---
me that letter!" and then he would read it. On it was written: "To the Messenger of the Lord of the
worlds, the last in line of Prophets, Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, from the Khimyari of
Tubba."
The fact that the King spoke of his respect for the Messenger of Allah in the opening words, that he
had written the name of the Messenger of Allah even before he had written it himself is striking.
The letter contained the following words: "0 Muhammad! I have submitted in faith to you, to
your Lord, Who is the Lord of everything, and all that you have brought from your Lord. I have
done so and so that when I reach you with this missive you may vouch for me on the Day of
Judgment, so that you may not forget me. Know that I am of the pioneers who believed in you
even before you came, even before Allah sent you. I am on your religion, and the religion of
Ibrahim."
When he read the letter, the Messenger of Allah said three times, emphasizing the fact that all things
in their beginning and in their end belong to Allah: "Greetings to you as well, 0 my true brother
in the land ofTubba!" See Halabi, Sirah, 2/278,279.
461 There are different reports about the origins of the people of Medina. A group of Israelites who
had come for pilgrimage wanted to stay here because they knew about the characteristics of the
coming Last Messenger. There was a tyrannous king where they used to live at the time, named
Nebuchadnezzar and they did not feel safe there. They had searched for a place to live from
Damascus to Yemen and they had found Medina to be the place closest to what was described in
the Torah. The first place they had come to was the marketplace of the Banu Qaynuqa. Later,
Arab groups joined them and they formed Medina. (Another report says that the Amalekites were
here before them). The tribes of Aws and Khazraj had come to Medina from the direction of
Yemen in order to escape the troubles they had had here. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad,
3/271.
462 Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 3/275
463 Muslim, Sahih, 3/1623 (2053)
464 Muslim, Sahih, 3/1623 (2053); Alnnad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 5/420 (23616)
465 The said dish contained a lot of onions and garlic and our noble Prophet thought the smell would
be unseemly for a meeting with Gabriel, the angel of revelation, and therefore had not eaten it.
See Muslim, Sahih, 3/1623 (2053); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/27, 28.
466 Alnnad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 3/111 (12110)
467 Later, on the day of Uhud, Hamza would declare his brother in Hijra the recipient of his will. See
Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/226.
468 In some sources Zubayr ibn Awwam' s brother is recorded as Abdullah ibn Mas 'ud.
469 At the time Jafar ibn Abi Talib was still in Abyssinia.
470 When they were setting down his birth records in the registry that Umar set up Bilal said "I will
not be separate from the brother that the Messenger of Allah declared, and he joined his name
with that of Abu Ruwayha who was his brother in hijra and from then on the Habashis' name
would always be mentioned alongside the sons of Hasam. His grave is in Damascus, in the
neighborhood ofHasam. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3/234.
471 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/238
472 Alnnad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 31190, 271; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31126
473 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1378 (3569-3571); Muslim, Sahih, 211042 (1428); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31126
474 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1378 (3571)
475 Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 21199 ( 4833); Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmuatu 'I-F atawa, 141157
476 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 389
477 This was the place where believers used to gather together to pray before our noble Prophet and
the Muhajirun came to Medina. As'ad ibn Zurara used to lead them in prayer. See Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 1/239, 240.

--- Sayfa 444 ---
478 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 3/211 (13231); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/239
479 Tayalisi, Al-Musnad, 1/277 (2085); Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 1/240
480 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1421 (3694); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/239,240
481 Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku '1-Makhtum, p. 17 4
482 See Muslim, Sahih, 4/2236 (2916); Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 21162 (2652); Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat,
1/239, 240. Ammar would be martyred 37 years from that day, on the day of Siffin, as he fought
on the side of Ali. When he was martyred, Ammar became a symbol for fighting for the righteous
side and even in his death he served the unity of Islam.
483 One zira is the unit of measure for the length between one's elbow to one's fingertips; and is
generally around 62 centimeters. According to this measurement, each side of the Masjid an-
Nabawi is 62 meters, and the area that covers the whole of the masjid, so the space was around
3.900 square meters. (The measurements here are taken from Zira al-Hashimi).
484 Bukhari, Sahih, 11137 (343); Muslim, Sahih, 1/478 (685)
485 Darimi, Sunan, 1/29
486 With the passage of time when the Masjid an-Nabawi needed to be demolished to be
reconstructed Ubayy ibn Qab took this stump to his own home as an important souvenir belonging
to our noble Prophet. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/252, 253.
487 Abu Dawud, Sunan, 1/189 (499); Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 4/573 (1679); Bayhaqi, Sunanu '1-Kubra,
1/390 (1704); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/40-42
488 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1/255, 256; 2/363; 8/25
489 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/363
490 Ibid.
491 Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami '1-Qur 'an, 16/168
492 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzuli, pp. 384-385
493 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 4/138; Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 4/214; Haysami, Majmau 'z-
Zawaid, 5/98
494 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/39
495 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 5/441 (23788); Ibnu'l-Athir, Usdu '1-Ghaba, 2/512
496 The Jews in Medina could not be said to be of the local population. They were Semitic people and
they had fled Roman oppression and had sought refuge in Medina, rather than spreading out and
getting lost altogether. There were three tribes
the Banu Qaynuqa, the Banu Nadr and the Banu Qurayza and these had certain subgroups. With time
they had started to intermarry with Arabs and they started to speak Arabic, giving their children
Arabic names. But when it came to genealogy, they would always boast of their ancestry, seeing
themselves as superior to all other groups. They considered all others to be obliged to serve them
and they tried to be powerful where they lived by holding the ropes of economic activity. They
were also well-versed in magic, fortune-telling and breathing cures, methods others would have
no knowledge of. See Mubarakfuri, Ar-Rahiku '1-Makhtum, p. 171.
497 Al-Baqarah 2:245
498 Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, p. 394
499 It is known that the Buath Battles that rage between Aws and Khazraj continued for a hundred and
twenty years. These two tribes had a common ancestry in the Banu Qayla and were thus in fact
related.
500 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1377 (3566)
501 "Excepting those among the people who associate partners with Allah with whom you made a
treaty, and who have not thereafter failed to fulfill their obligations towards you (required by the
treaty), nor have backed anyone against you. Observe, then, your treaty with them until the end oj
the term (that you agreed with them). Surely Allah loves the Allah-revering, pious (who keep their
duties to Him)" (at-Tawbah 9:4).

--- Sayfa 445 ---
502 See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/224; Hamidullah, Prophet of Islam, 1/206. For the full
Turkish text of this charter and the meaning it had in the context of the day's social structures see
Bulac;, Ali, "Medine Vesikas1," Yeni Omit, Year: 17, Number: 68, p. 47.
503 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/31-35; Hamidullah, Prophet of Islam, 1/206
504 Meanwhile our mother Ruqayyah was married to Uthman, and our mother Zaynab was married to
Abu'l-As. Our mother Umm Kulthum, on the other hand, had been married to Utba, the son of
Abu Lahab, but he had divorced her just to injure our noble Prophet and our mother Khadija, thus
destroying this family.
505 Ibn Hibban, Sikat, 3/212 (707)
506 The fact that Mut'im ibn Adiyy had asked for the hand of our mother Aisha for his son Jubayr,
and that Hawla pronounced her name with the suggestion of having her marry the Messenger of
Allah demonstrates this tradition among the Arabs.
507 It is probable that the incident of the great plague that happened in a previous Shawwal month
plays a role in this perception. In order to point to the baselessness of this reasoning, our mother
Aisha said: "Can there be a happier marriage than ours?" showing that their situation was
disproving this understanding. See Muslim, Sahih, 211039 (1423); Tirrnidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih,
3/401 (1093); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, 6/54 (24317).
508 Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/224
509 Bukhari, Sahih, 2/667 ( 1790)
510 Ibid., 5/2148 (5353)
ill Muslim, Sahih, 211006 (1382-1384)
512 Suyuti, Ad-Dhurru '/-Mansur, 1/357
513 Isfahani, Dalai/, 11152
514 It is said that this verse was revealed before the Hudaybiya, and that it was revealed once again
after the conquest of Mecca. See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 13/143.
515 In a verse this is expressed with "They considered their men of religion and scholars on a par
with Allah and accepted them as Lords!" (at-Tawba 9:31).
516 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 1/378

--- Sayfa 446 ---
BUILDING A NEW CIVILIZATION
N
ow Mecca was the mihrab 517 and Medina the minbar (pulpit), having at last
been united with its Perfect Orator, peace and blessings be upon him, a new
civilization was being built at the place where all roads had met since the
time of Prophet Adam, peace be upon him. Things had already accumulated in Mecca,
and had come to Medina altogether. Now, upon this foundation, each day new verses
were being revealed, and with the addresses and speeches of the noble Prophet the
people were learning new things every day. They had reached a very good state of
faith, and now people were waiting to learn the ways in which one could be a better
servant to Allah, built upon this basis.
Social relations were being revised from the beginning and an Islamic method was
being imposed on the ties that bound people. One day, a Companion would approach
the Beloved of Allah, and ask: 'What deed is better in Islam?" and the response he
received was: "That you should offer food to people and to greet everyone you know
or do not know. "518
This civilization was going to be built on giving without expecting anything in
return, on making people feel safe.
But none of this was the ultimate goal, for the ultimate goal was to act according to
a real Muslim model that would make Allah pleased, to reach for that horizon of
Allah's contentment. This would be a move that would get rid of any traces that may
have been left from the period of ignorance. This goal was reiterated by the Prophet of
Mercy as: "If one's neighbor is not assured that one does not mean him harm; then
that person cannot enter Paradise."519
Of course Paradise itself was not the goal; the road that would take one to Paradise
was the one that would win one Allah's contentment. So the person who aimed at
attaining that contentment could not stay indifferent to neighborly ties. He had to treat
them like their extended family and see to their needs. According to him a believer
who could eat while his neighbor was writhing in hunger was lacking faith. 520

--- Sayfa 447 ---
"A Muslim is a person whose hands and tongue people can trust,"521 said the
Messenger of Allah.
Wasn't it he the one who was called Trustworthy even by his enemies, and trusted
by them completely?
He instilled so much trust within people that even those who meant to kill him felt a
pang in their conscience and felt they needed to intervene when they saw people
slander him. This feeling of trust could domesticate cobras, could tum wolves into
keepers of sheep, and now this kind of behavior was what the Messenger of Allah was
asking from his Companions.
The dictum "As long as you do not wish for your brother what you wish for
yourself, your faith has not reached maturity"522 was his as well.
So in faith there was an ideal point of maturity and perfection for believers! One of
the shortest ways of reaching this point of perfection was to expect nothing for one's
deeds, and to stay behind during the distribution of gains. This was called tafani and
was a legacy of Abrahamic faith and heritage.
Another statement echoing from the same mihrab was saying that all believers were
like a single body, and that wherever in the world a fire should touch a Muslim, the
whole Muslim body would ache. So wherever in the world he may be, the troubles a
Muslim faces should be taken care of with all possible means, and fellow Muslims
should not stay indifferent to his or her suffering. There had to be a unity like the
bricks of a wall so that the Muslims could have a well-defended edifice! 523
These were steps taken for the sake of the welfare of the society. There was a flip
side to these measures as well, and that was that enmity had to be wiped out. The
community was not going to tum its back to anyone, and everyone's needs were going
to be taken care of; the successes of one's Muslim brother-224 was going to the cause of
joy and pride of another rather than envy, and thus people would become brothers in
the real sense of the word. Such strong brotherhood did not countenance severing ties
with your Muslim brother, whatever the reason may be, for more than three days and
sought to tum all vexation to understanding. Expressing this essence, the Messenger of
Allah was saying: "Do not be vexed with each other; stay away from envy and do not
tum your backs to each other! 0 servants of Allah! Be brothers. It is not permissible
for a Muslim not to speak to his Muslim brother for more than three days."525
Hence, a Muslim is brother of a Muslim; he neither wrongs him nor does hand him
over to one who does him wrong. Allah would help and see to the important needs of
Muslims so long as they help out their Muslim brothers and sisters.

--- Sayfa 448 ---
So, this kind of behavior was the greatest prayer offered to Allah for leading a life
free of worries. There was also an aspect of this kind of behavior that concerned the
afterlife. He, who saw to the needs of a Muslim brother in this world, was going to be
the recipient of salvation from Allah the Almighty at a time when he most needed it in
the after life and therefore get a moment of respite in a place where people sweat for
hardship. Forgiveness in this world meant being forgiven in the other, covering others'
faults here meant one's faults being covered in the afterlife; this would mean that the
believer would not heed the faults of his brother but always look for the faults he may
be committing himself. Rather than acting like a prosecutor of other people's faults, he
would be the prosecutor of himself. Being the defense lawyer for his Muslim brother
would become his character, for the Messenger of Allah said: "Muslim is brother to
Muslim; he does not injure him, and he doesn't suffer him to be injured! Whoever sets
off to see to the needs of his brother, Allah will see to his needs; whoever enters a
route in order to lift the burden of a Muslim, Allah lifts his burdens on the Day of
Judgment; whoever does not dwell on the disgrace of a Muslim, then Allah will cover
up his faults on the Judgment Day so that no one may see them."526
The best way to invite gales of grace to blow from the heavens was to approach
everyone with mercy and embrace everyone with affection. 527 This was Sunnah, the
way of the beloved Messenger of Allah.
To give to your fellow believer, even if it should be half a date, was an important
protection from Hell's fire. Should there be those who are not able to find that half
date, then greeting people with a smile and soft speech would be enough to earn the
same reward. 528
On the other hand, the smallest issues that man as a mortal may be faced with were
being treated and solved, for religion included solutions that could serve all sorts of
needs of man. From eating and drinking, to sitting and standing; from shopping to
domestic relations and social life- all these were treated and determined in a way to
make the individual's duties towards society practicable and thus a new civilization
was being built. Naturally, this was criticized by other people in Medina who said:
"Your Prophet teaches you everything including how to go to the toilet," for they
found this very strange.
Salman al-Farisi, who was faced with a similar reaction, gave the perfect example
of the transformation and answered the man in the following manner: "Of course he
teaches us that as well! He will teach even further things! He will teach us that when
we relieve ourselves we shouldn't be facing the qiblah, the direction of the Ka'ba, not
to clean ourselves with our right hand and when doing so to use at least three stones,

--- Sayfa 449 ---
and not to touch bones or dried animal excrement! "529
For he was a Prophet and it was he who had the position of a father vis-a-vis his
Ummah, and it would be he who would provide guidance in all aspects of life to the
new society that was emerging. In short, the believer was becoming a Qur'an that
walked, breathed and talked, and pulsated through society.
Now the speech of the Companions was Qur'anic, and their steps Muhammad-like.
Being a believer was an important choice and with this choice one accepted all that
this entailed, and promised Allah and His Messenger that they would fulfill all that
such action required. For a believer, a promise meant much more than a written bond;
it was impossible to point to a group more diligent in keeping their promises than the
Companions. The Messenger of Allah sat on the minbar of Medina and the
Companions formed the best assembly on earth, after the assembly of the Prophets,
peace be upon them all. It was clear that the seeds of change sown in Hira had
sprouted and had started to solve all the problems that had to do with the Tradition of
Ignorance. This change was not limited to a small region; with this change all houses
that had lost their luminance and harmony were to find happiness again. The whole
world, not just one portion of it, had to be enlightened, for the guide of this change had
been sent to all the realms, and no iota of existence was to be left untouched by him.

--- Sayfa 450 ---
517 An architectural feature found in every mosque to indicate the direction Muslims must tum to
when praying.
518 Bukhari, Sahih, 1/13 (12)
519 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 2/264 (510)
520 Bukhari, Sahih, 5/2240 (5673);Mishkatu 'l-Masabih, 2/424
521 Bukhari, Sahih, 1112 (1 0)
522 Ibid., 1114 (13)
523 Muslim, Sahih, 4/2000 (2586)
524 Brother as in the general sense of the word; also includes females.
525 Bukhari, Sahih, 5/2253 (5717)
526 Ibid., 2/862 (2310)
527 "What enables you to perceive what the ascent is? It is the freeing of a bondsman (a slave or a
captive); or feeding, on a day of privation, an orphan near of kin, or a poor wretch in misery; and
being, besides, of those who believe and exhort one another to patience and exhort one another to
pity and compassion. Those are they who are the people of happiness and prosperity (who will be
given their Records in their right hands on the Judgment Day)" (al-Balad 90:12-18). Also see
Abu Dawud, Sunan, 4/285 ( 4941 ); Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 4/323 (1924).
528 Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1316 (3400)
529 Muslim, Sahih, 1/223 (262)

--- Sayfa 451 ---
ANEW ERA
A
ll that was happening was proof of the beginning of a new era. Y athrib was
dressed in its new civilized character, and people who visited it were
benefiting from its peaceful environment. But Mecca was not going to let
things go so easily; it was full of hatred and was making plans to catch and kill those
that had immigrated to Medina. The Meccans came together often to discuss this issue
and were making decisions to reach their ultimate goal, staying true to their own
nature. Their attitude presented a threat to Medina. They did not accept the
immigration of the Muslims, and they also tried, through propaganda, to tum other
people against the emigration as well. This had become a matter of honor for the
Meccans.
The strategy to be followed under these circumstances had to be different from
previous ones. Now there was a Prophet in Medina who not only performed his duty
as a Messenger but also organized matters of state as the leader. They would now form
units that would be responsible for safety and security, and this web of security would
start with Medina and later expand. They would form a network of intelligence in
Hijaz and they would know of every passing creature in those parts, using their means
to the utmost degree.
The Atmosphere in Mecca
The Meccans were very angry because although they had all the power they needed,
the people whom they had thought weak had defeated them. It was no joke-they had
to find a way to make Yathrib hell for them! They would do whatever was necessary
to that end; they would use all kinds of enforcement. They first got in touch with
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul who had aspirations to become the leader in Medina.
The Meccans still considered him to be leader of the Yathrib Arabs. In a letter they
sent, they said: "There is no doubt that you harbor our man among yourself. We swear
by Allah, that either you will chase him out of your homeland with war, or we will
fight you till we have taken possession of your women and wealth."

--- Sayfa 452 ---
Even though the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had left
Mecca behind and immigrated, he was following the developments closely and knew
what kind of plans the polytheists of Medina were devising, for he was a leader that
reigned over not only the spiritual but also the physical realm. This called for a
strategy that would set an example to all the leaders who would later come. As a
result, our noble Prophet was informed of the letter.
When the letter reached him, Abdullah ibn Ubayy and his friends came together to
assess the situation. Our beloved Prophet arrived just as the discussion was taking
place. He knew well what the agenda in Medina was. He said: "The news of
Quraysh's threat to you has also reached me. The tricks and traps that they are setting
are no bigger than the ones you are setting against yourselves! Do you mean to fight
your own children and brothers?"
Upon these strong words of the noble Prophet they left what they were doing and
dispersed.
Abdullah ibn Salul was not a man to back down and give up easily; he had seen the
position of leadership being bestowed elsewhere and this offer that came from Mecca
had whet his appetite-he was full of ambition. He was in such a state of mind that he
could do anything they said. He had been a good choice for Mecca; with him they
were going to sow seeds of discontent among the Muslims, demoralize them so that
they may destroy them from within-thus they would use every possible trick of
psychological warfare. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was
following the matter closely so that he would not be caught unaware by the traps that
the polytheists were setting.
Another day, when Abdullah ibn Ubayy and his friends were sitting and talking, our
Prophet came to their presence and the atmosphere suddenly turned ice-cold. Abdullah
ibn Ubayy was thoroughly disturbed by the arrival of our Prophet and said so in so
many words. Abdullah ibn Rawaha responded to this uncouth behavior, stood up and
defended our Prophet which led to further confrontation. Our noble Prophet would
once again answer to these people with silence, people who had been the victim of
their own ignorance, and consulting with Sa'd ibn Ubada, he would once again choose
the route offorgiveness.
Measure for Safety
Now the matter had gained a different dimension; the Messenger of Allah was at the
same time the head of the new state. He had the duty to protect the people who had
come from Mecca, and also those from Medina who had trusted him and had united

--- Sayfa 453 ---
around him. Mecca was continuously harassing the Muhajirun who had settled in
Mecca as well as the Ansar who helped them, and was throwing threats at them.
Threats such as: "Do not think that you have escaped us, that you are free of us! We
will come as far as the streets between your houses and finish you!" had become
routine for the Muslims.
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, did not want anyone to be hurt
at all, and he watched over his Ummah like a mother watching over her newborn. The
slightest commotion was making him anxious and he would not rest until he learnt
what the matter was. Many nights he could not sleep from worry.
One night he whispered to our mother Aisha: "I wish some pure soul from my
Ummah would come and protect me tonight ... "
Before he had even finished his sentence, they heard footsteps outside: 'Who is it?"
they called out.
"Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas," said the voice.
It seemed that there were those who shared the same wornes. Upon which the
Messenger of Allah asked Sa'd: "What brings you here at this hour?"
Sa'd ibn Waqqas answered: "I have been struck with worry tonight about the safety
of our noble Prophet and I came here to protect him."
This was the sensitivity of the Ummah who had become one with its leader! Our
noble Prophet first prayed for Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and then went back to his room to
rest.
When his worry increased, the verse to the effect of: ''And Allah will certainly
protect you from the people" (al-Maedah 5:67) was revealed.
He looked out of the house and called out: "0 people! You can now disperse. For
Allah the Almighty will protect me!"
However, the danger continued. The other side had united and like an arrow that
had left its bow, they were making plans to attack the Muslims together. The Arabs,
who were normally fragmented in structure, had united in their enmity against Islam
and they were supporting each other in attacking our Prophet. The Companions were
expecting to be attacked at any moment and were sleeping with their weapons by their
side, alert towards the smallest activity. One night, a loud noise was heard in Medina.
Everyone had prepared themselves as best as they could and they made their way
towards the direction where the noise was coming from. They noticed someone
coming towards them. It was none other than the Messenger of Allah. "I looked, it is
nothing important," he said. 530

--- Sayfa 454 ---
It became clear that our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, cared not
only about the safety of the believers, but also the local population which consisted
mainly of Jews and polytheist Arabs, in a town that had not experienced peace and
security for centuries, for they had given him the authority to establish such an
environment of peace as well as the capacity to act in their name. The Medina Charter
was the clearest evidence of this. This wasn't just a matter of religion; it was a matter
of making the state function with all the different elements it contained. This
responsibility was primarily on the shoulders of the Messenger of Allah.
The Permission for War
Even though the Meccan polytheists resorted to all kinds of violence, the Muslims did
not yet have the permission to respond in kind with violence. Maybe at the time the
greatest show of strength was to stay silent in the face of all the injustices; they had
not been able to get a positive response from our Prophet concerning their request for
retaliation. They had been advised only to tum their faces away from the polytheists. 531
After some time, this prohibition had been alleviated with the permission given to
engage with people in mild discussions based on feelings of empathy and gentleness,
but still there was no permission given to respond to violence with violence.532
The situation now had changed, and the nature of events had altered. From now on
there was need for a general sensitivity rather than individual responses. They could
see the threat approaching. As if it was not enough that the Meccans had taken
possession of the homes and businesses of Muslims and sent them away; they were
now showering threats on those who had settled in Medina and were out to destroy
them. This threat was not directed solely at the Muhajirun either; it also included the
Ansar who had welcomed them. Under such circumstances defending the homeland
was an important duty that one had to perform.
Meanwhile another revelation had come. The verse explained that permission to
make war was given to those who had been kicked out of their homes unlawfully:
"The believers against whom war is waged are given permission to fight in response,
for they have been wronged. Surely, Allah has full power to help them to victory" (al-
Hajj 22:39).
This was not an order, but for the believers who were distressed under the violence
inflicted by the Meccans, this signaled an important way out. From now on when the
need arose they could also resort to war and in doing so, they would be responding to
those who only understood from the language of war in the language they
understand. 533

--- Sayfa 455 ---
Forming the Security Forces
In order to instate the awaited environment of security, our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, had turned to the regions outside of Medina to create an
environment of peace in the whole ofthe Arabian Peninsula. To that end he decided to
form platoons with different numbers of soldiers in order to secure public order.
The measures he took were aimed at establishing order and security around Medina,
collecting intelligence about new developments, preventing members of the Quraysh
who might travel through Medina from harming the people of Medina, pushing back
the Meccan forces that had come very close to Medina, proclaiming that the Muslims
were powerful and thus intimidating the enemy, speaking with the tribes around
Medina to find a common ground for agreement, engaging with a situation
immediately after it occurs and carrying the mission of tabligh, communication,
outside of Medina. Now that the permission for war had been granted, they had to be
prepared for such an eventuality, and such preparations were in effect training for the
possibility of war.
Campaigns and Battles
Consequently, the first campaign sent was the sariyya, troop of Hamza who was
leading a force of thirty men. Seven months had passed since the Hijra. A committee
had been prepared in order to supervise the caravan that the Quraysh had formed with
the aim of establishing a force against the Muslims, and Hamza had been appointed as
their commander. The aim was to confront the caravan and to show that Medina had
become a civilized town that had the means to procure all measures of safety. At the
same time, this would be a show of power by the Medinans to the Meccans.
In the caravan there were three hundred people including Abu Jahl. When they
came to the place named Sayfu'l-Bahr, they came across the caravan and there was a
short-lived tension between the Muslims and the Meccans who were displeased by
their arrival. The situation was handled calmly with the efforts of Majdi ibn Amr who
was friends with both sides, and Hamza's troop returned.
It was the month of Shawwal. Shortly after the troop of Hamza which took place in
the month of Ramadan, the Messenger of Allah next gave his cousin Ubayda ibn
Harith the duty, as the head of sixty men, to confront a Qurayshi force of two hundred,
led by Abu Sufyan. The two parties met at the place called Rabigh, and after the
mutual firing of a few arrows, they left the field.
The most important gain of this campaign had been Utba ibn Gazwan and Miqdad

--- Sayfa 456 ---
ibn Amr-who had both become a Muslim and yet not been able to reveal it because
of the oppression they faced-joining the ranks of the Muslims.
About a month after this campaign, in the month of Dhu al-Qadah, a troop of
twenty was formed under the commandership of Sa' d ibn Ubada and they travelled all
the way to location place called Harrar in pursuit of the Quraysh caravan.
In the meantime, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, would join these
troops himself and accompany them. 534 The aims of these troops were the same as the
other troops, the only difference in these troops were that the command was directly in
the hands of the Messenger of Allah himself.
A year had passed after Hijra. When the month of Safar came, the blessed
Messenger left Sa'd ibn Ubada to take over his place in Medina and went on a
campaign with a platoon of seventy men. Hamza was holding the banner. Their target
was once again the caravan of the Quraysh. This caravan was carrying the goods that
the Muhajirun had been forced to leave in Mecca. The polytheists of Mecca had
loaded these goods upon camels and were making their way towards Damascus in
order to sell them, and with that money they planned to buy weapons that they would
in tum use against Muslims.
Finally, they arrived at a place called Waddan. However, the caravan that had been
informed of the believers' arrival had already departed. The army waited there for a
while and then started the return journey to Medina, reaching Medina in fifteen days.
Through this campaign, the Messenger of Allah had the opportunity to visit his mother
Amina whom he had laid to rest in Abwa. The most important issue that drew
attention in this battle was that our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had
made an agreement of friendship with Amr ibn Mahshiyy, the leader of the sons of
Damra although they were not Muslims. According to this agreement, except for cases
of war in the name of religion, the Muslims would help the sons of Damra against
their enemies, and they too would help the Muslims in tum. In doing so, they were
widening the circle of safety around Medina.
In the month of Rabi al-awwal, another force of two hundred men had been
marshaled, and these men came all the way to a place called Buwat in pursuit of the
Quraysh caravan led by Umayya ibn Khalaf. The caravan consisted of a hundred
people and two thousand five hundred camels. It seemed the Quraysh was in great
preparation.
Leading the Muslim unit was the Messenger of Allah himself, peace and blessings
be upon him; he had left Sa'd ibn Muadh in Medina once again as his deputy, and he

--- Sayfa 457 ---
had given the banner to Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. Again in the same month a Qurayshi
unit led by Kurz ibn Jabir had come very close to Medina, stolen some sheep
belonging to the Muslims and then fled.
Our beloved Prophet, who had left Zayd ibn Haritha as his deputy, set off at once
with a group of seventy men and went to where the incident had taken place. 535 Ali,
may Allah be pleased with him, was carrying the banner. When they came to the
valley of Safawan near Badr, they saw that the Quraysh had already left so they also
returned home.
It was the last days of the month of Jumada al-awwal. Our noble Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, had left Abu Salama in charge of Medina, and gave the banner
to Hamza to carry. They had received news that the Quraysh had set off once again in
the direction of Damascus with a caravan of thirty camels to sell their goods and get
provisions to attack Medina. Things were getting more and more serious every passing
day. It was clear that the Quraysh were making very big plans.
Our noble Prophet, who knew of the situation, set off on the road with a force of a
hundred and fifty men. When they came to the place called Dhu'l-Ushayra, they
received news that a couple of days ago the caravan had made progress towards
Damascus, and so they returned to Medina. Returning from this campaign, they made
a pact with the sons of Mudlij who were allies with the sons of Damra, and thus a new
corridor of safety had been ensured around Medina.
The Campaign of Abdullah ibn Jahsh
Seventeen months had passed since the Hijra. It was the month of Rajah. It was time
for the return of the Qurayshi caravan to Damascus. The Messenger of Allah called his
aunt's son Abdullah ibn Jahsh to his side and handed him a letter. As instructed,
Abdullah ibn Jahsh would, with twelve men, ride for two days in the direction that our
Prophet had pointed out536 and at the end of the two days he would open the letter and
do as he was told. When the two days were up and it was time to open the letter, he
saw that our Prophet had given him the following order: "Walk toward Nahla which is
in between Taif and Mecca; wait for the Quraysh there and let us know about the
developments."
Nahla was very close to Mecca and only men with a heart of steel could take on this
task. That is why our beloved Prophet had kept their destination a secret, and he had
also instructed that no one is to be forced to undertake this task. But how could it be
that our noble Prophet should want something and they not comply? The target was
set and they started to make way. But Abdullah had given his Companions the choice

--- Sayfa 458 ---
of returning. Such had been the order ofthe Messenger of Allah.
Nevertheless, they were a group who were advancing without hesitations and there
would not be a single Companion who would choose to return; they would march
towards their destination without a single one of them wavering. The two that were
left behind had a valid reason, for one of the camels had fled the caravan and so Sa' d
ibn Abi Waqqas and Utba ibn Gazwan had gone after them.
While Abdullah ibn Jahsh and his friends waited in Nahla, they came across a
caravan passing by. This caravan also belonged to the Quraysh and was carrying
provisions for war. The believers who saw the caravan started to discuss among
themselves what the best course of action would be; it was the last day of Rajah and it
was considered a sin to make war in that month. 537 Had they waited for the end of the
month, the caravan would by then enter the bounds of the Haram, and then they would
not be able to do anything either. They were watching the caravan slip out of their
hands.
At last they decided to stop the caravan. One of them took out his bow and arrow
and took a shot towards the caravan. The arrow hit Amr ibn al-Hadrami and the man
died there and then. All of a sudden, tension filled the air. In the confrontation that
followed, Uthman ibn Abdullah and Hakam ibn Qaysan were taken captive and
Nawfal ibn Abdullah had fled.
This signaled the beginning of a new era. For the first time a polytheist had been
killed, two of them had been taken captive along with their goods. And all this was
happening in the prohibited months.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, scolded Abdullah ibn
Jahsh and his friends who came back to Medina:
"I have not given you orders to fight in the prohibited months!"
And he decided to wait concerning the fate of the two captives and the goods that
had been taken,
Abdullah ibn Jahsh and his friends were extremely devastated. In this route that
they had set out in the Name of Allah, they had taken a step that had displeased the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him.
Despite its vastness, the earth was contracting in on them. Upon every person they
encountered, they felt a great sense of shame. But it was of no use, what's done was
done, and feeling remorse now was useless.
On the other hand, Nawfal ibn Abdullah who had barely escaped had reached
Mecca and told the Quraysh what had befallen him. This was an incident that played

--- Sayfa 459 ---
well into the hands of the Quraysh and they started to tum it into a p1ece of
propaganda. They were explaining how the Muslims killed people in the prohibited
months, and slandering our Prophet by claiming that he had no regard for their
customs.
Before long, the Truthful Gabriel descended with the following verse:
They ask you about the Sacred Month and fighting in it. Say: "Fighting in
it is a grave sin; but barring people from the way of Allah, unbelief in
Him, and denying entry into the Sacred Mosque, and expelling its inmates
from it are far graver and more sinful in the sight of Allah; disorder
(rooted in rebellion to Allah and recognizing no laws) is even far graver
and more sinful than killing." (al-Baqarah 2:217)
Yes, it was haram to fight in the prohibited months, but the prohibition was not
limited to only this. Forcing people out of their homeland, confiscating their
possessions and goods, torturing people, attempting to kill people in the vicinity of
Masjid al-Haram, raiding the house of the most beloved subject of Allah-these were
all sins as great as killing.
During this period, the Messenger of Allah met with the captives and invited them
to Islam. Some of the Companion who saw him believed that his efforts would yield
no results, and asked him to allow them to execute them. But before long, Hakam ibn
Qaysan became Muslim. In the face ofthis change the Prophet of affection, peace and
blessings be upon him, turned to his Companion and said: "Had I gone along with
your suggestion and had him killed, he would have gone to Hell!"538
The Messenger of Allah, the representative of justice and trust, had decided to wait
for a while, fearing the death of his two Companions who had not returned. When this
verse was revealed and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and Utba ibn Gazwan returned, he sent
the Quraysh the blood money for the deceased Amr ibn al-Hadrami along with
Uthman ibn Abdullah who had not chosen Islam.
Now things had become clearer; Abdullah ibn Jahsh who had been under immense
spiritual pressure came to the presence of our Prophet. He lowered his face, and
hesitating to look at the blessed Messenger, he said: "0 Messenger of Allah, will we
be able to partake the merit that the fighters have gained with this battle?"
Our noble Prophet stayed silent; for the answer to this sincere question wrought
with a sense of responsibility was already hidden within the verse that had come
concerning the issue. The verse said: "Surely those who believe, those who emigrate
and strive in Allah's cause-they are the ones who may hope for the mercy of Allah.

--- Sayfa 460 ---
Allah is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate" (al-Baqarah 2:218).
But this did not bring an end to the matter; the intentions of the Quraysh were clear.
If they did not attack Medina today, they would definitely attack tomorrow. And so
our Prophet would take another step and send Talha ibn Ubaydullah and Said ibn Zayd
to Damascus after the Qurayshi caravan to acquire information regarding it
With all these campaigns and battles, our noble Prophet was showing that the Hijaz
was no longer unprotected, and that the Muslims were no easy opponents. With the
armed teams he sent to various parts of the peninsula, he was able to watch the
movements of those who had been attempting at his life for fourteen years, for he had
also been sent as a Prophet who was worthy of possessing a sword. So he was giving
this worthiness its due and was working towards upholding the honor of Islam. With
unexpected campaigns like these, he was seeing to the disorder taking place in the
deserts and thus providing for a much safer environment founded on justice.
The Change of Qibla-the Direction of Prayer
Both the obligatory Prayers that had been established after Isra, the night journey, and
Miraj, the ascension to the heavens, and the najila Prayers, supererogatory Prayers,
had all been performed facing the direction of al-Quds, the city of Jerusalem. 539 This
was a place that harbored Bayt al-Maqdis, the Holy Home and it was a place blessed
by Allah. But the heart of the Messenger of Allah lay with the Ka'ba and he was in
deep expectation to one day tum his face towards it. He would lift his face up to the
skies waiting for the moment when he would tum it towards the direction of the
Ka'ba. But this was not only his expectation; Companions with great vision like
Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, exhibited the same kind of sensibility and they,
too, wanted to tum towards the Ka'ba in their Prayers. For the qibla had been towards
the direction of the Ka'ba since the creation of the first man, Adam. Abraham and
Ishmael had both performed their Prayers turning their faces towards the Ka'ba, and
many Prophets from Moses to Saleh had done the same. And so the Ka'ba would
ultimately be the qibla of the Last Messenger as well. But the Will of Allah had been
for al-Quds to be the direction of the qibla for a little while, and this was the period
they were going through now. Maybe this was so that a common ground might be
shared with the Jewish people, the most influential population in Medina. However,
the Jews of Medina had turned even this into a point of superiority, boasting of the
fact that the Muslims were praying towards their qibla. This feeling of pride was not
enough for them; they started to use this as a slander.
One day when he met with Gabriel, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,

--- Sayfa 461 ---
said: "0 Gabriel, I ask my Lord to tum my face away from the qibla of the Children of
Israel, and towards the Ka'ba."
"Verily I am but a subject myself; you ask for it yourself from your Lord,"
answered Gabriel.
Allah the Almighty would of course respond to the request of His beloved and
would make him happy with the qibla he desired. It was another Monday. Sixteen
months had passed since the Hijra and the Truthful Gabriel brought down the verses
that declared that now it was time for them to tum towards the Ka'ba instead of Bayt
al-Maqdis:
Certainly We have seen you (0 Messenger) often turning your face to
heaven (in expectation of a Revelation. Do not worry, for) We will surely
tum you towards a direction that will please and satisfy you. (Now the
time has come, so) tum your face towards the Sacred Mosque. (And you,
0 believers) tum your faces towards it wherever you are. (al-Baqarah
2: 144)
Now his expectations had been met and the rumors had thus been stopped. The
qibla had been fixed, and from now on, Prayers would be performed towards the
direction of the Ka'ba. 540 But .fitna, sedition, continued to raise its ugly head. Now
some Jews had come to the fore to criticize this change. But the communication with
the heavens, with Allah the Almighty, was continuous and this attitude was taken care
of with revelation brought by the Truthful Gabriel.
The (hypocritical) fools among the people will say, 'What has turned
them from the direction they were facing in the Prayer?' Say (0
Messenger): 'To Allah belong the east and the west (and therefore the
whole earth with its easts and wests; in whatever direction He wants us to
tum, we tum). He guides whomever He wills to a straight path.' And in
that way (0 Community of Muhammad! Whereas others tum in different
directions and, straying from the Straight Path, falter between extremes in
thought and belief) We have made you a middle-way community, that
you may be witnesses for the people (as to the ways they follow), and that
the (most noble) Messenger may be a witness for you. We formerly
appointed (the Bayt al-Maqdis in Jerusalem) the direction to tum in the
Prayer (and now are about to change it) so that We may determine who
truly follows the Messenger from him who turns back on his heels (when
the Messenger's way does not suit his desires). And indeed that testing
was burdensome, save for those whom Allah has guided (and made

--- Sayfa 462 ---
steadfast in faith). Allah will never let your faith go to waste. Surely Allah
is for the people All-Pitying, All-Compassionate. (al-Baqarah 2:142-143)
This verse was of great importance to all those who lived in Medina and everyone
was trying to make sense of it from their own standpoint. The Jews said that our
Prophet was diverging from the qibla of previous Prophets: "Had he been a real
Prophet, then he would not have left the qibla of the Prophets before him", thus
speaking of their discontent. The polytheists on the other hand were saying, "It is good
that he is retracting and changing his views; look, he has changed his qibla and has
turned towards ours, soon he will also change his religion and come to our side." The
hypocrites, that is those who seemed to be Muslim in appearance but did not believe
by heart, were now starting to make their presence felt and were saying "Muhammad
does not know where to tum! Had it been the right qibla before why has he given it
up, and if the second qibla is the correct one, why has he been turning towards the
false one till today?"
The Qur'an spoke of those who conjectured about the reasons for the change of
qibla even though they knew deep inside that such an important event could have
happened for no other reason than as an order from Allah:
Even if (0 Messenger) you were to bring to those who were given the
Book (before) all kinds of signs and evidences, they would not follow
your direction (qibla). Indeed you are not a follower of their direction, nor
are they followers of one another's direction. (Theirs is an attitude arising
from their fancies and desires, not from knowledge.) Were you to follow
their fancies and desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then
you would surely be among the wrongdoers (those who wrong themselves
because ofthe errors they have done). (al-Baqarah 2:145)
Allah the Almighty had given tidings of all these before they happened; He had
already said that this would be the way that the degenerate would behave. Then, what
had to be done was to continue on one's way without paying attention to these rumors
and claims.
The concerns of the believers were of a different nature; they wondered about the
situation of their friends who had died before the qibla had changed, those who had
not had the chance to pray towards the new qibla. When they could not find an answer
to their question, they went to our Prophet. He then directed their attention to the
verses concerning the issue. Indeed, in these verses, Allah the Almighty was giving
clear answers to these questions and was telling them that He would not waste
anyone's belief.

--- Sayfa 463 ---
The Obligation of Fast and Zakah (Alms)
Another month had passed. The Truthful Gabriel came with new good tidings. When
the moment of revelation ended and our Prophet started to share with his Companions
what had been brought, they learned that they had been given the duty to fast during
daytime, during the month of Ramadan. In the verse sent, the Great Lord addressed
the believers: "0 you who believe! Prescribed for you is the Fast, as it was prescribed
for those before you, so that you may deserve Allah's protection (against the
temptations of your carnal soul) and attain piety" (al-Baqarah 2: 183).
Fasting was not an unfamiliar type of worship for them, for they had already started
to fast on certain days of the month. They had learnt that the Prophets before them had
fasted and they were expecting this to become their prescribed mode of worship as
well. That day, the order had come and their expectations were met. A few days were
left before the start of Ramadan and they would fast altogether. The verses revealed
that just like the Daily Prayers, giving zakah was also an obligation, and the instances
in which zakah could be given were calculated. It seemed that in order to keep the new
economic situation under control, there was need for a new organization, and this was
taken care of by appointing officials for zakah. Prayers, fasting and zakah were the
most foundational pillars on which religion was being built; and zakah was different
among these in that it contained a financial element. The Companions were already
sharing what they had with the needy. Now they would be performing this duty within
a specific framework and thus also enjoy the contentment of performing a religious
duty.

--- Sayfa 464 ---
530 Anas ibn Malik and other Companions reported that whenever a cry was heard in Medina, they
would always find that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had gone there
to look before them and this would give them a great sense of security.
531 Al-Hijr 15:94
532 An-Nahl 16:125
533 In the verses that arrived later, the span of this permission would be widened and it would include
becoming a power that would deter the enemy, and to fight through financial ways and through
physical combat on the path of Allah. See al-Anfal8:60, al-Maedah 5:35, at-Tawbah 9:41, al-Hajj
22:78.
534 The troops that are led by a member of our Prophet's Companions were called sariyya, and the
campaigns that our Prophet led himself were called gazwa.
535 There is also a report that the number was two hundred. See Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar,
11298; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/146.
536 It has also been reported that this number was eight. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/146.
537 Fighting in the prohibited months was prohibited in the period of ignorance as well. When the
Quraysh felt the need to fight in these months they would declare that they had switched the time
of the months and then would be able to start war. The Qur' an names this the nasi, through which
they thought they committed no sin, only fooling themselves. See at-Tawbah 9:37, Ibn Kathir,
Tafsir, 2/358; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 11161.
538 Waqidi,Maghazi, 1115; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 41137; Hakam ibn Qaysan would continue his life as a
good Muslim from that day forth and would end his life as a martyr at the incident of the Bi'r al-
Mauna. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 31150; Waqidi,Maghazi, 1115; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 41137.
539 It is reported that when praying in Mecca, our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,
would position himself in a way to face both the Ka'ba and Al-Quds (Jerusalem), but that after the
Hijra to Medina this had become physically impossible, and that is why his expectation of Ka'ba
as the new qibla had intensified. See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 3/158-160; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 3/370.
540 There are various reports about the circumstances of the revelation of this verse. One says that
when this revelation came, our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was performing
the Noon Prayer with his Companions and that he changed his direction after the third cycle and
concluded the Prayer in that direction. Another report says Bani Salama came to his homeland
and visited Bishr ibn Bara's mother Umm Bishr. After that visit, when he was praying the Noon
Prayer this verse was revealed (and here there is a masjid called the "Masjid of two Qiblas"). One
report says that the incident happened during the Afternoon Prayer, or that certain Companions
performed the Afternoon or Morning Prayers with our noble Prophet, facing the Ka'ba, and then
upon their return to their neighborhoods they shared this news with the other Companions and
thus Muslims started to pray towards the Ka'ba from then on. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11241,242.

--- Sayfa 465 ---
TOWARDS BADR
A
ll the developments showed that the Quraysh were making great
preparations for war in Mecca. Furthermore, they had confiscated the
possessions of the Muhajirun. They wanted to take these possessions to
Damascus and sell them for a profit. In short, they were planning to attack Muslims
with the money they would make by selling their goods. The caravan they formed was
basically a huge treasure trove on camels. There were around forty people in charge of
the caravan which was worth fifty thousand dirhams. 541 This was going to give the
Meccans an overwhelming power in war and this power was going to be used directly
against Medina. The Muslims could see the danger approaching; and the seed of this
danger, the caravan, was going to pass very close to Medina and then reach Mecca.
Thus the Muslims now had the opportunity to prevent this threat before it came to
pass.
The Pursued Caravan
This meant that the caravan led by Abu Sufyan needed to be intercepted and the
Qurayshi plan had to be stalled.
All attention was turned to the news that would come from Damascus. They had
sent Talha ibn Ubaydullah and Said ibn Zayd after the caravan in order to get
information and intelligence. Now they were getting news that the caravan had left
Damascus and was on its way back.
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was a Prophet sent to let every
person on earth hear the Name of Allah. His mission was to speak to everyone; his
duty was to convey his message.
Mecca had insisted with its opposition to his invitation from the very first day he
had started his mission and continued to do so. In addition to all this, the Muhajirun
were now settled in Medina and had formed a state and the Meccans were now
threatening this order, trying to prevent them from taking root. The preparations of the

--- Sayfa 466 ---
Meccans were all geared to this end. They planned to deal a great blow to the Muslims
one last time and thereby be finished with them. They had organized this caravan in
order to put their plan into action, so that with everyone's contribution, they may be
able to purchase enough weaponry.
It was this caravan that had been pursued in the battle of Dhu'l-Ushayra, the same
caravan that had escaped when they heard that they were being followed. The caravan,
led by Abu Sufyan, was composed of nearly one thousand five hundred camels and
was being transported by forty Meccans.
The roads had to be cleared from these obstacles that stood in the way of conveying
the Name of Allah to people, for they were pressuring the weak who wanted to accept
the invitation of Allah, and were not allowing them to speak of their faith openly.
Some people who preferred to be on the side of the powerful were just watching the
developments and were trying to shape their faith according to the needs of the time.
But Islam had an honor, and it was unthinkable that it should continue its life under
constant pressure from unbelief. It was now time to show that the power of Truth
reigned over falsehood.
When all these things were considered, it was clear that they had to confront the
Meccan caravan. Whatever the consequences may be, they had to put an end to this
one-sided hostility towards the Muslims, and our noble Prophet had to make the
presence of the Muslims felt in the Hijaz. All the circumstances were pointing towards
Badr. On the twelfth day of the month of Ramadan, the Messenger of Allah spoke of
his decision and gave the order to his chosen Companions to gather at the well of Abu
Inaba in order to stop the caravan. 542
The Sadness of Those Turned Away
Upon the news that the Quraysh caravan had left Damascus, our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, ordered that the army be gathered. At this important moment,
he took it upon himself to inspect the troops and he was meticulous in choosing who
was to accompany him. Wherever he should go, his great Companions wanted to go
with him; for every moment they spent with him they learnt something; they
witnessed our Prophet's connection with Gabriel, thereby becoming more aware their
own deficiencies so that they may tum them into virtues. This enthusiasm of the adults
was shared by the youth, and they too competed with each other to be in his company,
and didn't want to fall behind when following his every move. Even youth who were
almost children were acting with the same kind of sensibility; they did not want to be
left behind when he led.

--- Sayfa 467 ---
When one considered the preparations that the Quraysh was undertaking and the
caravan they had sent to Damascus, one could see that the atmosphere was very tense.
And now, in this tense atmosphere, a group was going to be sent to pursue the
caravan. This meant that the pursuit of the caravan led by Abu Sufyan could result in
all kinds of negative outcomes. That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, called out to Abdullah ibn Umar, Usama ibn Zayd, Rafi ibn Hadij, Bara ibn Azib,
Usayd ibn Khudayr, Zayd ibn Arqam, Zayd ibn Thabit and Umayr ibn Abi Waqqas
and told them to return home because they were too young. When his followers saw
that the younger ones were being turned down, they started to walk on their tiptoes so
that they may appear taller and not be turned away because they were too young.
The ones who had to return were deeply saddened. They shed tears because they
could not go with him, and they pleaded with him to overturn his decision.
Umayr ibn Abi Waqqas, witnessing what happened, retired to a comer and started
to sob. When his brother Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas saw his state, he approached him and
asked: "What happened? What is the matter with you my dear brother?"
Umayr ibn Abi Waqqas replied: "I fear that the Messenger of Allah will see that I
am young as well and tell me to return home."
He could not reconcile himself with the thought that he should stay behind while his
beloved Messenger was advancing on. His ultimate aim was to die as a martyr fighting
with our noble Prophet. He said: "I was hoping that Allah may grant me the gift of
shahadah; that is why I want to continue on my way."
His insistence paid off; because he was a little older than the others, he had been
permitted to stay. He had a rather long sword and he found it difficult to carry it
properly. His older brother came and helped this overjoyed young man carry his
sword. When he put the sword on his belt, one end of it was sweeping the ground. 543
Setting off from Medina
With the caravan set as the target, some Companions had presented their excuses as to
why they would not be able to come on the journey, and they were being exempt. No
one would be criticized for having an excuse. Uthman, our Prophet's son-in-law, who
had been at our noble Prophet's side from his earlier days, was among those who had
presented an excuse; for his wife, our Prophet's daughter Ruqayyah was suffering
from a very grave illness. Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, had to stay back in
order to look after her. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
who was very careful when it came to the performance of the duties as a subject of

--- Sayfa 468 ---
Allah, asked Abdullah ibn Umm Maqtum to lead the Prayers in the period when he
would not be present.
In previous battles the Ansar had not taken part, but in this one there was no
separation of the Muhajirun and the Ansar. 544 For this time the situation was very
delicate indeed. The situation concerned the whole of Medina, particularly the Ansar,
for the caravan of Abu Sufyan formed the foundation of the Meccan army that was
going to attack Medina.
Then there were also those who wanted to be with our Prophet although they had
not yet become Muslims. Hubayb ibn Isaf was one of them. He was known for his
power and technique in battle. But this was primarily a matter between the Quraysh
and our Prophet. There had indeed been an agreement with the polytheists of Medina
concerning security pledging that they would defend the city together. But there was
not yet a threat that would necessitate the participation of the polytheists. In this battle,
intelligence was very important; a piece of important news received could change the
course of the battle. That is why it was not appropriate that people who may have the
tendency to inform others about their movements should be included in the mission of
pursuing such a critical caravan. That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, would tum down such people and only the Muhajirun and the Ansar would
accompany him on this campaign. 545
Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah appointed Qays ibn Abi Sa'sa'a as leader of the
foot soldiers and when they left the place called As-Suqya, he ordered him to count
the soldiers. He would do as he was told and would report back that the number of
Companions, counted at the well of Abu Inaba, was three hundred and thirteen. This
news made our Prophet very happy and he would say with joy: "As many as the
Companions of Talut! "546
Then one Sunday evening, our noble Prophet set off from As-Suqya. They had only
two horses and seventy camels with them. They were advancing by taking turns riding
the animals. Although commander-in-chief, the Messenger of Allah was receiving no
preferential treatment; he rode the same camel with Ali and Abu Lubaba, taking turns.
Ali and Abu Lubaba would say: "You mount, 0 Messenger of Allah! We will walk
beside you," insisting to give their tum to him but refusing their offer, he said: "You
are not stronger than me in walking, nor am I less in need of the offer promised."
When they reached Rawha, our noble Prophet would send Abu Lubaba ibn
Abdulmunzir back to Medina and appoint him as deputy to ensure the town is not
unattended and without relevant authority. Abu Lubaba was sad to be returning back
to Medina; before his return, he left the shield he was wearing with the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 469 ---
Allah and walked back with downcast steps. Although the main aim when they set off
from Medina had been to pursue the caravan of the Quraysh, the Companions were
briefed on new strategies as they advanced on their journey. While making their way
towards the route of the caravan, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, sent
Basbas ibn Amr and Adiyy ibn Abi'z-Zaghba as advance guards; they were to reach
the caravan's route and report back on the progress of events. Our noble Prophet held
those who had set on this journey with him in prayer: "My Lord! These people are
barefoot; give them strength to endure against the difficulties of the road! They have
no clothes on their back; clothem! They have nothing to eat; feed them! These are
poor people; make them rich with your own grace! "547
When they came to Turban, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, turned
towards Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and called out to him: "0 Sa'd!"
He was pointing to a gazelle in the distance, telling Sa'd to prepare his bow and
arrow. Sa'd did as he was told and aimed at the animal. Our noble Prophet put his
blessed cheek on his shoulder and said: "Release now!"
And from the moment the arrow was released from the bow, he was praying: "My
Lord! Allow him to hit the target."
The arrow did indeed pierce through the neck of the gazelle. Our noble Prophet was
smiling. In this environment of scarcity, this gazelle was nothing but a Divine gift to
the beloved Companions. Sa'd, who had been the lucky recipient of a Prophetic
prayer, went and caught the gazelle, cut it up and brought it to the presence of the
Prophet. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, ordered that the
meat be cooked and distributed among the Companions.
When they reached Irqu'z-Zabya, they came upon a Bedouin. Our noble Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him, was trying to make use of every opportunity to piece
together information and so he asked the Bedouin whether he had any news of the
caravan. Soon it was clear that the man had no news to offer. Meanwhile, some of the
Companions were pressuring the man to salute the blessed Messenger. He said
surprised: "So you claim that the Messenger of Allah is with you?" And then he
approached our Prophet and saluted him. He was a Bedouin; he had not had the
chance to be in the company of the noble Messenger, to learn from him. After his
salutation he said to him: "If you are a Prophet, can you tell me what is in my camel's
belly?"
This was a question that angered the great Companions of the Prophet. Salama ibn
Salama came forward and said to the man: "Do not ask such questions and offend the

--- Sayfa 470 ---
Messenger of Allah. If you must ask, ask me, I will tell you,"
Soon after, he said some other things to embarrass the man.
Our noble Prophet, who heard what happened, was very upset and felt he had to
intervene.
"Take it easy and let him be. You have been rude to him and have gone too far."
He also turned his face away from Salama. It was clear that he was teaching his
Companions with each demeanor and stance, thus cultivating a community that would
be the teachers of humanity till judgment day. Now he would warn the Companions
with his words, he would censure them with his gestures so that he may direct them to
become people possessing the best behavior.
Abu Sufyan's Insight and Quraysh's Attitude
On the other hand, Abu Sufyan, who had returned from Damascus, had heard of the
activity in Medina and had changed his route to reach Mecca. He also sent Damdam
ibn Amr, paying him twenty mithkal, as a messenger to the Meccans to let them know
what was happening on the road. On his way to Mecca, Damdam cut the nose and ear
of his camel, ripped his saddle apart in order to further incite the Meccans, and then
tore apart his shirt. This would be an important message at that time to show the
gravity of the situation.
As he approached Medina, Abu Sufyan's fears heightened. As he was passing Badr,
he asked Majdi ibn Amr: "Have you seen anyone here? Has there been anything
different going on?"
"I don't think there is anything serious to worry about. I have only come across two
horsemen.548 They stood on that hill for a while, got some water from the well and
then left," said Majdi.
This piece of news alarmed Abu Sufyan. At once, he made his way to the place that
was pointed out. He wanted to get some water from the well and then ask those around
who it was that had come there recently. When he came to the hill, he was intrigued
by the camel droppings he saw, and he started to poke at them. He then said to those
around him: "I swear this is Yathrib's animal feed! Muhammad's spies have been
here."
He was a very clever man and it had not been difficult for him to figure out by
looking at the bits of animal feed in the camel droppings, that the two men had come
from Medina.
Feeling the responsibility ofthe caravan weighing heavily upon his shoulders, Abu

--- Sayfa 471 ---
Sufyan started to worry. He ran back to his friends, and keeping Badr to his left, he
changed his route once again. Now, the caravan was progressing on a safer route. He
sent someone called Qays ibn Imru' al-Qays to Mecca to inform the town that they
need not worry and that the caravan was now safe.
Atiqa hint Abdul Muttalib's Dream
Meanwhile, Mecca was talking about the dream that Atiqa hint Abdul Muttalib, our
Prophet's aunt, had seen. When she told her dream to her brother Abbas, she said: "0
my brother! I have had such a dream that I fear some evil will befall your tribe."
Abbas, who saw that she had gone pale even when speaking of the dream, asked:
"What did you see?"
And she answered: "I will not tell you until you promise me that you will not share
it with anyone else. If people should hear it, they will harass us and speak of things
that will not be pleasant."
Abbas was of the same opinion, but he could not stop himself from telling this
dream to his close friend Walid ibn Utba, a dream which he believed to be a warning
before a calamity that was going to befall them.
He in tum would speak of it to his father Utba and the dream would thus start
circulating among the Quraysh. It was three days before Damdam, the messenger sent
by Abu Sufyan, arrived in Mecca. That night, Atiqa hint Abdul Muttalib dreamt of a
man who came to Mecca on his camel, a man who stopped in Abtah, and with a loud
voice, called people to war. The man was saying: "Prepare for war and set out on the
road at once! Go at once so that you may see with your own eyes what will befall you
and where you will be defeated."
All of a sudden a great crowd gathered around him. The same man then came to the
Ka'ba; and the crowd full of people was following him. The strange thing was that the
man's camel had become as big as the Ka'ba, and mounted on his camel, the man was
repeating the same sentence with his resonant voice. After a while the camel became
as big as the mountain of Abu Qubays; the man was still mounted on the camel and
was repeating the same sentence: "Prepare for war and set out on the road at once! Go
at once so that you may see with your own eyes what will befall you and where you
will be defeated."
He then ripped a big rock from the ground and hurled it down from the mountain of
Abu Qubays. The rock shattered into pieces. Then each piece that tore away from the
rock hit one of the houses in Mecca and entered it.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
Startled with fear, Atiqa hint Abdul Muttalib woke up, and for a long time she could
not shake off the emotions induced by this dream and so had felt the need to share it
with her brother Abbas. Now, this was the dream that everyone was talking about in
Mecca.
Abbas had left home to visit and circumambulate the Ka'ba when he came across
Abu Jahl. He, too, was speaking about the dream that Atiqa had had with the people
around him. When he saw Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib approaching, Abu Jahl said: "0
Abu Fadl! Finish your circumambulation and then come and join us; I have things to
discuss with you."
When he finished his circumambulation and came towards Abu Jahl, he said to him
mockingly: "0 sons ofMuttalib! When did a female Prophet come amongst you?"
'What are you talking about? What Prophet?" responded Abbas.
"Atiqa's dream," said Abu Jahl.
Abbas was acting calm and trying to express with his collected behavior that he had
no idea of what Abu Jahl was talking about: "What dream?''
But Abu Jahllooked serious: "0 sons ofMuttalib. As if it was not enough that your
men lay claim on Prophethood, now your women have also started to act like Prophets
as well! There is Atiqa who keeps saying that some evil will befall us in three days'
time! If what you say is true we will see after three days. But if what she says does not
come to pass, then we will pass judgment on your family as a family of liars among
the Arabs, and you will not be able to escape this shame as long as you live!"
Upon leaving, Abbas was angry with himself for acting like he didn't know what
was going on, even though he did. When evening came and the sons of Muttalib
gathered around him, he could see even more clearly the kinds of reactions his
behavior earlier had caused. All those who had heard of what had passed between him
and Abu Jahl came to him and said: "This tarnished man slanders your men, and as if
this were not enough, he now slanders and insults your women, and you say nothing to
stop him."
Atiqa hint Abdul Muttalib herself was very angry with her brother for letting her
secret out into the open. They had pressured him so much that he decided to go to Abu
Jahl, stand before him and chastise him for what he had said.
It was the third day. Facing up to the risk, Abbas took measures in his own hands
and went to the Ka'ba. Just as he had expected, Abu Jahl was also there. He gave
Abbas a scrutinizing look. Just as he was about to approach Abu Jahl and give him the
response he deserved, he was interrupted by the voice of Damdam ibn Amr who was

--- Sayfa 473 ---
on his camel coming from the direction ofBatni'l-Wadi.
It was obvious that there were very important developments. In order to attract the
Meccans attention, Damdam had, just as Abu Sufyan instructed, cut the ear and nose
of his camel, had tom apart the saddle along with his shirt. Just as he expected, all
eyes were on him; the whole of Mecca wanted to hear what he had to say: "0 people
of Quraysh!" he said. "There is calamity, calamity! Muhammad has confiscated the
goods that you sent with Abu Sufyan to Damascus! I don't think you will be able to
catch him. Help! Help!"
Damdam's words had made both Abu Jahl and Abbas forget what they were about
to do: "Do Muhammad and his Companions think that this caravan will be like the
caravan oflbn al-Hadrami?" they were speaking amongst themselves.
The atmosphere became very tense all of a sudden, and the Quraysh who had been
waiting anxiously for days were now locked onto the idea of war.
The Meccan Army
This news was like a spark ready to be ignited by the Meccans, and it was presenting
brilliant opportunities for the likes of Abu Jahl. This gave them the lead to prepare for
war. The rich were providing with means those who were not equipped to fight, telling
everyone that they had to participate in this war. People like Suhayl ibn Amr, Zam'a
ibn Aswad, Tuayma ibn Adiyy and Hanzala ibn Abi Sufyan, who were well-versed in
poetry, were eloquently saying: "Will you now tum a blind eye to Muhammad and
those inexperienced little children who have left you for him? Do you not see that the
people of Yathrib are taking hold of this caravan and confiscating your goods? For
those considering taking part in this war, we will give money to those who want
money and power to those who want power," trying to encourage people to fight.
Nawfal ibn Muawiya was also one of those visiting the rich of the Quraysh, asking
them to provide those who could not afford to fight with provisions. Abdullah ibn Abi
Rabia responded favorably to his request: "Take these five hundred dinars and spend
them as you see fit." Nawfal had already taken three hundred dinars from Huwaytib
ibn Abduluzza,549 Tuayma ibn Adiyy had given him twenty camels, and taken upon
himself the expenses of the men who would fight on those camels.
In reality, they wanted to force people who they thought were Muslims or those
who held the potential to become Muslims to go to battle. Abbas, Ali's brother Akil
and Talib and another nephew of our Prophet, Nawfal ibn Harith, were among these
people.

--- Sayfa 474 ---
The Quraysh had no doubt that Abu Lahab was on their side;550 unquestionably, he
was a staunch denier of the Messenger's message. But on this occasion, Abu Lahab
said he was not able to participate in war; however he added that if As ibn Hisham
went to war in his place, he would cancel the debt of four thousand dirhams that
Hisham owed him. They accepted this exchange and didn't see it as a problem.
People like Umayya ibn Khalaf, brothers Utba and Shayba, Zam'a ibn Aswad,
Umayr ibn Wahb and Hakim ibn Hizam who had expressed their anxiety over Atiqa
hint Abdul Muttalib's dream came to the idol of Hubal and drew arrows. The strange
thing was that the first arrow they drew pointed to "no" when determining whether
they should join the war. They decided that the consequences would be unfavorable
for them and so decided not to join Abu Jahl in this war. But before long they had to
change their decision, for Abu Jahl had heard of the matter and had accused them of
being cowards. This gave them no choice but to join.
Although they had been incited to join the war by Abu Jahl, the worries of people
like Umayya ibn Khalaf were mounting with every passing day. Umayya was an old
and heavy man; he had difficulty moving because of his weight. That is why he had
said that he preferred to stay in Mecca rather than to go to war. He was sitting at the
Ka'ba among the Quraysh when Uqba ibn Abi Muayt approached him. He knew very
well the weaknesses of people and he would not shy away from exploiting these
weaknesses either. He had a lantern and an oil-holder in his hand. He brought these
and placed them in front of Umayya. Everyone was watching them curiously to see
what would happen: "0 Abu Ali! Come here and light this lantern; for you are now as
good as a woman."
This was the worst insult that a man like Umayya could be subjected to. That is why
he responded by saying "May Allah curse you and what you have brought," and then
left the Ka'ba and went home.
Before long, he too joined the army. Abu Jahl's plan was working without any
glitches. Uqba had also insisted on not joining the war at the beginning, but Abu Jahl
had found a way to bring him into the fold as well. Umayya knew this well. Now Abu
Jahl was saying "Even Uqba, who fears to be killed, is going to the war, so what is it
with you?"551 thus using Uqba to give the message to Umayya.
He also had come to him and said: "0 Abu Safwan! How long has it been now that
you continue to stand behind your own men? But you are the lord of this valley and
you have always been the leader ofthese people!"
Abu Jahl had managed to rise above the situation once again and had managed to

--- Sayfa 475 ---
bring Umayya to his heels. He had left Umayya with nothing to say. He was thinking
he could at least buy the best camel in Mecca and join the campaign. Helpless, he
came home and said to his wife: "0 Umm Safwan, come and prepare me for war!"
His wife was surprised. She knew very well that he was afraid to die.
She remembered his fear when he listened to the words of Sa' d ibn Muadh and
wondered why he had changed his mind and now wanted to go to war. In a rather
scrutinizing tone, she said: "0 Abu Safwan! How quickly have you forgotten what
your friend from Y athrib has told you ?"552
"I have not forgotten," answered Umayya, overwhelmed with despair
He was aware that he was walking straight into death. He had not forgotten what he
had been told, but he was hoping to stay away from areas where the fight was most
fierce and thereby save his life. At each of the stations that the polytheist army
stopped, Umayya would tie his camel to a tree, trying to maintain a sense of security.
Leaving Mecca
Two days had passed since the arrival of Damdam, the messenger who had brought
news about the caravan, and now the army of Quraysh was fully ready for battle. They
were very sure of themselves and they had no doubt in their minds that they would
win this battle. That is why they were walking with their heads held high, showing off
their strength.
Like attending a wedding ceremony, they marched joyfully towards battle. They
were so sure of themselves that they had even brought alcohol, women and musical
instruments to celebrate their clear victory.
The Meccan army which was commandeered by Abu Jahl consisted of one hundred
horses and seven hundred camels. For them, the caravan had become a secondary
matter. They were hoping to meet our noble Prophet and his Companions somewhere
outside the town and finish them off in a way that they would not be able to raise their
heads again in public.
They had also taken care of the food needs of the army among themselves, and
divided the duty amongst certain rich people who provided the provisions. The day
they left Mecca, Abu Jahl had ten camels slaughtered, thus feeding his army. When
they reached Usfan it was now Umayya ibn Khalaf's tum and he had nine camels
slaughtered. When they reached Kudayd, the famous poet Suhayl ibn Amr slaughtered
ten camels. In the days following, ten camels were slaughtered by Utba ibn Rabia and
another ten by Munabbih and Nubayh from the sons of Hajjaj, thus feeding the army

--- Sayfa 476 ---
with a concerted effort.
When they came to the place called Juhfa, Juhaym ibn Salt turned to his friends and
asked: "Have any of you seen the horsemen who rode beside me a minute ago?"
No one had seen anything.
''No we didn't," they said and added: "You must have gone mad! The devil is
playing with you."
Juhaym had seen a vision between dream and reality and he was not able to shake
off its effects. In his dream, a horseman from afar rode towards him and told him that
many people from the Quraysh, including the two sons of Rabia-Utba and Shayba-
Abu'l-Hakam ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl), Umayya ibn Khalaf, and Abu'l-Bakhtari had
been killed. He then cut the head of Juhaym' s camel and sent it rolling towards the
soldiers, and the blood spurting from its neck stained all the tents that were there.
When people started to speak about the dream amongst themselves and it finally
reached Abu Jahl, he said: "There you go, another Prophet from among the sons of
Muttalib."
According to him, the lies of the sons of Hashim were now being accompanied by
the lies of the sons of Muttalib. Although his own name had been mentioned among
those who would be killed, he was still mocking what he had heard, trying to show
others that these were insignificant and empty signs not even worth taking seriously.
He then added: "If and when we meet them tomorrow, you will soon see who will be
the one killed!"
Abu Sufyan's Call to Return
Qays ibn Imru' al-Qays, the messenger who had been sent by Abu Sufyan had reached
the army of Quraysh in Juhfa and was conveying to the army the following message:
''You set out thinking about your goods in the caravan and your men with them,
now Allah has saved both your goods and your lives from harm, so then return!"
Relaying them the message that war was now unnecessary, people such as Harith
ibn Amir, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Rabia's sons Utba and Shayba, Hakim ibn Hizam,
Abu'l-Bakhtari, Ali ibn Umayya and As ibn Munabbih, who did not want to fight in
the first place, started their preparations for return.
Abu Jahl was calling this cowardice and was making it difficult for them to return,
and Uqba ibn Abi Muayt and Nadr ibn Harith were helping him humiliate and put to
shame those people who wanted to return. They were encouraging hatred in the name
of denial and were leading their own men to plain and obvious death.

--- Sayfa 477 ---
'We swear we will not return until we have reached Badr! Then we will stay there
for three days, slaughter camels, eat and drink, and have entertaining sessions with the
dancing women! Thus, the Arabs will know that we have gathered together and have
come all the way here and then they will have nothing to say against us! Come on, let
us continue on our way!"
But not everyone was of the same opinion; Ahnas ibn Sharik called out to the sons
of Zuhra telling them that the caravan was now safe and that there was no need to
fight, and thus they returned home. The sons of Zuhra were followed by the sons of
Adiyy and no one was left to continue on to Badr from these two tribes. Abu Sufyan,
who heard that Abu Jahl was leading the Quraysh into battle despite all efforts, said:
"Woe to my tribe! There is no doubt that this is nothing but the selfish ambition of
Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl)"
When the messenger of the Quraysh came and told Abu Sufyan that despite
everything the army was still progressing towards Badr with the encouragement of
Abu Jahl, he was extremely upset. What was more, these men were calling him to
come with them, telling him to leave the caravan in Mecca and then catch up with
them. This was a strange tum of events indeed; they were walking themselves straight
into death! He did not heed any of their calls, and made it clear that he would not
sacrifice himself for the ambition of Abu Jahl. Before long, he came upon the sons of
Zuhra and Adiyy who had left the Qurayshi caravan. He asked them why they had left
while the others had remained, and in response they said that they had returned upon
receiving the news that Abu Sufyan had sent.
Critical Moment ofDecision
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who had been fasting since
the day they had set off, said to his Companions who had not already broken their
fasts:
"I have broken my fast here; break your fasts as well," thus telling them that they
should not hold the intention of fasting in cases of travel and war from that day on. For
the verses that the Truthful Gabriel brought spoke of this subject and the blessed
Messenger shared this knowledge with his Companions.
When they came to the place called Safra, our noble Prophet asked the name of the
mountains that rose before them and the name of the tribe that lived in those parts. He
did not like the answers he was given and so he changed his route, keeping Safra to his
left, and turned towards the valley of Zafiran to the right. There were no
"coincidences" in the universe, and these names that spoke of negativity had

--- Sayfa 478 ---
whispered certain truths to him, truths that were hid behind the seen. Our noble
Prophet had become one with existence to such an extent that he acted upon the
messages that these names had given him along with the intelligence he had received;
thereby constructing his strategy. That is when he received the news that the Quraysh
had set off on the road to wage war on them. Now the matter had changed course.
They had not started their campaign with war in mind and they were neither prepared
mentally nor by means of weaponry.
When making decisions, our noble Prophet was always very mindful to consult with
the views of the Companions in his company, and so at this critical point in their
journey, he turned to his Companions for consultation. First chief Companions such as
Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them, voiced their opinions. Miqdad
ibn Amr then took word: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "Continue on your route as
Allah has told you; we will always be with you! I swear by Allah that we will not say
as the Children of Israel said to Prophet Musa: "Go forth, then, you and your Lord,
and fight, both of you. (As for ourselves) we will be sitting just here!" (al-Maedah
5:24). We say: 'You and your Lord go and fight, but we will fight with you, on your
right and on your left, in front of you and behind you, to the death.' We swear by He
who has sent you with truth, even if you should tell us to walk all the way to Bark al-
Ghimad we will come with you without any hesitation."
These were the excited expressions voiced as a result of being able to run fearlessly
towards death with the blessed Prophet leading them; and this honest and humbling
statement had made our Prophet very happy. His beautiful face lit up like the full
moon. He responded first with prayers of beneficence for Miqdad and then turned
towards the rest of his Companions to say: "0 people! Tell me your views and show
me the way!"
It was clear from his choice of words that he did not want this consultation to be
limited to only a number of his Companions, in this address in particular, he wanted to
hear the opinions of the Ansar. For when the Ansar had given their word of allegiance
at Aqaba, they had meant providing the Muhajirun with security only within the
bounds of Medina. Now the issue was reaching beyond the bounds of Medina and
towards an apparent and heated conflict. Moreover, most ofthe army was made up of
the Ansar. That is why our Prophet repeated his request: "Tell me your views and
advise me."
Sa' d ibn Muadh stood up, saymg: "Let me speak on behalf of the Ansar, for it
seems to me that your request is directed at us, 0 Messenger of Allah."
''Yes," our noble Prophet replied.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
''You seem to worry that the Ansar will protect you only in their own homeland, 0
Messenger of Allah! Verily I now speak on behalf of the Ansar and I give you this
answer; go as far as you like ... Get in touch with anyone you see fit, and cut ties with
those you want ... Take as much from our possessions as you like, leave to us as much
as you like, and know that the amount you take from us will make us happier than the
amount you leave to us. We are always at your command and we will always be
waiting for your orders, and we will always be with you! We have submitted to you in
belief, have born witness that what you bring is truth; we have sworn allegiance to
you. So direct us now wherever you will, 0 Messenger of Allah. We will always be
with you! We swear by He who has sent you with truth, that should you ride your
horse into the sea, we too will ride our horses there and plunge in after you! And trust
that not a single one of us will stay behind! If you should meet the enemy tomorrow
with us, none of us will tum back. For when it comes to war we are patient, and when
we meet the enemy we are men of our word. You will see that, insha 'Allah, Allah will
enlighten your eyes and give you cause for joy through us and with the blessings of
His Messenger. I believe that Allah the Almighty has placed before you a deed that
you had not been expecting. Walk with us, with the blessings of Allah the Almighty!
Do not doubt that we will always be walking on your right and left, front and rear, and
we will fight with you to the death!"
It was clear that the Muslims had reached a certain level of awareness and within
that state was the potential to stand against the whole world-for there was the
promise of victory by Allah for those who did not fear to fight for Him and His
Messenger without expecting anything in return.
The Truthful Gabriel had come and given the good tidings that this promise would
be realized. In the verses that came, Allah had promised one of the two groups-that
is, the trade caravan and the Meccan army approaching-would fall. 553 Here it was
natural that they should choose the caravan that held fewer risks, and that was what
the Companions had thought at the beginning as well. However, Allah the Almighty
wanted to uphold the truth with His orders and wanted to annihilate the power of
shirk, associating partners with Allah, by preventing the spread of denial. This was a
great opportunity, and thus the truthful name of Islam would be upheld and shirk
would be defeated.
Thereupon our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, turned towards his
Companions and said: "Come, walk with the blessings of Allah, for Allah the
Almighty promises one of the two groups to me. I swear I could almost see the enemy
topple and fall one by one!"

--- Sayfa 480 ---
With strong conviction and determination, they made their way towards Badr.
Badr
In those days, Badr was the crossroad where Arabs would come together, trade and
organize fairs. In short, Badr was a place that neither the Meccans nor the Medinans
were a stranger to.
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, and his blessed Companions
arrived at Badr on a Friday. They were going to spend the night there and the battle
would take place the next day. 554
War meant intelligence and our Prophet was taking great care to collect information
about the position of the other side. That is why that night he sent, Ali, Zubayr ibn
Awwam, Basbas ibn Amr and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas to Badr for another
reconnaissance mission. They set off in the dead of the night and when they reached
the wells of Badr, they came upon two men sent by the polytheists, A slam and Arid.
They too had come to inspect and collect information. This was the first
confrontation between the Muslims and the polytheists, and after a short quarrel, the
Muslims took them prisoner and brought them to the blessed Messenger. When they
came to his presence, the Messenger of Allah was performing his Prayers. The
Companions pressured the two men to reveal to them some information until our
Prophet finished his Prayer. All the two men were saying was:
'We had come to get water for the Quraysh," but the Companions were not
satisfied. They believed that the men had come from Abu Sufyan's caravan. They
continued to pressure the two men, this time more harshly. At last the men realized
that the only way to their release would be to tell the Companions what they needed to
know, and so they admitted that they were Abu Sufyan's couriers.
By then our Prophet had completed his Prayer and had given his last salutations. He
turned to his Companions and said: "When the men tell you the truth you pressure and
beat them, when they lie to you, you leave them! These men are telling you the truth; I
swear that they are the men of Quraysh." He then addressed Aslam and Arid: "Where
is the Quraysh ?"
"Behind that hill you see," they answered.
"And how many are they?"
"Many."
'What is their number?"
'We do not know."

--- Sayfa 481 ---
"How many camels do they slaughter in one day?"
"Sometimes nine, sometimes ten."
Upon which our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his
Companions and said: "They must be around nine hundred or one thousand men."555
He had another question: "Who do they have among them from the leading men of
Quraysh?"
Aslam and Arid said that among them were Rabia's sons Utba and Shayba, Abu'l-
Bakhtari, Hakim ibn Hizam, Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid, Amr ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl),
Umayya ibn Khalaf, Hajjaj's two sons Nabih and Munabbih, Suhayl ibn Amr and Amr
ibn Abdiwud.
After listening to the names of Quraysh leaders, the Messenger of Allah said:
"Verily Mecca has offered before you today her most precious!"
Choice of Place
The two armies had come very close and now it had become clear that Badr would be
the place where they would meet. The military headquarters of the Muslim army
needed to be set up. On the seventeenth day of Ramadan, one Friday evening, our
noble Prophet came to Badr with his Companions and gave the order to set up camp.
Hubab ibn Munzir approached him and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah. Is your choice
of place due to a revelation from Allah that we cannot alter, or is it a personal choice
you made after having seen and assessed the field?"
Hubab was still young and he feared to be in opposition with our noble Prophet.
That is why he had lowered his voice as much as possible and was addressing our
Prophet with a hesitant tone. But time and place required that there be asked such a
question and from it stem a genuine discussion, one that everyone shared their
expertise.
"It is a choice made as a result of considering the conditions of war," answered the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him.
Upon which Hubab said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Where we are now is not a
favorable place to fight; it's best if you command us so that we may go closer towards
that well down there. I know this place and these wells well. Down there is a well I
know with replenishing and sweet water. We can make a dam there, collect more
water, see to our need and close off the other wells."
They were in the midst of a war and this sincere suggestion seemed reasonable.
Meanwhile, the Truthful Gabriel descended and had brought the good news that

--- Sayfa 482 ---
Hubab's suggestion was correct. Upon that our Prophet said: "What Hubab points to is
right" and having said that he made his way to the place that Hubab suggested and set
camp by the noted well.
Another interesting point to note was the fact that the Muslim army, who had been
stationed facing the direction of Damascus, and were not directly facing the sun. The
Polytheist army on the other hand had taken up their position on the Yemen side, and
this meant that they had to fight facing the sun.
After these developments, another Companion came to tell the blessed Messenger
that the wind blew from the top of the valley down towards where they were, and that
it would be advantageous to have the wind behind them as well, and that this would
help their victory. In response, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I
have already arranged my ranks and have placed my banner here; I will not change it,"
demonstrating the determination befitting a leader in such critical times.
In the meantime, the tent in which our noble Prophet would stay had been set up,
and the headquarters to plan the attacks and strategies that will change the course of
the battle had been determined. He wanted to inspect the field in which the battle
would take place. He went around the Badr wells with a group of his Companions. He
then called out the names of the leading men of Quraysh and showed, with his blessed
hands, one by one where they would fall and die.
Before long, our noble Prophet entered with his faithful friend Abu Bakr the tent
that had been set up for him. He paid great attention to the worldly "causes" and he
did not neglect his communion with his Exalted Lord either. For every step taken,
gaining Allah's good pleasure and approval was paramount. If He was content, His
help would come and they could surmount any difficulty. Yes, now was the time to
converse in and praise his Beloved, the Almighty Lord.
All of a sudden, the blessed Messenger felt the presence of someone standing
outside his tent, and when he stepped outside he saw that it was Sa' d ibn Muadh. His
face was filled with anxious anticipation. It was evident that he had feared that the
polytheists may do some harm to our Prophet, and that's why he had donned his sword
and come there to protect him. His anxiety could be read all over his face. He was
apprehensive about the dangers that the enemies presented to the blessed Messenger.
The Messenger of Allah turned to him and said: "It seems to me, 0 Sa' d, that you fear
the dangers that these people present."
"By Allah, yes 0 Messenger of Allah! This is the first battle we will engage in with
the polytheists."

--- Sayfa 483 ---
This man of precaution who did not leave anything to chance could only be met
with approval, and so our Prophet responded to Sa'd's sensitivity with his approval.
That night he pleaded to his Lord, asking Him to grant victory to the handful of men
who only wanted to institute the cause of Allah. Praying, he said: "My Lord, here is
the Quraysh, they have come with all their self-importance and pomp and ceremony;
they challenge You and call Your Messenger a liar. 0 my Lord! I ask You to give me
the victory You have promised against them! My Lord! Early tomorrow morning,
bury their nose in the dust!"
Rain and Sakina (Peace)
A light sprinkling of rain had started in Badr. It was like the pouring of mercy before
the coming victory. Of course the polytheists on the other side had been affected by
the rain as well, however on their side, the rain was pouring very heavily and they
could not move from where they were because of the mud. That evening, an
atmosphere of peace had descended on the Companions and they felt the presence of
Divine grace surrounding them. Sakina was the name of such a peace. They fell into
such a sweet sleep that this sleep made them forget all the trouble and pain they had
gone through. It was clear that they needed to be fit for the next few days of fighting,
so this sleep was a gift from Allah the Almighty so that they may have the necessary
strength and endurance in the morning. With the effect of this sakina that descended
gracefully upon the believers, they found it hard to even stand up without falling back
into this sweet sleep, having to lean on to their swords to stay up.
The polytheists who were getting ready for battle on the other side were struck by
heavy rainfall and were finding it difficult to walk around in the mud. They were also
faced with other difficulties they found hard to surmount.
On the morning following that peaceful evening, before the polytheist army came
and took their positions, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had gathered
his Companions and had put them in rows ready for battle. It was clear that he was
placing great importance on the appearance and stance of his men. For this was also a
message, an indirect one sent to the opposing side. The blessed Messenger himself
corrected the Companions that were standing a little to the front or back, and placed
them in a straight line. He then saw someone come half a body's width forward in one
of the rows. He approached the Companion standing out of line, tapped his belly with
his arrow so that he may go a little back, and said: "Keep in line, 0 Sawad."
Sawad ibn Ghaziyya stepped back in line with his row and then called out: "0
Messenger of Allah. You have disturbed me; I swear by He who has sent you with

--- Sayfa 484 ---
truth that I want my rights back!"
Our noble Prophet turned back to where the voice was coming from, opened his
stomach and said: "Here, take your rights back," signaling Sawad so that he may hit
him.
The Companions of Badr were following what was happening with great curiosity.
This particular behavior of our Prophet was giving those present a great lesson
concerning the rights of one another. Everyone was watching Sawad closely and
anticipating his next move. But what Sawad did next left everyone stunned. He first
bent and kissed our Prophet's stomach and then wrapped his arms around him,
hugging him tightly. His intention had become clear, it was not to hurt the blessed
Messenger, rather it was to make the most of a given opportunity and express his
unconditional love. Upon such an unexpected move, the blessed Messenger asked:
"Why did you do such a thing Saw ad?"
"0 Messenger of Allah!" he responded. "As you can see, battle is upon us and I am
not sure whether or not I will survive it. Thus, I wanted the last thing I did on earth to
be my skin touching your skin and so I may go to the Divine presence with such a
blessing."
This was just one demonstration of a Companion becoming one with our noble
Prophet, of burning with his love unconditionally. This gesture would not be left
unrewarded and so the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
complimented Sawad and made a special prayer for him.
In the meantime, a strong wind had blown and after a while it had stopped. Before
long a second wind blew and then a third, and then it calmed down. With the first
wind the Truthful Gabriel, with the second wind angel Mikail, and with the third wind
angel Israfil had come and with a thousand angels each, they had descended to help
the believers. This meant that when one achieved the state that made the Lord content,
when those on earth did what fell upon them to forward His Name, the inhabitants of
the skies did not stay indifferent, and they came to the aid of those whose continuous
intention was to do good. Angel Mikail and a thousand angels stood to the right of our
Prophet, angel Israfil and his company of a thousand angels stood to his left. They had
an appearance particular to themselves, wearing green, yellow and red turbans with
one end of their turban hanging down towards their waist. On the forehead of their
horses there was a woolen mark. 556
The big white banner had been g1ven to Mus'ab ibn Umayr to represent the
Muhajirun. Beside this banner were two more banners representing the Ansar. Hubab

--- Sayfa 485 ---
ibn Munzir was carrying the standard of Khazraj and Sa' d ibn Muadh the standard of
Aws. 557 Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had chosen "Ya the Banu
Abdirrahman" as the code word for the Muhajirun, and "Ya the Banu Abdillah" for the
Khazraj. The code word for Aws was "Ya Bani Ubaydillah." The code word that they
all used was, "Ya Mansur, Kill/"558
Cautioning the Com pan ions
The Messenger of Allah had a few words of advice to give to his Companions before
the battle started:
"I know that some people from the sons of Hashim and others have been forced to
join this war; we do not need to kill them! Whoever of you comes upon a man from
the sons ofHashim, do not kill him!"
At the top of this list was no doubt our Prophet's uncle, Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib.
He had become a Muslim but he was hiding it from the Quraysh. Our noble Prophet
had even freed Abu Rafi in return for the good news that he had brought-the news
that Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib had become a Muslim along with his wife. 559 That day,
the sons of Hashim along with Abbas had come to Badr with the coercion of Abu Jahl
and had been forced to hold their swords against those from their own family. There
were also others that our Prophet had advised his Companions to spare when fighting:
"There are none among them except for Abu'l-Bakhtari who has rights upon me.
Whoever sees him should spare him. Do not touch him unless he attacks you first!"
For he had been the one to support our Prophet after the incitement of Abu Jahl
when a few unfortunate people had thrown camel tripe on the Messenger's blessed
head. He was so enraged by Abu Jahl's behavior that he had cracked open his head
with a stick.
He had also played a big role in relaxing the boycott that had lasted for three years.
He had not believed in Allah and His Messenger, but still, our Prophet had not
forgotten even this little act of kindness he had done. As the Messenger of mercy, he
was showing compassion to this man who had come to Badr to fight him.
On the other hand, there were those who were not pleased with our Prophet's
stance: "How can we spare Abbas as he goes around the battlefield killing our fathers,
brothers and members of our tribe?"
When these words of concern reached our Prophet's ears, he called Umar to his side
and said: "0 Abu Hafs!" This was the first time he had called him with this
appellation. After this heart-melting address, he poured his heart out to him: "How can

--- Sayfa 486 ---
it be deemed right to kill the uncle of the Messenger of Allah?"
Whoever it was that said those words, Umar was ready to erase anyone who would
sadden the Messenger of Allah.
"Leave him to me, 0 Messenger of Allah! Grant me permission to cut off his head,"
he roared. For he believed that such an objection could come only from a hypocrite.
However, the Messenger of Allah would never ostracize any of his Companions;
however differently they may think, these differences had to be worked out within the
melting pot oflslam, and everyone would one day meet at a mutual viewpoint.
And it happened so that day. The people who Umar thought carried signs of
hypocrisy would one day become the close Companions of the blessed Messenger
whom even Umar would look upon with envy. 560
Khutba (Sermon)
Everything was under control up to that point. Why should it matter that the number of
people in the polytheist army were greater and their weapons state of the art! For
Allah Himself spoke many times of how believing groups, although they were fewer
in number, had defeated armies many times their own size. They had no goal other
than gaining the pleasure of Allah. Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, then gave a sermon to his Companions before battle. He first thanked Allah,
praised Him and then said the following: "There is no doubt that I encourage you in
what Allah encourages you, and I dishearten you and warn you about the prohibitions
that He has placed. Allah, most Exalted is his name, orders in truth, and He likes those
who are true and upright. He gives the upright their due according to the ranks He has
put in place, so that they may be remembered with the gift that He has given them, and
thus they are those who are superior to one another. You are now on the right path. On
such a path, Allah will accept only the deeds that are done for His sake and pleasure
and there is no doubt that patience, in the real sense of the word, is patience shown
under such dire circumstances. With this patience, Allah will eliminate all the
difficulties and help you forget all the hardships. Do not forget that it is only through
patience that one can gain salvation tomorrow. Here, the Messenger of Allah is with
you; he advises you against certain things, and asks you to do certain things; today
fear that Allah may see an action of yours that will cause Divine wrath. For Allah the
Almighty says "Allah's wrath is greater than the evil you may do unto yourself "561
Think well upon what He commands you to do in the book He sent you, think of how
He has revealed to you and shown you His verses, think of how He has saved you
from your oppressed situation and has given you comfort; hold fast to your book so

--- Sayfa 487 ---
that your Lord may be pleased with you! Do not, in these stations, forego any of your
Lord's commandments, so that you may attain the grace and forgiveness that He
promises you! For His promise is true, He is loyal to His word, and His punishment is
severe. Now you and I are all entrusted to Allah who is the All-Living and Self-
Subsistent. We lean only against Him, we hold fast only to Him, and from Him we
only ask help, and only to Him we tum our deeds! Our return will be to Him. May
Allah the Almighty grant us and all Muslims forgiveness!"
The Atmosphere at the Polytheist Front
Meanwhile, the polytheists sent Umayr ibn Wahb to gather more reliable and concrete
information about the army of believers. Umayr went up a hill and observed them for
some time. Pleased with what he saw, he returned and said the following: "They are
about three hundred men. Maybe a little more. They have seventy camels and two
horses! Give me a little more time and let me see if they have any supporting forces!"
He mounted his horse and wandered through the valley, and on his return he said: "I
did not see anything. However, 0 people of Quraysh, I see ownerless camels carrying
death on their backs ... I see the camels of Yathrib preparing an inescapable end! It is
obvious that they neither have anything to defend themselves with except for the
sword, nor do they have any protector. 0 Quraysh, do you not see! They do not make
a single sound, as if they have lost their ability to speak! Instead, they sit like dragons
waiting for an opportunity to catch their prey! I swear by Allah that for every man that
is killed on their side, someone will be killed on yours. And once so many of you have
been killed, what use is there to live on? But the main opinion will be your opinion
and you should make your own decision under these circumstances!"
This was the most critical moment within the army of Quraysh. Some of them did
not want to fight in the first place and were making plans to return home. These words
of Umayr gave those thinking of leaving the impetus to leave. Those who opposed
leaving argued that Umayr had collected wrong intelligence and insisted that they
should send another man to assess the Muslim front. Then they decided to send Abu
Salama al-Jushami. When Abu Salama arrived after inspection, he said:
"I swear, I too did not see an overwhelmingly powerful and strong force, or many
arms or equipment, or cavalry that we ought to take into consideration. But what I did
see was an army that has erased any thought of returning to their homes or to their
families! A group of men who are dedicated to the death although they have nothing
to fall back on except their swords, and have no one to support them! Only sky-blue
eyes the size of small pebbles hidden behind their shields! You should make up your

--- Sayfa 488 ---
own minds."
Abu Salama's assessment was no different to Umayr's. Hakim ibn Hizam, who
listened to them both went to Utba ibn Rabia and said: "0 Abu Walid! Verily you are
the elder among the Quraysh and its lord; people will listen to your word on this issue.
Would you not want to do something that people will praise you for as long as the
world stands?"
Who would not want to do such a thing? Hearing this, Utba turned to Hakim ibn
Hizam and said: "What do you mean to say, 0 Hakim?"
"Take upon yourself the duty of your ally Amr ibn al-Hadrami and stop these
people from returning back home!"
"Okay, I will do it, but you have to help me. Yes, it is true, he is my ally; I take the
duty upon myself to pay for his blood money and for his goods that have been looted!
And you should go to Ibn al-Hanzaliyya,562 because I believe there won't be anyone
except for him who will object to the idea of returning home."
After this conversation between them, Utba addressed the people and said: "0
people of Quraysh! I swear by Allah that by opposing Muhammad and his
Companions you are not doing a good thing. Even if you should fight and defeat them
tomorrow, how can someone who has killed the son of his aunt or uncle show their
face in public? It will be best if you give up now and return, do not stand in between
Muhammad and the Arabs! If they should beat him, then that is something you too
want! But if the opposite happens, then because you have not attacked him, no harm
will come to you! There is no doubt that I see men whose hearts are set on fighting to
the death; it is impossible for you to beat them! It is still not too late; this important
decision is yours to make! 0 my tribe! You can wish something upon me with this
matter and say "Utba was afraid!" although you know very well that I am not the most
coward among you."
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, who saw from afar Utba on
his horse calling to the Qurayshi army to return, turned to his Companions and said:
"If there is one auspicious man among that crowd, it is that man on that crimson
camel; if they do as he says, they will have acted right."
He was hopeful; this meant that the polytheists still had not come to a final
agreement among themselves. He then called out to Ali who was beside him: "Call
Hamza to me."
At the time, Hamza was somewhere close to the enemy front, and the minute he got
the summons, he came to the presence of the Prophet. The Messenger of Allah asked

--- Sayfa 489 ---
him who the man on the crimson camel was that was trying to convince the men to
return home.
In the meanwhile, at the enemy front Hakim ibn Hizam had gone to Abu Jahl who
was busy preparing his shield and sharpening his sword. He gave him Utba's greetings
and informed him of the recent developments. This was a development that drove Abu
Jahl crazy and he fiercely opposed the idea: "It seems that when he saw Muhammad
and his friends he was bewitched!" he said first. And then cursing, he added the
following: "I swear that we will not veer from our path until Allah has judged between
us and Muhammad! Utba would not normally say such a thing; but when he saw that
Muhammad and his Companions are so few in number that they could feed
themselves with just one camel, he started to fear for the life of his son who is among
them!"
At a time when returning home from war was spoken about on a regular basis, Abu
Jahl would of course not stop at these words and show everyone that he was truly the
infamous Abu Jahl! He rose furiously from where he was sitting and called to his side
Amir ibn al-Hadrami whose brother had been killed during the Abdullah ibn Jahsh
campaign. Everyone was watching to see what would happen next. The enraged Abu
Jahl was reminding Amir about his brother Amr who had been killed at Nahla and was
saying: "This ally of yours Utba is trying to dissuade people from fighting! Come and
see what has happened to us with your own eyes," asking him mourn his loss loudly.
Amir, whom Abu Jahl had helped and financially provided him with means, started
wailing there and then, tearing at his own clothes. He hurled himself on the floor and
was rubbing dirt unto himself, moaning: "Woe to my brother and what has befallen
him!"
This was a direct message to Utba ibn Rabia, for he was Amr' s closest friend
among the Quraysh. Abu Jahl's plan had worked. Amir writhing on the ground thus
had heartened the polytheists and had provoked feelings of revenge in them. Utba,
who heard of what had happened, first cursed at Abu Jahl and then he added:
"Tomorrow everyone will know who has pulled the wool over your eyes-he or I!"
In the meantime, Abu Jahl had already spurred on his horse hitting him with his
sword and had already started to recollect the army ...
Even though he did not overtly believe in Allah, at this trying moment, Abu Jahl
would remember Allah and he would plead with the Gracious Lord. People around
him heard him pray: "My Lord! Strange things have happened to us when we cut our
ties with our relatives; make us victorious tomorrow! My Lord! Whoever is more

--- Sayfa 490 ---
beloved by You, with whomever You are more content, let tomorrow's victory be
his!"
Thus, Allah the Almighty, who makes living out of the dead, and dead out of the
living, deployed people as He willed! The man who was the leader of evil in his tribe
was thus praying for the good to win on the battlefield of Badr. This was a prayer that
Abu Jahl was making against himself without any one prompting him to do so. Later,
the Truthful Gabriel would descend and say that it was also him who had acted first in
the case ofthe conquest_563
Efforts of Our Noble Prophet
Despite everything, the Prophet of Mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, would
take one last step and send Umar to the polytheists front to try to dissuade them from
fighting, at a time when swords had already had been drawn.
Maybe it was having seen Utba on his crimson camel trying to convince people to
return that had encouraged him. In the message he sent, he asked them to return back
to their homes, warning them about what would happen to them if they stayed. All
these efforts showed that the Messenger of Allah had no personal interest in going to
battle; his sole aim was the pleasure of Allah. Those who had come to Badr all the
way from Mecca were presenting an obstacle on the way to reaching that pleasure.
Had they left at that moment, they would not have been hurt, and the Muslims' efforts
to win Allah's pleasure would increase and continue through peaceful means.
But the polytheists had no heart or mind to understand the concept of gaining
Allah's pleasure and they did not have the leaders who would protect them from
throwing themselves into a dangerous situation. Abu Jahl's eyes were blinded by hate
and the people who were following such a pharaoh would of course not be able to
escape calamities.
When Hakim ibn Hizam, our mother Khadija's cousin, heard the news brought by
Umar, he came forward and said: "He is being sincere and is advising you; accept
what he says! For if you continue to make war despite this advice, you will not be
victorious."
The job of muddying the waters was once again Abu Jahl's, and he said: "I swear
that since Allah has given us this opportunity to fight against them, and now that we
have them in our grasp, we will not tum back!"
It was clear, this army that Abu Jahl would lead, was going to fight the war at all
costs. Even if the whole army should be against it, Abu Jahl's maliciousness was

--- Sayfa 491 ---
enough to lead them to war. Therefore, there was no point in resisting, they would don
their swords and try to comply with Abu Jahl's orders.
The Dimension of Prayer
Everything by way of earthly causes had been met, and now it was the time to tum
towards the Maker of Causes. The army at the enemy front was three times as many as
the Muslims and the wars of those days depended directly on the number and strength
of ground troops. Our noble Prophet turned towards the qibla and prayed two cycles
of Prayer in order that they may be able to defeat the army many times their size.
Then, raising his blessed hands to the skies, he pleaded to his Merciful Lord: "My
Lord! Do not leave me to my own devices! My Lord! Give us what You have
promised, and embrace us withY our grace! My Lord! If these men should perish here
today in the name of Islam, then there will be no one left on this earth who worship
You!"
Although at the time when making this prayer the blessed Messenger was directing
it at the leading men of Quraysh, this was ultimately a battle of monotheism and
polytheism. Thus, if polytheism was to win that day, then there would be no trace of
faith left in the world. That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, and
his great Companions did not consider leaving the battlefield of Badr without giving
their all, even if it meant their lives.
When pleading to his Lord with such a prayer, the blessed Messenger was so
sincere and making the request with his whole being, so much so that he had risen his
hands towards the heavens in such a way that his cloak fell off him. His loyal
Companion Abu Bakr picked it up and put it on his beloved Prophet's shoulders once
again, and he would say the following words of comfort to him: "0 Messenger of
Allah! Do not exhaust yourself so much when requesting from your Lord! This is
sufficient 0 Messenger of Allah! Do not be so insistent with your Lord! There is no
doubt that Allah the Almighty will actualize the promise He has made you!"
This was true; Allah the Almighty would not tum back on His word, and would
make it real. Victory at Badr was one of the things He had promised. But this promise
was at His discretion, and it was not to be taken by people as a sign to slack off. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was educating his Ummah,
community not only through his words but also through his stance and actions. Even
under such circumstances, slacking off was inexcusable and conversation of the
beloved was not to be abandoned!
Our noble Prophet had put his all into his prayers for his Ummah. Such that

--- Sayfa 492 ---
Companions such as Ibn Masud had observed our Prophet's relationship to his Lord
on the day of Badr and said that neither he nor the other Companions had ever seen
such a moment of closeness to the Lord by the Messenger. 564
Allah had made a promise and so the Messenger of Allah turned to Abdullah ibn
Rawaha and said: "0 Ibn Rawaha! There is no doubt that I will pray to Allah for the
acceptance of your wish! For He the Almighty never turns back on His word!"
Not a lot of time had passed when the blessed Messenger turned to his Companions
around him with a smile on his blessed face; his beautiful face was shining like the full
moon, beaming with happiness: "Good tidings to you, 0 Abu Bakr. Gabriel is here!
He has a yellow turban on his head and he is waiting, ready with his horse, between
the skies and the earth! I had lost sight of him for a short while when he had
descended on the earth, but he appeared again on the hills of Badr and he keeps telling
me 'Allah's help has come to you in response to your prayer and pleading!'"
Also, as guidance for those who would come till judgment day, Gabriel would bring
down the following verses: "When you were imploring your Lord for help (as a
special mercy), and He responded to you: 'I will help you with a thousand angels,
coming host after host'," (al-Anfal 8:9)565 thereby letting them know of the Divine
help that was at hand.
Overjoyed, the blessed Messenger could hardly contain himself in his shield as he
came out of his tent, sharing with those Companions around him the following verses:
"(But let them know that) the hosts will all be routed, and they will turn their backs
and flee. Indeed, the last hour is their appointed time (for their complete recompense),
and the Last Hour will be more grievous and more bitter" (al-Qamar 54:45-46). 566
The increased sound of horses neighing and swords clashing could now be heard on
the field of Badr. The Muslims now had the spiritual support they needed and were
more confident with themselves. On the other hand, their enemies were decreasing in
strength and power with every passing minute. 567
This great news was spread and in a very short time, it was heard by all the
Companions, making them extremely happy. Our noble Prophet had another piece of
good news for them. He turned to his Companions and said: "I can almost see clearly
now where each polytheist will be slain on the field!"
That day our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was not just asking for the
positive, he was also praying concerning those who insisted on inflicting evil on them,
especially naming those who had provoked the Quraysh against them, leaving them to
the judgment of Allah. These were Abu Jahl, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Rabia's son, the

--- Sayfa 493 ---
brothers Utba and Shayba, and Uqba ibn Abi Muayt; seven people in all.
He had prayed so sincerely that his prayer alone could tum the course of the battle
in Badr to the Muslims' advantage. He was pointing to the places where the lifeless
bodies of these seven doomed people would fall in Badr; this heightening the morale
ofthe Muslims before battle.
The beloved Messenger himself had donned his sword and was ready to fight the
enemy. The time for the first confrontation with the enemy had drawn near. He took a
handful of earth and threw it towards the enemy forces saying: "Let their faces
blacken," blowing the rest of the dust in his hand towards them.
Then he opened his hands and prayed: "0 my Lord! Put fear into their hearts, and
let their feet slip."
Then he turned to his Companions one last time and said: "Come on, tighter up your
rows, come closer to one another!"
The First Spark
There was an evil and degenerate man named Aswad ibn Asad among the polytheists
and he came to the fore of the enemy front and said: "I swear by Allah that I will
either drink water from this pool of yours or destroy it, or die destroying it!"
When saying these words, he started to run towards the pond. He was approaching
the Muslim front very quickly. The hands of the awaiting army went straight to their
swords, and now everyone could feel the cold face of war. This was the first spark of
the coming war.
They had to control this man who was running frantically towards them so Hamza
stepped forward and tried to kill the man before he could make it to the pond. With
one move the man's foot was severed and he had fallen down. Even in that injured
state he was trying to crawl towards the pond in order to destroy it. So much so that
the blood from his foot had polluted the water, and with his healthy foot he had
destroyed a little bit of the pond and had even drunk a little water from it. He was
keeping his promise for all present to see! Then Hamza made his second move and
killed this man who was trying to provoke people into a fierce battle.
Some of the polytheists who saw that the wells had been closed made their way
towards where the water was. Some of the Companions who saw them coming pointed
towards them their arrows but the blessed Messenger cautioned: "Leave them."568
Meanwhile Umayr ibn Wahb from the polytheist front had fired an arrow and it had
hit and slain Umar's freed slave Mihja ibn Aish.

--- Sayfa 494 ---
The individual efforts of the Muslims were of course very important in battle, but it
was even more important that these efforts be harnessed and brought together. That is
why the Messenger of Allah called out: "Do not start fighting before I tell you to do
so! Fire your arrows only when they approach you! Do not brandish your swords
unless they draw close to you and attack you, and meet them with your arrows first."
This was also a strategy directed at using the available resources in a resourceful
manner.
A little while later Abu Bakr informed our Prophet: "0 Messenger of Allah! They
have drawn very close now and have even started to cause damage!"
The Battle
Just as Abu Bakr was informing the blessed Messenger that the two armies were now
facing each other at a very close distance, the sons of Rabia, Utba and Shayba along
with Walid ibn Utba had stepped a few steps forward, and they challenged the
believers to produce fighters who would battle it out with them one on one. 569 This
was a clear challenge and a show of strength at the same time! When Abu Hudhayfa
saw that his father Utba had stepped forward and was shouting at our Prophet, calling
him to arms, he himself wanted to come forward and fight his father but the
Messenger of Allah prevented him. This was because even if ones father was a
polytheist, one should not raise his sword against his father under any circumstance.
Instead, the sons of Afra hint Ubayd from the Ansar, Awf and Muadh and Abdullah
ibn Rawaha stepped forward. But our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, did
not want the Ansar to be the first to be offered as combatants, because the Ansar were
not the real target of the Quraysh. That is why he ordered them to step back as well.
The polytheists had interpreted the blessed Prophet's tactic in refusing the first two
Companions to fight as evidence of their own superiority and were shouting: "0
Muhammad! Put before us men from our tribe who would be equal to us."
Upon which our Prophet called out: "0 sons of Hashim! Rise up and show these
men in error, who try to extinguish the light of Allah, what fighting for Allah means!"
The message was received by the Companions the Messenger had intended. For his
blessed eyes were gazing towards the three bravest members of his family. The
Messenger's uncle Hamza, his uncle's sons Ali and Ubayda ibn Harith flung forward
unhesitant like arrows shot out of their bows. They were all covered in white robes
and turbans. That is why their opponents had difficulty in recognizing them. Utba
asked: "And who may you be? Speak and introduce yourselves to us!"

--- Sayfa 495 ---
"I am the son of Abdul Muttalib, the lion of Allah and His Messenger," roared
Hamza in a tone that planted fear in their hearts. Utba did not want to be outdone by
him so he said: "And I am the lion of my friends," implying that he, too, was a
combatant of his own caliber. He then added: "And who are the two men standing
beside you?"
"They are Ali ibn Abi Talib and Ubayda ibn Harith ibn Abdul Muttalib," answered
Hamza.
They too were equal in caliber. Utba called out to W alid and asked him to engage in
the fight first. It was Ali who came before Walid. With two strokes Ali ended Walid's
life. Everyone was looking at each other in shock as Walid's lifeless body lay on the
ground. They now felt the responsibility to win the second round more heavily upon
their shoulders. This time Utba himself stepped forward, and in front of him stood
Hamza. They drew their swords and in no time Utba was on the ground, lifeless.
Now it was Utba's brother Shayba's tum. Although he was greatly demoralized
after seeing his brother drop dead, he attacked with all his strength to avenge his
brother. He drew his sword and aimed directly at Ubayda. Ubayda was the oldest man
among the Companions that day and that is why the combat took a little longer.
Ubayda had been wounded; he was shaken up after receiving a blow to his foot, at
which point Hamza and Ali joined the fight and killed Shayba.
Hamza and Ali then carried Ubayda, whose foot had been severed, to the presence
of our Prophet. He was losing blood quickly. He had Ubayda's leg stretched on the
ground. But Ubayda did not care either for his severed foot or the faintness he felt
because of losing so much blood. Instead, he said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Had Abu
Talib been living today, he would have seen me verify his predictions."
With these words, Ubayda was reminding the Messenger of Allah the poem that
Abu Talib had recited back in the days, implying that he, too, had fulfilled the task
that had fallen upon him. 570
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, knew how to comfort Ubayda
ibn Harith and so he gave him the good news: "I bear witness that you are a martyr!"
War
And so the war started. The Meccans were giving it their all to finish off the Muslims
with one last push while the Muslims were showing determination so that the
oppression they suffered for fifteen years might end, so that they would silence the
voice of denial and show the invincibility of faith, and so that they may make the

--- Sayfa 496 ---
Name of Allah reign on earth. There were things that the Meccans had not reckoned
with. For starters, the Muhajirun were not the sort of opponents they had expected.
These people could fight when it came to it, and they also had an undying power of
faith, it was impossible to stand against this power.
Just as the survivors of war would later recount, the day had gone past so fast that
they had not been able to see who had struck whose head, and which sword had cut
whose arm. 571
Naturally, it had been the blessed Messenger who fought at the very forefront.
Speaking of what he saw, Ali would later say: "At a point when Badr became too
fierce we would seek refuge under the wings of the Messenger of Allah."
That day he fought at the position closest to the polytheists and he was the one who
complied with all the necessities of war. Apart from prayer and supplication, jihad had
to be physically performed as well, and thus he would show his Ummah how to fight
by joining together these two elements. At one point our Prophet was heard saying:
"Race with each other to win Paradise which is as big as the earth and the heavens! I
swear by He who holds my life in His hands, whoever falls here today fighting with
patience and without the thought of returning home and with only the pleasure of
Allah as his goal, Allah the Almighty will put him in His Paradise."
At that moment Umayr ibn Numan had retired to one side to eat some dates to curb
his hunger. When he heard the statement made by of our Prophet, he asked: "Really, 0
Messenger of Allah, is it as big as the earth and the heavens?"
To which our beloved Prophet replied: "Yes."
''You mean that what stands between me and Paradise is only death?" he said.
Then he looked at the dates in his hands and said: "You are keeping me away from
embracing my Lord," and throwing the dates away, he brandished his sword and ran
towards the enemy, and was lost in the crowd. 572
At one point Umar approached our Prophet and heard him recite the verse with the
meaning: "(But let them know that) the hosts will all be routed, and they will turn
their backs and flee," (al-Qamar 54:45) as he attacked the enemy with agility. Umar
reassured himself that since the blessed Messenger was reciting this verse, the
Meccans were surely going to be defeated that day and would run back to where they
came from!
Abu '1-Bakhtari
One of our Prophet's Companions, Mujazzar ibn Ziyad, ran into Abu'l Bakhtari

--- Sayfa 497 ---
during battle. Bakhtari was one of the polytheists that our Prophet had told his
Companions not to hurt. They were so careful when complying with his demands that
even in the heat of the battle Mujazzar addressed Abu'l Bakhtari in the following way:
"The Messenger of Allah has forbidden us to kill you!"
When hearing this, Abu'l-Bakhtari was a little relieved. But he was not alone in this
war; his friend Juada ibn Mulayha who had accompanied him on his journey from
Mecca was with him. He asked: "What about my friend?"
Mujazzar answered: "There is no such order for your friend. I swear we will pursue
your friend and won't set him free! Our orders from the Messenger of Allah concern
only you."
Upon which Abu'l Bakhtari said: "Then I will not leave my friend on his own! If I
die, I will die with him! How can I let the women of Mecca say 'He abandoned his
friend in order to stay alive,"' and he continued to brandish his sword towards
Mujazzar. He then said: "Ibn Hurra will continue on his way, and he will not hand
over his hand as long as he lives."
Then the fight resumed between them. Abu'l Bakhtari's aggressive side had taken
over him, and he was swinging back and forth his sword fiercely. At last he dropped
dead with a blow from Mujazzar.
Mujazzar ibn Ziyad was at a loss about what to do. On the one hand he was happy
because he had slain one of the pillars of denial. But he was also sad because he had
killed a man whom our Prophet had ordered not to touch.
He hung his head in shame and came to the presence of the Prophet; a great sense of
remorse could be seen in his fallen posture. He informed the Messenger of Allah with
a soft tone: "0 Messenger of Allah. I swear by He who has sent you with truth that I
tried my best to take him captive and bring him to you but he resisted me and
preferred to die fighting. That's why I had to kill him."
The End of Abu Jahl
Two young men from the Ansar approached Abdurrahman ibn Awf who was fighting
in the front ranks. These youngsters were Muadh ibn Amr ibn Jamuh and Muadh ibn
Afra. They were so young that their moustaches had only just started to grow. It was
also clear that they had barely escaped from being sent home when the army had set
off from Medina.
When Abdurrahman saw them approach, he wished that more experienced men had
come to his side. But their aim was not to fight alongside him. One of the boys came

--- Sayfa 498 ---
to his side slowly and almost whispered in his ear so that his friend may not hear:
"Dear uncle, do you know Abu Jahl?"
''Yes, I do," answered Abdurrahman ibn Awf. "And what business do you have
with Abu Jahl, 0 son of my brother?"
"I heard him slander the Messenger of Allah; I swear by He who holds my life in
His hands that ifl see him, I will kill him before my shadow leaves his."
While he said these to Abdurrahman ibn Awf, the other young boy was tagging at
his cloak on his other side, saying similar things, asking about Abu Jahl. It was as if
they were both competing with one another as to who would kill Abu Jahl first.
Abdurrahman ibn Awf could not hide his surprise at the dedication and fearless
requests of these two youths.
Amazed, he said: "The man you ask about is that man over there," pointing to the
man across him who was fighting while murmuring poetry.
The minute he pointed at Abu Jahl, the two boys sprung towards their target like a
bullet. Abdurrahman ibn Awf was left behind, watching them in amazement. For
people had been admiring Abu Jahl and saying: "Today no one will dare come near
Abu Jahl."
But these two boys had already made their way towards him. Only a very short time
passed between them reaching Abu Jahl and him falling down on the ground. They
had attacked together from each side, and with the blows from their swords, Abu Jahl
was now lying on the ground, lingering in the throes of death.
Satisfied and happy, they came to the presence of the blessed Prophet. Another
great enemy of Allah had fallen down, and there could be no greater news. When it
was time to share this good news with the Messenger of Allah, they explained how
they had slain Abu Jahl, the Pharaoh of the Ummah. Our noble Prophet appreciated
what they had done and sharing their excitement, he asked: "So, which one of you
killed him?"
Both of them said that they were the one who had killed him. He then asked: "Have
you wiped your swords?"
''No, 0 Messenger of Allah," they answered.
They immediately took out their swords, racing each other to show them to the
Messenger of Allah first, to prove that they had indeed killed him. The noble
Messenger looked carefully at both swords and said: ''You have killed him together."
Muadh ibn Afra was wounded in one arm and he realized this wound only after
leaving the presence of the blessed Prophet. He was losing blood. It turned out that

--- Sayfa 499 ---
while he was brandishing his sword against Abu Jahl, his son Ikrima had targeted
Muadh and had wounded him on the arm. Abu Jahl had fallen injured, but he was still
alive.
The war had ended. The Companions were waiting for the order of our Prophet so
that they could inspect the battlefield and see the dead and wounded. Our noble
Prophet asked specifically whether Abu Jahl was among the dead. He described to
them a wound on his leg, should they have difficulty in identifying him. Before the
revelations had started in Hira, at a time when they were in the house of Abdullah ibn
Jud'an, Abu Jahl had deceived him and our Prophet had hurled him to the ground.
That maneuver had left a mark on Abu Jahl's knee. That was the wound that the
Messenger of Allah was describing.
When Abdullah ibn Masud located Abu Jahl, he was on the brink of death. He had
put his helmet on his face and placed his sword on his knee. He was lying face down
on the ground and had no strength to move, but he was still alive. Ibn Masud first
wanted to raise his sword and finish him off, but that would have been an easy death
for Abu Jahl. Abu Jahl had to feel defeat to his very bones. He also remembered the
threats that Abu Jahl had made against him years ago in Mecca. In those difficult days
Abu Jahl had threatened Ibn Masud and assured him: "I will definitely kill you."
At the time, Ibn Masud had a dream and he had interpreted it to mean that it would
be him who would in the end slay Abu Jahl. That is why he approached him and
nudged his head with his foot: "Thanks be to Allah who has put you to shame and
disgrace, 0 you enemy of Allah! Have you now come to your senses?"
But Abu Jahl was still the same Abu Jahl. He neither wanted to accept defeat, nor
did he concede from his denial. He responded: "Why should I feel shame or disgrace!
In the end, all you will achieve is having killed one man! Why should I feel disgraced
because a vagabond has killed me?"
Abu Jahl was actually thinking of something else; he was wondering the outcome of
the battle. He wanted to learn how the army he had persuaded to come to Badr was
faring. He asked with difficulty: "Just tell me, who has won the war?"
"The victory is Allah's and His Messenger's," cried out Ibn Masud.
Ultimately, what killed Abu Jahl was this news. For a man who was once a living
example of enmity and hatred, he now looked bitterly at Ibn Masud. This glance also
signaled the end of denial, Even though he did not want to concede because of his
pride. Even in this pitiful state, was still looked down upon Ibn Masud, refusing to
recognize the irony of the situation he himself was in. For Abu Jahl still regarded Ibn

--- Sayfa 500 ---
Masud as a shepherd, even though there was nothing shameful about herding sheep. It
was the Messenger of Allah himself who had said that every single Prophet of Allah
had herded sheep. Yes, Ibn Masud too had herded sheep but Abu Jahl's real intention
was to insult Ibn Masud with the last few breaths he had before he left this world. This
had been the last straw for Ibn Masud and Abu Jahl had prepared his own end.
With one final blow, Ibn Masud ended the life of Abu Jahl, a life constructed upon
hate and the oppression of others. Thus, another pillar of denial had been destroyed.
Abu Jahl's death signaled the turning point for Badr. The polytheists who had come to
fight only with his coercion started to run away after hearing the news of his death.
Ibn Masud came to our Prophet with this good news. When our Prophet heard the
news he first said: "La ilaha illallah!" (There is no deity but Allah) and then asked: "Is
he really killed?"
When Ibn Masud said "Yes" our Prophet went down to prostration and prayed two
cycles of Prayer, supplicating: "Thanks be to Allah who has made Islam and the
Muslims glorious!"
When the difference between truth and error became even clearer and the
polytheists started to run away, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, drew his sword and started to pursue them. Running after them, he kept repeating
the verses: "(But let them know that) the hosts will all be routed and they will turn
their backs and flee" (al-Qamar 54:45). This verse had been revealed five years ago, in
Mecca, and since that day the Companions had been waiting for the day that the
polytheist army would be defeated and run.
When the day of Badr came and they saw our noble Prophet reciting this verse as he
pursued the fleeing army, they were sure that the verse that day had given the good
tidings of the day of Badr. There was nothing left of the Quraysh in the field of Badr
except for the captives who had been tied up and the lifeless bodies of the polytheists.
A group of Companions were inspecting the captives with our noble Prophet.
Someone from the Companions stepped forward and said to our Prophet that now was
the time to attack the fleeing caravan. This was heard by our Prophet's uncle Abbas
and he said: "No, that is not permitted for you!"
Everyone was surprised. It was unheard of for a man who was captive to try and
teach a lesson to those who had taken him captive. The Messenger of Allah asked his
uncle: "And why would that be?"
"Because Allah the Almighty promised you one of the two groups, and now He has
given you one ofthem."

--- Sayfa 501 ---
The point Abbas was making here was true. Since Allah the Almighty had given
them the victory of Badr it would have been complete greediness to go after the
caravan. Our noble Prophet turned to Abbas and said: "You are right."
Meanwhile, the blessed Messenger was celebrating the victory that had been
bestowed upon him through words of poetry and sharing his happiness with his closes
Companion Abu Bakr.
Jubayr, the son of Mut'im ibn Adiyy-the polytheist who had offered our Prophet
protection on his journey back from Taif-came to the blessed Messenger and asked
for forgiveness. This was an act that had made the Messenger of Allah reminisce
about the past. After a while he said: "Had Mut'im ibn Adiyy been living today and if
he had spoken to me about these captives, I would've set them free just for his sake."
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, was a man ofloyalty, and
those who had lived through those days with him were trying to remember the
significant role that Ibn Adiyy had played in ending the three year boycott and the
heroism he had shown on the Messenger's return from Taif. He had taken the side of
the blessed Messenger and the believers and had been instrumental in ending another
period of oppression. 573
Servanthood during War
At the fiercest moments of the war, Ali would come to check up on our Prophet and
would find him prostrating and in constant prayer. The Messenger of Allah was a
person who did not shy away from fighting at the very front when there was need; but
he also never neglected keeping council with his Lord, which was just as important as
physical exertion.
Upon seeing that the blessed Messenger was safe, Ali once again dived into the
ranks to fight. Though his body was at war, his mind was continuously with our
Prophet and soon after, he came to check up on him again. The scene had not changed,
the blessed Messenger was in prostration, praying. Eventually the battle ended and Ali
was once again at the side of our Prophet. It was strange that he was still in prostration
and was calling out to his Lord: "0 my Lord, the All-Living and Self-Subsisting."
And he would continue praying in this position till every Qurayshi left Badr.
When speaking of that day, Jabir would speak of the following incident: "We were
praying with the Messenger of Allah during the battle of Badr. We realized that at one
point he was smiling. When he finished, we asked him: '0 Messenger of Allah! We
saw you smile during the prayer; why was that?' In response he said to us: 'Angel

--- Sayfa 502 ---
Mikail just passed by me. He had gone after a Qurayshi and was returning with dust
covering his clothes. He smiled at me and I smiled back! "'574
The Angels at Badr
Badr was extraordinary in all respects. The Quraysh had left Mecca with such high
hopes, and now they were returning wounded and defeated having left almost all their
leading men on the battlefield! For them, Badr had been a battle that ended even
before it began. For that day, before they knew what hit them, their heads had been
severed like harvested crops. It was as if men that they could not see were coming at
them and slaying them one by one. Those who had survived that day and had managed
to get back home alive, the same people who had later embraced Islam would later all
converge on the same thing: that day an unseen force had defeated the Qurayshi army.
When they had attacked the Muslim army, the very army whom they were
underestimating because of their small number, a cloud had gathered on top of them
which had put fear into the hearts of the polytheists. They had heard of what had
happened to the army of Abraha so many times that this tragic end was still very vivid
in their minds. What they saw was not merely a rain cloud; they could hear cries of
charging from within the cloud, including neighing of horses and clanking of swords,
sounds that could be heard all the way on the other side of the battlefield. Their shock
was to such an extent that the Muslim army whom they had previously seen to be only
a fourth of their own force now appeared differently to them, and they thought they
must be twice as big as their own army. All of a sudden everything had changed and
this change had brought them a little closer to death.
Suhayl ibn Amr, one of the polytheists who had been taken captive m Badr
returning to Mecca after having paid his price, spoke of the extraordinary sights he
had seen on the day: "During the battle of Badr, I saw such steeds between the earth
and the heavens and such horsemen in white riding them that it seemed to me that they
were either taking everyone in their way captive or were killing them."
When speaking of that day, Abdurrahman ibn Awf said that he first saw two people
fighting on the right and left side of our Prophet, and then later he saw another two
men come in front and behind, protecting him from danger.
One day, the Truthful Gabriel came to our Prophet in the appearance of Dihyah al-
Kalbi and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, asked him:
"Which of the angels was it who said ''Aqdim Hayzum!" (Come on Hayzum!) on the
day of Badr?" Gabriel replied:

--- Sayfa 503 ---
"All those I know among the inhabitants of the heavens."
Saib ibn Abi Hubaysh who had been taken captive that day swore that it was no
mortal being who had taken him captive. When he was asked who then had captured
him, he answered: "When the Quraysh started to lose, I was in shock. Then all of a
sudden, a tall man dressed in white and a turban wrapped around his head riding a
horse with white feet whose forehead filled the skies and the earth caught up with me
and tied me up tightly with a rope. At that point Abdurrahman ibn Awf came up to me
and seeing me in that state, asked: 'Who captured this man?"
No one answered. Then he took me to the presence of the Messenger of Allah. He
asked me: "0 Ibn Abi Hubaysh! Who took you captive?"
"I do not know," I answered. Upon that he said: "It was one of the angels who took
you captive."
Our noble Prophet's uncle Abbas had been taken captive by a Companion called
Abu'l-Yasar who was slight of build. Abbas on the other hand was a strong, heavy-
built man. Later our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, would ask Abu'l-
Yasar: "0 Abu'l-Yasar! Will you tell me how it is that you were able to take Abbas
captive?"
Embarrassed, he answered: "0 Messenger of Allah! When taking him captive a
man I had not seen before helped me."
And then he went on to describe the man.
To this sincere reply of Abu'l-Yasar, the Messenger of Allah said: "An angel full of
grace has helped you."
That day when all had been said and done, the Truthful Gabriel came to the
presence of the blessed Messenger and called to him thus: "0 Muhammad! Allah the
Almighty sent me to you and told me to stay by you until you are content with me; are
you content with me?"
Upon which our noble Prophet replied: "Yes I am content," and then told him that
he could leave Badr.
The Martyrs
There were fourteen martyrs from the believers that day. Six of them were from the
Muhajirun, eight from the Ansar, two from the Aws and six from the Khazraj. 575
Among the martyrs were our Prophet's cousin who had lost his foot in the one-on-one
combat Ubayda ibn Harith, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas's younger brother Umayr ibn Abi
Waqqas, Akil ibn Abi Bukayr who had come to Badr with three of his brothers, our

--- Sayfa 504 ---
mother Afra's sons Awf and Muawiz, Umayr ibn Al-Humam, Sa'd ibn Haysama,
Dhushimalayn ibn Abdiamr, Mubashir ibn Abdilmunzir, Umar's freed slave Mihja,
Safwan ibn Bayda, Yazid ibn Harith, Rafi ibn Mualla and Anas ibn Malik's cousin
Haritha ibn Suraqa.
Yes, one could rejoice about victory. But even if there should be victory, there was
sadness on the battlefield of Badr as well. That is because for our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, every single human being was like a universe and was equally
very important. Now he had to leave fourteen of his dearest Companions on the field
of Badr. The news brought by Gabriel said that twice what had hit them had hit the
other side, and this would comfort the believers somewhat, assuring them that they
should not be sad despite all the difficulties they had survived. 576
Our noble Prophet did not return from Badr at once and decided to stay there for a
further three days. During this stay he would perform the Funeral Prayers for his
Companions who had come to Badr with him and who had been the first to become
martyrs. He would pray for them to the Gracious Lord and would accompany them in
their last journey with the rest ofhis Companions by his side.
Addressing the Dead
The polytheists on the other hand had left seventy dead as they left and fled Badr.577
The polytheists whose names our Prophet had cursed in his supplication before the
war were also among the dead: Abu Jahl, Umayya ibn Khalaf, Rabia's son Utba and
Shayba and Uqba ibn Abi Muayt. They were all lying lifeless on the ground in the
exact places where the Messenger of Allah had indicated before the battle had even
started. Before long, they would start to smell under the scorching sun and an
unbearable stench would spread through the field. Other names such as Walid ibn
Utba, Abu Sufyan's son Hanzala, Umayya ibn Khalaf's son Ali, Uqba ibn Abi Muayt,
Talha's uncle Umayr ibn Uthman, the brother of our mother Umm Salama, Masud ibn
Abi Umayya and Abu'l-Bakhtari were among the other important people killed from
the Meccan polytheists.
Among the dead were also those young people who had been Muslim but who had
still been forced to fight. Fetters on their necks and feet, they had not been able to
immigrate like the other Muslims and had been forced to follow their masters to Badr.
These young Muslims were Harith ibn Zam'a, Abu Qays ibn Fakiha, Abu Qays ibn
Walid, Ali ibn Umayya and As ibn Munabbih.
They had become Muslim when our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was
still in Mecca but because of the great pressure they received from their fathers, they

--- Sayfa 505 ---
had not be able to declare their faith overtly. Today, they all lay dead on the field of
Badr.
This was a bitter experience indeed. In order not to witness such scenes again, the
Truthful Gabriel descended and brought the following message which would be a
lesson for all those who had survived the battle:
As to those whose souls the angels (charged with taking the souls of
people) take in the state of wrongdoing themselves (by continuing to live
in unbelief, without suffering to emigrate to a land where they would be
able to attain faith): They (the angels) ask the: 'What situation were you
in (so that you were not with the believers)?' They say: 'We were under
such oppression in this land that we could not find a way to faith.' They
(the angels) say: 'Was Allah's earth not wide enough for you to emigrate
in it?' Such are those whose refuge is Hell: how evil a destination to
arrive at. (an-Nisa 4:97)578
Three days had passed since the battle ended; before preparing his horse for the ride
back home, the blessed Messenger of Allah stopped by the lifeless bodies of the
polytheist chiefs and started to address them with their full appellations: "0 son of
such and such! 0 Abu Jahl ibn Hisham! 0 Utba ibn Rabia! 0 Shayba ibn Rabia! 0
Umayya ibn Khalaf! Have you now seen what it means to disobey Allah and His
Messenger? Have you seen that what your Lord promised you was the truth? I have
truly seen that what my Lord promised me was the truth! No others have treated their
Prophet as badly as you! While people put faith in me, you confuted me! While they
embraced me, you drove me out of my homeland! While others helped me, you
declared war against me! And Allah punished you very badly indeed for all that you
have done to me. Although I was sure of what I was saying, you accused me of lying;
you called me false although I was loyal and true!"
Umar, who witnessed this address of the Messenger of Allah, said: "0 Messenger
of Allah! It has been three days since these people died. Why are you then speaking to
their rotten lifeless bodies as if you are waiting for a response?
Our noble Prophet answered: "Don't think that you can hear what I am saying better
than they do. For they can hear everything I am saying now, but do not have the power
to respond."
The Uniqueness of Our Prophet
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was so merciful that he would
order the burial of the leaders of Quraysh who had been abandoned by their own

--- Sayfa 506 ---
people, and he himself would oversee their burial.
When burying Utba ibn Rabia, he looked at Utba's son Abu Hudhayfa who was
beside him, trying to understand the emotions he must be going through. Abu
Hudhayfa had turned pale. Obviously, he was grieved. It was clear that he was feeling
sorry for his father who had passed away without having embraced the faith. Our
noble Prophet could not bear to see him in such a sad state so he approached him, and
stroking the grieved Abu Hudhayfa on the head, he said: "I presume you are upset
about your father's situation."
''No," responded Abu Hudhayfa. "I swear neither my father nor the fact that he lies
here lifeless saddens me; the only thing that makes me sad is that my father was a soft
natured man, very reasonable in thought and too virtuous to end up like this. This
character of his used to give me hope; I was hoping that one day he would approach
Islam. I had been anticipating the day when he would embrace the faith, and now I
can't bear to see him like this."
This was indeed something to be sad about. In order to lift his spirits, the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, would pray to his Lord that He may take
away this sadness, thus sharing Abu Hudhayfa's grief.
It was the Messenger of mercy himself who buried Abu Jahl, the very man who had
pursued him relentlessly and who bore the greatest animosity against him. When
burying him in the ground he said: "Had Abu Talib been living today, he would have
witnessed how our swords came upon their heads."
For Abu Talib had recited a long poem during the Meccan years in anticipation of
the future after Abu Jahl and his accomplices had attacked our Prophet: "The
oppressors of today will see tomorrow what swords will fall upon their heads."
Now the result was crystal clear. Although their numbers had been few, the
Muslims had won a great victory in Badr. This victory was so impressive that it could
result in some individuals overstepping the boundaries of the ego and even disregard
the balance that needed to be kept in understanding that victory came from Allah and
not from themselves. It was the error of the time to see the victory as a work of certain
heroic people. So, in order to prevent such an error, the Truthful Gabriel descended
and brought the following revelations to our Prophet:
You (0 believers) did not kill them (by yourselves in the battle), but Allah
killed them; and when you (0 Messenger) threw (dust at them at the start
of the battle), it was not you who threw but Allah threw. (He did all this)
so that he might put the believers to a test by a fair testing from Him (so

--- Sayfa 507 ---
that they could attain their goal and should know that victory is from
Allah). Surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. (al-Anfal 8: 17)
Before long, the Truthful Gabriel would descend again and would explain to the
believers the true nature of the event:
For sure Allah had helped you to victory at Badr when you were a
despised (small) force. So observe your duty to Allah in due reverence for
Him, that you may be thankful. When you said to the believers: "Does it
not suffice you that your Lord will come to your help with three thousand
angels sent down?" Surely it does. (More than that), if you are steadfast
and act in piety to deserve His protection, and the enemy should fall upon
you all at once, your Lord will come to your help with five thousand
angels swooping down. Allah did not ordain this save as a message of
good hope for you, and so that thereby your hearts might be at peace-
victory comes only from Allah, the All-Glorious with irresistible might,
the All-Wise. (Al Imran 3:123-126)
The Good News Comes to Medina
The Messenger of Allah sent his freed slave Zayd ibn Haritha and Abdullah ibn
Raw aha to Medina to inform them of the outcome of the war. The next day after the
war, a Sunday, they came to the place called Aqiq and there they would part ways to
reach Medina from different routes. Before long, the people of Medina heard Abdullah
ibn Rawaha call out: "0 Ansar! Good tidings to you! Our noble Prophet is safe and
sound; the polytheists have been killed and taken captive. The two sons of Rabia and
Hajjaj, Abu Jahl, Zam'a ibn Aswad and Umayya ibn Khalaf have been killed. Suhayl
ibn Amr is among the prisoners!"
Asim ibn Adiyy listened to Abdullah carefully and asked: "Is what you say true, 0
Ibn Rawaha?"
"Of course it is," answered Abdullah. "I swear it is true. Tomorrow the Messenger
of Allah will here come too, with the prisoners in fetters."
There was great joy in Medina. Abdullah ibn Rawaha was going from door to door
sharing this good news. Children had gathered around him, and were running with him
in the town streets singing: "The degenerate Abu Jahl has been killed! Everyone,
including Umayya ibn Zayd has got what they deserved."
Zayd ibn Haritha had entered Medina from a different neighborhood, riding our
Prophet's camel Qaswa. He too was giving good tidings akin to Abdullah ibn

--- Sayfa 508 ---
Raw aha's and was sharing the news of the victory in Badr in the following way:
"Rabia's sons Utba and Shayba, Hajjaj's two sons, Abu Jahl, Abu'l-Bakhtari, Zam'a
ibn Aswad and Umayya ibn Khalaf have all been killed. Many of them have been
taken captive, including the fiercest of them, Suhayl ibn Amr."
Some people watching Zayd ibn Haritha return to Medina with our Prophet's camel
hesitated; they thought that he must be in shock after what he had experienced at war.
They were very worried since the blessed Messenger's camel had come without its
rightful owner. They feared our noble Prophet might have been killed in Badr.
In the meantime, one of the hypocrites had approached Abu Lubaba and said: "Your
friends have been so tom apart after the war that they will not be able to collect
themselves ever again after this day! Look, the chief Companion and Muhammad
have been killed! Here is his camel, we all recognize it! And this Zayd, he doesn't
know what he's talking about, he is in shock."
Abu Lubaba looked at the man who was making these bitter allegations and said:
"Soon Allah the Almighty will prove that what you are saying is not true!"
The Jews also made use of this opportunity to say: "There is no doubt that Zayd has
fled from the battlefield."
Usama ibn Zayd came running when he heard his father's voice and took him aside
to ask: "My dear father, is what you say really true?"
"My dear son, of course what I say is all true," responded Zayd.
Upon which U sama went to the hypocrite who had spread the rumor that the blessed
Messenger must have been killed and said: "There is no doubt that you are spreading
lies about the Messenger of Allah and Muslims; you will see, as soon as the blessed
Messenger comes I will tell him of your lies and have your head cut off1"
The next day the prisoners of war were led into Medina by our Prophet's free slave
Shukran and the truth of the matter would thus become evident.
Leaving Badr, and the Spoils ofWar
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, gave the job of gathering the
spoils of a hundred and fifty camels and other commercial goods to Habbab ibn Arat
and then left Badr. He himself rode the camel left by Abu JahP79 and had made his
way towards Medina.
He had appointed his freed slave Shukran to see to the war prisoners. They were
bringing the captives to Medina as well. There was no clear Qur'anic verse concerning
prisoners and the spoils of war. That is why our Prophet said: "Whoever you have

--- Sayfa 509 ---
killed among the polytheists, their valuables now belong to you, and whoever has
taken whoever captive, he is that man's captive."
Those who had run after the polytheists after a certain point in the war had not been
able to collect any spoils at all. That is why they were speaking among themselves, not
being able to come to an agreement. Those who had stayed in the battlefield to collect
the spoils said that it was their right; those who had pursued the fleeing polytheists to
ensure the final victory said that they had rights in the spoils that had been collected
and they protested that their rights be addressed.
When they couldn't resolve the issue together, they brought their problem to the
Messenger of Allah. In the meantime, the Truthful Gabriel had brought the solution
and had told our Prophet the guidelines for distributing the spoils, leaving no issue
unaddressed. According to the verses Gabriel had brought, our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, would take one fifth of the spoils and the rest would be
distributed equally among the Companions.
The only exception was a few Companions who had not fought at Badr who were
also entitled to getting some of the spoils. These were Abu Lubaba ibn Abdulmunzir
whom our Prophet had left as governor of Medina, Talha ibn Ubaydullah and Said ibn
Zayd whom he had sent on the road to Damascus to pursue Abu Sufyan's caravan,
Uthman, who could not come because of the illness of our mother Ruqayyah, and
Asim ibn Adiyy, Harith ibn Hatib, Hawwat ibn Jubayr and Harith ibn Simma whom
he had left as deputies in Quba.
He had also set aside a portion of the spoil for the relatives of those Companions
who had been martyred in Badr.
When the spoils were being distributed, the men who had fought fiercely and took
greater risks expected to be treated differently as well and to receive a greater share of
the spoil. The fact that the spoils were the rights of fighters was already set out in the
recently revealed verses, but they asked our noble Prophet that day as to the further
details of the distribution. That is why Sa'd ibn Muadh asked: "0 Messenger of Allah!
Will you give to the horsemen who have performed a very important task the same
amount you give to the weaker soldiers?"
The Messenger of Allah first turned to Sa'd ibn Muadh and then said with a sweet
voice:
"0 Muadh! Did you not achieve victory on the shoulders of the weak and the
powerless?"
When they came to a place called Safra, the sixty-three year old Ubayda ibn Harith,

--- Sayfa 510 ---
who had gone into the one-to-one combat on the order of the Messenger and had been
wounded on his foot, was too weak to continue walking. The Messenger of mercy was
trying to comfort him with his affectionate looks, but it was clear that Ubayd ibn
Harith was in great pain. Deep down, he felt peaceful and content that he would die a
martyr; for he had received this good news from the blessed Messenger himself. It was
now time for the realization of this good news and Ubayda died there with his head on
the knees of our Prophet.
When they arrived at Rawha, they met with the crowd that had come to greet them
from Medina. Rawha witnessed a great celebration that day. They were celebrating the
victory that had been won by the Muslims over the army of Mecca, and men, women
and children were sharing their happiness together. 580
Upon witnessing the humbling reception and glorification by the people, Salama ibn
Salama said: "Why are you making this victory such a big deal and exalting us in this
manner? I swear by Allah that it was as if we were fighting old men who had gone
bald and whose backs were arched, or as if they were camels with two of their feet tied
up waiting to be slaughtered. All that was left for us to do was to sever their heads,
and that's exactly what we did."
This was also a way not to boast about themselves and assume credit for their
victory, but rather to rejoice at the Divine help they had received. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who heard Ibn Salama's humble comment
first smiled and then said: "0 son of my brother! They were distinguished men indeed;
you would have been startled if you saw them from afar, and you would respond to
their orders immediately when they asked. When you compare your own deeds with
the efforts they put forth, you would look down upon your own actions, and they
would become greater in your eyes! But they raced to do evil to their Messenger!"
These were the very words that explained exactly what had happened to the
Quraysh and why.
Our noble Prophet reached Medina on a Wednesday, a day earlier than the prisoners
of war. The people who had gathered at the hill of Wada were singing songs to the
Messenger of Allah who had come to them like the full moon, and they were
embracing him with sweet melodies. Many people who heard that he was returning
victorious came and declared wholeheartedly that they, too, had become Muslims.
Now there was no support they could hold on to in the name of denial and the people
who were hoping for dissension had their hopes crushed. Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn
Salul was among them. The Jews who saw his coming said: "This Prophet is the
Prophet whose attributes we read in the Torah," thus conceding their position as well.

--- Sayfa 511 ---
Treatment of the Captives and Consultation
Meanwhile, the Messenger of mercy had asked his Companions to be sensitive when
handling the captives and to treat them well. Such that when meal times arrived, the
Companions would give their own share of dates as food for the captives.
Abu Zayd, who was to become a Muslim later, would point to this fact when talking
about those days of captivity: "I was among those captives who were brought to
Medina with the Ansar that day. When it was mealtime and the Companions of the
Messenger were about to eat something, they would give their own share of bread to
me instead in order to comply with the advice of the Messenger of Allah, and they
tried to keep themselves full by eating dates. On one of these days, one of the
Companions handed me the bread he had in his hand. I was embarrassed to take it so I
gave it to someone else, but what happened was the same piece of bread did a few
rounds and ended back in my hands."
The first evening when the captives were brought to Medina our Prophet could not
sleep a wink. Some of the Companions who realized this asked him the reason. He
answered: "I could not sleep from Abbas's moaning!"
One of the Companions who heard this stood up from where he was, went to Abbas
and untied him. A little while later our Prophet asked: "Why do I not hear the moans
of Abbas anymore?"
The Companion who had untied Abbas stepped forward and said: "I untied his
fetters, 0 Messenger of Allah."
The Prophet of Mercy who heard this act of mercy, smiled. It was clear that he was
very happy for what had been done. But just as he was the Prophet of Mercy, he was
also a Prophet that represented justice, so he said to the Companion who had untied
Abbas: "Go now and untie all the prisoners."
This was one side of the matter, now they had to find a solution to the new situation
they were in. Just like the situation they faced after the war regarding the spoils, the
current situation of the prisoners was a first and there was no precedent to follow. No
Divine message had come. They could not return the prisoners just because there was
no Divine decree either, because if they did, the polytheists would then start their war
plans anew on their return, and this would play perfectly into the hands of the
polytheists.
That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, first gathered his
Companions together and then consulted with them about what they should do with
the prisoners. These were all new and important issues, for the steps taken on that day

--- Sayfa 512 ---
would later become the precedent to follow. 581
'What do you think about these prisoners?" The blessed Messenger asked. He then
added: "Even if they should be your brothers of yesterday, Allah the Almighty has
today made them look upon you and your word to determine their fates."
Abu Bakr, the loyal Companion of the Prophet of Mercy, came forward: "0
Messenger of Allah. Even though Allah the Almighty has helped you and made you
victorious over them, they are still your relatives. Some of them are the sons of your
uncles, some of them are members of your tribe and some of them are your brothers! I
think it would be better if you took ransom for them and set them free. Thus, with
what we take from them, we will be more powerful than that of the deniers. And
maybe in doing so, Allah the Almighty will soften their hearts towards you with this
merciful gesture, and maybe one day they will come to you and support you!"
After listening to the view of his loyal friend, the blessed Messenger turned to
another close friend and asked: "And what do you make of it, 0 son ofKhattab?"
"0 Messenger of Allah," started Umar. "These are the men who drove you out of
your homeland, who declared you to be a liar and who confronted you with the
intention of killing you! I do not think like Abu Bakr; I think you should give so and
so person to me so that I may execute him myself! Leave Uqayl to Ali; let him finish
him! And to Hamza leave his brother, so that he may kill him! This way, Allah the
Almighty may see that we do not have an ounce of love in our hearts for the
polytheists! For these are the leading men of Quraysh and they are the men who led
others to Badr to fight us, let their heads be severed! I do not like the idea of them
being prisoners at your hand."
At that moment Abdullah ibn Rawaha came forward and said: "0 Messenger of
Allah, as far as I can see, there is much shrubs and firewood in this valley. I say let's
bum this place while they're in it."
Upon Ibn Rawaha's suggestion, the blessed Messenger's uncle Abbas said: "In
doing so, you sever all ties of kinship!" thus showing his reaction.
After listening to the views of his Companions, the Messenger of Allah entered
inside his home in Medina. The Companions waiting outside continued to speak
amongst themselves; some of them shared the same views as Abu Bakr, that they
should take ransom and set the prisoners free; others wanted to follow Umar's idea
and kill them all, and there were others who shared Abdullah ibn Rawaha's view to
bum them. After a while our Prophet stepped outside and said: "Verily Allah the
Almighty has softened the hearts of some men that they are softer than soft! And He

--- Sayfa 513 ---
has hardened the hearts of some that they are harder than stone," and then added:
"You 0 Abu Bakr are like Mikail who descends with compassion, and among
Prophets, like Abraham who says ''He who follows me is truly of me; while he who
disobeys me, surely You are All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate," (Ibrahim 14:36) and
Jesus who says "If You punish them, they are Your servants; and if You forgive them,
You are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise" (al-Maedah 5: 118)."
Then he turned towards Umar: "And you 0 Umar! Among the angels you are like
Gabriel who descends with fierceness, toughness and the intention of punishing the
enemies of Allah, and among the Prophets, you are like Noah who says, ''My Lord! Do
not leave on the earth any from among the unbelievers dwelling therein!" (Nuh 71 :26)
and Moses who says, "Our Lord! Destroy their riches, and press upon their hearts, for
they do not believe until they see the painful punishment" (Yunus 10:88)."
Then he called out to both Abu Bakr and Umar: "If you converge on a viewpoint, I
will not oppose it!"
He had not yet finished his words when Abdullah ibn Masud's voice was heard: "0
Messenger of Allah," he was saying. I would like you to exempt Suhayl ibn Bayda
because I have heard him say beautiful things about Islam, he is about to become a
Muslim."
This was news that made their hearts rejoice. Abdullah ibn Rawaha who heard this
would say later: "I have never feared that stones would rain down on me from the
heavens as when I heard the Messenger say 'Let Suhayl ibn Bayda be exempt'."
A mutual viewpoint had been decided, and our Prophet had favored it too. The
verses that had been revealed thus far emphasized on inviting people to faith by
forgiving them, and also through wisdom and good advice. As a soul that had become
one with the Qur'an, forgiveness had become one of the distinguishing characters of
the Messenger of mercy. He complied with the general view and ordered the prisoners
to be set free in return for a ransom. As for the exact price of the ransom, they decided
on four thousand uqiyyas. 582
Despite having decided the ransom price, the Companions were being flexible with
it and the amount was decreased for those who could not find that amount of money.
And then there were the poor people who had nothing at all; the Messenger of mercy
wanted them to gain their freedom as well, and soon a solution was found. It was
decided that those who did not have the means to pay for their own ransom would
teach ten young Muslims how to read and thereby gain their freedom. 583
Those who neither had the money, nor knew how to read or write would not be

--- Sayfa 514 ---
excluded from the mercy of the Messenger either. They would be set free upon the
condition that they would not speak ill against Islam ever again and would not help
those who oppose Islam. Amr ibn Abdullah, also known as Abu Izza, was one of these
people.584
The Treatment of the Prisoners
When the war ended and the winning side became apparent, strange things started
happening among the prisoners. These prisoners were the very people that the
Muhajirun had shared the same space in Mecca not long ago, they were their relatives
or neighbors. They had married into each other's families and they had gone to
Damascus and Yemen together for trade. They had good and bad memories together.
When Islam came as the new religion and our Prophet started to perform his duty of
communicating the faith, some of them had not wanted to accept this. What's more,
some of them had even prepared death-traps in order to stop him from communicating
his message.
Now, with a total twist in events, these people who thought themselves as powerful,
who had kicked the Muhajirun out of their homes and confiscated their goods had now
become captive and were waiting anxiously to hear what the Muslims would decide to
do with them.
Our noble Prophet's close relatives were among this group. His uncle Abbas ibn
Abdul Muttalib,585 Ali's brother Akil, another nephew of his, Nawfal and his son-in-
law Abu'l-As. They had all come to Badr to fight against our Prophet and were now
among the prisoners of war. The Messenger of Allah would not treat them any
differently because they were his relatives and he would set them free only after
obtaining their ransom from them. In fact, from his uncle Abbas, he would get the
ransom money for himself and his nephews, and only then would he set his uncle and
nephews free.
Among the people who came to the Messenger of Allah after the war was Abu'l-
As's brother, Umar ibni'r-Rabi. He had offered him a bag of money in order to free
him from captivity: "This is the money that Zaynab has sent for her slave."
Our noble Prophet first untied the bag and then peered inside. There, staring back at
him, was a piece of memory of our mother Khadija, the rose of his heart. It was the
necklace that our mother Khadija had herself taken off from her own neck and given
to her daughter Zaynab on her wedding day. 586
Upon seeing this necklace, the Messenger of mercy was transported back in time,

--- Sayfa 515 ---
overwhelmed with emotion, and reliving the wonderful memories he had with his
wife. He then turned towards his Companions who were eagerly awaiting to see what
he would do next, and he said: "If you wish, you may set Zaynab's slave free, and give
her possessions back to her."
How could it be that the Messenger of Allah would want something and the
Companions do not comply!
Besides, the verses that were revealed left it to the believer's discretion whether
they wanted to take ransom for the money in order to let them free, or set them free
with no recompense. 587
Before long they all said: "Of course, 0 Messenger of Allah," giving him their
consent wholeheartedly.
But the blessed Messenger had one condition; he called Abu'l-As to his side and
whispered something in his ear. Everyone was watching with curiosity. Abu'l-As put
his ear near his father-in-law's mouth and then after a while started to nod his head in
consent. It was clear the issue had thus been closed. 588
Suhayl ibn Amr, the man who encouraged the Meccan army with his poetry and
who was full of hatred for his son Abdullah who had left the polytheist army early in
the morning and joined the Muslim side, was also among the prisoners. Umar, who
saw him among the captives, came forward and said to our Prophet: "Leave him to
me, 0 Messenger of Allah. Leave him to me so that I may pluck out his teeth and
make his tongue droop so that he may not be able to speak against you anywhere ever
again."
Umar was speaking as befit his nature, for he believed that every hand and tongue
that worked against the Messenger of Allah should be cut. But the Messenger of
mercy had other expectations. He turned to Umar and said: "Even though I am a
Prophet, I will not put people under such torture! Then Allah will hold me
responsible! Leave him 0 Umar! Leave him, for a day may come when he does
something to your liking! "589
Divine Directive concerning the Prisoners
Another day had passed and Umar had come to the presence of our Prophet. Our noble
Prophet and Abu Bakr had put their heads together and were crying. This was a scene
that alarmed Umar: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "What is it that makes you cry?
Why are you crying? If there is something to cry about, then I will cry with you. Even
ifl can't cry, I will force myself to do so!"

--- Sayfa 516 ---
Umar really did not know what had happened but he was being sincere, speaking
from the heart. The blessed Messenger looked at his pure face and started to say the
following: 'We were about to be subjected to great punishment for rejecting Ibn
Khattab's words! And had that punishment come, only Umar, the son of Khattab
would have escaped it! I have been told of the punishment there under that tree."
The Truthful Gabriel had descended and had brought revelations from the Exalted
Lord when the blessed Messenger was near the mentioned tree. In the revelation that
came, Allah the Almighty was saying the following about the people taken prisoner at
Badr:
It is not for a Prophet to have captives until he has widely exhausted the
enemies in the land. You (0 believers) seek the fleeting gains of the
present, worldly life, but Allah wills that the Hereafter will be yours.
Allah is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise. Had there not
been a previous decree from Allah (concerning that gains of war are
lawful and captives can be released in return for ransom), a tremendous
punishment would surely have touched you because of what you took (the
gains of war, and the captives taken in expectation of ransom, before the
enemies' power in the land had been sufficiently suppressed and
exhausted). (But since such a decree has already come) now enjoy as
lawful and pure and wholesome of what you have obtained (as gains of
war and ransom); and keep from disobedience to Allah in all your actions.
Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His
believing, pious servants). (al-Anfal 8:67-69)
The Death of Our Mother Ruqayyah
It was the twenty-third day of the month of Ramadan. It had been ten days since the
pursuit of the caravan had begun. But every day of these ten days had progressed with
a new development. In these ten days the Companions had been faced with problems
that could only be faced and resolved in a lifetime. Yet, they had learnt their lesson in
this short time from the Perfect Teacher, peace and blessings be upon him, who taught
them how they should act when faced similar problems in the future.
They had been showered with good fortune and Divine grace had reigned over
them. When leaving Medina they had the caravan in mind, but Allah the Almighty had
made the Qurayshi army cross their path and they had complied with the necessities of
war by engaging in battle, and now they were returning victorious to Medina. People
were congratulating them and yet there was something sad about the atmosphere.

--- Sayfa 517 ---
They had come to celebrate the victory at Badr and yet the absence of our Prophet's
daughter Ruqayyah in this welcoming group made them sad.
While victory was being written in Badr, our mother Ruqayyah had breathed her
last in Medina, and she had already been buried before the arrival of our Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him.
The day Zayd ibn Haritha arrived at Medina they were performing their last duty in
the cemetery of Al-Baqi. Our mother Ruqayyah, for whose sake our Prophet had left
Uthman as guardian in Medina during the battle Badr, had died. The Companions in
the cemetery heard takbirs, declarations of Allah's oneness, approaching in the
distance. Uthman wondered what this voice, clearly bringing some good news, meant.
Before he could get an answer to his question, the owner of the voice approached and
was now taking takbirs at his side. When they saw that Zayd was coming mounted on
our Prophet's camel, all eyes had turned towards him and they were waiting to hear
the news he brought. He was speaking of a victory. Allah the Almighty had
demolished the leaders of the polytheists to the ground and had given his Messenger
victory. They did not know how to react to such news; whether to rejoice at the news
of the victory at Badr or to mourn the death of our mother Ruqayyah whom they had
to bury in the absence of the Messenger of Allah!
Since victory had been won at Badr, the Messenger of Allah would soon arrive.
How were they now going to give this news to the Messenger of Allah, how were they
going to tell him "We buried your daughter in your absence"?
A different kind of pain was being felt in Medina. The Messenger of Allah, who
had already buried three of his sons with his own hands, had started to lose his
daughters one by one as well. It was clear that with every loss, he was being turned
towards eternal Companionship. Even at the sweetest moments of victory, Allah the
Almighty put something in his way to increase his sadness, so that he may not be
overjoyed at any victory won on this earth.
At last, he too received the news; there was nothing one can do against Allah's
Will. He was the one who gave, and He was the one who took. Ruqayyah was now
free from the burdens of this world and she had gone to be with her mother Khadija
and her brothers who had died very young. The journey of life continued and although
this meant a short separation, they would meet again someday. The blessed Messenger
made his way to Al-Baqi Cemetery. He came to his daughter Ruqayyah's grave. His
heart was overwhelmed with sadness, and his eyes filled with tears. That day our
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, opened his blessed hands and prayed for a
very long time besides his daughter in Al-Baqi.

--- Sayfa 518 ---
The Bitter News That Reached Mecca
On the other hand the first person to bring the bad news to Mecca was Haysuman ibn
lyas. At the time the Meccans were sitting together at Hijr and talking amongst each
other. When they saw Ibn lyas approach with his clothes in tatters, exhausted and full
of fear, they had understood what had happened: 'What is it, what news have you
brought?" They asked.
Haysuman did not know where to start. He explained one word at a time:
"Killed! Utba ibn Rabia, Shayba ibn Rabia, Abu'l-Hakam ibn Hisham (Abu Jahl),
Umayya ibn Khalaf, Zam'a ibn Aswad, and the two sons of Hajjaj, Nabih and
Munabbah, Abu'l-Bakhtari ibn Hisham."
He continued as if he was going to declare the death of every Meccan. Safwan ibn
Umayya, irritated, cut him short: "I swear this man has no reason left in him! Nor any
heart! Ask him about me as well, let him tell you what has become of me!"
The men took him seriously and asked Haysuman what had become of Safwan. He
pointed to Hijr and said: "There, he is sitting there," and then added. "But I swear his
father and brother have been killed."
For a few moments, it was as if life had stopped still in Mecca! It had become clear
that both Haysuman's reason and heart were in the right place and working properly,
for he had just recognized Safwan and had given the news of his father's and brother's
death in Badr. Mecca and its people were totally stunned.
The truth of Haysuman's news had thus been tested out, and now people had
gathered around him to get the details of what exactly had happened at Badr. Each
piece of news they received demolished their morale one word at a time. Mecca had
parted with its best men; almost all the leading men of the town were no longer alive.
This was no easy matter, for almost all men of substance had been killed.
The Qurayshi army had left seventy of its nine hundred and fifty men in the field of
Badr, along with a further seventy who had been captured. There were also many
wounded. They were now reaping what they had sown many years ago in Mecca.
Maybe they did not give it much thought but the moment they had thrown the camel
tripe unto the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, as he was in
prostration to his Lord, was not a sight to be forgotten. Neither was the prayer he had
uttered afterwards: "Dear Lord! I leave the Quraysh unto you! I leave the Quraysh
unto You! My Lord, I leave the Quraysh unto you! Abu Jahl ... Utba ibn Abi Rabia ...
Shayba ibn Abi Rabia ... Walid ibn Utba ... Umayya ibn Khalaf, Uqba ibn Abi Muayt
-all of them I leave unto You; it is only You who will defeat them, 0 Lord! "590

--- Sayfa 519 ---
At last, the people who had put the Blessed Messenger into this state, who had
threatened his life, who had thrown camel tripe upon him and then laughed, who had
tried to wrap a turban around his neck and drag him on the ground-all of them had
been left at Badr, the Messenger of Allah had left them to Allah and none of them had
been able to return.
The Death of Abu Lahab
Meanwhile, Abu Lahab was making his way towards the Ka'ba, his dress dragging
after him. He came and sat down, propping himself against a wall. His back almost
touched the back of Abu Rafi, the slave of Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib, who was
working at the Zamzam wells at the time. Abbas's wife Umm Fadl was there was
well. Before long, they saw Abu Sufyan ibn Harith coming with the news of the
Quraysh's defeat at Badr. People who saw him coming started to point at him saying:
"There, there comes Abu Sufyan ibn Harith. "
There was a peculiar strangeness in the atmosphere. It was as if everyone knew
something and yet they were not articulating it. Abu Lahab said to Abu Sufyan:
"Come here my nephew! I swear by my life that you seem to bear news! What has
become of our men, come here and tell me!"
He approached Abu Lahab and sat down. Curious looks were directed at him,
everyone was waiting to hear what he would say. Abu Sufyan was in despair. He said
the following: "When we met them, it was as if we willingly had stretched our necks
before them and they simply went about killing and capturing us as they wished! I do
not blame any of our men, for during the battle we met men mounted on horses that
spanned the distance between the earth and the skies, all dressed in white, such men
who were impossible to withstand against or to catch up to!"
Before Ibn Harith could finish his words, Abu Rafi couldn't hold his excitement and
lifting up a curtain shouted out: "There is no doubt that they were angels."
When he finished what he said, he was shaken by a strong slap across his face. Abu
Lahab was already filled with anger and hate, and now brimming with such emotions,
he had taken it out on Abu Rafi. But he couldn't control his anger so he threw himself
over Abu Rafi and continued to beat him.
Abu Rafi was a slightly built man; as the recipient of the angry blows from such an
aggressive man as Abu Lahab, he was seriously injured and was lying, almost lifeless,
on the ground.
This frustrated Umm Fadl who had been watching the matter unfold. She took hold

--- Sayfa 520 ---
of one of the tent pegs and stood in front of Abu Lahab: "How can you beat a slave so
just because his master is not here?"
She too was very angry. She was the wife of Abu Lahab's brother Abbas, and not
being able to contain herself, she started to hit Abu Lahab on the head with the peg.
His head started bleeding. He was so shocked that he did not quite know what to do as
he was trying to clean the blood from his head. These were the blows that would
eventually lead to his death. The news he had received of the friends with whom he
had walked on the path of denial, coupled with these blows left no life in him. He was
a total wreck, grieving. Seven nights later the people of Mecca would receive the news
of Abu Lahab's death. Another castle of denial had thus become rubble.
Mecca in Mourning
The whole of Mecca was in a state of mourning; everyone had lost someone and
everyone was lamenting after their dead. From every family, someone had either been
killed or taken captive by the Muslims. The stifling air of denial was even denser now
with the atmosphere of mourning, and hearts were heaving with oaths for revenge.
They were spreading on the ground the belongings of the people who were left in Badr
and women were gathering around these possessions and wailing for days. This would
continue for a month.
One Meccan, who had had enough of this mourning period, came to the fore and
said: "Do not act like this! For news of this state of yours will reach Muhammad and
his friends, and this will make them happy."
Though they did not look favorably upon this suggestion at the start, they would
later understand that the man was right and so they stopped coming together to wail, to
tear their clothes apart and to do similar strange things.
They also decided not to act too hastily about the Issue of the captives. They
thought that by waiting a little before paying the ransom they would be able to
decrease the price of the ransom. They feared that if they rushed paying the ransom,
the Muslims would increase the amount, so they decided to give the appearance that
they did not care about their own men-just for the sake of paying less.
A man from the polytheists, Aswad ibn Muttalib had lost his three sons at Badr;
Zam'a, Akil and Harith, and he wanted to mourn for them properly. But now he was
being stopped by the polytheists' decision to not mourn and he was grieving inwardly.
One night he had heard someone crying outside, and calling his slave, he asked him to
find out who it was. The slave went and brought back the news that it was a woman

--- Sayfa 521 ---
who had lost her camel. Upon hearing this, Aswad composed a poem describing the
grief he felt not being able to mourn for his three sons killed in Mecca whereas a
woman could cry because she lost her camel.
The News ofVictory from the Land of the Romans
While the Muslims were sharing the joy of their victory at Badr, an achievement
which made it possible for Islam to be represented in the honorable way it deserved,
they also received another piece of good news from the land of Romans. When the
Qur'anic chapter about the Byzantine Romans and the Persians had been revealed,
Abu Bakr and the Meccan polytheist Ubayy ibn Khalaf had a long conversation and
had agreed on a bet to be revealed nine years later and with a reward of a hundred
camels. The Qur'an had given the news that the Romans would gather their forces
once again and attack the Persians and defeat them within a period of 3 to 9 years.
This news also said that the Muslims would experience great joy on the day that the
Romans were victorious. Now nine years had passed. The Companions who had
returned with the joy of victory from Badr were received in Medina with the news that
came from the land of Romans. What great joy, what great fortune this was! People
like Abu Bakr, who witnessed firsthand that the news that Allah had given had come
to pass just as He said, were turning towards Him in gratitude and experiencing new
heights of indebtedness.
The Romans had taken back the land that had been occupied nine years ago and the
Persians had been driven back to the rivers of Tigris and Euphrates. Those who had
thought nine years ago that the Rum would never be victorious again were shown to
have been wrong; Allah the Almighty who brings the living out of the dead had shown
everyone that what people considered "impossible" today could well happen. Wasn't
Badr also one of these "impossibilities"? The Meccans had come to Badr with the
expectation of wiping out the Muslims and then to celebrate there and then-defeat
was the furthest this from their minds!
This showed that the detailed plans made in the name of denial did not always hold
up, and the reckoning of the Merciful was always superior, indeed, what Allah said
always came to pass.
That is how the events unfolded that day, and seeing that another piece of news
given by the Qur'an had come true, many people became Muslim. 591
In the meanwhile, Abu Bakr would rightly receive the hundred camels, and with the
advice of our Prophet, he would give them away as alms.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
541 It is also reported that the number was seventy. See Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 11321;
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4118.
542 There is one report that says this order came on the eighth day of the month of Ramadan. See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 31159; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 11325.
543 Bukhari, Sahih, 411456 (3739); Ibn al-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 4/287. On that day Umayr was
sixteen years old.
544 This incident shows how our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, considers the
feelings of people in his treatment of them. When the Ansar gave their pledge in Aqaba they had
said that they would protect him but it had not been specified whether this protection extended
outside Medina as well. That is why in the twenty-odd raids that had happened outside Medina no
members of the Ansar had accompanied him. But now the situation was different; for the Quraysh
had started to threaten not only our beloved Prophet and the Muhajirun but the whole of Medina
and was putting their plans into practice. Thus this presented a situation that had to be treated
within the framework of the agreement that had been made after the Hijra.
545 Hubayb ibn Isaf would come back, say that he has become Muslim and thereby not leave the side
of our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. See Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 2/443; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/23; Suhaili, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 2/300.
546 Tabari, Tarikh, 2/26; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/25. This number changes according to
different accounts; it has been recorded as fourteen, fifteen or seventeen. There are also reports
that the army count was done twice. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 2/333; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-
Nihaya, 3/383. It is reported that the Companions at Badr were three-fifths Ansar and two-fifths
Muhajirun. This number, as our Prophet pointed out, was the same number as the number of the
men in the army of Dawid against the army of Goliath. That day too, when the men had only
taken a handful of water from the river, the believers had defeated the army of denial although the
weapons of the latter were much stronger. Likewise, in Badr, the believers would defeat the same
army of denial spearheaded by Abu Jahl.
547 Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 2/20. When the battle was done, the Companions who were the recipients of
our Prophet's prayer no longer had fear of going hungry and they were returning home victorious.
548 These two horsemen were Basbas ibn Amr and Adiyy ibn Abi Zaghba. They too had come to
gather intelligence about the caravan. When they met Majdi they speculated and told him that the
caravan would pass that point in a day or two's time. Majdi was of the same opinion and said
"You are right." They then left that place and came and told the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, what they had seen and heard. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/163-164.
549 It is also reported that the amount of money was 200 dinars. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 1133; Balazuri,
Ansabu '/-Ashraf, 11127.
550 It is also said that he did not join the battle because of Atiqa bint Abdul Muttalib's dream. See
Tabari, Tarikh, 2/24; Waqidi,Maghazi, 1129.
551 In response to the offensive and repeated behavior of Uqba ibn Abi Muayt, the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, said emaged: "If I meet you one day outside Mecca,
know very well that I will kill you." Uqba, who had managed to incense the mild-natured
Messenger who was sent to give life to people to the degree that he should say such a thing, was
now bent double with fear. He knew well that Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings
be upon him, would never lie and that if he said something, it would definitely come to pass. That
is why he feared going out of Mecca and he preferred to spend his time at home.
552 Only a couple of months ago, speaking to his friend Sa'd ibn Muadh who had come to Mecca to
perform his minor pilgrimage, he had heard our noble Prophet's statement that he would kill him
and he had shared this with his wife. Umm Safwan who's heard this asked: "Is he in Mecca?"
And he had answered: "I do not know." From that day on he had sworn not to leave Mecca and he
had been adamant to stand by his resolution to that day. See Bukhari, Sahih, 411453 (3734); Ibn
Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 3/316.

--- Sayfa 523 ---
553 Al-Anfal 8:7-8
554 It is also reported that it was a Friday. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/21; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1143.
Although there are also reports that Badr occurred on a Monday, this is not a theory that is much
credited. See Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 2121.
555 The army of the polytheists was indeed comprised of nine hundred and fifty men, the average of
what our noble Prophet had suggested. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2115.
556 There are different reports as to the face and the clothes of the angels who participated in Badr
that day. The colors of the turbans are reported to be red, black, yellow and white. These angels
who had taken the physical shape of certain people were dressed differently according to the
clothes that the person they resembled was wearing. For instance the Truthful Gabriel had come
in the shape of Zubayr ibn Awwam and he too was fighting with a yellow turban on his head. See
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4143, 44.
557 On that day the polytheists also had three standards and they were carried by Abu Aziz ibn
Umayr, Nadr ibn Harith and Talha ibn Abi Talha.
558 Another report says that the general watchword of that day had been "Ahad, Ahad." See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 3/182.
559 Abu Rafi was the slave of Abbas; Abbas had given him to the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, as a present. His master's being a Muslim symbolized for him the route to
freedom. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/73,74.
560 Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 7/481 (37390); Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 31165. The Companion
that Umar was angry at was Abu Hudhayfa; his father Utba ibn Rabia was one of the fiercest
enemies of our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. He would be one of the first to show
regret on the day of Badr. He was so sorry for what he had said about our Prophet's uncle that day
that he had said "Only shahadah (martyrdom) can wash away this shame", and indeed he would
become a martyr on the day of Yamama. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/177; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/34.
561 Ghafir, 40/10
562 With this he meant Abu Jahl. For Hanzaliyya was an expression used for Abu Jahl's mother. See
Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/170; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/30-31.
563 Al-Anfal8:19
564 Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 10/14 7 (1 0270); Bayhaqi, Dalai/, 3/32
565 Muslim, Sahih, 3/1384 (1763); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1130
566 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 2711 09; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 4/267
567 Al-Anfal 8:44
568 Among those who ran to the wells, only Hakim ibn Hizam was left standing. See Ibn Hisham,
Sirah, 31169; Bayhaqi, Dalai/, 3/56.
569 The conventional rules of engagement were as follows: firstly the most heroic of the fighters
would step forward and they would fight in front of everyone. The outcome of these one-to-one
combats would give an idea of which side was more likely to win, and it would be a cause for
boasting. This combat was called mubaraza.
570 Abu Talib had said the following in his poem: "Today you refute Muhammad, but I swear by the
House of Allah that today we cannot say a word! The day will come when we will fight with him
and strive heroically. We will not hand him over to you until we have become like pieces of meat
beside the cutting board, until we have sacrificed our sons and our own lives!" See Ibn Hisham,
Sirah, 21111; Tabarani,Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 10/158 (10312).
571 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/26
572 Muslim, Sahih, 311510 (1901); Ahmad ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 3/136; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/43
573 Mut' im had died about seven months before the battle of Badr. See Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 1123 3; Ibn
Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1169.
574 Abu Ya'la,Musnad, 4/49; Haysami,Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 6/283.

--- Sayfa 524 ---
575 Some reports say that the number of martyrs was eighteen. See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir,
10/202.
576 Al Imran 3: 165
577 There is also one report that says that the number of dead the polytheists left behind was fifty. See
Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/270; Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 3/167.
578 Wahidi, Asbabu Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, p. 180; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/77.
579 He would fight on this camel in his later battles, and finally in Hudaybiya, this camel would be
slaughtered. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 11261, 314; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/95, 103; Tabarani,
Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 11192.
580 Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/193; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/38
581 There are reports that at that time Gabriel came and told our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him, that he was free to do as he pleased with the prisoners. See Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 5/209;
Nasai, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 5/200; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2122.
582 One uqiyya corresponds to 1283 grams.
583 Before Islam, the people of Mecca were more literate than the people of Medina. See Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 2122; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 6/322; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 11373.
584 Bukhari, Sahih, 411474 (3793); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/211
585 The Quraysh had asked the rich people of the time to help them and they had made ten people
take on the expenses of all those who participated in Badr. One of these was our Prophet's uncle
Abbas. He had not been able to resist the pressure put upon him by the polytheists of Mecca,
especially Abu Jahl, and so had come to Badr with them. He had come, and now was waiting for
the judgment to be passed on him.
586 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 6/322; Dalailu 'n-Nubuwwa, 31150
587 Muhammad 47:4
588 En Ondekiler (Those in the Forefront), Akademi Ara~tmna Heyeti, p. 90
589 The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had no intention to have any of the
prisoners of war tortured and he strongly forbade the Muslims to do it. He was the last of the
Prophets whose coming had been expected. The day would come when Suhayl too would submit
to Islam and would do things that would gladden the likes of Umar; he would speak to the
Meccans on the day that the blessed Messenger left this world and all that was in it, preventing
those whose faiths had not yet taken strong root from returning to a state of denial. See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 3/200, 6/89; Waqidi,Maghazi, 11107; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/41.
590 Muslim, Sahih, 311418-1419 (1794)
591 Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 5/189 (2935), 343 (3192, 3193); Hakim, Mustadrak, 2/445 (3540)

--- Sayfa 525 ---
THE DEVELOPMENTS AFTER BADR
V
ictory had been won at Badr but it was clear that matters were not going to
be settled in Badr, for as they fled the field of Badr, the hatred of the
Meccans was no less than when they had gone there in the first place. When
one considered the population at the time, with seventy dead and just as many
prisoners of war meant that the impact of war had touched every household. The
people who had gone to Badr reluctantly were now filled with hatred against Islam
and the Muslims, saying that they would take revenge as soon as possible. People who
had witnessed that day took oaths not to sleep in their beds, to continuously wail or to
never to touch anything new until revenge was taken. In short, on their way from
Badr, they had already started to make plans for a new attack, swearing that the
business was not finished there.
There were those who were not pleased with the Muslims' victory in Medina as
well. These were the polytheists who secretly wanted the Qurayshi army to win and
the Jews who did not like to see another power on the rise. The tribes scattered around
Medina were also worried about the situation; they feared that a strong state built in
Medina would in the future threaten them as well.
The Muslims on the other hand were feeling differently; they had seen that with this
victory that Allah granted them, the oppression that they had been subjected to for a
quarter of a century was ending, and they had become even more determined to face
what may follow. The whole strategy had to be developed taking these circumstances
into consideration and that was what the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, would do.
The first information they received was that the tribes of the Banu Ghatafan and the
Banu Sulaym were gathering forces to attack Medina and so our Prophet appointed
Siba ibn Urfuta as deputy ofMedinal and made his way to the Kudr wells on the road
to Najid with two hundred horsemen. The Banu Sulaym tribe, who had not yet been
able to gather their men and who heard that the blessed Messenger was coming with
two hundred horsemen, started to flee and left five hundred camels behind.:?.

--- Sayfa 526 ---
Our noble Prophet stayed there for three days, declared his rule, and then returned
to Medina.
The Battle of Sawiq
In the meanwhile news started to arrive from Mecca. Abu Sufyan had declared that
because of the shame he felt at the defeat at Badr, he would not oil his hair, wash
himself or come near his wives until he took revenge on our Prophet and his dear
Companions. Before long, Abu Sufyan started to advance towards the direction of
Najdiyya with a force of two hundred people. This was a strategy they were trying out
for the first time, and they had learnt this from the blessed Messenger who had used it
before at Badr. But the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was a
flawless leader and commanding officer who kept changing his tactics and he would
surprise the Meccans each time with a new strategy!
Abu Sufyan came as far as only one or two stations away from Medina. He entered
Medina secretly at night and knocked on the door of Huyayy ibn Akhtab, the chief of
the Banu Nadir tribe. When he saw that Huyay was afraid to open the door, he went to
another elder of the tribe, Sallam ibn Mishkam.
Sallam welcomed Abu Sufyan with great hospitality and gave him the information
he needed. Abu Sufyan stayed there for a while and then left. When he returned to his
friends, they killed the Ansar they came across on their path and then torched a date-
grove.
It was impossible to guess where and when the hatred of Mecca would show its
ugly face; there was now a great need to heighten security. The Meccans were now
attacking in secret and killing innocent people randomly because they were too afraid
to fight it out on the battlefield. Seeing they were at a disadvantage, this was their
merciless idea of taking revenge.
Upon this incident, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, set off with a
group of two hundred people-eighty of them mounted on horses-and started to
follow Abu Sufyan and his men.2.
Abu Sufyan who heard that our Prophet had left Medina to follow him told his men
to return to Mecca as quickly as possible. Fearing that their current pace of running
away was not enough to stay ahead of our Prophet, he took a further step and told his
followers to drop everything they had on the camels to lighten their load. At first, the
polytheists did not understand why Abu Sufyan was asking them to do such a strange
thing; but when they heard that they were being followed closely by the Muslim army,

--- Sayfa 527 ---
they all dropped their loads and started to flee in the direction of Mecca.;!
The Messenger of Allah who had returned to Medina after a five-day pursuit was
asked by his Companions about the merit and benefit of what they had done: "0
Messenger of Allah! Do you believe that what we have accomplished counts as
gazwa, battle?"
What had got them wandering was the fact that although they had gone after the
enemy, they had returned without confronting them. The blessed Messenger answered:
"Yes it does."
The Battle of Ghatafan and an Assassination Attempt
Another piece of news came from the land of the Banu Salaba and Muharib: The
enemy had planned to surround the Messenger of Allah. The blessed Messenger left
Uthman as deputy and set off on the twelfth day of the month of Rabi al-awwal. When
they heard that he was coming towards them with his Companions, the armies of the
Banu Salaba and Muharib dispersed and fled to the mountains. When they arrived,
they only saw one man. When they sat down and spoke with this man for a while, he
too became a Muslim and he told them all that had passed there until they came.
Meanwhile, heavy rain started to pour and they were drenched. When they retired to
the side in order to dry their clothes, a man named Du'thur ibn Harith2. approached our
Prophet from behind and lifting his sword, he exclaimed: "Who will save you from me
today?"
It looked like the man had planned this attack from before and now was attempting
to kill our Prophet by sneaking up on him from behind. He had taken an oath among
his tribe before saying that he would not return without having killed Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him.
When he turned around and saw the man, the Messenger of Allah tried to captivate
him with his eyes and said in a very relaxed manner: "Allah!"
His trust in Allah was complete, and he had Allah's word that He would protect
him. As the man stood there with his sword lifted, the Truthful Gabriel appeared and
struck the man with a blow on the chest and brought him down. The man could not
register what had happened, he was looking left and right to see who it was that had
hit him.
Meanwhile the blessed Messenger took the man's sword from the ground and
pointing it directly at his face, he said: "And who will save you now from me?"
The man was helpless; there was no one around to lend him a hand. He had relied

--- Sayfa 528 ---
on his own strength but it was useless now in the current situation he was in. There
was nothing else he could do but to surrender. He responded in full submission: "No
one," for he could see no other force that he could hold on to. He realized that the only
power there belonged to Messenger of Allah who had support from the Divine. He
continued: "I will never draw a sword against you from now on, and neither will I be
among a group who does so. And I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, and I
also bear witness that Muhammad is His Messenger."
Once again, someone had come to end the life of the Messenger of Allah, and once
again, that person had found new life in our noble Prophet and was returning back to
his tribe with the intention of transferring new life to other lifeless souls. Thus,
Du'thur ibn Harith returned to his tribe and started to speak about Allah and His
Messenger to his tribesmen. He said: "0 my people, I am now returning from the
presence of the most beneficent of mankind." In the Divine message that came
afterwards as a mark of appreciation, there was also a reference to this situation:
0 you who believe! Remember Allah's favor upon you: when a people
were minded to stretch out their hands against you but He restrained their
hands from you. Keep from disobedience to Allah in reverence for him
and piety so as to always deserve his protection. And in Allah should the
believers put their trust. (al-Maedah 5: 11)
Our noble Prophet stayed there for ten days and then returned to Medina without
encountering any problems. This gazwa and others like this showcased the strong
basis established by the Messenger in Medina, and Islam's rule in the Hijaz was thus
reinforced.
The Changes Shortly after Badr
It was the blessed month of Ramadan and officially the first time the Muslims had
started fasting, and only a few days were left for Eid. This too would be a first. The
Messenger of Allah was sitting among his Companions and informing them of the
rules concerning the alms ofjitr. For it was now wajib, mandatory for every Muslim
who was well-offto give their alms before Eid, regardless of whether they were young
or old, free or slave, man or woman. Meanwhile, supplementary ruling concerning
zakah, alms, had been revealed as well. Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, was sharing these with his Companions, asking them to do what was
required ofthem by Allah.
He would then share with them the good news of Eid. There would be days of joy
and peace, and for the first time, they would form rows behind our noble Prophet and

--- Sayfa 529 ---
pray the Eid Prayers. During these days of peace, the Messenger's young nephew Ali
married his youngest daughter Fatima, and after a simple and modest ceremony, they
now had their own household and took their first steps as a married couple.£
Meanwhile, Abu Darda from the Ansar had come and become Muslim.
Everyone was still wondering what the blessed Messenger had whispered into the
ear of Abu'l-As, our Prophet's son-in-law, as he set him free. It became apparent that
from now on Zaynab, the daughter of Messenger of Allah, could not continue her
marriage and put her head on the same pillow as a polytheist, so Abu'l-As started
preparations to send our mother Zaynab to Medina. About a month had passed since
Badr when the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, sent one of his
Companions from the Ansar along with Zayd ibn Haritha to Mecca to bring his
daughter Zaynab to Medina. Zayd would accompany his fellow Companion and
together they would face many difficulties and obstructions. Finally, after days of
waiting and a journey full of adventure, they would accompany Zaynab on her way
back to Medina.z
An Assassination Attempt
Umayr ibn Wahb, whose son Wahb ibn Umayr had been taken prisoner by the
Muslims, would speak of his sorrow to Safwan ibn Umayya and the bitterness of the
defeat at Badr. He voiced his frustrations by saying: "I swear by Allah that if it wasn't
for these debts that I had to pay off or this family that I fear would be desolate after
me, I would get on my camel and go to Medina to kill Muhammad! Whatever has
happened to me has happened to me because of him; my son is still a captive in their
hands!"
For Safwan, such a man filled with revenge was an opportunity not to be missed, so
he said: "Your debts are my debts, I will pay them off! Your family is now my family;
I will not deprive them of anything as long as they live and I will share everything I
have with them!"
On the one hand was a man who would do anything to carry out this deed yet feared
that if he lost his life in the meantime, he would leave his family in debt and they
would have a hard time sustaining themselves, while on the other hand was a devoted
supporter who would counter all his worries! They seemed to have agreed. They saw
eye to eye, and stared at each other for a long while. These looks were proof that the
deed was met with acceptance by both parties. In the end Umayr would say the
following to Safwan: "Let this remain between the two of us! Do not speak of what
you are about to do or what position I have taken!"

--- Sayfa 530 ---
"Okay, I won't," said Safwan. The deal was made and they parted ways to see to it
through.
Umayr ibn Wahb started his preparations for the road as soon as he reached home.
He sharpened his sword and dressed it with poison, fully prepared for the
assassination. In appearance he was going only to save his son Wahb. He set off on the
road and reached Medina after many days.
Umayr arrived at Medina, and positioning his camel to kneel down in front of the
Masjid an-Nabawi, he made his way to the blessed Messenger's mosque. The wise
Umar, who was closely following his every move, exclaimed:
"0 enemy of Allah, you dog Umayr! He must have come with ill intentions!"
Right after saying these words, he stood up and entered the Prophet's Mosque. He
ran to the presence of our Prophet and called out to him: "0 Messenger of Allah! That
enemy of Allah Umayr has donned his sword and come here."
"Let him come to me," responded the Messenger of Allah. This was the consent
Umar did not expect the Prophet to give. The man had clearly come with ill intentions;
it was so obvious for one to see! And yet the blessed Messenger had allowed him to
come to his presence, there was nothing left to do except to be on guard.
Umar approached Umayr. In the meantime, he held on firmly to his sword and said
to the Ansar around him: "Let this filthy man enter the presence of the Messenger, but
do not keep your eyes off him, for he is not a man to be trusted."
At last they entered the mosque. Seeing them so tense, the Messenger of mercy
called out: "Leave him 0 Umar!" And to Umayr he said: "Approach, 0 Umayr!"
Umayr then approached our Prophet and said: "Good morning to you." He was
trying hard to conceal his real intentions.
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, the greatest man of mercy and
affection said: "Allah the Almighty has given us a better salutation than the salutation
you use, 0 Umayr! Verily salam, peace, is the salutation of the inhabitants of the
heavens." And then he asked: 'What brings you here, 0 Umayr?"
"I came for the captive you have in your possession. Do not hold back your mercy
from him," answered Umayr.
With the way this conversation was going, the questions wouldn't have ended and
so the blessed Messenger asked the crucial question that would reveal his true
intentions: "Then what is with the sword that hangs from your neck?"
Upon that question Umayr responded nonsensically: "Fie upon this sword! What
have we left except this sword?"

--- Sayfa 531 ---
He knew deep down that he was not being convincing at all with these words. Each
question that was addressed revealed his true intentions more and more. Our noble
Prophet seemed to know the real nature of what was happening. Umayr then decided
to look directly into our Prophet's eyes for the first time since he arrived. The
Messenger of Allah was looking straight at him. Their eyes met for a second and our
Prophet's stem glance seemed to say "Leave all these aside and tell me really why you
came here before I tell you myself1" The blessed Messenger said: "Tell me the truth!
With what purpose have you come here?''
"I have no other purpose than this; this is what I came here for," was all Umayr
could muster. He could not tell upon himself! But he felt that he was pushed into a
dead end.
Then our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, started to speak with all his
majesty: ''No! You and Safwan ibn Umayya sat at Hijr and spoke of the Qurayshis
that died in the wells of Badr. Then you said "If I did not have debts and a family
dependent upon me, I would go and kill Muhammad," upon which Safwan took upon
himself your debts and your family's maintenance. But know that Allah the Almighty
will put a barrier between you and your intention and will not have you do it!"
Umayr was stunned! He could hardly stand up straight and his face changed from
one color to another. How could a man know and relay a conversation that had
happened five hundred kilometers away, especially when there had been no third party
present, how could he know what intentions he was hiding inside him? Only Safwan
could have told him this, for there had been no other witnesses to their conversation.
But it couldn't be Safwan, he was even more ambitious than him that our noble
Prophet should be killed. The fact that he had taken on Umayra's debts and the needs
ofhis family as long as they lived was proofofthis. No it could not be! There was no
way a mortal could do this!
There was now only one thing left to do. Umayr gave up and turned to our noble
Prophet shamefacedly: "I bear witness that you are the Messenger of Allah! We have
been lying to you about the news you bring from the heavens and about you 0
Messenger of Allah! This was something only Safwan and I knew about. Only Allah
and no one else could have told you about it! Thanks be to Allah who has brought me
to Islam even though it should have been through this way! I bear witness that there is
no deity but Allah and that Muhammad is his subject and Messenger."
The Companions, who had been watching the events unfold, especially Umar, were
astonished. They had just witnessed how a man who had evidently come with evil

--- Sayfa 532 ---
intentions melted before the blessed Messenger like wax left under the sun. This was
the doing of the Messenger of Allah, and he was thus giving a lesson with his
exemplary behavior. This showed that killing people and casting them aside was the
easy option; the important thing was to have people like Umayr see the truth and join
the company of the believers. A Muslim had to live such a life that even those who
came with the intention of killing them should not return without having gained
something from their presence, and be different from the men who had come on their
return.
Meanwhile our noble Prophet had turned towards his Companions and said: "Help
you brother learn about his religion! Teach him the Qur'an and set his slave free!"
While all this was happening in Medina, Safwan was telling the people in Mecca:
"Soon you will receive good news which will make you forget all the pain you have
had to suffer since the defeat at Badr!"
He was also asking everyone who came from Medina news about Umayr, becoming
impatient to share the good news with the Meccans. Then someone came and brought
him the news that Umayr had become a Muslim. He was having the shock of his life;
how could it be that a man who had taken such a great risk to kill someone go and
submit his will to the person he had intended to kill? How could he so easily abandon
his goals? If this news were true, how could he face his people and say to them that
the good news he wanted to give was such and such! He was now cursing away and
sharing with those around him the anger he felt against Umayr. He would never speak
to him again and would not give him a single cent from his wealth!ll.
The Siege of the Banu Qaynuqa
The Banu Qaynuqa was one of the three main Jewish tribes settled in Medina, and this
tribe had also signed the agreement made after the Hijra. This was the tribe of
Abdullah ibn Salam. After he became a Muslim, they had pressured him a lot and
never really accepted the fact that he had become a Muslim. The latest developments
showed that they had not been true to their agreement. The victory won at Badr had
displeased them greatly, for the Muslims were now attaining a level power that could
not easily be prevented. There were people among them who were trying to provoke
their tribe against the Muslims. An old man named Shas ibn Qays had called a young
man to his side and told him to speak to their tribe about the difficulties they had
endured during the Buath wars and to make them remember poems about these wars.
At a period when everything about the past was being forgotten, remembering that
period would make the tribe more sensitive and aware of the differences. The aim was

--- Sayfa 533 ---
to create discord between the Aws and Khazraj. The young man who had been advised
by Shas joined the crowds and started to do as he was told. Before long, old quarrels
surfaced again. The Aws and the Khazraj were about to attack each other. They had
even decided on confronting one another at a certain place when verbal arguments did
not satisfy their animosity. When our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, came
to know about the situation, he went to the named place with his Companions. He
called out to the two tribes: "0 you Muslims! I invite you to Allah! I invite you to
Allah! How can you want to return to the customs ofjahiliyya, ignorance, when I am
among you and Allah has bestowed Islam and His grace upon you? With Islam Allah
the Almighty has severed your ties with the practices of jahiliyya, He has saved you
from the darkness of denial, He has brought peace and understanding between you,
and yet, how can you return to your old ways?"
This address of our Prophet helped the Aws and Khazraj come to their senses; they
started to think how it was that they had once again put themselves in the same
situation. Assuming such an attitude with no good reason was inappropriate of a
Muslim. They wanted to find out the reason that had led them there, and they wanted
to find out who had provoked it. It did not take them long to find answers. This was
not the first wrongdoing of the Banu Qaynuqa; they had wanted to create dissension
before Badr as well but the Muslims had always been forgiving, hoping that one day
they would understand their error.
With their heads lowered with shame, they cried and started to embrace one
another. They promised each other that they would never again take heed of the
intricate words that tried to incite them against each other. The information about the
tribe of Qaynuqa was not limited to this either; they had gotten in touch with another
Jewish man named Qab ibn Ashraf to plant seeds of dissension and thus they were
asking for it. The last straw that broke the camel's back was their treatment of a
woman who had gone to the Qaynuqa market to sell her wares and then to procure her
own needs. The woman had sold her goods there and then had gone to a jeweler to buy
gold. The merchants of the Banu Qaynuqa who had seen that she was alone had
attacked her and ripped opened her face veil, making fun of her. Meanwhile the
jeweler approached her from behind and pinned the skirts of her dress to her waist, so
that when she stood up her private parts could be seen. This pleased the Banu
Qaynuqa to such an extent that they couldn't stop laughing at the woman. The woman,
who understood that her skirt had been purposely lifted up, started to cry out for help
in the face of this attack which targeted her honor.
A Muslim man who was outside noticed something was going on and when he

--- Sayfa 534 ---
looked inside, he understood what had happened and he hurled himself on the Jew to
teach him a lesson. A fight started between them and before long the Muslim had
beaten the Jew to the ground. Seeing their friend on the ground, a few other Jews who
had been watching the events unfold, attacked the Muslim man and killed him.
The relatives of the Muslim martyr were infuriated and before long they came to
our noble Prophet to ask for help. They were breathing from their noses, and they
wanted vengeance. What the Banu Qaynuqa had done was a very disgraceful act on
many levels, and they had to receive a fitting punishment.
However, they too had signed the agreement made after the Hijra; they had
promised to help defend Medina if it was attacked, and now they were planning to
attack the Muslims! But our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, did not
retaliate at once saying "You have violated the agreement" but rather decided to
gather the Banu Qaynuqa to speak to them. He invited them to act more responsibly,
to give up their destructive ways, to live humanely like Muslims, and to rethink their
position before the things that happened to the Quraysh happened to them too. But
they did not appreciate this merciful approach; they would make fun of his suggestion
and say: "0 Muhammad! Do not let the victory you have won over inexperienced
young people get to your head! If you should fight against us, then you will
understand what real war is! For you have not yet met anyone like us!"2
This was a clear challenge and their insolent attitude towards the Messenger of
Allah was tantamount to a declaration of war. It seemed they would not understand
from mere words; as if it was not enough that they had not kept to the terms of the
agreement, they were now totally disregarding the authority they had only recently
accepted, and so one had to speak to them in a language they understood.
Meanwhile, the Truthful Gabriel descended. He told our Prophet to convey the
deniers the following message after reminding them of Badr:
Say (0 Messenger) to those who disbelieve: "You will soon be
overpowered and gathered into Hell!"-How evil a cradle it is! There has
already been a manifest sign (of the truth of Allah's way) and lesson for
you in the two hosts that encountered (at the Battle of Badr): one host
fighting in Allah's cause, and the other disbelieving, who saw with their
very eyes (the host of the believers) as twice their actual number (during
fighting). Allah confirms with His help and victory whom He wills.
Surely in that is a lesson for those who have the power of seeing. (Al
Imran 3: 12-13)
The message that came after was even clearer:

--- Sayfa 535 ---
If you have strong reason to fear treachery from a people (with whom you
have a treaty), return it to them (i.e. publicly declare to them, before
embarking on any action against them, that you have dissolved the treaty)
so that both parties should be informed of its termination. Surely Allah
does not love the treacherous. (al-Anfal 8:58)
This would be the gracious mode of action. It had been the other side who had
violated the agreement. Still, Allah the Almighty wanted the Muslims to let them
know that the agreement was no longer valid, so that the other side knew of the
situation before they entered war. And that is what our Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, would do.
Twenty months had passed since the Hijra. They were in the middle of the month of
Shawwal, and leaving Abu Lubaba once again as his deputy in Medina, and giving the
white banner to Hamza, the Muslims attacked the Banu Qaynuqa. They had a strong
fortress, but when they saw the Muslims coming, they went in and locked themselves
there. The siege would last fifteen days. During this time, Allah had put fear in their
hearts and the Banu Qaynuqa surrendered, saying that they would accept the terms
that our Prophet would decide upon. The men of the Banu Qaynuqa who could bear
arms had been taken captive and their hands had been tied. They were now waiting for
the verdict, consenting to whatever judgment our Prophet would pass.
They thought their end had come, for they had gambled with their lives and they
had lost. Then, Abdullah ibn Ubayy, who was an ally of the sons of the Banu Qaynuqa
and who had become Muslim after Badr, arrived. He spoke of the agreement that had
been signed and asked our Prophet to show mercy to the Jews of the Banu Qaynuqa.
In fact, he was insisting on it so much that, the more our Prophet remained silent, the
angrier he became, and he tried all sorts of ways to make him consent. At last, he put
his hand in the pocket of our Prophet's shield and pulled him towards himself. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, told him to take his hands away
from him. But he did not seem to understand: "Shame on you! Leave me alone!" the
Messenger of mercy said.
"By Allah, I won't. I will not leave you until you have promised that you will show
mercy to my allies! They protected me against the Arabs and the Persians and finished
them in a single day with seven hundred men, three hundred of them in shields ... I am
afraid that this may lead to unending wars."
Another ally, Ubada ibn Thabit, who saw Abdullah's stance and understood well his
real intentions would come to our Prophet and say that all agreements with the Banu
Qaynuqa had been annulled: "0 Messenger of Allah. I now accept as friends only

--- Sayfa 536 ---
Allah, His Messenger and the believers and annul the pacts I have with all others. I am
putting aside these deniers and their pact!"
The Truthful Gabriel would advise the same thing with the news that he brought. In
the verses Allah the Almighty was explaining that only believers could be friends with
believers, that in any other relationship one had to be on one's guard, and that those
who took this route and made their stance clear in the name of faith would surely be
rewarded.lQ
0 you who believe! Take not the Jews and Christians for guardians and
confidants (in their Judaism and Christianity). Some among them are
guardians and confidants to some others. Whoever among you takes them
for guardians and confidants will eventually become one of them (and be
counted among them in the Hereafter). Surely Allah does not guide such
wrongdoers. Yet you (0 Messenger) see those, in whose hearts there is a
sickness (that dries up the source of their spiritual life, extinguishes their
power of understanding and corrupts their character), hastening towards
them (to get their friendship and patronage) as if competing with one
another, saying, "We fear lest a turn of fortune should befall us." But it
may be that Allah will bring about (for the believers) victory or some
other outcome of His own will (to punish those hypocrites or the
wrongdoers whose friendship and patronage they seek). And then they
will find themselves utterly regretful for the secrets they (as hypocrites)
sought to keep hidden in their selves. And those who believe will say (to
each other): "Are those the self-same people who swore by Allah their
most solemn oaths that they were indeed with you?" Their works have
gone to waste and they have become losers. (al-Maedah 5:51-53)
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, gave the Jews of the
Banu Qaynuqa three days to leave Medina. Despite the rebellion and the impending
exile, not a single soul had been hurt and no one had been taken prisoner. Whereas
they, with their unjust treatment and attitudes, had deserved a harsher punishment, and
they, too, knew this and were expecting a decision to be made that would harm them
m some way.
They were overjoyed; while they had expected a death sentence, they had been
given their life back, and considering this as a great gift, they started their preparations
to leave town. Ubada ibn as-Samit was overseeing their leave from Medina. They had
left great quantities of weapons behind them, and these were distributed among the
Companions. Muhammad ibn Maslama was appointed to see to the distribution ofthe

--- Sayfa 537 ---
possessions that the Banu Qaynuqa had left behind.
Another New Celebration: Adha
The return from the siege of the Banu Qaynuqa had coincided with Eid al-Adha, the
celebration of sacrifice, and those who could financially afford it were enjoined to
sacrifice an animal. In the land of the Banu Salima where they were performing the
Eid Prayers, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, sacrificed two sheep; and
those who could afford it had their animals sacrificed alongside his.
This was an Eid that the Muslims were celebrating for the first time. Certain days
had been celebrated as festive days before in Medina. According to their long
tradition, the people of Medina would come together and would celebrate with various
games. Now, in place of the festivals they celebrated in the time of ignorance, Allah
the Almighty had granted them two festivals: Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha. These were
the two days of festivity that Muslims would share together from now on.
Other Developments in the Third Year
Thirty months had passed since the Hijra of the blessed Messenger to Medina. Umar
wanted to marry his daughter Hafsall to Uthman (who had lost his wife Ruqayyah, the
blessed Messenger's daughter, in the days of Badr) and had gone to speak to him
about it. Uthman was not yet ready for such a marriage.
Umar was somewhat disappointed in the answer he got, but was trying to be
understanding. When he saw that there was no hope from that front, he would speak to
another close friend, Abu Bakr. But he, too, was not thinking of marriage either. Then
he came to our Prophet and spoke to him about what was on his mind. The answer he
had expected came from our Prophet: "Shall I tell you a more auspicious son-in-law
than Uthman and a more auspicious father-in-law for Uthman?"
Who would not want such an auspicious offer? So Umar said: "Tell, 0 Messenger."
Upon which the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "You
can marry your daughter Hafsa to me, and I will marry my daughter Umm Kulthum to
Uthman!"
Umar could hardly stand from joy! Having family ties with our noble Prophet was
the greatest happiness for him!
Thereafter, two happy unions took place in Medina. Uthman, who had been by our
Prophet's side starting from his days in Mecca, would from that day on be called
"Dhun-Nurayn", meaning the possessor of two pure lights.

--- Sayfa 538 ---
Shortly after, a baby boy was born to Ali and Fatima, and our noble Prophet named
him "Hasan."
Thirty-one months had passed since the Hijra, and the grace and blessings of the
month of Ramadan, the month of forgiveness and mercy, could be felt everywhere.
The blessed Messenger, who wanted to spread his wings of mercy and affection over
his ummah and see to the needs of those in difficulty, had seen the dire situation that
Zaynab hint Khuzayma was in. Her husband, Ubayda ibn Harith, had been wounded
on the first day of Badr and become a martyr and our Prophet wanted to offer her a
helping hand, and the easiest way to do this under the given circumstances was to
marry her, and that is what he did.
Zaynab was a very kind-hearted woman who was known as the mother of the poor
and needy since the time of ignorance. Zaynab had been given the honor of becoming
wife of the Messenger of Allah at a time when she was thinking that she would have
no one to share her life with since she had become relatively older in age. Due to old
age, Zaynab hint Khuzayma died about eight months later and left the world known as
the "Mother of the Believers", and our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,
himself buried her in the cemetery of Al-Baqi.ll
They had now reached the month of Jumada al-Ula. The summer months had
approached and the Quraysh had started to think about the caravan they were going to
send to the region of Damascus. On the one hand they were still writhing with the pain
of Badr and on the other hand they were saying: "If we just sit and wait like this, all
our resources will finish and we will die of hunger."
At long last, finding a much longer route, they organized a caravan led by Safwan
ibn Umayya; they employed a guide called Furat ibn Hayyan and set off on the road.
Our noble Prophet was informed of this development and appointing Zayd ibn
Haritha, he went on a campaign with a force of one hundred men. Safwan, who heard
of the Muslims coming, started to flee. When the army of men came to their
destination, Zayd ibn Haritha saw that the caravan had already left. He took Furat ibn
Hayyan prisoner and went back.ll
This too was something crucial because Mecca now understood that they could not
roam around the Hijaz as they wished and had to watch their behavior.

--- Sayfa 539 ---
.! It is also reported that the deputy appointed in Medina in this gazwa was Abdullah ibn Umm
Maktum. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4/209; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/50; Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 3/219.
~After taking one fifth for himself, the remaining four hundred camels were distributed among the
horsemen, and this meant two camels per head. They had also taken a slave called Y asar as
captive, and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, gave him his freedom. See
Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/31; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 1/391.
2. Their date for leaving Medina was a Sunday, the fifth of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah. Twenty two
months had passed since the Hijra and he had left Bashir ibn Abdilmunzir as his deputy in
Medina. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/30.
:! Most of their load consisted of sacks. That is why this gazwa would be name sawiq meaning flour.
See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/311; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/51.
2. Some reports say that this person was called either Ghawras ibn Harith or Awf ibn Harith; and that
his tribe was the Banu Muharib. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 41159; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 7/138 (2883).
2En Ondekiler, p. 125
2 Ibid., p. 93
§Umayr ibn Wahb would later go to Mecca and tell people how he had become a Muslim. His story
would inspire many others to become a Muslim as well. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/213-215;
Tabari, Tarikh, 2/45-46.
2Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 3/313, 314
l2Al-Maedah 5:51-53
.!.! Our mother Hafsa was born five years before revelations had started, the year that the Quraysh
were repairing the Ka'ba. She had married Hurrays ibn Huzafa and they had made the hijra to
Medina, and then her husband had died after Badr. See Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 2/384;
Zahabi, Tarikhu 'I-I slam, 11500.
ll Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 8/115. There is also a report that says that our mother Zaynab died three
months after her marriage to our Prophet. See Ibn al-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 1119, 3/359; Ibn
Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 2/385.
ll Furat ibn Hayyan would later come to the presence of our Prophet and become Muslim. See Ibn
Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/36; Tabari, Tarikh, 2155; Ibn al-Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/393.

--- Sayfa 540 ---
AN EXPECTED DEVELOPMENT
Abbas's Letter
T
hree years had passed since the Hijra, and it was a Thursday in the month of
Shawwal. Our noble Prophet received a letter that Abbas had sent when he
was in Quba.~ After listening to Ubayy ibn Ka'b read him the letter, the
blessed Messenger told Ubayy to keep the contents of the letter a secret and then went
to see Sa'd ibn Rabi.
It appeared shortly after that the Quraysh, who were getting help from neighboring
tribes, had left Mecca to take revenge on the Muslims and to redress the injuries they
had suffered in Badr. The Quraysh had given the newly formed army their goods that
were in the caravan that Abu Sufyan had led to Damascus before Badr, and had
contributed in other ways to the army in order to take revenge on Medina. Gabriel
spoke of the matter and gave the following information:
Those who are persistent in unbelief spend their wealth in order that they
may bar from Allah's way. They will continue to spend it so until it
becomes for them a source of sighs and anguish, and then they will be
vanquished. (al-Anfal 8:36)11
Upon this news, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, sent his
Companions to different places and directions and told them to come to him
immediately with any intelligence they may gather about the newly-formed Meccan
army. Completely aware of the sensitivity of the situation, Companions such as Sa'd
ibn Muadh, Usayd ibn Khudayr and Sa'd ibn Ubada had donned their weapons and
were keeping watch over our Prophet, not leaving him alone for a single moment,
even when they prayed.
The Meccan Army
They had received news that the Meccan army was three-thousand strong and that the
neighboring tribes from around Mecca had contributed to the army as well. There

--- Sayfa 541 ---
were also many people, like Hanzala' s father Amir, who had left Medina in order to
join the Meccan army.l2 They were coming mounted on three thousand camels and
two hundred horses. Abu Sufyan was leading the army. The leader of the cavalry was
Khalid ibn Walid, and Abu Jahl's son Ikrima was his aide. They had also taken
women with them so that they may encourage the men. The wives of the chiefs
especially were among the women who came. Their purpose was to deter the men
from fleeing the battlefield so that their honor and pride may not be damaged. Even
though they were sure of themselves, they could not help think in one comer of their
minds about a negative outcome to the situation. In short, the Meccan army had
gathered together all the resources needed to fight a war, and was thus progressing
towards Medina.
When they reached Abwa, Abu Sufyan's wife Hind hint Utba, who had lost all her
relatives including her father at Badr, had wanted to open the grave of our Prophet's
mother and tear apart her heart, but fearing that this may become a custom and that
similar things might be done to their graves, the Quraysh did not allow her.
Those who had suffered as a result of Badr, like Hind, were reciting poems in order
to encourage the soldiers, trying to keep them focused and motivated.
Consulting with the Com pan ions
The Meccan army had come to the vicinity of Uhud. Uhud meant Medina; the Meccan
army that had come there with great pomp and grandeur was now looking upon
Medina with the desire to bum everything to the ground.
The leading Companions had gathered together. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, was consulting with them. This was a development that was
different to Badr. They had consulted with each other before going to Badr as well and
they had decided on a plan of action together. The same had to happen that day, for
the verse that had been brought by Gabriel was explaining that our Prophet had to
consult with his Companions, pointing to the general fact that consultation should be
the action taken by the entire Ummah.
They first discussed the current state and situation ofthe Meccan army. They knew
that a force of three thousand was approaching them. Especially the Companions who
had not been able to attend Badr, or those who had become Muslim after Badr, were
saying that they would fight with the Meccans and defeat them.
The blessed Messenger, on the other hand, was saying that they should not leave
Medina and that they should defend the city from the inside. He had had a dream and

--- Sayfa 542 ---
had shared it with his Companions on Friday morning: "I swear by Allah that I have
seen such things which I hope will tum out to be good; I saw some animals being
slaughtered, a hole in the sheath of my sword, and I saw myself putting my own hand
inside a strong shield!"
Those who wanted to make all aspects of the Messenger's life a guide for their own
asked him the meaning of the dream. Our noble Prophet said that the slaughtered
animals signified that some of his Companions would become martyr, the hole in his
sheath meant some trouble that would befall him and the shahadah of someone very
close to him, and the strong shield signified that they should seek refuge in Medina.
That is why the blessed Messenger used his vote for staying in Medina for defense. He
was thinking that maybe when the enemy entered the town they would catch them in
the streets where they would have to divide their forces, and that the women could
help them from the rooftops. The Companions on the other hand were saying: "0
Messenger of Allah, we have been waiting and praying to Allah for such a day! Now
He has given us such an opportunity, and has granted us the chance to show our
selves. Let us go outside Medina to meet the enemy, 0 Messenger of Allah! Let us go
outside and fight them so that they may not be encouraged to think that we are afraid
of them."
The leading men ofthe Ansar and the Muhajirun did not agree with this impulsive
attitude, and were saying that it would be better to do what the Messenger of Allah
said. But the overriding view was that of the men who had not yet had the chance to
fight in the previous war. Abdullah ibn Ubayy, especially, was discontent about where
the discussion was going and kept saying that he thought that they shouldn't fight. But
this was a consultation, and our noble Prophet wanted to institute consultation in the
lives of the Muslims, which was an order direct from Allah. The fundamental point of
establishing consultation among the people was more important than the decision
made at that juncture, and that was why everyone could speak their mind freely. He
was a Messenger, a Messenger who was informed by Allah the right and wrong
decision and the consequences of each decision, but the overriding view was that they
should engage in war outside Medina, and so he complied with this view and decided
to meet the Meccan army outside of town.
This meant the start of a very busy period in Medina. Starting from the moment
when the Morning Prayer was performed, the only subject spoken about in Medina
was how to respond to the Meccan army whose breath they could now feel,
approaching even closer. Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was
making use of every opportunity and was encouraging his Companions to defend

--- Sayfa 543 ---
Medina. The subject at Friday Prayers was naturally the impending engagement. In the
Friday sermon, our noble Prophet was emphasizing the importance of faith and
patience, and that if they acted as advised; they would attain Allah's help, thus
encouraging his Companions to defend their homeland.
Preparations were continuing. The Companions had an air of festivity about them;
they were excited to go to Uhud, as if it were some wedding celebration. They were
looking forward to teaching the people who raised the standard of denial, the mongers
of hate who had come all the way to Uhud, a very important lesson they would never
forget.
Determination
After the Afternoon Prayer, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
entered his home with Abu Bakr and Umar. He was now going to put on his shield and
join his Companions to take his place at the front of the army that was to go to Uhud.
The people had gathered in the space between his house and his blessed pulpit, and
were waiting for him.
Companions such as Sa'd ibn Muadh and Usayd ibn Khudayr, who interpreted the
caution in the blessed Messenger's words, the expression on his blessed face and the
dream he had were telling the other Companions: "Even though revelation comes to
him from the heavens, you have forced the blessed Messenger to fight outside
Medina! Come on, give up your insistence and leave the matter to him; do as he tells
you!"
While the Companions were speaking outside, the blessed Messenger appeared. He
had put on his armor, wrapped his turban, and was holding his shield in one hand and
had his sword by his side. The Companions had started to rethink the matter after
receiving a warning from Sa'd ibn Muadh and Usayd ibn Khudayr, and were now
regretting their decision. Opposing what their Prophet, the pride of humanity had said
would surely bring disaster to those who were so close to him. For any false steps
taken by those closest to him, those who had the status of muqarrabin, would lead
other followers of the Prophet to take similar false steps. They hung their heads
apologetically and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! We pressured you; it was not seemly
for us to have opposed you. Do as you please, 0 Messenger of Allah."
When the Messenger of mercy saw the regret of his Companions, rather than
turning back, he said: "When it was I who wanted to stay in Medina, you said 'No.'
Once a Messenger has put on his armor, it would not be appropriate for him to take off
out until Allah has judged what will pass between him and his enemy! Now focus on

--- Sayfa 544 ---
what Allah has decided for you and follow His orders. Now, be on your way in the
Name of Allah! The victory will be yours as long as you are patient!"l2
It was clear that the men leading the army had to be decisive on such critical
occasions; this was more important than the possible gains that may be made by
changing plans, and our Prophet wanted to prove this point to his Companions. For
Allah the Almighty had said to him: "When you are resolved (on a course of action),
put your trust in Allah. Surely Allah loves those who put their trust (in Him)" (Al
Imran 3:159).
The decision for consultation had to be taken in consultation as well. However now
was the time to show determination and to stand behind their decision.
The Young People Who Were Sent Away
Just like in Badr, our noble Prophet wanted to send the young people who he saw were
too young back to Medina. Abdullah ibn Umar, Usama ibn Zayd, Usayd ibn Zuhayr,
Zayd ibn Thabit, Zayd ibn Arqam, Araba ibn Aws, Amr ibn Hazm and Abu Said al-
Khudri were among those who had been turned away that day. These young people
who strongly wanted to fight with the Meccan polytheists were very sad. But it was
not just these young people who had been sent away; the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, would not ask the Jews or the polytheist Arabs to fight
with him that day. He even turned down those Jews and polytheists who offered to
fight alongside the Muslims, for this was a battle between denial and faith, and only
those who took their power from faith could be victorious in such a war. When they
came to the place called Shaikhayn, they saw a well-dressed and orderly group
approach them, and they asked them who they were. When they learnt that this was a
group that had not yet become Muslim, but a group who wanted to fight alongside
them, the blessed Messenger said: "We cannot get help from the people of denial to
fight against the people of denial," emphasizing that in matters of faith, they should
only work with believers.
Then there were those who did everything they possibly could just to be able to go
to war with the blessed Messenger. When he allowed Rafi ibn Khadij, who was young
by age but looked much older in appearance, come with him to fight, another young
man named Samurah ibn Jundub came forward and said to our Prophet: "0 Messenger
of Allah. I am stronger than Rafi; I'd beat him if we were to wrestle."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, appreciated his will to
go to war and so he let the two youths wrestle in front of his Companions. The result
was as Samurah had said. Who knows, maybe Rafi ibn Khadij had lost on purpose so

--- Sayfa 545 ---
that his friend may be able to come along with him to fight. Seeing the passion in their
eyes, our noble Prophet allowed both of them to come to war with him.
The blessed Messenger divided his Companions into three groups. Ali was holding
the banner of the Muhajirun, Usayd ibn Khudayr was holding the banner of the Aws,
and Hubab ibn Mundhir was holding the banner of the Khazraj. He had left Abdullah
ibn Umm Maktum as his deputy in Medina.
They were about one thousand people. Only one hundred of them wore armor.
Zubayr ibn Awwam was leading the cavalry, and Hamza was the leader of the men
who were running towards Uhud with no armor. Just as in Badr, they were one third of
the enemy by way of numbers. But they did not fear the enemy's power, or death!
Shahadah, martyrdom in the way of Allah, was the one goal they had.
Uhud
Our noble Prophet had reached Uhud with his Companions in the evening time. They
would pray the Evening and Night Prayer together with the call for Prayer made by
Bilal. Our noble Prophet, the greatest of Commanders, was using a different strategy
in each of his battles, aware that the Meccan army was trying to understand the tactics
used at Badr so that they may prepare better for Uhud. That is why strategically Uhud
would be different to Badr. Thus the blessed Messenger showed his enemies that he
was always one step ahead of them; that he was the one who was setting the agenda.
He was speaking to the hearts of the people and he wanted his Companions to be
within the decision making process.
The blessed Messenger chose fifty horsemen from among his Companions and
appointing Muhammad ibn Maslama as their commander, he told them to wonder
around inspecting what was happening in the dark of the night and then to come back
to report to him. Zaqwan ibn Abdi Qays responded to the question: 'Who will stand
guard and protect us tonight?" taking upon himself to see to the safety of our beloved
Prophet.
Meanwhile our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, asked: "Where is
our advance guard and guide? Who will take us beyond those hills without letting the
other side know?"
Abu Haysama answered: "I will, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
Upon this the blessed Messenger set out under the guidance of Abu Haysama in
order to find out what was happening behind the hills. On their way they had to pass
through an orchard belonging to a blind man who was of the hypocrites. Mirba' ibn

--- Sayfa 546 ---
Qayzi, who although was blind, understood that our noble Prophet and his
Companions had entered his orchard, responded so disproportionately that the
Companions found his response difficult to understand: "If you are the Messenger of
Allah, I do not forgive the fact that you have entered my garden. Had it been not you
but someone else, I would definitely have beaten them up!" While he was saymg
these, he was also throwing earth from his garden on our Prophet.
This unreasonable attitude of the blind man distressed the Companions so they
approached him to make him stop. One of the Companions even hit the man hard on
the head with his bow ... This was something they could not tolerate: for while this
man was insulting the Messenger of Allah, his relatives were waiting to pounce on
them, ready to help the culprit. The atmosphere grew tense all of a sudden. Our noble
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, intervened at once and said: "Leave this
man be, he is not only blind in the eye, but also in the heart!"
The Hypocrites Leave
It was another Saturday. Bilal's heart-rending voice was once again heard in the field
of Uhud; the Muslim army were about to perform the Morning Prayer in ranks behind
the blessed Messenger. One could sense a commotion in the army. Before long they
understood what the commotion was all about. About three hundred men, including
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul were returning home, leaving the army that was
supposed to protect Medina.l..!l. This meant that in the face of three thousand men on the
enemy front, the Muslims were going to fight one man against five. This was a
deliberate act to hurt the Muslims from within and its aim was to shake the Muslims'
spiritual resolve. As they left, they were voicing their discontent by saying: "He does
not listen me, he keeps council with mere boys and decides to go to war! We do not
know why we are sacrificing ourselves, we do not know what we are pushed
towards!" It was clear that Allah the Almighty did not want such hypocrites on the
side of the Messenger when he fought, and in order to not give way to further trouble,
He was sending them away at the very start. For only His servants could carry the
benefits He saw fit to bestow; at such a juncture, only the subjects who turned towards
Him with a sincere heart could shoulder this load.
Abdullah ibn Haram would go after them and call out: "I speak to you, my tribe! I
warn you in the Name of Allah; do not dishonor and humiliate your tribe by leaving
your Messenger alone just as he is about to face the enemy! My tribe! Come, either
fight for Allah, or stay for defense!"
But they were in no state to listen to this message or to understand the depth of its

--- Sayfa 547 ---
meanmg. Instead of heeding the warning that was given to them, they turned to
Abdullah ibn Haram and said: "If we knew how to fight, we would not have
surrendered you to them; but we do not think there will be a battle! If you listen to us,
you can return with us," thus giving him their piece of mind as advice. Abdullah, who
just witnessed their astonishing attitude and irreparable intentions, said: "0 you
enemies of Allah! What more can I do? How dare you think Allah will leave His
Messenger to your mercy!"
Indeed, Allah the Almighty would not leave His Messenger at the mercy of anyone.
The news brought by Gabriel was saying similar things: "It was not (the will) of Allah
to leave the believers in the state you are now in (with the people of true faith
indistinguishable from the hypocrites), until He distinguishes the corrupt from the
pure" (Al Imran 3: 179).
The Qur'an would also speak of their hypocrisy, it would reveal what they hid
inside themselves, and would offer it as an example and a warning for the generations
to come, making a historical note of their dissension:
And that He might mark out those who acted in hypocrisy: when they
were told, "Come and fight in Allah's cause, or defend yourselves
(actively, in order to keep the enemy outside the city)," they said: "If we
but knew there would be fighting, we would indeed follow you." They
that day were nearer to unbelief than to faith, uttering with their mouths
what was not in their hearts. Allah knows very well what they were
concealing. ( Al Imran 3 : 16 7)
When the hypocrites left at such a critical point before the battle, this resulted in
various views emerging among the Companions. Some believed that these hypocrites
were now "people who should be killed" but some diverged from this idea. The tribes
of the Banu Salima and the Banu Haritha particularly were almost at each other's
throats.l2
It was once again the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who
would keep the peace and resolve the matter by saying: "The matter in coming to
Uhud is as much a matter of selection as it is just and noble; just as the impurities in
gold and silver are cleansed with fire, this cleanses the impurity and sediment."
After Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salulleft Uhud with three hundred men, some people
from the Ansar came to our Prophet to suggest that they should ask for help from the
Jews of Medina, to which the blessed Messenger replied: 'We do not need their help,"
and kept to his stance, expressing his view that an army composed of believers would
be much more fitting.

--- Sayfa 548 ---
The Sermon at Uhud
The blessed Messenger would now position himself facing Medina, with the mountain
of Uhud behind them. Morning had almost broken and he prayed the Morning Prayer
with his Companions. He then turned to them and spoke to them at length. This was
his last sermon before the battle began. He was advising them to keep to Allah's book,
to know what was permitted and what was not, and was emphasizing patience and
deliberation. Our noble Prophet also touched upon theme of unity; he spoke of many
things concerning how one should behave in this world and the scenes one would be
faced with in the afterlife, inviting his Companions to be diligent in the face of the
enemy. He wanted his Companions to assume the position for battle, and walking
from left to right, he himself was seeing to it that the lines were in order. Now the
army was ready in all respects and the Messenger of Allah gave them one last
warning: ''No one of you should start fighting before I tell you to do so."
Meanwhile, he had chosen around fifty archers, and appointing Abdullah ibn Jubayr
as their leader, he had advised them as follows: "Keep these horsemen away from us;
do not let them come from behind us to surround us! Even if we should come
victorious, stay where you are! Let us not receive an attack from your direction! Even
if you should see that we have defeated the enemy and have entered among their
soldiers, do not move! Even if you should see that they have come upon us and have
started to tear at our flesh do not leave your positions until you receive word from me!
Even if you should see that we are killed, do not try to come and help us, to support
and defend us! Instead, throw your arrows at them because horses cannot advance
when they have arrows thrown at them! And do not forget that we will be the winning
side as long as you keep to your position.~
Meanwhile he had asked and learned who was carrymg the banner of the
polytheists: "We are far better than them in matters of loyalty," he said and then
asked: "Where is Mus'ab ibn Umayr?"
"Here," Mus'ab said coming to the fore. The blessed Messenger encouraged him
and said: "You take the banner," and gave it to him.
The Muslims' watchword that day was ''Amit ... Amit", meaning "Kill."
The State of the Meccan Army and the First Spark
The Meccan army was prepared and they had come to Uhud very sure of themselves.
Khalid ibn Walid was keeping the right flank with two hundred horsemen. These were
the horsemen that our Prophet had drawn the archers' attention to. The left flank of the

--- Sayfa 549 ---
army was kept by Ikrima, the son of Abu Jahl. The foot soldiers were led by Safwan
ibn Umayya and the archers by Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia.~ The banner was carried by
Talha ibn Abi Talha. At a time when tension in Uhud was at its peak, Hanzala's father
who had gone to Mecca from Medina with fifty of his men to join the polytheist side,
started the attack: "0 you tribe of Aws," he was calling out.
Those who saw that it was Abu Amir who was attacking them responded: "0 you
sinful man, may your eyes go blind!" And thus the battle started.
With this first spark the war caught flame and one could now hear the voices of
women who were in the Qurayshi army; they were reciting poems and chanting songs,
encouraging their men against the Muslims. It was especially the wife of Abu Sufyan,
Hind, who heartened the men with her words.
Hind was promising impossible things to the soldiers should they win the war,
trying to tum each one of them into ruthless war machines.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who learnt of this
situation would pray thus: "Dear Lord! I attack only in Your name, I walk on towards
the enemy only in Your name; the reason I am fighting the enemy is only for You!
You are my sole support, and what a beautiful aide You are too!"
The Disciple of the Ummah
One of the polytheists had come forward and was asking for someone to engage in one
to one combat with him. When they saw how heavily built he was, they hesitated a
little. The man who was riding a grey camel repeated his request a second and then a
third time. After a moment's hesitation, Zubayr accepted his challenge. He was
moving so fast that those who were watching him from behind could not follow his
actions.
When he reached the polytheist calling him atop his camel, he jumped on him like a
lion would have jumped on its prey. It was a scene never before seen; the one-on-one
combat continued on the camel! Zubayr had got hold of the man in such a way that he
could not even use his sword. Our noble Prophet, who was watching him from afar,
said: "He whose back is closer to the ground will be killed."
All eyes turned once again to the camel. It was the polytheist whose back was closer
to the ground. The Companions all breathed a sigh of relief. Before long, Zubayr made
one last strike to the polytheist whom he had pulled to the ground. When he had
completed his mission and came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah, the
blessed Messenger would look at him affectionately and say: "Each Messenger has a

--- Sayfa 550 ---
disciple, and my disciple is Zubayr."
He then turned to his blessed Companions. The look in his eyes made it clear that
he was going to underline a point that they had to be watchful of at all times: "Had
Zubayr not accepted the challenge, I would have answered the man's call and gone
into combat myself."
Ali's Sensitivity
Talha ibn Abi Talha, who was carrying the banner of the polytheists, called out: "Who
will fight me?"
When a moment of silence occurred in the battlefield, Talha ibn Abi Talha repeated
his words a second time. This was a coincidence that should not have happened;
because they were letting denial have the word in the field of battle. Talha would say:
"0 you, the Companions of Muhammad! You said that you believed that your dead go
to Paradise and that our dead go to Hell; you lie! I swear by Lat that had you really
believed that, you would have put a man before me."
They could not let him speak anymore. Ali appeared at once in front of Talha. They
drew their swords and a fierce fight started before the eyes of the two armies. Before
long Ali pushed Talha ibn Abi Talha to the ground. Just as he was about to deal him
the final blow, Ali stepped back. This was strange; the fight should have ended with
Talha's death. When the war ended, they asked Ali why he had stepped back. He
answered that just as he was about to strike him, Talha' s private parts had been bared
and hence Ali, a man of prudence, had stepped back.~
A Sword Well-used
That day, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had presented to
his Companions a sword he had picked up and said: "Who will use this sword well
and do it justice?"
Companions such as Umar, Ali and Zubayr offered to take it but they could not
manage to take it out of our Prophet's hand. The sword was still in our Prophet's hand
and he kept repeating the question.
It was clear that he meant something more with those words, different from their
apparent meaning. At last Abu Dujana came to the fore and asked: "And what does
this sword require, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
Upon which the blessed Messenger replied: "That you should dive into the enemy
ranks and use it until it has bent."

--- Sayfa 551 ---
Abu Dujana believed that he was up to the job and so he said: "I take this sword in
order to use it well and do it justice, 0 Messenger of Allah."
This was a great responsibility and this responsibility was now only his among all
the luminaries that were present in the field of Uhud. Abu Dujana, in fact, was a man
of slight build, but he knew well how to fight. In such situations he would wrap a red
turban around his head. When people saw him put this red turban on, they would
know that there would be a fierce fight and that Abu Dujana would fight until he or his
opponent died. He wrapped the same turban in the field of Uhud too. When the Ansar
saw him, they started to say: 'We see that Abu Dujana has already put on the death
turban."
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, who saw his enthusiasm, was
pleased with his approach to the situation and he would give Abu Dujana another
target: "I hope that when I have given you this you will enter from the front and go all
the way to the back among the enemy," and then he gave him the sword.
Abu Dujana took the sword and swaggered confidently towards the enemy lines.
Watching him closely, the blessed Messenger said: "His walk is something that is
allowed only under these circumstances, normally, it is not something that is to
Allah's liking."
Abu Dujana was almost floating with happiness and he entered the ranks of the
enemy reciting poems; then slowly, people lost sight of him. Zubayr was curious as to
why the sword had not been given to him but to Abu Dujana and so he followed him
into the ranks of the enemy. He was keeping an eye on Dujana. He was severing the
heads of each denier that came on his path and was making his way towards the end of
the enemy lines. When the sword became blunt after a while, he sharpened it on rocks
and continued on his way. There was a man among the polytheists who had given
much damage to the Muslims; Abu Dujana met him and finished him off as well.
Abu Dujana was now about to reach the final destination that our Prophet had
mapped out for him, he had come all the way to the last rank where the women were.
Abu Sufyan's wife Hind, who had been encouraging the deniers to fight with her
poetic words, stood up against him. He was about to hit her with his sword when the
battlefield of Uhud echoed with her cries: "Help!" She shouted, but there was no one
to come to her aide. Abu Dujana calmly put his sword back into its place and said:
"Let me not stain the honor of the sword given to me by the Messenger of Allah with
this woman's blood," and so he did not deal Hind the final blow to kill her.~
Meccan Army's Defeat

--- Sayfa 552 ---
When Talha ibn Abi Talha, the first polytheist to challenge the Muslims in Uhud fell
to the ground and died, the Quraysh's banner was carried by his relatives. It changed
hands in the following order Uthman ibn Abi Talha, Abu Sa'd ibn Abi Talha, Musafi'
ibn Talha, Harith ibn Talha, Kilab ibn Talha ibn Abi Talha, Julas ibn Talha ibn Abi
Talha. These were either Talha's brothers or cousins. Seven people from the same
family died under the banner of the polytheists.
Of course this was not something that happened all at once; but it did not change the
result. After Julas died, the banner was picked up by Artat ibn Shurahbil, but he too
was soon killed, and then it was taken up by Abu Zayd ibn Umayr and when he was
killed, it was taken up by Kasit ibn Shurahbil, and thus they all tried to keep the
Meccan flag soaring in Uhud.
When he too was killed, the banner was left to the women to carry. The polytheist
army who saw that the banner kept falling, was greatly demoralized. Seeing that every
man who took it up was being slain, they no longer had the heart to pick it up. Amra
hint Alqama, one of the women in the rear rank, tried to pick the banner up. But it was
already too late; it no longer meant anything for the banner to be held up. The
polytheist army was faced with great defeat. The polytheist women were tearing
themselves apart in order to stop the polytheist men from fleeing but this did not stop
them. The wife of Abu Sufyan, Hind, was railing at the men for fleeing and was
physically putting herself in front of them to stop them from running. But it was not
only the banner that kept falling to the ground. By the time Amra hint Alqama had
picked the banner up, many of the polytheist men had fallen to the ground, never to
rise again. The pungent smell of blood spread everywhere.
Now what the Muslims needed to do was to follow the fleeing polytheists. Allah the
Almighty had granted another victory in the name of Islam.
The Moment When Orders Are Not Complied With
That day, the cavalry of the Meccan army had attacked three times in a row, and every
time they attacked, they had been pushed back by the group of archers located on the
hill. The horses could not advance with the arrows coming directly at them. They
could now see why our Prophet had insisted that they keep their position at all times.
But the moment when the polytheists were defeated and started running away, there
was a divergence of opinion on the hill of archers. Some of the archers who saw the
battle progressing in the favor were calling out: "0 you people! Come to the spoils!
Allah the Almighty has helped you defeat the enemy but you stay there doing nothing.
Look, your brothers have come victorious over the enemy, go after the polytheists and

--- Sayfa 553 ---
collect the spoils with your brothers!"
These words were the first point of fracture in the resolve needed in Uhud. They
seemed to have forgotten the aim of the directive given by the Messenger. They
interpreted the directive as meaning "stay at your post till the end of the battle"
however our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had said to "stay at your post
till I order you to come", emphasizing the importance of this strategy. This meant that
by leaving their post on the hill, they were leaving a gap in the ranks. Abdullah ibn
Jubayr and some of his friends who thought like him were startled by what they were
hearing and responded: "How quickly have you forgotten the words of the Messenger
of Allah saying 'Protect us against the danger that may come from behind us and even
if you should see us being killed, do not leave the position you are at and do not
attempt to help us! Do not join us even if you should see us collect spoils; just stay
there and protect us against the dangers that may come from behind us."'
According to them, these directives were not to be understood in the way that their
friends had understood. They had their own reasoning: "That is not what the
Messenger of Allah meant with those words," and they interpreted his words
differently. And their interpretation guided them towards collecting the spoils~ to the
effect that there were now only a handful of archers left alongside Abdullah ibn
Jubayr.
The two hundred strong cavalry force led by Khalid ibn Walid, who were waiting
for the perfect moment to attack, realized what was going on with the archers on the
hill and they prepared to attack the handful of men that were left. Khalid ibn Walid
was supported by Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl.
This negligent act, one that seemed to be small at first, was about to change the
entire course of the war. It was a bitter experience, but maybe through these archers,
Allah the Almighty was giving a lesson to those that would come later. This proved
that they had to comply with the orders that their leaders gave them without forced
interpretation. When and if they diverged from this practice, they had to at least let the
person who had given them the orders know their new course of action.
As there were no longer any arrows blocking their progress, the cavalry attacked the
Muslims from behind. First, they killed the handful of archers that remained on the hill
along with their leader Abdullah ibn Jubayr. And then all of a sudden they attacked the
Muslim army who were pursuing the fleeing polytheists from behind, as well as the
Muslims that were busy collecting the spoils. Now, one could hear the shouts: "For
Uzza! In the name ofHubal" echoed in the field. It looked like the winds of morning
had changed direction and now luck was on the side of the polytheists.

--- Sayfa 554 ---
A dust cloud the likes of which had not been seen in Uhud was now rising up to the
mountains. The Muslims were now engaging with the enemy that had come from
behind, and the polytheist army that had been fleeing a second ago turned back and
started to attack as well: the Muslims were now caught straight in between two fires.
There was great panic; some among the Muslims had already retired to the side
thinking the battle was over; there were also those who had dropped their swords in
order to collect the spoils. The scene was one that did not fit the atmosphere of war.
Their backs had been bent in two for not doing the job that our noble Prophet had
requested of them. Thus, their wrong decision would bring further wrongs and Allah
the Almighty would give a bitter yet effective lesson to be heeded by the generations
to come.~
Just as in Badr, they heard a voice here in Uhud as well calling out to them: "0 you
subjects of Allah! Look at your brothers and join them!"
This voice had heartened the fleeing polytheists, and when they saw that Khalid ibn
Walid and Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl were attacking from behind, they came to their senses
and went on the offensive. The message brought by the Truthful Gabriel would
describe the situation in the following terms:
Allah did indeed fulfill His promise to you when you routed them by His
leave, up to (the point) when you lost heart, and disagreed about the order
(given to the archers among you not to leave their positions), and
disobeyed, after He had brought you within sight of that (victory) for
which you were longing. Among you were such as cared for this world,
and among you were such as cared for the Hereafter. Then He diverted
you from them (the enemy), that He might try you. But He has surely
pardoned you: Allah has grace and bounty for the believers. (Al Imran
3: 152)
The Devil who had appeared in the shape of Jual ibn Suraqa on the hill of Aynayn
kept calling out: "Muhammad has been killed!"
This was a call that would go deep into the hearts of the Muslims and hurt them
gravely. One bad misfortune followed another with greater force and heartache,
making the previous misfortune seem less significant in comparison. The Muslims
were in great despair, they had no more energy left in their knees to walk.
When this call was heard, there were also those who said: "If the Messenger of
Allah is dead, then fight for his religion. Put yourself on the line for him and fight till
the moment when you reach Allah in martyrdom." But this call of the Companions,

--- Sayfa 555 ---
who were caught in cross fire, would not be enough to stop the other side.
All this stemmed as a result of disregarding the subtleties of the Prophetic order.
Had they waited for the order of the blessed Messenger to be sent from his
headquarters, and had the archers not opened this gap in the defense, they would have
attained absolute victory just as in Badr, without having suffered so many losses. But
now there was a new situation to be dealt with and this required that they developed a
new strategy.
Our Noble Prophet's Perseverance
While the battlefield looked like judgment day had occurred, the blessed Messenger
had not moved from his place, and had stood his ground against the enemy. He was
standing at a place closest to the Meccan polytheists and was throwing arrows to those
who approached to attack him. In the process of doing so, his bow string had broken in
two. There were very few people left around him.~ The men who did not leave our
Prophet's side that day were saying that they would shield his face with their faces,
and that they would sacrifice their lives for our Prophet. When he saw them running
frantically left and right from anxiety, he would call out: "You, so and so, come
towards me, I am the Messenger of Allah," thus keeping the soldiers in line and
curbing their tendency to disperse.
Our beloved Prophet had been left alone; the polytheists who sensed that the
barricade of Companions around him had weakened, started to shower arrows in his
direction.
Then at one point, the voice of Abdullah ibn Shihab was heard: "Show me
Muhammad!" And then he added: "Ifhe is saved today, then know that I am dead."
When saying this he was actually standing right next to the blessed Messenger but
he was unable to see him.
Safwan ibn Umayya, who saw this foolish state of Abdullah ibn Shihab, would
scold him for not being able to see the man he was standing right next to. This was not
something particular to Abdullah ibn Shihab either; his four friends were suffering
from the same predicament; they too had agreed to kill our Prophet but had not
managed to do so.
That day, there were men such as Ali, Zubayr ibn Awwam, Talha ibn Ubaydullah,
Abu Dujana, Harith ibn Samma, Hubab ibn Mundhir, Asim ibn Thabit and Sahl ibn
Hunayfwho, through Divine will, had returned safe and sound from Uhud. They were
at the forefront of the Muslim army and had thus changed the course of events in

--- Sayfa 556 ---
Uhud. They gave the message to those that would come after them, "If you hope to
solve your most acute problems, then you have to have the same purity of intention
and action as us."
Although unknown to themselves, each person's end was known within the
framework of fate and it could not be altered. It was a known fact that while many
people who shunned risky situations such as the battlefield for fear of death died under
unexpected circumstances, many other men who fought at the very front line returned
home safe and sound.
Abu Talha was one of the best archers in the Muslim army, but that day three bows
broke in his hands. On the one hand he was aiming and shooting arrows at the enemy,
and on the other hand he was trying to protect the Messenger of Allah. At one point he
had seen our Prophet go into the open field and had said to him softly: "0 Messenger
of Allah. Let my mother and father perish for you! Do not go so much into the open
field, for they will make you their target and shoot arrows directly at you. Let my life
perish for you!"
For a while Ali had been separated from our Prophet and he started to worry about
him. He was running around on the field of Uhud in order to find the blessed
Messenger. He had also looked among the dead but he could not find him there too.
He was saying to himself: "I swear by Allah that the Messenger of Allah couldn't
have left the battlefield, but I don't seem to be able to see him here now. I believe
Allah the Almighty is showing us His anger to point to what we need to do by taking
His Great Prophet away from among us. Then what falls upon me to do today is to fall
a martyr fighting for his cause so that I may be reunited with him!"
He then broke the sheath of his sword and delved into a crowd of polytheists. The
polytheists who saw him coming were, amazingly, stepping aside to give him way
from fear. Ali was thus making his way among the crowd when finally; he met our
noble Prophet in the rear ranks.
There were people who were putting their bodies as shields all around the blessed
Messenger so that no arrow would hit him; they had formed a human shield around his
body. Talha ibn Ubaydullah reached for an arrow that was coming our Prophet's way
and it severed two of his fingers. What importance did two fingers have when one had
to protect the beloved Messenger? They had put all their lives in his services. Two
fingers were gone but the arrow that had been destined for the blessed Messenger had
been diverted-that was what was important. At one point when the polytheists came
closer, our Prophet asked: "Who will stand against them?"

--- Sayfa 557 ---
It was Talha's voice that rose first: "I, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
It was clear that where he stood had strategic importance, so the blessed Messenger
said: "You stay where you are." And then someone else from the Ansar called out: "I,
0 Messenger of Allah."
"Okay, you come," said our noble Prophet and then the Ansar fought valiantly, but
before long, he fell martyr.
Another group of polytheists attacked right after the first group. The Prophet's
blessed voice echoed through the field of Uhud: "Who will stand against them?"
It was again Talha who said: "I, 0 Messenger of Allah."
''You stay where you are," replied the blessed Messenger once again.
Then the voice of another Companion from the Ansar was heard: "I, 0 Messenger
of Allah."
"All right, you come," said our noble Prophet.
This member of the Ansar also fought valiantly like his friend before him, and like
him, he too fell martyr.
This repeated itself till only Talha ibn Ubaydullah was left by our Prophet's side.
When a similar situation occurred, the blessed Messenger called out once again: "Who
will fight against them?
It was again Talha who said: "I, 0 Messenger of Allah."
He had in the meanwhile been wounded on his hand and his fingers had been cut
off. He was now feeling particularly anxious, for he could not bear the thought of
failing to defend the blessed Messenger. He gathered himself together and ran to the
defense of our Prophet, all the while responding to the attacks of the polytheists!ll
It was not only Talha who made a human shield around our Prophet. Some of the
Companions of our noble Prophet had fallen martyr that day and there was practically
no one who had not been injured. Abu Dujana had made his own body a shield for the
blessed Messenger and had received the arrows himself. Abdurrahman ibn Awf had
received more than twenty sword blows that day and he would lead the rest of his life
suffering from those wounds.
Sa' d ibn Abi Waqqas had entered the ranks of the polytheists with the intention of
becoming a martyr, and he had seen someone that the polytheists were attacking
mercilessly, a face that had turned red that he could not recognize from afar. He asked
Miqdad ibn Aswad standing by his side who the red-faced man was: "0 Sa'd," said
Miqdad. "That is the Messenger of Allah and he is calling you to his side!"

--- Sayfa 558 ---
How could it be that our noble Prophet should call and the Companions not go to
his side? He ran to him at once. When he saw Sa'd coming, the noble Messenger had
him sit by his side and shoot arrows at the polytheists. Sa' d got hold of his bow and
started to shoot arrows at the polytheists, all the while saying: "Dear Lord! These are
Your arrows, and You defeat the enemy with these!"
Our beloved Prophet, who heard this, was giving Sa' d arrows to shoot and was
praying for him in the following manner: "Dear Lord! Accept Sa'd's prayer! Dear
Lord! Let Sa' d's arrows hit the target! Shoot, and let my mother and father perish for
you 0 Sad!"
Sa' d could see that the Messenger of Allah was handing him the very same arrows
that he had given him with his own hands just a few minutes ago! He could see what
kind of a blessing our Prophet's prayers were working on their stock.~
The Real Target and the Sad Result
The main target of the polytheists was undoubtedly our noble Prophet. A polytheist
named Utba ibn Abi Waqqas~ had thrown four stones at him one after the other and
one of them had hit our Prophet's blessed face. The stone had broken a lower right
tooth and his blessed lips had burst open, bleeding. The polytheists had taken
advantage of a moment's disorganization and kept attacking. They were showering
arrows and stones upon the blessed Messenger. At one point they heard Ibn Qamia's
voice: "Here! Take that! I am Ibn Qamia," while mercilessly attacking the Messenger
of Allah. Our noble Prophet would tum to Ibn Qamia and say: "I leave you to Allah."iill
At one point, when faced with the coming danger, the blessed Messenger called out:
"Who will drive these men away?" concerning the polytheists who were coming
towards him.
A sharp but strong voice was heard: "1, 0 Messenger of Allah."
When gazes turned to where the voice was coming from, they saw that a woman
was running towards our Prophet with bandage material and a water-skin in her hands.
This woman, Nasiba hint Qa'b, had seen that the army needed her as well alongside
all the men, and she had got on her horse and come to Uhud.
She had come all the way near where our Prophet was and started fighting, trying to
protect him. She was wielding her sword and shooting arrows, and was fighting like a
lioness on the battlefield. When she heard the voice of Ibn Qamia, who was shouting
at the top of his lungs so as to challenge the Messenger of Allah, she walked over to
Ibn Qamia along with Mus'ab ibn Umayr and tried to finish him off with a few blows

--- Sayfa 559 ---
from her sword. But that day, Ibn Qamia had worn two shields on top of him and
Nasiba hint Qa'b's sword would not cut through.
Mus'ab ibn Umayr, who was carrying the banner of our noble Prophet, was also
fighting like a lion. The saddest thing was that among those who had come with the
polytheist army all the way to Uhud for revenge was Mus'ab's mother Hunas and his
brother Abu Aziz ibn Umayr who had been set free for ransom money after Badr.
Mus'ab had such a firm faith that there was no standing in front of him. But the
disorganization displayed by the Muslims had made him quite mad. With Islam's
banner in one hand and a sword in the other, he continued fighting fiercely.
But Ibn Qamia had sworn to kill the blessed Messenger, and Mus'ab, in his armor,
looked very much like the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. That is why
Mus'ab had become the target of Mecca that day! Then all of a sudden Ibn Qamia
stood in front of Mus 'ab. They first drew their swords and started to battle it out one-
on-one. This was a battle of equals and in the end, Mus'ab fell martyr. His lifeless
body became the symbol of Uhud. But even though Mus'ab fell, the banner of Islam
would not lie there on the ground! Amazingly, an angel in the appearance of Mus'ab
continued carrying the banner!
Ibn Qamia thought he had killed the blessed Messenger. He turned to the Quraysh
and started to shout with joy "I have killed Muhammad!" His voice echoed
everywhere in Uhud. In some places where this voice echoed, there were those who
dropped their swords, and those who were wailing from grief. Umar was in total
shock, as if struck by lightning, when he heard Ibn Qamia's words and exclaimed:
"Let me not hear anyone say "Muhammad has been killed" or else I will sever their
head!" putting such an eventually out ofhis mind at once.ll
At one point, Malik ibn Duhshum approached Kharija ibn Zayd, and explaining that
he had heard that our Prophet had been killed, he wanted to verify the news.
Haritha responded to his question in the following way:
"Even if the Messenger of Allah may have been killed, Allah is Hay, alive, and He
never dies! The Messenger of Allah, for his part, performed the duty he received from
His Lord to communicate His message; so then stand up and fight to the death for His
religion!"
A similar reaction came from Sa'd ibn Rabi. They had also come to him to verify
the same news. This was the subject that the Companions were most sensitive about
and he too was shaken as if he had received a lightning shock to the brain. But it did
not take him long to gather himself together, and speaking of the continuity of the

--- Sayfa 560 ---
cause of Allah, he too told those around him to continue to fight in the path that
Messenger of Allah had sacrificed his life, hence encouraging them towards the
battlefield.
In the chaos that ensued in Uhud, the first Companion to see that our Prophet was
alive and to let the other Companions know was Ka'b ibn Malik.
To all he came across he said overjoyed: "I have seen the Messenger of Allah with
these two eyes; blood is trickling from under his helmet but he is alive! 0 you
Muslims! Rejoice! The Messenger of Allah is over there!" shouting out that our
Prophet was alive and well. Uhud would find new life with this news and everyone
would tum to where this voice was coming from. However our noble Prophet, upon
seeing his excitement, gestured to Ka'b to be quiet. For their exuberance could show
the enemy the direction to attack.
Mercy, in spite ofEverything
Meanwhile, the helmet of the blessed Messenger had shattered and two of its rings had
stuck into his cheeks. Moreover, he had fallen into one of the trap holes that Abu Amir
-who, leaving Medina, had joined the Meccans-had dug and when falling, our
Prophet had almost fainted. These were scenes that drew the beloved Companions
mad. Ali ran at once and held the blessed Messenger's hands. Meanwhile, Talha ibn
Ubaydullah descended into the hole, and using his spear as a support, he helped the
Messenger of Allah get out, even with the weight of two armors upon him. Before
long, he heard the following words of praise: "Today Talha has deserved everything."
After hearing such beautiful words, Talha no longer felt the exhaustion of Uhud and
had forgotten all the difficulties he had endured. Talha was gloating with joy-he was
experiencing a certain type of peace he had never felt in his entire life.
However, the Messenger of mercy was very sad. How could they treat a Prophet,
who sacrificed his life to lead them to salvation, so badly? The Pride of Humanity was
cleaning the blood that trickled from his blessed beard and saying: "How can the
people who break the tooth of their Prophet and crack open his head, only because he
invites them to Allah, ever be saved?"
He was inviting them to believe in Allah, but they, on the other hand were calling
him to the path of unbelief. He was inviting them to Paradise; they were calling him to
Hell.
This was a scene that the great Companions could not bear to look at; they could see
blood trickling from the face of our noble Prophet whom they had bound their lives to.

--- Sayfa 561 ---
They came to him to share his pain, and there were those who asked him to pray that
the people who had put him in this position is punished: "Raise your hands and curse
them, 0 Messenger of Allah!" They were saying.
But even under these circumstances the Messenger of Allah, the Prophet of mercy
and affection would not heed those who asked him to curse. On the one hand he was
wiping away the blood that was trickling down his blessed beard, and on the other
hand he was saying: "I have not been sent to mankind to curse them, but to invite them
to grace."
In the meantime, the Truthful Gabriel, who came to the Prophet's rescue at every
turning point, had descended again and brought the news that bestowing faith to
people, forgiving them or responding with wrath were all acts pertaining to Allah.ll
On the other hand, these verses meant that even if the people, who hurt the blessed
Messenger, were on the enemy side today, they too would soon be introduced to the
faith tomorrow. That was what the Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon
him, wanted in the first place, and opening up his hands to the sky, he started to pray
in favor of those who cracked open his head and broke his teeth: "My Lord! Forgive
my tribe; for they do not know!"
In the face of such magnanimity, Companions who had displayed their anger, such
as Umar, were saying: "0 Messenger of Allah! Let my mother and father perish in
your way. Prophet Noah, peace be upon him, cursed his tribe saying "0 Lord! Do not
let the deniers live comfortable lives on earth and finish off their line." You are bent in
double, blood is trickling down your face and your tooth is broken and yet you pray
for good for them and say "0 Lord! Forgive my tribe, for they do not know!" I know
that should you raise your hands and curse at them, we would all be eradicated from
the face ofthe earth."
This was the difference of the Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon
him. He, who had come to hold the hand of humanity and help them reach perfection,
did not concede from his position even under such dire circumstances and was always
on the side of peace and reconciliation. Even if this should be the position of the
Messenger of Allah, the Companions would do what befell them to do and they would
not let the blood of our noble Prophet go un-avenged. Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah, who
saw him in this position and was enraged, kept asking: "Who did this to you, 0
Messenger of Allah?"
Our beloved Prophet told him the name of the person who had wounded his face
and broken his tooth: "Utba ibn Abi Waqqas."

--- Sayfa 562 ---
Hatib ibn Abi Balta'ah was determined and turned to the blessed Messenger:
"Which direction did he go?"
The blessed Messenger pointed to the direction Utba had gone. Upon that Hatib ibn
Abi Balta'ah got hold of his sword and went after Utba. He finished him off before
long and then came back to the presence of the Prophet. This meant that someone who
had raised his hand against the blessed Messenger had to be dealt with and further life-
threatening risks should thus be stalled. That is why the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, said to him twice to express his contentment: "May Allah
be pleased with you," and then prayed for beneficence for him.
Sacrificing One Tooth for Each Ring
When he saw that blood was trickling from our Prophet's blessed face, Abu Bakr
came forward. He believed that a single hair strand damaged on the Messenger's body
called for the sacrifice of a thousand Abu Bakr's. But it was not only him who wanted
to offer the sacrifice. Abu Ubayda came forward and said: "By Allah leave that job to
me," and insisted.
They were becoming more and more emotional as they approached, for our noble
Prophet was writhing with the pain of the rings that pierced his cheeks.
Abu Ubayda approached the blessed Messenger with great attention. He first tried
to pull the rings out with his hands, but it was clear that this would hurt our noble
Prophet and so he tried to pull the rings out with his teeth. He first bit one of them and
tugged onto it with all his might. The ring had come out, but so had Abu Ubayda' s
tooth. When Abu Bakr saw this state of Ubayda, he came forward so that he may pull
out the other ring, but Abu Ubayda did not intend to let him have such an honor.
Swearing by Allah, he asked Abu Bakr to leave it to him. He once again pulled the
ring with his teeth and tugged on it so hard that another one of his teeth fell out as
well.l2.
Now they had got rid of the rings that had been stuck into our Prophet's blessed
face. Meanwhile, Malik ibn Sinan placed his lips where the blood was seeping out
from, where the rings had been pulled out, and he started to suck at our Prophet's
cheeks.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who saw this asked
Malik in astonishment: "Are you drinking my blood?"
''Yes I am, 0 Messenger of Allah," Malik responded.
"He who has come in contact with my blood shall be spared Hellfire," he said.

--- Sayfa 563 ---
Hamza's Shahadah
When our Prophet fought with the enemy in Uhud, Hamza, his uncle and nursing
brother, was by his side at all times. Allah had, through the hand ofHamza the "lion of
Allah", killed thirty-one people from the enemy. He had killed some ofthe men who
had been carrying the banner of the enemy and thus had played an important role in
the defeat that the deniers suffered at the beginning. It was natural that such a lion
should have many enemies along the way. Hamza had also killed Tuayma ibn Adiyy,
Jubayr ibn Mut'im's~ uncle at Badr. Upon the death of his uncle, Jubayr had called
his slave Wahshi to his side and said:
"If you kill Muhammad's uncle Hamza for my uncle who has been killed, then you
will be set free."
Freedom was the most important thing for a slave and so Wahshi' s became so
hopeful that he was living each day with the dream of killing Hamza. He was very
good at throwing spears and he was always practicing to become even better at it.
Uhud was a very important opportunity for him and his eye was continuously on
Hamza in the field. But there was no way to get near him; he was severing the head of
each men who came close. People who chose him as a target found themselves dead
on the ground even before registering what had hit them. When he saw Hamza from
afar, Wahshi asked those around him: "Who is that man?"
"Hamza!" they answered.
"Just the man I am looking for," he said to himself and started to approach Hamza
from behind, hiding behind trees and rocks. Each step he took was bringing him closer
to his target. At that moment Siba ibn Abdiluzza stood before Hamza: "Come here to
fight and finish him," he called out.
But in a split moment Hamza had attacked Siba and brought him to the ground,
killing him instantly.
In the meanwhile, Wahshi had come as close as he could to Hamza, and hiding
behind a rock, he was waiting for the right moment to attack. For a moment Hamza's
armor had slid opened; this was the right time, and Wahshi threw his spear with all his
might. The spear pierced Hamza's chest-even in that painful state he tried to respond
to Wahshi but it was impossible. Wahshi was still afraid to approach Hamza, waiting
for him to become totally motionless.
Just then, Hamza gave away his soul as the master of all martyrs. From now on,
Wahshi was a man who had gained his freedom. He had no other goal than this and so
came and took his spear away from Hamza' s lifeless chest; he then opened up

--- Sayfa 564 ---
Hamza's belly, tore away his liver and took it to Hind. He knew that she too wanted
revenge on Hamza; for it was Hamza who had killed her relatives including her father.
Clearly, he wanted to be appreciated for what he had done. He came and said: "This is
Hamza'a liver."
Hind's eyes opened very wide, she was over-excited to have reached the end of
something she had been dreaming about for a long time.
And Wahshi would receive the reward he was expecting; Hind first took Hamza' s
liver and started to chew on it and then spat it back out. This was the moment when
her hatred had reached its zenith. She then turned to Wahshi and gave him the
necklaces and the kaftan she was wearing. She also promised to give him ten dinars
when they returned to Mecca.
But this had not been enough the quench the feelings of hatred that Hind was
feeling. She took hold ofWahshi's hand and asked him to show her where Hamza had
fallen. They came to where he was. She then started to tear at Hamza's blessed body;
she cut his nose and ears, and wore them around her neck as an ornament, not taking
them off until they reached Mecca.
Hind then stepped on a high rock and started to proclaim to the people what she had
done, exalting the Meccans for having revenged the defeat at Badr in the intoxication
of their victory. But it would be another Hind who would give her a piece of her mind:
Hind hint Usasa was responding to what she had said, saying that many more Badr's
would come, trying to drown the voice of Hind hint Utba. When in Mecca, Wahshi
informed his master as to what he had done and so gained his freedom.
Divine Help and Recovery
Everyone could now see how some negligence that appeared to be small could cause
great havoc. Maybe in order to prevent greater catastrophes Allah the Almighty was
showing the Ummah of Muhammad an example, through the Messenger of Allah, and
drawing their attention to a very serious point. Success was possible only through
obedience to Allah and His Messenger. Now everyone was racing to sacrifice all they
had for Allah and His Messenger. On the one hand they were retreating towards the
skirts of the mountain, and on the other these men, who had given all they had to the
fight, had shown with their actions that they were sincere in all aspects. They had once
again given their word to the death and had sworn that they would not leave the
blessed Messenger ever again. This also meant that our noble Prophet was once again
taking the reins in his hands. The bitter experience they had concerning the archers,
and some instances in which the fighters had abandoned their swords, were now in the

--- Sayfa 565 ---
past and the Trust of Mankind, peace and blessings be upon him, had started to reign
over Uhud once again. It was such that he had turned what seemed like a defeat into a
victory, and in Uhud the Messenger of Allah was preparing the last scene which
would be a victorious one.
Such sincerity would be rewarded by Allah as well, and He sent down peace upon
these men who had been wielding swords since early morning and risking their lives,
just as in Badr. A sweet slumber came upon them and they almost dropped their
swords from their hands. Men like Abu Talha were picking up their swords again but
they could not help dropping them once more. The enemy soldiers were beneath them
and Bishr ibn Bara' dropped his sword from his hand; because of sleepiness, he did
not even realize that the sword was no longer in his hands. Sleep was like a blanket
that now covered all the difficulties they had had to face. Here was Divine help, and
these difficulties would soon end. There were angels that had come to help in the field
of Badr. They had been present since the beginning of the battle; Allah the Almighty
had promised to help the people of faith with five thousand angels. But this help had
been subject to the obedience of Allah and His Messenger, and after what had
happened at the hill of the archers, because they had not displayed the obedience to
orders and the stance expected of them, the angels had retreated and left them on their
own.l2.
When our noble Prophet retreated to the skirts of Mount Uhud that day, Sa'd ibn
Abi Waqqas saw two angels in white clothes-Gabriel and Mikail-fighting and
protecting the blessed Messenger from the dangers that the enemies presented.
When Sa'd was shooting the arrows that the blessed Messenger was handing him, a
young radiant faced man dressed in white was bringing back the shot arrows from the
battlefield and saying "Shoot, 0 Abu Ishaq."
After having been killed by Ibn Qamia, an angel had taken on the duty of Mus' ab
ibn Umayr who had been carrying the banner; this angel had taken on the appearance
of Mus'ab and was letting the flag of our noble Prophet fly high. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, would at one point call out to him: "Mus'ab,
advance forward!"
And the angel would tum to him to say: "I am not Mus'ab."
Abdurrahman ibn Awf, who heard our Prophet call out to Mus'ab, said rather
surprised: "0 Messenger of Allah, was Mus' ab not martyred?"
''Yes," answered the blessed Messenger. "But an angel is carrying out Mus' ab 's
duty for him instead!"22

--- Sayfa 566 ---
At one point the Messenger of Allah asked Harith ibn Simma the whereabouts of
Abdurrahman ibn Awf and he answered that Abdurrahman was fighting furiously
with the enemy at one comer of the field.
Upon which our Prophet said: "There is no doubt that the angels are fighting with
h.
"
Ill.
Receiving this piece of joyful news, Harith ran straight to Abdurrahman ibn Awf
and saw seven polytheists outstretched all around him on the ground. He asked: "May
Allah increase your strength! Have you killed them all?"
"I have killed these and these" he said, and then added: "But I did not see who
killed these."
Harith could not hide the astonishment he felt at the truth of the news that Allah and
His Messenger had given and he said to himself "Sadaqallahu wa Rasuluh" meaning
"Allah and His Messenger verily speak the truth."
Anas ibn Nadr, who felt the sadness and embarrassment of not having been with our
noble Prophet at Badr, said: "I was not able to attend Badr which was the first battle of
the Messenger of Allah; if Allah the Almighty should give me the opportunity to meet
with the polytheists once again I know what I will do for Allah," burning with the
desire to fight for Allah. Now Allah the Almighty had given him opportunity he had
been hoping for and he had come to Uhud to give his all to the fight.
When the war started and there was dissolution in the second rank, Anas raised his
hands to the skies and spoke what was in his heart: "Dear Lord! I ask you for
forgiveness of what these friends of mine have done, I ask for Your mercy. And as to
what they (the polytheists) do, I enter into Your refuge and forgiveness."
It was clear that he was deeply stricken concerning this dissolution and he could not
come to terms with the result. He thought of taking his sword and diving into the ranks
of the enemy. On his way, he saw a group of the Ansar and the Muhajirun; they had
left their swords upon hearing the news that our Prophet had been killed, and were lost
deep in thought. Anxious he asked: 'Why are you all sitting here unarmed?"
"The Messenger of Allah has been killed," they said. It was as if Anas has been hit
by a bullet in his head. But he knew that a believer should never lose his composure,
even in the battlefield. Even if the Prophet may have been killed, the Islam he believed
in was not a system limited to the lives of certain people; it was a way of life that had
to be lived at all costs. That is why he cried out to the people who were waiting
desperately in Uhud: "What is the point of living in a world in which he does not
exist? What good could it do you? Come on, get up and put your life on the line for

--- Sayfa 567 ---
the path that the Messenger of Allah has died for, and go die on that path!"
Then he continued on his way amongst the crowd and was out of sight. Sa' d ibn
Muadh would see him at the rear ofUhud and would say: "I am with you too."
But he had a difficult time keeping up with Anas ibn Nadr, he couldn't quite do
what Anas did. Anas turned back and called out to Sa'd: "0 Sa'd, how beautiful is the
scent of Paradise! I swear by Nadr's Lord that I can smell that scent beyond Uhud!"
Anas ibn Nadr, who was cutting through enemy ranks almost at the speed of light,
was then out of sight, for Sa'd ibn Muadh who was watching after him could no
longer spot him. He had dived into the enemy throng and had fallen martyr when
fighting valiantly.
When evening fell and they found his lifeless body, they saw more than eighty
wounds caused by swords, spears and arrows. His face had been destroyed, and they
had cut off his nose and ears. They hardly recognized him although they were looking
at him very closely. At last his sister would come and recognize him from a mark on
his finger. He had been a true Companion and soldier, and the Qur'an would speak of
men like him as heroes who complied with their duties without fault).2
Different Intentions and Quzman
Even if the actions carried out and the efforts made may have been the same, people
were treated differently in accordance with the consequences of their actions. Intention
was like a glass in which pure water was poured and it gave an appearance according
to the color of that glass. The same thing would happen in Uhud that day.
There was a man called Quzman who was fighting fiercely in Uhud that day. He
displayed heroics similar to Hamza, he severed the heads of all those who stood in his
way, and people around were watching him in amazement.
Essentially, he had had no intention to come to war, but when the women of the
Banu Zafar had started to mock him, he grabbed his weapon and came to Uhud. At the
time the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was organizing his
ranks in the field of Uhud. Quzman came and took his place in the very first row.
And when the war started, there was no way to stand against Quzman. He had shot
the first arrow. He was a great hero; he had been the one to kill at least three of the
standard carriers of the polytheists and had played a big role in the losses of the
enemy. His valiance had been noted by the other Companions and they had come to
the blessed Messenger to speak of his exploits in praising terms.
Still, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was saying that he

--- Sayfa 568 ---
was a man whose abode would be Hell. This was strange indeed. People were
surprised to hear what our Prophet said in view of what Quzman had done; there were
those who even doubted the Messenger. How could it be? Quzman was a person who
was even able to throw arrows with his hand like spears and hit the target; he could
attack a horseman on his own and kill everyone on his way.
He had once again dived into the ranks of the enemy and had killed nine men, and
he himself had been wounded. Qatada ibn Numan who saw him wounded said: "0
Abu Ghaydak, whatjoy for you! You will become a martyr."
Meanwhile other people had gathered around him and they, too, said: "We swear by
Allah you lived through a great test today! Rejoice 0 Quzman!"
When hearing these words he said: "Why do you say that I should rejoice? I swear I
only fought for my tribe, in order to exalt their honor. Had it not been for my tribe, I
would not have fought."
Then he put the handle of his sword on the ground and placed its sharp end on his
belly, and threw himself on top of it and committed suicide. Quzman had killed
himself1 When those who were surprised to have witnessed such a death came and
gave the news to our noble Prophet. The blessed Messenger first said the takbir and
then said: "I swear that I am Allah's subject and Messenger."
Then he called Bilal to his side and told him to communicate to the people the
following: "Verily, only Muslims can enter Paradise. And even if it should be through
a degenerate man, Allah the Almighty always verifies His religion."
A Procession of Heroes and Re-gathering
From the moment that the false news of our Prophet having been killed spread
throughout Uhud, the field became the scene where those who had been educated by
his side displayed heroism. Abdullah ibn Jahsh and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas raced each
other to the death to receive prayers from him, other valiant men like Haysama ibn
Haysama were also running towards death, men like Hanzala ibn Abi Amir were
striving for martyrdom, and men like Amr ibn Jamuh were walking onto enemy lines
as if they were walking towards Paradise. And then there were those like Amr ibn
Thabit who attained eternal salvation with very little effort that day. Rather than
waiting for their death in Medina, there were those like Husayl and Thabit ibn Waksh
who had decided to attain eternal youth in their old age by coming to Uhud. There was
a procession of heroes in the battlefield and Uhud bear witness to how many known
and nameless men and women-like Nasiba hint Malik-who planted fear in the

--- Sayfa 569 ---
hearts of the Meccan army when they fought to protect our Prophet.
But the false news did not last long; when Qays ibn Muharris:ll! saw that the blessed
Messenger was amongst his Companions again, everything changed. His morale was
boosted and he threw himself into the ranks of the enemy once again; he did not care
whether he died or not. He was now a steed that no one could stop. He was severing
the heads of all who stood in his way. He would at last be stopped with a spear thrown
from afar.
Before long, they heard the deep voice of Hubab ibn Mundhir in the field of Uhud;
he was calling the men to re-gather. And he became the point around which the
Muslims gathered and this voice became the new driving force for the movement to
make the voice of Truth reign supreme. This was good news that gave new life to the
believers and all those who heard the news tried to pass it on to the others. Abbas ibn
Ubada, Kharija ibn Zayd and Aws ibn Arqam kept repeating it.
Abbas ibn Ubada was saying: "0 you Muslims! Come on, come to Allah and your
Prophet! The difficulties that befell you also befell your Prophet. But he promises you
help and victory so long as you retain your power of patience and resist."
While saying these words, Abbas took off his armor and threw away his helmet. He
then turned to Kharija ibn Zayd who was next to him and asked: "Do you need these?"
It was clear that they knew each other well and as soon as he heard the question,
Harith answered: "No."
Then he said the following words that showed what a believer who disdained
worldly life was capable of: "I am thinking what you are thinking!"
Now all three of them had dived into the enemy ranks and were fighting fiercely. At
one point they heard Abbas ibn Ubada say the following: "While we have these eyes
that see what happens, what excuse can we have tomorrow should something happen
to the Messenger of Allah?"
Harith, who was wielding his sword at the same time, responded: "Then we will
have no evidence or excuse for ourselves in the eyes of the Lord!"
All those who saw the blessed Messenger safe and sound took a sigh of relief and
forgot all the difficulties they had had to endure. There was something new afoot in
Uhud now and there was a re-gathering around our noble Prophet. Morale was up
again and a new victory was being built on the shoulders of those who disdained the
gains of worldly life.
Ubayy ibn Khalaf, who had been taken prisoner after Badr, had given his ransom
money and had thus freed himself. He had promised to buy the best horse on his return

--- Sayfa 570 ---
to Mecca and that he would feed it with the best fodder possible. He had done as he
had promised and his only aim had become to kill the blessed Messenger, preparing
himself for Uhud.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, knew of his intentions
and when he had retreated to the skirts of Mount Uhud, he said: "I fear Ubayy ibn
Khalaf will attack from behind; if you see him coming, you must tell me!"
Indeed, before long Ubayy appeared with a group of men from behind, mounted on
his horse with his iron armor: "Where is Muhammad? If he is saved today, I shall not
live."
One of the Companions came forward and tried to finish him off, but he could not
manage. Others tried to go after him but the blessed Messenger said: "Leave him be!
Give way!"
He was a shameless, impudent man and speaking ill, he started accusing our
Prophet of lying and of running away from the field of battle. He had overstepped the
boundaries and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, wanted to
respond to him personally and so he took the spear from Harith ibn Simma's hand.
The people around Ubayy, who saw that our Prophet was coming at them with all his
might and majesty, started to run frantically to the left and right. Our noble Prophet,
who was the best representation of everything was also at the representative in putting
up a fight when the time came.
Ubayy received a spear blow and fell off his horse; he started to roll on the ground
before he realized what had hit him. Scared to death, he cried out: "I swear
Muhammad has killed me!"
One blow from the blessed Messenger had frightened Ubayy to death and he
remembered the words he had heard in Mecca many years ago. He responded to those
who criticized him for not putting up a fight and giving up so quickly: "I swear by Lat
and Uzza that had this happened to the whole ofthe people ofDhu'l-Majaz, it would
have been enough to kill them all! For when in Mecca, he had said to me, "I will kill
you." I swear that he could kill me even if he merely spit on me!" And he was right to
a certain degree, for when returning with the polytheist army, Ubayy breathed his last
at the place called Sarif and was unable to return to Mecca.
Another polytheist who had hopes and dreams of killing our Prophet was Uthman
ibn Abdullah. He was among the captives of Badr, and when he had paid his ransom
money and returned to Mecca, he prepared his best mount for the job. Then, putting on
his full body armor, he went out looking for an opportunity to kill the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 571 ---
Allah. When the opportunity he was looking for came, like Ubayy he said: "If you
escape death today, I shall not live a single day longer!"
And spurring on his horse, he speedily rode towards our noble Prophet. The blessed
Messenger would stand against Uthman as well. Everyone was staring at the
Messenger, eager to see how this would end. Uthman, coming at full speed with his
horse, all of a sudden disappeared. Everyone was shocked, it was as if the earth had
opened up and swallowed him. What really happened was that Uthman's horse had
fallen into a hole. Harith ibn Simma, who saw Uthman fall into the hole, grabbed his
sword and approached the hole. After a brief confrontation, he finished Uthman off.
Our noble Prophet heard of Uthman's death as well and said, in giving thanks:
"Thanks be to Allah who has driven away this evil as well!"
The blessed Messenger called out to Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and said: "Tum them
away," and went upwards from the skirts of Uhud, telling him to shoot arrows at the
polytheists who were approaching. Upon which Sa'd replied: "How can I tum them
away on my own?"
He repeated this three times; in appearances he was faced with a force that he
couldn't possibly stand against on his own. But when it was the beloved Messenger,
that told him to do so, the circumstances would change. He grabbed his arrow satchel
and taking one arrow at a time, he aimed at a polytheist and shot. The arrow had hit
the target and the man died! He then shot another; that too hit its target and that too
had killed the polytheist. He shot the third, killing a third man. The polytheists who
wanted to come close to where the Messenger of Allah was were thus frightened
away. This meant that one should not stay behind and that one should not give up in
the face of difficulties one may face and keep on progressing. In the verse that came,
the Great Lord would point to this and say:
Do not, then, be faint of heart, nor grieve, for you are always the superior
side if you are (true) believers. If a wound has touched you (at Uhud),
(you know that) a similar wound touched those (disbelieving) people (at
Badr). Such (historic, eventful) days-We deal them out in turns among
people so that Allah may mark out those who (truly) believe and select
from among you such as bear witness to the truth (with their lives);- (it is
a fact that) Allah does not love the wrongdoers (and in the end He
punishes wrong and makes truth superior). ( Al Imran 3 : 13 9-140)
This meant that a believer who had achieved true faith would not worry even if the
world should explode, and would be in no hesitation to continue doing what he is
meant to do. For a believer must always aim further.

--- Sayfa 572 ---
When one had a gem like faith in their hands, it would not be seemly to worry about
things that other people did. For with faith, one would be striving only for the pleasure
of Allah and to exalt His religion. On the other hand, the people on the other side were
fighting on the side of the Devil. They were making themselves get the better of them
and were after worldly gains.
So this meant that a real believer could be identified and distinguished from a non-
believer only when he or she went through such difficult ordeals. If their aim was to
gain the pleasure of Allah, the obstructions that may come their way would result in
them purifying themselves, and as they walked upon the earth, they would become
tongues that reminded people of Allah. The tidal waves experienced on the day of
Uhud were clearly in order for such gains to be made. In order that their feet may be
firmly grounded in future days of victory, they had experienced a temporary quake
and Allah the Almighty had taken some of them as martyr, so that greater quakes may
not shake them in the future.
Another interesting aspect of the matter was that future Companions who would
come and submit in faith such as Abu Sufyan, Khalid ibn Walid and Ikrima ibn Abu
Jahl were given an advance by Allah in Uhud. For today, they formed the highest
commanding rank of the Meccan army. Thus Allah the Almighty did not damage their
honor and did not let them suffer under the psychological complications that defeat
may cause.
Remedy in Uhud
Meanwhile, Ali had brought water to our noble Prophet. The blessed Messenger first
wanted to take the water and drink but he did not because he had not liked its smell.
Instead, he poured the water over his face to wipe away the blood, and said: "The
wrath of Allah has become greater against those who have spilt His Prophet's blood."
The blessed Messenger's daughter, our mother Fatima, was much saddened to see
him in that state and was wiping her father's face and embracing him all the while to
console him. She burnt a straw mat and with its ashes, she tried to stop the blood.
Muhammad ibn Maslama, who saw that the blessed Messenger was not drinking the
water brought to him, went to the women and asked for water from them. But they,
too, had no water left. However, Ibn Maslama he had no intention of returning to our
noble Prophet without having found him some water. Finally, he had found some
water in a well and brought it to the blessed Messenger. Our noble Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, who was clearly very thirsty, first drank from this water and

--- Sayfa 573 ---
then prayed for Muhammad ibn Maslama for this thoughtful gesture.
When the atmosphere became more peaceful, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, prayed the Noon Prayer in Uhud. It was clear that he had no
strength to pray while standing up and so he prayed sitting down.
Our noble Prophet wanted to observe what had happened thus far on the battlefield
from a high vantage point; he tried to climb a high rock but he was unable to do so
with the weight of his armor.
Talha ibn Ubaydullah, who saw the blessed Messenger in such a state, came to the
rescue once again and helped him to carry out his will. Upon which the blessed
Messenger would say the following about Talha concerning all he had done from the
beginning: "Paradise has become the well-deserved right of Talha for all he has done
for the Messenger of Allah!"
When the blessed Messenger saw Khalid ibn Walid come with a group of
cavalrymen, he opened up his hands and prayed in the following manner: "Dear Lord!
No other power reigns over us except Yours! There are only a handful of people who
worship You in this land; do not let them perish! Dear Lord! There is no way they can
be superior to us; do not give them the pleasure!"
Meanwhile a group of archers from the Muhajirun, including Umar, had come
forward and were shooting arrows at the horsemen that were coming. Just like in the
case of the archers he had placed on the hill before battle, the horsemen were not able
to advance in the face of the shower of arrows and they would return. Thus, our noble
Prophet and his beloved Companions would be saved from another catastrophe.
It had been reported that Ziyad ibn Sakan was heavily wounded; the blessed
Messenger asked his Companions to bring Ziyad to him at once. For Ziyad was the
brave Companion who, amongst a moments disorganization on the Muslim front, had
responded to our Prophet's question of 'Who will bear his bosom against these men
and protect me?" and had cried out: "1, 0 Messenger of Allah," and he and his five
friends had started to defend the Messenger to the death.
His efforts had not gone unnoticed and were watched with admiration by all. Four
of his friends who had been fighting with him had all fallen martyr, and they had
barely and with great difficulty retrieved him out of the hands of the polytheists. He
was covered in blood and it was clear that he too would soon die a martyr as well. Our
noble Prophet put his blessed feet underneath Ziyad's head and was trying to console
him in his last moments. As he was moving towards eternal life as martyr, he had the
honor of having put his head on the Messenger's blessed feet. The looks of affection

--- Sayfa 574 ---
he got from our Prophet had made him forget all his troubles and he was breathing his
last peacefully. Then, with his cheek resting on the blessed foot of the Messenger of
Allah, he passed away to meet his Creator.
Meccan Army Retreats
At this point it was as if time had stopped in Uhud; both sides had suffered great
losses and Abu Sufyan, the commander of the Meccan army, found it dangerous to
attack the Muslims once more. The Companions of our noble Prophet who had
retreated to the skirts of Uhud were re-gathering their forces and this re-organization
of the Muslim army frightened the polytheists. Besides, they did not know why the
three-hundred strong group had left before the battle had even begun and they feared
they may return. This would have meant a new danger. They had not forgotten what
they had gone through at the beginning of Uhud and Abu Sufyan was one of the
people who knew very well that the believers were not afraid to die and ran towards
death almost gladly. That is why, after having received such a result in their favor (at
least in appearance), they did not want to damage their reputation and the feeling of
victory that their army had and so he called his men to return to Mecca. But there was
still one thing he was not sure about and in order to inspect it, he went all the way to
the skirts ofUhud. He shouted: "Is Muhammad among this group?"
The Messenger of Allah had warned his Companions not to answer his question.
That is why no one answered. When he couldn't get the answer he wanted, he
repeated his question three times. It was obvious, he still wasn't sure if the blessed
Messenger had been killed. Then, implying Abu Bakr, he asked: "Then is Ibn Abu
Quhafa among this group?"
The blessed Messenger did not want them to reply this time either. Abu Sufyan
called out again: "Then is Umar ibn Khattab among you?"
It was clear that he knew the leaders of the Muslim front very well and on whose
shoulders the whole cause was being carried. He obviously wanted to build a plan of
action according to the answer he received; but the Messenger of Allah did not change
his attitude and gestured his Companions to continue to give them the silent treatment.
Umar was fidgeting in his spot, for he could hardly contain himself from giving Abu
Sufyan the answer he deserved. But each time, our Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, did not allow him. Umar turned once again to the Messenger of Allah and
begging for permission, he asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! Shall I answer him?"
There was a psychological war of minds going on in Uhud. This time our Prophet
said: "All right, go answer."

--- Sayfa 575 ---
Meanwhile, Abu Sufyan had turned to his tribe and was shouting: "I believe they
have all been killed. Had they been alive they surely would have answered ... "
He had not quite finished his sentence when they heard the deep voice of Umar
echo throughout the field of Uhud: "You lie, 0 enemy of Allah! Allah has spared all
of them so that they may humiliate you and bring you disgrace. Do not rejoice; all of
the names you mentioned just now are all alive and well."
Abu Sufyan was experiencing great shock. So Ibn Qamia had been wrong; the man
he had killed had not been Muhammad! If all of them were still alive, this meant that
their task was very difficult. His idea to return home now seemed even more
reasonable. He could not risk the situation as it stood now. He first shouted: "0 great
Hubal!" trying to buy some time.
Looking at the vast battlefield of Uhud and shouting thus, he was trying to insinuate
that their belief were superior to the Muslims'. This time it was the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who encouraged Umar-who was finding it
hard to contain himself as Abu Sufyan spoke-to respond. Who could stop him now?
"Undoubtedly the greatest is Allah!" Umar roared.
"This is the day in return for Badr; on that day you brought us misery, and today the
day has smiled on us and we are the ones that are happy," said Abu Sufyan. Upon
which Umar spoke again: "The two cannot be the same; our dead have flown into
Paradise while yours have gone to Hell."
Abu Sufyan did not want to remain silent to these words: "You are the ones saying
that; if it is as you say, woe to us! But we have Uzza, and you do not!"
How could Umar not respond? He said: "Our Lord is Allah; you do not have
anyone who watches over you!"
But Abu Sufyan's doubts regarding the death of the blessed Messenger were still
not over; he now called Umar to come closer to him. Our noble Prophet allowed him
to go and so Umar went closer to Abu Sufyan. Abu Sufyan was asking, this time more
genuinely: "I ask you for Allah, 0 Umar! Tell us the truth, have we killed
Muhammad?"
"I swear by Allah, no! He can hear your voice at this very moment," answered
Umar.
Upon which Abu Sufyan said: "You are an upright man who speaks the truth, more
so than Ibn Qamia."
This meant that even at Uhud, Abu Sufyan believed not his own men standing by
his side, but his enemy on the other side who had donned his sword against him. He

--- Sayfa 576 ---
formed his judgment accordingly and said: "You will find, among your dead, people
who have been tortured and whose bodies have been tom apart; whose noses and ears
have been cut and scattered around. I swear I did not consent to it; I did not order them
to do so, and I even stopped those who were doing it! Be careful! Let our next
rendezvous be the beginning of next year, at Badr once again."
This was his last remark and with that, he turned around and headed back to Mecca.
When he reached his soldiers, he gave the orders to go back home and so the Meccan
army started on their way.
While Abu Sufyan and his soldiers were going back, the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, wanted to make sure that they did not mean to cause them
any further harm. He feared that on the way back to Mecca they may enter Medina
and attack the women and children. That is why he called the leading men from his
Companions to pursue the enemy: "If on their way back they mount their camels, this
means they will leave without causing any harm. But if they leave their camels and
mount their horses, this means they mean to enter Medina. This would clearly mean
pillage and if you sense that that is what they mean to do, then we will be as one and I
swear by He who holds my life in His hands, we will walk over them," thus calling the
Companions' attention to this crucial point.
Receiving this order from the blessed Messenger, the worthy Companions followed
the enemy till the valley of Aqiq, and they would keep such a close eye on them that
they would even hear some of their conversation. A group of polytheists were saying
that now that they had the opportunity, they should go to Medina and pillage the town,
but some others like Safwan ibn Umayya were warning the others: "Do not even think
about it! Do you not see that they are re-gathering their forces and do you not see how
they run to death gladly? It is impossible for us to reach Muhammad without having
killed them all. Let us go now while we still have the upper hand, without turning our
victory into defeat," and thus they wanted to make Abu Sufyan and the others give up
the idea of war at present. And so the Meccan army would mount their camels for the
long road and return to Mecca.
The strategy to tum defeat into victory had worked and a new victory had emerged
from what had appeared to be defeat. Their stance had exhausted the Meccan army
and made them afraid, and they had decided to leave Uhud as quickly as possible.
They may have experienced a temporary shake up but it was again the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who had transformed the final outcome ofthe
war at Uhud.

--- Sayfa 577 ---
The Field at Uhud after the Battle
When the polytheists left the field at Uhud after deciding they did not want to continue
to engage the Muslims in battle, the worthy Companions descended into the battlefield
and started to walk among the dead and wounded. Those standing could easily be
seen, but it was not yet clear who had fallen martyr and who was waiting for help,
lying wounded. There was a blood curdling scene in the field; each body they came
upon had been tom apart, their noses and ears had been cut off, to the point that it was
difficult to identify the dead.l2
Those who had fallen had already flown away to Paradise as martyrs, but those who
remained were squirming in pools of blood. Uhud was crying! Our noble Prophet,
who shared the same fate with his Companions and who was deeply grieved for what
had happened to his friends said at one point: "Who could go and see how Sa'd ibn
Rabi is? I wonder if he is alive or among the dead. For the last time I saw him was
with twelve arrow wounds to his chest," and someone from the Ansar stood up and
started to search for him.:!!! He would call out his name three times as he looked around
the battlefield and yet he got no answer. At last he called out: "The Messenger of
Allah wants to have news of you, he is the one asking, he is the one who sent me."
Upon which he heard a very weak voice and so went towards it. Sa' d was breathing
his last; he had more than seventy arrow, spear and sword wounds throughout his
body. The Companion touched him gently and said: "The Messenger of Allah has
asked 'Is Sa'd ibn Rabi among the living or the dead?' and sent me to look for you."
Sa'd tried to gather himself and said, with great difficulty: "Count me as one of the
dead," and then added: "Give greetings to the Messenger of Allah from me and tell
him that I now smell the scent of Paradise. Give my greetings to my tribe as well and
say to them that if something happens to the Messenger of Allah while they had the
power and ability to protect him and didn't, I will grab them by the collar in the
presence of Allah and they will have no excuse when they are faced with Him!"'
These were his last words, and with these words, his blessed soul flew away from
Uhud towards Paradise.
The State of Hamza
Our noble Prophet was out on the battlefield looking for his uncle Hamza all the while
asking: 'What has befallen my uncle?"
At that moment, Ali found him at a place called Batni'l-Wadi and came straight to
the Messenger of Allah to give him the news. The blessed Messenger rushed towards

--- Sayfa 578 ---
his uncle. However the scene he came across was indescribable. Hamza's belly had
been cut open and his liver had been taken out, his nose and ears had been severed.
This was the most pitiful scene that a man could bear to see. The Messenger of mercy
was grieved at the horrific state of his uncle and started crying. He looked around for
something to cover his uncles mutilated body. A Companion from the Ansar came
forward and taking off a piece of his dress, he put it on Hamza; but this was not
enough to cover his entire body. Then someone took off a piece of their dress and thus
the scene that was searing the hearts was covered.
But it was not only Hamza who had been mutilated and left. There were seventy
Hamza's on the field ofUhud waiting to be covered, sixty-four of them were from the
Ansar. That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, would give one of
the covering cloths to Jabir telling him to place it on someone else.
When the Messenger of mercy saw his aunt Safiyya hint Abdul Muttalib approach,
he said: "Please be gentle with her." It was clear that he did not want her to see
Hamza, her brother, in that state. Zubayr, who heard our Prophet's instructions, stood
in front of his mother and tried to prevent her from seeing him. But Safiyya pushed
her son aside with her hand and said: "Go away! I do not want to see you at this
moment."
Zubayr was trying his hardest to prevent his mother from coming closer to his
uncle: "Dear mother, the Messenger of Allah wants you to return."
'Why is that? I have already heard that they have mutilated my brother as he fought
for Allah; though my heart grieves, by the will of Allah, I will bite my tongue and be
patient."
And when she kept insisting, Zubayr ran to inform our noble Prophet. Upon which
the Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Get out of her way."
Safiyya, who was a woman of great fortitude, came next to her brother Hamza and
prayed for him for a long time, and said words of istirja:ll, praying for his forgiveness.
The blessed Messenger said the following words to Abu Qatada who said some
harsh words to the Quraysh because he could not hold himself: "0 Abu Qatada! The
truth is that the people of Quraysh are made up of people who are deserving of trust.
Whoever trespasses the limits when speaking of them, Allah will put him in his place.
If Allah grants you a long life, you will consider your own actions in the path of Allah
very small compared to what they will achieve by way of servantship, you will then be
sorry for not being able to do more!"
When other people, too, wanted to respond the way Abu Qatada had done, the

--- Sayfa 579 ---
Truthful Gabriel descended and revealed the best conduct when faced with such
situations. "If you have to respond to any wrong, respond (only) to the measure of the
wrong done to you; but if you endure patiently, it is indeed better for the patient" (an-
Nahll6: 126).;g
Leaving the Martyrs in Uhud's Good Keeping
Our noble Prophet told his followers to take the armors of the martyrs and said: "Bury
them with their blood and clothes," thus telling his followers to bury the fallen
Companions in the field of Uhud. Thus the martyrs of Uhud were buried without
having been washed, and with what they had been wearing that day.
The blessed Messenger stood where he had uttered four takbirs after he had seen the
lifeless body of his uncle Hamza. The blessed Messenger had each martyr that had
been brought to him put by his side, and he would perform the Funeral Prayer and
pray for each of them. Thus, he prayed seventy times for his uncle and milk-brother
Hamza.
The Companions started to dig up the graves of the martyrs at once but soon
realized that there was no way they could dig a grave for each of them. When they
came to tell our Prophet, he told them to bury the martyrs two or three to a grave.
What he said was being carried out as he said without question. When it was time to
put the martyrs in their graves, they could not decide who to place first. Upon that, the
Messenger of mercy wanted them to give precedence to the Companions who knew
the Qur'an well.
Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Haram and Amr ibn Jamuh, Kharija ibn Zayd and Sa'd ibn
Rabi, Numan ibn Malik and Abdullah ibn Hashas, and Abdullah ibn Jahsh and Hamza
were put in the same grave. And then there were those who had been put three to a
grave in Uhud.
The Messenger of Allah looked at Jabir, who held onto his father and cried before
he put him in his grave, and said: "Cry for him if you like; angels are giving him shade
with their open wings till you put him in his grave."~
Mus'ab's Final State
Our noble Prophet next went to the martyred body of Mus'ab ibn Umayr, a beloved
Companion whom he had sent as envoy to Medina. Having sacrificed himself for the
cause of Allah, Mus' ab was now leaving the blessed Messenger on his own. Mus' ab
lay lifeless and bare on the cold battlefield with his hands covering his face, it was as
if he was covering up the shame he felt for not being able to stop the hands that

--- Sayfa 580 ---
stretched to hurt his beloved Messenger. For a long while the Messenger of mercy
looked at him with great affection, and then recited the following verse:
Among the believers are men (of highest valor) who have been true to
their covenant with Allah: among them are those who have fulfilled their
vow (by remaining steadfast until death), and those who are awaiting (its
fulfillment). They have never altered in any way. (al-Ahzab 33:23)
Given the circumstances of war, the Companions could not find a shroud large
enough to cover Mus'ab's body, the standard bearer of Uhud. He had carried the
weight of those difficult days on his shoulders till here, but now he was walking to his
final destination. When they told the Messenger of Allah that they had no shroud large
enough for him, he said: "Cover his head with what he had on and put some azhar
plants on his feet." When they did as they were told, the Messenger of mercy looked at
the body of Mus' ab whose shroud was half weed and half garment, and said with
much heartache: "0 Mus'ab! What wonderfully precious and expensive clothes you
had on the first time I saw you in Mecca! There was no one that dressed better than
you in all of Mecca ... But now your hair is disheveled and you lie in an old cardigan
that doesn't even cover your entire body!"
Then he turned to the battlefield of Uhud. This time his address was to all the
martyrs including Mus'ab. Our noble Prophet was bearing witness for all those who
had put their lives on the line: "The Messenger of Allah bears witness that on the Day
of Judgment you will be martyrs, witnesses in the eyes of Allah."
The blessed Messenger had some words for those Companions who had been left
behind as well. He turned to them and said the following words of wisdom which they
would commit to their memory: "0 people! Visit them and come here! Give greetings
and salute them. I swear by Allah who holds my life in his hands that they will
respond to the greetings of each Muslim who salutes them."
It was apparent that some of the Companions were experiencing feelings of shame
and guilt, for it was they who had insisted on going to Uhud and fighting the
polytheists, and it was because of their insistence that seventy of their friends lay
martyred before them. Had they listened to the blessed Messenger, none ofthis would
have happened. They knew this very well and were ready to accept whatever the
blessed Messenger was about to say to them.
But our noble Prophet did not even insinuate the smallest thing and he did not speak
of the past decision made saying 'Did I not tell you?', for he wanted to stress the
importance of consultation among Muslims, and this was more important than
anything else at that moment. That is why he would tum to the Maker of Causes, and

--- Sayfa 581 ---
after entrusting his martyred Companions to Uhud, he would say: "Form a row, I will
supplicate my Lord."
How could it be that the blessed Messenger should want something and they not
comply? As soon as he said these words, all the Companions, the men in the front and
the women behind them, had formed row after row in Uhud.±! That is when the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, would tum his face to the qibla
and would pray for a very long time.:!l
Leaving Uhud
After a strenuous day filled with the work that would normally take years to complete,
our noble Prophet got on his horse and left Uhud and headed towards Medina. He met
Hamna hint Jahsh, the wife ofMus'ab ibn Umayr, on the way, and comforted her: "0
Hamna, hang in there and be patient, and expect to receive your reward from Allah."
Hamna understood that she was going to receive some bad news.
'Who should I be patient about, 0 Messenger of Allah?" she asked.
"About your uncle Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib," the blessed Messenger responded.
Upon which Hamna said: "Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiun! Truly, to Allah we
belong, and to Him we shall return. I ask Allah the Almighty to welcome him with His
mercy. How beautiful is it to die as a martyr, a witness for Him!"
The blessed Messenger said once again: "Hang in there and be patient, and expect
to receive your reward from Allah."
Hamna was anxious to hear another bad news.
'Who for, 0 Messenger of Allah?" She asked.
"For your brother Abdullah ibn Jahsh!" the Messenger of mercy replied.
"Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiun! Truly, to Allah we belong, and to Him we shall
return. I ask Allah the Almighty to welcome him with His mercy. How beautiful is it
to die as a martyr, a witness for Him!"
"Hang in there and be patient, and expect to receive your reward from Allah," the
blessed Messenger repeated a third time.
'Who shall I be patient for, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
"For your husband Mus'ab ibn Umayr!"
This had been the final straw for Hamna. Hearing that after her uncle and brother
she had also lost her husband, Hamna could no longer contain herself and she cried
out: "Woe to me!"

--- Sayfa 582 ---
Our noble Prophet, who had been following the reactions of Hamna from the
beginning, turned to his Companions and said: "It is indeed true that the place of a
husband in the affections of a woman is different!"
The Patience of Medina
Despite everything that had happened, Medina was displaying great patience in the
face of such calamities, and they never blamed those who returned from Uhud
concerning those who had been left there. Furthermore, they acted as if nothing had
happened, rejoicing in the fact that our noble Prophet had come back safe and sound.
A woman from the Ansar who had heard the false news that the blessed Messenger
had been killed, came to personally welcome our noble Prophet after she heard that
the company of Uhud were returning. Someone who had seen this woman coming,
told her that her brother and father had been killed in the battle, another told her that
her son and husband had become martyr. But it was as if she did not hear these pieces
of news and she continued to run towards the Prophet to welcome him. She kept
saying to those she met: 'Where is the Messenger of Allah? How is he?"
The people returning from Uhud were surprised at her state: "Thanks be to Allah,
he is well, 0 mother of such and such," they answered. Upon which she said: "Show
him to me; I want to look on his blessed face, I want to see him."
When she came near our noble Prophet and saw his radiant face, she uttered such
immense words that it was worthy of having been written in the pages of history: "Let
my mother and father perish for you 0 Messenger of Allah! Having seen that you are
safe and sound, all other calamities will be small for me!"
Sa' d ibn Muadh, who was holding onto the rein of the horse that our Prophet was
riding on, saw his mother who had come to welcome those who were coming from
Uhud, and said: "This is my mother, 0 Messenger of Allah."
He tried to comfort her by asking her how she was. The woman who had come
closer to the Messenger of Allah seemed sad and lost in thought, for another one of
her sons, Amr ibn Muadh, had been martyred at Uhud. The Messenger of mercy tried
to explain to her the news of her son's death as delicately as possible. But this
steadfast woman turned to the beloved Messenger who had lived through the Uhud
war from beginning to end and had left seventy of his Companions there, and said: "I
have seen you safe and sound, what calamity can shake me now?"
These instances demonstrated the steadfastness of the Muslims in the face of all the
troubles that they were living through. To act in this way in the first moment after the

--- Sayfa 583 ---
catastrophe, when the shock of the events was still very fresh in minds, was something
that only an unshakeable person could do. However the blessed Messenger still
wanted to condole this woman who could stand so unshaken. He said: "0 Umm Sa'd!
Glad tidings to you and the families of the martyrs! For their martyrs are in Paradise
and will be friends next to each other and they will be able to intercede for their
families!"
'We are content with you, 0 Messenger of Allah," said Sa'd's mother. 'Why
should we cry for them when we have you among us. I only ask you to pray for those
who have been left behind."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, did not tum down her
sincere request and lifted his hands in prayer: "Dear Lord! Let sadness leave their
hearts, help them nurse the wounds that they have suffered and adorn the rest of the
days ofthose who have been left behind with Your grace."
Then the blessed Messenger turned to Sa'd and said: "0 father of Amr! The wound
of your household is still open! Do not forget that each of them who received a wound
today will be resurrected on judgment day with a better appearance than they have
today; the color may be the color of blood but the scent is the scent of musk. Here,
whoever among you has been wounded let him go home and tend to his wound! Do
not try to keep me company as I go home."
Upon that, everyone had gone their own way to their homes to tend to their wounds.
The blessed Messenger had also gone to his humble home. Before long, Bilal called
out the call for Prayer, it was time for the Evening Prayer and the Companions all
went to the Masjid an-Nabawi to perform the Prayer.
After the Prayer, Sa' d ibn Muadh went to the land of the Abdiashal; he had gathered
together the women of this tribe, including his wife, to come to the Masjid an-Nabawi
to wail for Hamza. This was because when Sa'd had entered Medina, he had seen the
women of the tribe of Abdiashal gathered together to cry for their own martyrs and he
had heard our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, say: "And when it comes to
Hamza, he has no one to cry and wail for him."
His was the sensitivities of the Companions; so from now on everyone would cry
for Hamza, and then for their own martyrs. When the blessed Messenger went out for
the Night Prayer, he heard the sounds of crying coming from the Masjid an-Nabawi.
He asked those around him what the wailing was for and he was told that it was the
women of the Ansar wailing over the death of his uncle Hamza. The Messenger of
mercy first prayed for these women and then told them to go back to their homes.

--- Sayfa 584 ---
Our noble Prophet after leading the Night Prayer, turned towards his blessed home
to get some much needed rest. His Companions, meanwhile, stood between the Masjid
an-Nabawi and our Prophet's room, seeing him off. The Aws and Khazraj particularly
were keeping an eye on his door for fear of any dangers that may come, and were
keeping a watchful eye over the blessed Messenger.
All these events (connected to the battle of Uhud) that were recounted for the past
few chapters had started one Saturday in the month of Shawwal, thirty-two months
after the Hijra, and had ended on the same day. Therefore, time was wide enough to fit
in the one day such developments, and that if a person wanted, they could make their
time as fruitful as this.
The Attitude of the Hypocrites
The hypocrites who had turned back from Uhud and who had caused a decline of
morale among the Companions did not feel any regrets about leaving their friends in
the lurch. On the contrary, they were saying that what had been done was wrong,
trying to stir unrest in Medina. Ubayy ibn Salul, who was their leader, spoke to his son
who was trying to tend to the wound he had received in Uhud in the following
manner: "It wasn't me who told you to go to war alongside Muhammad. He didn't
even listen to me and instead paid attention to the opinions of a few children. I could
see all these were going to happen anyway."
Although he knew he could not make his father take heed of what he was about to
say, Abdullah still said: "What Allah wills for the Messenger of Allah and his
Companions is always better," trying to make his father understand that everything
lived through was a part of Divine destiny. But all this was of no avail.
In the meantime, some Jews used this "defeat" as an excuse to break their silence:
"Muhammad is after the money; a Messenger would never be afflicted with such
things as in the battlefield! Look! He has even been wounded and his Companions are
desolate," thus trying to insinuate that our Prophet was not a Prophet.
Some hypocrites who stood by Ubayy ibn Salul said: "Those who were killed
would not have been killed had they returned with us," trying to shake the spirit of
unity among the Companions.
Umar, upon hearing these words, would go straight to the presence of our Prophet
and would share with him what he had heard. Of course, having such an impulsive
nature, Umar would not be content with just sharing the news but also insisting on our
Prophet to give permission so that he could chop the heads off these men.

--- Sayfa 585 ---
"0 Umar," said our Prophet. "Do not doubt that Allah the Almighty will manifest
His religion and make His Messenger glorious. We have a pact with the Jews, we
cannot kill them." But Umar found it difficult to stay put: "But how about those
hypocrites?" he asked.
Upon which our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, responded: "Do they
not bear witness saying 'I bear witness there is no deity but Allah and Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah'?"
Umar hung his head at the truth of this statement but insisted on his request saying:
"Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah! But they do so because they fear being killed. But now
their stance is clear; through this difficult process Allah the Almighty has made
evident what they had been hiding inside themselves all along."
This was true; the real intentions of the hypocrites were becoming clearer, but
religion commanded that one had to act upon appearances and not solely on intentions.
That is why our noble Prophet ended the discussion with the following words: "I have
been forbidden to kill a man who says 'I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah
and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah'."
Finally, the blessed Messenger had some good tidings for Umar: "0 Umar," he
started. "We will not see the Quraysh put up a fight like this ever again till we enter
Mecca and salute the Ka'ba."
After a few days had passed and when things had calmed down a little, Ubayy ibn
Salul changed colors again like a chameleon and started behaving like a true believer.
When on Friday our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, stood up to give the
Friday sermon, he also stood up and said words to encourage people to listen to the
Messenger of Allah.~
Ham rau '1-Asad
The Companions who had nursed their wounds at home since Saturday evening came
to the Masjid an-Nabawi on Sunday morning upon the call to Prayer delivered by
Bilal.
Our noble Prophet, the Trust of Mankind, peace and blessings be upon him, had
been in deep thought since the previous day and he could not be sure on a certain
matter. When it came to the Meccans, the business had been left unfinished; they had
fought with them but had to return back without having gained any ground. There was
the possibility that the Meccans could change their plans and come back to attack
Medina. They were not to leave open such an opportunity. The blessed Messenger

--- Sayfa 586 ---
also had to make sure that everyone knew that the authority still lay with Medina after
Uhud.
Meanwhile Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Awf had come to the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, and had brought news of the Qurayshi army concerning
their position. Indeed, the Qurayshi army had assessed their situation when they had
come to Malal and had decided that to return without anything to show that they had
won the war was not right, and that they needed to eradicate the Muslims altogether.
They had no spoils or captives as they returned to Mecca. They had fought but they
had nothing in their hands to show that it had been them who had won the battle.
'What is it that we have accomplished?" They asked themselves. 'We have
weakened them and dealt them a heavy blow but then we left them to their own
devices! All those who should have been the real target are alive and this means a
great danger for us all. Come, let us return and kill them all."
But not everyone was of the same opinion. Safwan ibn Umayya came forward and
said: "0 my tribe! Do not attempt such a thing! The Muslims are now more indignant
than ever before and I fear that they will come upon us with those who were not at
Uhud. You should be content with what you achieved and return. For I fear that you
will lose what you have, should you attack them once again."
Our noble Prophet listened to all this as related by Abdullah and consulted the
matter with Abu Bakr and Umar. He then called Bilal to relate to the people: "The
Messenger of Allah orders you to pursue the enemy! But only those who were with us
at Uhud should come!"
Shortly after, the Truthful Gabriel had descended, bringing the following message:
Do not be faint of purpose in pursuing these people (who fight with you,
and keep them under pressure as long as the state of war continues
between you and them). If you are suffering (having to endure hardships),
they too are suffering just as you are, but you hope (to receive) from Allah
what they cannot hope for. Allah is indeed All-Knowing (of the states and
conditions of all things), All-Wise. (an-Nisa 4: 104)
When it was our Prophet who invited them, how could the Companions refuse?
Putting aside their wounds, the pain of those who had become martyrs, the tears of the
orphaned children, and their weak physical state, they all rose at once with their
swords and gathered under the standard of the blessed Messenger. The Qur' an would
also speak of their stance and would praise them in the following terms as examples of
how a Muslim should act when one is called to act by Allah the Almighty and the

--- Sayfa 587 ---
Messenger of Allah:
Those who responded to the call of Allah and the Messenger after the hurt
had befallen them-for all those of them who persevered in doing good,
aware that Allah was seeing them, and acted in reverence for Allah and
piety, there is a tremendous reward. (Al Imran 3: 172)
There were also those like U sayd ibn Khudayr"..l who were nursing their wounds
when they received the blessed Messenger's message. As soon as he heard it he
saluted: "For Allah and His Messenger, we have heard and we obey." Despite their
open wounds not having healed properly, they donned their swords and joined the
campaign. From the Banu Salima tribe alone there were forty wounded men who
obeyed the Messenger's order and joined the forces.
Ubayy ibn Salul also wanted to join the pursuit but our Prophet did not respond
favorably to his request. The exception, as stated by Bilal, was that those like him who
had returned home halfway to Uhud were not allowed to participate in this pursuit. Ibn
Umm Maqtum was once again to be deputy in Medina and Ali was carrying the
banner.:!!!
Before the blessed Messenger left Medina, he entered the Masjid an-Nabawi,
prayed two cycles of Prayer, and then set off. This time the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, was riding a horse named Sakb and there was no one
mounted on a horse in the army except for him. He was wearing his armor and helmet,
such that when one looked at him, one could only see his radiant face. When he saw
Talha he asked: "Where is your weapon?"
"Close by, 0 Messenger of Allah," Talha answered and then went and donned his
weapon. He too was heavily wounded; that day he had nine wounds on his chest
alone. Despite his injured state, he said:
'When the Messenger of Allah has so many wounds on his body, what importance
can mine have," and feeling the pain that our noble Prophet must be feeling in his very
own heart, he kept on his way.
Our noble Prophet asked him: "Where do you think they (the Meccan army) may be
at the moment?"
"Sayyala," responded Talha.
"That is what I thought as well! But do not forget 0 Talha, Allah the Almighty will
not have us experience another Uhud until the moment He let us enter Mecca."
Meanwhile, the blessed Messenger chose three men from among his Companions
and sent them in the direction of Hamrau'l-Asad for inspection. These were the two

--- Sayfa 588 ---
sons of Sufyan ibn Talq, from the tribe of Aslam, Salit and Numan and with them was
another Companion from the sons of Uwayr. They would go ahead of the rest of the
group and let our noble Prophet know of the developments.:!2.
Except for the nameless Companion from the sons of Uwayr who could not make it
all the way because of his exhaustion and wounds from Uhud, the brothers Salit and
Numan would reach their target and start collecting information about the Meccan
army. But it was not long before when they were discovered by the Meccan army,
who was planning to return and attack Medina, and were both killed.l.Q
Among the Companions, there was almost no one who had been with the
Messenger of Allah the day before in Uhud and who was now not accompanying him
on the way to Hamrau'l-Asad. Even those who were physically in no position to set
off on the road found a way because they did not want to fall short of our Prophet's
orders. The brothers Rafi and Abdullah ibn Sahl from the tribe Abdiashal were among
them. They were both badly wounded. Abdullah's wounds were more serious than
Rafi's but when they heard the voice of Bilal calling, they decided to join the group,
even if it meant crawling towards Mecca.
That day, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, would tell his Companions
to collect wood and then to bum them in the evening. When evening came, Hamrau'l-
Asad could be seen through the five hundred fires that had been lit. The sight and
news of these fires spread quickly in the darkness of the night and this showed that the
Muslims were now both qualitatively and quantitatively ready. This put greater
pressure on the Meccan army.
Meanwhile, Ma'bad ibn Abi Ma'bad, who had made a pact of intelligence with our
Prophet and who had promised to tell him what was happening at Tihama2l came to
our Prophet and said the following: "0 Muhammad! I swear by Allah that what has
befallen your Companions has made us sad as well. We would have so wanted Allah
to exalt you and to deal defeat to others!"
They sat down and talked for a while. Soon after, Ma'bad asked permission to leave
and our Prophet accompanied him on the way for a little while. When Ma'bad left
Hamrau'l-Asad, he came to where the Meccan army was.
At the time, the Meccan army had united around the idea of attacking Medina even
though people like Safwan ibn Umayya insisted on going back to Mecca. The arrival
ofMa'bad happened at such a critical time.
When Abu Sufyan saw Ma'bad, he turned to those around him and said: "Here is
Ma'bad! He must have fresh news!" and then called out to him: 'What is the news, 0

--- Sayfa 589 ---
Ma'bad? What news do you bring us from over there?"
Upon which Ma'bad started to say the following: "I must say that I have seen
Muhammad and his Companions coming towards you with a great force that I have
not seen before. They are furious at you. Members of Aws and Khazraj who were not
with him yesterday have joined him as well this time! Their only thought is to avenge
themselves and they do not mean to return before they have done so! They are furious
at what befell them and they regret very much what happened yesterday! In short, they
harbor such hatred towards you the likes of which I have not seen before."
Abu Sufyan could not hide his astonishment at what had been said: 'Woe unto you!
What are you talking about?"
Ma'bad took another step and continued: "I swear you will see the foreheads of
their horses before you leave this place."
Abu Sufyan was now even more worried. He asked hesitantly: "We had just
decided to go back and wipe them out altogether."
Ma'bad shook his head and said: "I would not advise that at all! Their appearance
was so majestic that I have even composed a poem about the scene I witnessed."
Abu Sufyan was now completely intrigued and he asked Ma'bad to recite the poem.
He then started to recite the poem at length. In the poem, Ma'bad spoke about the
surprise and anxiety he felt on seeing the majesty and power of the Muslim army,
expressing his worries for the Meccan army whom they now targeted. The language
he was using was very well-chosen and the expressions were very powerful. In the
face of such powerful words, Abu Sufyan had been struck speechless. His heart had
just shattered into pieces due to the vivid descriptions he heard. He was lost in
thought. It seemed that Safwan had been right about not attacking Medina. He was
trying to weigh everything out in his mind, trying to reach a final solution. One could
see anxiety written all over his face, and at last, he decided to order the army to return
to Mecca. The strategy had worked and the Meccan army had been defeated with the
power of appearances and now they were taking the short way back home. On the way
back, they came upon a caravan and left the following message with them to give to
the Messenger of Allah: 'We will gather our forces again and attack you and wipe you
and your Companions from the face of the earth."
It was clear that even when running away, they tried to not compromise their pride
and utter challenges even when they were retreating in fear. When the message
reached him, our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, only said: "Allah is
enough for us, for us He is the best aide."

--- Sayfa 590 ---
His words gave strength to the believers. Before long, the Truthful Gabriel
descended and spoke of the words that the Meccans had spoken and that it was best to
trust in Allah and leave one's business to Him.g
Having spent Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday at Hamrau'l-Asad, the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, returned to Medina having suppressed his
enemy and treated the wounds of Uhud. For Hamrau '1-Asad was not a campaign on its
own but constituted a part of the process that started with Uhud.

--- Sayfa 591 ---
!±Because of the urgency of the letter, the envoy that Abbas had chosen from the sons of Ghifar
traveled the distance between Mecca and Medina in three days. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11204.
11 Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/38; Wahidi, Asbabu Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 1184
!!?. Hanzala' s father Abu Amir was one of the people who had signed the Medina contract. But as time
went by, he was unable to repress the feelings of animosity that he felt and he openly declared his
enmity towards the Messenger of Allah. Meanwhile Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, who thought
like him but who still gave the appearance of a Muslim, had decided to hide himself. When he
heard that the Meccans were making preparations for Uhud, he joined the Meccan army with fifty
of his men and came to Uhud to fight. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11205; Balazuri, Ansabu '/-Ashraf,
11136.
!2 Bukhari, Sahih, 6/2682; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/351; Hakim, Mustadrak, 21141 (2588)
~On other hand, Abdullah ibn Ubayy's son Abdullah (his name was previously Hubab and then our
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had changed it to Abdullah when he became Muslim)
was with the noble Prophet from the very beginning, unlike his father who led the men to
rebellion. Just as on the day of Badr, he would not leave the side of the Messenger of Allah in
Uhud either. See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/133; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 3/940 (1590); Ibn Hajar,
Al-Usaba, 41155 (4787).
l2.por related verses see Al Imran 3: 122; an-Nisa 4:88.
~ Waqidi, Maghazi, 11224; Said ibn Mansur, Sun an, 2/356 (2853)
:ll It is also reported that the infantry was led by Amr ibn al-As. It is a strange twist of fate that the
most important names of the day ofUhud would later become Muslims.
ll. That day, Talha ibn Abi Talha would die without the need for a final blow from Ali.
~After the battle, Zubayr asked Abu Duj ana the reason why he did not kill Hind and he answered: "I
did not want to stain the sword of the Messenger of Allah with the blood of a woman who was
crying for help." See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 4116; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 11414.
~It is true that spoils were the right of the warriors; but here the group in question was a group of
Companions that had been addressed by the Messenger of Allah and they had been given orders
to follow by him. Had they waited for the order that would come from the Messenger, they would
have got the spoils in due time. Their action which would be expected of normal people was a
disgrace for people who had reached the level of muqarrabin. They would thus get the
appropriate punishment for their actions through shahadah, for trying to reach before the right
time what had already been promised them. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/41, 47, 4/476; Tabari,
Tarikh, 2/62.
:ll When speaking of this moment the Qur'an would say "The devil made them slip for certain things
they had done", warning the believers not to repeat the same mistake again. See Al Imran 3:155.
1§. In some reports this number is fifteen, and in some thirty.
llour beloved Prophet, who saw his anxiety and heard his words would explain that even under such
circumstances as war, a spiritual balance should be kept, and he would say: "Had you said
'Bismillah, 'the angels would have carried you up to the skies and the people would have gazed at
you like that; and you would have seen the mansion that Allah has prepared for you while still
living in this world." See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqatu'l-Kubra, 3/217; Tabarani,Mu'jamu'l-Kabir, 11116
(214).
~It is reported that that day Sad shot one thousand arrows. See Hakim, Mustadrak, 3/28 (4314);
Bazzar,Musnad, 4/50 (1213); Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11439.
~ Some accounts report that the blessed Messenger said the following about Utba who broke his
tooth and wounded his face: "Dear Lord! Let him not live another year" and that after this prayer,
Utba duly perishes. See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/30. There are also reports that the
tooth of the Messenger of Allah grew again but that Utba's offsprings all died before they reached
the age of puberty and thus his line died. See Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf, 3/263; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-

--- Sayfa 592 ---
Ghaba, 21124.
;ill Before long Allah the Almighty made a mountain goat or some similar animal harass Ibn Qamia
and that the animal tore him apart and killed him with his horns. See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir,
8/130 (7596); Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 11418.
ll That day Umar had calmed down only after seeing the blessed Messenger to one side, with his
Companions' gathering. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 41144; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 4/206.
E The verse that came said: "(0 Messenger, you are a servant charged with a certain duty,
therefore) it is not a matter for you whether He turns towards them in mercy (to accept their
repentance for their unbelief, and grants them faith) or punishes them because they are
wrongdoers" (Al Imran 3: 128), thus giving the good news that the people who broke his tooth and
wounded his face would one day repent. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 7 /194; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir,
21114.
12. Abu Bakr says that among the men who have lost their front teeth, the most adorable is Abu
Ubayda. See Tayalisi, Musnad, 113 (6); Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/34, Sirah, 3/59.
l1Jubayr ibn Mut'im who was very good at the science of genealogy and who said that he had learnt
it from Abu Bakr would come and become Muslim after the war of Hudaybiya. See Ibn al-Athir,
Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11515, 516
12. Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 11287 (2609); Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 10/301 (10731); Tabari,
Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 4/81; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 11412
1§. Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 31121; Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 7/369 (36770); Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 4/205, 206
ll Arras ibn Nadr was Arras ibn Malik's uncle and his name was given to him in respect for his uncle.
See Ahzab 33:23. Concerning this see Bukhari, Sahih, 311032 (2651), 411487 (3822); Tirmidhi,
Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 5/349 (320 1); Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 4/212.
~It is also reported that this Companion was Qays ibn al-Harith.
1:?. It was only Hanzala whose body had not been mutilated in the field of Uhud because although he
had been of the Aws tribe, his father Abu Amir had joined the Meccan army to fight on their side.
For his father's sake the polytheists of Mecca had not touched Hanzala and had not carried out
what they had thought fitting for other Muslims. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11275; Ibn Abdilbarr,
Istiab, 11372.
i2.rt is said that this person was Muhammad ibn Maslama or Ubayy ibn Ka'b. See Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-
Unf, 3/281; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/44.
j]_Istirja is to say, when one receives the news of a death: "Truly, to Allah we belong, and to Him we
shall return", the Arabic being "Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiun."
~For this event see Tirmidhi, Sunan, 5/299 (3129); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 51135 (21267);
Hakim,Mustadrak, 2/391 (3368), 2/484 (3667); Nasai, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 6/376 (11279).
~For the good tidings that our Prophet gave Jabir and his father Abdullah, see Al Imran 3: 169; Ibn
Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/47, 48; Wahidi, Asbabu Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 132, 133.
~ It is said that there were four women Companions with him at the time. See Waqidi,
Maghazi, 11314.
~ Bukhari, Adabu 'l-Mufrad, 11243 (699); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/424; Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-
Kabir, 5/4 7 ( 4549)
i2 Some Companions who said that he had no right to speak in such a manner pulled Abdullah ibn
Ubayy ibn Salul from his skirts and told him to hold his mouth. His instability and indecisiveness
with faith was very well know, he did not present a definite stance. At last he was forced to leave
the Masjid an-Nabawi. Another Companion who saw him at the door of the mosque asked him
why he was leaving and he said that although he had tried to do good, he had been met with much
displeasure. He then closed his doors to those who called for him to come back and repent, merely
saying that he did not want anyone to ask for forgiveness for him, including the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 593 ---
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 4/56; Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf,
3/293.
£.That day Usayd had nine wounds. Tufayl ibn Numan who had run to the order of Messenger of
Allah had thirteen Ka'b ibn Malik and Hirash ibn Simma had ten and Qutba ibn Amir had nine
wounds. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11335; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/308-309.
~It is also said that the standard was given to Abu Bakr. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11335; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/309
~It is highly probable that the Companions did not give the name of this Companion because he
could not make it to Hamrau'l-Asad due to his exhaustion from Uhud. See Waqidi, Maghazi,
113 3 5; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/310.
22When the blessed Messenger came to Hamrau'l-Asad, he buried them in great sadness and prayed
for them there. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 11335; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/310.
2..!. Tihama is the south of Najd, a general name of the region of Hijaz that includes Mecca. See
Hamawi, Mu jamu 'l-Buldan, 11440.
gAl Imran 3: 173-174; Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 4/180; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 11431; Wahidi, Asbabu
Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 135.

--- Sayfa 594 ---
DEVELOPMENTS AFTER UHUD
A
nother crisis had been averted and the evil of the polytheists had been
repelled. But the Muslims had to be sure of this. However, the news that
came from around Medina was not a very good one. Our noble Prophet and
his Companions, who returned from Hamrau'l-Asad having nursed the wounds of
Uhud and put the enemy in its place, hardly had time to gather their strength when
they received the bad news. The martyrdom of the seventy Companions of Uhud and
the apparent victory of the Meccan army had whetted the appetite of others who had
been waiting for an opportunity to attack Medina. They thought in their own way that
this was the right time to attack Medina in order to get rid of Muslims altogether; they
had even started forming pacts and gathering their soldiers together! However these
developments spread so fast that news of it came to the blessed Messenger as well.
Of course these problems would all eventually be solved and overcome, but the
blessed Messenger preferred to devise his own strategy rather than to wait for the
enemy to take their own steps and make the first move. He would assume such a plan
of action this time, too, so that when a particular group made plans to attack Medina,
they would find themselves face-to-face with Muslims. This was a tactic to gain time
in battle; it was easy to disband enemy groups preparing for battle before they had set
off on the road, for this prevented the opening of wounds that could open if these plots
hatched into war. Now was the time to do everything one could do by way of positive
action.
The Messenger of Allah would one-by-one take the steps necessary and establish
security in the Arabian Peninsula, making his name known to all, and sending teachers
to each comer of Arabia to spread the Qur'anic world view. That is why he was
sending reconnaissance branches to various places and thus demonstrating his
sovereignty in Hijaz. He was sending educators abroad and also acted as a guide
himself to those who came to Medina to learn the content of the Divine message.
It was clear in the way they left that the Meccan polytheists would come again. At
least until they came, it fell upon the Muslims to enable Qur' anic thinking to be

--- Sayfa 595 ---
properly understood by the whole community so that it may be accepted
wholeheartedly by all. That is why the time now was not about waiting to see what
will happen tomorrow, but about walking towards the future with patience and activity
in order to build a better tomorrow.
Inheritance Rulings
Life continued its course despite all that happened, and in parallel with what was
happening in this daily flow, the connection with the Truthful Gabriel continued as
well. Amra hint Hazm,22 who had lost her husband Sa'd ibn Rabi in Uhud and who
was now pregnant, came to the presence of the Messenger with her other child whom
Sa'd had entrusted to her and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! These are the daughters of
Sa'd who fought with you and fell martyr in Uhud! Their uncles came and confiscated
all his property and left nothing to their nieces. What counsel can you provide us with,
0 Messenger of Allah? For without financial means, these children won't be able to
have a promising future and have a home of their own when the time comes!"
This was indeed a sad situation, for here was a woman who had lost her husband,
and now she was faced with the cultural norm that the brothers get the property of a
man who had fallen in war.~
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, looked at the two
orphans who were by his side and said: "I hope that Allah the Almighty will give the
last ruling about this issue."
It was clear that he was waiting for the answer that would come through Truthful
Gabriel. Before long, the Truthful Gabriel brought the rules about inheritance, relating
to the blessed Messenger the verses that spoke of Allah's final judgment on the rules
concerning those who die and leave their relatives behind. E.
Then our noble Prophet sent Jabir ibn Abdullah to call Sa'd ibn Rabi's brother and
wife to his presence and said:
"Give two-thirds of Sa'd's property to his two daughters, give one-eighth to his
wife, and the rest is yours."
This was the first time that the blessed Messenger was distributing inheritance.
Amra, who heard what the blessed Messenger had said, could not contain herself and
shouted "Allah is the Greatest" from where she was, for she could see justice being
restored. This meant that now, women could receive a portion of inheritance This also
meant that inheritance matters would not be decided anymore by men who had the
power, but by Allah's justice and women would no longer be victimized! She was so

--- Sayfa 596 ---
happy that her takbir could be heard from all comers of the mosque.i§.
This was also the first distribution of inheritance that had been carried out according
to Divine law. This was a new development for Medina and the people who heard of
the news signaling the end of what they had been practicing till that day, came at once
to the presence of the Prophet and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! What is the truth
behind this news that has reached us?"
And when they found out the truth of the matter, they gave the following response:
"0 Messenger of Allah! You mean to say that now we will give daughters a share of
the property that their fathers have left? But they cannot ride horses or fight in battle!
What's more is that these girls will leave their families and go to other families when
they get married! What's next? Will we also be required to give a share to children
who cannot yet hold a sword? But they are of no use to us!"
Thereupon, our Prophet read to those who had gathered around him and those who
thought the new practice was strange, the verses of the Qur' an, relating to them the
latest ruling that Allah had sent down.22 What could they say when it was He who had
ordered such a thing! When they understood that the ruling was now definite, they
acted in a way that was fitting of them as the Companions of the Prophet, and never
again did they act upon their own desires when distributing inheritance money and
property.
The Rights of Orphans and the Limitations to Polygamy
The system of justice implemented amongst the people of Arabia had been a system
based upon the principles that were generally determined by the powerful. In this
system, when a person did not have someone powerful to support them, there was no
way for them to regain their rights. Orphans were such people. The children that were
left behind because of frequent wars and disputes that happened with no good reason
would normally be taken under the protective care of their relatives, and these
relatives would be the recipients of the children's inheritance. When the orphaned
child was a girl, the situation was worse. Such girls would not be allowed to get
married for fear that they would share their inheritance with others and lay claim to
that property, or they would be married off to their guardians. Not only would the
guardian take all the brides inheritance, he would also not offer any marriage dowry to
her.
In the period of ignorance, the Arabs married as many women as they wanted and
would leave them whenever they wanted. In this society where men reigned supreme,
marriage and divorce had become occurrences that happened completely at the whim

--- Sayfa 597 ---
of the man. From this perspective, such marriages were something that people
regarded as normal and a private affair that didn't need to be interfered with. Another
reason for such marriages was because of the high rates of men dying at war.
Consequently, there were many widowed women and orphaned girls left behind. That
is why men marrying more than one woman were a common occurrence, one that
prevented women without guardians from being neglected in a society where they
could not protect their own rights. So because no new rulings had come to date, this
situation continued.
At last, the Truthful Gabriel brought the Messenger of Allah the practice that would
change all that. First he said: "0 people!" stressing that he was addressing all people
and not only Muslims. After this general address came the warning in the following
way: "Abstain from rebelling against your Lord who created you from one man and
from that man he created a companion, and from them made many men and women.
Refrain from disrespecting Allah whose name you pronounce in order to ask for
something from each other and from severing ties of kinship. Allah is the supreme
protector over you."
These expressions that pointed to the fact that the whole of humanity was a family
that had the same mother and father, and that people should act according to this law,
was a perfect introduction to what would be spoken next. After such an introduction
everyone was listening attentively to the ruling that would now follow.
"Give orphans their property, do not take the unclean in return for the clean, do not
mix their property with yours and then eat from it. For doing so is a great sin."
This meant that from now on people would not be able to act as they wished
concerning orphaned girls whom they had taken in their custody, they would not be
able to make use of these girls' inheritance as they saw fit, and they would not be able
to enforce a life on these girls which they had no say over. As our mother Aisha said,
this verse was a great message that invited people to do act justly towards these girls
whose rights were taken away from them under various pretexts. For the verse would
continue as follows:
If you fear that you will not be able to observe their rights with exact
fairness when you marry the orphan girls (in your custody), you can
marry, from among other women (who are permitted to you in marriage
and) who seem good to you, two, or three, or four. (an-Nisa 4:3)
These few verses alone marked the beginning of a new revolution. The matter had
two aspects: the first was that the rights of the orphan was so important that men were
advised to marry other women rather than fall into the trap of the old traditions of

--- Sayfa 598 ---
locking them in houses and not letting them marry others, to marry them without
offering them any insurance, or to simply confiscate their inheritance. Added to that,
Allah the Almighty was introducing a limit to the number of women a man could
marry and then advising that treating them equally was an indispensable condition to
the rule:
However, if you fear that (in your marital obligations) you will not be
able to observe justice among them, then content yourselves with only
one, or the captives that your right hands possess. 3 Doing so it is more
likely that you will not act rebelliously. (an-Nisa 4:3)
And then came the expression that everyone had to pay attention to: "You will never
be able to deal between your wives with absolute equality (in respect of love and
emotional attachment), however much you may desire to do so" (an-Nisa 4: 129).
It was all clear now; Allah the Almighty was proposing marriage to one woman as
being the norm and was calling to the conscience of the men to uphold the principle of
fairness when there were exceptional circumstances or necessities to marry the second,
third or fourth. In this way, Allah the Almighty was also limiting marriage, which
once took place with an infinite amount of women, to four.
Among the Companions of the day, Nawfal ibn Muawiya was married to five2l!,
Harith ibn Qays was married to eight22 and Ghaylan ibn Salama22. was married to ten
women. They would all come to the presence of our Prophet and explain their
situation. The Messenger of Allah advised them to keep four of their wives with them
and to part ways with the others.
The recognized freedom and rights of the women were not limited to merely this.
An entire chapter of the Qur'an titled "Nisa" was dedicated to women and spoke of
their conditions and rights.
Give to the women (whom you marry) their bridal-due (mahr) willingly
and for good (i.e. without expecting a return); however, if of their own
accord they remit any part of it to you, then you are welcome to enjoy it
gladly. Do not give to those of weak mind your property that Allah has
put in your charge (as a means of support for you and for the needy), but
feed and clothem out of it (especially with the profit you will make by
exploiting it), and speak to them kindly and words of honest advice. (Care
for and) test the orphans well until they reach the age of marriage. Then,
if you find them to be mature of mind, hand over to them their property;
and do not consume it by wasteful spending, nor do so in haste fearing
that they will come of age (and so take it over). If the guardian is rich

--- Sayfa 599 ---
(enough to support himself and his family), let him abstain (from his
ward's property); but if he is poor, let him consume thereof in a just and
reasonable manner. When you hand (their property) over to them, let there
be witnesses on their behalf Allah suffices as One Who reckons and
settles the accounts (ofHis servants). (an-Nisa 4:4-6)
As it can be seen, the verses revealed listed the rights of the orphaned girls and
women one by one and determined the rights of these women which has never been
mentioned before, giving the right of choice to women. From now on, women in
society could speak their own minds and would be listened to when they spoke. They
could also seek their rights and be recognized as important members of society,
knowing that their quest was now recognized by Allah.
Sariyyas and Gazwas
The first campaign after Uhud was the Banu Asad ibn Khuzayma of Abu Salama with
a force of one hundred and fifty men. Two months had passed, and they had just
sighted the new moon signaling the month of Muharram. The two sons of Khuwaylid,
Tulayha and Salama, had encouraged all those who could hold a sword among the
tribe of the Banu Asad to attend war and they had prepared a big army to attack
Medina.
Receiving this piece of news, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, called to his side Abu Salama, the wounded lion of Uhud, and ordered him to go
on a campaign to the Banu Asad and solve the issue in its place. Abu Salama started to
gather his forces and with his hundred and fifty men went to the land of the Banu
A sad.
the Banu Asad, who had received news that our Prophet was coming to them, were
caught in a panic; they decided to give up the idea of war and dispersed immediately.
What was left of the army were the camels and the sheep that had not been able to
flee. Thus an evil plan that had not yet been put into action had been caught at its first
stages and dealt with accordingly and so the enemies had not been able to carry out
their plan. Mission was accomplished and Abu Salama and his friends waited for a
while, and then taking the camels and the sheep with them, they returned back to
Medina.2l
On a Thursday in the month of Muharram, the Messenger of Allah received news
that Khalid ibn Sufyan al-Hudhali was preparing an army to fight against Medina.
Upon receiving this news, the blessed Messenger sent Abdullah ibn Unays to that area
to inspect the matter.

--- Sayfa 600 ---
Abdullah ibn Unays's return took a very long time and he was only able to get back
to Medina after eighteen days. During inspection, he had been able to come very close
to Khalid ibn Sufyan, and after seeing the gravity of the matter, he had killed him so
that the forces of evil may not have time to gather. He had thus gone on his own and
had solved the matter before it developed into a problem. For his efficiency, the
blessed Messenger gave the staff he was holding and said: "This will be greatest proof
between you and me on the Day of Judgment."2
Another Assassination Attempt
Meccans who thought that they still had not avenged themselves for Badr and had
blown away their chances at Uhud had not given up their plans for revenge; they were
taking oaths for revenge and were wallowing in their hatred. At some point, Abu
Sufyan said to the young people who were gathered around him: "Isn't there anyone
among you who will rid us of Muhammad? Look, we are suffering from so much pain
and yet he goes about in the market freely!"
There was none among the crowd who took up the challenge; for they all knew that
this meant certain death. To go all the way to Medina on one's own and to kill the
blessed Messenger was a task no ordinary man could handle. Empty handed, Abu
Sufyan made his way home. After a short while, he heard a knock on his door. When
he opened the door, he saw a Bedouin youth who told him: "If you promise me and
generously grant my requests, then I can go and kill Muhammad! For I know this
business well; look, here's my dagger which is lighter than a feather and it is waiting
to carry out such a task."
At a point where he had lost all hope, they had blossomed once again. Abu Sufyan's
eyes glittered with joy. This job could only be carried out with such young men who
were ready to risk all. He invites the youngster inside and said: ''You are the very man
we are looking for."
He was deeply content. He gave the youth a camel and enough money and property
to please him. Now, everything was agreed upon. Then he said: "Do not speak ofthis
to anyone-let this stay between just the two of us. For I fear someone may hear of it
and go and tell Muhammad."
''No one will know of it," assured the youth.
Then, mounting his camel in the dead of night, he reached Medina after a six-day
journey. He tried not to attract too much attention as he asked about our Prophet to the
people he came across. He had come as far as the Masjid an-Nabawi.

--- Sayfa 601 ---
At the time, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was not
there, for he had gone to the land of the sons of Abdiashal. And so the youth followed
him there. He tied his camel somewhere and then approached the blessed Messenger,
who was sitting among his Companions and speaking with them.
When he saw the youth approach, he said to those near him: "That young man over
there, his intentions are not good. He is plotting some evil! But do not worry; I swear
by Allah that Allah the Almighty will put an obstacle between him and what he is
planning and will not let him carry out his plan."
Meanwhile, the youth came near them and asked: 'Which one of you is the son of
Abdul Muttalib'?"
The blessed Messenger answered: "I am the son of Abdul Muttalib."
Then the youth came closer to the blessed Messenger as if he wanted to say
something private to him.
Usayd ibn Khudayr, who sensed the young boy's ill intentions and thought about
the words he had just heard from our Prophet, said: "Stay away from the Messenger of
Allah!" and then pulled at his clothes. He had pulled so hard that the dagger he was
hiding strapped on his waist was revealed. Upon which Usayd called out: "0
Messenger of Allah! Here is the man with bad intentions!"
The young boy looked desperate, fearing for his life.
Usayd ibn Khudayr had got hold of the youth's collar and was pulling him towards
himself to prevent him from doing any harm to the Messenger. When the youth saw
that he was thoroughly trapped he called out: "My blood! My blood 0 Muhammad,"
trying to save his life by seeking refuge in our Prophet's mercy. The blessed
Messenger turned to the youth and said: "Tell the truth! Who are you and why did you
come here? If you tell the truth, that will be for your own good. If you lie then I will
know what you are trying to hide!"
"Am I safe? Can I trust you?" asked the young boy.
The Messenger of Allah assured him: "Yes, you are safe."
Upon being reassured, the youth started to tell the Messenger his story starting from
what happened in Mecca, how Abu Sufyan had asked for help from the young men,
his hatred for the town and people of Medina, what he would not stoop to do in order
to take revenge on our noble Prophet and all the worldly goods that he promised him
when he went to Abu Sufyan's house ...
The man's tongue had loosened, but according to the Companions, he still presented
a danger and couldn't just walk the streets of Medina freely. They just could not be

--- Sayfa 602 ---
sure of what he could do. Consequently, Usayd ibn Khudayr took him to his home and
imprisoned him there.
The next day, the Messenger of Allah called the young boy to his presence once
again and said: "You have my surety; you can now go wherever you please or you can
choose something else which would be of more benefit to you."
It was clear that he wanted to take this youth who had plotted evil against him on
the side of goodness as well. The warmness in the Messenger's eyes, and his
embracing tone of voice was enough to melt the heart of the young boy and so he
asked: "And what would be of more benefit to me?"
"That you should bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that I am His
Messenger," said the blessed Messenger.
How could one refuse such a sincere invitation! The young boy could feel peace to
his very bones and said: "I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that you
are the Messenger of Allah."
Then he said the following to our noble Prophet: "I swear, 0 Muhammad, that you
are a man full of affection! I almost lost my mind when I saw you and I felt my hands
were tied and I did not know what to do! And only you understood the reason of my
presence so quickly before anyone and there had been no one who could have given
you that news! That is when I understood that you are under Divine protection in the
face of evil. You are the one who represents truth; those who follow Abu Sufyan are
the soldiers of the Devil."
These were sentences that made the blessed Messenger smile. Another problem had
been surmounted with no difficulty, and another man who had come to kill had found
new life when entering the climate of the Messenger of Allah and was now returning
having filled his lungs with peace.
Two Bitter Experiences: Raji and Bi'r-i Mauna
To walk on the path of righteousness was not an easy task, it called for great
sacrifices. Bitter experiences would be encountered with in this endeavor; there would
be many traps scattered on this path that would be presented as harmless and certain
sacrifices would have to be made in the name of religion.
Raji
It was the fourth year of the Hijra and the month of Safar. The Medina which the
polytheists thought had been weakened after Uhud had shown, with what had
happened at Hamrau'l-Asad, that they had been wrong in thinking so. The two

--- Sayfa 603 ---
attempts that the polytheists had put forward had been averted before they even
started. The dealers of hatred who saw this now tried a different route and came to
Medina. These were men of the Adal and Qara people: they said that they had become
Muslims and that they needed a guide who would teach them about the articles of faith
and religion. They asked our noble Prophet for a teacher who would teach them the
Qur'an. One could only judge according to men's apparent intentions and this request
seemed reasonable. Their request was accepted, for these people who had chosen
Islam as their religion could not be left without a guide who would help them on their
way to attain the pleasure of Allah.
The Messenger of Allah, who regarded the event of one person becoming Muslim
as a much higher reward than any worldly wealth, had been very happy and he
selected ten Companions from the students of Suffa (the men who had devoted
themselves to learning the Qur'an and lived within the Masjid an-Nabawi) and ordered
them to go to the said people and teach them the religion. Asim ibn Umar ibn Khattab
was leading the group.22
They set off and came all the way to a well called Raji used by the Hudhayl tribe
who lived in Hijaz. Then suddenly, the evil plan that had been prepared well before
was put it practice and before they knew it, the Companions were surrounded by a
blazing fire! Around one hundred archers from the sons of Lihyan had come out from
where they had hidden and were now attacking the Companions they had rounded up.
They were tightening the squeeze around the Companions who were trying to climb to
a higher ground in order to defend themselves.
They wanted to take them all prisoners, saying: 'We promise that if you surrender
we will not kill any of you."
What our Prophet had said in Hamrau'l-Asad still rang in their ears and they did not
want to be bitten twice. The men who had told them they were Muslims and brought
them all the way here from Medina had now disappeared and had left them there,
trapped in the fire, to die. Who knew what tricks they would play on them if they had
surrendered? That is why they decided to fight till their last breath. When Asim ibn
Umar saw that martyrdom was inescapable, he started shooting arrows, praying: "Dear
Lord! Let the Messenger of Allah learn of our state."
He had only seven arrows and each one he shot had brought down a denier. When
he ran out of arrows he got hold of his spear and with it he had killed all those who
had approached him. When the spear broke as well he started to wield the sheath of
his sword and said: "Dear Lord! I fought to protect Your religion as long as I lived, do
not let my body be dishonored in the hands of the polytheists after I have fallen

--- Sayfa 604 ---
martyr! "2:!
It was not possible to resist a power with so few resources at hand and before long
the seven Companions would fall martyr there.
Only three of them had been left: Hubayb ibn Adiyy, Zayd ibn Dasinna and
Abdullah ibn Tariq. The sons of Lihyan repeated that if they surrendered they would
not be harmed, telling them to stop wielding their swords and shooting arrows. The
three Companions had no choice but to surrender. They first untied the strings of their
bows and bound their hands with these strings.
Abdullah ibn Tariq was discomfited and reminded the polytheists that they had
promised not to do anything to them: "This is your first deception", Abdullah said,
upon which they killed him there and then.22 It was clear that they meant ill and that
death awaited the others as well. They took Hubayb and Zayd and made for Mecca.
They then gave them up to the Meccans for a price.
The Meccans who had been deeply injured in Badr and who had not been able to
settle their accounts properly in Uhud were very pleased; they were now going to get
their revenge at least out of these two Companions and thus satisfy their built-up
hatred. They wanted everyone to participate in this "festival." That is why they first
imprisoned the two of them and then a couple of days later they brought them to a
place called Tanim and murdered them in bloodthirsty way.22
Bi'r-i Mauna
Once again in the month of Safar, a man named Amir ibn Malik came to visit our
Prophet. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, invited him to
Islam but the man was not prepared to accept it; he neither acted like he was for it, nor
did he say that he was against it. It was clear he had doubts. Maybe he needed some
time, for even though he did not accept the faith himself, he wanted those close to him
to be introduced to this religion. That is why he said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Why
don't you send some of your Companions to the people ofNajd to speak to us about
Islam; I believe our people will accept the invitation."
The Messenger of mercy replied: "I fear that the people of Najd will do my
Companions some harm."
Upon which Amir ibn Malik promised: "I give you my word for them."
According to the culture of the time, giving ones word was like a surety; even
though ignorance and injustice was at its peak, going back on one's word meant losing
one's manhood and honor. The general attitude of the blessed Messenger was to make
use of every opportunity to explain to people the road to salvation. At the same time

--- Sayfa 605 ---
they received news from the region between Najd and Medina that the safety of the
Muslims living in that region was at risk, such that tribes such as Ri '1, Zakwan,
U sayya and Lihyan had sent news to the Messenger of Allah and asked him to help
establish this security.
The conditions of the time required that they grant such a request and so our
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, chose seventy people from among his
Companions2Z and told them to go with Amir ibn Malik and to communicate Islam to
the people of Najd. He had also given them letters to give the leaders of the places
they would visit. Munzir ibn Amr had been appointed as the leader of the group.2!l. All
of them were the "qurra" Companions, from the Suffa, who knew very well the verses
sent by Allah and the statements of the Messenger of Allah.
When they set out on their journey, they came to a well called Mauna and set up
camp there. They let their camels rest and graze, while they set off to give the letters
to the people that the Messenger of Allah intended. That is why they chose three
people from among them and sent them to Amir ibn Tufayl.22.
Haram ibn Milhan22 was one of the three Companions selected, and when he and his
friends approached their destination; he decided to leave his two friends at a certain
point and offered to go to Amir ibn Tufayl on his own: "You both stay close by here
as I go to them! If they give me safe passage, you will see it for yourself and come; if
they try to kill me then you can go to our friends and tell them what has happened."
And Ibn Milhan did just as he said. He went to the presence of Amir ibn Tufayl,
gave him the letter from the Messenger of Allah and invited them to the true religion.
Amir, who had been the lucky recipient of a letter from the Messenger of Allah, did
not even bother to look at it but gave orders for Ibn Milhan to be killed. Upon this
order Jabbar ibn Sulma got hold of a spear and pierced it into Ibn Milhan's back. The
envoy of the Messenger of Allah was covered in blood; the spear that had pierced him
from the back had come out from his chest But Ibn Milhan was happy to be leaving
the cares of this world behind and to be attaining the rank of a martyr in the Name of
Allah and His Messenger. Ibn Milhan wiped his face with the blood that had been
smeared on his hands and said with great joy:
''Allahu Akbar! Allah is the Greatest! I swear by the Lord of the Ka'ba that I have
been saved! "Zl
Then, before the letter reached its destination, Haram ibn Milhan became a martyr.
However Amir ibn Tufayl's hatred was not of a kind that would be satisfied with the
death of one of the Companions of the Prophet. He called out to the sons of Amir and

--- Sayfa 606 ---
told them to attack the others that remained. Interestingly, the sons of Amir did not
obey this order. This was strange indeed; he was ordering them but they were not
complying with his request, instead, they wanted to honor the word that their uncle
Amir ibn Malik had given to the Messenger of Allah previously.
As a leader, this was something that drove Amir ibn Tufayl completely mad. He
couldn't just stand there doing nothing, for even if those closest to him were not
willing to help him out, he was going to find other people from around and attack the
envoys of the Messenger of Allah.
Before long, the envoys of the blessed Messenger saw a great crowd coming hastily
towards them, with men composed of the Usayya, Ri'l, Kara and Zakwan tribes.
Sensing the ill intentions of the men, they said to them: "We swear we do not have
anything against you. We only want to do a deed that the Messenger of Allah had
appointed us to do. We are the envoys ofthe Messenger of Allah."
However these people were blinded by hate and they just would not listen. And so
they decided to defend themselves but because they were outnumbered, their defense
had been of no avail. It just didn't make sense; these men whose only aim had been to
communicate to people the message of Allah and His Messenger were put to the
sword!
It was only Amr ibn Umayya that had been saved among those who had set out for
this trip. Despite the fact that he had experienced many difficulties during this trip, he
had managed to stay alive and quickly made his way back to Medina. On the way he
came across two people who were from the tribe that had murdered his friends, and
when he found this out, he killed them considering it was his duty of loyalty to his
friends
He then went straight to the Messenger of Allah and told him what happened.
Medina was suddenly covered with sadness, for this was the second sad news that had
arrived in the one day. As if it was not sad enough to receive the tragic news that ten
sincere hearts had been martyred in Raji upon responding to a false promise, the
blessed Prophet and his Companions received more tragic news that sixty-nine
Companions had also been killed for no good reason.
"This is the work of Abu Bara," the blessed Messenger said and added: "I did not
want this to happen and I feared that we may be faced with something like this! "ll
Amr then spoke about the two Amiris that he had killed on the way. All of a
sudden, the atmosphere became electrified. Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him, responded: "You have done something really bad," and then said: "I had

--- Sayfa 607 ---
given them assurance and promised to protect them. I swear by Allah that I will pay
their blood money."
Amr, who till that moment had thought that he had done something good and was
perhaps expecting words of praise, was extremely surprised! The sadness of the
Prophet drowned him in sadness as well and he regretted deeply what he had done.
But regret did not help things at this point.
This was yet another example of Prophetic affection and people could see Prophetic
justice put in place in front of their very eyes. On the one hand there were people who
deliberately had killed sixty-nine innocent people and on the other hand there were
two people who had mistakenly been killed. Even though the Messenger of Allah did
not speak about the blood money for his martyred Companions, he said that he would
pay the blood money of the two men whom had given surety and who had been killed
mistakenly by a Companion of his, and even insisted on it to be paid immediately!
The Banu Nadir
The Banu Nadir was a Jewish tribe living in Medina and were allies of the Banu Amir,
the tribe of the two men that Amr ibn Umayya had killed not knowing that our Prophet
had given surety to them. They too had signed the Medina treaty that had been
formulated after the Hijra, and they had accepted the terms of the new state that had
been founded. They had promised to help defend Medina and live a life of coexistence
side by side with the Muslims.
However, their dealings with the Meccans continued and they harbored enmity
towards the Messenger of Allah. They received a letter from the Meccans and they
were tricked into thinking that the Meccans would provide them logistical support.
That is why they sent word to the Messenger of Allah, saying that they wanted to
debate with the Muslims in the open field and so asked our Prophet to come with
thirty of his men. Their aim was to attack our Prophet when he did not expect it and
kill him along with his leading Companions. But they retracted when they saw the
valiant Companions by the side of the Messenger of Allah and asked for the
challenges to take place three on three. The Messenger of Allah was informed of the
preparations of these three men and although he had set off on the road to meet them,
he returned back and did not fall into their evil trap.
One Saturday, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, came to
Quba with a group of his Companions, and after praying the Afternoon Prayer there,
he visited the neighborhood where the Banu Nadir lived. His aim was to procure their
assistance in paying the blood-money of the two men from the sons of Amir with

--- Sayfa 608 ---
whom the Banu Nadir were allies, to ask them to help him transfer the money to them.
This was also, in a way, an inquiry to sound out what the Banu Nadir thought of the
developments, for they had been reacting differently towards the Muslims since Badr.
This was the difference of the Messenger of Allah, for although there was no such
thing as blood money in the world of Amir ibn Tufayl and his friends who had killed
sixty-nine of our Prophet's Companions without good reason, and although they
continued to challenge him, the blessed Messenger was doing what he ought to do,
and he did not base his sense of duty on the actions of others.
When our noble Prophet came to the land of the Banu Nadir with nine of his
Companions,ll he found them holding a meeting among themselves. When he
approached them and told them about his intention to pay the blood money of the two
men that Amr ibn Umayya had mistakenly killed, they responded to him in the
following way: 'We will do what you ask us to do 0 Abu'l-Qasim! Now you have a
reason to come and visit us! But first sit down and rest a while, then we will see to
your business! Meanwhile let us discuss the matter among us and let us try to resolve
this matter that has brought you all the way here."
Their response seemed positive; they were going to ensure this mistake did not lead
on to further mistakes. It appeared as though the issue would be resolved. Our beloved
Prophet sat down and leaned on the wall of a house nearby and started to wait as he
was told with his Companions.
An Unsuccessful Assassination Attempt
The sad reality was that these men who did not show the Messenger of Allah their true
faces and were just trying to buy time were thinking that the opportunity they had
been seeking had thus been handed to them, and so they started to debate among
themselves. The discussion was led by Huyayy ibn Akhtab: "0 Jewish people! As you
can see Muhammad has come among you with not even ten men with him. Climb the
roof of the house he is sitting against, throw a rock over him and kill him! You will
never get such a chance again! If he is killed, his friends will disperse. Those who
came from the Quraysh will return to their own homeland and those who have joined
him from the Aws and Khazraj will return to their own business! If you want to do this
you will not find a time as ripe as this! When will you do this if not today?"
Hearing his heated speech, a man called Amr ibn Jahhash stood up to say: "Then I
will climb that roof and hurl a stone over him," and with that he went towards the
house in whose shade our Prophet was resting.

--- Sayfa 609 ---
Naturally, not all ofthem were ofthe same view. Sallam ibn Mishkam, who saw the
gravity of the situation, felt the need to warn his people and came to the fore to say:
"0 people, even if you should contradict me for the rest of your life, agree with me
today! I swear by Allah that if you try to do this, he will be informed of this and he
will at once realize that you are about to deceive him. This would also be violating the
pact we have made with him; do not do such a thing!"
While Sallam was saying these words of caution, Amr ibn Jahhash had already
prepared himself a rock and had started to carry it up to the roof of the building. Then
the Truthful Gabriel came to the Messenger of Allah and told him of the situation.
This was clear betrayal. Apparently people did not give up their bad habits that
easily. It was clear that their hatred continued growing and their attitude against Allah
and His Messenger was taking them to a point of no return. When the blessed
Messenger was informed of their evil plans, he stood up as if he were about to see to a
particular need and started to walk in the direction of Medina with very quick steps.
Since his Companions had not been informed of the developments, they thought that
the Messenger was going to see to his need and come back and so they stayed sitting
where they were. A lot of time passed and the Jews of the Banu Nadir who had
prepared their plot on top of the house were getting impatient to carry out their plan.
They were happy to notice someone approaching from afar. But their happiness was
soon gone because they saw that the man approaching was another Jew from the same
tribe. The Jewish man who saw that his tribesmen were looking at the roof of a house
in silent expectation, asked: 'What are you trying to do?"
'We want to kill Muhammad and take his Companions prisoner," they responded
"And where is Muhammad?" he asked again.
"He must be close to here somewhere," they replied.
"I swear that I saw Muhammad a little while ago in Medina," the Jewish man said
calmly.
This last comment had shocked and greatly distressed the Jews. They were utterly
bewildered and didn't know what to say or do! Sallam had been right all along; our
noble Prophet had got the news of their actions and when he had heard of their plot, he
had left for Medina.
Anxiety and Assessment
When they realized that it was taking the Messenger of Allah a very long time to come
back, the Companions were worried and rather than to wait for him there, they decided

--- Sayfa 610 ---
to go after and look for him. Abu Bakr said: "There is no point in us waiting here. It is
clear that our noble Prophet has gone for some important business," and so they all got
up and started to walk together.
Huyayy ibn Akhtab who saw them leave and who was convinced that their plan had
been figured out said to his tribesmen: "Abu'l-Qasim acted hastily; we only wanted to
comply with his wish and wanted to host him among us," trying to save the situation.
But it was too late, what's done was done.
Kinana ibn Suwayra came to the fore and asked the members of his tribe who
planned to attack on the blessed Messenger: "Do you know why Muhammad stood up
and left?"
''No we swear we do not know; is there something you know?" they responded,
acting all clueless.
''Yes, of course I do," he said, and then added: "I swear by the Torah that I do know
the reason for this. The reason Muhammad left is that he was informed about the trap
you set for him. Do not fool yourselves; I swear by Allah that he is the Messenger of
Allah. The reason he left is that he received Divine news of the trap you set for him.
There is no doubt that he is the last of the Messengers. You expected him to come
from the family of Aaron but Allah the Almighty bestowed him where He pleased.
According to what our books say and what we read in the untainted Torah, his birth
place is Mecca and where he will immigrate to is Yathrib. As to his attributes, there is
not the tiniest of divergence; they are exactly as our book says."
After explaining the universality of the noble Prophet, Kinana then spoke about
what was likely to befall the members of his tribe because of their wrong attitude and
ill-intentions: 'What he offers you is much better than you fighting him. But
unfortunately, I already see you leaving behind your property and homes, leaving
behind the cries of your children and your family, and still going. This is your honor;
come and obey me with these two things, for there is nothing to gain from the third."
'What are these two things?" they asked.
"Becoming a Muslim and being of the same religion as Muhammad. If you do this
then you will have saved your wealth and you will share the same exalted status as his
Companions. You will have kept your property and you will have escaped exile."
'We will not leave the Torah and diverge from the covenant of Moses," they
responded.
"Then wait; for he will soon send you news telling you to leave his country and go
elsewhere. Say yes to this request, for he would not confiscate your property and lives,

--- Sayfa 611 ---
and you will get to keep what is yours. You can sell them if you like, or keep them and
do whatever you like with them."
''Now this sounds like a better plan," they said.
After making these recommendations to his tribesmen, he then turned to their leader
and called out: "0 Huyayy! Beware and do not respond haughtily to his words! Do
what he tells you to do and leave his country!"
The desperate Huyayy said with complete exhaustion:
"All right. I will not say anything to him and accept his offer to leave."
The nine Companions who had left the Jewish tribe to look for our Prophet saw
someone coming from Medina and asked him whether or not he had seen the
Messenger of Allah. The man said that he had seen the blessed Messenger in a
neighborhood in Medina and so they started to make haste towards the said
neighborhood.
They found our beloved Prophet just as he was calling his Companion Muhammad
ibn Maslama to his side for an important mission. They were curious why he had left
without notifying them. When they came to him, they asked: "0 Messenger of Allah!
We did not understand why you stood up and left," and they received the following
answer: "The Jews were preparing to assassinate me. When Allah sent me its news, I
got up and left. "H
Now it all became clear. All their tarrying and lingering around was so that they
could talk over the issues amongst themselves and so that they may prepare their
assassination plot better.
The Envoy of the Messenger of Allah
Before long, Muhammad ibn Maslama came, and was waiting for the duty that the
blessed Messenger would give to him. Our noble Prophet told him to go the Banu
Nadir Jews to tell them that he had been sent by the Messenger of Allah and warn
them that they had to leave his homeland.
After receiving these instructions, Muhammad ibn Maslama quickly made his way
to the Banu Nadir tribe. The leading men of the Banu Nadir who saw him coming
realized that news concerning them was about to be revealed and they surrounded him
all at once. Firstly, Muhammad ibn Maslama said: "The Messenger of Allah has sent
me to you with a letter. But I will not give that letter to you until I remind you of the
incident that that took place here that you all knew about."
"And what is that?" they asked pretending they did not know.

--- Sayfa 612 ---
"Tell me for the sake of the Torah which was revealed unto Moses, before
Muhammad was given the revelation, I had come here and joined your congregation.
You had the Torah with you and that day you told me: '0 Ibn Maslama! If you want
we will feed you; and if you want to become a Jew, let us help you become Jewish,'
and I had said: 'No, just give me something to eat; I do not want to become Jewish.'
Upon which you had brought me a pot of food and had said: 'The only reason why
you won't accept our religion is that it is the religion of the Jews. You seem to want to
join the religion of the Hanif about which you have heard something. But Abu Amir
ar-Rahib is not its possessor; the person who really possesses such qualities of
Prophethood will be the one who is smiling, whose eyes are reddish and who is skilled
at war. He will come from the direction of Yemen. He will mount a camel and wear
clothing known as shamla. He will be satisfied with little food and his sword will
always hang on his shoulder. He will speak with wisdom and he will come to you and
be a part of you. I swear he will come from your land. And this means some people
will be deprived, some killed and some will be held accountable."'
When Ibn Maslama repeated these words that they had spoken a while back, they
understood where the conversation was heading and they started to murmur: "It is
true, we did say all these things to you, but Muhammad is not the Messenger we were
talking about."
Muhammad ibn Maslama was content in receiving this answer, one he had been
expecting to get. Now was the time to convey the message of the blessed Messenger
so Ibn Maslama explained: "The Messenger of Allah has sent me to you and asked me
to relate to you these words: 'You have not been true to the agreement we had made.
You have broken it by trying to assassinate me."'
Ibn Maslama then recounted to them how Amr ibn Jahhash had gone up the roof of
a house and looked for an opportunity to kill the Prophet. They could not say a thing.
They realized that their plans had been discovered and disclosed. But everything had
not yet been said. Ibn Maslama read the last message of the blessed Messenger: "I
give you ten days; leave my land in this given time! If we see any one of you here
after ten days, he shall be killed."
What Kinana and Sallam had said had come true. The Banu Nadir were
experiencing shock after shock: "0 Muhammad," they called out and then said to Ibn
Maslama: "We would not have expected someone from the Aws to bring us such
news." But they had no right to complain as such, for it had been them who had
broken the agreement and it was them who had planned to assassinate the blessed
Messenger. The fact that they were in alliance with the Aws tribe, the tribe of

--- Sayfa 613 ---
Muhammad ibn Maslama, would not have been an impediment for Ibn Maslama to
carry out the business of the Messenger of Allah and so he said to them: "It's all water
under the bridge now. "22.
After they received the message of our noble Prophet, the Banu Nadir had no choice
but to make preparations for the road. On the one hand, while they were loading their
camels, on the other hand they were looking for people who could help them move
their possessions. Although they did not want to go, they could not stay there
anymore. It had been their own doing and now they were going to bear the
consequences.
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salol's Men
While preparations to leave Medina were under way, two men came to the land of the
Banu Nadir. They were Suwayd and Da'is, the envoys of Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn
Salul, the man who had headed the hypocrites since Uhud. They had brought a
message from Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul and were relating it to the Banu Nadir
who were busy preparing for the road: "Do not leave your home and belongings, go to
your fortress and stay there. I have a force of two thousand with me made up of my
own tribe and other Arabs. They too will enter the fortress with you and will fight with
you to the death. Qurayza will also help you, they will never leave you alone. Do not
forget that your allies from Ghatafan will support you as well."
In the meantime, they had sent news to the Banu Qurayza tribe and asked for help
from their leader Ka'b ibn Asad, but Ka'b had said: ''Not a single person from our
tribe will violate our agreement with Muhammad," thus turning them away.
Although this was disheartening for Huyayy ibn Akhtab, the leader of the Banu
Nadir, he would not give up. Thus, acting as if he had not received such news of
rejection, he continued to provoke the people against the Messenger of Allah, and with
the news he sent, he made the Banu Nadir believe that they had strong backing behind
them.
Before long, Huyayy ibn Akhtab started saying: "I will send news to Muhammad
saying we will not leave our land and property, let him do what he wants!"
This decision was like intentionally and foolishly walking into death so Sallam ibn
Mishkam intervened: "I swear, 0 Huyayy, your vain ego is what's making you take
this dangerous step! If your suggestion is met with approval, then I will leave you with
other Jews who think like me. Do not do this! I swear by Allah that you also know that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah! His attributes are the same as has been

--- Sayfa 614 ---
recorded in our books. We are being stubborn and ignoring such a blatant truth only
because he has not come from the children of Aaron. Best will be if we stay true to the
agreement we have made and leave. You had disagreed with my objections
concerning the plot against him and now you see where it has taken us! Later down
the track when it is time to collect our produce, we will come back and collect it
ourselves, or we can send someone on our behalf, and then we sell it however we like.
As long as we can take our possessions with us when we leave, we should not be
affected too much. Is not our honor and glory through what we hold in our hands by
way of wealth? If we lose what we have, then we will be no different to other, poorer
Jews. If we do not accept what Muhammad has offered us today, and if we stay in the
fortress and we are besieged, then we won't even be able to imagine what will happen
to us. Even if we say then that we are accepting his offer, it will be too late and he will
not accept our offer."
In response to Sallam's smcere warnmg, Huyayy gave the following response:
"Muhammad will never get the chance to besiege our fortress, and if he does, he will
have to go back empty handed. Do you not see what Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul has
promised me?"
It was clear that he was blinded by ambition. But truth had to be voiced and Sallam
felt he had to stop him from making a decision that would undoubtedly lead to him
and his people into ruin. And so he said: "What weight could Ibn Ubayy's word have?
All he wants to achieve is to bring you in confrontation with Muhammad and to put
your lives in danger. Have no doubt that when the time comes to fight, he will just sit
at home and won't help you. He has spoken to Ka'b ibn Asad about the plan but he
has repressed that as long as he lives, not a single soul from the Banu Qurayza tribe
will violate the agreement that they have made with the Muslims. Did he not give
similar promises to his former ally, the Banu Qaynuqa who broke the agreement with
the Muslims and fought with Muhammad. And then what happened? They went inside
the fortress walls and started to wait for the help promised by Ibn Ubayy. But Ibn
Ubayy was just sitting at home! Before long, Muhammad came and surrounded them
and they had no choice but to surrender. What I mean to say is that Ibn Ubayy never
helps his allies. We used to fight against him with the Aws. Then Muhammad came
and intervened between them and only then was the fight over. When it comes to Ibn
Ubayy, he is not of the Jewish tribe, or of Muhammad's religion. How can we trust
him?"
Huyayy's mind, however, was made up and Sallam's words had no effect on him.
He answered in the following way: "It is a pleasure for me to fight Muhammad!"

--- Sayfa 615 ---
In the face of such animosity, all Sallam could say was the following warning:
"Then you have to believe me that the result of such fighting will not only force us
to leave our lands but also to lose our possessions and honor, and as our fighters are
killed, our families and children will be taken captive."
When it became clear that Huyayy ibn Akhtab would not consider any alternative to
war, Samuk ibn Abi'l-Huqayq who was known as a mentally disturbed person came to
the fore and said: "0 Huyayy! What an inauspicious man you are! You are almost
going to wipe the Banu Nadir offthe face of the earth."
Huyayy was furious.
"I see that the whole of the Banu Nadir including this village idiot have agreed to
speak up and object to me," he replied.
The atmosphere was very tense indeed. Samuk's brothers started to beat him up,
and turning to Huyayy, they said: "We will never go out of your word, we will never
contradict you."
Then after all this Huyayy called his brother Juday ibn Akhtab to his side and told
him to go to the blessed Messenger and say: 'We are not going anywhere, we are not
leaving our land and property, do what you will."
He also asked his brother to go to Abdullah ibn Ubayy and let him know about the
decision the made and to send them the support he promised.
When Judayy came and related Huyayy's message, the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, who was sitting among his Companions at the time, started
to say out loud "Allah is the Greatest." The other Muslims who heard his words also
spoke the same words. He then said: "The Jews have preferred war; they have just
declared war."
It was now clear. The issue that had been left hanging for days had been resolved by
the Jews with the decision of war which would bring about their own end.
As soon as he had delivered his brother Huyayy's message to our noble Prophet,
Judayy went to Abdullah ibn Ubayy. The head of the hypocrites was sitting at his
home with a group of his friends. Judayy has just entered and was about to speak
when he was startled by the shouts of the Messenger of Allah who was calling his
Companions to fight against the Banu Nadir.
Making a second attempt to speak, Judayy was once again interrupted, this time by
the sound of a door slamming open. It was Abdullah, the son of Ibn Ubayy who had
entered. As soon as Abdullah had heard the call of our noble Prophet, he had come to
his home at one and grabbing his sword and shield, he ran to the place he had been

--- Sayfa 616 ---
summoned. Even at a home where the leader of the hypocrites was head of the family,
there was a young man who was loyal to the orders of the blessed Messenger, and this
greatly distressed Judayy.
Ibn Ubayy was sitting silently on one side and could not even prevent his son from
leaving. This was enough evidence for Judayy to realize that that he could not expect
anything from Ibn Ubayy. He left to go back to the land of the Banu Nadir as quickly
as he came.
When Huyayy saw his brother Judayy commg, he was very excited: "What
happened, what news did you bring?" he asked eagerly.
"There is bad news," answered Judayy. "When I related to Muhammad the news
you sent, he called out "Allah is the Greatest" and then said to those around him: "The
Jews have declared war." And right after that I went to Ibn Ubayy and was about to
give him the news when I could already hear the call of Muhammad who was inviting
people to fight against the Banu Nadir."
"And what was Ibn Ubayy's answer?" asked Huyayy.
"I do not think he will be of any use to us," answered Judayy, for he had made it
clear through his attitude that he would not keen on helping them.
"The only thing he said was 'let me send word to my friends from Ghatafan so that
they may enter the fortress with you and help you,"' explained Judayy.
It was all very clear now; Sallam had been right all along. A person's character did
not change even when years had passed. Ibn Ubayy had acted in a manner befitting his
character and he had left hanging the people he had made promises to.
Moving towards the Banu Nadir
Now was the time to move towards the Banu Nadir who had violated the agreement
and had challenged the authority in Medina. Our noble Prophet left Abdullah ibn
U mm Maqtum as deputy of Medina and marched towards the land of the Banu Nadir
with his Companions. He was going to pray the Afternoon Prayer in the land of the
Banu Nadir. When the Banu Nadir saw the Messenger of Allah coming towards them
with his Companions, they started to attack them with stones and arrows while they
ran to their fortress. This defensive state of theirs continued till the end of that day.
They set up camp for our noble Prophet from wood and covered the roof with the
sackcloth that Sa'd ibn Ubada had sent. Sa'd had also taken upon himself to carry
dates for the Muslims.
The Banu Qurayza, another Jewish tribe that the Banu Nadir expected help from,

--- Sayfa 617 ---
was watching from afar what was happening and they decided to stay out of the
conflict. Ka'b ibn Asad had kept his promise and had stayed true to the agreement
they had made with the Messenger of Allah-he had refused the requests of Huyayy
ibn Akhtab. They did not provide any fighters or logistic support as the Banu Nadir
has hoped they would.
The battle had started, but the sun had set and day had come to an end. After the
Night Prayer the blessed Messenger left AliZ2 as the head of the army and mounted on
his horse to go back to Medina with ten of his Companions. He still had his armor on.
Our noble Prophet, who was back in the land of the Banu Nadir for the Morning
Prayer, had his camp moved to a place called Hatma where he had led the Prayer and
then retreated to his tent. Before long an arrow pierced through the tent.ZZ It became
apparent that the tent was still within shooting range so they changed its position to a
place called Fadih.
Night had fallen that day as well but there was no news of the two-thousand strong
army that Abdullah ibn Ubayy had promised. The Banu Nadir had taken a risk and had
faced war but as usual, Ibn Ubayy had preferred to stay at home. Hopes were
dwindling.
Sallam ibn Mishkam and Kinana ibn Suwayra who assessed the situation turned to
Huyayy ibn Akhtab and said: "Where is the help promised by Ibn Ubayy, the one you
were so sure was coming?"
He too was aware ofthe situation and he was desperate. He had taken a big risk by
trusting people who were unreliable and had taken his own people down this
dangerous road. He held his head down in shame and said: "What am I to do?"
This was the expression of exhaustion. All he could say was: "It means this
catastrophe is in our fate, we will just have to bear it."
It was clear that he was trying to relegate the negative outcome stemming from his
own actions to fate and thereby find some solace. But his had been a conscious choice
and blaming it on fate was not going to save him from paying the price.
The siege continued for days.l.!l. They had closed in on themselves completely, and
all they could do was to throw stones and shoot arrows from inside the fortress to the
outside. One evening Ali disappeared for a while. When it took him long to come
back, the Companions became worried and they went to inform the Messenger of
Allah ofthe situation.
"0 Messenger of Allah! We have not seen Ali for a long time!" they said in a
concerned manner.

--- Sayfa 618 ---
"Do not worry about him, he is seeing to a business that concerns you," the blessed
Messenger answered.
A little while later Ali came. It then became apparent that he had seen a Jew named
Azwak (the one who had managed to pierce our Prophet's tent with his arrow) leave
the castle in the dark of the night with a couple of his friend to attack the Muslims.
And so Ali had sat in ambush to get him. He had managed to kill Azwak and was now
returning safe and sound. The Messenger of Allah listened to Ali recount what had
happened and when he learned the whereabouts of Azwak's friends, he sent Abu
Dujana and Sahl ibn Hunayf after them. They too went and killed the rest of the
plotters that night.
Cutting of the Date Trees
Generally speaking, the Jews of the Banu Nadir were very attached to their worldly
possessions, and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, knew this
to be their weak point. When the siege took longer than expected, he gave the orders
to have the Jews' date trees be cut and their houses burnt so that they may put an end
to their resistance. Normally, the Prophet was against the cutting of trees and
disturbing the environment, even during times of war. But here the intention was
different; the trees and houses were the only driving force that would make the Jews
give up the resistance.
The people who were given the responsibility to cut the trees were Abu Layla al-
Mazini and Abdullah ibn Salam. When they entered some of the best orchards and
started to cut down the trees, loud cries from the fortress were audible. Their aim was
already accomplished. The Jewish women were crying and tearing at their clothes,
throwing themselves on the ground and hurling abuses in all directions.
The Banu Nadir were very surprised. They had not expected such a move from
Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him. But now things had
changed and their prized date groves were being put to the axe. Sallam ibn Mishkam
was one of the people who did not like what he saw and so he ran to Huyayy ibn
Akhtab and started to complain: "0 Huyayy! The ajwa dates are being cut branch by
branch. These are trees that only start to give fruit thirty years after they are planted!"
Huyayy was surprised as well. He would not have believed it had he not seen it with
his own eyes. He sent word to the Messenger of Allah, saying: "0 Muhammad! You
have forbidden destruction on the world; then why are you having these date trees
axed?"

--- Sayfa 619 ---
These words led to a difference of opinion among the Companions. Some believed
that this course of action was wrong and said they should not cut down the trees, and
others believed that this was the only course of action they could take to make the
Jews who loved their possessions give up the resistance. It was not long before
Truthful Gabriel descended and revealed the verse: "Whatever (of their) palm-trees
you may have cut down or left them standing on their roots, it was by Allah's leave
and so that He might disgrace the transgressors" (al-Hashr 59:5).
So, the true nature of the matter was different, and at time when the believer could
not see the matter as a whole, he had to trust the leader. So this was not just an issue of
finding the weakness of the Banu Nadir tribe but it was also a lesson in obedience for
the greater community. They had already started to reap the results, and before long,
they would receive a second message from Huyayy saying: 'We will give you what
you want and we will leave your land!"
But now circumstances had changed and the laws of the new order of the siege
would now be applied. That is why our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,
said: "The conditions we agreed upon are no longer valid, that is why you will leave
with as much as your camels can carry from your belongings except for your
weapons."
Huyayy was taking things slow and was expecting the Messenger of Allah to accept
the terms that had been agreed upon before the siege. Sallam ibn Mishkam, who saw
Huyayy wavering around and was worried that a greater misfortune would befall them
if they took things so slow, said: 'Woe unto you, 0 Huyayy! Accept their terms before
worse things befall you!"
'What could be worse than this?" retorted Huyayy.
"All who are able to hold a sword may be killed, all your possessions may be
confiscated and your families may be taken captive. It is better to lose some of our
possessions now and leave!" said Sallam.
But Huyayy was determined to carry on as he saw fit and for two days he did not
accept the offer. Meanwhile, dispute within the Banu Nadir had grown. Friends like
Yamin ibn Umayr and Abu Said ibn Wahb came together and one told the other: "I
swear by Allah that you also know that Muhammad is the Prophet we have been
waiting for. Come, let us both become Muslims and save both our lives and our
property."
It was the most logical step to take in order to save their lives both in this world and
the Hereafter, and so accepting the offer, that night they went to Medina and became

--- Sayfa 620 ---
Muslims. Even Huyayy could not withstand the pressures of the Banu Nadir whose
situation was going from bad to worse. He finally sent word to the Messenger of Allah
saying that he accepted his offer of taking as much as the camels could carry except
for the weapons and then to leave. This showed that the siege was at an end.
Muhammad ibn Maslama was supervising the Jews' leave. There were those among
them who were still taking it very slow. They were stalling by saying that some
Medinan people owed them money and so they wanted to settle their accounts with
them. Our noble Prophet, who learned of the situation said: "Then come to some
negotiation by reducing the price, and then take all your loans at once and leave."22
Sadness Within, Ostentation Without
Then, with heavy hearts, the Banu Nadir started to leave their land, burning down their
own houses so as not to leave anything behind. They took their families and left. But
from the outside, they did not look at all like people who were exiled from their own
lands; the women had put on their best clothes and adorned themselves with jewelry as
if they were going to a wedding. Finally, they got on their special mounts and left
merrily. It was clear that they did not want to let their enemies know of the sadness
they were feeling inside. As they were passing by a neighborhood which was
primarily Muslim, Abu Rafi Sallam ibn Abi'l-Huqayq lifted the sackcloth on his
camel and said: 'We regard this as the ups and downs of this world. Even though we
leave our palm groves here, we are going to the palm grove of Khaybar," trying to
flaunt their imminent power.
They loaded their possessions on six hundred camels. As their caravans passed, the
sounds of tambourines and drums could be heard throughout Medina. The scene they
had left behind was one to take lessons from; even though they recognized the
Messenger of Allah, although they could see that he had been given the mission to
carry the revelations to the people, they were turning their back to the truth and were
leaving their homes for no good reason. Most of the Banu Nadir Jews, who now
seemed to be leaving Medina in high spirits, went and settled in Khaybar and the
leading men of the Banu Nadir such Huyayy ibn Akhtab, Sallam ibn Abi'l-Huqayq
and Kinana ibn Suwayra would be prime guests of the Khaybar Jews. Although the
Jews had kept up a happy front, the hypocrites who were hiding themselves in Medina
were very sad about this situation.
After they left, the Truthful Gabriel would bring the chapter al-Hashr that spoke of
the double dealings of the Banu Nadir Jews, their attitude towards worldly
possessions, their excessive trust in their fortress, how they had been deceived by the

--- Sayfa 621 ---
promise of the hypocrite, how these people had lived in fear and agony although they
seemed united from the outside, how, thinking they had been acting clever, they had
really been foolish ... In short, the verses detailed how they failed to live a peaceful life
on this world although all they cared about was worldly life itself. Surah Hashr would
thus also come to be known as the Surah the Banu Nadir.
What the Banu Nadir Left Behind
The Banu Nadir, who were reaping what they had sowed, had left behind quite a large
piece of land and on it burned and destroyed houses, along with weapons like swords
and armor. Because these goods had not been won as spoils in combat, the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had declared it to be the property of Allah
and announced that he would dispose of them as he saw fit.lill After things calmed
down and people started to return to Medina, our Prophet called Thabit ibn Qays ibn
Shammas to his side and said: "Call your tribe to me."
Thabit replied: "Do you mean only the Khazraj, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
''No, the whole ofthe Ansar," answered the blessed Messenger.
And so Thabit called the Ansar to the presence of our noble Prophet. The Ansar
were curious as to why they had been called. Before long, the blessed Messenger
started to address the Ansar. As usual he started his words by giving thanks, and spoke
of his gratitude concerning the Ansar's help to the Muhajirun who had come there
leaving behind their homes and all that was inside them. Then he continued with the
following: "If you would like I can divide the property of the Banu Nadir that Allah
has given to me between you and the Muhajirun. But you know that your Muhajirun
brothers don't have any property or houses to live in; they are just dependent on your
help and hospitality. If you like, I can give these to them and they can leave your
houses and start to live on their own properties."
Although the expressions he used were very soft, these words of the Messenger of
Allah worried the generous people of the Ansar. They wondered whether they had
committed negligence in taking care of their Muhajirun brothers and sisters. Before
long, Sa'd ibn Muadh speaking for Aws and Sa'd ibn Ubada speaking for Khazraj
came to the fore and said the following: "0 Messenger of Allah! Divide it among our
Muhajirun brothers and sisters! If you like you can even take from our property and
divide it among them too; but please do not separate them from us, let them continue
to live with us."
Before he could even complete what he was saying, echoes of "Yes, we think the

--- Sayfa 622 ---
same, we too accept this suggestion 0 Messenger of Allah" started to be heard from
among the Ansar.
This was a very moving moment indeed; it showed that very strong social bonds
had been formed and that they had a strong society that would take them to the future.
This was an attitude that would please Allah and His Messenger. The people who
were up front when it came to rendering service were receding to the very back when
it came to receiving any compensation for their efforts. Was this not the very attitude
that Allah and His Messenger expected from Muslims?
This display of generosity and complacency would also move the heavens and in
the message brought by the Truthful Gabriel, Allah would use the following
expressions for them:
Those who, before their coming, had their abode (in Medina), preparing it
as a home for Islam and faith, love those who emigrate to them for
Allah's sake, and in their hearts do not begrudge what they have been
given, and (indeed) they prefer them over themselves, even though
poverty be their own lot. (They too have a share in such gains of war.)
Whoever is guarded against the avarice of his own soul-those are the
ones who are truly prosperous. (al-Hashr 59:9)
Thus tongues had expressed what was already in the hearts; what had happened had
pleased Allah and the Messenger of Allah was happy as well. He opened his hands
and prayed: "Dear Lord! Have mercy on the Ansar and their children."
Then, the spoils of what was left from the Banu Nadir, (which was called ''fay"
because they had been received without warfare) were distributed among the
Muhajirun. As an exception, only Sahl ibn Hunayf and Abu Dujana were given
portions from the Ansar because they had very meager means. The famous sword of
Abi'l-Huqayq was given to Sa'd ibn Muadh.
The Second Badr
When leaving Uhud, Abu Sufyan had said: "The new meeting time and place for us
will be the beginning of the next year, at Badr; we will meet there and battle it out."
To his challenge the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had told
Umar to reply: "It will happen if Allah wills it to happen," and so the Messenger's
message was carried over to Abu Sufyan.
To give ones word meant giving surety and what had been spoken about had to be
put into practice when the appointed time came. Not keeping one's word meant a great

--- Sayfa 623 ---
weakness. Especially in such a tense environment it would have been impossible to
reject a second round for a battle such as Uhud. Now the time had come close and our
noble Prophet had started to prepare his Companions for the war: they were going to
go to Badr once again.
On the other hand, Abu Sufyan was feeling the weight of his challenge, even though
it had been his idea at the start, and he was now trying to find an excuse in order not to
go to battle. Because he could not say "Let us not go", he seemed on the outside eager
to go to Badr, but inside he was making plans to reverse the course of events. He
wanted to spread the news that a great army had been prepared in Mecca with the help
of surrounding tribes, and hoped that our Prophet and the Muslims would give up the
idea of war-he wanted to make it seem like it had been the Muslims who did not dare
go to war because they had feared him, not the other way around. Meanwhile, Mecca
was suffering from drought and going to war in those circumstances meant more harm
than good.
Nuaym ibn Masud had come to Mecca and brought news to Abu Sufyan and his
friends concerning the army in Medina. Abu Sufyan had seen his arrival as an
opportunity and promised him twenty camels should he be able to convince the
Muslims not to go to war, saying he would give the camels to the supervision of
Suhayl ibn Amr.
He gave a very good camel to him as some sort of down payment, asking him to go
to Medina and spread the news of the "great" army that he had gathered together. Abu
Sufyan was so sure of what Nuaym would accomplish that he went to the Quraysh and
addressed them thus: "We have sent Nuaym ibn Masud in order to prevent the
Companions of Muhammad from leaving for Badr, he will do all in his power. But let
us set off on our way anyway, we can stop after we have walked one or two nights and
then we will return. Then it will appear that it was not us but them who turned back on
their word, and things will be in our favor. If despite everything they should come, we
can tell them that this is a year of drought and we can postpone the battle to a more
fruitful year."
''You are well advised," they said to Abu Sufyan.
It was clear that the plan was accepted by everybody for this reaction of the
Quraysh was clear proof of support.
On the other hand, Nuaym ibn Masud who had returned to Medina on the camel
that he was given in advance, started to spread the news that Abu Sufyan had already
gathered a great army and had set off for Badr. The Jews and the hypocrites who heard

--- Sayfa 624 ---
this were very happy indeed: "Muhammad will not be able to escape the clutches of
this army!" they were saying, trying to break their morale to such an extent that their
attitude had alarmed the Messenger of Allah.
Abu Bakr and Umar who came to his presence said: "0 Messenger of Allah! There
is no doubt that Allah will support His clear religion and the followers of this religion
will be victorious, and He will make His Messenger glorious. We have a meeting with
the Quraysh and we do not want to go back on our word. They will consider it as
cowardice. You should go to the place of the appointment and I swear there will be
good in this."
This was a discussion that made the blessed Messenger happy and he said the
following: "I swear by He who holds my life in His hands, even if no one should come
with me, I will go to the appointed place!" And then our Prophet, peace and blessings
be upon him, left Medina with a force of one thousand five hundred men. He had left
Abdullah ibn Rawaha in Medina as deputy. There were ten horses in the army. Ali
was carrying the standard.
Reluctantly, Abu Sufyan had also set off on the road. He had an army of two
thousand with him. They additionally had fifty cavalrymen with them. They were
moving but with every step they took, they were filled with fear. Even if there was a
consensus to return, such a crowd made a difference, and he would not be able to deal
with dissent should there be one. That is why when they came to the place called Marr
az-Zahran and camped where the water of Majanna was, he was trying to find ways to
tum the army back somehow.
He felt it would be suicide to go into a confrontation with the Muslims, the result of
which he could clearly see. Scenes from Badr and Uhud were still playing vividly in
his mind. When the stopover was at an end and the army stood up to go, he addressed
them: "0 people of Quraysh! Return! Do you not see that we are suffering from
draught this year? Let us return now and fight in a year when our pastures are green
and our animals have enough to eat and can give us plenty of milk. How can we fight
in this time of famine! I am returning, return with me!"
This was the call that the Meccan army was waiting for and there was no objection
from anyone, so they returned to Mecca. Because they ate a particular type of soup
called sawiq on this short journey, this army that returned half way was called jaysh
al-sawiq, or the army of sawiq.
The situation in Medina was very different. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, who had set off on the road with his Companions had come to

--- Sayfa 625 ---
Badr with the first appearance of the moon of Dhu al-Qadah.
A fair had been set up in Badr like in all other years and big groups of people had
come with their wares to do business there. The Meccan army, however, had not
come. Still, our Prophet waited for them there for eight days.§.!
Most of the fair was made up of our Prophet's Companions. At one point Mahshi
ibn Amr, who had made an agreement with our Prophet in the battle ofWaddan, came
near our noble Prophet, and was looking very surprised: "0 Muhammad," he said.
"Did you come to these wells in order to meet the Quraysh. As far as we had been told
you were all dead and done for! But I see that most of this fair is made up of your
people!"
It was clear that there was continuous propaganda in the Hijaz. Those who were not
courageous enough to come to the field of battle were conducting some kind of
psychological warfare. Mahshi's reaction showed that he too had been subjected to
such disinformation. But now was the time to don the same weapons as the enemy and
so our noble Prophet said to them: 'Well, if you like we can annul the treaty between
I"
us.
This was a response that Mahshi had not been expecting. He was quite
flabbergasted; how could these people who were supposed to have been "finished" be
in such good condition that they had even made Abu Sufyan step back? They were far
from "finished"; on the contrary, they seemed to gain strength as their caravan made
way. Time had revealed the truth and exposed the lies. It would have been
meaningless to challenge them: ''No, we have no such intention! On the contrary; we
will not even think of attacking you, we will stay true to our agreement and never
break it," said Mahshi.
Mahshi's response showed how important it had been for the Messenger and his
Companions to come to Badr. They had now learned about the plots that were being
hatched against them, and the other side was now informed about their condition,
enough to make them afraid of the Muslim army. People would believe what they saw
rather than what they heard and in Badr the message had both been given to the eyes
and the ears.
Now the task was to return to Medina safe and sound, and so the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, left Badr with his Companions and
made for Medina.
Other Developments at That Period

--- Sayfa 626 ---
Meanwhile the field of communicating the message was getting greater and the
Muslims were reaching out to new people. They were learning languages when
necessary, and when an envoy was to be sent, the Companions were taking on the
responsibility as they did not trust the translations that other people would make. Zayd
ibn Thabit learned Hebrew in a very short time, and showed the other Muslims how it
was possible to make things happen when one wanted to.
There were also births and deaths; our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him,
and the Companions had rejoiced with the birth of Husayn, the son of Ali and Fatima.
Abdullah, the son of our mother Ruqayyah who had married Uthman, had died, along
with our mother Umm Salama's husband Abu Salama. The practice of praying two
cycles instead of four during long journeys also started in this period. It was also in
this period that the judgments concerning adultery and stoning were discussed with the
Jews. The judgments concerning sharing land and ''fay" were also put in place in this
period.
Our Noble Prophet's Moral Education and
the Logic of the Ansar
A young man named Julaybib came to our noble Prophet: "0 Messenger of Allah," he
mumbled. He looked ashamed, it was clear from his attitude that he was under the
pressure of his strong desires and feelings. He wanted to say something but he could
not gather up the courage to say it. When he was greeted by the affectionate looks of
the Messenger of mercy, he collected himself and said to him with his face blushing
pink: 'Will you give me permission to engage in adultery?"
Those who heard him charged towards him at once and started to pressure him:
"Look at what he wants to do! This is unthinkable" and so they hurled abuses at him
and the atmosphere got very tense.
It was again the Messenger of Allah who calmed them down: "Bring him to me," he
said, and so young Julaybib approached our noble Prophet. The blessed Messenger
stroked the head of the young man and sat him by his side. He asked: "My dear
Julaybib! Would you want your mother to be subjected to such behavior?"
This was a question that brought the young man to his senses. He jumped up and
said: "Let Allah the Almighty make me perish before you; I swear, 0 Messenger of
Allah, I would not want my mother to be subjected to such behavior."
This was the answer that the Messenger of Allah was expecting to receive, so he
asked again: "And just the same, other people would not want their mothers to be
treated so by other men." The blessed Messenger asked once more: "And would you

--- Sayfa 627 ---
want your daughter to be subjected to such behavior?"
This was a question that Julaybib did not expect and was utterly ashamed: "Let me
perish for your path, I swear, no 0 Messenger of Allah," was all he could say.
The blessed Messenger was not letting him go out of his affectionate gaze for even
a second and continued: "Nobody would want their daughters to be treated that way
either, 0 Julaybib."
He asked again: 'Would you want your sister to be treated in such a way?"
Each question the blessed Messenger asked was piercing the young man's heart. He
was regretting having asked his question: "Let me perish for you 0 Messenger of
Allah, I would not like that either."
Our noble Prophet repeated the same thing: "Nobody would like their sisters to be
subjected to that!"
The questions continued.
'Would you like your paternal aunt to be subjected to such behavior?"
It was clear that our Prophet was not going to let the young man go before he had
made sure that the young man's heart and mind enlightened on this matter, and with
the young man, he was educating the whole of the Ummah. Julaybib gave the same
reaction: "Let me perish on your way, I would not want like it 0 Messenger of Allah."
The Messenger of Allah's judgment was the same: "And likewise, other people
would not want their aunt to commit such a sin."
Now was the last question: "And what would you say to your maternal aunt to be
part to such a sin?"
Julaybib was almost writhing with shame, tempests in his heart! Coming to our
noble Prophet with his trouble had been the right decision; his shame was now slowly
turning into a peace of mind. He looked at our Prophet's radiant face and said: ''No, 0
Messenger of Allah! Let me perish on your way, how can I want such a thing?"
Our beloved Prophet would be the last to speak: "And so no one would want their
maternal aunts to be party to such a sin." The Messenger of Allah would draw
Julaybib closer to himself, place his hands on his shoulders and pray for him in the
following way: "Dear Lord! Forgive his sins! Make his heart pure and his chastity
safe."
Julaybib, who had come so close to the Prophet and received his special prayer,
would from then on be one of the chastest men of Medina.
But our Prophet, the Sultan of Messengers, would take another step and would go to

--- Sayfa 628 ---
one of the Ansar on behalf of Julaybib and say: "I ask for the hand of your daughter in
marriage."
The member of the Ansar was ecstatic, the blessed Messenger had come all the way
to his house to ask for the hand of his daughter. He said at once: "Of course, 0
Messenger of Allah."
The Messenger of mercy had to correct the misunderstanding and so turned to the
Ansar and said: "I do not ask for it for myself." This time the Ansar asked: "Then who
do you ask for, 0 Messenger of Allah."
Our noble Prophet answered: "For Julaybib."
The member of the Ansar knew Julaybib. He did not come from a noble family and
he had been known for his unorthodox behavior to that day. That is why the Ansar
hesitated for a moment and said: "Let me confer with her mother, 0 Messenger of
Allah," and asked for leave.
The Ansar approached his wife and said: "The noble Messenger is asking for the
hand of your daughter."
The wife was just as happy to hear such news.
'What a great honor! Of course." she said.
Everything was fine till that moment, but then the husband said: "But he does not
ask for himself, he asks for Julaybib," the atmosphere changed. The woman answered
agitated: "What? Julaybib? Is that what the blessed Messenger could come up with?
But we have not given her even to such and such person! No! I swear by Allah that
you cannot marry her to Julaybib."
This was the reaction that the Ansar was expecting and so he got up to go and give
our noble Prophet the news. Just as he was about to get out of the house, they heard a
voice from inside: 'Who is asking for my hand in marriage?"
This was none other than the girl whose hand the blessed Messenger had asked for
Julaybib.
They told her the situation. But her stance was completely different and she asked
them: "So the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, asks for
something from you and you refuse?"
This was a question that made them think hard, but she did not stop there and read
them the verse: "When Allah and His Messenger have decreed a matter, it is not for a
believing man and a believing woman to have an option insofar as they themselves are
concerned. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger has evidently gone astray"
(al-Ahzab 33:36) and then she added: "If the Messenger of Allah has seen it fit, you

--- Sayfa 629 ---
should say yes to this marriage; because Allah the Almighty will not let me perish."
Both parents were now feeling sorry they had not considered this fine point before:
"You are right," they said. Their own daughter was showing them the right way.
The Ansar who changed his mind went out to give the news to the blessed
Messenger and said: 'We are in agreement with you on the issue that you have seen
fit; she is yours, you can marry her to whomever you will."
Our noble Prophet replied: "I am content with this decision" and then he would
himself marry off Julaybib.
He prayed for the new couple: "Dear Lord! Let good graces shower upon them and
let their daily keep be abundant."
And now Julaybib was the chastest man ofMedina!g
Dumat Al-Jandal
A little time had passed since the second Badr and now the Muslims received news
from the direction of Damascus, at a place called Dumat Al-Jandal.
Some tribes had come together and they were forming units to prepare an attack on
Medina. This was another movement against Islam, threatening Medina and its people.
They were also attacking caravans that passed near them, confiscating their goods and
harassing the travelers.
Good deeds were being obstructed in one way or another by the disbelievers; it was
as if they were racing each other trying to prevent good deeds from happening around
them. But the truth was that Islam was offering a base for people to live a humane life
and offering ways to get rid of all things that threatened peace and harmony in society.
Certain problems had to be dealt with today, for if they were not solved now they
would cause greater problems in the future. That is why they had to go Dumat Al-
Jandal now and solve the problem where it occurred.
Dumat Al-Jandal was a place near the lands of the Romans, one of the two great
empires of the time. That is why some people came to the Messenger of Allah and told
him that such a journey may lead to great danger by provoking the Emperor of the
Romans.
But instating peace and order was more important than anything else. That is why
our noble Prophet left Siba ibn Urfuta in Medina as deputy and left Medina with the
force of one thousand men. Because of the delicacy of the situation, our Prophet had
taken a guide from the sons of Uzra named Mazkur with him, for he knew about all
the narrow passageways and secret routes to Dumat Al-Jandal. They were moving by

--- Sayfa 630 ---
night and resting by day. Then, before anyone had noticed, the thousand-strong army
reached their destination. Mazkur said: "0 Messenger of Allah! This is where their
animals graze; you wait here and let me check the surrounding area," and thus asked
for permission to leave. Our noble Prophet replied: "Okay, I'll wait."
Mazkur then inspected the area by following the droppings of the camels and the
sheep. According to the dropping patterns, these people who had come together to plot
in the name of evil were now moving towards the west. Mazkur came and reported the
situation to Messenger of Allah, upon which our Prophet started to make his way
towards where they were. The group of bandits started to scatter around Dumat Al-
Jandal like mice when they saw the thousand-strong army approach them. They
disappeared; even though the army went searching deep into the countryside, they
could find no trace of the enemy.
The Messenger of Allah stayed in Dumat Al-Jandal for a couple of days; he was
sending units around, trying to establish security in the area. The units would return
with the camel herds that the bandits had left, but there was no trace of the men.
Only Muhammad ibn Maslama had come upon a man in the direction that he had
gone, and catching him, had brought him to the presence of the Prophet.
The blessed Messenger asked the man where his friends had gone and the man
replied: "When they found out that you had come and confiscated their camels, they
all fled."
The man seemed like an upright person by nature and our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him, spoke to him about the beauties of faith and invited him to
Islam. The man accepted this invitation and became a Muslim.
Thus, the weight of Islam had been felt and the Muslims had shown, now also in the
region of Damascus, that they would not be intimidated by a group of bandits that had
taken arms against them.
The Muslims were being informed about possible attacks against them even at the
early stages of planning, and they were swift in dealing with the situations even before
they occurred. This aroused great fear in some tribes who had made similar plots.
Now that the aim had been accomplished it was time to return and our noble
Prophet gave the order to his army to return back to Medina.
Our noble Prophet was making use of every moment and taking hold of every
opportunity; for instance, as they were returning home, he made a pact with Uyayna
ibn Hisn al-Fazari. This meant that now a sphere of security had been achieved in the
region, and this was also a bulwark against possible threats that may come from

--- Sayfa 631 ---
outside. The region that Uyayna lived in was facing famine and our Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him, allowed them to come all the way near Medina to graze
their animals; this would also enable this tribe to be in closer contact with Islam.
During that period, sitting down and signing a treaty with people meant that those
people would be introduced to Islam at the same time, facilitating their entry into the
religion.
the Banu Mustaliq
Another piece of news came from where the sons of Mustaqi were. The leader of the
Banu Mustaliq, Harith ibn Abi Dirar, had prepared an army with neighboring tribes
and had plans to attack Medina. The Muslims first had to verify that this news was
correct and so the Messenger of Allah appointed Burayda ibn Husayb from among his
Companions to check it out. Burayda, who set on the road with the aim of gathering
intelligence, came to the said place to see that a great crowd had indeed been formed.
They seemed proud and sure of themselves. When they saw him approach, they asked:
"Who are you?"
Despite the pride, they were now worried. Burayda said: "I am one of you."
When Burayda was appointed for this job, he had asked our noble Prophet
permission to "bend" words when need be, and the blessed Messenger had given him
permission. Then he continued with the following: 'When I heard that you came
together to go after that man, I came to join you. If you are sincere in your intention, I
will go to my own tribe and gather those who will obey me, and then we will attack
him together and finish him off."
They felt relieved. He was a man they did not know but that was not important. For
he took the same man to be the enemy! That is why Harith ibn Abi Dirar said: "That is
why we have gathered here together; go to your tribe and be quick!"
This decided matters; the news that had reached the blessed Messenger had been
correct. These men truly had come together to attack Medina and were seriously
preparing for war. But Burayda still acted cautiously and said: "I am leaving now;
before long I will come back with a big group of people from my own tribe."
They were overjoyed with this new development; here was a man who had come of
his own volition to promise more men for the war! Meanwhile, Burayda had already
started to make his way for Medina and was going to take the news of a great army
being prepared against the Muslims. As soon as the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, received the news, he ordered for preparations so that they may

--- Sayfa 632 ---
meet this army prepared.
It was the sixth year after the Hijra and the month of Shahan. Our noble Prophet
advanced towards the sons of Mustaliq with his Companions, thirty of them
cavalrymen. He had left Zayd ibn Haritha as deputy in Medina.§l
The fact that the Muslim army was not travelling a long way, and considering the
spoils to be received after the encounter, the cunning hypocrites joined the army as
well, whereas normally, they had stayed behind as in previous battles. They took a
break when they came to the place called Halaiq. There, a man from the sons of
Abdulqays approached them. The blessed Messenger asked him: "Where is your
tribe?"
"In Rawha," he replied.
Our noble Prophet asked again: "Where are you going?"
The man replied: "I do not want anything else but to come to you and submit in
faith to you, to bear witness that what you have brought is true and to fight against the
enemy with you."
The Messenger of Allah was very happy; another heart had met his Lord, another
soul had entered the path of becoming a subject to Allah. Our noble Prophet spoke the
following words in gratitude: "Thanks be to Allah who has honored you with Islam."
The man asked: "Which act earns the contentment of Allah more?"
With this question, the wise and eager man was implying that entering Islam had to
be something more than proclaiming the oneness of Allah and honoring his
Messenger. He wanted to know what the first thing was, after bearing witness, which
would make Allah very happy.
"The salah that you pray in time," responded our noble Prophet.
So now this new Muslim knew that the most important thing after faith was
performing the Prayers, and that a believer, having chosen faith, had to be careful with
his Prayers, had to perform them on time, and in a sincere manner.
Later, they came upon a man who was spying for the enemy and the Companions
caught him and brought him to the presence of our noble Prophet. The blessed
Messenger asked the man about the whereabouts of the enemy forces and what kind of
weapons they had; however, he was not able to get an answer from the spy. Our
beloved Prophet wanted this man to become a Muslim as well; that is why he told him
about Islam and asked him to accept and become a subject to Allah. But the man had
proven to be stubborn and he was not taking this chance which had been presented to
him.

--- Sayfa 633 ---
They then came to the place called Muraysi and the enemy forces that had come
together to attack Medina learned that the blessed Messenger was advancing towards
them. They were in great panic. The man they had sent out as a sentry had been
arrested as well! This was no joke; a big army was approaching them and these tribes
that had not considered the real possibility of war started to disperse and left Harith
alone with his own men!
The Messenger of Allah stayed at Muraysi and started preparations for battle.
Before long, the Muslim army had taken its position in ranks and was waiting for the
order. The standard ofthe Muhajirun was carried by Abu Bakr,~ and that of the Ansar
was carried by Sa'd ibn Ubada.
As usual, our noble Prophet would make it clear that he had not been the one who
sought this war and before attacking them, he would try to speak to the enemy army.
He had chosen Umar for this job. The valley of Muraysi started to echo with Umar's
deep voice: "Come, say "La ilaha illallah" so that your property and lives may be
protected!"
The echo of the voice hit the mountains and the enemy responded by showering
arrows on our noble Prophet and his Companions. The Muslims started to shoot
arrows back. Harith's intentions were clear; war was inescapable. The code words of
that day was: "Ya Mansur! Amit!"
That day, as witnessed by our mother Juwayriya, the enemy soldiers saw the army
of Islam to be greater than they really were, and the Muslims saw the enemy to be
fewer than they really were. This was clearly observed in the way the battle was
going; men that people had not seen before and would not see after had come on their
horses and were helping the Muslims.
The shooting of arrows from both sides continued for a while and then the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, ordered his Companions to
attack the enemy on foot. It was as if the army oflslam had become one body and was
walking towards the Banu Mustaliq together. What could stand up to such a stance?
Before long, the Banu Mustaliq was rendered incapacitated; the fighters had been
taken captive and their possessions had been confiscated. Ten people died on the side
of the enemy, only one was lost among the Companions, Hisham ibn Subaba, and that
was by mistake. Our noble Prophet ordered that his blood money be paid and gave the
money to Hisham's brother Mikyas ibn Subaba.lll
The captives consisted of two hundred families. Burayda ibn Husayb had been
appointed supervisor for the captives; Shukran, the freed slave of our Prophet, had

--- Sayfa 634 ---
been appointed to oversee the spoils of war including the camels, sheep and other
livestock. The job of distributing the spoils was given to Mahmiya ibn Jaz.
When the distribution had been made, some of the wares that had been left had been
sold to the bidders. Juwayriya hint Harith, the daughter of Harith ibn Abi Dirar, the
leader of the enemy army,~ was given to Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas and his
cousin, and she had made a deal with them to be set free for 9 okka (400 dirhams) of
gold.lE
This war and captivity was different from other wars and captivities. The Muslim
army could have taken this opportunity to kill everyone but they had chosen to take
people captive, and they were clothing them and giving them from their own food.
When the daughter of Juwayriya realized the difference in the "enemy" and found out
about the reason behind such behavior, she remembered the dream she had had three
days ago, said "La ilaha illallah, Muhammadu 'r-Rasulullah" and became a Muslim.
She had dreamed that a moon had been born in Medina and had come all the way to
her. She had been under the influence of that dream for days but did not have the
courage to share it with anyone else. Now she was hoping that the dream would come
true and she watched the developments unfold with curiosity.
Juwayriya, who became Muslim against her father's wishes, gathered up her
courage and went to the presence of the Messenger of Allah. She said: "0 Messenger
of Allah! I am a Muslim woman who bears witness that there is no deity but Allah and
that you are His Messenger. I am the daughter of Harith, the leader of this people; I
am Juwayriya hint Harith ibn Abi Dirar. You must know what has become of us! I
have been given to Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas and his cousin. But Thabit bought
me by giving away some of his date groves in Medina. And then we made an
agreement with him for my release for an amount that I will not be able to pay. He did
not force me to agree, I agreed off my own accord. Because I believed you would help
me on this; help me 0 Messenger of Allah, help me to gain my freedom."
Our noble Prophet listened to Juwayriya carefully and then said: 'Would you like
me to offer you something that is even better than that?"
She was surprised and asked: "And what could that be, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I will pay for your
release and then marry you."
Could there be a better fortune than that? The doors that led to the palaces of
happiness in this world and the next had been opened for someone who had just lost
everything she had had, including her freedom! This lucky woman had just been

--- Sayfa 635 ---
invited to the most beautiful of palaces without having to pay anything! Yes, her
dream was coming true. Juwayriya had a heart that was filled with faith, a heart that
would not miss out on such an opportunity: "Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah, I accept,"
she said.
Since his offer had been accepted, it was now time to speak to Thabit ibn Qays.
Word was sent out to him and before long, he came to the Prophet's presence. Our
noble Prophet told him that he wanted to pay the release price for Juwayriya and then
to marry her.
Thabit was very happy indeed. He probably understood what the Messenger's
intentions were. Juwayriya was the daughter of Harith, the leader of the Banu
Mustaliq, and she would be a good match for our noble Prophet: "Let my mother and
father perish in your way 0 Messenger of Allah! She is yours for no price." But the
blessed Messenger would still pay her price, free Juwayriya and marry her.
The news of the marriage of our Prophet was soon heard among the Companions.
One Companion who heard about it looked at the captive that had been in his lot and
said: "He is the relative of the Messenger of Allah."
At a time when they least expected it, the Banu Mustaliq had become relatives of
our noble Prophet. How could they hold the relatives of the blessed Messenger
captive?
One by one, all the captives were released-such generosity had never been seen
before in history. That day, because of this newly-formed family bond, one hundred
families were set free and they had thus benefited from this blessed union. When her
uncle's daughter came to tell Juwayriya what had happened, she too thanked the Lord
who had set her tribe free through her.l!!l.
The rest of the captives gained their freedom as well when their relatives paid their
price and thus all the captives from the Banu Mustaliq tribe were set free.
TheW ell of Muraysi
While on the one hand captives were being set free, on the other hand a group of
Companions had gone to the well of Muraysi to bring some water. Muraysi was a
shallow well and the ropes of Sinan ibn Wabar from the Ansar and Jahjah ibn Masud
from the Muhajirun got tangled together as they lowered their buckets. Jahjah could
not control himself and hit his friend, and Sinan whose head had been injured from the
blow cried out: "0 people ofthe Ansar, come to my aid!"
Jahjah, who saw that things were getting out of control, called out to the Muhajirun

--- Sayfa 636 ---
in the same manner asking his friends to come to his help too.
The Ansar and the Muhajirun, who thought that something very important had
happened, came to where the cries were coming from. The atmosphere was getting
tense and a very small spark was about to set alight to the whole situation. Swords had
even been drawn. It was as if after all that had been experienced, people had gone
back to their old habits and they were on the brink of a war that called to mind the
long wars in the period of ignorance that had gone on for centuries.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who heard of the event
came at once to the well. He was angry: 'What is the meaning of this call which is a
remnant ofthe times of ignorance?"
When he listened to what they told him, he saw that a small mistake was about to
open the doors to great chaos. Maybe Allah had wanted to strengthen their brotherly
bonds while our noble Prophet was still with them. It was when such incidents
occurred that our noble Prophet would be able to show them how to treat such
incidents when arising in the future.
He called out to them: "Stop acting like this! Because this is an old and corrupt call.
On the contrary, help your brother though he may have trespassed, or been trespassed
against! If your brother has trespassed, then help him abandon that trespass, and if he
has been trespassed against, then be his helper."
It was clear from this that both sides needed help. That is why the Ansar and the
Muhajirun both spoke to their respective member. It was not right to over-react
according to a few moments of anger while they had the Messenger of Allah in person
among them. Religion was made up of good counsel and now was the time for this
good counsel.
The meetings had yielded a positive result and both Sinan and Jahjah were now
sorry for what they had done. Sinan, the Ansar who had sustained the head injury, had
given up his rights and said that he forgave his friend Jahjah. All had been forgiven.
On the one hand while these were happening at the Muraysi well, on the other hand
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul had sat down together with ten of his friends and was
assessing the situation. Zayd ibn Arqam, who was at the time quite young, was among
them as well. Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul was fuming with anger and was coming
out with all the thoughts he had hidden so far, he said: "I have never seen such a thing.
I knew that these would happen to us at some point! But my tribe overrode me; they
should have made me king! Do you not see? Now they lord it over us in our own land,
scorn and insult us. I swear our situation with the Quraysh is like feeding the crow so

--- Sayfa 637 ---
that it may come and take our eyes out!~ Till I had heard Jahjah's call I had given up
all hope that there was going to be such a stance against them, that I would die before
hearing it. But I am sorry to say I am still alive and yet I have no power to answer that
call. It is also true that who is greater and who deserves more respect will be made
clear when we get back to Medina."
Having said these he turned to his friends and called out to them: "You have caused
this yourselves! You accepted them into your city and they came and settled in your
land. You gave them from your possessions and now they have the same means as
you! I swear if you had not received them with such open arms they would not have
been here but elsewhere. But see now, they do not agree to what you do and even
make you the target of their arrows. But the truth is you fought for them and your
children were left fatherless because of them! They grew in number while you
diminished!"
Ibn Salul had found his surroundings favorable for his discourse and so was
exploiting the situation. Zayd ibn Arqam, who heard these words of his, ran to the
presence of our Prophet and told him one by one what he heard; the blessed
Messenger was not happy with what he heard, his face changed color. Maybe he
feared that this wound that was being opened would be infected before he could do
anything about it. He did not want another conflict to take place among his
Companions. First he said to Zayd: "0 young boy! Could it be that you misheard him
because you were angry with him?"
Zayd was sure of himself: ''No, 0 Messenger of Allah! I swear I heard exactly these
from him."
The blessed Messenger turned to Zayd once again: "Could it not be that you have
misheard him?"
"I swear no, 0 Messenger of Allah," he said.
This time our noble Prophet asked: "Maybe it was not him but someone else who
said it, maybe you mistook him?"
Zayd was sure of what he had heard and said: "I swear no, 0 Messenger of Allah."
The Companions who heard of what Zayd ibn Arqam had said and saw how much
this had saddened the Messenger of Allah wanted to intervene. Especially the Ansar
were incensed, exclaiming: "How can you speak against the leader of your tribe and
how can you attribute words to him that he has not spoken? Thus you both injure us,
and disregard all respect for bonds of kinship!"
Zayd, who was unjustly being censured, said: "I swear I heard all of this from him,"

--- Sayfa 638 ---
trying to defend himself. He also said the following to make them believe him: "I
swear that there is no man I love more than Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul among the
Khazraj. But should I have heard these words even from my father, I would not have
hesitated to come and tell them to our noble Prophet. I hope that Allah the Almighty
will soon send a verse that will verify what I say to His Messenger."
The Attempts of the Ansar
A group from the Ansar who heard what Zayd ibn Arqam said went at once to
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul. Among them was Aws ibn Hawli who called out: "0
Abu Hubab. If you have really said all these things, then do not deny it. Just go to the
Messenger of Allah and ask for forgiveness! But if revelation comes, then your lie will
be exposed! If you haven't said these then go to him and ask for forgiveness and swear
that you haven't said any of it!"
Aws had not finished his words when Ibn Salul stood up and said: "I swear by the
Great Allah that I have not said these," and then walked over to our noble Prophet.
He was now going to try to make good his mistake and soften the atmosphere.
When he saw him coming, our noble Prophet was quick to react and said: "0 Ibn
Ubayy! If these words belong to you, ask for forgiveness."
But he had now taken an irretrievable step, and swearing in the Name of Allah, Ibn
Salul said: "I did not say what Zayd claims I have said, I did not even mention such a
topic."
Our noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, did not act harshly even under
these circumstances. One of our Prophet's Companions who was by him at the time
said the following words which eased Ibn Salul's mind: "Maybe the boy had been
mistaken and has not retained what the man has said correctly."
Despite all that had happened, the noble Messenger was treating people with
affection, and even though he was aware that they were trying to deceive him, he did
not accuse them for it.
Umar's Offer and Setting off on the Road
Umar was furious at what he heard. He simply could not accept such behavior. It was
obvious that there were something shady going on and this hurt people such as Umar.
People who had overstepped their boundaries had to be made aware of these
boundaries and they should not be given the opportunity to spread their ill will to
society. He grabbed his sword and came to the Messenger of Allah. At the time our

--- Sayfa 639 ---
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, was sitting under the shade of a tree and
was having his back massaged. This was a scene Umar had not seen before. And so he
asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! Do you have pains in your back?"
''Yesterday evening the camel threw me off its back," the blessed Messenger said.
"0 Messenger of Allah," Umar started. "Give me permission to get rid of this Ibn
Ubayy!"
'Will you really do that?" asked our noble Prophet.
''Yes," said Umar. "I swear by He who has sent you with truth that I will do it."
The blessed Messenger knew very well what he could or could not do. Had there
been a slight inclination in our beloved Prophet towards that decision Umar would
have gone and killed the man instantly. But this was not a matter that could be
resolved through the sword. There were many people who considered Ibn Ubayy their
leader and followed him. They all remembered the day that they had left Uhud. These
men, whatever they may be plotting behind closed doors, were saying that they were
Muslims and they were praying right behind the Messenger of Allah. Then it was
crucial that they abstained from a mode of action that could affect others as well.
That is why our noble Prophet said to Umar: "Then I see that in Yathrib, should I
give the word, there are many who will kill him!"
Umar, who was really out to get Ibn Ubayy, said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Why
don't you then order Abbad ibn Bishr_Q to take his head?"
The Messenger of mercy did not like this idea, for he was a Prophet who had been
sent not to punish but to give new life to people when they went astray. That is why he
turned to Umar and said: "No, then people will start gossiping and saying that
Muhammad is killing his friends."
The religion brought by our Prophet advised balance and it was clear that the
Messenger of Allah was practicing moderation on dealing with Ibn Ubayy.
And so Umar had to take a step back, but it was too late, people were already
talking about what Ibn Ubayy had said. They had to find a solution to this.
"Then why don't you tell people to get on the road," asked Umar.
Our noble Prophet, who had been rejecting all the suggestions till that point, said:
"All right, that can be done."
With that, the deep voice of Umar started to echo at the head of the Muraysi well.
This sudden outburst of Umar made the Companions hesitate for a moment because it
was not the habit of the blessed Messenger to start on a journey in the middle of the

--- Sayfa 640 ---
day when the sun was so high. Before long, they could all see our noble Prophet
mounted on his camel Qaswa; it was clear that there was going to be a journey ...
The leader of the Aws, Sa'd ibn Ubada approached the blessed Messenger,2l greeted
him and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! You set off at such as strange time today! You
have never set off at this time before, what is the reason for this?"
Our noble Prophet turned to him and said: "I believe what your friend has said has
not reached you."
Indeed, Sa'd really had not heard about it: "Which friend, 0 Messenger of Allah?"
he asked.
"Ibn Ubayy," answered the Messenger of Allah. "He believes that when he returns
to Medina, those who are held in favor will displace those who are not held in favor."
Sa' d was a leader who understood the situation well, and said with his sound
perception of events: "0 Messenger of Allah! You will displace him if you want to!
Because it is you who is in favor and he who is in need of favor! Glory is with Allah,
His Messengers and the believers. But treat him kindly! Because when Allah brought
you here, his tribe was getting ready to declare him leader with a crown and a gown
decorated with pearls and gems. All the gems on his crown had been put in place
except for one piece that was held by a Jew called Yusha who refused to give it to
him. He was aware that Ibn Ubayy wanted that piece badly for his own glory and so
Yusha was asking for a very high price. At this very moment Allah the Almighty sent
you and he very probably thinks that you have stolen what was supposed to be his."
The Sensitivity of Abdullah
Ubayy's son Abdullah,~ who heard of what Umar had come to say, came to the
presence of the Messenger of Allah. It was clear that he was very sad indeed. He had
been deeply saddened by his father's arrogance but there was nothing he could do
about it. He had become quite pale in the face. He said, ashamedly: "0 Messenger of
Allah!" His demeanor showed that he had made a very important decision. He first
gulped down his words and then gathered himself. Finally, he uttered the following
words that could freeze a man's blood: "If you plan to kill my father because of what
he has said, then leave that business to me. I swear I can bring him to me before you
can even stand up from where you are! Khazraj knows that there is no son better than
me in service to his parents; I have been preparing their food since such and such time,
and it is also me who serves them their drinks! What I fear is that if you order
someone else to kill him, I would not be able to bear to see the murderer of my father

--- Sayfa 641 ---
walk among us, and I am sure I will kill that man and then go to Hell! But your
forgiveness is greater and more valuable!"
To his suggestion our noble Prophet said: "0 Abdullah! I do not wish to kill your
father, nor have I ordered anyone to do it; as long as he is among us we will treat him
kindly and only wish him well!"
Abdullah breathed a huge sigh of relief. Although he truly loved his parents, he was
about to become a son who murdered his father. Now, he had witnessed the vast
mercy of the Messenger of Compassion and he had been relieved of the many worries
that could have come one after another. Since his father was the subject of the
conversation, he wanted to inform our Prophet: "0 Messenger of Allah!" he started.
"The people of Medina had agreed to make my father the leader, it is at such a period
that Allah the Almighty sent you here; that is how Allah lowered his position and
raised yours. And such men are about him today that reminds him of the position that
he has lost, provoking him."
These words of Abdullah were the same as Sa'd ibn Ubada's. They were dealing
with the psychology of a man who had lost what he had hoped for the minute he had
found it, and it was natural that others would want to exploit the psychology of such a
man. So it was clear that some matters could be resolved only through time.
When they came to the valley of Atiq, Abdullah went to the front of the army and
waited for the arrival of his father. When he finally saw him, he took the reins of his
father's camel and sat it on the ground, and to prevent the camel from rising up again
he stepped on the camel's front feet.
Ibn Salul was faced with behavior that he did not expect from his son and so he
started to call him names: 'What are you trying to do, you son of a such and such?"
Abdullah answered: "I swear by Allah, you cannot enter Medina until our noble
Prophet gives you leave! Then you will see who is held in favor and who is not."
Abdullah did not care about people who tried to stop this behavior of his which had
been a surprise for all those who knew him. He believed his father deserved worse.
This stance of Abdullah was also recounted to the blessed Messenger: "Abdullah
ibn Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul is not allowing his father to enter Medina until you
have given him leave."
Our noble Prophet, who did not like to see son tum against father, went to them as
soon as he received the news.
Abdullah's foot was still on the front feet of the camel and he was standing up to his
father, and his father was saying the following: "There is no doubt now that I am out

--- Sayfa 642 ---
of favor even when it comes to my children; I am lower than the women!"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who found them in this
state, turned to Abdullah and said: "Set your father free," and only upon that order did
Abdullah set his father's camel free and allowed his father to enter Medina.
The News Brought by Gabriel
Our beloved Prophet had already set off on the road and he was calling out "hal hal"
to his camel to hurry him up. The young Zayd, who had told him what Ibn Ubayy had
said, was watching carefully the blessed Messenger's facial expressions in order to
understand what he was thinking, and hoping that revelation would come that would
verify what he had said.
Then came the moment that Zayd ibn Arqam had been hoping for; the Messenger of
Allah was sweating intensely. Zayd looked more attentively at the radiant face of our
noble Prophet. At that instance, the blessed Messenger was feeling the burden of
revelation upon him, that was why he was sweating so much. It looked as if the camel
he was riding would kneel at any moment. Zayd ibn Arqam was filled with a lightness
of heart; he was hoping that the revelation contained the information that would verify
what he had said.
The moment of revelation had passed and the Messenger of Allah had been relieved
from the difficult conditions he had been under a minute ago. Zayd could see the
blessed Messenger coming towards him. Pulling slightly at his ears, the blessed
Prophet said: "Your ears have not deceived you, young man! For Allah the Almighty
has sent the revelation that verifies what you have said."
The stance taken by Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul had thus been verified in the
chapter al-Munafiqun that revealed the inner character of hypocrites who appeared to
be believers on the outside. Thus, when they heard a word from Abdullah ibn Ubayy
ibn Salul, it would be his tribe who censured him first and told him that what he said
was wrong. Our noble Prophet was following the developments very closely, and
when he saw the stance that Ibn Ubayy's tribe took against him, he said to Umar:
"What do you think of these developments, 0 Umar? If we had had him killed the day
you had said 'Let us kill him' who knows what kind of an outrage we would have
caused!"
Umar was a man of submission to the cause and so he said: "I have understood once
more that in all respects, by way of beneficence and wisdom, the acts of the
Messenger of Allah are far superior to mine."

--- Sayfa 643 ---
The Non-stop Journey and the Contest
Revelation had come and revealed the hidden intentions of Ibn Salul. The journey
continued non-stop. Evening had fallen but our noble Prophet had no intention to stop.
He was making way in the dark. They gave a break only when the sun was high up in
the sky. Thus, by travelling non-stop, our noble Prophet had prevented people from
discussing the issues raised by the dissenters and thus prevented gossip from
spreading. It was obvious that being faced with an issue that would be solved with
time, he did not want to further anymore unnecessary discussions. They were so
exhausted that they could hardly see one another from fatigue. The minute they
stopped for a break, each person went to a comer to rest. During this journey the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had asked for a race to be held
between the horses and the camels and he personally participated in these races.
Maybe this was done to bring some energy and enthusiasm to a journey that was
proving to be very arduous. Qaswa, the camel carrying our Prophet, had left all the
other camels behind, participating in the same sport with our Prophet's horse.2l
The Disappearance of Qaswa and
the Resurfacing Dissension
The hypocrites saw the break as an opportunity to gather together and to make use of
everything to their advantage. This went to show that the decision not to take too
many breaks in the journey had been a wise one. The camel of our noble Prophet had
been lost and these men, who looked upon all incidents as an opportunity for
themselves, kept talking about the disappearance of the camel.
Zayd ibnu'l-Lusayt, who saw the Companions looking for the camel, asked: "Why
are these men going about in all directions?"
Those near him said: "Qaswa, the camel of the Messenger of Allah has
disappeared."
Upon which Zayd said mockingly: "Why doesn't Allah tell him where his camel
is?"
Even the way he purposely stood when talking was enough to provoke the
Companions; the man had found an opportunity and now was exploiting it. Upon
which those around him said: "Let Allah take your life away, you enemy of Allah!
What you're engaging in is clear dissension!"
Usayd ibn Khudayr went one step further, and showing the spear in his hand, he
said: "0 you enemy of Allah! I swear by Allah that had I known, even slightly, that

--- Sayfa 644 ---
the Messenger of Allah would condone it, I would cut up your private parts here and
now, and finish you. If you carry this dissension with you in your heart, then what are
you doing with us here?''
"I am here to get spoils," Zayd said rather truthfully. It seemed he did not feel
shame anymore. His mouth had been opened and out spilled all that he was harboring
inside: "I swear by my life that Muhammad gives us news greater than the
whereabouts ofhis camel, he keeps bringing us news from the heavens!"
It was as if his ears could not hear what his mouth was saying! Because of his
disrespectful attitude and words, the Companions of the Prophet were ready to pounce
on him: "You will not be saved now! We cannot be under the same shade as you! Had
we known about this dissension in your heart, you would not have been able to sit
with us even for a moment.
At last Zayd understood that what he had said was going to cost him dearly. He had
given himself away and in doing so, he had risked his own life. He stood up and
started running away, although he knew very well that he would not be able to escape.
Where could he go? He decided to try to seek refuge in the affectionate arms of our
noble Prophet, the very person he had just spoken against! At that moment, the
Trusted Gabriel descended with news of what had happened.
Our noble Prophet started to address the people around him, with Zayd in his
presence: "A man from the hypocrites is making fun of the Messenger of Allah
because his camel has been lost and says, 'Why doesn't Allah tell him where the
camel has gone? I swear by my life that Muhammad brings us news about matters
much greater and more important than the state of the camel; he keeps bringing us
news from the heavens.' No one, except for Allah knows about the unseen. But right
now Allah the Almighty is telling me where the camel is; it is in such and such valley,
its reins tied to a tree. Go to that direction and find it."
The Companions started running towards the valley that our noble Prophet pointed
to in order to teach the opportunist Zayd a lesson. Before long they found the camel,
as described, with its reins tangled up in a tree. The hypocrite Zayd was completely
devastated when he saw that they were coming towards him with the camel. Although
he had not given his name explicitly, he was well aware that the Prophet knew about
his allegations and that his standing in the eyes of the Prophet was now below naught.
Before long, he left the presence of the Prophet and went to where he had been sitting
with his friends. His possessions had been scattered all over the place. No one said a
thing, it was clear that they were all very angry with him. When he wanted to join his
friends and sit with them, they said: "Do not come near us."

--- Sayfa 645 ---
Now he had lost his friends as well. Still, there was one thing he wanted to find out:
"I must definitely speak to you," he started. "Tell me, in the Name of Allah, did any
one of you go to Muhammad and tell him what I told you?"
''No, they said with difficulty. "We swear that we haven't. We haven't even left our
spot."
Zayd's astonishment grew: "I can't believe that whatever I spoke of here was
known and repeated by the Messenger of Allah," he said unable to hide his surprise.
Then he told them about the interchange that occurred between him and our noble
Prophet, and then said: "I had my doubts about Muhammad till today but now I bear
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I feel like today is the first day
that I have become a Muslim."
Our noble Prophet's affectionate arms had opened up the gates of faith for yet
another person in the true sense of the word. He had not closed the doors on Zayd
when he could have; he had not named and shamed him. Now our Prophet was
reaping the result of this approach.
Some of the men who witnessed this transformation in Zayd said: "Go and tell the
Messenger of Allah what has happened, he will ask for forgiveness for you."
And so he stood up and went to where our noble Prophet was, told him what had
happened. He was asking for forgiveness for what he had said a little while ago in true
repentance.
The Zenith of Dissension: The Incident of Ijk
For the journeys that he embarked upon outside Medina, our noble Prophet would
draw lots among his virtuous wives and would take one of them on the journey. For
his journey to the Banu Mustaliq, he had once again drawn lots and it was to be our
mother Aisha who would accompany him.
Our mother Aisha had a very thin physique; she would get on a special platform on
the camel-called hawdaj-made for such journeys, and then this hawdaj would be
lifted on top of the camel-this is where Aisha would be during the entire journey.
When the army stopped for a break, she would be lifted down in her hawdaj and
would step out of it to see to the service of our Prophet. It had happened just the same
way that day as well. The army was now returning with the storm that dissension had
earlier caused. Masks had dropped and real facades had been seen, the hypocrites who
had been waiting for an opportunity till that day had almost entered a contest of
slandering the Messenger of Allah.

--- Sayfa 646 ---
They were now very close to Medina, and our beloved Prophet ordered the army to
take a rest. The camel of our Mother Aisha had stopped as well; her hawdaj had been
unbound and she had been put on the ground. All was good and well up to that point.
At the time when people were called to get ready to move out again, our Mother Aisha
had gone to the side to see to her own needs, and she was looking for the necklace she
dropped, the one that she had borrowed from her sister. Meanwhile, the Companions
of the Prophet had thought that Aisha was still in her hawdaj. Considering how thin
she was, they couldn't tell that she was not in the hawdaj, so they lifted it up and set
off on the road.
When our Mother Aisha came back to where the army had camped for rest, she saw
that there was no one left; she called out but there was no one to hear her. The strange
thing was that the necklace she had thought she had lost was there right in front of her.
There was nothing she could do but to wait. She wrapped herself around with her
shawl and started to wait for the Companions who would come to collect her when
they realized that they had left her behind.
Before long, Safwan ibnu'l-Muattal came; he too had been left behind and had
missed the chance to set off with our Prophet. When he saw a figure that had been left
behind like him, he moved towards it and saw that it was none other than our mother
Aisha who was sitting down wrapped up in her shawl.
"Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi rajiun," he started to say, "Surely we belong to Allah
and to Him we will return, I see the family of the Messenger of Allah has been left
here as well!"
He knew why he had been left behind but was surprised to see that the wife of our
noble Prophet, the mother of the believers, had been left behind as well, how could
that be? He could not understand why. He said: "May Allah show mercy on you," and
then added "Who left you here?"
In the eyes of the loyal Companions of the beloved Prophet, Aisha, the mother of all
believers, was in a status above their own mothers.2! Our mother Aisha was his mother
as well. The coming of Safwan ibnu'l-Muattal was a source of joy for our mother
Aisha; for now she would not have to wait so long on her own; she would be able to
reach the army that had only very recently taken off.
Safwan moved aside so that our mother Aisha could get on the camel comfortably,
and signaled: "Here, please get on the camel."
Then Sawfan got hold of the camel's reins, and with our mother Aisha mounted on
it, he started on the road. They were going rather fast in order to catch up with the

--- Sayfa 647 ---
army.
The army was advancing, and so were they. The soldiers had not given a break and
had not placed the hawdaj on the ground and so they had no means of knowing that
our mother Aisha was not really inside. Just as they stopped for the break, they saw
Safwan approaching them with our mother Aisha mounted on a camel behind him.
This was a scene that the people who wanted to create dissension could easily
exploit; their eyes met and they started to slander the mother of the believers. They
were accusing our mother Aisha, the pillar of virtue, of adultery, trying thus to
somehow get at the Messenger of Allah. They were trying to spread it as a rumor,
trying to divide the Muslims' opinion. Everyone was behaving according to their own
nature. This was systematic slander and the hypocrites wanted everyone to have heard
it until they had reached Medina. They wanted this to be the talk of the town and they
wanted to place seeds of doubt in the hearts of Muslims.
The Sickness of Our Mother Aisha
It had been twenty-eight days since they had set off for the Banu Mustaliq. It had been
an exhausting journey full of problems, but another one of the tricks of those who
wished evil had been averted, and important steps had been taken as to the security of
mankind.
When the campaign ended and they returned to Medina, the fragile body of our
mother Aisha had weakened to the point of illness and she started resting. She had no
idea of the rumors that were being circulated about her. The hypocrites' campaign of
slander was continuing. Our noble Prophet heard of the slanders along with the family
of Abu Bakr and both were deeply saddened. They were slandering the name and
honor of our beloved Prophet and the virtue of our Mother Aisha.
Neither the blessed Messenger nor the family of Abu Bakr spoke to our Mother
Aisha about this slander. But our Mother Aisha, who was rather perceptive, sensed
that something was not quite right. She was trying to decipher the reason behind the
change in our Prophet's behavior. She was sick, but the Messenger of Allah did not
seem to be as close to her as he had been in her previous illnesses. And so our Mother
Aisha took leave and went to her mother and father's house and continued her
treatment and rest there for the next twenty days. It was there that she found out about
the rumors made against her.
She was going to speak about it to her mother; then she found out that her mother
already knew about it. Yes, her mother had heard of the developments but she was a

--- Sayfa 648 ---
mother who knew that any woman in her daughter's position would be the target of
such speculation. She tried to console her. But the dimensions of the slander was too
great to leave it to time; our mother Aisha could not sleep anymore. Although he did
not believe what was being said about our Mother Aisha, the Messenger of
Messengers wanted to consult with his Companions and see what the people thought.
He saw that the Companions did not believe the rumors either.
Still, these were very difficult days and everyone was waiting for the judgment from
Allah. On a day when all eyes were turned to our noble Prophet and all ears were
waiting for the news that would come from his Lord, a smile appeared on the face of
the Messenger of Allah which washed away the sadness that had been placed there for
some time. He first went to the family of Abu Bakr to give the good news, and called
out to our mother Aisha: "Rejoice 0 Aisha! Allah the Almighty has sent down a verse
that says that you are innocent!"
Now all troubles were left behind, and the innocence of our mother Aisha had been
revealed by the Lord of the Realms! Some verses of Chapter an-Nur had been revealed
and the Messenger of Allah went outside and shared the verses with his Companions.
The verses revealed that the people who had instigated this rumor were but a small
group and said that such seemingly negative developments would lead to a greater
good. These verses made it clear that the believers, when faced with such rumor,
should say: "I do not believe it, these are nothing but slander," thus showing the right
course of action under such circumstances.22.
When the verses came and made clear who was on which side and what group
should be treated in what way, our noble Prophet punished some of the Companions
who credited the rumors spread by the hypocrites. The believer should never fall into
the trap of speaking ill of innocent people against whom they have no proof. The
verses that came concerning the incident made this clear, saying that those who were
under the influence of such atmosphere intentions must get their punishment. And the
blessed Messenger was putting this order into practice. Otherwise, people would
continue to fabricate and then to propagate slanders against others and this would
jeopardize the harmony within society.
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, who was at the heart of the tumult and whose
accounts would be thoroughly processed in the afterlife, continued on his way.
Although our noble Prophet knew very well who the people who had propagated the
slander were, he had not punished them that day and had left their judgment to the
One whose has Absolute Justice. This was because the coming revelation said that
Allah the Almighty had prepared a great punishment for them in the afterlife, and that

--- Sayfa 649 ---
this account had to be left to Him.
The Coming ofHarith ibn Abi Dirar
Harith ibn Abi Dirar, who had dreamed of attacking Medina and thereby wipe out the
blessed Messenger and the Muslims from the face of the earth, had unexpectedly seen
the Messenger of Allah and his Companions in front of him and fallen into despair and
had lost his standing among his peers. Later, he went to Medina in order to rescue his
daughter Juwayriya from captivity with a train of camels by his side. His aim was to
give as many camels as may be asked of him and then take his daughter and leave.
When he reached the valley of Aqiq, he started to look at the camels he had brought
with him for that purpose and was reluctant to let all of them go, so he hid two of them
in the valley of Aqiq and decided to get her daughter in return for the remaining
camels. He was going to collect those two camels on the way back from Medina,
having rescued his daughter.
He then made it all the way to the presence of our noble Prophet and called out: "0
Muhammad! You have taken my daughter captive, here is her ransom, set her free."
The Messenger of Allah was sorry to see Harith in this state, a man who a month
ago had very different dreams. He looked at the camels he offered in return for his
daughter's freedom and then asked: "Where are the two camels that you hid in a
remote place in the valley of Aqiq?"
Harith could not speak. There had been no one around when he hid those camels.
Then how did Muhammad the Trustworthy know about their existence? No, this was
definitely not something that a mortal could have learnt by himself. This made it clear
that Muhammad the Trustworthy acted upon revelation, and after asking a good
number of questions, in a very short time Harith said: "I bear witness that you are the
Messenger of Allah."
This was strange indeed! A man who had only yesterday our noble Prophet now
spoke the words of shahadah on his own account, saying that he believed that he was
the Messenger of Allah.
Time was the most eloquent of storytellers; something that seemed like a problem
yesterday would solve itself with time, and when one had patience and held fast to it,
many problems would indeed be solved in this manner, on their own!
Harith's confession was not limited to this, and he added: "I did want to keep those
two camels to myself, but no one other than Allah knew of this desire inside me," and
he became Muslim in the presence of our Prophet.

--- Sayfa 650 ---
At a time just when he was about to lose his afterlife, a time when his life on earth
had become intolerable, here he was, having gained it all.
The Battle of the Banu Libyan
The sad memory of Asim ibn Thabit and Hubayb ibn Adiyy who had set off to teach
the Qur'an and who had been assassinated was still fresh in everyone's memory.
These people, who had no other aim than to spread the Name of Allah, had been
deceived and murdered. Justice had to be restored; for the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, was not a leader who spoke only to the hearts of people, he
also had to organize worldly matters as well. He had to say 'No' to tyranny and
oppression otherwise, further violations would take place. In order to not leave the
violation of the Banu Lihyan and the Banu Hudhayl tribes-who had murdered the
two Companions at Raji-go unpunished, he organized a military campaign against
them, towards Usfan, with a force of two hundred men.
They were going to go and have a look at the state of the tribe of the Banu Lihyan;
if they still harbored hate towards the Muslims and plotted against them, they were
going to be given a lesson, and if they tended towards peace, then they were going to
be given the opportunity to accept the authority oflslam.
Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum had been left as deputy in Medina and once again our
Prophet was keeping the destination secret; that is why he turned in the direction of
Juruf and followed the itinerary of Ghurab, Mahis, Batra, Y ayn, Suhayratu' s-Sumam,
Sayyala and came to the valley of Ghuran which was five miles away from Usfan
where the Companions had been murdered.
the Banu Lihyan saw that our noble Prophet and his Companions had come very
close to their land and there was nothing they could do. They could foresee what
would befall them and they understood that now the only authority in the Hijaz was
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him. There was only one thing
they could do and so they fled to the mountains.
Our noble Prophet stayed there for two days and when he saw that there was no one
around, he divided his Companions into two groups and sent them in different
directions. They had not come across anyone in these reconnaissance missions. He
turned to his Companions and said: "If we go to Usfan the Meccans will think that we
are coming to Mecca."
Maybe having come all this way he also wanted to give a message to the Quraysh as
well.

--- Sayfa 651 ---
Then he gave the orders for this advance and turned towards Usfan. The blessed
Messenger was a man of great loyalty and when he reached U sfan he started to pray
for the Companions who had been martyred there; he had turned to Allah and was
asking for His mercy for them.
Then he sent a group of ten cavalrymen headed by Abu Bakr in the direction of
Mecca; they were to inspect the situation, making the Quraysh feel the pressure of the
Muslim army.
They came all the way to Kura al-Ghamim, but they too returned without having
encountered anyone. Their goals had been met; the criminals had had to flee to the
mountains in recognition of their own wrongdoings and it had been made clear that the
believers now had the upper hand in the Hijaz, everyone now recognized the authority
of our noble Prophet.
Now they could return and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, said: 'We are people whose main aim is to return to Allah; insha 'Allah, we will
return to our Him with repentance, we will always be bent in two in thanks, and we
direct ourselves only towards Him in our worship. We seek refuge in Allah from the
exhaustion of the campaign, from finding sadness in return and misfortune that may
befall to our family and possessions. Dear Lord! Let us reach peace in a way to
partake in Your forgiveness and contentment." Having said this prayer, the blessed
Messenger and his Companions returned to Medina after fourteen days.

--- Sayfa 652 ---
~It is also said that name of Sa'd's wife was Amra bint Haram. The confiscation of Sad's
inheritance had happened while our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had been at
Hamrau'l-Asad and on his return Amra told our noble Prophet of the situation. See Waqidi,
Maghazi, 11330; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/388; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 8/30 (11495).
i1 In those days female children would get no share from inheritance, and among the male children
only those who could wield a sword would get a share. Since Islamic law had not yet been put in
place people were still practicing their old inheritance customs. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan,
4/275; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/96; Waqidi, Maghazi, 11330.
22. An-Nisa 4:11; Wahidi, Asbabu Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 1150
22 The child that Amra was carrying when her husband Sad became martyr was given no share of this
inheritance. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/374 (15062); Abu Dawud, Sunan, 31121 (2892);
Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 4/414 (2092); Ibn Majah, Sunan, 2/908 (2720).
22 Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 4/275; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/96, 97; Waqidi, Maghazi, 11330
i§Bayhaqi, Sunan, 71184 (13835); Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 11452
~Abu Dawud, Sunan, 21272 (2241); Ibn Majah, Sunan, 11628 (1952); Darakutni, Sunan, 3/270 (100)
22Ghaylan ibn Salama had ten wives when he became Muslim. When he became Muslim they had
become Muslim as well. When the said verse came only four of them remained with him and the
others left. See Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 3/435 (1128); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2/83
(5558); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 71183 (13827).
§.1. Not long after this sariyya, Abu Salama died. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 11343.
g Before Abdullah ibn Unays died, he asked the staff that was given to him by our Prophet that day
to be placed by his shroud. See Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 6/31; Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 18/406
(101); Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/160.
22. Some reports say that the leader of this group was Marsad ibn Abi Marsad. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah,
41123, 136, 6/19; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/207; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2155.
~It was not enough for the polytheists to merely kill Asim. They meant to tear apart his body and
bring his head to the Meccans, for he had killed important Meccan men on the day of Badr, such
as Uqba ibn Abi Muayt. They knew how they would be applauded should they be able to take his
severed head back to Mecca. However, when they approached him to sever his head, they were
unable to do so because of the bees that were swarming around his body. Allah the Almighty had
answered his prayers and did not let the hands of polytheists touch him. They left him thinking
they would come again early the following morning. When they came the next morning they were
not able to find Asim. Heavy rain had fallen that evening and the floods had taken Asim's body to
a place they could not locate. Asim's prayer had thus been answered and Allah had not allowed
polytheist hands to dishonor his body after he died. See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1108 (2880); Ahmad
ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 2/294 (7915), 2/310 (8082); Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 41124.
22. Abdullah had found a way to loosen the strings and had started to run. But he could not save
himself, he was caught and murdered as well. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11354; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat,
2/56, 3/454; Bayhaqi, Dalai/, 3/402 (1226).
22 While the Meccans were preparing to kill them, the Messenger of Allah was sitting in Medina and
he turned his gaze towards Mecca and said: "And unto you peace."
After uttering such words, Messenger of Allah was all of a sudden filled with sadness. Those who
saw the sudden change in his mood could not understand the reason and asked: "0 Messenger of
Allah! To whose salam have you responded?"
"This is in response to Hubayb's salam," he said and gave them the news that Hubayb had been
murdered, in Mecca. This salam was the last words of Hubayb in Mecca. He was the first Muslim
to be murdered by hanging. Upon the news of his martyrdom, the blessed Messenger sent Amr
ibn Umayya and Salama ibn Aslam to Mecca and they would take back Hubayb's body after
experiencing many difficulties. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 41126-127; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/79-80.

--- Sayfa 653 ---
22 It is also said that this number was forty. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 41173; Tabari, Tarikh,
2/82; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 11427.
2ll. Munzir was someone who wanted heartily to become a martyr and that is why that day he was
called "Al-Mun 'iku li Y amuta", meaning "he who offers his neck to death willingly." See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 4/138; Tabarani, Mu 'jamu 'l-Kabir, 20/357 (841); Tabari, Tarikh, 2/81; Ibn Hajar,
Al-Isaba, 6/217 (8230).
22 Amir ibn Tufayl was the nephew of Amir ibn Malik who had given our Prophet surety and had
asked for seventy people from his Companions from the Suffa. See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba,
2/65; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 3/600.
22Haram ibn Milhan was the brother of our mother Umm Sulaym. See Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/225; Ibn
Abdilbarr, Istiab, 11337.
2.!. This statement made by Ibn Milhan would lead to the salvation of the person who killed him that
day. What Ibn Milhan had said was incomprehensible to Jabbar. He was surprised; how could a
man whom he had just pierced through the back with a spear say: "I am saved?" How could he be
so happy when leaving this world and embrace death with open arms? This welcoming attitude by
Ibn Milhan remained in Jabbar's mind for a while and he would ask people those he came across
what such words meant. He would ask: "What kind of salvation is this? Did I not kill that man?"
but he could not find an answer. One day, he finally understood that this was the sign of happiness
that expressed Ibn Milhan' s will towards martyrdom and his desire to be rid of the difficulties of
the world. In the face of the astonishment he felt, Jabbar said: "I swear by Allah he has been
saved," and then he became a Muslim. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11348; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-
Nihaya, 4/83.
71. There were no words to describe the sadness of the Prophet upon hearing the news of the death of
his sixty -nine Companions. It was as if darkness had reigned over Medina. The effect of these two
sad events would be felt in Medina for months, and the Messenger of Allah would pray especially
after the Morning Prayers concerning the people who had caused the two events that led to the
deaths of his sixty-nine Companions, leaving the perpetrators to the justice of Allah. Concerning
the Usayya tribe who had deceived seventy of his Companions at the Mauna well, he would say
Usayya has rebelled against Allah and His Messenger and he would continue to do so till the
moment the news "Let our situation be known to our tribe whom we left behind; for we have met
our Lord, us content with him and He content with us" reached him. See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1031
(2647), 411503 (3868), 5/2349 (6031); Muslim, Sahih, 11468 (677); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
3/215 (13278)
:U. These were Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali, Talha, Zubayr, Sa'd ibn Muadh, Usayd ibn Khudayr
and Sa'd ibn Ubada. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/318.
~ Al-Maedah 5:11
11 Tabari, Tarikh, 2/84; Waqidi, Maghazi, 11367. We have decided to translate what was literally
"now hearts have changed" in the original account as "water under the bridge" because we believe
it expresses the meaning better.
1.§. It is also said that this person was Abu Bakr. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11367; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda
wa 'r-Rashad, 4/322.
71 There was a strong man called Azwak among the Jews and the arrow this man shot hit our
Prophet's tent. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11372; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/322 and so its
place was removed again, to the place called Fadih.
1.§ There are various reports that the siege lasted six nights, fifteen days, twenty nights or twenty-five
nights. For different reports see Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/323.
12. The verses about interest had not yet come and so there were some Companions who owed money
to the Banu Nadir who practiced usury. Usayd ibn Khudayr was one of them. He had borrowed 80
dinars from Ibn Abi Huyayy for a period of one year and he now owed him 120 dinars. This
happened before the year was over and when the Messenger of Allah spoke these words Usayd

--- Sayfa 654 ---
closed accounts by paying the 80 dinars and Abu Rafi would take his money and leave Medina.
See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11372; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/324.
l!2.Al-Hashr 59:7
§.l The Companions were engaging in business in the fair at the same time. They had predicted that
the campaign would end the way it did and so they had come prepared and had brought their
wares with them so that they may be able to make use of their journey in this manner. Business
had been so good that some Companions such as Uthman had earned one dinar for one dinar,
reaping hundred percent profit that day. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 11384; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2/60
~See Muslim, Sahih, 411918 (2472); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 31136, 4/421, 422, 425, 5/256;
Ahmad al-Banna, Al-Fathu 'r-Rabbani, 22/219; Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 6/155-156 (10333); Ibn
Kathir, Tafsir, 3/490 for Julaybib's embracing Islam and the Messenger of Allah's delicate
treatment of him.
l2 There are also reports that the person left in Medina was Abu Dharr or Numayla ibn Abdullah al-
Laysi. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 4/252; Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur 'an, 5/215.
~It is also reported that the standard of the Muhajirun was given to Annnar ibn Yasir. See Waqidi,
Maghazi, 11405; Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/297; Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 41178.
!!2. It is reported that Mikyas attacked and killed the Ansar who had killed his brother by mistake
despite the fact that the Messenger of Allah had decided to solve this through giving him the
blood money. Mikyas then went to the Quraysh and had been killed as a recanter of faith on the
day of Mecca's conquest. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11859; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 21196;
Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/298; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 3/203; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/78.
!!2 It is reported that Juwayriya's name was Barra and the name Juwayriya was given to her by the
Messenger of Allah. See Muslim, Sahih, 3/1687 (2140); Abu Dawud, Sunan, 2/81 (1503); Ahmad
ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 11258 (2334), 11316 (2902), 6/429 (27461).
l!2 Thabit had taken the full rights of Harith's daughter Juwayriya all unto himself in return for a date
grove in Medina. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11409; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/34 7.
~Years later when our mother Aisha was speaking of what an auspicious presence Juwayriya was,
she would say: "I do not know anyone who has been as beneficial as she was to her own tribe"
adding that her marriage to our Prophet had resulted in the freeing of a hundred families. See Abu
Dawud, Sunan, 4/22 (3931); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6/277 (26408); Hakim, Mustadrak,
4/28 (6781); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/74.
!!2The Arabic saying "Feed your dog so it turns around to eat you" conveys the same meaning in the
Turkish expression "Feed the crow so that it may pick your eyes out." The Arabic version is one
that Ibn Ubayy used, implying our Prophet.
2Q In another report Umar says "Why don't you order Muhammad ibn Maslama." See Waqidi,
Maghazi, 11415, 421; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/349.
2lit is also said that this Companion was Usayd ibn Khudayr. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11415; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/350.
~Abdullah's name was Hubab; when he became Muslim the Messenger of Allah changed it to
"Abdullah" and that's how he came to be known after that. Because Abdullah was the eldest child
Ibn Salul was called Abu Hubab in the Arabic fashion, meaning father of Hubab. See Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 3/541; Ibn Abdilbarr,Istiab, 3/940; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 41155 (4787).
22. That day our Prophet had two horses by his side: Lizaz and Zarib. Abu Usay Saidi was riding
Zarib that day and it had been the horse that came first among the horses. The camel ridden by
Bilal had reached the target first. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11426; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 4/353.
2±Al-Ahzab 33:6
22. An-Nur 24:11

--- Sayfa 655 ---
A NEW ATTACK AND THE TRENCH
F
or about a year now peace reigned in the Hijaz; there were small commotions
here and there, but our noble Prophet, with his acute vision, had anticipated
them, and with preventive action all possible conflict had been averted. But
this did not mean that things would continue in this manner. About twenty leading
Jews such as Salam ibn Abi'l-Huqayq, Huyayy ibn Akhtab, Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq,
Hawza ibn Qays and Abu Amir came together to plot against the Muslims. Before
long they went to Mecca and started to provoke the Quraysh against the Messenger of
Allah. They said: "In a war against Muhammad we will side with you. Let us combine
our efforts together and get rid of him!"
This offer pleased the Quraysh; they had been expecting such an offer of alliance
from the Jews for years. The Quraysh had in fact written to the Jews a number of
times but had received no favorable response to their offers. Now the Jews had come
to them themselves and were making the very same offer. Abu Sufyan said: "Hello my
dear friends! You are most welcome! For us the most lovable person is he who works
with us in enmity towards Muhammad." They were desperate to take revenge for
Badr, a defeat they could not forget.
The Quraysh had not been able to come to the second Badr that they had made a
promise to fight. This cowardly behavior had cost them a lot of face and they had been
censured by their friends. Their weakness and lack of bravery were being talked about
all over Mecca. Now they had the chance to regain the reputation they had lost, and
the Jews of Medina were offering to work with them. This was a great opportunity for
both sides; they decided on the time they would gather and disbanded having made
their pact.
Afterwards, Abu Sufyan chose men from various branches of the Quraysh tribe, and
having gathered fifty leading men of these tribes, he made his way to the Ka'ba.
Entering underneath the cloth of the Ka'ba, he swore that they would fight till their
last drop of blood.

--- Sayfa 656 ---
The Jewish group who left Quraysh now came to Ghatafan and were making the
same offer to them. They were saying that they would give half of their yearly produce
and gains of Khaybar to them, promising them the riches of the world if they attacked
Medina. They told them that the Quraysh would be with them too, trying to make
them understand that they too had to be where all the other tribes had promised to be.
They accepted. Before long, they went to the Banu Sulaym and convinced them as
well. The plan seemed to be going well, and they started touring all the Arab tribes.
They gave the date to all the tribes that they negotiated with and told them to be ready
by that date. They had convinced almost all the tribes to fight against the Messenger of
Allah and the believers. That is why the Battle of the Trench was also called Ahzab,
the Arabic word for the plural of "group" since the army was made up of various
different tribes.
Then, the time came to deal the first blow in this last confrontation. It was the
month of Shawwal and the fifth year of the Hijra. In the assembly of discussions
called Daru'n-Nadwa, they bound the standard and gave it to Uthman ibn Talha. Now
everything was ready and the four-thousand strong Meccan army started on its way to
Medina under the leadership of Abu Sufyan. The army had three hundred horses, one
thousand and five hundred camels. The tribes who heard of this move started to act
and came to join the army of Abu Sufyan. the Banu Sulaym joined with seven hundred
men, the Banu Fazara with one thousand men, Ashja with four hundred men, the Banu
Murra with four hundred men. Before long, the total number of the Meccan army
reached ten thousand men. The numbers were such that there was one soldier to
almost every single person in Medina, including old men, women and children.
They were coming at the Muslims once again; these men whose only goal was to
maintain their iniquity had no intention to reform themselves. What had Medina and
the Medinan people done to them? But iniquity and denial had no logic! They wanted
to kill and their reasoning had become a slave to their hatred. Their vision was small,
and their minds had frozen; they were doing what was in the nature of their own
character.
The Danger Noticed and Counsel with the Com pan ions
On the other hand the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was
following on how the Jewish community had gone to Mecca and how they were
provoking the Arab tribes against him. Every movement in Mecca was reported back
to him through his intelligence network and he developed his course of action
according to this information. Four days before Abu Sufyan set off on the road, the

--- Sayfa 657 ---
blessed Messenger had received news that the army would be on its way and had
already started to discuss the matter with his Companions. Although he did not want
to fight, the reality was that the Quraysh had already gathered together and were
coming towards Medina to fight them; and he needed to find a way to avert the
misfortune that battle might cause.
He asked every one of his Companions about what sort of strategy they should use.
He asked whether it would be better to stay in Medina and fight the enemy in the
streets, or to go outside of Medina and fight a battle in the field. The discussions held
before the Uhud war was still fresh in memory and so this time, everyone was
approaching the issue very carefully.
Everyone spoke their mind and each suggestion had its own risks. Then they heard
the voice of Salman al-Farisi: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said, "In the lands of Persia
when we are confronted with the threat of cavalrymen attacking out cities, we dig
trenches around our settlements and protect ourselves thus!"
This was the kind of suggestion that our noble Prophet had been waiting for; and
the Companions liked this idea as well, and after speaking about it for a while, they
accepted the idea to dig trenches.
The decision had been made but Medina really needed to understand the gravity of
the matter. That is why the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
gave them the good news that if they started with patience and adorned themselves
with piety, they would be victorious. Now it was time to dig the trench that would
protect Medina. This was no joking matter; Mecca had gathered all the tribes around
them and now had Medina as its target.
The Prophet went to the outskirts of mount Sal and set up camp there. Then they
determined where the trenches were going to be; because Medina was encircled by
mountains, the enemy could only come from the north and this is where they would
dig the trench.
First, they drew a line from the fortress of Shaikhayn to Mazad, leaving mount Sal
at the back. Then they started from Mazad and the stretch to Dhubab and Ratij was
divided among the Companions; they were divided into groups of ten and everyone
had to dig a length of forty zira .22 These small groups were going to work concertedly
together; the Muhajirun was going to dig between Ratij and Dhubab and the Ansar
between Dhubab and the mountain of Abu Ubayda.
The Ansar and the Muhajirun had their own opinions concerning Salman al-Farisi;
both groups said: "Salman is one of us," arguing that he should help them with the

--- Sayfa 658 ---
digging because Salman was a very sturdily built man.
Our noble Prophet realized what was going on and said: "Salman is of the Ahl al-
Bayt (one of the people of the Prophet's household)," thus ending the discussion
gently.
They were racing against time and everyone would dig their own portions and the
trenches would be finished before the Meccan army came. While the Companions
were busy with the digging, at the very same time the Messenger of Allah started to
wield the pickaxe. He too carried earth on his back-such that his clothes were
covered in earth and dust. They had even borrowed equipment for the job such as
pickaxes and shovels from the Jews ofthe Banu Qurayza.
Some people hesitated and wavered as always on that day as well. Although their
excuses were not believable, they offered them. The reality was that in the eyes of the
Companions, these half-hearted, hesitant people hardly existed and they did not expect
them to help them in such an auspicious undertaking. The fact that they had found a
way not to participate in the digging would not entirely escape attention and their
defect would be revealed as a verse to the Messenger by Allah and would be recited
till the end oftime.22
While some of them wavered, children who had not yet reached puberty were
coming to help our noble Prophet dig the trench.2l!
The blessed Messenger, who was working hard amongst his Companions, was at
times helping them with the digging, carrying milk to the workmen, and reciting
motivational words to the men in order to keep their spirits high.
He then joined the men who were reciting the poem of someone named Juayl ibn
Suraqa. He then changed the name Juayl to Amr, to which the Companions responded:
"Today he changed the name of Juayl to Amr, today he is the only support of the
weak," and the Messenger of Allah would respond by repeating the same line:
"Today, he is the only supporter of the weak."
They were working merrily as if a ten-thousand strong army was not approaching
them. At one point our noble Prophet became very moved when watching his
Companions work and prayed: "My Lord! There is no other place to live except for
the land of the afterlife. Forgive the Ansar and the Muhajirun with Your grace."
They had focused on digging with such determination that they did not seem to tire
at all. They said: "We have given our word to Muhammad to do jihad till the end of
our lives, we have sworn allegiance to him," pointing to the fact that they did not
diverge from their main aim one small bit.

--- Sayfa 659 ---
They were working with all their might but it seemed that the trench was not going
to be dug up so easily. There was very little to feed the working men.
People would usually mix barley flour and oil and try to curb their hunger with that.
Although this gave off a very strong scent, they did not complain and they continued
to wield their axes and shovels. In doing so, they were showing with their actions that
in order to reach one's goal one did not need to have perfect circumstances. Hearts
were beating as one; their leader was leading them and they were so focused on the
work they were doing that they even came to the Messenger of Allah to ask for
permission to see to their most basic needs; after seeing to their needs they would start
with their work once again.
They continued the job of digging, which they had started with the Morning Prayer,
till evening and went home with the satisfaction of having helped the cause. It was
clear that Medina would go back and forth between mount Sal and the town until the
digging was completely finished.
The joy of each day was different, the stanzas and verses they recited out loud
changed every day and this gave them renewed energy each time. They heard Ibn
Rawaha recite the following poem as they wiped off the sweat from their brows: "I
swear by Allah that had he not existed we would not have been adorned with the true
path, we would not have been informed about giving alms or Prayer. Dear Lord!
Please descend peace upon us; make our feet stand fast on our cause, let them not
slip ... The polytheists have become one and they are coming towards us in rage and
malice, if they want to spread dissension with that, they will find us standing in their
way ... "
Having said these words, he raised his voice and repeated the sentence: "They will
find us standing in their way!"
From afar, mount Sal looked like an ant heap with worker ants carrying food. The
only difference was that one could hear each group chanting songs and this made the
whole scene look like a festival. They would hear the Messenger of Allah recite the
following verses as he dug at the trench: "I start with the Name of Allah, we have
altogether found the right path with Him. Had we followed someone other than Him,
we would truly have failed today. How beautiful is He as our Lord, and how
wonderful is our religion!"
As the leader of his congregation, our noble Prophet had given himself so much to
the job at hand that sometimes he dug the trench with the axe and sometimes he
carried the earth on his back. At one point he was so tired that he decided to stop and

--- Sayfa 660 ---
rest for a while. There was not even a small cushion on which he could rest so he
found a stone and put his cheek upon it. He was so tired, he needed to lay down his
head, even if it was on a stone. This did not escape the notice of Abu Bakr and Umar,
they came to the Messenger of mercy at once and they asked the people not to make
any noise around him so that he may sleep for a little while. After a very short nap, the
Messenger of Allah jumped up from his sleep and said: 'Why did you not wake me up
earlier?" he asked and then grabbed the pickaxe again to continue with the digging.
He was sincerely praying for his Companions, asking: "My Lord! There is no abode
other than the afterlife. Treat the Ansar and the Muhajirun with Your Grace and
Mercy. My Lord! You defeat the Adal and Qara, for it is them who have forced me to
carry these stones!"
In those days, when Abu Bakr and Umar could not find bags to carry the earth, they
would use their own clothes to carry it, and the two loyal friends worked together, two
friends who had walked side by side since Mecca. Some of the female Companions
and the wives of our Prophet, particularly our mothers Aisha, Umm Salama and
Zaynab hint Jahsh took turns to go to the trenches and bring water to the diggers.
The Hard Rock and Windows Opening to the Future
The digging continued despite the ever-hardening conditions. As they went deeper
into the ground, they encountered bigger rocks and breaking them required great skill.
Salman and Umar came across such a rock and even though they were pounding it
with all their might, the tools they were using had broken in their hands and the rock
stayed as it was. When they realized that they were not going to be able to succeed
they let the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, know about it. At
the time our Prophet was staying at a Turkish -style tent: "I am coming at once!" he
said and started to make his way to where the rock was.
Those who looked a little closely could see that he had tied a stone around his belly
in order to suppress his hunger, for they had not eaten a single morsel of food for days.
He came to where the rock was and first asked for a bowl of water; he spat gently into
the bowl and then opened his hands and started to pray. As soon as the Prayer was
finished he started to pour the water onto the rock, it was as if that hard rock was
transforming into soft earth. Then Salman took the sledge hammer and pounced upon
the rock with a "Bismillah."
With his first blow a third of the rock broke away, and there was a great spark
where the hammer hit. But this spark was no ordinary spark, it was as if a great flame
had come from the direction of Yemen and was lighting up the whole of Medina, like

--- Sayfa 661 ---
a strong torch lights up the night. Everyone was watching what was happening without
a sound. The Messenger of Allah first said ''Allahu Akbar" and then continued: "The
keys of the region of Yemen have been given to me, I now see the doors of San' a like
a dog's front row teeth."
Then they hit the rock once again, and again a third of the rock broke away and a
shaft of light appeared. This time the light came from the lands of the Romans, the
Byzantines, a light that illuminated Medina. Upon this our noble Prophet said ''Allahu
Akbar" once again and added: "The keys of the region of Damascus have been given
to me; I swear I see the red palaces of Damascus from where I stand."
The curiosity of the beloved Companions was compounded; it was as if the noble
Messenger had forgotten the armies of the Ahzab who had already come very close to
Medina and was giving information about the future through the curtains that had been
half drawn. It looked like these pieces of news were going to continue.
Then the blessed Messenger hit the remaining part of the rock and this time it fell
into pieces entirely like sand particles. Another spark was seen where he had hit the
hammer and people could see a great light emerge in the direction of Persia, like a
torch illuminating Medina in the dark of night. Upon that our noble Prophet said: "I
have also been given the keys to the lands ofthe Persians. I can, from where I stand,
see the palaces of Hire and the cities of Kisra, in a row like the teeth of a dog. Gabriel
gives me the news that my Ummah will rule in these lands; and so rejoice today for
the good news of victory tomorrow."
The good news that the blessed Messenger gave took away the exhaustion of the
digging work and they all said: ''Alhamdullillah. Thanks be to Allah, these are
promises that will undoubtedly be realized; the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, promises us victory after having suffered so much oppression."
At that moment our noble Prophet turned to Salman who had come from the land of
Persia and had settled in Medina; and he was explaining to him one by one, to the
minutest of details, the appearance of the palaces of Kisra. Salman was astonished.
How could our noble Prophet know these things although he had not seen them
before? This was his reaction: "Yes, you speak the truth, they are just as you describe
them, 0 Messenger of Allah! I bear witness, once again, that you are the Messenger of
Allah!"
The blessed Messenger had another piece of good news to share, and turning to
Salman, he said: "These are the victories that Allah will make possible after I am
gone, 0 Salman! Damascus will definitely be conquered and Heraclius will escape to

--- Sayfa 662 ---
the ends ofhis kingdom. You will be faced with no force as you seize Damascus. And
the east will be conquered too; the Kisra will be killed and there will never be a Kisra
again! "22.
Each of these given tidings were amazing beyond imagination and it was difficult to
grasp that day the consequences of such victories. Our noble Prophet stood by the
trench and turned towards the future, giving happy news of spring in winter. While
there was such opening in the future, what could be the significance of a couple of
malevolent men coming together and plotting against the Muslims?
These expressions had been a great source of morale for the people who had been
afraid of the ten-thousand strong army that was now approaching them. They were
standing their ground even more firmly and they moved more confidently.
However, not everyone's approach was the same. The hypocrites were at work
again and had started to mock the good news that our Prophet had brought:
"Muhammad is standing in Y athrib and saying that he can see the cities of Kisra being
conquered for you; do you not see that you are now digging a trench because you
cannot even fight against your present enemies and resort to hiding?"
Before long, the Truthful Gabriel would descend and make these bickering of theirs
known: ''And (remember) when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a
disease (at just that point in the situation) were saying: 'Allah and His Messenger
promised us nothing but delusion"' (al-Ahzab 33: 12).
The sincere effort the Muslims put into the digging of the trench was helped by the
Divine hand. That day, the dish that Jabir cooked and the bread he prepared was
enough for all the soldiers who had come to him in tens.
A handful of dates brought for Abdullah ibn Rawaha would feed all. A similar thing
happened with the date paste that Umm Amir brought and the lamb that Abu Rafi
cooked.
The digging of the trench, which started with poetry and songs and which was made
even more joyful with the food that was offered, was almost finished. Those who had
finished their task early were helping the ones who lagged behind and thus they were
showing that they were one body in the face of the enemy. The digging continued for
six days and now the polytheists were going to be faced with a wide and long obstacle
when they came! When the digging of the trench was finished the Meccan army had
come close to Medina, they had made it almost to Uhud. War was now close at hand
and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, sent the women and the
children who had helped with the digging back to secure parts of town.

--- Sayfa 663 ---
The Ranks Become More Distinct
The blessed Messenger had left Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum as deputy in Medina
once again. The women and children had been placed in the more secure parts of town
and barriers had been placed around them against possible incursions.
He had an army of three thousand; Zayd ibn Haritha was carrying the standard of
the Muhajirun, and Sa'd ibn Ubada was carrying that ofthe Ansar. The code word for
the Trench was "Ha Mim; La Yunsarun" that is, "They will never be helped."
He was going to position himself with his back to the mountain of Sal and with the
trench in front and was going to wait for the attack. When they came to the place they
had agreed, a tent was set up for the Messenger of Allah and it was from here that he
was going to direct his Companions.
The First Impression
All the preparations had finished and they were now waiting for the moment that the
enemy would come. Not a lot of time had passed when the ten thousand strong Ahzab
army came to face the beloved Companions-it was as ifthe earth and heavens were
filled with soldiers.
In fact this scene was one that should have frightened them, but the believers had
been given news about what would happen beforehand and were spiritually ready for
it, and so no anxiety touched them; on the contrary, because they were living through
an event that had been promised by Allah and His Messenger, their faith grew even
stronger.
What the blessed Messenger said was slowly coming to pass! As long as they had
the noble Prophet by their side, what care could they have?
The messages brought by the Truthful Gabriel were vivid in their minds and the
Great Lord said the following in the revelations that Gabriel brought:
Or do you believe that you will enter Paradise without having experienced
the difficulties and trials that those before you went through? Distress and
affliction befell them and they were shaken violently, so that the
Messenger and those who believed with him said: When will the help of
Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is nigh! (al-Baqarah 2:214)
And now they were entering such a difficult phase and advancing towards a stage in
which they would pray, with the Messenger of Allah "0 Lord! When is your succor?"
but it was all right, the captain of the boat they were on was none other than the
blessed Messenger. They said: "These are the things that Allah has promised us; Allah

--- Sayfa 664 ---
and His Messenger speak the truth!" (al-Ahzab 33:22).
The First Shock
The polytheists had come sure of themselves and with the intention of revenging the
previous defeats, and they had made it all the way to where the trench was. And then
they were confronted with the trench! What was this? It was something they had not
encountered before. They looked at each other dumbfounded and said: "This was a
trick that the Arabs have not played before."
One of them came to the fore and said: "There is a Persian among his friends; this
must have been his idea."
They had come with such hopes but now there was a deep and wide trench in front
of them which prevented them from entering Medina. They thought the trench must
only be in the stretch in front of them and so they went left and right to see where it
ended. But it did not yield any results, for all entries into Medina had been obstructed
by the trench.
They were experiencing a great shock even before having wielded their swords;
they had planned to enter from one end of Medina with ten thousand people and then
come out the other side having exterminated all the Muslims including the Messenger
of Allah. That is what they had come there for: they were going to occupy Medina and
not leave anything standing. But now their plans had been stalled, and they had met an
end they had not expected. What were they going to do now?
They had no choice but to try to attack the Muslims by shooting arrows from afar
and try to go across from the weaker points of the trench. They got hold of their bows
and started to shoot arrows at the Muslims. Thus, a war that was clearly going to last
long had started.
The Last Act in the Game of Treason: the Banu Qurayza
The network that had provoked the Quraysh by going all the way to Mecca and then
visiting all the surrounding tribes was at work once again. While this was happening,
the exiled leader of the Banu Nadir, Huyayy ibn Akhtab, was knocking on the door of
Ka'b ibn Asad, the leader ofthe Banu Qurayza which was the last remaining Jewish
community in Medina. 10° Ka'b had signed the Medina Charter that had been penned
after the Hijra and after what had happened with the Banu Qaynuqa and the Banu
Nadir, he had signed a new treaty with the Messenger of Allah, reinstating his trust in
him. That is why when he heard that the voice at the door was Huyayy ibn Akhtab's,
he reacted as would be expected of him and did not open the door. But it seemed

--- Sayfa 665 ---
Huyayy was not going to return without having achieved his purpose.
'Woe unto you 0 Ka'b, open the door!" he said and insisted on knocking.
Ka'b had understood the intention of his coming. He wanted to visit the same
misfortunes that had befallen his own tribe on the tribe ofKa'b.
'Woe unto you!" he responded from the inside. "For you are a most inauspicious
man! I have signed a treaty with Muhammad and given him my word, I won't break it.
I have seen nothing but loyalty from him!"
All these did not matter for Huyayy at all. He was blinded by ambition and could
not think of anything but evil. Now that he had formed a great alliance in the name of
evil, he wanted the cooperation of the Banu Qurayza as well so that he may be able to
conquer the town from within. If the Banu Qurayza joined them from the inside and
given them logistical support, then they could overcome the difficulty posed by the
trench and thus they would have more of a chance to claim victory. That is why he
continued to pound on the door: "Woe unto you! Open this door, let us talk."
Now it was a matter of will and Ka'b was quite as insistent as Huyayy and he said:
"I swear I cannot do it," from the inside.
So Huyayy changed the course of the conversation and tried to hit Ka'b from his
weak spot: "Of course you won't open the door for you do not want to share the
Jashisha dish at your table!"
Ka'b was much upset and angry at these words; how could a man, especially a
leader, not open a door for fear that his guest would share his meal? He ran to the
door, opened it and invited Huyayy inside.
Huyayy was sure that now things were on the right track and started to speak at
once: "Woe unto you 0 Ka'b! I have brought you the honor and glory of the time, the
army that ripples like the sea. I have put the Quraysh in Majmaul Asyal in the
direction of Ruma; the Ghatafan people and their leaders near Dhanab Naqama and
Uhud! They have all given their word to me that they will not leave this place until
they have wiped out Muhammad and his friends."
Although these words were to Ka'b' s liking, he was not sure of the outcome of such
action. He had heard similar words before and it had always been Muhammad the
Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, who was victorious at the end of the
day. That is why he continued to be cautious and said: ''You have brought me
something that will only end in defeat; you are like a cloud emptied of water that
brings no rain and yet continues to thunder. Woe unto you Huyayy! Leave me to my
own devices for I have encountered nothing but loyalty from Muhammad!"

--- Sayfa 666 ---
They were each more stubborn than the other and neither wanted to concede their
position, and so the conversation between them continued for a long while. At long
last Huyayy, who had been dreaming of this day for years, succeeded in convincing
Ka'b. At the end of this deed they were all going to be "saved!" But Ka'b had one
condition; if the plan did not work out and if the army of the Ahzab had to tum back,
they were going to take him into the fortress and defend it to their last drop of blood!
Such a tum of events for Huyayy was not even possible and so he accepted the offer
and therefore connected their path in enmity against the Messenger of Allah. Now
Ka'b was openly declaring that his treaty with our noble Prophet was no longer valid,
declaring that he was going to work in concert with the Ahzab in enmity towards our
Prophet.
All of a sudden Medina was talking about how Ka'b had now declared himself to be
an enemy to the blessed Messenger and that he was acting with Huyayy.
Amr ibn Su'da, who had heard of the newly formed alliance, warned them about the
possible catastrophic consequences of their actions and preached to the leaders of the
Banu Qurayza saying: "If you are not going to help him, then you should at least leave
him alone with his enemies" but this fell on deaf ears, and they did not seem likely to
change their decision.
In order to guarantee his own life, Ka'b ibn Asad wanted to have the custody of a
number of people from the Quraysh and the Ghatafan during the course ofthe war and
Huyayy ibn Akhtab set off on the road in order to realize this goal.
This challenge posed by the Banu Qurayza meant that now there was another, a
more dangerous front that the Muslims had to fight in Medina. The Banu Qurayza,
who had been true to their contract for the last six years, had now defected. They
wanted to knife the Messenger of Allah from the back! The atmosphere in Medina
grew very tense.
But then there were those among them who had a strong conscience. On that day,
the brothers Asad, Asid and Salaba from the sons of Sane would come to the presence
of the Prophet, declare that they were not going to be ruled by Ka'b ibn Asad's
decision and that they had become Muslims.
Investigating the Truth of Treason
While these were happening in the land of the Banu Qurayza, our noble Prophet had
taken position on the other side of the trench and were waiting for the arrival of the
Meccan army. Umar had been the first to hear of the treason, and as soon as he did, he

--- Sayfa 667 ---
ran to the side of the Messenger of Allah and let him know of the developments. He
was very saddened to hear the news. In order to verify it, he sent a group of his
Companions including Sa'd ibn Ubada, Sa'd ibn Muadh, Abdullah ibn Rawaha,
Hawwat ibn Jubayr and U sayd ibn Khudayr to the land of the Banu Qurayza, advising
them in the following manner: "Go and see if the news that has reached us concerning
this tribe is true; if the accounts are true, then when you bring it to me break the news
to me in a way so that only I may understand it and so that our people may not be
frightened! If they are still true to their agreement with us, then you can speak out
about it openly."
It was clear that our noble Prophet did not want the Companions to hear of this
treachery, in order that the high morale which had been achieved despite the dire
conditions may not be destroyed. As soon as they were given this mission, the group
of Companions went straight to the land of the Banu Qurayza. The accounts had been
correct. The Banu Qurayza had violated the agreement and had started to provide the
Ahzab army with logistic support; they were setting up their market where the army
was so that the Ahzab could see to their needs more easily. They were also providing
them with horses, camels and other tools of war, helping the Meccan army to get
whatever it lacked. The Companions reminded the Banu Qurayza of the agreement
they had with the Muslims and advised them to return to the state of peace and
agreement before things took a bad tum, they advised them not to listen to Huyayy ibn
Akhtab, but the men had already made up their minds. They said, very clearly and
assertively: "We will not return to the old agreement; who is this Messenger of Allah
you speak of? I have broken the agreement just like I have untied the laces of these
shoes, from now on I have no agreement with him," said Ka'b ibn Asad.
These were words that the Muslims could not stomach; the man had overpassed the
limits and was openly insulting the Messenger of Allah. Usayd ibn Khudayr was
incensed and spoke louder than any one of them and said the following to Ka'b ibn
Asad in a way to challenge him: "You enemy of Allah! Know your place! How can
you say these negative things about him? Watch what you say and do! You will see,
with the help of Allah, the Quraysh will tum back defeated and you will be left all
along by your own house; then we will come back and confront you, take you out of
that hole where you seek shelter and teach you a lesson!"
The atmosphere was now inflamed and a duel of words had started between the
leaders of the Banu Qurayza and the envoys of our noble Prophet. Both sides were
furious, throwing threats and insults at each other.
But whatever words were spoken, it was clear that these men were not able to

--- Sayfa 668 ---
understand, therefore there was no point to persevere. It was Sa'd ibn Muadhl2l who
rounded up the argument: "Leave this man alone! Leave him, because there is no point
speaking to him anymore."
There really was no point in speaking; the company that the blessed Messenger had
sent for reconnaissance was returning having verified that treason has indeed taken
place. When they reached the place where the trench was, Sa'd ibn Ubada made his
way to the Messenger of Allah; he could see from the way Sa' d was walking that news
was bad and yet with enquiring eyes, he wanted to hear the result from him:
"It was obvious, just as the tribes of Adal and Qara who had betrayed Hubayb and
his friends in Raji, the Banu Qurayza were treacherous as well!" Sa'd explained.
Our noble Prophet, who wanted to teach his Companions to draw lessons from each
calamity, to make each test a victory, who opened the doors to spring in the coldest
blizzard, letting his Ummah feel the gentle breeze, prayed: "Rejoice, 0 believers!
Allah's help and victory is near, rejoice! Verily, I see the days when I will have the
keys to the Old House (the Ka'ba) and when I will circumambulate it once again; both
Kisra and the Kaiser will be destroyed and all their wealth will be distributed in the
way of Allah!" 102
Before long, the news of treason had spread among the believers and they were
thoroughly worried, for their children and family were unprotected from an attack that
would come from the inside! They were afraid, and many doubts had started to form
in their heads.
Those who exploited every opportunity were once again at work; the dissension in
the hearts of hypocrites was kindled again and they made it their job to disturb the
morale further. They were saying: "Muhammad promises that we will have the wealth
of the Kisra and the Kaiser and that their money will be spent in the way of Allah, but
do you not see that we do not even know what will become of us today, we cannot
even go to the toilet to relieve ourselves. " 103
They did not stop there, they were saying to the believers around them: "0 people
of Yathrib! You cannot continue to hold fast here; there is no point in sitting and
waiting; tum back," thus trying to make them abandon our noble Prophet.
One group among the men had come to the blessed Messenger saying that their
families were alone and unprotected in Medina and were asking permission to return.
Sa' d ibn Muadh, who saw that the Banu Haritha who had made a habit of evading
responsibility was among these men, came to the Messenger of Allah and asked him
not to allow these men to return.

--- Sayfa 669 ---
Nights as Clear as the Day
In those days wars took place only during the day and both sides would rest in the
evening. But at the Trench, things were different. It was very difficult to tell when and
how the other side would attack. On the one hand the army of Ahzab was looking for
an opportunity to cross the trench at a weak point, on the other hand the Banu Qurayza
were conspiring. Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, had received information that the Banu Qurayza would attack Medina in the
night and was greatly saddened. The line of Aaron, who had settled in Medina to wait
for his coming because they had read about his characteristics in the Torah, were now
acting completely contrary to their ancestors and betraying the Messenger of Allah.
And as if that were not enough, they were planning to attack innocent women and
children.
Without losing any time, our noble Prophet sent a force of two hundred men led by
Salama ibn Aslam and a force of three hundred led by Zayd ibn Haritha to Medina;
they were going to go to Medina from different routes and were going to protect the
innocent people who had been left there, providing a deterrent presence for those who
may think to attack the civilians. Both groups that performed their guarding duties all
through the night would loudly pronounce the greatness of Allah, to make clear to all
that Medina was not unprotected, and thus the Banu Qurayza were intimated by them
and so did not launch an attack on the town.
In this state of affairs in which the enemies were helping each other, the Muslims
were also fighting hunger, exhaustion and cold. The nights were especially bitterly
cold. The Messenger of Allah was also affected by the cold and he went into his tent
and sought comfort in the presence of our mother Aisha. Meanwhile he was constantly
thinking about the trench; he was saying that the weaker points had to be monitored
very closely, asking his Companions to be very careful about it.
He himself was vigilant; he was not able to sleep. He knew that the platoons under
the command of Abu Sufyan-Khalid ibn Walid, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl and Dirar ibn
Khattab-were patrolling the trench to see if there was a point where they could cross.
In the middle of the night, he had said: "I wish a man sound of heart would come and
patrol the trench and the hole in it during the night."
Before he could finish what he was saying, he heard the sounds of a sword and
shield outside, indeed, a man sound of heart from his Companions had come.
'Who is it?" the blessed Messenger called out.
"Sa'd, 0 Messenger of Allah," replied Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. Upon which he said:

--- Sayfa 670 ---
"This trench, it will be under your supervision," and then he himself retired to his rest.
Having put the places he had been worrying about in the hands of a man he trusted,
the blessed Messenger could rest for a while.
The job of keeping guard as the Messenger of Allah slept at night was shared by
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, Abbad ibn Bishr and Zubayr ibn Awwam.
Another evening our Prophet was praying in his tent. Our mother Umm Salama was
with him. He went outside and said: "Those are the horsemen of the polytheists; they
are trying to cross the trench."
Then he called Abbad ibn Bishr to his side: "Do you have anyone with you?" he
asked.
''Yes, I am with a group of your Companions around your tent," he answered.
Upon that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, pointed to
where the polytheists were and said the following: "Go and patrol the trench! The
polytheist horsemen over there are looking for a weak point to cross and reach you!
They aim to attack you in the still of the night!"
And then he opened his hands and prayed: "Dear Lord! Protect us from the evil
deeds, show us your victory against them, defeat them; because none other than You
can defeat them."
Meanwhile Abbad ibn Bishr had gone to where they had been requested to go, and
they had seen Abu Sufyan with a group of horsemen. Abu Sufyan was trying to
determine the weak points of the trench in order to cross it. Both sides made for their
arrows when they saw each other and this confrontation lasted a while. Such that the
polytheists who did not expect this stance had been exhausted and they had to retreat.
Abbad ibn Bishr, who came to the tent of the blessed Messenger to inform him,
found him praying. Our noble Prophet was not abandoning his connection to Allah
despite all the commotion that was happening outside the tent, setting an example for
the Companions, exemplifying that he was not going to compromise the extra Prayers
he had assumed as duty.
Peace Attempts with Ghatafan
By violating their agreement, the Banu Qurayza had set the Messenger of Allah
thinking. Because ofthem, they had had to fight on more than one front. The damage
that would be caused by the enemy from the inside would be much more devastating
that the damage that the army Ahzab could inflict from the outside. That is why our
noble Prophet wanted to send the army of Ahzab packing in the first instance and then

--- Sayfa 671 ---
protect his people from the enemy within. That is why he sent word to the two leaders
ofGhatafan, Uyayna ibn Hisn and Harith ibn Awf. They came with a group often; our
noble Prophet told them to leave this conspiracy aside. 104
They had very long sessions and at last Uyayna and Harith promised that they
would leave the Meccan army. But they asked, in return, that half of the dates of
Medina should be given to them.
They could easily give money in order to divert a catastrophe but what they were
asking for was too much. That is why the blessed Messenger offered them one third of
it. They did not accept and insisted on having half. Despite their insistence our
beloved Prophet did not accept anything more than a third, and so that is what they
agreed on and now was the time to out it down to paper.
Abbad ibn Bishr was keeping vigil by the side of our noble Prophet in his iron
armor. At that moment U sayd ibn Khudayr entered with his spear in his hand; he did
not know what was happening. He challenged the Uyayna who had stretched his legs
in the presence of the blessed Messenger and said: "Keep your feet away! How dare
you stretch your legs so in the presence of the Messenger of Allah, had the Messenger
of Allah not been here I would verily have cut you up and finished you off with this
spear."
When he learned of the truth of the matter he turned to our noble Prophet and said:
"0 Messenger of Allah, if this is an order that comes from the heavens then do it, but
if it is not so, then we have nothing but the sword to give to these men; they have not
been able to make us concede to anything, why should it be so now?"
This was a courageous stance, and it had to be given some thought.
If these were the thoughts of everyone then there was nothing to be worried about;
that is why our beloved Prophet called Sa'd ibn Muadh and Sa'd ibn Ubada and spoke
to them about the matter. 105
At the time the Ghatafan group was s1ttmg and waiting. When the blessed
Messenger came, he placed his two blessed hands on their shoulders and spoke to
them about the developments in a low voice that no one else could hear. Then he
asked them what they thought about it, they said: "0 Messenger of Allah! If this is an
order that came from the heavens then do it; if it is something that you yourself want
to act on, then do; what falls on us to do is to listen and obey! But if this is something
that can go either way, then we have nothing but the sword to give to them."
These words were no different to Usayd's. But they had to understand the matter
well. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was at the same time

--- Sayfa 672 ---
the Prophet of Mercy and he was after peace under all circumstances. For him, war
was the last resort; he would try all the routes that could lead to peace, and he would
try to resolve the conflict without hurting anyone. That is why our noble Prophet said:
"I see that the Arabs have allied themselves against you; they attack you from all
sides. Under such circumstances I hope that dispersing their power for a little while to
buy some time will be beneficial."
Now Sa'd ibn Muadh took word: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "Before we used
to call to gods other than Allah and we would worship idols and not the Allah we
know today. Even in those days they had no hope of getting dates from Medina except
by way of purchase or through our hospitality. Now, when Allah the Almighty has
honored us with Islam, when we have found the right path, when you honor us with
your presence, how is it that we should part with our property because they tell us so?
We do not need such an agreement! I swear that till Allah the Almighty has decided
among us we will not give them anything but the sword."
The stance of the Companions was sturdier and in such circumstances unity within
was more important than anything else; and the agreement with the Ghatafan men
would be putting this unity at risk. That is why the blessed Messenger took a step back
and turning to Sa'd he said: "Then this business is with you, you can do as you
please," upon which Sa'd ibn Muadh said: "Let them do all they can," meaning that
they were not going to make an agreement with the Ghatafan, thus spelling the end of
the affair.
The Moment the Trench is Breached
The tense wait in front of the trench had been continuing for days. There were raids on
certain days and night but the Ahzab could not cross to Medina. There had been no
further engagement other than throwing stones and shooting arrows and spears
between the two sides.
There seemed to be no progress; Abu Sufyan, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl, Dirar ibn
Khattab, Khalid ibn Walid, Amr ibn al-As, Nawfal ibn Muawiya, Nawfal ibn
Abdullah, Amr ibn Abdiwud, Uyayna ibn Hisn, Harith ibn Awf and Masud ibn Ruhayl
and the leaders of the Banu Asad had agreed, they were going to determine the
weakest point of the trench and then attack it and cross to the other side at all cost.
Finally, they found a narrow passage; Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl, Dirar ibn Khattab,
Nawfal ibn Abdullah, Hubayra ibn Abi Wahb and Amr ibn Abdiwud, spurred their
horses and jumped, thus crossing to the other side. The others were looking at them
from behind.

--- Sayfa 673 ---
'Why are you not crossing?" asked those that crossed over to those left behind.
''You have already crossed over, for now we will wait for you to tell us when there
is need, and then we will cross over."
These men who had crossed the trench and thus shown their valor were now riding
their horses towards mount Sal. They were going to make up for the days of waiting
which they had not been able to use their swords, attack the Muslims and damage their
forces considerably. But it did not transpire as they would have liked it; the Muslims
who saw them crossing the trench ran there at once and held this weak point, making
it impossible for further enemy forces to cross over.
Maybe this was part of the strategy of the Messenger of Allah; maybe he had left
certain points "passable" so that the enemy would come in a dispersed manner. For in
this raid, the valiant polytheist Amr ibn Abdiwud had been killed by the sword of
Ali 106 and those who had seen him fall could do nothing but run away. That day Ikrima
had not had the chance to even pick up his spear.
Companions such as Umar and Zubayr ibn Awwam followed those who ran away.
Zubayr had caught up with Nawfal ibn Abdullah and had cut his head in half with
his sword. Such that the force of the blow had cut up the saddle and gone all the way
to the neck of the horse. Those who saw the blow said to Zubayr: "0 Abu Abdillah!
We have not seen a sword like yours," and he would reply: "I swear what cut it was
not the sword but the wrist."
Zubayr had also dealt a blow to Hubayra ibn Abi Wahb who was running away;
with the force of this blow that came from behind his horse, Hubayra's armor had
fallen down and he had found no other solution but to flee. 107
Those who had crossed to the other side in order to "finish off the business" were
now finished themselves and were returning empty-handed. They went to Abu Sufyan
in this defeated state and said: "This is such a day that we have nothing else to do, let
us return."
They then sent a message to the blessed Messenger saying that they wanted to have
the dead body of Amr ibn Abdiwud in return for one thousand dirhams. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Let him be yours, we do
not take money from the dead! " 108
Hands Lifted in Prayer
Ten days had passed and the tense wait continued. The army of Ahzab was spurring
their horses, looking at places to cross, and the Muslims were trying to make sure that

--- Sayfa 674 ---
the trench was impassable. Our noble Prophet had warned his Companions about the
Meccan army who had come there with expectations that they were not going to be
defeated: "0 people! Do not seek confrontation with the enemy! Ask for health and
life from Allah! But whenever you come face to face with the enemy, then grit your
teeth and show patience; for Paradise is under the shade of swords!"
Now confrontation with the enemy was taking place and now was the time of
patience; but the enemy did not show any signs of returning and they were trying new
tricks all the time.
It was a Monday, a time between the Noon and Afternoon Prayers. The Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, came to the Masjid and started to pray in
the following way: "0 Lord who has sent down the book and who keeps all account!
Break the unity ofthis army of Ahzab, break them to pieces, and give us victory over
them!"
They had gone so far as to make the blessed Messenger, who was the Prophet of
compassion and mercy, pray in such a way.
At a moment when dear life was at risk, he was doing all he could by way of earthly
strife and then turning towards his Merciful Lord, asking for victory. He would repeat
the same prayer on Tuesday and Wednesday. The beloved Companions, who could no
longer bear the pressure, would tum to the blessed Messenger and say: "0 Messenger
of Allah, we are at our tether here; is there nothing we can say or do to get out of this
situation?"
''Yes there is," answered the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him.
"Say 'Dear Lord! Cover over trespasses and faults; end our fears and worries."'
The Beloved of Allah was advising his Companions to pray, and he himself did not
stop praying that day. At one point they heard him supplicate: "Dear Lord! I ask of
You to make happen the help and victory You promise us. Dear Lord! Or else there
will be no one left to worship You on earth!"
Then, with a great swelling and opening of heart, our noble Prophet turned to his
Companions and they could all see the traces of the good news on his radiant face, and
thus they too were content to know that help was near.
All Out to Attack
When Amr ibn Abdiwud was killed and those who had crossed the trench with him
had been forced to flee, the polytheists decided to launch an attack that would leave no
one behind and started to make preparations for this; everyone was encouraging each

--- Sayfa 675 ---
other for this last push. With the first lights of the morning they started a total attack.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had prepared his
Companions for battle as well and they were keeping file just behind the trench,
waiting for them; when they received news that the polytheists had prepared for battle,
our Prophet gave them the promise of victory if they continued to fight with patience.
They were mounting attack upon attack and there was great worry. It was impossible
to tell who would attack from where. The polytheists seem to pop up like mushrooms
from everywhere, when they got rid of one, when they had finished off a group;
another one came and around the trench was a battle that seemed to have no end.
Meanwhile, a group of two hundred men led by Khalid ibn Walid were approaching
the tent of our noble Prophet; they were blinded by hatred and did not think twice
about death.
This scene would continue till late hours of that day; the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, and his Companions had not had time to pray in this chaos,
they had failed to fulfill their duty towards Allah during a battle which they were
fighting in His N arne.
The polytheists had come with a purpose and had fought to the death and yet had
not been able to get the result they wanted, and so they started to draw back slowly;
before long everyone had retreated back to their own line. Usayd ibn Khudayr had
been appointed to keep guard on the polytheist side of the trench with a group of two
hundred men.
Khalid ibn Walid who had returned for a while attacked again with his horsemen,
and in the clashes that followed, one of the Companions, Tufayl ibn Numan, died as a
martyr.
Meanwhile, Sa' d ibn Muadh had been injured, he had been hit by an arrow in his
arm. What our mother Aisha had feared had happened; the arm that was left out of the
armor had taken a hit and he was now losing blood. This great Companion who had
held fast to the cause of our noble Prophet was showing great composure and wit, and
prayed: "Dear Lord! If there is the possibility of war with the Quraysh after this, then
let me live so that I may fight in it, because I sincerely want to fight these people who
exiled Your Messenger from his own homeland and who accused him of lying and
who try to torture him at every given opportunity. My Lord! If we will not fight them
again, then allow me to die a martyr, but please let me know that we are free of the
threat of the Banu Qurayza!"
In the chaos experienced that day, two Muslim groups had clashed and because both

--- Sayfa 676 ---
sides had their faces covered, they started to exchange blows, some among them were
injured and some killed. One of them spoke the code word of the Trench "Ha Mim ...
La Yunsarun" and that was when both sides dropped their swords and embraced one
another. Then they told the Messenger of Allah what had happened and asked them
what would become of the injured and the killed. The blessed Messenger said: "Your
injury has happened on Allah's path; whomever has been killed among you has died a
martyr."
The hesitation they had concerning their friends' status had thus been cleared and
they had sworn not to wield swords again without having spoken the code word.
In the meanwhile our noble Prophet was performing the Prayers he had missed. He
had come all the way to the place called Buthan and there he would first perform the
Prayers he had missed and then pray the Evening Prayer. After completing his Prayer
he said: "Just as they have prevented us from performing the middle Prayer, I hope
Allah will fill their homes and graves with fire."
For a believer the Daily Prayers was everything and the blessed Messenger, peace
and blessings be upon him, had opened his hands to the skies and was asking his Lord
to punish those who had kept him away from such an important duty.
The Logistic Support from the Banu Qurayza
the Banu Qurayza, who had annulled the agreement they had and thereby had declared
war on the Muslims, continued to provide support for the polytheists on the other side
of the trench. The supplies of the Ahzab were rapidly depleting and so Abu Sufyan
addressed Huyayy ibn Akhtab in the following manner: "Fodder for our animals have
finished, do you have any to give us?"
''Yes we do," said Huyayy and as soon as he left Abu Sufyan he went to the leader
of the Banu Qurayza, Ka'b ibn Asad, and asked him to see to the needs ofthe army.
"Our possessions are yours; take whatever you wish, do whatever you like; send for
someone so that they may bring their camels and take as much food as they want,"
said Ka'b.
Upon Ka'b's words the polytheists sent twenty camels and before long the Banu
Qurayza were sending twenty camel loads of provisions to the polytheists.
Meanwhile twenty people from the sons of Amr ibn Awf had left the trench in order
to observe the developments around the area and to bury some of their relatives who
had died. They made their way towards Medina. When they came to the valley of
Aqiq they came across the men of the polytheist army who were leading twenty

--- Sayfa 677 ---
camels with loads of provisions. They could see that something was afoot-this added
another dimension to the treachery of the Banu Qurayza and something had to be done
about it. They tried to seize the provisions and this resulted in a confrontation between
the two sides. But the believers were greater in number and they seized the twenty
camels and their loads without any loss of men on their side. They went to bury their
men with the twenty camels by their side and then came to the Messenger of Allah and
told him what had happened. There was great joy at the Trench, the camels had been
loaded to see to the needs of the polytheists but Allah the Almighty now gave these
camels to the Muslims. There was a war going on and everything captured in war was
considered to be spoils; the loads were taken down and some of the camels were
slaughtered and became food and energy for the believers. Some of them were later
brought to Medina. This was a great loss for the polytheists; they had not been able to
get the support they were hoping for and they had also lost the twenty camels they had
sent as transport. Dirar ibn Khattab, who had been leading the polytheists in this
expedition and who had just managed to save his life and escape, came back to where
the Azhab army was. He approached Abu Sufyan and told him what had befallen their
group. Abu Sufyan was infuriated at what he heard and he was very angry at Huyayy
ibn Akhtab because he had not been able to deliver on his word. He said to him:
"What an inauspicious man this Huyayy is! So long as I have known him he has
always left us alone. Now what will we put our freight on when we return?"
Another Instance of Betrayal
A Jewish group often decided to exploit the absence of the Messenger of Allah from
Medina and started to shower with arrows the compound where his family and aunts
were residing in. This was betrayal from the inside; rather than going to the field of
battle and fighting, they were cowardly trying to attack unprotected and innocent
women and children who had taken refuge in certain strongholds. Their aim was to
cause anxiety within the Muslims who were fighting at the trench. the Banu Qurayza
was thus preparing its own end. One of them had come all the way to where the
women were hiding and was about to enter. Our mother Safiyya who noticed this
called out to an old Companion Hasan ibn Thabit who was with them: "0 Hasan! Go
and give that man a lesson."
There was no way that the Messenger of Allah who was engaged with the enemy at
the trench could come and so the blessed Messenger's aunt Safiyya decided to contain
this incursion with her own devices. For Hasan was old and did not have the strength
or power to fight. That is why he said: "May the Lord have mercy on you 0 daughter

--- Sayfa 678 ---
of Abdul Muttalib! You know well that I am not the man for this job; had I been able,
I would have gone with our noble Prophet and stand against the enemy."
It appeared that she would have to take care of this herself. Safiyya put on her
garment and grabbing her sword she came to where the man was. The Jew who was
trying to get in was now faced with the figure of a well-built woman, and she finished
him off with one blow to the head. Our mother Safiyya was calling to Hasan from
below: "0 Hasan, come down and pick up the valuables off this man; I could do that
too but I do not want to touch this strange man."
Hasan said: "I do not need the valuables of that man, 0 daughter of Abdul
Muttalib!"
The other members of the group who saw that their man had been killed thus
believed that the Messenger of Allah had left some soldiers behind and so left the
compound immediately .109
The Last Maneuver
Nuaym ibn Masud was a friend of the Banu Qurayza; that day he too had been caught
in the web ofthings and had joined the army of Ahzab and come all the way to here to
fight the blessed Messenger. He was a very clever man; he was able to manipulate
people and provoke conflicts between them. With every passing day, however, he was
feeling greater unease inside and asking himself whether what he was doing was right.
After a while famine spread and caused deaths among the men and the animals!
This was not how things were supposed to happen; maybe all this was because they
were attacking Medina with no good reason.
Then Nuaym ibn Masud finalized his decision; he was going to become a Muslim!
Accepting this and being determined about this seemed to have changed everything;
he felt much lighter and he could see all the troubles he had inside dispersing. He had
indeed become Muslim but no one knew about this change he had gone through. One
day, between the Evening and Night Prayers he went to our noble Prophet who was in
Prayer. When the blessed Messenger ended his Prayer he saw Nuaym and sat beside
him. He could feel the change in Nuaym and turning to him he asked: "What is it that
brings you here at this hour 0 Nuaym ?"
There was warmness in his voice that melted Nuaym's heart. He was so happy that
he had come; all the things that had been troubling his heart for the last few days now
had left their place to a great peace that knocked his feet off the ground. In great
modesty he looked at the radiant face of our blessed Messenger and said: "I came to

--- Sayfa 679 ---
bear witness to you and to say that all that you have brought is the truth."
Another person had recognized his Lord and had become subject to Him-what
greater happiness could there be for the Messenger of Allah? He forgot all the
difficulties he had been experiencing and was feeling a peace that penetrated the
darkness of the night.
Nuaym had also brought a piece of information to our noble Prophet. The
polytheists who had been waiting for this day for a long time had said "We have come
here to fight Muhammad and his Companions, but now we have to abandon this
pursuit" and in response to that the Banu Qurayza had made a reference to the
agreement they had made at the beginning, saying: "This is your business, you can do
as you like. But do not fail to send us back the people you have taken from us; and
then you can do as you please." Such was the harsh answer they gave to them.
Thus cracks had started to form within the Ahzab army, it was good news that the
enemy had difference between then, it was as if time and space had conspired to give
an opportunity for Nuaym to show himself1
He was using the wit he had been using for the other side now for Islam, and before
he had had the chance to pray two cycles of Prayer he had started to serve religion at
the front! This was also noticed by our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, who
said to Nuaym: "They have sent me an envoy saying that in return for the Banu Nadir
returning to their land and us giving them back their property they will make peace
with us."
They seemed to be thinking the same thing.
Nuaym started by saying: "0 Messenger of Allah; order me to do whatever you
like! Whatever you say is my command! Because no one from my tribe or from any
other group knows that I have become a Muslim!"
Upon that our Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "You are just one
man among us; try to keep the enemy away from us as much as you can, and do not
forget that war is deception!"
"Then I will do so," said Nuaym. "But 0 Messenger of Allah! I might have to say
certain things that I don't mean; will you give me permission to do so?"
His intentions were sincere and they were at war; under such circumstances the
power of the word was sometime more efficient than the sword and the shield. That is
why the Messenger of mercy gave him the permission he was seeking.
Nuaym set off right after his talk with the blessed Messenger and went to the Banu
Qurayza; because no one knew that he was a Muslim he was shown great respect, his

--- Sayfa 680 ---
allies were offering him food and drink.
He first said to them: "I did not come here in order to eat and drink; you know how
well I love you and the friendship I harbor for you; my essential purpose in coming
here is my love and need to speak of certain things that I fear for you, to warn you."
It looked like he was about to say something very important. They were listening to
him very intently. They said: "We know that; you have never been accused of
anything among us; you are one of the best among us by way of goodness and
loyalty."
Nuaym said: "But you will have to keep whatever I say a secret."
Their curiosity was roused even more, and so they consented: "All right, we will not
share it with anyone."
Now the stage was set for his disclosure and everyone was listening to him; he
could speak freely and he could achieve the effect he wanted in his listeners. He
started to say the following: "The deeds of this man are really inauspicious; you see
what he has done to the Jews of the Banu Qaynuqa and the Banu Nadir, he confiscated
their property and then exiled them from their homes! Ibn Abi Hubayk sought refuge
with us and now we have gathered together to come here and help you! But as you can
see the job is taking much longer than we anticipated; I swear neither the Quraysh nor
the Ghatafan are in a similar position to you vis-a-vis Muhammad. Quraysh and the
Ghatafan are nomadic tribes and they have come here and have settled here. If they
find an opportunity they will exploit it! But if they take a great blow in the war
because of unprotected developments then they will have to return to their lands! You,
however, have no such luxury, this is your home! All that you have, your possessions,
your families and women are all here! Even though they gathered together to fight
Muhammad, the Ahzab are slowly being beaten by him and his friends; they have
even killed their leader Amr ibn Abdiwud! And the others ran away wounded!
Because they know of your circumstances and position they cannot disregard you;
they need you! Do not neglect to take some men of the Quraysh and Ghatafan as
security with you before you start fighting; then you will have deterred them from
giving up the fight against Muhammad-they will first have to come and get the men
you have taken as security!"
What Nuaym was saying was really reasonable; the Quraysh and the Ghatafan
could easily leave this place but they had no such option themselves-they had burned
their bridges in Medina and annulled their treaty with Muhammad the Trustworthy,
peace and blessings be upon him! It was too late to tum back and retrace their steps!

--- Sayfa 681 ---
There was no other way for them but to win this war; that is why they had to act very
meticulously: "You have verily shown us the way we should act, the precautions we
should take, we will do as you say," and thus they thanked him for reminding them of
this detail that they had not thought about. Nuaym, reminded them once more, said:
"But this will stay between you and I!"
Of course they were not going to denounce someone who had been so close and
helpful to them on such a crucial matter! Goodness would only be met with goodness
and so they said: "Fear not; we will not share it with anyone," thus giving him their
word.
The first step was bearing its fruit. Nuaym left and went to Abu Sufyan with quick
steps. The general commander of the Ahzab army, Abu Sufyan, was at that moment
sitting with a group of his friends. After the usual greetings Nuaym ibn Masud
approached Abu Sufyan and said the following: "0 Abu Sufyan! I come to tell you
something; but you will not reveal this and keep it a secret!"
Abu Sufyan was startled and he was seized by great curiosity. He said: "All right, it
will stay between you and me!"
Nuaym ibn Masud who had received this guarantee from Abu Sufyan started to say
the following: ''You know very well that the Banu Qurayza regret that they have
violated the agreement they had with Muhammad and they want to renew the treaty
and return to the way things were before! They sent an envoy to him for this very
purpose when I was with them. This is the message they sent him: 'We will give you
seventy-two men from the leaders of Quraysh and Ghatafan for you to sever their
heads but in return you will let the Banu Nadir-our arm which you have severed- to
go back to their land. If you do this, then we will fight with you till you have got rid of
the Quraysh'. If they send word to take men as security from you, let this plot be
known; do not send your men to them and be vigilant about the leading men of your
tribe! Do not repeat any word of what I said to you to anyone."
Abu Sufyan was very surprised at what he was hearing and said: "Okay, we will not
speak of this to anyone."
He was trying to imagine how things would develop and what further steps he may
have to take.
Nuaym had one more business to see to; he went to where the Ghatafan were and to
them he said: "0 people of Ghatafan, you know I am one of you, but let this stay only
between us! You have to know that the Banu Qurayza has sent men to Muhammad,"
and then he repeated what he had said to Abu Sufyan. Likewise, he warned: "Do not

--- Sayfa 682 ---
give your men to them."
Like the other groups they thanked Nuaym for the information he had brought them.
He had performed his role immaculately; all three groups had taken what he said
rather seriously and were all now waiting to see how things would develop.
Before long, the Banu Qurayza sent the following message to the Quraysh with
Azzal ibn Samual:
''You have been here a long time and yet you have not been able to accomplish
anything; and what you do does not seem reasonable! If you had determined when you
were going to attack Muhammad, and had you attacked from one side and we had
attacked from here and the Ghatafan from where they are, at least one group among us
would have got hold of Muhammad by now! From now on we want you to send us
some of your leading men so we can hold them as security, or else we will not fight on
your side! Because we fear that if you lose the war or sustain some damage you will
go to your own lands and leave us here alone and unprotected in the hands of
Muhammad to whom we have declared our enmity!"
Abu Sufyan was cautious with his reaction when the envoy came and delivered the
Banu Qurayza's message, and as the envoy turned back to go, Abu Sufyan turned to
his friends and said: "This is the plot that Nuaym was talking about."
Nuaym continued to do rounds; he left Abu Sufyan and went to where the Banu
Qurayza was and said to them: "0 people of the Banu Qurayza! When I was with Abu
Sufyan your envoy came to him and asked for the men as security. They did not give
him any answer. As your envoy was leaving Abu Sufyan was saying to the men beside
him: 'We will not give you even a goat should you ask for one! I should give my
friends away so that they may give them to Muhammad to kill them? No, I won't give
away any of my friends as security to anyone!' So think well; do not accept to fight
with Abu Sufyan and his friends until they have accepted to give you their men as
surety! Because if you do not fight with Muhammad and if Abu Sufyan goes and
leaves you, then your old treaty will still be valid."
They liked what they were hearing and yet they were not sure that things would tum
out the way that Nuaym described. That is why they said: "We do hope that is how it
will be!"
Then Ka'b ibn Asad came to the fore and said: "I swear I will not fight with
Muhammad. I did not want it from the beginning anyway, this accursed man Huyayy
forced me."
Zabir ibn Bata followed him. He was a more radical man and he was of the opinion

--- Sayfa 683 ---
that despite everything they should fight our noble Prophet in league with the others:
"If the Quraysh and the Ghatafan abandon the thought of fighting Muhammad and
leave, then there will be no option left for us but the sword. Come, let us attack
Muhammad altogether and do not insist to take men from the Quraysh as security for
they will never give you anything. Their numbers are greater, they have much better
horses-why would they feel obliged to give us surety? They could easily run away
should they want to but we have no such option-and when it comes to the Ghatafan,
they tried to negotiate with Muhammad, to make them give some of the date groves of
Medina but Muhammad did not accept their offer and they returned empty handed!"
Zabir was saying these but he would be left alone with his argument because no one
in the tribe of the Banu Qurayza liked the idea of fighting on the side of Quraysh
without having some of their men as security. It was a Saturday evening; Abu Sufyan
and the leading men of Ghatafan sent a group to the Banu Qurayza led by Ikrima ibn
Abu Jahl. Their message was the following: "We are not here to stay forever; the
horses and the camels have started to perish. Be prepared for the last push so that we
may get this over with and end this business between him and us!"
After this incoming message the leading men of the Banu Qurayza looked at one
another. What Nuaym ibn Masud had said was still very fresh in their minds. That is
why they said: "Today is Saturday, we can't do anything today. Some people among
us had done something on a Saturday and all sorts of calamities that you know of had
befallen them. Besides, unless you give us your men as security, so long as we do not
have some kind of guarantee, we will not fight Muhammad on your side! Because we
fear that when the course of the war turns against you, you will leave us alone and go
back to your lands, but we are here and if such a thing happens we have no power to
fight against him, and this will be our end!"
The envoys that had gone with Ikrima reported what the Banu Qurayza said and
Abu Sufyan and his friends concluded: "So what Nuaym was talking about was true."
And so they sent word again to the Banu Qurayza: "We swear we cannot give you a
single man; if you want to fight then go ahead and fight."
The Banu Qurayza who received this news said: "It seems what Nuaym said to us
was true; you see, these men seem to have no other purpose than war! Whenever they
find an opportunity they will take it, but if things don't go according to their plans
they will leave us all alone."
Nuaym' s efforts had worked and now there was irreparable dissension within the
ranks of the Ahzab army; the various camps did not trust each other anymore. Many
more envoys would go back and forth between them but this would be of no avail.

--- Sayfa 684 ---
Divine Blessing
Divine blessing made itself felt once again; the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, saw the Truthful Gabriel and turning towards his Companions,
he repeated three times: "Take care; rejoice at the news that comes from Allah"
And just as he finished his words all was chaos in the Trench, there was a great
wind and tents were flying in the air, one could hardly see anything from the dust. The
Ahzab army that was already asunder because of inner conflict was now they were
fighting a great storm that hit their side of the trench; their cauldrons were overturned,
their fire had gone out and their settlements were completely destroyed! It had become
quite dark and there was a frightening noise where the trench was! It had gone so dark
that they could not even see the tips of their fingers. The polytheists who were already
shivering because of the cold were now totally desperate because of the storm.ill
They were faced with armies they had not seen till that day! Sand and dust was
everywhere and it was difficult to tell who was doing what! They were trying to tie up
the ropes of the tents that had broken away, trying to dig the poles back into the
ground but each time a gale took them away and they could not succeed. They were
now shivering with fear and the leader of each tribe was calling his men to his side-
still this was not enough and they feared that they would be assassinated at any
moment. They were continuously crying out for help, driving the men near them to
desperation.
Now the ruler of the trench was the wind that Allah had sent as a blessing. He had
filled the eyes of the polytheists, who had come to attack Medina with the intention of
getting rid of our noble Prophet and the believers, with sand and the enemies of Allah
were writhing in pain. The frightened hypocrites were asking to leave, speaking of
their unprotected families as excuse and were leaving the battlefield. But the believers
who anticipated the blessing of Allah felt themselves to be stronger than before. The
wind had supported the spiritual standing of the believers whereas it had frightened
the polytheists.
In the middle of the night the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
tested his Companions and asked: "Is there no one among you who will bring me
news of this army?" and then he said that the person to do so would be his neighbor in
Paradise. Upon this Abu Bakr came forward and pointing to Hudhayfa, he suggested:
"How about if you send Hudhayfa?"
Our noble Prophet turned to the person who was sitting next to him and asked:
"Who are you?" The person who was asked the question answered: "I am Hudhayfa."

--- Sayfa 685 ---
He was the man they wanted, to him our noble Prophet said: "Get up and bring us
the news ofthese men who seem to be running this way and that."
Hudhayfa, who because of his modesty was not able to stand up because of the
strong winds blowing at his clothes, said rather embarrassed: "I swear by He who has
sent you with truth that I did not get up and present myself because I was
embarrassed." Because at the time he was wearing a dress belonging to his wife and it
covered him only down to his knees.ll!
Upon which the Messenger of Allah said to him: ''Neither cold nor hot will touch
you till you have come back to me."
Having given this good news, the blessed Messenger also said the following to
Hudhayfa who feared not falling martyr but feared falling captive: ''You will not be
taken prisoner either," and after giving this second piece of good news he gave him
particular directives. The blessed Messenger who looked at Hudhayfa as he was going
towards the enemy lines would open up his hands in prayer and say:
"0 Lord! Protect him from the dangers that may come from his behind, right, left,
above and below."
Now, Hudhayfa left all the worries he had and was walking directly to where the
enemy was as if he was strolling in fields of flowers. Then the Messenger of mercy
called: "0 Hudhayfa!"
Hudhayfa turned back where he was at once and started to listen to what our noble
Prophet had to say. The Messenger of mercy was saying the following: "Do not cause
any problems among them until you have returned back."
Thus having received the last directive from our noble Prophet, Hudhayfa crossed
to the other side at once and approach the crowd that was near the fire that had been
set in the middle. A hefty man (Abu Sufyan) was around the fire saying the following
anxiously to those around him: "Come let's get on the road! Let's go!"
It was clear that he was an important man and Hudhayfa prepared himself to shoot
an arrow at him. Just as he was about to do so he remembered the last warning of the
Messenger of Allah-this memory had his hands tied, he had to return without causing
any problems and so he put the arrow back in its place.
Meanwhile the sounds coming from where he was had alerted Abu Sufyan; he was
worried that a spy had entered their ranks. That is why he said to those near him: "Let
everyone hold the hand of the person next to him and look him in the face."
This was a very clever move by Abu Sufyan and Hudhayfa was about to be
revealed. He held the hands of the men to his right and left and then asked the man on

--- Sayfa 686 ---
his right: "Who are you?"
"Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan."
Then he turned to the man on his left and asked him who he was: "Amr ibn al-As,"
the man answered. Thus he had acted before everyone else and averted this trick.
The wind was blowing very hard. The army of the Ahzab now believed that there
was no choice other than running away and started to collect their belongings
hurriedly. Abu Sufyan had mounted on his camel and was trying to make it stand up
but the animal could not stand because of the force of the gale. They were so afraid
that they were going to run away without even glancing back; they traveled back the
length of a three day journey to Medina in a single day totally exhausted when they
arrived.
Hudhayfa, who had infiltrated the polytheist camp, had collected news and was now
bringing it to our noble Prophet. On his way back he came across a group of about
twenty horsemen; they said to him: "Tell your friend; Allah the Almighty
overpowered that multitude with the wind and armies."
These were men he did not recognize. Hudhayfa was totally surprised. When he
came to the presence of the blessed Messenger he found him in Prayer once again.
Having completed his duty, Hudhayfa had started to shiver once again because of
the cold. Our noble Prophet then threw one side of the clothing he was wearing over
Hudhayfa and then started to listen carefully to what he had experienced and seen ... 112
Leaving the Trench
Now it was time for the Ahzab army to leave before they had the chance to stay
around. The polytheists, who had not forgotten Uhud and Hamrau'l-Asad, feared that
the Muslims would follow them from behind and so they had left an army of two
hundred cavalrymen under the leadership of Khalid ibn Walid and Amr ibn As by way
of protection. When the morning came, there was not a single enemy soldier left on
the other side of the trench!
Looking at them from behind, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, said by way of thanks: "He is One, there is no deity beside Him. He has made
His soldiers victorious, and He has responded to His subject with His help. He has
defeated his enemies and He has wiped out the Ahzab! There will be no such thing
after this; from now on it will not be them who come to fight us; we will be the
determining factor in the field of battle."
As he was leaving the Trench, Abu Sufyan left the following letter for the blessed

--- Sayfa 687 ---
Messenger with Abu Usama al-Jushami: "I start this letter by taking an oath in the
name of Lat and Uzza and in the Name of Allah! I advanced upon you with a great
and multitudinous army; I had come here to wipe you off the face of the earth so that I
may not have to face you again! I see that you do not want to face us; you seek refuge
behind the trench. But there will surely be a day between you and me when even the
women get strangled, a day like Uhud!"
It was clear that the one who tasted defeat in this case was a glutton for punishment;
despite the defeat, Abu Sufyan was throwing threats and challenges so that his honor
may not be tainted, but ironically he did this from afar, behind the trench.
Ubayy ibn Ka'b had read the letter to the Messenger of Allah. After having listened
to it till the end, the noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had his
Companions write the following response: "In short, your letter has reached me. You
still trust in your numbers and you are still a slave to your pride. As you say so
yourself, you had no other plan than to come straight at us and finish us! But this is
something between you and us that will be decided only by Allah and Allah the
Almighty has given victory to us! Do not forget that Allah will show you the day
when I topple and destroy Lat, Uzza, Isaf, Naila and Hubal! I warn you of that day
now, 0 you degenerate of the tribe ofthe Banu Ghalib!"
It was clear that just as one had to wield the sword on the battlefield; one also had to
speak with powerful words that would resonate like an arrow. Thus, the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, put Abu Sufyan in his place, a man who still
acted proudly after his defeat.
Now that the polytheists had retreated, there was no need to stay by the trench
anymore, and that is why the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him,
gave the order for his people to return to Medina. But because he was thinking of the
Banu Qurayza, he did not want his Companions to be unduly overjoyed; for there
were still some accounts to be settled. On the other hand, the hypocrites who had
backed away from fighting with petty excuses had no idea that the Ahzab army had
retreated and they were saying: "They still have not perished," thus eagerly awaiting
the defeat of the believers. They were the ones, along with the Banu Qurayza, who
were expecting retaliation for their betrayal, who would be devastated to see the
blessed Messenger and his Companions return home safe and sound. Now that the
Ahzab army in whom they had put their trust had retreated, they were left alone. Only
three polytheists had been killed as a result of this war which had gone on for almost a
month, and eight of the Companions had fallen martyr. The Truthful Gabriel then
descended and spoke about what had happened at the Trench, summarizing the real

--- Sayfa 688 ---
intentions of the parties who had been fighting.ill.
the Banu Qurayza
The noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, had returned to Medina with his
Companions; they had left their weapons aside and were resting. The Messenger of
Allah had retired to the room of our mother Aisha. He asked for some water. With it
he washed his hands, face and head and then made his way to the Masjid an-Nabawi
and prayed the Noon Prayer with his Companions. He then returned back to his
humble home of serenity. He saw a man with a turban appear in front of his door. The
man was in his armor and was shaking the dust off himself and at the same time he
was calling out to the Messenger of Allah.
When the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, heard the voice, he
ran to the man. Our mother Aisha was intrigued as well; who was this man that had
made the blessed Messenger run speedily to the door? She wanted to come to the door
and see what was happening.
The Messenger was standing outside and looking rather excited because it was none
other than the Truthful Gabriel who had come in the shape ofDihyah al-Kalbi.
"0 Messenger of Allah!" Gabriel was saying. ''You have been too quick in laying
down your arms! We, the angels, have not put our weapons aside since the enemy
came here! We pursued them till Hamrau'l-Asad and left them only when we were
sure that they could not cause harm anymore. Allah the Almighty has made them
experience a great defeat. I hope you will be forgiven; why did you leave the field
while we were still engaged? Come with me, we are going. Allah has ordered you to
fight the Banu Qurayza. Now, with the angels by my side, I am going to their
battlements to shake their fortress, get your Companions and come with us!"
The Messenger of mercy always approached his Companions with mercy and
thought about the news that the Truthful Gabriel brought. Thinking of his Ummah, he
said: "My Companions are very tired; could you not give them a couple of days to
rest?"
"Do not wait and advance on them! I swear by Allah that I will descend upon them
like a hammer and shake them and their houses to the ground!" exclaimed Gabriel.
Having said that, Gabriel turned back and started to make way with those angels
who were by his side.
Our mother Aisha, who had been following the developments from the door till that
moment, said to our noble Prophet, who re-entered his blessed home: "0 Messenger

--- Sayfa 689 ---
of Allah, who was it that you spoke to?"
"Did you see him?" asked the blessed Messenger, and then the following
conversation took place between them: ''Yes."
'Who did you think he resembled?"
"Dihyah ibn Khalifa al-Kalbi."
"That was Gabriel! He was telling me to advance upon the Banu Qurayza."
Before long the town crier of our noble Prophet was walking the streets of Medina
and calling out: 'Whoever listens to and obeys Allah and His Messenger, he will pray
the Afternoon Prayer at the land of the Banu Qurayza,"lli thus calling out the
campaign that was to be led towards the bed of treachery.
It was the twenty-third day of the month of Dhu al-Qadah. Abdullah ibn Umm
Maktum was left as deputy in Medina. The standard that had not yet been rolled up
after the Trench was given to Ali. He put on his helmet and armor, and donned his
weapons. Then he mounted his horse (named Luhayfbecause ofthe length of its tail),
and with his three thousand Companions, he made way for the land of the Banu
Qurayza. When they reached the place called the Banu Najjar they saw two armed
platoons that were waiting for them. This was food for thought; the Banu Qurayza
must have received news of their coming; but when had they had the time to prepare
and come there? That is why the Messenger of Allah asked: "Has any one come to
these parts recently?"
''Yes," they said. "Dihyah al-Kalbi who had a velvet cover on his saddle passed
here.
He will be here before long. He told us to get out our weapons and be on the road
immediately."
What they said verified that it was the Truthful Gabriel they were talking about.
Upon that the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "That person
was Gabriel. Allah the Almighty has sent him to the Banu Qurayza so that he may
frighten them and shake their fortress from its foundations."
Ali was progressing with a group of Companions including Abu Qatada, and he was
the first to reach the Banu Qurayza. The Banu Qurayza were angry that he had come
and put up the standard of our noble Prophet right in front of their faces, and so they
responded in an insulting way.
They were slandering the Messenger of Allah and the mothers of the believers, the
pure and virtuous wives of our blessed Prophet. The developments showed that there
was indeed great degeneration; these were expressions that made grown men blush.

--- Sayfa 690 ---
The Companions were shocked at what they had heard and they kept silent. The only
thing they said was: "The matter between us can only be decided by the sword." Ali
could not take anymore of it; he left Abu Qatada with the standard and came to the
presence of our noble Prophet to say: "Please do not come any closer to these
degenerate people; Allah the Almighty will help you in any case."
The Messenger of mercy had understood what the situation was and said: "Why do
you not want me to approach them?"
Ali blushed to the ears when he remembered what he had just heard and so he kept
silent. He was not even able to answer the question of the blessed Messenger. Upon
that he said: "I believe you have heard ugly words about me."
''Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah," was all Ali could muster. He was so ashamed that he
was not even able to look our noble Prophet in the face when saying these few words.
It was the Messenger of mercy, who would do the consoling once again, said: "Had
they seen me for who I am, they would not have said any of those things!"
This meant that if they actually saw him and listen to him, if they were among the
people in his company, they would not be able to say anything negative. Yet, despite
the worries of Ali, the Messenger of Allah started to advance towards the fortress of
the Banu Qurayza.
As they approached the fortress, Usayd ibn Khudayr came to the fore and reached
the fortress before the others and started calling out to them: "0 you enemies of Allah!
We will not leave until you die out of hunger! You are like foxes caught in their dens."
The Banu Qurayza were frightened to hear these threats: they could see that they
were heading towards sure death. They were experiencing indescribable fear and
anxiety.
"0 Ibn Khudayr," they replied. 'We are not your ally, but the ally ofthe Khazraj."
What could such alliance mean after so much treachery?
That's why U sayd responded: "There is no alliance or agreement between you and
me!"
By that time our noble Prophet had come near, and the honorable Companions who
saw him coming surrounded him to protect him from any plot that the Banu Qurayza
might have devised. Our beloved Prophet came a little bit closer and then started to
address the leader of the Banu Qurayza in a language that they would understand:
"Allah the Almighty has descended His wrath upon you, and you still slander me!"
They changed that very moment; it was as if it had not been them who had been
cursing and swearing at the Messenger of Allah and slandering his wives, as if it had

--- Sayfa 691 ---
been someone else: "0 Abu'l-Qasim," they called out "We did not do such a thing!
You would have nothing to do with ignorance, and you would never say such things."
They were trying to prove that they had done nothing wrong and they were thus
trying to seek refuge in the virtue ofthe Messenger of mercy.
The Siege
The siege had started and that evening Sa'd ibn Ubada sent the believers sacks of
dates. Our noble Prophet said: "What wonderful food is the date!" thus appreciating
and lauding the actions of those who helped his Companions in such critical situations.
Starting from the early hours of the next day, they started their attack on the Banu
Qurayza. The blessed Messenger had placed the archers in specially assigned locations
and he had divided his Companions into ranks for the siege. The shooting of arrows on
both sides continued until that evening.
Days went by; the Banu Qurayza felt secure because they had a good stock of food
in their fortress and they did not want to surrender.
But after a while, their hopes started to dwindle and they became quite desperate;
even if they should resist, there was not much they could do. They were about to
perish; that is why they started to call out from the inside: "Let us free, we want to
speak to you!"
The Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, accepted their request.
Before long Nabbash ibn Qays came to the fore from among them and started to
walk towards the blessed Messenger: "Give us the chance to leave with our property
and our families as you let the Banu Nadir leave; we will take whatever our camels
can carry except for the weapons and leave."
Many things had happened after the Banu Nadir incident; they had seen what had
happened to the two tribes that had betrayed the Muslims and knowing what the
punishment would be, they still had betrayed the authority to which they had sworn
allegiance to, and they had done it twice! They had been forgiven and given leave to
stay in Medina and then had signed another agreement saying that they would protect
Medina with the Muslims. The grace that the blessed Messenger had shown them was
not limited to that; before his arrival in Medina, a person from the Banu Qurayza was
not considered equal to a person from the Banu Nadir. Such that the Banu Qurayza
had to pay life for a life when a person from the Banu Nadir was killed by them,
whereas the Banu Nadir could get away by paying only blood money. The Banu
Qurayza had been a tribe that was socially inferior among the Jews and the Messenger

--- Sayfa 692 ---
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had come and given them the same status
as the Banu Nadir. But they had given their thanks and returned their gratitude by
setting joining ranks with the enemy-they had thus helped the enemy get their
essential needs and provide logistical support. This was treachery from the inside, a
treachery that could cost the Muslims severely! They had opened their arms to
Huyayy ibn Akhtab, they had harbored this man who was a war criminal and they had
devised plans with him to damage the Muslim side from the inside. They were writing
letters to those who were waiting on the other side of the trench, asking them to make
one final push.
Meanwhile some of them had already attacked the Muslims from behind; they had
attacked women and children and thus had psychologically weakened the men fighting
at the front. They had drawn their swords and showered arrows on the Muslims. They
had also opened their mouths and spoke of unheard slanders.
All these were clear indications that they were rebelling against the legitimate rule
in society; and they were doing all these out of their own volition.
That is why the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, did not accept
their offer. It was clear that they had debated the issue at length already and so they
immediately came up with another offer: "Then do not touch our lives, leave our
women and children to us and let us go without taking any of our possessions."
This was not accepted either. They now had to be content with the decision that our
noble Prophet would take. Nabbash returned to the fortress in desperation. When he
came back and told his people about the conversation he had had with the Messenger
of Allah, Ka'b ibn Asad started to call out to his tribe: "0 people of the Banu
Qurayza! You can see for yourselves what is happening to us; I will now offer you
three choices, you are free to choose whichever you want."
'What are they?" they asked.
The experienced leader started to enumerate them: "We can follow this man and
submit to him. I swear by Allah that it is already clear that he is a Messenger sent by
Allah; he is the Prophet whose attributes you read in your book. Thus you will have
protected your lives, your possessions and your women! I swear by Allah that you
already know that Muhammad is a Prophet, the one thing that stops us from following
him is that he was not chosen from among the Banu Israil but that Allah chose him
from among a people that He wanted. Your reason is nothing but jealousy. I swear I
was not against violating our agreement with him, all this trouble has been caused by
this inauspicious man (Huyayy ibn Akhtab ).ill Do you remember what Ibn Jawwas

--- Sayfa 693 ---
said to you when he came here? He asked: 'Do you know why I left such a land as
Damascus with various wines, white bread and delicious dates and came here where
there is only water, barley and dates?' You had asked in tum, 'Why?' and he had
answered: 'Verily, a Prophet will come from this land; if he appears while I am still
alive, then I will be his follower and helper. If he appears after me, do not stay
indifferent to him, go to him and be his helpers; then you will be the happy ones who
believe both in the previous and the following book! Give my greetings to him, and
tell him that I submit to him as well.' Come, let us speak our allegiance to him even
now. "
They did not like what they had heard and responded: "We will never leave the
edicts of the Torah, we will not change it with another!" Upon which Ka'b spoke
about his second suggestion: "Well, since you do not accept this offer, then let us now
kill our children and wives, and let us appear before Muhammad and his Companions
as heroes who have drawn their sword. Then we will have left nothing behind us that
will cause us anxiety and will fight against Muhammad until Allah the Almighty
decides between us. If we die, we will have died together and then we will not leave
behind a generation that grieves for us. If we come out of this alive, then we will find
other women and then start new families."
They could see that Ka'b was at an impasse. He was not a man that would say such
things under normal circumstances. It was clear that the present state of affairs was
worse than they had expected. It seemed that there was no end other than death to the
predicament they found themselves in, and Ka'b was trying to find alternatives to
lessen the impact of the calamities that they were about to face.
Neither the first nor the second alternative was something they could accept. That is
why they asked: "How can we kill these innocent people? And what meaning would
life have without them?" The second offer was not accepted either. Then Ka'b shared
with them the last suggestion: "Seeing that you have not accepted the previous offers,
you should listen to this one at least. Tonight is Saturday eve and Muhammad and his
Companions will feel safe; let us attack them this evening!"
They started to grumble once again and these were the voices that were heard: ''You
mean we should disrespect the Shabbat and do things that those before us did? You
know what happened to those who did such things before us, and how their forms
were changed into apes!"
It looked like they were not open to any suggestions. Ka'b was at a loss, he did not
know what to say. For the first time they seemed determined and united and so he
said: "I believe none of you has ever been so adamant at any point in your lives

--- Sayfa 694 ---
before!"
Those Who Spoke Sincerely
The gloom at the meeting continued; all the possibilities that were discussed were
discarded as illogical and they could find no way out. Then the brothers U sayd and
Salaba, the sons of Saya from the Hudhayl tribe that were not members of the Banu
Nadir or the Banu Qurayza but who were settled on the land, and their cousin Asad
ibn Ubayd came to the fore to say the following:
"0 people of the Banu Qurayza! We swear by Allah that you know that he is the
Messenger of Allah; his attributes can be found in the books we have in our hand.
Both our scholars and the scholars of the Banu Nadir have always spoken about him.
(Then they pointed to Huyayy ibn Akhtab) and he, along with Jubayr ibn Hayyaban
are among them! He was the most upright man among us, and before he died, he had
spoken to us about all of his attributes."
They did not like what they were hearing: "We will not leave the Torah," they said.
Now it was a matter of obstinacy more than anything else.
Despite everything, they were choosing to walk willingly to death, and in doing so,
they were giving up their world, the earthly life that meant so much to them_l.l2
Amr ibn Su 'da started to speak; he was calling out to them in the following manner:
"0 you community of Jews! You annulled the agreement you had with Muhammad
for no good reason and so there is now no agreement between him and you! I will not
be a party to your wrong actions as I have not been a party to them before! If you will
not follow Muhammad's teaching, then at least stay as Jewish people and accept to
give him head tax, but I am not sure whether he will accept that!"
'We cannot accept the Arabs taking head tax from us, death is dearer to us than
that!" they said.
This idea was not accepted either; the Banu Qurayza were in the gnp of such
obstinacy that had there been a ladder placed in front of them that led to Paradise they
would have stayed away from it and accused the person who had placed the ladder
there. Having witnessed their attitude, Amr gave up on the Banu Qurayza and said:
"Then I am not with you," and then he left the assembly and took a very important
step. As he was coming out of the fortress with the two sons of Saya and Asad ibn
Ubayd, Muhammad ibn Maslama, who was keeping guard outside, called out: "Who
is it?" and he answered: "Amr ibn Su 'da."
This was a name he recognized, and he knew what a deep thinking man he was.

--- Sayfa 695 ---
Since these men had been able to leave the fortress at this hour, they had to have
decided on the right course of action-they must have opened their doors to belief.
Muhammad ibn Maslama let them pass, and then opening up his hands, he started to
pray in the following manner: "Dear Lord! Do not take away from me the virtue of
helping lift the obstacles on the path of generous people."
Ibn Su'da's target was the Masjid an-Nabawi; he went there straight away and
stayed there till morning. Everyone believed that he would be there the next morning
but he had left and set off to a place no one knew where. When his situation was told
to the Messenger of Allah, he said: "He is such a man that Allah the Almighty saved
him because of his loyalty."
They Decreed Their Own Deaths
The main subject of their talk was the judgment that would be passed on them, and it
looked like it would be execution. They were assessing their situation and wondering
about the chain of events that led them there; seeing every time that execution was
surely going to be their lot.
There was a man named Hakam among them; he and his wife loved each other very
much. As the siege continued they would come together and weep. His wife Nubata
would say to him: "It will be a shame; you will leave me and go" and she would cry
even more deeply. When Hakam saw that death had become certain, he thought of a
way to take his wife with him, so that his wife would not be left behind as a slave. If
he was going to die, then his wife should die with him! He knew this would not
happen on its own and so he devised a plan. He decided to set it in motion. He called
Nubata to his side and said: "I swear by the Torah that it will be as you say! You are a
woman! You should roll this millstone over them! Here we will not be able to kill any
one of them. You are a woman and if Muhammad should come victorious over us
today he will not touch the women, he will not kill them!"
Nubata was a woman, who never did anything against her husband's wishes, and
life had no meaning for her without her husband and so he went to the top of the
fortress of Zabir ibn Bata and rolled a millstone from there onto the believers who
were resting in the shade of the fortress. The honorable Companions tried to run away
when they saw the stone falling but it hit Khallad ibn Suwayd and he fell martyr.
Abu Lubaba
As the siege grew harsher they sent word to the Messenger of Allah and asked him to
send them Abu Lubaba so that they may confer with him. The blessed Messenger,

--- Sayfa 696 ---
peace and blessings be upon him, accepted this as well.
Before long Abu Lubaba ibn Abdilmunzir went to the land of the Banu Qurayza.
The tribe was out on the streets, the families and the children; they were speaking of
their situation to him and asking him to intercede for them. They were in a very pitiful
condition and Abu Lubaba was touched to the heart. Their leader Ka'b ibn Asad came
to the fore and said: "0 Abu Lubaba! We preferred to have you. Muhammad says we
will have to succumb to the judgment that he passes on us, what do you say, shall we
accept his judgment?"
''Yes," answered Abu Lubaba. He had been careless while answering and
unconsciously he had pointed to his throat as he said "Yes", thus indicating to them
that the judgment was to be execution. He considered this unconscious act to be a
great betrayal on his part; he could not forgive himself1 He regretted it dearly; he
could hardly walk and he had started to cry. He had gone beyond what the Messenger
of Allah had given him leave to do; he believed he had committed a grave crime!
While everyone was curious about the news that Abu Lubaba would bring, as soon
as he came from the fortress he went straight to the Masjid an-Nabawi. He tied himself
to one of the pillars, saying that he would not leave that pillar until he died or he knew
that the blessed Messenger had forgiven him for his fault. He also swore that he would
not set foot in the land of the Banu Qurayza who had betrayed Allah and His
Messenger.
Before long the news of Abu Lubaba spread among the believers and it also reached
the Messenger of Allah. This is what he said: "Leave him alone until Allah the
Almighty passes His judgment on him. Had he come to me straight away and spoke to
me about it, I would have prayed for his forgiveness; but he did not come to me to
speak about it, so leave him to his own devices."
That was when the Truthful Gabriel descended and brought news from Allah: "0
you who believe! Do not betray Allah and His Messenger, that you should not betray
the trusts in your keeping while you know (what doing so means)" (al-Anfal 8:27).
Abu Lubaba thought that the expressions in the verse referred directly to him and
because of that he was not able to look anyone in the face. He did not eat or drink and
waited for the moment that Divine mercy would come. This would take six days: his
wife and daughter took turns coming to him and untied his ropes for a small duration
so that he may take ablution and pray. When Abu Lubaba performed his duty of
servanthood, he had himself tied up again.l!.Z
He had turned his back on the world; he started to lose some of his vision and soon

--- Sayfa 697 ---
after his hearing decreased. One morning, when the blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, was in the home of our mother Umm Salama, the Truthful
Gabriel descended and brought the verses that spoke about the place of loyal people
such as Abu Lubaba in the sight of Allah. The Prophet of affection and mercy was
smiling. Our mother Umm Salama who saw him thus asked:
"0 Messenger of Allah! May Allah give you a long life, why are you smiling so?"
"The repentance of Abu Lubaba has been accepted," replied our noble Prophet.
The coming revelation said that people who were usually firm in their belief but
who sometimes crossed paths with those who were not as firm would be forgiven
when they committed an error and when they repented sincerely.ill
Our mother Umm Salama was equally excited to witness that when a sincere heart
directed himself towards his Lord, he would be forgiven.
"Shall we go straight to him and tell him of this news, 0 Messenger of Allah?" she
asked.
"If you like, yes," said our noble Prophet. Upon that our mother Umm Salama got
out of her room and called out: "Lubaba/"
"0 Abu Lubaba! Rejoice! Allah has accepted your repentance."
Everyone who heard this happy news ran to where Abu Lubaba was tied to the pole;
they were going to untie him and share his joy. He was clearly very happy; he had
turned towards his Lord sincerely and he was now full of thanks for the judgment that
had been passed on him as a result of his sincerity. How could it have been otherwise?
Allah the Almighty had called him "My servant" and had sent the Truthful Gabriel to
deliver a message especially for him! When he saw the people who had come to untie
his ropes, he said: "No please stop! I took an oath; do not untie me until the Messenger
of Allah has come."
Meanwhile our noble Prophet had come to the mosque to lead the Morning Prayer.
He first came to where Abu Lubaba was and saluted him. He was looking at his
Companion with such love and affection! For minutes, there were no words spoken
but their loving hearts conversed. This continued for a while and then the blessed
Messenger untied Abu Lubaba's ropes himself.
Abu Lubaba had been untied with the incoming decree and he was watching the
radiant face of the blessed Prophet. Then he said: "0 Messenger of Allah! For my
atonement to be complete I will leave that place where I committed that sin, and then I
will give everything I own to Allah and His Messenger for the use of alms, and thus
get rid of everything!"

--- Sayfa 698 ---
The Messenger of mercy, the epitome of moderation showed him the right measure
here as well: "0 Lubaba," he said, "one third of it will be enough."
The Arbitration of Sa'd ibn Muadh
Each passing day was working against the Banu Qurayza. Just as their ancestors had
found strange excuses not to sacrifice a cow as had been ordered to them, they too had
resorted to many things, but this only made their situation worse.
All routes were closed and at last they said that they were going to accept the
conditions that the blessed Messenger would decide on.
Muhammad ibn Maslama had been given the job of gathering the captives, and
Abdullah ibn Salam, who had been a Jewish scholar and then accepted Islam, had
been given the job of seeing to the women and children. When they entered the
fortress and saw what the Jews owned they saw that they had one thousand five
hundred swords, three hundred armors, two thousand spears, one thousand five
hundred shields and many more weaponry. All this showed what kind of an attitude
they had towards the believers, and these had been kept in stock to be used against our
noble Prophet! There were a small number of camels and sheep and these were
confiscated. Apart from that there were many pots and pans and barrels of spirits. All
these would be spilled with the order of the Messenger of Allah and no one would
touch them. No verdict had yet been spoken but everyone thought that the Banu
Qurayza had deserved death and expected our beloved Prophet to pass judgment
accordingly. That is why the Aws, who had long been allies of the Banu Qurayza,
came to them and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! These are our allies, not the allies of
Khazraj. We know the treatment you thought fit for Ibn Ubayy that was the ally of the
Banu Qaynuqa, you pardoned seven hundred of their men, four hundred of their
cavalry! Now, these are our allies and they regret having broken their promise; forgive
them for our sake this time!"
The blessed Messenger kept silent. Almost all of the Aws had come together and
they wanted the Banu Qurayza to receive the same verdict as those before them. But
such favoritism was not a seemly thing in a community that was supposed to carry
virtue to the ends of the world! And so, in order to stop such a thing from happening
again and to be clear, the blessed Messenger thought of such demands, turned to them
and said: "Would any one of you like to take upon himself the judgment that will be
passed on them?"
They breathed a sigh of relief; it seemed they did not have to worry so much. Our
noble Prophet was leaving it up to them to decide the judgment to be passed on their

--- Sayfa 699 ---
allies. Upon their affirmative answer, the blessed Messenger said: "Then choose one
of my Companions."l.!2
Their eyes were gleaming with happiness and they were looking at each other.
Before long they chose Sa' d ibn Muadh who was their leader and the Messenger of
mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, was going to respect the decision that he
would take.
Meanwhile Sa' d ibn Muadh was being treated in the tent of Quayba hint Suayd for
the wounds he had received in the Trench. 120
Upon this decision the Aws ran to the Masjid. Sa'd had no energy to stand up. It
was clear that he was standing on the thin line between this world and the next.
Still, the Aws sat Sa' d ibn Muadh on a donkey and did their utmost to take him to
the place where the blessed Messenger was. On the way they turned to him and said:
"0 Abu Amr! The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, left to you
the judgment concerning your allies so that you may do right by them; you know how
Ibn Ubayy acted concerning his own allies. Please be merciful towards them."
It seemed as if they had left their sense of justice to one side and they were
comparing themselves to the Khazraj, concerning their allies with whom they had
warred for centuries. The situation of the Banu Qurayza was unlike that of the Banu
Qaynuqa or the Banu Nadir, it was not simply a matter of resistance! They were acting
with the impulse of tribalism which they had not been able to leave aside and it was
impossible to come to a just decision under such pressures.
Sa' d preferred to stay silent and did not speak his mind. His attitude caused distress
among the Aws. Despite all their insistence Sa'd looked very determined. At a point
when they pressured him, he said: "Now is the time for Sa'd not to waver because he
fears the censure of the censors!"
Hearing these, Dahhaq ibn Khalifa said: "Woe unto that tribe!" and started to cry.
He understood; the insistence was not going to pay off and Sa'd was not going to
compromise the route he meant to take. At the same time Dahhaq ran back to his tribe
and had already started to offer condolences for what was about to happen to the Banu
Qurayza.
At last, when Sa' d ibn Muadh approached the place where the blessed Messenger
was, our noble Prophet called to his Companions who were near him: "Here, stand up
in order to greet your master."
Upon that the Companions stood up in two rows and they began to greet Sa' d ibn
Muadh until he came besides the Messenger of mercy.

--- Sayfa 700 ---
After he had rested a little, our noble Prophet told him: "Pass your judgment on
them, 0 Sa'd."
To which Sa'd replied: "The real authority to judge lies with Allah and His
Messenger."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said to him: "Allah has
ordered that you should pass judgment on them."
It was clear that this judgment had also been allowed by Allah. Then this was not a
personal matter, but a mission that would win the person who judged the contentment
of Allah; and so one had to direct oneselfto Him and give the best judgment.
The Aws surrounded Sa'd once again: "0 Abu Amr! Our noble Prophet has
conferred upon you the job of passing judgment on your allies; be lenient with them,
and remember how they once strived for your benefit," thus trying to pressure him in
his decision. Upon which he turned to them and said: 'Will you be content with what I
decide about the Banu Qurayza?"
It was clear that he wanted to prevent different opinions to be voiced after he had
spoken his judgment, he did not want this to be another occasion for dissension. That
is why he wanted to make sure. They said, altogether: "Yes, we will be content with
your judgment! The reason we thought of you for this judgment when you were not
even here is because you would want the best for your allies like we do; today we are
in need of your help and we expect this goodness from you; for we will be bound by
your good action more than ever before!"
This was the kind of response he wanted-it seemed the tribe was not going to
object to his decision.
But Sa' d was very cautious, and turning to them he said: "I will do whatever I can
for you."
They did not understand. What was the connection between these words and the
judgment he would pass, and why was he so insistent?
They asked, with curiosity: "What do you mean by these words?"
Sa'd said the following to them: "I want to have your word that the judgment I pass
on them will be my judgment alone; I want your word in the Name of Allah!"
''Yes, we promise in the Name of Allah," they said, and this promise was enough
for him; he believed they would not be able to go back on their word, and even if they
should, no one would listen to them after such promises. He then turned to the group
among whom the Messenger of Allah was sitting. He was not able to look our noble
Prophet in the face because of his embarrassment. He called out: "Those who are

--- Sayfa 701 ---
present here must likewise be content with the decision I take!"
They called out: "We are all content with your judgment."
Now it was time to speak the judgment that everyone had been waiting for, and he
started to say the following slowly and clearly: "My judgment is that their men who
have reached puberty should be killed; their women and children should be taken
captive, their land should be distributed among the Muhajirun and their property
should be distributed among the Muslims."
Sa' d was speaking as if directly from the holy Qur' an and he was passmg a
judgment there could be no qualms about. That is why the blessed Messenger, peace
and blessings be upon him, turned to him and said: "You have decided about them
according to the Divine judgment that Allah has passed seven heavens removed from
here."
For early that morning, Gabriel had descended and had spoken about the content of
the decision that was to be given concerning the Banu Qurayza. This was in a way
Allah the Almighty's response to the prayer of Sa'd; for that evening when he was
suffering from the pain of his wounds to an unbearable extent, he had lifted up his
hands and asked his Lord not to take his life away from him before justice had been
restored concerning the Banu Qurayza.
Execution of the Judgment
The judgment had been passed and now was the time for the execution. It was a
Thursday towards the end of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah. The captives were gathered
together and brought to Medina: the men who could hold a gun were given to the
supervision of U sama ibn Zayd, and the women and children were under the
supervision of Ramla hint Harith. The possessions and weapons in the fortress were to
be sent to the house of hint Harith, and the livestock were to be left free to graze in the
orchards in the area.
This scene touched the heart of the Messenger of mercy. When he saw the prisoners
of war, he ordered that they be treated with kindness and then he had sacks of dates
brought to be given to the captives. They looked rather pitiful in the heat and the
Messenger of Allah would warn the Companions as he had warned them before, about
treating the prisoners well.
Had it been left to him, he would have let them all go but now it had become a
public issue. In a matter that had become a public concern, Allah's right was in
question, and it was impossible to impose his own personal decisions.

--- Sayfa 702 ---
Those who had made it a habit of provoking dissent in society had to be punished
timely and justly to set an example for those who had such intentions for the future.
Making an example of these people would prevent problems in the future. Then, for
the sake of the community and society, those who made a habit of causing problems
had to be punished and the rights of the innocent citizens needed to be protected.
Then, those whom judgment had been passed were brought to the place of
execution. The prisoners who saw their friends going to the place of execution one by
one said to their leader Ka'b ibn Asad: "0 Ka'b! What will Muhammad do to us?"
Ka'b was in trouble himself and so he said after a deep sigh: "Woe unto you! He
will do something that you will not like at all! How stupid you really are! Do you not
see that those who go do not come back? I swear this is nothing but the sword. I tried
to warn you before and make you change your mind but you did not listen to me!"
"This is not to remind us of our folly!" they responded, "Had we been afraid to go
against your advice we would not have violated our agreement with Muhammad in the
first place!"
Huyayy ibn Akhtab was listening to what was taking place and was calling out to
them: "Leave aside blaming each other, for this will not bring any good! Just grit your
teeth and try to become resistant to the sword!"
Another practice of the Prophet of Mercy was noticeable: when the noon heat grew
too great, our noble Prophet warned his Companions to let them rest, and told them to
just carry out the sentence and not to give them anymore harm: "Do not punish them
with both the heat of the sun and the heat of the sword at the same time."
The Messenger of mercy's order was carried out at once and the honorable
Companions would take the prisoners to a place where they gave them water and
where they could rest.
At one point the blessed Messenger's eyes met those of Ka'b ibn Asad. He said to
him: "0 Ka'b!"
This was the kindheartedness shown to someone who had been sentenced to a
verdict given according to Divine justice. The price of rebelling against Allah and His
Messenger was going to be paid, but the Messenger of Allah looked on the person on
whom the judgment was going to be carried out and he did not want him to perish
altogether as he was going to the other world. Ka'b turned to the blessed Messenger
and responded: "Yes, 0 Abu'l-Qasim."
Upon that the Messenger of mercy said: 'Why did you not listen to the advice of
Ibn Jawwas? For he tells his interlocutors to follow me. He said that when you saw

--- Sayfa 703 ---
me, you should give me his regards and greetings!"
There was nowhere Ka'b could run; it was exactly as the blessed Messenger said!
Only a few days ago it had been him who had reminded his tribe of what Ibn Jawwas
had said, but they had rejected it violently. Like then, he felt the great weight of his
tribe upon him, and as his last words he said: "I swear by the Torah that you tell the
truth, 0 Abu'l-Qasim! If I did not fear that the Jews would say that I decided to submit
to you because I fear the sword, I would have followed you; but I am a member of the
Jewish religion!"
The punishment of the people who had become a symbol of treachery continued till
the evening. Sa'd ibn Muadh was supervising every step, was seeing to it that there
was no unnecessary commotion.
The Killing ofNubata
When the execution of the known perpetrators was finished it was time to punish
Nubata, the wife of Hakam, who had thrown the millstone from the battlements and
had killed Khallad ibn Suwayd. They started to look for Nubata among the prisoners
but they could not find her. At the time Nubata was by the side of our Mother Aisha
who did not know what was going on. Nubata seemed very joyful as she said: "They
are killing the captives from the Banu Qurayza."
Then a loud voice was heard: "0 Nubata!" They were calling for her. It was time.
"I swear they are calling for me," she said. Our Mother Aisha was surprised as well;
what were they going to do with such a happy woman! She first asked her why they
might be calling her. Nubata said: "My husband killed me." Our Mother Aisha was
doubly surprised. She asked: "How is it that your husband killed you?"
Upon that Nubata started to explain her story which would now result in her reunion
with her beloved husband: "When we were at the fortress of Zabir ibn Bata my
husband told me to throw the mill stone on the Companions of Muhammad, and I did
it. The stone went and killed one of them. Now I will be killed in retaliation for
that! "ill
What Nubata said was right and she was executed that day for killing Khallad ibn
Suwayd. Among the women of the Banu Qurayza it was only Nubata who was
sentenced to death that day.
The Fate of Those Pardoned and the Captives
The judgment passed by Sa' d ibn Muadh did not include all of the Banu Qurayza;

--- Sayfa 704 ---
among the Banu Qurayza that day there were young people such as Atiyyatu-'1-Qurazi
and Rifa'a ibn ShamwaP22 Amr ibn Su'da, Ibn Sa'ya's sons Salaba and Usayd and
their cousin Asad ibn Ubayd. These men of conscience were forgiven. Zabir ibn Bata
had done a great favor for Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas during the times of the Buath
wars.
Thabit was acting out of a feeling of loyalty and so he ran to where the prisoners
were. He found Zabir and asked him: "0 Abu Abdurrahman, do you recognize me?"
"How can someone like me not recognize you," responded Zabir. Then Thabit said
the following to him: "You have rights over me; you had done me a great favor! Now
I am in a position to return that favor!"
These were words that relieved him; his eyes glittered for a moment and he said
with hope: "I know that a generous man will not abstain from being generous for a
man who himself is generous; this is the day I need you most!"
Thabit listened to how Zabir was asking him for help and so he ran to the presence
of our noble Prophet: "0 Messenger of Allah!" he said. "I owe Zabir a favor from the
day of Buath, he had held my hand that day and saved me! That is why I speak of this
favor and I ask you to release him for my sake: forgive him for my sake."
Loyalty for loyalty was a beautiful mode of action and the Messenger of mercy,
peace and blessings be upon him, said to Thabit: "He is yours." Then Thabit ran to
Zabir quickly and let him know of the situation. But Zabir didn't seem please, and
with a sour face he said: 'What is it to an old man who has lost his property and
family in Yathrib to continue living?"
Thabit was surprised. The man had been saved but he also wanted to have his
possessions and his family! This was a strange state of affairs but Thabit had already
made the offer, and so he went to our noble Prophet and asked for the property and the
family of Zabir. He said: "0 Messenger of Allah, let's give him his property and
family too."
"They too are yours," responded the Messenger of mercy.
Thabit went to Zabir twice as happy for now he had saved his life and property, and
said: "Verily, the Messenger of Allah has returned to you your family and property."
While he received this good news, there was still no sign of content on Zabir' s face,
quite the opposite, he seemed depressed. A moment later he asked: "0 Thabit! Truly
you have paid back the favor I had done you in full; you have paid your debt. But
Thabit, tell me! What became of Ka'b ibn Asad whose face used to glow like a
Chinese mirror, whose face was awaited on by many a maiden?"

--- Sayfa 705 ---
"He was killed," answered Thabit.
Zabir himself knew the answer to the question, it was clear that he had something
else to say. This time, implying the Banu Ka'b and the Banu Amr, he asked: "And
what happened to those two great assemblies?" to which Thabit answered: "They, too,
have been killed." It was clear that the man was grievously hurt: "0 Thabit! What can
it mean to live in a place where they no longer exist? I will go where they are and stay
with them forever. I do not need this; but 0 Thabit, go and check on my wife and
children, for I believe they are very afraid of death. Tell your men to set them free and
give them their possessions!"
Thabit was lost in thought as well; the person he wanted to help had turned out to be
a very strange man. He wanted to go the presence of the Prophet and tell him of the
situation. When informed, the Messenger of mercy set his family free and gave them
their possessions. This request of Zabir had been fulfilled and now was the time for his
last wish: "0 Thabit! For the sake of the favor I have with you, I ask you to kill me
and send me where the rest of my tribe is; I am so eager to be united with my friends
that I will not be able to wait till the bucket is drawn from the well!"
This was an impossible thing; Thabit had done all he could to save him and had
managed in the end and yet he himself was asking to be killed by him. He said: "I
cannot kill you."
But Zabir was bent on dying and he could not think of anything else and so he said:
"I do not care much who kills me!"
There were about one thousand captives made up of women and children. It was
declared that those who could bring their ransom money would be released. Some
wealthy Jews such as Abu'sh-Shahm had come and paid the ransom money for their
families and friends, thereby rescuing them from captivity. 123
Our noble Prophet divided them into five groups. Apart from one-fifth who was
given to his custody through revelation, he started distributing them among the
Companions. The captives who fell to his lot were either set free or gave as present to
others. There were some he gave to his Companions so that they may work for
them. 124
Meanwhile he had some advice for his Companions. He reminded them that even if
they were captives, they had to treat people well and was saying that while they were
deciding the fate of the captives, they should not separate the mothers from their
children. He said: "You cannot enter between a mother and a child until he or she has
reached puberty." The honorable Companions asked: "And what is puberty, 0

--- Sayfa 706 ---
Messenger of Allah?"
"That the girl should start to get her period, and the boy should be sexually
aroused."
Thus, while women with children could be sold to Jews and the polytheists, the
small children without mothers could only be sold to believers.
That day Uthman and Abdurrahman ibn Awf bought many captives of the Banu
Qurayza jointly and then distributed them among themselves. 125
Rayhana hint Zayd
Zayd ibn Amr's daughter Rayhana was among the captives; she was married to
someone from the Banu Qurayza. And she had fallen to the lot of the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, during the distribution of the captives.
The Messenger of mercy offered Islam to her, but she would not accept it, and said
that the only way she knew was Judaism. The Messenger of mercy was deeply
saddened; Rayhana was about to say no to a great opportunity that had been presented
to her by the best of creation.
Then he left Rayhana hint Zayd to her own devices and called Ibn Sa'ya to come to
him. He told him about Rayhana's situation and how he sincerely wanted her to
become Muslim.
Ibn Sa'ya had understood the matter:
"Let my mother and father perish in your way, you want her to become Muslim?"
he asked surprised.
He meant that the blessed Messenger should not worry himself and that Rayhana
would no doubt become Muslim. He then went and found Rayhana among the
captives and said: "Do not follow your tribe. Do you not see what Huyayy ibn Akhtab
brought upon their heads? Come and be a Muslim, do you not see that you have the
good fortune ofbeing in the lot ofthe Messenger of Allah!"
All hearts are in the hands of Allah and it is He who takes and gives. Rayhana
accepted the invitation of Ibn Sa'ya; she had already been thinking after the
encouragement by our noble Prophet and she just needed one little push to completely
submit. When Ibn Sa'ya came to our noble Prophet to bring the joyous news, the
blessed Messenger was sitting among his beloved Companions. When he heard the
footsteps approach he said: "These footsteps must belong to Ibn Sa'ya, he is bringing
the good news ofRayhana becoming Muslim."
It was just as he said and Ibn Sa'ya who came to his presence said: "0 Messenger

--- Sayfa 707 ---
of Allah! Rayhana has become Muslim."
He was overjoyed because another person had boarded the ship of Islam and had set
sail to the shore of salvation.
The Distribution of the Spoils
They had seized a lot of spoils from the land of the Banu Qurayza and these were
going to be distributed among the three-thousand strong Companions. The spoils were
gathered together and divided into five; each had an arrow put on top of it. On one of
the arrows was written "for Allah" and the lot that had this arrow on it was put aside.
This was given to our noble Prophet so he may use it as he saw fit. Our beloved
Prophet left this lot in the custody of Mahmiyya ibn Jaz and then went on with the job
of distributing the rest of the spoils.
The owner got one portion and the horses got two.
Only three horses got one portion. The number of total portions of cavalry and
soldiers were three thousand and seventy-two. Khallad ibn Suwayd, who had been
killed by the stone thrown from the fortress by Nubata, and Abu Sinan ibn Mihsan
who also had died that day were both represented. Although they had engaged in
battle that day, the female Companions such as Safiyya hint Abdul Muttalib, Umm
Umara Nasiba, Umm Salit, Ummu'l-Ala al-Ansariyya, Sumayra hint Qays, Umm Sa'd
ibn Muadh and Kabsha hint Rafi were not given "spoil portions" but "presents" by our
noble Prophet.
The Death of Sa'd ibn Muadh
Sa'd ibn Muadh was a heavy built and tall man. He was white of complexion, had a
beard and a beautiful face. A month had passed since he had first been injured and his
wound opened up again and he started to lose blood. The blessed Messenger took Abu
Bakr and Umar with him to visit Sa'd. All indicators showed that Sa'd's earthly life
was coming to an end. Our noble Prophet approached him and put his head on his
blessed knees; blood had been smeared on the blessed Messenger from the wound. He
opened up his blessed hands and prayed: "Dear Lord! Sa'd put his faith in the
Messenger and fought on Your path. He did all he could do for this cause. When You
take him to Your presence, please take his soul like those souls You have taken with
ease!"
The Messenger of mercy was once again praying for his Companions. Sa'd, who
saw that the blessed Messenger was bearing witness for him, opened his eyes and said:
"Let the peace and greetings of Allah be upon you 0 Messenger of Allah! I

--- Sayfa 708 ---
wholeheartedly bear witness that you are the Messenger of Allah."
The morning after Sa'd passed away. Soon after, the Truthful Gabriel came to our
noble Prophet. He had a white turban on his head and was asking: "0 Messenger of
Allah! Who is the person for whom the skies have opened this evening and for whom
the earth has quaked?"
So it had been understood. When the blessed Messenger heard the voice of Gabriel,
he ran to the house of Sa'd ibn Muadh. He was running so fast that the Companions by
his side who wanted to come with him were left behind.
"0 Messenger of Allah!" they called from behind. 'We are sore with walking so
fast! What is the reason of such haste?"
"I do not want us to be late for Sa' d the way we were late for Hanzala and let the
angels wash him," said the blessed Messenger.
They had at last reached Sa'd's house; it was as expected. Sa'd ibn Muadh had
moved on to the eternal realm, and the room he was in was full of angels.
Firstly our noble Prophet tried to console Sa'd's mother. When his body was
washed and lifted upon shoulders, our noble Prophet carried him on his shoulders as
well. Then he left this duty to his Companions and continued to walk at the head of the
procession. The people who were underneath the coffin while lifting it realized that
the coffin was light as a feather: "0 Messenger of Allah," they said. "Although Sa'd
was a heavily built man, we have never carried such a light coffin as this. Is it because
of the judgment he passed on the Banu Qurayza?"
''No," said the Messenger of Allah. "I swear by He who holds my life in His hands
that Sa' d is being carried by angels!"
Our noble Prophet led Sa' d's Funeral Prayer.
It was as if the whole of Medina was walking to the cemetery of Al-Baqi; our
Prophet was also present as they dug his grave. When the body of Sa'd was lowered
into the grave, the Messenger of Allah's face changed color and became pale:
"Subhanallah! Allah is above all things," he was saying, and he repeated this three
times. His Companions repeated this invocation of his: the Baqi cemetery was echoing
with the voices of takbir and tasbih. There were tears in the blessed eyes of the
Messenger of mercy and his heart was filled with grief. His blessed beard had been
wet with tears, and he was wiping his face with his hand.
Sa' d's mother also came to the cemetery. At first the honorable Companions tried to
drive her away, but the Messenger of Allah intervened and said: "Leave her be ... "
Umm Sa' d, who had also lost one of her sons in Uhud, was bent in two with the

--- Sayfa 709 ---
pain of separation in this world and yet was happy and found peace knowing that she
had given her second son as a martyr on the path of Allah! That is why she said: "I
hope that his reward will be big in the consideration of Allah."
The Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, waited upon Sa'd's
body till it was lowered into the grave and earth was spread over him. He then prayed
for a while and then left after consoling Umm Sa' d.
Other Developments of the Fifth Year of the Hijra
New decrees concerning an Islamic way of life continued to descend from the
heavens. The ruling concerning the ablutions when there was no water had come, in
the shape of tayammum, the method of taking ablutions with earth, and this had made
life easier for people who had trouble finding water before Prayer. Meanwhile, another
ruling had come concerning alcohol; since the final ruling about alcohol had not yet
come, some of the Companions still came to the mosque to pray while inebriated, and
leading the Prayer in such a state, they had mixed up the verses. This led to the verse
that ordered them not to approach Prayer while having drunk alcohol. This was
another step in distancing the populace from drinking. The verses that spoke about the
sin of speaking ill of others and slandering others with no proof were being taken very
seriously, and this form of bad behavior that shook the society from its foundations
was stated as a grave sin.
The rulings concerning adoption had also come and it was expressed that from now
on people should be attributed to their biological fathers. Till that time people who had
adopted other people would consider themselves to be their fathers, and the adopted
person would be known as the son of that person. In another verse that the Truthful
Gabriel brought had revealed that the marriage of the Messenger of Allah to Zaynab
hint Jahsh had been solemnized in the heavens and so our Mother Zaynab, who
divorced from Zayd and married our Prophet, thus took her place among the pure
wives of the Prophet. Another decree that came that year was the obligatory nature of
the hijab; there was special emphasis on how women should dress and that they should
put on loose garments to wrap themselves when they went out.
There were also rulings concerning divorce and this was described by the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, as the least liked of all permissible
things in the eyes of Allah.
The verses also referred to various codes of behavior and thus people were invited
to live a model life that could be an example to all. One of these was asking
permission from people before entering their houses; and that one should tum back

--- Sayfa 710 ---
when that permission is not granted. These meant, taken together, a reconstruction of
social life according to Islamic standards. Again, within that year, there was a second
census in Medina. People had witnessed an eclipse of the sun and been shaken by an
earthquake. Under such circumstances of natural catastrophes they would not panic
but start to pray, and thus they were introduced to the Prayers of Kusuf and Khusuf at
times of solar and lunar eclipse. The same year there was famine in Mecca and they
sent help to some tribe there. Thus the believers showed that even if they were in need
themselves, they were ready to consider the needs of others as well. Meanwhile a
delegate of Muzayna had come to Medina and they had freed Salman al-Farisi from
slavery.
Sixth Year of the Hijra
Time had flown quickly with several important events happening and it was already
the sixth year of their leaving Mecca. It was like yesterday; everyone was missing the
land of Prophets, the sacred city which Ibrahim had rebuilt. Their hearts were in
Mecca, the direction they faced every time they performed the Prayer. They, as
believers, were burning with the desire to visit the House of Allah.
Returning home was something that was on everybody's mind; people who were
tied to Mecca with birth ties were dreaming of the day they would go to the Ka'ba. For
the Ka'ba had been built, from the very first day, with the purpose of worship. What
was happening there now instead of worship was like a carnival; people were
whistling and clapping and dancing as they circumambulated the Ka'ba. They also
took off their clothes in which they had sinned, left them aside and circumambulated
the Ka'ba naked-in their mind, it was done in the spirit of worship.
The Messenger of Allah missed the Ka'ba too. For him, Ka'ba was like a mihrab
that had been robbed of its minbar. The minbar that had been established in Medina
had to be brought together with the mihrab in Mecca, and a meeting of these two
Companions had to be realized.
Even though the polytheists had not been able to get what they wanted in Badr,
Uhud and the Trench, Muslims still had to be vigilant about the polytheists. That is
why the blessed Messenger sent a watchman abroad to ensure the security of the
region. In the month of Shahan of the sixth year of the Hijra, our blessed Messenger
called Abdurrahman ibn Awf to his side and wrapped his turban. He sent him to the
land of the Banu Kalb and enjoined him to treat the people he would come across with
kindness; in the same month he also sent Ali to Fadak who had tried to set up an
alliance with the people of Khaybar and who were planning an attack on Medina. It

--- Sayfa 711 ---
seemed that after the Banu Qaynuqa, the Banu Nadir and the Banu Qurayza, Fadak
and Khaybar were planning to sow seeds of contention. Our noble Prophet was
keeping them under very close watch. In the month of Ramadan of the same year, he
had sent Abu Bakr or Zayd ibn Haritha to Wadi al-Qura where they were hatching
plots to assassinate him. In the month of Shawwal, he sent a platoon of twenty men led
by Kurz ibn Jabir after the Uranis who had come to Medina for cure and yet had stolen
the camels that had been given them and then killed the shepherd who had guarded
them. Although they said they were Muslims the Uranis were openly treacherous.
They had used their illness as an excuse and come to the Messenger of Allah. He had
allocated camels and a region to them; they were to drink the milk of these camels.
They had followed his advice and had been cured. After their cure they had killed the
shepherd of these camels and taken the camels and run away. These people had at the
same time rebelled against religion and when the blessed Messenger found out what
they had done, he raised his blessed hands to the heavens and prayed: "Dear Lord!
Make their eyes blind and make their ways a dead end!"
The main goal in all of this was to ensure the security of the Hijaz and thus to
validate the fact that Islam was the sovereign power here. On the other hand all these
would slowly lead to the atmosphere of security in which they would be able to go to
Mecca and circumambulate the Ka'ba.
22 Zira, also known as a pic or pike, is a measure of length that varies, often between 65 and 75
centimetres.
21 An-Nur 24:63
~Abdullah ibn Umar, Zayd ibn Thabit, Abu Said al-Khudri and Bara ibn Azib were the children
who dug the trenches with the Messenger of Allah that day. They were all fifteen years old. See
Waqidi, Maghazi, 11454; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 4/371.
22. Salman al-Farisi who listened to these words that day from the Messenger of Allah lived to witness
all of these happen. Some of these lands were conquered during the time Umar and some during
the time of Uthman. Based on these hadith Abu Hurayra narrates that the Messenger of Allah that
day named all the places that would be conquered. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 41176; Ibn
Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 3/419.
100 the Banu Nadir and the Banu Qurayza are the name of two tribes that are of Prophet Aaron's
lineage, peace upon him, the descendants of two brothers Qurayza and Nadir. See Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5118.
!2.1. It is also reported that this person was Sa' d ibn Ubada. See Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 41179; Tabari,
Tarikh, 2/93; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 2/38.
102 Al-Ahzab 33:10
103 Al-Ahzab 33:12
104 Both men would later have the honor of becoming Muslims and take their place among the noble
Companions.
105 There are also reports that the Messenger of Allah said "Then let me call all the Sa'd's and confer
with them," and that he then called Sa'd ibn Muadh, Sa'd ibn Ubada, Sa'd ibn Rabi, Sa'd ibn

--- Sayfa 712 ---
Haysama and Sa'd ibn Mas'ud. See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 6/28 (5409); Haysami,
Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 6/132.
106 En Ondekiler, p. 134
107 Waqidi,Maghazi, 11472
108 For the body of another man who had come there that day saying "I will definitely kill
Muhammad" and had fallen into the trench breaking his neck, the Quraysh had offered two
hundred dirhams. The Messenger of Allah had said: "Neither his dead body nor his money will be
of any benefit; for both his body and his money is unclean." See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
11248 (2230), 11272 (2442); Ibn Abi Shayba,Musannaf, 6/496 (33256); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/133.
109 The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who received the news that our mother
Safiyya had killed the man who had attacked them would allot a portion of the spoils of war to her
and consider her among the warriors. See Abu Ya'la, Musnad, 2/43 (683); Haysami, Majmau 'z-
Zawaid, 6/134.
!.!QAl-Ahzab 33:9. After this incident the Messenger of Allah said "I was helped by the Saba wind;
and the tribe of Ad was destroyed by the wind ofDabur." See Bukhari, Sahih, 11350 (988), 3/1172
(3033), 311219 (3165); Muslim, Sahih, 2/617 (900); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 11223 (1955),
11228 (2013), 11324 (2984).
ill Hudhayfa would later recount that that day he did not have armor or a shield, but merely a dress
belonging to his wife which came down only to his knees. Maybe this was why when our Prophet
first called out he could not stand and he did not think it seemly to go over to the enemy line in
such clothes. See Hakim,Mustadrak, 3/33 (4325); Bazzar,Musnad, 7/317 (2916), 7/346 (2943).
ill Hudhayfa reports that after he had completed his mission and told the Messenger of Allah what
had happened he fell a sleep there and slept till the morning as he was. When the morning came,
our noble Prophet came to him and called out "Wake up you sleeper!" to wake him up to perform
the Morning Prayer. See Muslim, Sahih, 311414 (1788); Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 16/76 (7125); Bazzar,
Musnad, 7/317-318 (2916).
ill. Al-Ahzab 33:9
ill Because of this order, the Companions had diverged on the point of whether they should pray as
they were still on the road: some said that the time of the Afternoon Prayer was about to lapse and
so they prayed on their way, and some did not pray until they had reached the land of the Banu
Qurayza, for that had been the exact call of the crier. The ones who thus prayed late, prayed their
Afternoon Prayer as the sun was about to set in the land of the Banu Qurayza! The Messenger of
Allah, had not said anything against either choice that day. See Bukhari, Sahih, 11321 (904);
411510 (3893); Tabarani,Mujamu'l-Kabir, 19/79 (160).
ill. The man who had provoked them to violate their agreement, Huyayy ibn Akhtab, had not been
able to leave and stayed at the fortress of the Banu Qurayza because of the promise he had made
to Ka'b ibn Asad. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 41195; Tabari, Tarikh, 2/99.
lli That night when Usayd, the brothers Salaba and Asad ibn Ubayd saw that the Banu Qurayza had
closed all doors to any suggestions, they would come to the presence of our Prophet and tell him
that they had become Muslims. Thus they had protected themselves and their families from what
befell the Banu Qurayza. See Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1196; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 1152 (100).
ill The period that Abu Lubaba stayed tied to the pole is recounted differently in different accounts:
Some say a little more than ten days, one says up to twenty, and one says twenty-five. See Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/9.
lliAt-Tawbah 9:102
1..!2 In another report it is said that the blessed Messenger chose Sa'd ibn Muadh. See Ibn Hisham,
Sirah, 4/198; Tabari, Tarikh, 21100.
120 Quayba, may Allah be pleased with him, had a wife who would bring separated families together,
who would help those who had no helpers and who would see to the needs of the unfortunate; she
also looked after the wounded. The Messenger of Allah set up tent in the Masjid for her and asked

--- Sayfa 713 ---
her to tend to the wounded there. His intention was thus to be able to visit his wounded
Companions such as Sa'd ibn Muadh easily. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/291; Waqidi, Maghazi,
11510, 525; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 8/94 (11682).
121 Our mother Aisha would say later how suprised she was to see Nubata so merry that day although
she knew she would be killed. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11517; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya,
41144; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5114.
122 Salma bint Qays, the blessed Messenger's paternal aunt, had come to his presence and said: "0
Prophet of Allah! Let my mother and father perish on your way, let Rifa'a free for my sake! For
he is very likely to pray and he eats camel meat!" Upon that he had forgiven Rifa'a for her sake.
Witnessing such grace with his own eyes, Rifa'a would become Muslim. See Waqidi, Maghazi,
11515; Tabari, Tarikh, 21103; Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf, 3/444.
123 Among the people that Abu'sh-shahm saved were two devoutly Jewish women, both with three
children. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11523; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5116.
124 It is stated that the blessed Messenger sent some of the captives to Damascus, and others to Najid.
In return from them he got horses and weapons. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5116.
125 In this distribution Abdurrahman ibn Awf left the decision to Uthman and he chose the elderly.
And although this seemed to be disadvantageous at first, it would be to his advantage in the end. It
was revealed that the elderly had hidden valuable things and so Uthman came to possess these
things as well. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11524; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5116.

--- Sayfa 714 ---
THE UMRAHEXPEDITION AND HUDAYBIYA
W
hile during the days people daydreamed about being in Mecca, in the
evenings they dreamed of worshipping in the Ka'ba. Our noble Prophet
also had a dream; in it some of his Companions had shaved their heads,
and some had had their hair shortened and they were walking around the Ka'ba in
peace and safety; he too had taken the keys of the Ka'ba and walked around it and
performed the minor pilgrimage, umrah.
When the morning came, our noble Prophet shared his dream with his Companions;
there was great joy in Medina and the Companions felt the peace of being promised
that they would soon be going to the Ka'ba-they were going to go and this longing
would come to an end. The blessed Messenger felt the very same thing.
They started to make their preparations. Nobody could claim the Ka'ba for
themselves; their ancestor Abraham had built it and had entrusted it to the people so
that they may worship Allah in it. Now this trust was squandered in the hands of those
who were not fit to be its trustee. It was our noble Prophet who would give it back its
original purpose and glory. He was going to go there and demonstrate himself how
Allah was to be worshipped.
Meanwhile, Busr ibn Sufyan had come to Medina and become a Muslim. When he
wanted to return, our beloved Prophet said to him: "0 Busr! Do not make haste in
going! Maybe we will go all together! For we are planning to set off for the umrah."
The aim was not war but worship; that is why they only took small daggers with
them in order to protect themselves from wild animals. On this journey a number of
sheep and camels were accompanying them in order to be slaughtered. The blessed
Messenger had taken a camel with him for this purpose.
It was another Monday in the month of Dhu al-Qadah and the calendar showed the
sixth year after the Hijra. The Messenger of Allah went into his blessed room, put on
two layers of clothing and mounted his camel Qaswa and set off on his way. This was
the start of the journey towards the center of the world. This time our mother Umm

--- Sayfa 715 ---
Salama was accompanying him. Ibn Umm Maktum was left in Medina as deputy. 126
With our Prophet were one thousand and four hundred people from the Ansar and the
Muhajirun-two hundred of them were cavalrymen. 127 The few people who came
from the Arab tribes close by joined this happy caravan. There were also female
Companions among them including Umm Umara, Umm Mani Asma hint Amr and
Umm Amir al-Ashhaliyya. It had already been dreamt: They had no doubt that they
would enter the Ka'ba and circumambulate it. When they reached Dhu'l-Hulayfa, they
prayed the Noon Prayer. Then the blessed Messenger started to mark the seventy
camels that had been brought there to be sacrificed; he was turning the sacrificial
animals towards the direction of the Ka'ba and marking them on the right side. He
marked some of them himself and left the rest to Najiya ibn Jundab and asked him to
do it. Meanwhile, he called the new Muslim Busr ibn Sufyan to his side and asked him
to be the scout to lead them. A platoon of twenty men led by Abbad ibn Bishr was also
sent as a sentinel force .128
Umar and Sa'd ibn Ubada came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah and were
conferring with him about taking more weapons with them. They had worries; you
could never know what the Quraysh might do. It was true that they had set off with the
intention of worship, but the Quraysh knew no rules. That is why they wanted to be
prepared. But despite their insistence, the Messenger of mercy said that nothing other
than a small traveler's knife would be carried so that the pure intention of worship
would not be compromised.
Ihram and Its Rules
There, a further two cycles of Prayer were performed; the atmosphere was
unbelievable and the joy of worship could be seen on every face, in every tear. The
main goal was to circumambulate the Ka'ba so our noble Prophet put on the piece of
cloth called ihram. He wanted to share with his Companions the determination of
spirit that should accompany their dress: "Labbayk Allahumma labbayk. Labbayka la
sharika laka labbayk. Inna 'l-hamda wa 'n-ni 'mata lak; wa 'l-mulk la sharika lak," he
started to say, "Dear Lord, here I have come to Your presence. You have no partner.
Thanks are due toY ou and all things are Yours."
Our mother Umm Salama also spoke the intention of getting into ihram, which was
more a state of being than a mere piece of cloth.
This was their first introduction to the concept. They were following closely what
the Messenger of Allah was doing; whatever he did was repeated by his followers.
The honorable Companions who followed his every step also dressed in the ihram

--- Sayfa 716 ---
there. Those who did not do so would adopt the ihram when they came to Juhfa, and
thus were in total spirit of worship. The journey continued. At Bayda, the blessed
Prophet made for the direction of where the tribes of the Banu Bakr, Juhayna and
Muzayna lived. He wanted them to join this caravan as well. But they spoke of their
work and property that had to be looked after and so did not join them on their
journey. They looked at the believers that progressed towards the Ka'ba, and said to
one another:
"Muhammad is calling us to fight against a tribe that is well equipped with
weapons; but he and his Companions look like a camel that will be overpowered at
one go. Muhammad and his friends will not be able to return from this campaign-
don't you see, they do not even have any preparations for war!"
The Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, who was always on the
lookout for chances to communicate Allah's message came upon a group of people
from the tribe of the Banu Nahd as he was progressing on his way. He invited them to
faith but they were not responding favorably. Their fortune had come to their feet, and
yet they were refusing it. However they wanted to offer milk to our beloved Prophet.
He said: "I cannot accept the gift of a polytheist."
But he turned to his Companions and asked them to buy this offered milk; what he
said was done at once. The Banu Nahd, whose possessions had always been stolen
from them, were surprised to see such generosity displayed by the Messenger of
mercy. The honorable Companions went one step further and they wanted to buy three
animals that the Banu Nahd had hunted and eat them. But then they remembered that
it was not permitted to hunt when in ihram and they asked the blessed Messenger
whether they could eat meat hunted by others. He answered: "Yes, you can. All is
permitted for you to eat when you are in ihram except for the meat that you have
hunted yourself, or that has especially been hunted for you!"
They kept learning something about their religion every step of the way; when they
came to Abwa, Najiya, who had been given the duty to look after the sacrificial
animals, came to our noble Prophet and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah. One of the
camels is stuck on the way, it cannot walk anymore, what shall we do with it?"
"Slaughter it, and dip the rope round its neck in its blood," he said. "But neither
you, nor your friends should eat of its meat, leave it for other people!"
Abu Qatada was among those Companions who had not yet entered ihram. He had
moved with the leading group of twenty and they had made quite some way. At the
time when they had taken a break, he sat down to tie his laces. A zebra came towards

--- Sayfa 717 ---
them and the other people in the unit could not do anything because they were already
in ihram; they hoped that Abu Qatada would see it at once and hunt it down. They
were not able to signal to him because they still wanted the meat to be halal for them,
and they feared that the zebra would escape before Abu Qatada saw it. At last Abu
Qatada saw the zebra and he jumped on his horse to pursue it. He had forgotten to take
his arrows and spear with him so he called out to his friends to give him his gear. But
none of them agreed to do it, for they knew that if they helped him none of them
would be able to eat the zebra: "We swear we cannot help you with that," they said.
Abu Qatada was angry. He jumped down from his horse and taking his gear
himself, he mounted his horse again.
Before long Abu Qatada came back to where the Companions were, holding the
zebra. They were happy; they were once again faced with a Divine gift. On the one
hand they were hesitant about eating the food of an animal hunted while they were
still in their ihram, and yet they sat down and ate the meat of the animal.
Abu Qatada had saved the foreleg for our noble Prophet. When he came to the
presence and told him, the blessed Messenger asked: "Did any of you point the animal
out to him or ask him to hunt?"
''No," they said. Then the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
said: "Then eat, for it is a halal gift from Allah to you." Then he turned to Abu Qatada
and said: "Do you have anything from it by your side?"
Upon which Abu Qatada gave the foreleg he had set aside to the blessed Messenger,
and the Messenger of Allah also ate from the meat of the hunted animal. When they
came to Hudaybiya, the wound on Companion Ka'b ibn Ujra's head was infested with
insects, an injury from which he was suffering badly. When the blessed Messenger
came up to him and saw the severity of the matter, he asked: "Do the insects that come
to your head hurt you?"
The Companion answered: ''Yes."
"I did not think you would be so weakened," the Messenger of mercy said and let
him shave off his hair. Then he said the following: "You should fast for three days,
feed six poor people or sacrifice an animal for this transgression of the rules! " 129
All these were examples as to how a believer should behave when in ihram and the
honorable Companions were witnessing these for the first time. With every step they
took they were learning something new and they raced each other to be a closer
subject to Allah.

--- Sayfa 718 ---
The Journey That Assures
The journey continued, the one thousand four hundred strong mass of people were
walking towards Mecca, they took extra care that nobody would be hurt in the
slightest. The caravan did not disturb the people of the lands they passed through-the
farms and orchards were left untouched. The journeyers were like angels that
descended from the heavens. Humanity was for the first time experiencing an
understanding that prioritized rights and justice. They did not want to confiscate
anyone's property. People who watched them from afar could see their difference and
they would want to offer presents to the Messenger of Allah. Ima ibn Rahda had come
with his son and given the blessed Messenger, as present, two hundred sheep and two
camels with udders loaded with milk. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, first said: "I hope Allah will grant you more bounty," and then distributed
this gift among his Companions.
This was one indicator of being accepted in the world with open arms, and this
respect would not be limited to this either. Each tribe that they came across
appreciated their peaceful journey and so gave them what they had in their hands-
bread, gherkins and herbs. During this journey, the Messenger of Allah was given a
herb that had a nice smell and a delicious sap, and he sent some of it to our mother
Umm Salama to taste as well.
The Attitude of the Meccans
The news that the Messenger of Allah was coming to Mecca with his Companions in
order to do umrah and visit the Ka'ba, had reached Mecca, and the Meccans were
overwhelmed with fear. The blessed Messenger was coming upon them at a time when
they least expected it. Even if war did not seem to be the intention of the Muslims, the
reactions of the Meccans showed their weak psychological state. They gathered their
assembly together and started to discuss the issue: "Muhammad wants to come with
his army and perform umrah. The Arabs who hear this and who have seen how we
have warred with him until recently, what will they think? As long as we breathe we
should not let them enter Mecca!"
There were of course those who believed that the umrah was just a cover up that the
Muslims were using and that they really wanted to make war with Mecca. The
discussions revolved around the necessity of not letting the believers into Mecca and
the job of organizing this stance was given to Safwan ibn Umayya, Ikrima ibn Abu
Jahl and Suhayl ibn Amr.
They gave their word that they would not take any steps without consulting the

--- Sayfa 719 ---
Quraysh. The first subject they consulted about was in regards to sending a sentry
group of two hundred men to Kura al-Ghamim. The Quraysh said: "That is a very
good idea indeed," and so they sent two hundred cavalry men led by Khalid ibn Walid
on the road. They were to go to the place called Kura al-Ghamim and they were going
to ask the following tribes: the sons of Hun, the Banu Harith, the Banu Abdimanah,
the Banu Mustaliq known as the Ahabish (named after the mountains under whose
shadow they lived), and also tribes like Thaqif who acted in concert with them to be
ready to fight alongside them. The place they would go to was also determined: it was
to be Baldah.
Meanwhile, the Quraysh took care to be very hospitable towards the Ahabish; they
made a division of labor amongst themselves, and they were organizing feasts at the
homes of Daru'n-Nadwa, Safwan ibn Umayya, Suhayl ibn Amr, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl
and Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza.
The address was clear; all those who had completed their preparations were coming
to Baldah. Before long they had set up their tents and had sworn not to let the
believers pass through. The Quraysh had come with their women and children. They
had also placed sentries on top of the mountains and had told them to let them know
when the believers came, in a tone of voice only they would hear.
The new believer Busr ibn Sufyan, who had seen their maneuvers, came to the
Messenger of Allah with the news of what was happening. At the time the believers
were at a place called Ghadir al-Ashtat, near Usfan.
"0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "The Quraysh have heard about your coming, and
they have taken their milk-giving camels and families with them, and wait in their
armor near Dhi Tuwa. They are taking oaths between them in the Name of Allah about
how they will not let you enter Mecca. Khalid ibn Walid is waiting for you at the place
called Kura al-Ghamim."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, listened to Busr very
carefully in order to understand the state of mind of the Quraysh and the strategies
they would resort to in order to resist. He was surprised to see this attitude in people
who claimed to act in the Name of Allah, and then stated that at all events he would
come victorious over the Quraysh who was always looking for conflict.
Another Consultation and the Prayer for Fear
The news signaled the coming of another crisis and so the Messenger of Allah first
ordered that the route be changed and then he turned to his Companions, gave thanks

--- Sayfa 720 ---
to Allah and exalted Him the way He deserved and then spoke as such: "0 you
Muslims! Speak your mind and tell me what you think. The Quraysh is giving feasts
to the Ahabish tribes in order that they may stand in our way and keep us away from
circumambulating the House of Allah. What shall we do? Do you think we should
head straight to the House of Allah and fight with those who try to keep us away from
it? Or shall we tum towards these tribes who are supposed to stop us and finish them
first so that they may not have time to attack us and so that Allah may defeat them?"
"The Messenger of Allah knows the right course of action," said Abu Bakr.
"However, 0 Messenger of Allah, we did not come here with the intention to fight!
Then let's continue on our way; then if there are those who stop us from
circumambulating the House of Allah, then we will fight them."
Usayd ibn Khudayr said similar things. This was the common view among the
Companions; they repeated what Abu Bakr said. Meanwhile, Miqdad ibn Aswad came
to the fore and said: "I swear by Allah that we, 0 Messenger of Allah, will not say, as
the Jews said to Moses 'Go to your Lord, we will sit here', on the contrary we will say
'You judge as you and the Lord wishes and walk-we are ready to fight with you."'
This was the spirit that the blessed Messenger had hoped for and so the Messenger
of Allah said: "Then walk in the Name of Allah," and started. They then came to the
valley called Ghamim, between Usfan and Dajnan, and camped there that night.
On the other side, Khalid ibn Walid had deciphered where the blessed Messenger
and his Companions were because of the dust that lifted as they walked. He had given
the news to the Meccans and then had come to Ghamim with his horsemen. He stood
between the believers and the qibla, and watched the Messenger of Allah for a very
long while.
The Messenger of Allah, who saw him coming, divided his Companions into ranks.
He ordered Abbad ibn Bishr to stand ready with the cavalry. This was a crucial
moment and anything could happen.
A long wait started; both sides were watching the other but neither side made the
first move. Time for Noon Prayer came and the blessed Messenger called Bilal to call
out the call for Prayer. Everyone was silent and it was only the moving voice of Bilal
that echoed in Ghamim. Right after the call for Prayer the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, turned towards the qibla and started the Prayer; his
Companions were right behind him, praying as well. Then they finished their Prayers
and retreated back to their bastions.
Khalid ibn Walid, who had been watching them carefully for some time, said to

--- Sayfa 721 ---
himself regretfully: "It was the perfect time to attack them and finish them off. But
another time of Prayer will come-Prayer that is dearer to them then their children or
their own lives; then I will march upon them and finish them off." He was going to
attack them when the time for the Afternoon Prayer came and was going to put them
all to the sword.
But that is not how it happened because at that moment the Truthful Gabriel
descended and brought new messages to the Messenger of Allah from beyond the
skies. The coming verses said:
When you (0 Messenger) are among the believers (who are on an
expedition and in fear that the unbelievers might harm them) and stand (to
lead) the Prayer for them, let a party of them stand in Prayer with you and
retain their arms with them (while the other party maintain their positions
against the enemy). When the first party have done the prostrations
(finished the rak'ah), let them go to the rear of your company (and there
hold positions against the enemy), and let the other party who have not
prayed come forward and pray with you, being fully prepared against
danger and retaining their arms. Those who disbelieve wish that you
should be heedless of your weapons and your equipment, so that they
might swoop upon you in a single (surprise) attack. But there will be no
blame on you if you lay aside your arms (during Prayer) if you are
troubled by rain (and the ground impedes your movement), or if you are
ill; however, be fully prepared against danger. Surely Allah has prepared
for the unbelievers a shameful, humiliating punishment. When you have
finished the Prayer (especially considering you have shortened your
Prayers when journeying and in the state of fear), remember and mention
Allah (with your tongues and hearts), standing and sitting and lying down
on your sides (and even while at war). Then when you are once again
secure, do the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions (and do the
Prayers you had to omit just at the time of actual fighting). (Know that)
the Prayer (being the most important kind of worship) is prescribed for
the believers at fixed times. Do not be faint of purpose in pursuing these
people (who fight with you, and keep them under pressure as long as the
state of war continues between you and them). If you are suffering
(having to endure hardships), they too are suffering just as you are, but
you hope (to receive) from Allah what they cannot hope for. Allah is

--- Sayfa 722 ---
indeed All-Knowing (ofthe states and conditions of all things), All-Wise.
(an-Nisa 4; 102-104)
Each incident was the occasion for instituting yet another decree in the Muslim way
of life. They were followed by a Hand of Supervision that directed them to the right
course at every step. Khalid ibn Walid was waiting for the Afternoon Prayer for his
attack while Allah the Almighty had already warned the Muslims and told them how
to act.
When it was time for Prayer and the call for Prayer was called, Khalid ibn Walid
made his last preparations. When he saw that half of the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah were not standing in Prayer behind the Messenger of Allah he was
surprised; the Muslims had already put into practice the method that had been ordered
by revelation-the blessed Messenger was praying the Prayer of Fear with his
Companions. To that end, he had divided his Companions into two. He was praying
each single cycle with one group of his Companions and the other Companions were
waiting on the side even if it should be just for the length of one cycle.
The Move to Hudaybiya
When evening came, the Messenger of Allah said pointing: "Tum to the right and
walk towards those trees," and then asked: "Who among you knows the hill of
Dhatu'l-Hanzal ?"
His aim was to get out of there without letting Khalid ibn Walid know, and also so
that he would not be faced with any Meccan on the way, for he did not want to
confront any Meccan because of his mercy towards them.
Burayda ibn Husayb said: "I know it, 0 Messenger of Allah," upon which the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to Burayda and said:
"Then lead us!"
Using the dark night as an invisibility cloak, a difficult journey started; at the front
was Burayda, behind him was the army of Companions. They were going towards the
West. Burayda had chosen to go from the Asal side of the Sarawi Mountains.
Khalid ibn Walid, on the other hand, was waiting with his friends, knowing nothing
about the developments. They were moving under extremely complicated and hard
conditions.
At a particular point m the journey Burayda's feet had become bruised and
wounded to the extent that he could no longer walk. Upon which the Messenger of
Allah told him to mount a camel and asked someone else who knew the way to lead.

--- Sayfa 723 ---
This time it was Hamza ibn Amr who came to the fore; he too could go only so far and
he could not tell the rest of the way. In order to reach the desired destination, they now
needed a new guide. The name that offered itself now was Amr ibn Abdi Nuhm al-
Aslami; he was now in front of the Messenger of Allah and leading the way. The road
was difficult; they were all bowing their heads in order not to run into branches and
the bushes. But their intentions were pure and help was on the way. The light of the
full moon was lighting their way, affording them great help.
When they reached a certain point, the blessed Messenger pointed to a hill far away
and asked: "Could that be the hill ofDhatu'l-Hanzal?"
Amr said: "Yes, that is it, 0 Messenger of Allah. That is the hill of Dhatu'l-
Hanzal."
The Messenger of mercy said: "Whoever climbs the hill of Mira, his sins will be
forgiven, just as the sins of the Banu Israil were forgiven."
As soon as these words poured out of the blessed Messenger's lips, naturally
everyone started to run towards the hill as if there was a race on! The Messenger of
Allah, who saw this said the following: "Tonight this hill is like the door that Allah
mentioned concerning the Banu Israil 'Go through the gate with your heads bowed
and say "Forgive, 0 Lord!" so that your sins may be forgiven."'
Now the difficulties had been left behind and they were at a more secure place. The
Messenger of mercy said: "Say: We ask for forgiveness from Allah and we tum
towards Him with great repentance."
The Companions who were following his every step had started to speak these
words of repentance. Then our noble Prophet said: "This is the way the Children of
Israel were called to repent and yet they hesitated."
The Messenger of Allah had yet another piece of good news and said: "Everyone
who passes this night on this hill will definitely attain Divine mercy!"
They had reached their destination; now they were going to rest and eat. But they
feared that the Quraysh would see their lit fires and know where they were. When they
came to the Messenger of Allah and spoke of these fears he said: "They will never see
you."
With the first light of day, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, led the Morning Prayer. He also said that all his Companions-except for the one
on a red camel-had earned Allah's forgiveness. The Companions were overjoyed.
However, they all wondered who the unfortunate man on a red camel was. This was a
man from the sons of Damra who had joined the Companions in the morning and who

--- Sayfa 724 ---
had lost his camel. When the situation was made clear to him and he was asked to go
to the presence of the Messenger of Allah, he refused and said that finding his camel
was more important to him than anything else. 130
Hudaybiya and the Bounty That Came with Water
The journey continued. At last they approached the place called Hudaybiya and were
faced with a situation they did not expect. Qaswa had sat down, and he would not get
up. The Messenger of Allah could not understand the reason why his camel was not
standing up despite the efforts by him and his Companions. They said: "Qaswa is
being very stubborn," and he replied: "No it is not! Qaswa is never stubborn! The One
who once stopped the army of the elephants enter Mecca has stopped him."
For there was no space for coincidence in the universe, and for him, each movement
was a message from Allah. This was also better than walking into Mecca and starting
a chain of events they could not predict. The atmosphere was very tense and this could
cause a lot of bloodshed.
Then there were those in Mecca who had become Muslim and yet were hiding it. If
there should be a war, Muslims could kill Muslims without knowing. Besides, there
were potential Muslims in Mecca who could meet the true religion the next day
themselves, or following generations from their family could indeed declare their
loyalty to the Messenger of Allah. So this was the time to seek peace and the
Messenger of Allah said: "I swear by He who holds Muhammad's life in His hands
that today, whatever plan is asked for me that will exalt Allah's name, I will accept it."
The Messenger of peace was once again choosing peace over war.
Our noble Prophet, who had understood the message, changed Qaswa's direction
and tried to get it up. It was as he expected; Qaswa got up and started to walk! This
validated the meaning of the message. They had now reached the furthest point of
Hudaybiya; the weather was very hot and people needed water. The developments
showed that they were going to stop there for a while. That is why the Messenger of
Allah went to a well that had some water and set up camp there. There were no other
wells around.
Where the Messenger of Allah had camped was outside the boundaries of the
Haram, or the Sanctuary. For his Prayers he went a little way further and entered the
Sanctuary Zone and performed them there. It was now time for the Afternoon Prayer
and the Messenger of Allah took a jug of water for his ablutions. The honorable
Companions watched him as he took ablutions. There was something strange. He

--- Sayfa 725 ---
looked at them and asked: "What is with you all?"
'We are perished, 0 Messenger of Allah!" they said.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to them and said:
"As long as I am with you, no one will perish."
Who could perish as long as they had the Messenger of Allah in their heart?
But they wanted to explain what they really meant: "0 Messenger of Allah, we
have no water to take ablutions or to drink except for what is in your hand."
The shortage of water was extreme and it seemed that the Companions expected the
blessed Messenger to work a miracle. He told them to pour the jug of water into a
bowl and then he placed his blessed fingers inside it and started to say a prayer. Then
he said: "There you have it! Bismillah."
The honorable Companions waited to see what would happen. And what did they
see? Water was miraculously running from the fingers of the Messenger of Allah!
People ran to get their water skins. They drank from this water, took their ablutions
and also gave it to their animals.!.ll Smiles covered the faces of the Companions once
again at Hudaybiya, the water skins were full and they had satiated themselves with
water, even if it was only for the time being. The blessed Messenger, who was also
smiling after seeing these developments, opened up his hands to pray: "I bear witness
that there is no deity but Allah and that I am His Messenger," thus thanking his
Lord. 132
The Bounty of Rain and a Warning
That day a rain that soothed the hearts rained on Hudaybiya, the dry grass found life
and the insects that lived on the land were refreshed. This was a manifestation of
Divine grace for the believers. But not everyone was showing the same kind of
gratitude, and some even connected this timely gift to earthly causes, failing to see the
Divine Power behind it. People like Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, whose stance was
not quite clear, said:
"This is something that happens in the autumn months; and the star of Sirius has
sent it down to us."
While they were being showered with so many gifts, they insisted on not seeing the
hand of the Great Power that bestowed upon them all these. Afterwards, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, led the Morning Prayer and
then turned to his Companions and said: "Do you know what your Lord tells you?"
It was clear how people who had been wrought with Prophetic education would

--- Sayfa 726 ---
answer such a question: "Allah and His Messenger know best!"
The word was once again his, and so he would speak once again in general terms so
as not to offend anyone in particular. "Allah the Almighty says," he said starting his
words.
Maybe the Truthful Gabriel had come and brought news from beyond the heavens
once again. The Companions who had made it a habit to act according to Divine
orders were listening to the Messenger of Allah with great attention. The Messenger of
Allah continued his words with the following: "Among my subjects are those who
made it to morning as believers, and those who made it to the morning as deniers.
Those who made it to the morning as believers say 'It has rained down on us with the
grace of Allah', and they have believed in Me and rejected the stars. Those who say 'It
is the stars that made the rain come down' are those unfortunate ones who deny Me
and believe in the stars!"
Thus he was correcting another mistake without hurting anyone's feelings and was
warning his Companions not to fall into the trap of observing the causes without
seeing and appreciating the Maker of the Causes. Meanwhile, Amr ibn Salim and Busr
ibn Sufyan from the Companions had given camels and sheep as gifts to the
Messenger of Allah. Then Amr sent a similar gift to his friend Sa'd ibn Ubada, who in
tum came and presented it to the Messenger of Allah. Upon that the Messenger of
mercy prayed: "Amr has given these flocks to us as present; may Allah increase Amr' s
bounty."
Then he had the animals slaughtered and had the meat distributed among his
Companions. He was taking the same share from the meat as everyone else even
though it had actually been given to him as a present, thus making it clear that hearts
should beat as one in need just as it does in times of wealth.
Fruits of Dialogue
Subsequently, Budayl ibn Warka came to where the Messenger of Allah was with a
delegation that consisted of people like Amr ibn Salim, Hirash ibn Umayya, Harija ibn
Kurz and Yazid ibn Umayya. They were all from the tribe of Huza'a. The Huza'a
tribe, though not Muslim, was an ally of the Messenger of Allah-they had a dialogue
on the basis of their common humanity. They would always inform the Messenger of
Allah about all that happened in the region of Tihama, fulfilling some kind of
intelligence service. Now, at a very critical point, this alliance was paying off, and the
Huza'a delegate who had seen that their services would be needed had come to the
rescue of the Messenger of Allah. After the usual greetings, Budayl started to speak:

--- Sayfa 727 ---
"We come from where the tribes of Ka'b ibn Luayy and Amir ibn Luayy who are
related to you are. They provoked the surrounding tribes known as Ahabish and came
with them, some other tribes and their own families also came to where the Hudaybiya
waters are, and they are camping there! They take oaths in the Name of Allah and say
that they will not let you reach the House of Allah even if it should cost the lives of
their leaders!"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, listened to the words of
Budayl with great attention and patience.
Those who came would carry the news about the Messenger of Allah to the
Quraysh, just as they had brought news about the Quraysh. This was a sign that the
Muslims and the Quraysh were having some contact through peaceful means for the
first time. That is why the real intentions had to be spelled out clearly in a way to also
maintain the honor of being a Muslim.
'We did not come to fight with anyone," began the Messenger of Allah.
'We have undertaken this journey in order to circumambulate the Ka'ba, we will
fight whoever tries to stop us from walking to it! To resort to arms has always been
detrimental to the Quraysh. If they want, I can give them enough time for them to feel
safe-and they will not interfere with our communication with other people. If those
they have provoked against me come victorious over me-and this is what the
Quraysh want-then they will have had what they want. But if my cause wins over
those people, then they will be free to join either the others or Islam. They can grab
their swords and fight me, and thus they will have had their respite! But if they do not
look on these options favorably, then I will do all I can till this head is severed from
this body and Allah the Almighty will put His judgment to work!"
After listening to the blessed Messenger, Budayl said: "I will convey all these you
have said to the Quraysh," and he and his friends left the presence of the Messenger of
Allah and went to the Quraysh. Those who saw them come towards them said:
"Budayl and his friends are coming. They will most probably try to get news from us,
to collect intelligence! Do not ask anything from them."
The atmosphere was very tense all of a sudden. Budayl realized the sensitivity of
the situation and started to speak accordingly: "We are coming from where
Muhammad is. Would you like us to give you his news?"
The tension continued. Not only that, now Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl and Hakam ibn As
came to the fore, and said rather angrily: 'We do not need any news you may give us.
But you can tell him that he will not enter Mecca this year even if it should cost us the

--- Sayfa 728 ---
lives of all our men!"
Thus they made it clear that they were very adamant about this decision that they
had made and they were not open for discussion. But not all of them were of the same
view. Urwa ibn Masud came to the fore and said: 'We should listen to what Budayl
has to say; if you like it, you'll accept it, if not, you'll reject it."
Upon these words Safwan ibn Umayya and Harith ibn Hisham both turned to
Budayl and said: "Speak then! What was it that you saw and heard?"
They had at last given him the opportunity to speak and he had to make best use of
it: ''You are too hasty in your decision about Muhammad," began Budayl, "for he has
set off on the road not to fight but to do umrah!"
When Budayl shared with them everything that he had heard from the Messenger of
Allah, there was a change in the atmosphere; the bitter memories of Badr, Uhud and
the Trench were still fresh in their minds and now they could see an alternative to war.
And so the experienced Urwa came to the fore once again: "0 Quraysh!" he said,
"Would you ever doubt me?"
''No!" they said, it was clear that he was going to build his argument on trust. Then
they had the following conversation: "Are you not close as a father to me?" Urwa
asked.
''Yes," they replied.
"And am I not your son?"
''Yes, that is true as well."
''You must remember that day when I came with my sons and followers to help you
against those people ofUkaz!"ill
''Yes that is true, that is what you did! None of us will doubt your sincerity!"
"Then let me give you advice today; you know how much I love you all and I
would not keep from you something that I believe will be to your advantage. Budayl
has come to you with a very reasonable plan; only ignorant fools will not take it into
consideration. Accept it! And send me so that I may investigate whether all this is true
and tell you the truth of the matter. Let me go to him and have a look as your agent
and then bring new news from him!"
U rwa ibn Masud
There was nothing to lose in taking this course of action and so the Quraysh responded
favorably to Urwa's offer, and sent him to the Messenger of Allah. As soon as he
arrived, he said: "0 Messenger of Allah. I left Ka'b ibn Luayy and Amir ibn Luayy

--- Sayfa 729 ---
with the camels and families by the waters of Hudaybiya; the tribes of Ahabish and
other people who obey them are united against you. They swear giving the Name of
Allah that they will not let you pass even if you crush them all! And so you have to
choose between two things; you will have to crush your own tribe to annihilate them.
There has never been a man who has destroyed his own tribe before you. The people
you see around you will leave you and disappoint you. I swear I do not see any
honorable men with you; they are mostly people you have gathered from Allah knows
where! I do not recognize their faces, and I know nothing of their lineage! If you
should fight, they will disperse all around you, and you will be taken prisoner by them
what could be graver for you than all these?"
Urwa's words were hard to stomach, and this had been too much for Abu Bakr who
had been listening patiently till that moment. How could this man talk about fleeing?
None of those present would leave the side of our noble Prophet or let him be hurt
until all of them had been broken into smithereens. He had to respond to Urwa in a
language he would understand! Abu Bakr, the loyal and modest Companion who
would not even dare speak when near the Messenger of Allah, said: ''You go on
crawling at the skirts ofLat! How should we leave him and go?"
His outburst expressed the feelings of all the Companions who were glad to hear
their opinions thus voiced. Urwa was surprised by this display. He had not been able
to recognize the man behind the voice; for he had hid his face. He turned to where the
voice was coming from and asked: "And who is it that speaks?"
Those around him said: "Abu Bakr."
Urwa hesitated when he heard the name of Abu Bakr, he remembered the help he
had asked from Abu Bakr at a time when he was having difficulty paying the blood
money for a man he had killed. That day, when his closest friends helped him with
two or three camels, Abu Bakr had given him ten, and had saved him from great
difficulty. That is why he turned and said: "Had there not this been favor that I have
not yet been able to pay back, I swear by Allah that I would talk back at you!"
Another thing that did not escape the attention of the honorable Companions was
that every time Urwa attempted to speak, he also tried to get a hold of the beard of the
Messenger of Allah. Mughira ibn Shu'ba134 who had become Muslim on the day of the
Trench and who saw what Urwa was trying to do, was keeping guard by the side of
our noble Prophet and hit Urwa's hand with the handle of his sword every time he
tried to touch the blessed Messenger's beard.
"Before this sword enters your guts you should stop trying to touch the beard of our

--- Sayfa 730 ---
noble Prophet, for the hand of polytheist cannot touch him," he said.
Urwa was angered that Mughira responded the same way to all his attempts to get
close to the Messenger and so he turned to him and said: "Woe unto you! You are
such a hard and rough man." Turning to the blessed Messenger he said: "See what is
happening to me! Who is this man among your Companions that is harassing me so? I
do not believe there is a worse man among you."
Our noble Prophet was smiling; he wanted to show Urwa the distance that his old
friend had travelled and said: "This is the son of your brother, Mughira ibn Shu'ba."
How could he not know Mughira? There was no one who could surpass him by way
of wit and intellect in the entire Arabian Peninsula!
A man could only change so much! He looked at him in wonder and amazement
and then said: "Was it not you who nurtured the hatred against the tribe of Thaqif
among us?"
He was speaking just to show that he had not been daunted. He was indeed much
troubled by the change he saw in his friend. He was trying to size up not only Mughira
but also the honorable Companions and was amazed at the progress that they had all
made. They did not even let a single drop of spit fall from the blessed mouth of the
blessed Messenger. When he pointed to something to be done they all ran to do it;
when he got up to take ablution they would all rush to bring the jug. They even took
extra care not to let a single hair strand fall down to the ground. They preferred to stay
silent in the presence of our noble Prophet out of modesty and respect, whose face
they could not bring themselves to look because of its magnificence, and spoke in very
low tones if they had to.
This conversation went on for a while and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, repeated to Urwa what he had said to Budayl; that his aim was
not to fight anyone or to shed blood but to make his umrah in peace with his
Companions.
Urwa's Comments
Urwa was very impressed by the attitude and demeanor of the honorable Companions.
When he returned to the Quraysh he said: "0 my tribe!"
It was clear that he had had a very good impression of the believers. More than the
magic of what he had heard, the unmistakable message of the believers' demeanor had
impressed him. He continued: "I have been sent as envoy to the Kisra, the Kaiser and
kings like Najashi; but I have never seen a ruler who was attended to like Muhammad!

--- Sayfa 731 ---
And the thing is he is no king! I swear by Allah, when his spit falls down from his
mouth, someone from his Companions cups it in their hands. When he points to
something to be done, they all run to do it; when he gets up to take ablution, they all
rush to get a drop of the water he takes ablution with. They even take care not to let
his hair strands fall down to the ground. They all fall silent when he speaks, they
cannot bring themselves to look at his face because of it magnificence, nobody speaks
without his permission, and if he doesn't speak, they don't say a thing. He offers you a
reasonable plan; come, accept it. I have studied them well; let me tell you this, if you
offer nothing but the sword to them they will fight you to the death! I have seen such a
group that will not care what befalls them if you do not let their leader visit the House
of Allah. Even the women I have seen will not hand him over to you till they die! So
think well upon this and decide accordingly!
0 my tribe! I am just warning you and reminding you, come, accept this offer made
to you! Or I fear that if you tum an honorable man from his way, a man who comes in
peace and who will exalt the Ka'ba as it deserves to be, then you will lose the support
of others as well."
As was clear, Urwa had really been impressed and his speech to his tribe was very
effective indeed. Now they did not know quite what to do. First there was a great
silence. Then the silence was broken by the following voice: "Do not speak so 0 Abu
Y afur! Is there anyone among us who speaks like that? In any case, we will not accept
him this year, maybe he can come next year."
These were not words that would satisfy Urwa and so he said: "I fear some calamity
will befall you if you do not let him in," and then he took his men and went back to
Taif. This was an unexpected loss on the part of the Quraysh. There was a hole in their
ranks and this could lead to their ultimate defeat.
A Better Approach
Now the Quraysh were really confused about what they should do. Each person or
group that went came back with the same impression. The leader of Ahabish, Hulays
ibn Alqama, who saw this said: "Let me go; just let me go so I can see for myself,"
asking Quraysh's permission to go and investigate himself.
"Okay," they said. "Go and investigate."
And so he started to make way towards where the Messenger of Allah was.
Our noble Prophet knew his adversaries very well, when he saw that Hulays was
coming to him, he said to his Companions: "The man who is coming is from such and

--- Sayfa 732 ---
such tribe; he is respectful and is very careful concerning the sacrificial camels-bring
the camels to the front."
They did so, and the camels were brought forward towards where Hulays was
coming with the chanting of takbirs and talbiyas. Hulays saw the marks on the necks
of the camels that indicated that they were to be sacrificed; he also saw that the camels
had been bound with ropes for fifteen days and that their hairs were falling off because
of their captivity: "Subhanallah!" he cried out in surprise, "it is not right that these
people should be kept away from going to the House of Allah. Allah will not be
content that the sons of Abdul Muttalib are being kept away from visiting the Ka'ba
while the tribes of Lahm, Juzam, Kinda and Himyar can visit. These people should not
be kept away from entering the House of Allah! I swear by the Lord of the Ka'ba that
the Quraysh are doing a very bad thing; do you not see that these men come only to
perform the umrah?"
Hulays was very excited about what he had seen and he could not keep his
enthusiasm to himself. The blessed Messenger saw his reaction and said: "Yes, it is as
you say, 0 brother of the sons ofKinana."
Hulays returned without even feeling the need to speak to the Messenger of Allah.
And as soon as he came to the Quraysh, he said: "0 Quraysh!" his tone of voice had a
measure of censure in it. He then continued to speak concernedly: "I have seen such
things that let me tell you, there is no way to stop them from coming; their sacrificial
camels have been bound with ropes and have eaten their own hair. Because people
have entered ihram they are now infested with insects. Our pact was not to stop people
from entering the Ka'ba, to circumambulate the House of Allah or to hinder them
from offering their sacrificial animals.
I swear by Allah that if you give up trying to come between him and his intention of
coming here, then I will take all the tribes of Ahabish with me and disperse them."
The Quraysh did not like what Hulays had to say: "Hold on a minute," they were
saying. 'Wait till we have come to an agreement among ourselves. You are a man
who lives in the desert; you would not understand such things! What you have seen
with Muhammad are all traps."
This was denial in its usual form; it did not make sense to look for reason in its
judgment, it was their habit to slander others, and what the Quraysh was doing was
this very old trick. But they were watching the developments closely as well. This
time Mikraz ibn Hafs came to the fore when he saw that the people were being
influenced by the stories that had been told: "Let me go," he said, and the Quraysh let

--- Sayfa 733 ---
him go as well.
This time, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who saw
Mikraz approach said: "This is a treacherous man," and warned his Companions, thus
teaching by his very actions that one should know his adversaries very well.
Mikraz had made a raid on the tribe of the Banu Nadir during the Badr war and had
killed their leader Amir ibn Y azid and since then he was known with this betrayal of
his.
The Envoys of the Blessed Messenger
Things were still not clear and our noble Prophet took a step and chose Hirash ibn
Umayya from among his Companions, and giving him his camel named Salah, he sent
him to the Quraysh. His aim was to make clear once again that his intention was not
war and that he had come solely with the intention of umrah.
As soon as Hirash arrived, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl drew his sword and slashed the
camel on the legs; he was filled with so much hatred and rancor that he was also about
to kill Hirash. The tribes of Ahabish, who saw such an outburst of anger, intervened at
once and did not let him kill the envoy of the blessed Messenger; they set Hirash free
and let him return. Hirash came back to our noble Prophet at once and spoke to him
about how he had been treated.
The sensitivity ofthe situation was growing each passing day and at such a juncture
every step taken was very important indeed. The Quraysh were very nervous; they
were acting without thinking things through and causing much problem.
Our noble Prophet on the other hand, was determined to get his message to the
leaders of the Quraysh. He was going to speak to their hearts and minds and somehow
convey to them that they should get out of the way of people who had no other aim
than gaining the contentment of Allah by visiting the House of Allah. This time he
called Umar to his side to send as envoy to the Quraysh. When he learnt of the blessed
Messenger's intention, Umar said: "0 Messenger of Allah! I fear that the Quraysh will
try to kill me, for they know my enmity towards them. And there are none among
them from the sons of Adiyy who may protect me! But despite all that, 0 Messenger
of Allah, if you want me to go to them, I will go without any hesitations!"
Umar' s worry was not for his life, but he knew that should he get killed, the killing
of such a respected envoy as himself would be cause for war-and under such
circumstances who knew what would set off the first spark. Our noble Prophet was
thinking as he listened to Umar: "0 Messenger of Allah!" continued Umar. "I can

--- Sayfa 734 ---
recommend you someone who is more respected by the Quraysh, and who will be
more protected among them, who had stronger connections, Uthman ibn Afwan."
Foresight was an important quality for a believer, and these suggestions of Umar
were full of foresight and wisdom. Upon the advice of Umar, the blessed Messenger
called Uthman to his presence and said: "Go to the Quraysh and tell them that we have
come to do umrah and not to make war! And invite them to Islam."
The mission that was given to Uthman was not limited to that. He was also to go to
those who had become Muslims after the Hijra and give them the good news of the
imminent conquest of Mecca, that soon Allah would make His religion victorious
there. He was to give them this news so that they may be able to live their religion out
on the open, without feeling the need to hide it. After receiving orders from our noble
Prophet, Uthman set off on the road. When he arrived to Baldah, he was confronted by
the Quraysh: "Where are you going?" they asked. He was cautious and said: "The
Messenger of Allah sent me to you. I invite you to believe in Islam and Allah; enter
His religion altogether-Allah the Almighty will make His religion and Messenger
come victorious over you. Stay out of his way so that you may not be of those who
oppose him! And if the Messenger of Allah should be defeated, well then, that is what
you want! If he should be victorious, then the choice will be yours; you may come and
choose Islam like other people, or you can resist him and fight him! You know what
war always brings you; you are weak and exhausted and you have lost leading men of
your tribe! What's more, the Messenger of Allah is not coming to fight; he comes with
animals marked for sacrifice, with only the intention of doing umrah, and he wants me
to tell you that he will return after he had offered these animals in sacrifice."
'We hear what you are saying. But this is something that cannot be. He can't come
here suddenly like that. Go and tell your friend that he cannot come upon us!"
It did not seem possible to get the Quraysh to open their doors; even before meeting
the leading men of Quraysh they had been faced with the reaction of the people on the
street and Uthman could not perform the mission that had been entrusted to him
satisfactorily. It looked like he was not going to be able to speak to them as he wished
and so he was about to return. Just at that moment, Aban ibn Said came up to him.
After a quick exchange of civilities, he said to Uthman: "Whatever you need, just tell
me without hesitation."
He had come down from his horse and was asking Uthman to mount it; he would
get on behind him. Umar had been right; at a juncture where the routes seemed to be
blocked, old friendships would come into play and many doors that seemed locked
would open. On the other hand Aban was saying: "Go to the left and right and do not

--- Sayfa 735 ---
fear anyone, for the sons of Said are the most honorable and respected of the Haram,"
thus making clear with the language of poetry that Uthman would be under his surety.
First, they came all the way to the Ka'ba and Uthman started to visit the leading men
of the Quraysh. He was visiting every single one of them and bringing them the news
of our noble Prophet. They were all saying: "Muhammad will not come upon us like
that," and then were closing their doors.
But they were not able to banish Uthman altogether and said to him: "You can
come by yourself and circumambulate the House of Allah if you like." But he
answered: "I will not circumambulate the House of Allah unless the Messenger of
Allah does," thus refusing their offer. He understood the intentions of the Quraysh and
so he went to the believing men and women of Mecca who had been oppressed: "The
Messenger of Allah says," he began, and those who saw a Companion such as Uthman
realized that they would be receiving some news from our noble Prophet and hence
were overjoyed. There were those who had been waiting for this for six years: having
found him, it had been very difficult to live away from him! But the reason Uthman
came was not solely to bring them his greetings. There was good news: "I will place
you under my wings and protect you very soon and no one will have to hide their faith
in Mecca anymore."
This was like receiving gales of spring in winter! They longed to be able to express
themselves freely! Now that such an envoy like noble Uthman had come to them, this
good news would come to pass as well. As they saw Uthman off, they waved at him in
tears and asked him to bring their greetings to our beloved Prophet. Uthman's efforts
continued for three whole days.
Mutual Search for Peace
While Uthman continued his Mecca visits, the anxious wait of the blessed Messenger
and his Companions continued. Although the Quraysh were challenging them, they
could not flat out declare war on them because of their previous experiences in war.
That is, although they were incensed by the developments, they were also afraid to
take any wrong steps; they were weighing every development to a reasonable
conclusion.
On the other hand, the honorable Companions were worried about Uthman who had
gone as envoy and had not come back. Some of them were saying: "Uthman has gone
and we believe that he must have reached the House of Allah and done his
circumambulation."
To which the Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I do not

--- Sayfa 736 ---
believe he will go and circumambulate the Ka'ba while we wait here."
The Companions said: "What should stop him," seeing that he has gone so far and
for so long.
Our noble Prophet, who knew his friend well, turned to them and said: "This is
what I believe of him; even if he should have to stay there as it is for a year, he would
not circumambulate the Ka'ba without us."
Because of the tension in the atmosphere, our noble Prophet had asked his
Companions to keep sentry at night and Aws ibn Hawli, Abbad ibn Bishr and
Muhammad ibn Maslama rotated among themselves for this job. This was something
that had been suggested by the blessed Messenger and before long it would become
clear how right he had been in suggesting such a measure. While Muhammad ibn
Maslama was keeping guard, fifty men of Quraysh led by Mikraz ibn Hafs had come
to where the honorable Companions were in a seeming mission of reconnaissance, to
see if there would be an opportunity for them to catch the Muslim unawares and raid
their camp.
Muhammad ibn Maslama, who noticed the men immediately, set to work at once;
he took the Qurayshi men prisoner-only Mikraz had been able to escape. As
Maslama was taking the men to the presence of our noble Prophet, Mikraz was
running to Mecca to inform the Quraysh of what had just happened.
On the other hand, Companions such as Kurz ibn Jabir, Abdullah ibn Suhayl,
Abdullah ibn Huzafa, Umayr ibn Wahb, Abu'r-Rum ibn Umayr, Hisham ibn As, Abu
Hatib ibn Amr, Abdullah ibn Abi Umayya, Ayyash ibn Abi Rabia and Hatib ibn Abi
Balta'ah came to our noble Prophet and said that they wanted to go to the Ka'ba in
secret and the blessed Messenger had given them leave upon their insistence. But
when the Quraysh saw that these men had broken into their ranks, they were
thoroughly displeased and had taken the said Companions as prisoner. When they
learnt that Muhammad ibn Maslama had taken their men prisoner, the atmosphere got
even tenser. A group from the Quraysh ran to Hudaybiya and started to pelt the
Messenger of Allah and the honorable Companions with stones and arrows. The
honorable Companions had been on their guard. In the confusion, twelve more cavalry
men were taken prisoner from the Quraysh, Ibn Zanim who had been shot with an
arrow while he was at some high place was killed.
Although neither side really wanted to fight, it looked like war was close at hand
once again; at such a juncture even the smallest spark could set a great fire and lead to
unforeseeable consequences. That is why the Quraysh got together to assess the

--- Sayfa 737 ---
situation once again. They decided to send Suhayl ibn Amr, Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza
and Mikraz ibn Hafs to the blessed Messenger as envoys in an attempt to lessen the
tension. Our noble Prophet, who saw Suhayl approaching from afar turned to his
Companions and said: "Your job has been made easy," this was a play on the word
Suhayl, for its root came from the word "easy."
The envoys of Quraysh had reached them and Suhayl ibn Amr approached the
Messenger of Allah and said: "0 Muhammad!" The hesitation in his voice reflected
the psychology of the Quraysh as a whole. It seemed that the Quraysh wanted some
kind of agreement as well. Their attitude of supremacy had been defeated and now
they wanted to speak on reasonable terms. Suhayl continued in the following manner:
"Your friends being out of prison and the extreme behavior of those who fought with
you were not our intention; we did not know such a thing would happen, and when we
heard of what happened we told them that we did not agree with them and that they
were in error. These are the actions of those who have no reason and no standing
among us! Set free our friends who you have taken as prisoner and give them to us."
Our noble Prophet, after listening to Suhayl, said: "I will not hand over your men
until you have set my Companions free."
This was only natural. The honorable Companions whom the Quraysh had prisoner
had committed not act of degeneracy as the men of Quraysh had done. That is why
they said: "You have acted fair."
Upon that Suhayl ibn Amr and the men with him sent Shuyaym ibn Abdimanaf to
the Quraysh and asked the ten Companions to be set free. This was a new hope for
peace; and the Messenger of Allah had sent word so that the men of Quraysh would
too be released. All that was discussed was put into practice and the men of Quraysh
had been set free. But the news that Uthman had been killed along with ten other
Companions on their way back changed everything at once; there was a new
development and things had to be considered accordingly.
The Alliance at Ridwan
When the news of the martyrdom of Uthman and the ten Companions reached our
noble Prophet, he said: "It seems we will not be able to part from this place without
having fought the Quraysh," asking his Companions to swear allegiance to him. He
had come to where the houses of the Banu Mazin ibn Najjar were and he sat under a
tree: "Allah the Almighty orders you to swear allegiance to me," he said.
The people who had been thus called rushed to the blessed Messenger in order to

--- Sayfa 738 ---
comply with his request.
"0 people!" he called out. "To alliance, to alliance! The Blessed Soul is here; be
quick, in the Name of Allah!"
Upon that, the honorable Companions started coming to our noble Prophet and to
swear allegiance to him one by one; they were putting their lives at stake, and
swearing that come what may, they would not stay away from the field of battle, and
that they would defeat the polytheists. As the act of alliance continued, Numan ibn
Muqarrin was standing guard by our noble Prophet parting the branches of the tree so
that people could come to him more easily. The first person to hold out his hand was
Abu Sinan al-Asadi, and he said: "Give me your hand, 0 Messenger of Allah, I will
swear allegiance to you." Upon that the noble Messenger asked him.
'What will you swear your allegiance by?"
With great submission, Abu Sinan answered: 'Whatever you like."
Taking one step further, the blessed Messenger asked: "And what is it I want?"
Abu Sinan said the following: "I will stand in front of you with my sword and fight
until Allah the Almighty gives us victory or until I become a martyr for Him!"
After that everyone came to the blessed Messenger and took their oaths of
allegiance just like Abu Sinan. At one point our noble Prophet lifted up one of his
hands and supplicated: "Verily Uthman had gone in pursuit of Your and Your
Messenger's business!"
And then with one of his hands he took the other in lieu of Uthman' s and said that
Uthman had also taken the oath of allegiance in absentia. He then turned to his
Companions and said: "You are the best on earth," and told them that the people who
put their trust in him under that tree would not be touched by Hellfire.
Among those who had come all the way to Hudaybiya were Jadd ibn Qays who had
not sworn alliance; he had been unable to get rid of the dissension in his heart and he
had hidden under his camel in order not to be seen and to not swear allegiance.
Everyone, including the Messenger of Allah, had donned what weapon they could
find. The forces on both sides were not equal but the honorable Companions had a
faith that could overcome anything. Umm Umara had taken one of the poles that had
been supporting a tent and tying a knife at its tip, she had made it into a weapon in
order to defend herself in case of danger. Our noble Prophet, who until then had
deemed it not appropriate to light fire at night, allowed people to light fires after this
point saying: "Light fires and prepare food; because no one will be able to come close
to you in measure of good deeds." 135

--- Sayfa 739 ---
Suhayl ibn Amr, Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza, Mikraz ibn Hafs and the Qurayshi' s
around were watching what was happening very closely. They felt a little intimidated;
it would not be possible to fight such determined people who were running towards
death with such open hearts. For them, it was impossible to see another group of
people like them; this was a different and unbelievable kind of loyalty, one that
bonded stronger than blood ties or tribal connections! The Companions were united in
showing the Meccan polytheists how to really show respect to a leader, how sensitive
one could be in living by their leader's orders, and how, when the going got rough,
they could exercise physical and spiritual self-sacrifice.
These were action that the Quraysh had neither seen nor heard. That is why the
envoys believed that they had to find a way of agreement at all events, and they were
debating as to how they would get out of this situation with minimal losses. Before
long, news would come and they would learn that the information about Uthman and
the ten other Companions being martyred was false-and so the Muslims would
reJOice.
The Agreement
Suhayl ibn Amr and his friends returned to Mecca and they spoke about the scene they
saw at Hudaybiya as clearly as they could. They spoke of the way that the
Companions reacted to the news of their friends' being murdered and how they ran to
swear their allegiance when our noble Prophet invited them. They spoke of their
determination to fight the polytheists despite their difficult circumstances. The
Qurayshis, who finally used some common sense, converged on the following
decision: "For us, the best would be to make peace with Muhammad on the condition
that they will not visit the House of Allah, but come back and do so next year. Thus
the Arabs and those who have heard about his arrival here will know that we have
deterred him! They can come next year, stay in Mecca for three days, offer their
sacrifices and return. Thus they will not have entered our land without our permission
and have stayed only for a couple of days!"
Upon this decision, they sent Huwaytib and Mikraz led by Suhayl ibn Amr to our
noble Prophet once again. They said to Suhayl: "Go to Muhammad and make an
agreement with him! But be sure the place the condition of not entering Mecca this
year; we swear that we will not let the Arabs say that we have been pressured into
letting him enter our land."
As planned, Suhayl and his friends set off on the road again and came to
Hudaybiya. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who saw them

--- Sayfa 740 ---
coming from afar, said: "Since these men have been sent again, the Quraysh want
peace."
He was hopeful, this was what he wanted as well. He also knew that the Meccan
polytheists and the Jews had made a pact at Khaybar to have a joint stance against
Medina. Now they would at least be able to come to an agreement with one party of
this alliance, and this could weaken the force of the enemy. This opportunity had to be
taken in the name of Islam, the religion he had been sent to communicate to
humankind.
Suhayl came close to our noble Prophet, who was sitting on the floor. He knelt
down. Abbad ibn Bishr and Salama ibn Aslam ibn Harith were keeping guard next to
the blessed Messenger, dressed in their helmets and armor. The honorable
Companions had formed rings around the blessed Messenger, trying to follow what
was happening. They spoke for a long while. There was intense negotiating; the voices
kept increasing and decreasing. At one point Suhayl raised his voice so much that
Abbad ibn Bishr found this difficult to tolerate and warned him: "Keep your voice
down when you are talking to the Messenger of Allah!" reminding all that one should
not raise one's voice higher than that of our noble Prophet. After these long and heated
talks, some articles had been agreed upon 136 and it was time to put them down in
writing.
The Outbursts ofUmar
This article and the circumstances seemed very dire to the believers; on the one hand
was Suhayl who did not want to negotiate and on the other hand were the believers
who thought that the Muslims had conceded too much. Their aim was not to criticize
our noble Prophet but to make things clearer. One of the things they had learned from
Allah and His Messenger was that a believer was superior to a denier or polytheist;
and what they were faced with now seemed to contradict this knowledge that they had.
Umar could not contain himself and so ran to the presence of the Messenger: "0
Messenger of Allah!" he called out. "Are you not the Prophet of Allah?"
''Yes, I am the Messenger of Allah," replied our noble Prophet.
But this answer did not seem to calm Umar down and so he continued with his
questions: "Are we not on the right path and they in error?"
''Yes!"
"Are our dead not in Paradise and theirs in Hell?"
''Yes!"

--- Sayfa 741 ---
"Then why do we concede from our religion on this point, why do we abstain from
fighting until Allah decides between us?"
"I am the servant and Messenger of Allah, I will not rebel against Him! And He will
not leave me in a difficult situation either; He is the One who helps me in all
situations."
'Was it not you who said that we would go to the House of Allah and
circumambulate it?"
''Yes, I said that! But did you hear me say 'You will go this year?' Do not forget
that you will certainly enter it one day and circumambulate the House of Allah!"
Umar, who had an impulsive and hot tempered nature, thought only of that day, and
without taking into consideration how situations without war could work for their
benefit in the future, was reacting hastily.
He was so agitated that he also went to Abu Bakr and said similar things to him.
Abu Bakr, who was the zenith of loyalty, was answering each question with great
sobriety and each of his answers paralleled with that of our noble Prophet. At last he
turned to Umar and said: "My dear fellow, there is no doubt that he is the Messenger
of Allah! You don't expect him to rebel against Allah, do you?"
"I know that he is the Messenger of Allah," Umar tried to answer. But Abu Bakr
continued: "His helper is Allah; follow him closely until you die! I swear by Allah that
he is always on the right path."
Maybe that day Allah the Almighty was showing to the Muslims how they should
behave in such situations; that they should not react only taking that particular day into
account, but to consider the future consequences of their actions. Many years later,
Umar would greatly regret his actions and the words he said that day; he would report
later that in order to atone his wrong behavior, he prayed and fasted more than he was
obliged to, gave alms and freed slaves.
Another Companion who witnessed Umar's insistence that day, Abu Ubayda ibn
Jarrah, turned to him and said: "0 son of Khattab! Do you not hear what the
Messenger of Allah is saying? It would be best if you sought refuge in Allah from the
wiles of the Devil, and if you must criticize something then criticize your own
behavior!"
Upon that Umar started to repeat: "I seek refuge in Allah from the wiles of the
banished devil," and although his emotions had not settled down, he listened to reason
and submitted himself, trying to curb his emotions from then on.

--- Sayfa 742 ---
Putting the Agreement in Writing
Now things had quieted down and all that was left was to put the articles in writing
and then to verify them. Suhayl ibn Amr turned to the blessed Messenger and said:
"Now have these written on paper."
Upon that our noble Prophet called Ali to his side and said, 'Write!"
"Bismillahirrahmanirrahim!" (In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman andAr-Rahim.)
'What do Rahman and Rahim mean," asked Suhayl.
He hesitated when asking, for although he felt a pang in his heart as he said this, he
was there to represent the Quraysh and this role made him look sterner than he really
was. Suhayl was not a man who did not know what Ar-Rahman (the All-Merciful) and
Ar-Rahim (the All-Compassionate) meant. From the very first days his three siblings,
his son-in-law and daughter, and then two of his sons had become Muslim and had
preferred to be with the blessed Messenger. He had subjected his youngest son Abu
Jandal to various pressures and tortures; he had left him locked up thirsty and hungry
and come to the presence of the Messenger of mercy. That is why he insisted: "I do
not know what they mean, so instead you should write, "in Your Name, 0 Allah",
'Bismikallahumma! "'
The believers who saw his insistence said: "We swear we will not write anything
other than Bismillahirahmanirrahim."
Once again, there were claims on both sides. They were thinking only of the present
moment and they were acting impulsively without thinking of the gains to be made
tomorrow. Our noble Prophet, who did not want the issue to be bogged down in
details, turned to his son-in-law Ali with great self-confidence and patience and told
him to erase Bismillahirrahmanirrahim and write Bismikallahumma.
Another hurdle was thus over, and the Companions were silent in the face of this
determined stance of our beloved Prophet. The blessed Messenger was about to say:
"This is the agreement made between the Messenger of Allah and Suhayl, the son of
Amr," when Suhayl stopped him again and said: "I swear, had we believed that you
are the Messenger of Allah, we would not have stopped you from circumambulating
the House of Allah and we would not have fought you! Write in this document things
we know; write, Muhammad, son of Abdullah."
This was the extent of his intolerance! Suhayl was the representative of denial of the
day, and he was being very stubborn. He was not going to let slip any detail when it
came to advancing his own cause, and he tried to tum each step to his advantage. Even
though Suhayl wanted this title erased, he was still the Messenger of Allah. And so the

--- Sayfa 743 ---
Messenger of mercy turned to Ali and said: "Erase it ... "
The words had been spoken but the atmosphere grew very tense. Companions such
as Sa'd ibn Ubada and Usayd ibn Khudayr held Ali's hand and said: "Either you write
the 'Messenger of Allah' or the issue between us and them will be solved by the
sword," making it clear that they would not tolerate his blessed name to be rubbed off
and anything else written.
Ali was of no other mind; he had just erased "Bismillahirrahmanirrahim" and
written "Bismikallahumma", but he did not want to erase the name of our noble
Prophet, he wanted this form of address to remain in the document like a seal. He did
not want to obey this order of the blessed Messenger either.
Meanwhile, voices were being raised more and more in the presence of the blessed
Prophet, and a commotion had started. The Messenger of Allah gestured with his
hands to quiet his Companions. Then he turned to his son-in-law with grace that was
becoming of him; it was clear he had a few words for him: "Tomorrow, you will find
yourself in a similar position and you will have to compromise as well!"
He had once again opened the curtain of the hidden realms, foreshadowing the
chain of events that would start with the assassination of Uthman and end with the
assassination of Ali himself; particularly with the incident of Tahkim in which Ali
would have to make a critical and life-changing choice. Then he gestured: "Give it to
me," and then erased his noble title "Messenger of Allah" with his blessed hands and
then asked "Muhammad, son of Abdullah" to be written instead.
This wish was also obeyed and another situation of conflict was avoided.
They then started discussing the article "A person who leaves Mecca and seeks
refuge in Medina will be handed back to Mecca even if he should be a Muslim."
Again voices were raised: "Allah is above all and He knows all," they were saying.
"How can you have that written down? How can we hand over someone, who comes
to us as a Muslim, over to the polytheists?"
''Yes," was all the blessed Messenger could say.
Again, there was something he knew that the others did not. As the Qur' an puts it;
the speech of our noble Prophet was nothing other than revelation. He had opened up
the curtains of the hidden and was speaking to his Companions thus. He continued his
words in the following fashion: "Allah the Almighty will distance the person who
leaves us and goes to them from His grace; but when it comes to those who leave them
and come and seek refuge with us, Allah the Almighty will bestow upon them a way
out and well-being."

--- Sayfa 744 ---
On the one hand they were trying to put the articles of the agreement on paper, and
on the other hand they were shaken by the attack of a group of thirty men. 137
Both sides were surprised; this was not a part of anyone's plans, and they had not
been given such a mission. When they saw the group coming from afar, the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, opened up his hands and prayed against
those who tried to block the path of goodness and peace. When it was the Messenger
of Allah who asked, naturally Allah the Almighty answered favorably; such that it
seemed that the men could no longer see or hear. And so it was very easy for the noble
Companions to capture them and render them incapable. They brought all of them to
the presence of the blessed Messenger. He asked: "Have you come here under the
surety of someone-has anyone given you an assurance?"
''No," they answered.
It was thus made clear that these were individuals acting on their own and so the
Messenger of mercy set them free there and then. This was an act that was known by
Allah and had the approval of the heavens, for the Truthful Gabriel had come later to
him and brought the verse with the meaning: ''And He it is Who restrained their hands
from you" (al-Fath 48:24).
Abu Jandal
All the commotion was over and the document was finally sealed, now it was time for
the parties to part. When they were all ready to return home, they realized a dark
figure coming towards them. The person seemed to have difficulty walking, and yet
made a dust cloud behind him more than a normal person would. The slow pace of the
walk also intrigued those who were watching; clearly these were the steps of someone
who was heavily wounded or sick!
When the figure approached close enough, they saw that it was Abu Jandal, the
younger son of Suhayl ibn Amr, the representative of the Quraysh. Suhayl ibn Amr
had imprisoned and tortured Abu Jandal and had bound him tight before he came to
Hudaybiya. In the absence of his father he had escaped his prison, and with the fear of
getting caught he had chosen remote paths, and walking over mountains he had
reached Hudaybiya to be with the Messenger of Allah. This was a scene that made all
the believers happy, including his brother Abdullah who had changed sides and gone
over to the camp of our noble Prophet at Badr. It was clear that he had suffered a lot,
but all his suffering was about to tum into memories of the past. People ran to him
with open arms, some were crying from joy.

--- Sayfa 745 ---
On the other side, when Suhayl saw that his other son also had come to the camp of
the Messenger, he was incensed. His veins were about to burst from anger, and getting
hold of his son Abu Jandal, he started to shake him and started beating him with the
thorny stick he had by his side. After harassing his son for a while, Suhayl turned to
the blessed Messenger and said: "0 Muhammad! This is the first person I demand to
be returned according to our agreement."
Those present froze when they heard this demand; our noble Prophet tried to force
the conditions in order to allow the return of a Muslim to safety from torture. But
Suhayl was determined to make things difficult for him: "If you try to hang on to him;
then our agreement will end forever and then I will never sign a treaty with you ever
again." The blessed Messenger took another step in order to save a someone who was
being victimized and said: "Spare him and hand him to me, and keep him outside the
terms ofthe agreement."
Suhayl did not accept this offer and said: "I will not give him over to you and nor
will I keep him outside the terms ofthe agreement."
The Messenger of Allah looked at Abu Jandal and then to his father Suhayl, and
said: "Yes, you can do it, and you should do it!" trying to use what influence he had.
"I will not do it, ever," said Suhayl.
The other envoys of Quraysh, Huwaytib and Mikraz, who saw Suhayl's harsh
attitude and the insistence of our noble Prophet, displayed some signs of mercy and
they also suggested that Suhayl should let Abu Jandal stay outside the terms of the
agreement, but they too were not able to convince Suhayl either.
Abu Jandal was watching what was happening with great anxiety and hope, and
when Huwaytib and Mikraz took hold of him to take him to a tent, he cried: "0 you
Muslims!" His voice echoing throughout Hudaybiya. "I have come to you as a Muslim
and you are handing me over to the polytheist? Do you not see what I am faced with?"
This was indeed a heart-breaking scene. They were crying out not knowing what
had been set in store for Abu Jandal, and they were thinking that he was being put
once again in the heat of the flames without having experienced the peace and bounty
of the Righteous Lord.
Raising his voice after him, our noble Prophet said: "0 Abu Jandal! Be patient and
expect your reward from Allah! For Allah will provide a way out and expansion for
you and for other believers who are under oppression. However, we have made an
agreement with this tribe and sworn that we will abide by its rules; we cannot tum
back on our word."

--- Sayfa 746 ---
The Messenger of Allah naturally knew more than was apparent, and there was no
doubt that Allah the Almighty would provide a way out for Abu Jandal and his
friends. Abu Jandal's trust in our noble Prophet was endless; but there was one thing
he knew for certain; that his father Suhayl was going to start where he had left off
when he returned and was going to torture him in all ways imaginable. Umar ran after
him and showing him the handle of his sword, said: "0 Abu Jandal!" he ran as though
he was ready to kill Abu Jandal's father and free him of his troubles.
But he continued in the following manner: "Hold fast, and be patient expecting your
reward from Allah! There is no doubt that they are polytheists and their blood is not
dearer than a dog's in the eyes of Allah."
But at that moment Abu Jandal was in no state to be able to listen to Umar, and he
returned to where he came from in the custody ofthe envoys ofQuraysh.
Now the agreement had been completed to the full and one of the Companions, Ibn
Maslama, had made another copy of the document under the order of the blessed
Messenger and given it to Suhayl ibn Amr, the representative of Mecca.
The State of the Sacrificial Animals and
Getting out of the Ihram
Till that moment, the honorable Companions had no doubt that the dream of the
blessed Messenger would be realized; that is why they had come all the way to
Hudaybiya-they were anticipating their own dreams of circumambulating the Ka'ba
after all those years to come true. What they had lived through for twenty days, the
harsh conditions of the agreement that had been signed and lastly the state of Abu
Jandal had shaken them profoundly. They found themselves in a state of hesitation.
They were sad about the death of Companions such as Ibn Abbas and about not
having been able to go and circumambulate the House of Allah. Even the camels that
had been kept away from going there had started to moan, making sounds they usually
make out of love for their offspring.
Now everything had come to an end and the agreement had been signed. Now a
new era was beginning; now they had the opportunity to share the beauties of Islam
with other people without having to worry about the state of war. But the honorable
Companions had not quite grasped the meaning of this opportunity yet, and they still
could not come to terms with the fact that they had to leave without having
circumambulated the Ka'ba. As they were getting ready to return, the blessed
Messenger called out to them: "Stand up, slaughter your sacrifice animal and cut your
hair," but none of them moved to obey the orders of the blessed Messenger.

--- Sayfa 747 ---
They could not give up the idea of visiting the Ka'ba and they did not want to be in
a situation where they would seem disobedient to the blessed Messenger. But
circumstances now called for a choice. They also hesitated as to whether what our
noble Prophet said was an order or an encouragement. It is probable that they hoped
that the Truthful Gabriel would come and abolish the peace treaty; for revelations kept
coming and such a change of course was still possible and then they could go and
circumambulate the Ka'ba that very year. They were in very deep thought, and they
were not quick enough to show the usual sensitivity they had towards the orders of the
Messenger. That is why the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
repeated his request three times, and still no one moved to sacrifice their animals and
cut their hair in order to get out of ihram. Our noble Prophet was rather disappointed
by this and he went to our mother Umm Salama and said: "The Muslims have
perished. I have told them to sacrifice their animals and cut their hair and yet they do
not do so."138 He wanted to discuss the issue with his soul mate and he sought her view
on the matter. Umm Salama looked kindly at the blessed Messenger: "0 Messenger of
Allah," she started. "Do not censure them as yet, since they are experiencing a great
shock at the moment. The problems you have faced concerning the articles of the
agreement, having to return without the conquest they were hoping for-these have
taken a great toll on them. 0 Messenger of Allah! Best is if you go and slaughter your
animal without saying anything, and then call someone to shave your head."
Our mother Umm Salama was speaking as one of them; everyone had a mission,
and she, for her part, was fulfilling the duty of being with our noble Prophet on this
journey and was suggesting the best solution at such a historic moment. It was evident
that at such moments the actions of people who were at the forefront of society would
be more effective than verbal encouragement or force.
Our noble Prophet got out of his tent; he had thrown his ihram over his shoulder
leaving one shoulder open and he had taken a knife in his hand making his way
towards where the camels were. Everyone's eyes were locked onto him. Before long
they all heard our noble Prophet say: "In the Name of Allah, the Greatest," it was clear
that the Messenger of Allah was slaughtering his animal. 139
How could the Companions remain seated after seeing the blessed Messenger
slaughtering his animal; everyone went to where the animals were. Our mother Umm
Salama's suggestion had worked; people were now running to and fro in Hudaybiya,
and all the Companions were slaughtering their animals.
The blessed Messenger, who had just sacrificed his animal, was about to leave his
ihram; he called Hirash ibn Umayya to his side and had him shave his head. The

--- Sayfa 748 ---
honorable Companions were rushing not to let a single hair strand of our noble
Prophet fall to the ground. Umm Umara had got hold of some of his hair.
Some of the honorable Companions also had their heads shaved, and some had only
shortened their hair. The Messenger of mercy looked out of his tent and said: "Let
Allah the Almighty's mercy be on those who have their heads shaved."
The Companions who had shortened their hair were worried: "0 Messenger of
Allah, how about those who have it shortened?"
They feared that they had not properly withdrawn from their state of ihram. The
blessed Messenger said once again: "Those who have it shaved," and he repeated this
three times.
The Companions were now in great doubt and they expected the blessed Messenger
to say something good about those who had only shortened it. The Messenger of
mercy said:
"And also those who have it shortened," thus making the matter clear and putting
everyone out of their misery.
Then a strong wind blew towards Hudaybiya and the hair cut from the Companions
was carried towards Mecca. Now, having postponed the circumambulation of the
Ka'ba by one year, it was time to leave Hudaybiya. It had been twenty days since they
had arrived there 140 and with the intention of coming to Ka'ba next year and
performing their Prayers in peace and security, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, ordered them to start their journey back to Medina.
The Journey Back and another Miracle
They had now left Hudaybiya and were advancing towards Medina. They camped first
at Marr az-Zahran and then at Usfan. They had no food left so they came to our noble
Prophet in order to ask for permission to slaughter the camels they were mounted on
and the blessed Messenger gave them this permission.
They were happy but before they could fulfill their plan, Umar intervened and
coming to the blessed Messenger, he said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Do not let them
slaughter our mounts. It is more appropriate that people should have more camels by
their side just in case. Can you imagine what will happen tomorrow if we are faced
with the enemy hungry and on foot! If you approve of it, I have a better plan. I will tell
the people to bring whatever they have by way of food and once we have gathered all
of it together, you can say a prayer of bounty on them; there is no doubt that Allah the
Almighty will help us return home safely through your prayers."

--- Sayfa 749 ---
Our noble Prophet responded favorably to the suggestion of Umar and he called
people to bring their food. He had placed a spread of skin on the ground and asked
people to put their provisions on it.
The honorable Companions had brought all they had by way of food, and most of
them could not bring anymore than a handful of dates. When everyone had brought
what they had and placed it on the skin, it was only as big as a baby goat.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, opened up his blessed
hands and started to pray for these foods; after a while he turned to his Companions
and told them to start eating after pronouncing "In the Name of Allah" and to satiate
themselves. One thousand and four hundred people came to this spread and left having
eaten till full. Not only did they eat till they were full, but they also filled their bowls
with the leftover food. Before long, the entire caravan had come, eaten and taken from
it, and yet miraculously, the amount of the food the size of a baby goat still remained!
Another miracle, this time through the suggestion of Umar had just occurred. At a
point when they were in dire need, their Gracious Lord had helped them and our noble
Prophet was full of gratitude to Allah, and he was smiling in happiness and gratitude.
The Companions had at that moment seen his shiny pearl-like teeth, a sight so rare and
beautiful that it had only been seen a handful of times in the lifetime of the Messenger
of mercy. In gratitude he said: "I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that I
am His Messenger. I swear by Allah that anyone who goes back to Allah having
believed in these two things, will be saved from Hellfire!"
The Companions were so lucky and blessed to be at the side of our noble Prophet
for they kept witnessing all the bounty and grace that the Almighty bestowed upon
him. Each step they took with him, each solution they suggested made them even
more elevated by way of their faith, and thus they kept experiencing the wonders of
this Companionship.
Then the blessed Messenger gave orders for the road; this time the tongue of the
heavens had loosened and grace started pouring down upon them.
The Companions were overjoyed! At a time when they were experiencing a terrible
drought this meant a lot to them; they raised their hands to the heavens and were
drinking their fill from this grace that was showering down upon them. After all these
gifts received one after the other, our noble Prophet turned to his Companions and
started to address them. As he was advising his Companions, three strangers came and
joined the circle of the Companions; one of them had shortly after turned away and
gone. The blessed Messenger, who took great notice of everything he saw, including

--- Sayfa 750 ---
the demeanor of these men in his sermon, said: "Do you want me to inform you of the
state ofthese three men?"
The Companions naturally said: "Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah."
Our noble Prophet said: "One of them is too modest and so he remains at the back
of the congregation, and Allah has taken note of his modesty. The other has shown
that he is sincere in his repentance, and Allah has accepted his repentance. The third,
he has turned away. And so Allah has cut off His bounty from him, and turned His
beautiful face away from him."
Hudaybiya: The Greatest Conquest
The Muslims were returning home with great gains; however, the noble Messenger
had heard some talks going around. Some were saying that Hudaybiya was not a
conquest. They said that not having been able to circumambulate the Ka'ba and
sacrifice their animals was proof of this. According to them, having handed over
Muslims who sought refuge with them to the polytheists verified their understanding
of what had happened. Each rumor led to new information being formulated about
religion, and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who heard
these rumors turned to his Companions once again and said: "These are such bad
words! Quite the contrary, this is the greatest of conquests, for the polytheists have put
their swords in their shields and have resigned from driving you away from their land.
They sat down and made a pact with you, for they felt they had to confer with you for
their own safety! Because when they saw you and estimated your strength, they
realized this was a scene not to their liking and that Allah the Almighty had made you
victorious over them. Now you are returning home in safety, having gained good a
deed-this is the greatest of conquests! How quickly have you forgotten Uhud! That
was when although I called after you, you kept climbing up high without even looking
back. Remember the day of Ahzab when they all came attacking you; they were
attacking you from below and above, and your eyes had opened wide thinking it was
your last, and even then, you had certain doubts concerning Allah and His help."
These words of the blessed Messenger weighed heavy on the honorable
Companions and they all said in unison: "Allah and His Messenger tell the truth;
indeed this is the greatest of conquests."
They had to view the situation from a broader perspective, the soundest thing to do
was to think more extensively and contemplate upon the benefits they would reap
tomorrow. Hudaybiya had been an instant, as the blessed Messenger pointed out, in
which the polytheists who till yesterday thought of no solution other than the sword,

--- Sayfa 751 ---
sat down and recognized the existence of the Muslims in the international arena. If one
looked a little more carefully, the matter could be seen in all its clarity, and that is why
the Companions had hung their heads and said: "We swear, 0 Messenger of Allah, we
did not think of what you have thought of. You are indeed the one who knows Allah
and our needs and wants better than anyone among us!"
When they came to Kura al-Ghamim, the walking pace of Qaswa, the camel of the
noble Messenger seemed to have changed, and it seemed to be walking as if it was
carrying a very heavy load. Those who observed Qaswa from afar had already
understood that a new revelation was coming to the blessed Messenger. Umar was
asking a question to our noble Prophet and yet he was not receiving an answer from
him. That is when he understood what was happening, though he was a little afraid
there would be a revelation concerning his insistence. And so he galloped away and
came to the very front of the caravan. Before long the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, who had not been able to answer Umar due to the coming
revelation, called out to Umar. When Umar heard the Prophetic voice he was really
worried that he would be faced with some admonition in the revelation that came. But
instead, he was faced with the smiling face of the Messenger of mercy, a smile that no
doubt emerged because of the content of the revelation. He said: "Such a chapter has
been revealed to me that it is dearer to me than the world and everything that is in it."
Everyone was now extremely curious about what the chapter was, and they
gathered around the Prophet to find out what it was. Then our noble Prophet started to
recite chapter al-Fath: "Verily We have granted you a manifest conquest and victory,"
started the surah, this was indeed a verification of what our noble Prophet had said a
couple of hours ago. One of them asked our beloved Prophet to verify what had been
said: "Is this a conquest?" Upon that the noble Messenger said: "I swear by He who
holds my life in His hands that this is a conquest." And so the issue was verified once
again, and there were no doubts that Hudaybiya was a conquest.
The Truthful Gabriel who brought the new revelation congratulated our noble
Prophet, and he responded to his warm wished. The honorable Companions who saw
this came to the blessed Messenger and shared with him the joy of such an important
conquest bestowed upon them by Allah_l!l
Now the Companions were comforted. They had found out that the objections they
made now and then by raising their voices had been forgiven and so were content.
They also understood well that the choices made by the Messenger of Allah were none
other than within the Will of Allah the Almighty and that to seek alternatives to his
decisions were not becoming of a believer.

--- Sayfa 752 ---
The blessed Messenger was now walking day and night with his Companions, as he
wanted to reach Medina as soon as possible. A month and a half had passed since the
Messenger and his Companions had left Medina with the purpose of performing
umrah. Nearly half of this period had been spent in Hudaybiya and the rest on the way
and back.
The Arrival of Abu Basir and following Developments
Finally, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had arrived backed
at Medina with his Companions. And before long, Abu Basir, who had freed himself
of the oppression of the Meccan polytheists, had come to the Muslims to seek refuge
just like Abu Jandal. 142 Abu Basir was an ally of the sons of Zuhra. Just like Abu
Jandal, when he became a Muslim in Mecca, he had been subjected to imprisonment
and torture. He had found a way to escape and had come to Medina with the hope of
getting rid of all his troubles. His feet were swollen from running; he had escaped
Mecca on foot, and in order to leave no tracks behind, he had followed narrow, prickly
pathways.
When the Meccan polytheists found out that Abu Basir had come to Medina, they
asked for him to be returned according to the terms of the Hudaybiya agreement.
Ahnas ibn Sharik and Azhar ibn Abdiawf, were going to write an official letter and
send it to the Messenger of Allah with Hunays ibn Jabir. Hunays took his slave
Kawthar with him on the journey so that he may lead the way, and he arrived in
Medina three days after Abu Basir. When he handed the letter to our noble Prophet,
Ubayy ibn Ka'b read it out to him: ''You know the terms of agreement we made with
you. Whoever from us comes to you, you have agreed, in front of witnesses, to return
him to us; and so return our friend to us!"
This was a difficult decision indeed. But it seemed impossible to keep the peace
without making these difficult decisions. 143 That is why the Messenger of Allah called
Abu Basir to his side and ordered him to return to Mecca with the two people who had
come to take him back. Abu Basir was in shock: "0 Messenger of Allah!" he was
saying, "They pressure me concerning my religion, and they take every opportunity to
force me to recant, and yet you are sending me back with these polytheists?"
This was an issue difficult to explain and so the beloved Messenger placed Abu
Basir before him and started explaining to him the following in the most affectionate
tone: "0 Abu Basir, as you know well, we have made a pact with that tribe and have
made certain promises; according to our religion we cannot be the ones who violate
this agreement! But the truth of the matter is Allah the Almighty will surely send you

--- Sayfa 753 ---
and other Muslims in similar situations a solution and a way out."
Abu Basir listened to the blessed Messenger and then voiced his worries once again.
This time he was begging: "0 Messenger of Allah, are you really handing me over to
the polytheists?"
There were two alternatives and the blessed Messenger had been forced to choose
one. For the safety of his community and so that people would be able to get to know
Islam and embrace it, these difficulties had to be born; in time they would transform
into sweet memories: "Return, 0 Abu Basir," repeated the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him. "For Allah the Almighty will send you a solution and a
way out."
All doors had thus been closed and so Abu Basir had no choice but to set off on the
road to Mecca with Hunays and his slave Kawthar. It was absurd! He was practically
walking himself to torture, oppression and much more! Meanwhile people came up to
him and said: "0 Abu Basir, do not doubt that Allah will send you a solution and a
way out. Rejoice for this good tiding that our noble Prophet has already given you!
Sometimes one man is greater than a thousand men. You should act in such and such a
way!"
It was clear what they meant with these words. On the way back, they suggested
that he should kill the envoys of the Quraysh and that that would be the way out. Umar
also had reminded him: ''You are a full-blooded man and you have your sword with
you, making it clear how he should get rid of his captivity."
When they came to the place called Dhu'l-Hulayfa, Abu Basir somehow managed
to kill Hunays and came back to Medina. He had also tried to attack Kawthar but had
not been able to catch up with him. Kawthar ran to the protection of the blessed
Messenger. When he entered Medina, our noble Prophet had just finished performing
the Afternoon Prayer and was sitting with his Companions. When he saw them
coming he said: "This man is much too frightened," and when he approached near, our
noble Prophet asked: "What happened to you? What is this state of yours?"
Kawthar, who was completely out of breath, was speaking in fragments: "He killed;
I swear that your friend killed my friend! He was about to kill me too, I escaped from
him only with difficulty."
He was asking our noble Prophet to protect him, and our noble Prophet gave him
surety.
Before long Abu Basir came as well; he was mounted on Hunays' s camel and his
sword by his side: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "You did what you had to do and

--- Sayfa 754 ---
thus you have complied with your responsibility; you stayed true to your agreement
and handed me to your enemy. And I, in order not to face anymore violence and to be
able to practice my religion freely, defended myself!"
The blessed Messenger was happy on the one hand to see Abu Basir freed, but on
the other he was trying to foresee the crisis that would be precipitated by such action.
This was a new state of affairs, and it was difficult to tell what would happen next.
That is why he first said: "Woe unto him."
This meant that he was censuring Abu Basir, and that he was also worried about the
consequences.
Then he added: "If the men had others with them, this would definitely have
resulted in a new war!"
Abu Basir was a man of high intellect and he could see from these words of the
blessed Messenger that he was going to hand him over to the Quraysh once again. It
seemed that it was not going to be possible for him to live peacefully in Medina with
our noble Prophet. He had to leave and bear the consequences. And so he bade
farewell to the Messenger of Allah with whom he had wanted to be reunited and so
left Medina. 144

--- Sayfa 755 ---
126 It is said that when going to Hudaybiya, Numayla ibn Abdullah al-Laysi or Abu Ruhm Kulthum
ibn Husayn might have been left as deputy in Medina; and also that all three of them were left and
that Ibn Umm Maktum had been given the office to lead the Prayers. See Balazuri, Ansabu '/-
Ashraf, 11154; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/33.
127 The number of people who set out for the umrah is variously cited as being one thousand and
three hundred, one thousand and four hundred, more than one thousand and four hundred, one
thousand and five hundred, one thousand and five hundred and twenty five, one thousand and six
hundred, one thousand and seven hundred and one thousand and eight hundred. The differences in
the number, the variance after one thousand and four hundred are probably because of the Arabs
that joined them after they had set off for the road. The reason why this nunber various also has to
do with the fact that the people who were observing the event that day were not counting the
women, children and others who would not be able to fight. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 5/70-71.
128 It is also said that the commander of the platoon was Sa'd ibn Zayd. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11574;
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/34.
129 Ka'b said that the verse that said "Whomever among you falls ill, or some discomfort befalls him,
then he needs to make it up for it through fasting, sadaqa or sacrificing an animal' (al-Baqarah
2:196) was revealed concerning him. See Bukhari, Sahih, 411535 (3955); Muslim, Sahih, 2/861
(120 1); Tirmidhi, Al-Jamiu 's-Sahih, 5/212 (2973); Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 2/232.
130 It is reported that that day this man fell down a precipice and that his body was torn apart by wild
animals. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11585; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/40.
ill When Jabir who was recounting the incident was asked "How many people were you that day?"
he said "Had we been one hundred thousand that water would have sufficed", and then he went on
to say that they were one thousand five hundred. See Bukhari, Sahih, 411526 (3921); Ahmad ibn
Hanbal,Musnad, 3/329 (14562); Darimi, Sunan, 1127 (27).
132 There were other miracles in Hudaybiya that day concerning water. See Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1311
(3384), 411525 (3919); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4/290; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 111126 (4801);
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5173.
133 Urwa ibn Mas'ud's mother was the daugther of Subay'a bint Abdishams from the Quraysh and he
said these words which meant "My mother is from you and so I am a son to you as well" See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 4/280; Tabari, Tarikh, 21118
134 Mughira ibn Shu'ba was one of the four names that Arabs cited as genius. He had become
Muslim as the war of the Trench continued and he had migrated to Medina. When he saw Urwa
coming, he had donned his sword and covered his face to keep guard by the Messenger of Allah.
See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/39-40; Ibn Hajar, Bidaya, 8/53.
135 The expression in the hadith is: "No tribe after you can reach the same level of 'say' (effort) or
'moud' (measure) with you." We translated it as the above for ease of understanding. See Ahmad
ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/26 (11224); Hakim, Mustadrak, 3/38 ( 4336); Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf,
7/386 (36853).
136 The following were the articles they had agreed upon 1. There were would be no more war
between the two sides for ten years 2. People would be safe from the dangers that may come from
others 3. The Messenger of Allah and the honorable Companions would go back this year but they
would come and visit the House of Allah next year. They were going to stay three days in Mecca
and they were going to carry only weapons of travel; and they were not going to take their swords
out of their sheaths. 4. Those who had come and sought refuge in the blessed Messenger without
their guardians' leave would be returned even if they should have embraced Islam; but should
anyone of the Muslims seek refuge with the Quraysh they would not be returned 5. Each side
would stop censuring the other, and incidents of betrayal and theft would be prevented 6. Tribes
other than the two sides were free to make pacts and agreeements with them. As soon as this last

--- Sayfa 756 ---
article was agreed upon, the Huza'a tribe said "We have agreed upon a pact with Muhammad"
and the Banu Bakr tribe said "And we have made an alliance with the Quraysh." Thus they made
it clear on whose side they were. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 4/325; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat,2/97;
Waqidi,Maghazi, 1/608.
137 Another report says that this number was eighty. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal,Musnad, 3/122 (12249);
Nasai, Sunanu '1-Kubra, 5/202 (8667); Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 4/193.
138 In another report his expressions are: "Do you see what the people are doing? I order them to do
something; but they look at me in the face and yet do not do it!" See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/613;
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/56.
139 The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had sacrificed seventy camels that day
in Hudaybiya, and one of them he had slaughtered with seven other people. There is also a report
that he sent twenty camels to Mecca with someone from the tribe of Aslam and that he had them
sacrificed in Marwa. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/614; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/57.
140 It is reported elsewhere that the Muslims stayed nineteen days at Hudaybiya. It is also reported
that the entire journey of leaving Medina and coming back Medinahad taken a month and a half.
See Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu '1-Athar, 21125; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/57.
ill In the following verse Allah the Almighty lists the material and spiritual gifts that He will give
His Messenger. He read the meaning of the verses to the honorable Companions: "That God may
forgive you (0 Messenger) your lapses of the past and those to follow, and complete His favor on
you, and guide you (to steadfastness) on a straight path (leading to God's being pleased with You
and eternal happiness); And that God may help you to a glorious, mighty achievement" (al-Fath
48:2-3).
The honorable Companions turned to the Messenger of Allah and said: "Rejoice 0 Messenger of
Allah!" And then added "Allah the Almighty has clearly stated what sort of bounty He will give
you." The Muslims were worried about what may happen and they said "We do not know what
will happen to us tomorrow!" Upon hearing of their anxiety, the blessed Messenger started to
recite the following verses to them: "He it is Who sent down His (gift of) inner peace and
reassurance into the hearts of the believers, so that they might add faith to their faith. To God
belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth; and God is All-Knowing, All-Wise. And that He
may admit the believing men and believing women into Gardens through which rivers flow,
therein to abide; and may blot out from them their evil deeds. That is a supreme triumph in God's
sight" (al-Fath 48:4-5).
142 The name of this Companion who was known more with the address Abu Basir than his real
name, was Utba ibn Asid. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 4/291; Bayhaqi, Sunanu '1-Kubra, 9/227; Ibn
Hajar,Al-Isaba, 4/433 (5401)
143 Concerning the verse and the connected ruling that comes later, only female Companions such as
Umm Kulthum who fled from oppression in Mecca, were held exempt. See al-Mumtahana 60:10.
144 Abu Basir followed the coastal route and settled in a place called Is. Other believers who had
heard that he set up camp there went and joined him and they presented a threat for the polytheists
of Mecca. Abu Jandal came as well. People from surrounding tribes would also come and join
them and as a result of this formation the Meccans would send Abu SufYan to Medina to annul the
related article of the Hudaybiya agreement. Upon this request the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, would write a letter to Abu Basir-but Abu Basir, who was ill at the time,
would die while reading the letter. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11625-629; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 411614
(2875); Ibn Athir, Usudu'l-Ghaba, 3/146.

--- Sayfa 757 ---
THE PERIOD OF AMBASSADORS
AND OPENING UP
A
new era started in Medina. With Hudaybiya, the danger that could come
from Mecca had been averted, and now was the time to take the
enlightening message of Islam to people who were living without
knowledge of religion. The wars that had occurred had always been ignited by the
Meccans and it was always them that had been the cause of the conflict. Each time, the
Muslims had taken the position of defense, and they had not had the opportunity to
portray the Divine message-which was as essential as water and air to people who
were living without an aim. The real goal of a believer was to take the Name of Allah
to hearts who were in need, to let them know their Lord.
In fact, with Hudaybiya started the conquest of Mecca; the people now had the
opportunity to get to know Islam in this atmosphere of peace, and they got a chance to
see the beauties in the heart of Islam. New ways and routes between Mecca and
Medina were established, and these ways and routes were now pathways used to take
Islam to hearts in need. This is what the blessed Messenger did and he encouraged his
Companions to do the same. Now was the time to conquer the hearts within and
without, for he had been sent as Prophet to the whole of humanity, not only those who
he could directly address. He was a Messenger whom all should recognize and for this
to happen, the Muslims needed to reach out to other people. On the basis provided by
Hudaybiya, Allah the Almighty was now giving the believers this opportunity.
Six years had passed since the Hijra, and they were about to enter the seventh. 145
One day after Hudaybiya, the Messenger of Allah addressed his Companions, and
after giving thanks to Allah and praising Him, he said: "0 people, there is no doubt
that Allah the Almighty sent me as mercy to all mankind. Fulfill your duty towards me
so that Allah the Almighty may treat you with His mercy. I will send some of you as
ambassadors to kings; do not act like the Children of Israel and oppose me as they
opposed Jesus, son of Mary!"

--- Sayfa 758 ---
The Companions were surprised: "0 Messenger of Allah! In what way did the
disciples oppose?"
On that question he answered: "He had invited his disciples to do the duty that I ask
of you today. When Allah sent him the revelation 'Send your men to the kings of the
earth' he had sent them to a number of places. The disciples who were sent to places
that were close-by consented whereas those who were sent a long distance objected.
Then Jesus opened up his hands and said: 'My Lord! I have conveyed what you have
sent me to the Disciples; but they waiver.'
Upon that Allah the Almighty said: 'I know how to deal with them.'
The next day they woke up speaking the language of the country they were to be
sent to. Upon that Jesus said to them: 'This is something that Allah has deemed and
verified for you; now don't lose time and be on your way."'
With this story it was obvious the blessed Messenger was prepanng his
Companions for something important; for his Messengership was not limited to a
particular region like Prophet Jesus, it contained all.
And so his Companions had to show even more determination than the Disciples
and not falter in their obedience to their Messenger. And so it would be! The
Companions who listened to the Messenger said: "0 Messenger of Allah! We swear
by Allah that we will not contradict you on any matter; you can send us wherever you
like, without a doubt we will obey your orders!"
They were thus mentally prepared; and when our noble Prophet received such a
firm answer from his Companions, he chose some of them to send to tribal chiefs,
sovereigns of states and kings around the area. He was writing letters to them and
handing the letters to the Companions he was sending to the determined lands. The
Companions who had heard of these missions were excited; when they heard that they
were also going to be sent to the Byzantines, the Persians and the Abyssinians, they
had a few concerns and they shared their concerns with our noble Prophet: "0
Messenger of Allah!" they were saying. "They do not read letters unless they are
sealed."
It was true; it was important to know your addressee when communicating the
message. In order to not be faced with a negative outcome from the start, they had to
take care of these eventualities. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, had a ring made. On the ring was written: "Muhammad, Rasul of Allah." From
then on, this signature would be stamped at the end of all the letters sent!
On the same day he called six of his Companions to his side and sent all six of them

--- Sayfa 759 ---
to different places.
The First Envoy to Abyssinia
The first person to be called was Amr ibn Umayya; our noble Prophet was sending
him to Abyssinia. The letter he was carrying said: "In the Name of Allah, the All-
Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
This is a letter from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, to the leader of
Abyssinia, Najashi.
May security and wellbeing be upon the believers, those who bear witness that there
is no deity but Allah, that He has no peer, that He takes no partner or child, and those
who verify that Muhammad is His subject and Messenger!
Verily, I invite you to the peace and vastness of Islam; for I am the Messenger of
Allah! Come, be a Muslim and be a part of His world of peace. 146 '0 People of the
Book, come to a word common between us and you, that we worship none but God,
and associate none as partner with Him, and that none of us take others for Lords,
apart from God' (Al Imran 3:64)."147
Najashi, who received the letter of the blessed Messenger, first read it, then he
kissed it and pressed it gently onto his face and eyes, and as a sign of his respect, he
stood up from his throne and declared that he had become Muslim. After proclaiming
faith and saying the words of shahadah, he added: "If I had the opportunity to go to
him, I definitely would. I swear, as Allah is my witness, he is the illiterate Prophet that
the Jews and the Christians have been expecting! Just as Moses spoke of the good
news of the coming of Jesus saying 'He will be mounted on a donkey', so had Jesus
spoken the good news of Muhammad saying 'He will be mounted on a camel.' Of
course the better thing would be to see him with one's own eyes! But I have very few
aides from among the Abyssinians; I am waiting for their hearts to warm up to Islam."
Najashi placed the letter of our noble Prophet in a box made out of ivory, and as a
token of his respect, he said: "As long as these letters stay here, bounty and goodness
will flourish in Abyssinia." Apart from this gesture, Najashi organized a wedding
ceremony for the blessed Messenger and the daughter of Abu Sufyan, our mother
Umm Habiba, who had remained alone after the death of her husband Ubaydullah ibn
Jahsh.
On the other hand the attempts of Amr ibn al-As would yield no results and he
would have to relent in the face of the determined attitude of the king.
Farewell to Abyssinia

--- Sayfa 760 ---
As soon as the preparations were complete, Najashi put the immigrants on a ship and
gave them crates of presents and saw them off to Medina. The sadness of fifteen years
was about to end; the honorable Companions who always had an eye out for news
from Medina would put the years of longing to an end, and they would consolidate
their immigration with a second journey.
While they were happy, Najashi was saddened because these people who had
become his dear friends were leaving Abyssinia. His one wish was that they should
reach Medina safe and sound. He would take extra measures to that end and would try
to make sure that they would reach Medina without anyone getting hurt. First he
handed two letters to Amr ibn Umayya; in one of them was written the news that the
marriage of Umm Habiba had been transacted, in the other that he had sent off the
honorable Companions to Medina. He had also made a note that he could come too if
the blessed Messenger wanted him to, and he spoke of his deep-felt loyalty to the
Messenger of Allah. He did not want to send them alone; he had sent his son Arha
along with a guarding unit of seventy men with them. He had allocated two ships for
this purpose. One of these was allocated to the people entrusted to him by our noble
Prophet, and the other to the men of N aj ashi. 148
The Second Letter to the Byzantines
The Byzantines were one of the two great powers of the time and our noble Prophet
sent Dihyah al-Kalbi from among his Companions to the Byzantine king Heraclius; he
told him to give the letter to the lord of Basra. At the time Heraclius was in Jerusalem.
He had sworn that should he be able to defeat the Persians he would walk all the way
from Hims to Jerusalem. He had indeed defeated the Persians and so had walked to
Jerusalem. Dihyah, who had brought the letter from the blessed Messenger, went
straight to Basra; there he was going to find the Byzantine governor of Basra and he
would ask him to take him to the king of Heraclius with the letter. Harith, who had
received the letter, gave one of his men, Adiyy ibn Hatim, as a guide to the
Messenger's envoy and sent him off to Jerusalem where Heraclius was at the time.
During the journey people would approach him and tell him that when he met the king
he should prostrate down in front of him, and not to lift his head up until the king had
ordered him to. When Dihyah told them that he would not prostrate in front of anyone
else but Allah, he was warned that the king would not listen to him and banish him
from his presence. Heraclius was an intelligent man who would observe the skies and
make meanings out of their positions. At the time there was a depressing atmosphere
in Jerusalem. To those who asked about the reason for his sadness, Heraclius would

--- Sayfa 761 ---
say: 'When I observed the stars last night I saw that from among the circumcised in
this community, a king will come," and he asked them: 'Who among this community
is circumcised?"
"There are none circumcised except for the Jews," they answered. "You do not need
to fear them; you can write to the cities that are under your command, they can kill all
the Jews and then you will be rid of your worries!"
In such dire times had Dihyah come and given the blessed Messenger's letter to
Heraclius.
"0 King!" they were saying. "This is a man from the Arabs, from Damascus, and he
has come to tell you of an important event that has happened where he lives!"
Heraclius was looking at Dihyah and the letter in his hand; since the letter was in
Arabic he called for a translator and then had it read out loud to him:
"In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate ...
From Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, to Heraclius, king ofthe Romans ... "
The very second the translator spoke these words, he was slammed down to the
floor with a blow by Heraclius 's nephew: "Do you not see this letter," he exclaimed.
"The man starts with his own name and not yours, and he does not call you lord but
just the king of the Romans. We can't have this letter read here today!"
"I swear you are either a complete idiot or a crazy man," answered Heraclius. "I did
not know you to be so. Do you want to tear up the letter even before you have read it?
I swear by my life that if he is the Messenger of Allah as he says, then he has the right
to start the letter with his own name instead of mine, and to call me the king of the
Romans. Because I am not Lord over them, I am just their master; they do not have
any other master, so that is true. Had Allah wanted, He would let them come over me
and kill me just as they advanced on Kisra the king of the Persians and killed him."
After saying these words, Heraclius ordered the translator to continue to read the
rest of the letter: "Let peace and good fortune be upon those who follow guidance!
The truth of the matter is that I invite you to the vast world of Islam. Become Muslim
and find peace, so that Allah may reward you double! If you do not accept this
invitation of mine, know that all the sins of your people, including the poor peasants
will be upon your head."
Our noble Prophet had also written a verse in the letter. In this verse the Great Lord
was addressing people of the book such as Heraclius and was telling our noble Prophet
to speak to them in the following manner:

--- Sayfa 762 ---
0 People of the Book, come to a word common between us and you, that
we worship none but Allah, and associate none as partner with Him, and
that none of us take others for Lords, apart from Allah. If they (still) turn
away, then say: "Bear witness that we are Muslims (submitted to Him
exclusively)." (Al Imran 3:64)
While he was listening to the rest of the letter, the following words fell from the
mouth of Heraclius, the king of the Romans: "I swear I had not heard a letter
beginning with 'Bismillahirrahmanirrahim' since it was used by Solomon, son of
Dawid!"
He then ordered those around him to leave and called to his presence the clergymen
who had the greatest authority on Christianity; he was asking them their opinion.
U squf, who was the chief among the priests, started: "I swear by He apart from Whom
there is no deity ... There is no doubt that he is the Prophet that Moses and Jesus have
spoken the good news of, the Prophet that we have been awaiting!"
It appeared that they were at a very important junction and Heraclius asked U squf:
"Then what do you advise me to do under these circumstances? How do you think I
should act?"
"I think you should follow him," said the priest with tears in his eyes.
However, Heraclius had some concerns: "I know what you mean very well," he said
at first. "But I would not have the courage to be his follower; because then I will lose
my kingship and the Romans will kill me!"
Then he remembered what he saw as he was observing the stars and calling Dihyah
he asked whether he was circumcised.
The answer was as he expected; the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, ordered his followers to be circumcised and his Companions obeyed. Time
was running out for the Kaiser; he first took the letter of our noble Prophet and placed
it on his head and then started to kiss it; then he placed it gently inside silk and velvet
fabric for safekeeping.
Before long he wrote a letter to Rome to confer with his friend Dagatir who was of
the same mind-set as he. But a lot of time would pass till the answer of that letter
arrived, and he felt he needed to clear the matter before that, and so he asked those
around him: "Is there anyone from the tribe of this man who claims to be a Prophet?"
They set off on a search and they found a caravan belonging to the Quraysh near
Gaza. Abu Sufyan was on this caravan-he was brought to the presence of the king.
The king asked him questions, and in the face of the answers that he received he

--- Sayfa 763 ---
compared the message of the blessed Messenger with the message of previous
Prophets and then concluded that he must be the awaited Prophet.
Then he ordered the leading Roman men to gather at his palace. When everyone
had gathered, he had the doors of the palace locked. He stood up on an elevated stage
from where he could observe everyone, he was worried about how they would react to
what he was about to say. He started his words by saying: "0 you Romans! Verily I
have received the letter of Ahmad. I swear that he is the Prophet that Jesus speaks
about and whom we have all been waiting for! He is the Prophet whose characteristics
we find in our books and whose coming we have been looking forward to. Then come,
submit in faith to him, be his follower and stand in rows behind him in Prayer so that
you may save both your world and the Hereafter."
These words ofHeraclius angered the leading men of the Romans; there was a great
clamor in the palace. Everyone was growling at Heraclius.
They were looking at their king in hatred and anger; they wanted to walk out on him
to show their disdain at his invitation; they were running about like wild animals! But
when they made for the doors they saw that it was locked and this incensed them even
more. Heraclius watched what was happening from his elevated position; and his
concerns for faith were growing even more, and he was quite afraid. So long as he did
not repair his relations with these people, he realized, he could not hold onto his
throne or even his life! That is why he said: "Settle down and come here," he called
out after them.
He was calling his men to bring those who were trying to flee. These prominent
Romans who had not managed to get out turned back to hear what the king was so
eager to share with them. He said, once again: "0 you Romans! I said what I said just
now in order to test your loyalty to your religion; I see that you are of a mindset that I
was hoping for."
This attitude pleased the Romans, this time they exalted him and prostrated before
him in great respect.
Usquf, who saw that as soon as things got out of hand the King had conceded his
position, could not bear this attitude of not accepting the truth even when they
recognized it, cried out: "I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah."
All eyes turned to him all of a sudden; the Romans were looking at him with hatred!
Such, that they could not contain themselves and attacked U squf and lynched him
there and then. 149

--- Sayfa 764 ---
The Letter Sent to the Noble Messenger
A couple of days later Heraclius sent off Dihyah with a letter and many gifts. The
following was written in the letter: "To Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, whose
good news Jesus had spoken, from the King of the Romans, Heraclius. Your envoy
came to me with the letter you sent; I swear that you are the Messenger of Allah. We
already knew about you from the Gospel we have in our hands, for Jesus, the son of
Mary had already spoken of your news! Although I invited the Romans to believe in
you, they stayed away, had they listened to me, it truly would have been better for
them. How I would have given anything to come to you, to be in your presence and
wash your feet!"
But on the way, when Dihyah came to a place called Himsa, a group of people from
Juzam stopped him and took everything he had on him, and that is why he reached the
presence of the Messenger of Allah with only the clothes on his back.
When he entered Medina he went directly to the blessed Messenger. He gave the
Messenger of Allah the letter of Heraclius and told the blessed Messenger all that had
happened. When the blessed Messenger of Allah read the letter and listened to what
had happened, he turned to Dihyah al-Kalbi and said: "So long as they have my letter
with them, their reign will continue."
Muqawqis: the King of the Copts
The Companion of the blessed Messenger, Hatib ibn Abi Balta' ah, was the person in
charge of taking the blessed Messenger's letter to Muqawqis, the king of Egypt and
Alexandria. There were similar expressions in the letter he sent him, and once again
the blessed Messenger the blessed Messenger was inviting the Copt of Egypt to Islam
as well. Our noble Prophet included the verse that called the people of the book to
unity and spoke of the issues that would be important to his addressee. Hatib found
Muqawqis in Alexandria and gave the blessed Messenger's letter to him. After he had
read the letter, the following conversation took place between them: "I want to speak
to you about some of the things that I want to clarify," said Muqawqis.
"Okay, let us speak," answered Hatib.
"Is your master not a Prophet?"
''Yes, he is the Messenger of Allah!"
"If he is really a Prophet of Allah, then why did he not put a curse on the people
who drove him out of his homeland?"
''You bear witness that Jesus, the son Mary is the Messenger of Allah, don't you?

--- Sayfa 765 ---
Then, since he is a real Prophet, would it not have been more appropriate for him to
ask Allah to smite his tribe, rather being raised up to the heavens by Him?"
There was nothing Muqawqis could say to these words and so he preferred to stay
silent. After staying silent for a while he turned to Hatib again: "Can you repeat what
you have just said?"
After listening to Hatib once again he thought deeply about what had been said.
Then he turned again and said: "You speak well, you seem to be coming from
someone who has good judgment."
When the envoy of our Messenger saw that Muqawqis had softened so much, he
said: "Before you, there were people here who said 'Am I not your greatest Lord?' But
Allah the Almighty punished them both in this world and the Hereafter. You should
take heed of their example so that you yourself do not become a cautionary tale!"
'We will not change our religion before we have found one that is better than ours,"
replied Muqawqis.
Upon that Hatib said: "I invited you to the religion of Islam that Allah has sent-a
complete religion that will not leave you wanting anything else, and the Messenger
invites the people to the same thing as well. It is also true that the people who oppose
him most are the people of the Quraysh, the ones who show him most enmity are the
Jews and those who are closest to him are the Christians. I swear by my own life that
Jesus brought the good news of Muhammad, and this is no different than Moses
speaking the good news of Jesus; us inviting you to the Qur'an is like you calling the
people of the Torah to the Gospel! Whichever community a Prophet has addressed,
they have become that Prophet's Ummah. Obeying that Prophet is a right unto them,
and now you know of this Prophet! And by calling you to the religion of Islam, we do
not ask you to stray away from the religion of Prophet Jesus; on the contrary we invite
you to follow him and to live according to the facts that he, too, communicated."
The envoy of the Messenger of Allah was saying exactly what needed to be said
about the Christian faith, and after listening to all this, Muqawqis said: "I have thought
about the issue of this Prophet. He does not preach about leaving the world aside, and
he does not tell people to stay away from what everyone recognizes as good and what
one may require! I do not see him as some kind of magician or a lying sorcerer! On
the contrary, I see in him signs of Prophethood which gives you news of the seeds
hidden under the ground, of conversations that have happened between people-but I
will need some time to consider!"
This was a strange situation indeed! Muqawqis was not saying that he believed, nor

--- Sayfa 766 ---
was he saying the contrary. Then he put the letter of the Prophet into a box inlaid with
ivory, and then sealed it and gave it to one of his servants. He then called his scribe to
his side and had him write the following in Arabic:
"In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
To Muhammad, son of Abdullah, from the Lord ofthe Copts, Muqawqis.
To put it plainly, I have read your letter and I have understood what you have
invited me to! I also know that there is a Messenger to come, but I had thought that he
would appear in Damascus. I have treated your envoy kindly, and I am sending you
two slaves who are held most highly by the Copts-Mariya and Sirin-and a mount.
Peace be upon you! " 150
Then he gave this letter to Hatib and said: "Go now; but do not let the Copts hear
anything from you," and then he saw off the envoy of the Messenger of Allah to
Medina.
Hatib ibn Abi Balta' ah arrived in Medina and told the Messenger of Allah about the
five days he spent in Egypt. The blessed Messenger said: 'What an unfortunate man!
He could not risk his power, but the power he is so fond of will not be his for long
either. "ill
Kisra, the Persian Emperor
The envoy that was to go the Persian lands and take the letter of our noble Prophet to
Kisra was Abdullah ibn Huzafatu's-Sahmi; he was to take the letter and with the
mediation of the governor of Bahrain, Munzir ibn Sawa, he would send the letter to
Kisra. Like the other letters of invitation, in this letter the Messenger of Allah started
with the Name of Allah, he lauded His Name and then explained that he was a Prophet
sent by Allah-inviting the Persian King Kisra to faith. But Kisra was agitated by the
very first sentence of the letter, and grabbing the letter from the person who was
reading it, exclaimed: "How can he start with his own name and not mine?" and he
tore the letter and threw it on the ground. The words had been harsh on his ego and
vanity and thus he had the audacity to tear up the letter!
Huzafa, who felt he had performed his duty and who tried to warn them to the best
of his ability, left and made for Medina. In the meantime, Kisra sent his men after
Huzafa and asked him to return to the court but he had already reached Medina. He
recounted what he lived through to the blessed Messenger. The noble Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him, listened to Huzafa with great sadness and said: "And Allah
will tear his kingship to pieces," and showing his reaction to the way his letter had

--- Sayfa 767 ---
been received, he prayed: "Dear Lord! Tear his kingship apart just as he has tom my
letter apart."
And so it would come to pass; Kisra would write a letter to Bazan, the governor of
Yemen after having tom the blessed Messenger's letter apart. He would ask him to
send two of his strong and able men to our noble Prophet to sever his head and bring it
back to him.
But things did not happen the way he imagined they would; internal conflict arose
in the land of the Persians, and the Byzantines took advantage of the situation and
attacked the Persians. In this atmosphere of chaos, Kisra's son Shirawayh would kill
his father and take over the throne and chaos would break lose in the lands of the
Kisra, the man who tore the letter of the Messenger of Allah.
Other Letters
Slowly but eventually there came an atmosphere of peace. Our noble Prophet was
sending letters with envoys in all directions in order to perform his duty of
communication to a greater geography. He wanted to be able to help everyone-to the
extent that he did not want a single moment to be wasted. He wanted to abolish all the
obstacles between people and their Lord and he wanted to take everyone to the exalted
level of being a good subject to Allah. This was his duty as the Prophet whom all had
been waiting for in this late period of history, and the blessed Messenger was
performing his duty in an excellent manner.
He sent Salit ibn Amr, the brother of Suhayl ibn Amr to Hawza ibn Ali, the ruler of
Yamama, he sent Shuja ibn Wahb to Harith ibn Abi Shamir, the ruler of Damascus,
and sent Ala ibn al-Hadrami to Munzir ibn Sawa, the leader of Bahrain.
This method of "communication" by letter was not for a limited time only; they
were making recourse to all sorts of tabligh and all resources were being poured into
letting other people be introduced to the faith. 152
As can be understood by the names that had been chosen to carry the message with
letters from our noble Prophet, as well as the demeanor they showed in the places they
visited, the envoys sent were just as important as the letters themselves. For they were
successfully answering the questions put to them, they were doing their best to
understand the world view of the people they were speaking to and they spoke to them
in a manner they would best understand, and they shared with them knowledge about
the message they had been able to gather first hand from the Messenger till that day.
Now was the time to take the Divine light that had been born in Hira to different

--- Sayfa 768 ---
climates. That is why the blessed Messenger wrote many letters at different times and
kept sending them out with his envoys. For instance, when Amr ibn al-As came and
became a Muslim, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, sent him
to the kings of Uman, Jayfar and his brother Abd; thus he would give Amr the duty of
communicating a religion he had previously been observing suspiciously from afar,
taking the opportunity to benefit from his political genius.
Naturally not everyone who had been sent these letters became a Muslim. Some of
them had accepted the invitation of our noble Prophet and become Muslim, but some
of them insisted on their denial and thus missed the opportunity to jump on the ship of
Islam, whose captain was Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon
him, and sail off to the shore of salvation. But now there was one difference-now it
was our noble Prophet whose word was law in the Arabian Peninsula, and even those
who did not accept his message could see this fact. From now on, anyone who took
the smallest step in the region had to reckon with our noble Prophet and his
judgments. The Messenger of Allah, who was speaking to the hearts of the people was
now also a very important authority in the field of business and trade.
The Alcohol Ban
Before the alcohol ban, some people in the Hijaz were already abstaining from
alcohol, having realized its detrimental effects. Among them were Amir ibn Zarib or
Afif ibn Ma'dikarib and the blessed Messenger's grandfather Abdul Muttalib and
Abdullah ibn Jud'an. In the later period these people also included Abu Bakr, Uthman
ibn Maz'un, Uthman ibn Affan, Abdurrahman ibn Awf, Abbas ibn Mirdas and Qays
ibn Asim.
When they said to Abbas ibn Mirdas: "Will you not take a glass of this drink; it will
refresh you and give you strength?" he answered: "I do not like the idea of waking up
as the lord of my tribe and then go to bed as the most degenerate among them. I swear,
no! I will not drink this thing that comes between me and my intellect," and thus he
had refused alcohol which had made people playthings in the hands of others. 153
In a verse that had been revealed in Mecca before the Hijra, it was declared that
along with the bad effects of alcoholic drinks that were made out of dates and grapes,
there were also some benefits to be had from them if they were used in good faith. As
such, alcohol had not been banned entirely. The verse spoke of the "beauty" of the
benefit to be had from the drink, but then there was a great emphasis on the fact that
people had to use their reason in their consumption of this drink. 154 The Companions
were asking questions to the Messenger of Allah about the drinks that they had

--- Sayfa 769 ---
hesitated about and were expecting an explanation. Before long a verse came and
revealed that alcoholic drinks had both beneficial and detrimental properties, but that
the detrimental properties outweighed the beneficial ones. 155 But this verse did not
contain a clear decree or prohibition either and people like Umar decided to wait and
prayed: "Dear Lord! Send us a sound and clear decree concerning alcohol!" and
waited for the news that the Truthful Gabriel would bring.
The order of not approaching Prayer when intoxicated was not a clear decree
either, 156 there was no clear ban as yet, and so some Companions continued to drink in
between Prayers. But as these developments happened, there were also those who had
seen where these verses were leading to and so were staying away from alcohol
altogether, but they were not compelled to do so since the ban had not yet been set.
Then, one day, the Truthful Gabriel would bring the final decree concerning
alcohol:
0 you who believe! Intoxicants, games of chance, sacrifices to (anything
serving the function of) idols (and at places consecrated for offerings to
other than Allah), and (the polytheist practice of) divination by arrows
(and similar practices) are a loathsome evil of Satan's doing; so tum
wholly away from it so that you may prosper (in both worlds). (al-Maedah
5:90)
These were expressions that would send ripples among the Companions; for the
verse that came was of a nature to put an end to all minds in doubt. And so nobody
would have hesitations anymore, and there would be no more space for alcohol in the
Hijaz. At the end of the verse the Great Lord said to His subjects who believed in Him
and turned to Him: "Satan only seeks to provoke enmity and hatred among you by
means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to bar you from the remembrance oj
Allah and from Prayer. So, then, will you not abstain?" (al-Maedah 5:91) thus making
it clear that faith and alcohol could not co-exist together. At the time, people had
gathered at Abu Talha's house. For a moment they heard the voice of the street-caller
assigned by the Messenger of Allah; he was reading the verse that had just been
revealed, proclaiming that alcohol was now entirely prohibited. As soon as he heard
the caller's voice, Abu Talha called out to Anas and said: "Go out and see what the
voice is saying."
Anas went out and came back to tell them what the caller was saying: "Be warned;
alcohol has been banned!" Everyone froze-those who were holding their wine
glasses dropped them immediately, and those who were about to bring their glasses to
their lips threw them to the ground.

--- Sayfa 770 ---
As soon as the voice of the caller was heard, people started to pour liquor on to the
streets from the windows and the doors of their homes. The dry streets of Medina
turned into streams of alcohol!
From each door of every home prayers were heard: "We have given it up, dear
Lord!"
This was the sensitivity of the Companions. They were so sensitive in their religious
duties that they had started wondering about those who had drunk before and yet had
become martyrs on the battlefield, or had died peacefully in their beds. They had
started to think of the outcome of their friends who had fought at Badr, Uhud and the
Trench, for the sake of Allah and had fallen martyr. The end of the verse made it clear:
There is no sin on those who believe and do good, righteous deeds for
what they might have partaken (in their pre-Islamic past), provided
(henceforth) they fear (the end of their previous creeds and misdeeds) and
come to faith and do good, righteous deeds, then keep from disobedience
to Allah in reverence for Him and piety and believe (more profoundly),
then be more meticulous in obeying Allah in greater reverence for Him
and piety and be devoted to doing good: Allah loves those who are
devoted to doing good, aware that Allah is seeing them. (al-Maedah 5:93)
145 The time that the letters were sent could be the end of the sixth year, or the month ofMuharram in
the seventh year. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 111344, 372.
146 Najashi was the name given to the ruler of the highest order in the Abyssinian state, such as
"king" or "sultan." As we understand from the expressions in the letter, it is possible to say that
the Messenger of Allah is speaking of two Najashis in the letters he sent to Abyssinia. The first
Najashi, Asham ibn Abjar, had already declared that he had become Muslim with the aide of the
first Muslims who had migrated there with Jafar-and he had already sent a letter full of praise to
the blessed Messenger. Therefore, as Arras points out, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, was inviting the new Najashi to Islam with the letter he sent with Amr ibn
Umayya. See Muslim, Sahih, 3/1397 (1774); Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/603; Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 111344, 366.
147 The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, also wrote at the end of the mentioned
verse 'And if they refuse this invitation, tell them 'Bear witness that we are believers who obey
Allah's orders' and he warned Najashi saying 'If you turn away from this verse, then you will
bear the burden of the responsibility of the Christians among your tribe'. See Ibn Kathir, Sirah,
2/41, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 31104.
148 However, the second ship would sink in the middle of the sea and sixty men, including his own
son would die. See Tabari, Tarikh, 21132; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 1165; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba,
1138.
149 The blessed Messenger, who heard the news said regarding Usquf, "He shall be resurrected as an
ummah unto himself." See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 111355.
150 Later, the blessed Messenger would give one of these slaves as a present to Hassan ibn Sa bit and
marry the other one, Mariya, himself. Mariya bore a son named Ibrahim. The mount that
Muqawqis had sent as gift was called Duldul. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 11134-135; Tabari, Tarikh,

--- Sayfa 771 ---
21141,218.
ill Among the gifts that Muqawqis sent was a doctor. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
be upon him, spoke to the doctor and said: "You can return to your family, because we are a
community who do not eat before we are hungry and who leave the table without fully having
satiated ourselves." See Halabi, Sirah, 3/251.
152 For further information on when and who was sent letters see Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad,
111344.
153 Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/168
154 An-Nahl 16:67
155 Al-Baqarah 2:219
156 An-Nisa 4:43

--- Sayfa 772 ---
KHAYBAR: THE POINT OF CONTENTION
I
t had been twenty days since the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, had returned from Hudaybiya-with the agreement signed, the troubles that
could come from Mecca had somewhat been averted. For with Hudaybiya, the
alliance that the Meccan polytheists and the Khaybar Jews had made was annulled, at
least for some time. Still, the Banu Qurayza, the Banu Qaynuqa and the Banu Nadir
who had been exiled from their homeland and who had come to live in Khaybar
presented a clear danger-it was difficult to know what reaction they would give to
different developments. Especially leading Jewish men such as Sallam ibn Abi'l-
Huqayq, Kinana ibn Rabi and Huyayy ibn Akhtab had come and settled there, saying
that they would seek revenge with the help of their friends in Khaybar, throwing
threats all around. They had also played a great role in provoking the surrounding
tribes and encouraging the Meccan army to come all the way to the Trench. The
delegation that had gone to Mecca to provoke the polytheists included nineteen of the
eminent men of Khaybar, they had also gone to the surrounding tribes, and they had
promised a great portion of their produce should these tribes attack Medina! They
acted on feelings of revenge and were keeping their eyes out for any opportunity.
When they returned empty-handed from the Trench where they hoped to be victorious,
they had become anxious. They knew that they would be held accountable for their
actions and so they wanted to be the ones to act first. They had decided to act quickly,
so before the Messenger of Allah and his Companions came upon them, they were
planning to make a surprise attack on Medina with the help of the Jews of Tayma,
Fadak and Wadi al-Qura. Usayr ibn Zarim, who had become their leader after Abu
Rafi, was particularly swearing challenging oaths and seemed to be provoking his
community. He had also spoken to the people of Ghatafan and had been able to
convince them in this business of attacking Medina. His efforts were being well
received by his community as well and they were applauding him as a leader who
would help them avenge their friends' deaths. In short, Khaybar had become the
center of sedition and was ready to explode any minute.

--- Sayfa 773 ---
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was following all that
was happening very closely. To be better informed of the situation, he had appointed
three of his men to go and find out what was happening in Khaybar and then to report
back-their investigation confirmed what they had been hearing. The same was true
regarding the experience ofHarija ibn Husayl who, among them, had come all the way
to Medina. The "bounty" that had been promised in the verses before the conquest was
becoming clearer and clearer.lli
Our noble Prophet ordered his Companions to make preparations; but he also
warned that no one should act with the wrong assumption of getting the spoils of
Khaybar, and made it clear that those who were joining the campaign for that purpose
would not be given any spoils whatsoever.
The Jews of Medina, who lived in Medina according to the pact that they had
signed with the Muslims and who now understood that the blessed Messenger
intended to lead a campaign against Khaybar, were quite anxious, and in order to
weaken the hand of the Muslims they did not ask them to pay all the debts owed to the
Jews. People like Abdullah ibn Abi Hadrad, who was trying to pay the debts he
incurred before Khaybar, had had to sell the clothes off his back, and had gone to war
with borrowed clothes! The Messenger of Allah himself had had to help Abu Abs ibn
Jabr, who had no means to join the campaign. The Jews of Medina, who did not think
the conquest of Khaybar was possible, were speaking of the castles, the great rivers
and variety of fruits to be found there, along with the courage of their warriors-trying
to weaken the morale ofthe believers.
Despite all this, one day our noble Prophet and six thousand six hundred people-
two hundred of them cavalry-set off from Medina and made their way to Khaybar!
The Messenger of Allah had left Siba ibn Urtufa as his representative. 158
On this journey there were ten Medinan Jews with our beloved Prophet. There were
also about twenty female Companions who were to act as nurses, spin thread, cook
food and carry water. Before they set off, our noble Prophet gave the order that those
who wanted to join the campaign but whose animals were not up for the trip should
not come. It was Bilal of Abyssinia who was letting the people know of this order. At
that moment the horse of one of the Companions faltered and the Companion on the
horse fell down and broke his foot; he was losing blood and before long he died.
When the blessed Messenger heard of what had happened he turned to Bilal al-
Habashi and said: "0 Bilal! Did you not tell the people that those whose mounts are
not healthy and fit should not come on the campaign?"
Bilal had done his duty but the person who fell from the horse had not listened to

--- Sayfa 774 ---
him. It was clear that the blessed Messenger was trying to keep discipline within the
ranks. He would not lead the Funeral Prayer of the person in question and turning to
Bilal would say, three times: "Paradise will not be accessible to those who do not keep
guidance."
Ukkasha ibn Mihsan and Abbad ibn Bishr had been sent as sentries from different
directions and they had also hired guides including Husayl ibn Harija and Abdullah
ibn Nuaym for a fee. 159
Progressing on the road the blessed Messenger was asking the name of each of the
crossroads they would encounter and after hearing the name he would consider and
choose one of them. They were making way mostly in the night.
Our noble Prophet did not want his Companions to say their takbir out loud; he
said: "Allah the Almighty Whom you are praying to is not deaf or hidden; verily, you
are praying to Allah who hears your inner most prayers and who is closest to you,"
warning them to progress in silence. Maybe he wanted to reach Khaybar when the
people of Khaybar least expected it, and wanted to catch them unawares. The
following prayer could be heard pouring out of his blessed lips: "Dear Lord! I seek
refuge in you from worrying about the past and the future, from weakness and sloth,
from miserliness, from cowardice, from debt that suffocates, and from the harassment
of the unrighteous."
Abbad ibn Bishr came across a man who was spying for the Khaybar Jews, a man
who was in the guise of a shepherd-he tried to catch him and speak to him. The man
first talked about how the Jews had prepared for the war and how no force could stand
against them, but when Abbad pressed him he had to speak to truth; the people of
Ghatafan had indeed come to Khaybar with four thousand men to support Khaybar
and had already started their preparations for war! When the spy spoke of what he
knew in front of the blessed Messenger as well, Umar who was beside him wanted to
sever the man's head there and then, but because of the surety of Abbad, the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had not allowed it. 160
Meanwhile, the leader of the hypocrites was at work; he was trying to send the news
of the campaign of our noble Prophet and his Companions to Khaybar so that the Jews
may be warned. When our noble Prophet reached a point between the Khaybar castles
of Shikk and Natat, he gave the order to camp. It was a rough, bushy place and yet
they were to stop and perform Prayers.
When they started on the road again and came to a point where they could see
Khaybar, the blessed Messenger called out to his Companions: "Stop!"

--- Sayfa 775 ---
These people, who were the epitome of obedience, had all stopped in their tracks
and waited to see what the Messenger of Allah would do. Maybe he was going to tum
to his Merciful Lord once again in all earnestness and present his position to Him. He
lifted up his hands and started to pray in the following manner: "Dear Lord! The Lord
of the seven heavens and all that they cast a shadow on; the Lord of the earth and all
that it shoulders, the Lord of the devils and those who are led by them; the Lord of the
wind and all that it scatters around! We ask for the good of this land and its
inhabitants; and we seek refuge in you from this place and all harm that could come
from its inhabitants."
Despite all that had happened, our noble Prophet was praying for the good of the
people who had become a center of provocation and sedition, those who were plotting
against him-even at such a critical point he was turning to his Lord and asking for
their good, and when he finished his Prayer he turned to his Companions and said:
"Come! Now walk in the Name of Allah."
When they came to Khaybar it was the middle of the night and the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, chose his place to camp and they started to
make preparations for the following day. Because it was night, this was when our
noble Prophet would perform his Tahajjud Prayer, and with the first light of day he
had started his Morning Prayer, and his Companions were right behind him. They
raised their hands in prayer and asked for victory from the Great Lord.
At one point Hubab ibn Munzir approached the Messenger of mercy; he was about
to take a step that would set an example to the others: "0 Messenger of Allah!" he
said. "This place that you have chosen as your headquarters-if this has been an order
from Allah, then we can have nothing to say concerning it; but if it is a place that you
have chosen with military conditions in mind, then let us tell you what we think of this
choice."
In this approach that would set an example to others, our beloved Prophet would
say: "This was just a personal choice."
These words opened up the way for Hubab, and he said the following: "Then, 0
Messenger of Allah, I would say that this spot is too close to their castle, for we know
that they have all taken positions in the Natat castle. Besides, they are people who are
very good archers and the arrows they shoot will come down from their height and
reach us; and we will have a hard time returning their arrows! We should at least put
our backs to these rocks and position ourselves against the arrows, then the arrows of
the Jews won't reach us."

--- Sayfa 776 ---
But there was also something that our noble Prophet knew.
"And the truth ofthe matter is as you say," he said and then continued: "But let us
station ourselves here for today and we will change our position in the night
insha 'Allah."
Meanwhile, he had called Muhammad ibn Maslama to his side and was giving him
directions to find a better place to camp elsewhere. Now was the time to put into
action the prayers they had made. The Messenger of Allah put his men into fighting
position and was waiting in front of the castles of Khaybar! He was on top of his
mount and said: "Allah is great! Khaybar is demolished! When we raid the homeland
of an enemy tribe, the state of those deniers who have been warned with our envoys
will truly be sorry. "ill
The code word was one again "Ya Mansur! Amit."
The Shock ofFirst Contact
As usual, the people of Khaybar had left their homes to go to their fields and gardens,
and they were totally shocked to be faced with an army that was waiting for them:
"Woe is us! Here is Muhammad and his orderly army!" they said and started to run
away.
They were running away on the one hand but on the other they were still trying to
belittle the army of faith that they held in deep enmity: "Muhammad will dare fight
against us? What a strange thing!" and they believed they would come victorious
despite everything.
The fact that things had become so serious had divided them into two camps: one
camp was saying that they should stay inside the castles and be on the defensive, the
other camp was saying that they should come out to the field and fight one on one.
They trusted their big and strong castles, they were filled with provisions and rivers
ran through them to satisfy their needs. Leading men such as Sallam ibn Mishkam
were saying: "Do not shy away from fighting with him here; it is better for you to die
fighting then to be left alone here."
They took their valuables and families to the castle of Katiba and placed their
provisions in the castle named Nairn. All those who could hold a gun had gathered in
the castle of Natat and were promising each other that they would fight till the last
drop of their blood.
As expected, the first spark came from them; with the first rays of sun they started
to shower arrows onto where the Messenger of Allah and his Companions were. They

--- Sayfa 777 ---
were shooting so fast and in such successiOn that by the end of the day fifty
Companions were wounded. The arrows that they shot became ammunition for the
believers-as soon as the arrows fell on the ground the Companions would collect
them and shoot them back at the castle ofNatat. A siege that would continue for days
had thus started; when night fell they moved to the place determined for their
headquarters and this place would bear witness to the fall of the Khaybar castles one
by one. 162
On the other hand the Meccans had received the news of the blessed Messenger's
campaign to Khaybar and they were making bets as to who would triumph.
People such as Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza, Safwan ibn Umayya, Abbas ibn Mirdas
and Nawfal ibn Muawiya were sitting in Mecca and making bets on the war in
Khaybar for a hundred camels. 163
The Illness of the Blessed Messenger
The Khaybar siege was continuing but our noble Prophet had fallen ill and was not
able to come out among his Companions. It seemed that fate was preparing the
Companions for difficult circumstances. Our beloved Prophet called his loyal friend
Abu Bakr to his side and gave the white standard to him-this meant that now Abu
Bakr was commander of the army in front of Khaybar. Night fell that day as well and
no results had been obtained; it seemed as if each day was an exact replica of the
previous one. The shower of arrows that started in the early hours of the morning
would cease during the evening, and the same routine would be repeated the next day.
The morning of that day the Messenger of Allah would call Umar to his side and give
the standard to him. The following day, the standard was given to someone from the
Ansar-the standard kept changing hands every day! In the meantime there was close
combat as well-some groups who came out of the castle would be confronted by the
Companions and these confrontations would last until one party triumphed over the
other!
Because the weather was very hot, some of the Companions would retire under
trees and rest intermittently. And so Mahmud ibn Maslama was one Companion who
had taken rest under a tree. A Jewish man by the name ofMarhab took note of this and
rolled a mill stone over him and injured him gravely. The Messenger of mercy, a
person of love and affection, ran to the aide ofhis Companion; he put in place the skin
that had been scraped off his head and bound it with a piece of cloth. 164
Meanwhile, many from the Companions had fallen ill: hunger had reached its limit
and they had eaten unripe dates in their despair. 165 The Messenger of mercy, who saw

--- Sayfa 778 ---
the state they were in, gave the following advice: "Cool some water in a water skin
and then between the call for Prayer and the takbirs before the Prayer, say the Name
of Allah and pour it down your head."
Here was yet another offering: the Companions treated even a single implication
from him as an order and so they did exactly what he had said, and indeed they had
thus been cured of the said disease.
The Efforts to Disperse the Enemy
At one pointour noble Prophet would try to convince the people of Ghatafan who had
come from the outside to support Khaybar to abandon this war. To this end he sent
Sa'd ibn Ubada from his Companions to the commander of Ghatafans, Uyayna ibn
Hisn, with whom they previously had had an agreement. Sa'd came very close to the
castle and called out: "I want to speak to Uyayna ibn Hisn."
It was clear that he was bringing a message. But his call led to another point of
contention in the castle; because when Uyayna spoke ofhis intention to open the door,
commander Marhab would oppose him: "He will see the weak points of our castle, do
not let him in, you go to him instead," he said, and insisted on not taking the envoy of
our noble Prophet in. But Uyayna was of the opposite opinion. He thought that the
envoy should come in, see how strong the castle was and how numerous the soldiers
were and then go back. But it happened as Marhab would have it and Uyayna ibn Hisn
went out of the castle and came to where Sa'd was: "The Messenger of Allah has sent
me to you," Sa'd started his words, and then conveyed the following message of the
blessed Messenger to him: "Allah the Almighty gave me the good news of the
conquest of Khaybar; now you should go. If you do this when we triumph over the
Khaybar, one year's date harvest ofthis place will be yours."
But Unayna had no intention to come to an agreement; he had done the same thing
on the day of the Trench. He was saying that he would not leave their allies in return
for anything and speaking of the strength of the people of Khaybar, he said that they
would be given such benefits anyhow when they won the war. They spoke for a long
time but came to no agreement. There was no point to insist where one could not
achieve results and so Sa'd said the following as he left: "The reality is that one day
you will find yourself begging for the terms that I have offered you today; but that day
we will not respond to you in anything but the sword."
He reminded him of what had come to pass with the Banu Nadir and the Banu
Qurayza; had they accepted the first offers, they would have spared themselves from
what befell them! They had preferred violence and they had been the ones to lose.

--- Sayfa 779 ---
This was an offer, and when it was not met favorably, Sa'd went straight to our
noble Prophet and told him the response that Unayna had given-and then he gave his
own opinion: "0 Messenger of Allah! There is no doubt that Allah the Almighty will
keep His promise to you; then do not give a single date to these desert Arabs. When
they see that swords are being wielded at them, they will tum their backs and run to
their homes just as they did at the Trench! " 166
The sun had waned a little, and our noble Prophet turned to his Companions and
said: "You will take the standard and spend the night near the castle of Nairn where
the people of Ghatafan are," and thus he gave the order of attack on the Ghatafan who
had not accepted their call for peace. They too could see the change in the strategy;
there was a new commotion outside their castle and this commotion, before long,
directed itselftowards the castle of Nairn. When they saw that the Muslims had come
and erected their standard right in front of their castles, they were very frightened and
spent the night in fear. Towards the morning, in the dark of the night, a voice they did
not recognize said to them: "0 people ofGhatafan!"
They could not see where the voice was coming from even though they were
looking around frantically.
''Your families in Haifa! They perish! Help! Help! You have no nvers, no
possessions left, help!" cried out this voice and repeated its invocations.
Added to the possible strife they were going to face the next day, now they felt
anxiety for their families and property. They had come to Khaybar in order gain
worldly goods risking their lives, and now they were also about to lose their families!
They were in great despair. They had no courage left to fight, nor strength to even
stand up. They decided at once to go back home and started to leave their castle.
It was not only the Ghatafan who were gripped by fear that night. The Khaybar
were also afraid and were already regretting their decision. When the news that the
Ghatafan had left reached Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq in the castle of Katiba, he would
say the following to those near him: "When did we ever profit by coming together
with these desert Arabs? Whenever we went to them for help, they deceived us and
never delivered the help they promised! I swear that had they not promised to help us
in the beginning we would not have chosen the path of war with Muhammad! I wish
we had listened to Sallam and not called these desert Arabs to our side for help! He
had told us that he had tried them many times and had been left standing by them
many times. He tried to dissuade us but we did not listen!"
The dissolution had started, now all the people of Khaybar were talking about was

--- Sayfa 780 ---
the Ghatafan returning home, and their betrayal. They censured the Ghatafan in all
ways possible. On the other side the Messenger of Allah and the Companions were
watching the developments in front of the castle. They were keeping guard in the night
as well; this was a night under Umar's watch and at one point he saw a dark figure
coming towards him from the one of the castles: "If you give me surety I will come
close to you," the person asked for permission.
'Who are you?" they called out.
"A man from among the Jews," said the man.
The person who asked for safe custody would be given that surety and so the Jew
was welcomed. This man insisted to be taken to our noble Prophet. It was clear that he
had something to say to him. They took him to the blessed Messenger. At the time the
blessed Messenger was performing his Prayers. When he finished his Prayer and saw
what was happening, he turned to the Jew named Simak and asked: 'Who are you and
what news is there?"
"0 Abu'l-Qasim," he answered, "Will you give me safe custody if I tell you secret
and important information from within the castle?"
''Yes," answered the blessed Messenger.
Even if the man had not promised to g1ve the information, the policy of the
Messenger of mercy was to welcome anyone who asked for custody by his side. So
Simak gave information of those who went from one side to another, the state of fear
and panic they were in, where they hid their weapons and provisions, the shelters
underground, and where they hid the catapults and weapons named dabbaba .167
His only concern was to be able take his wife and children and live. He kept
mentioning them and asked our noble Prophet to keep his promise. The blessed
Messenger invited Simak, who had given him such important information, to Islam so
that he might save his eternal life as well. But Simak was not yet ready for that: "Give
me a couple of days to think about it," he said and our noble Prophet would give him
that space. 168
At last the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his
Companions one day and said: "I will give the standard to such a person who loves
Allah and Allah loves him," and he also gave the good news that Khaybar would be
conquered the next day. Our noble Prophet was bearing witness-the commander who
would take Khaybar was an important person who loved Allah and who was loved by
Allah. For the Companions who had no expectations of acceptance other than by Allah
thought this to be a very exalted and important position indeed and so everyone was

--- Sayfa 781 ---
expecting to be handed the standard the next day. There was a special kind of
tranquility and peace in their hearts knowing that the conquest would happen the next
day, and so the Companions passed the night in remembrance of Allah.
Morning broke, and after the Prayer the blessed Messenger turned to his
Companions once again, and after giving them advice, he asked for the standard to be
brought to him. The honorable Companions were standing up in ranks to see which
lucky person the standard would be given! Then our noble Prophet asked: 'Where is
Ali?"
"0 Messenger of Allah, Ali's eyes are aching," the Companions responded.
"Call him to me," he said and so Salama ibn Akwa went to call Ali. Salama was
holding Ali's hand to aide him, and thus they came to the presence of the blessed
Messenger.
The Companions had thought that he would not be able to come at all because of
the pain in his eyes that he had been suffering from for days. When they saw him
approach, they started to point out to him and say: "There he is, Ali is coming."
And the blessed Messenger said: "He will be the means through which the conquest
will happen," pointing to his son-in-law.
"Come near me," he called out. Ali said: "0 Messenger of Allah, I have pain in my
eyes to the degree that I can hardly see where I am stepping."
Upon that our noble Prophet started to say a prayer of healing for Ali's eyes. He had
also taken a little bit of his blessed saliva and was putting it over his son-in-law's eyes,
supplicating to Allah to heal them. They were experiencing another miracle! It was as
if these were not the eyes of Ali that had been aching until a moment ago. There was
no pain left, and Ali could see clearly now. It was as if he had not been ill at all!
Then the blessed Messenger put the sword and armor on Ali, the Warrior Lion, and
handing him the standard he said: "Take this standard and advance! Fight till the
moment Allah will make you victorious and do not tum back."
'What shall I fight the people on?" asked Ali, and our noble Prophet answered:
"Fight them till they bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that Muhammad
is His subject and Messenger. When they accept that, they will have saved their lives
and possessions from you-their accounts are held by Allah! Advance towards their
homes and wait a while; invite them to Islam and tell them about the responsibilities
they have towards Allah and the Messenger of Allah. I swear by Allah that should a
single man become Muslim because of you, this is better for you than valleys full of
red camels."

--- Sayfa 782 ---
The compassion of the Messenger of mercy was to such a degree that he wanted to
lay out principles for people who had been showering arrows and stones at them, with
whom they had been fighting at close quarters. After giving orders, he started to pray
to Allah that He may help Ali and his friends. Ali, who had bravely taken the standard
from our noble Prophet, started to walk confidently towards the castle and came to the
front of the Khaybar castles; the honorable Companions were walking with him. Then
he erected the standard in front of the castles. The people inside the castles were
watching the developments-having seen him come and erect the standard had caused
anxiety among the people of Khaybar and they called out: "Who are you?"
"I am Ali, son of Abu Talib," answered Ali.
The name Ali was not foreign to them; it seemed that in the books they had in their
hands there was mention of this name as the one to conquer their castles, and when
they heard his name their anxiety grew. One of the people who had heard the name
'Ali' started to call out: "0 community of Jews, I swear by what has been revealed to
Moses that your end has come, and you will be defeated today!"
The first to come out of the castle was Harith, Marhab's brother. He walked out
challenging the Companions and stood in front of Ali, the Warrior Lion. The next
minute he was lying lifelessly on the ground. Harith was followed by Usayr; Usayr by
Yasir-they all met the same fate as Harith. Usayr was killed by Muhammad ibn
Maslama, and Yasir by Zubayr ibn Awwam!
This time it was Amir who came out of the castle with his double armor to
challenge the Companions. Dhu al-Fiqar, the sword of Ali, would be his end!
Now it was time for Marhab; the death of his brother had enraged him and now he
was out on the battlefield with his soldiers. He had double the armor, two helmets on
his head, and a sword in each hand. He shouted out: "The people of Khaybar know
well that at times when war comes knocking on the door and the fight is most fierce, I
am Marhab who gives war its due, equipped with weapons from top to bottom!"
War of words had once again started before the swords. In front of the castles of
Khaybar there was a war of words that cut to the hearts-and so one had to respond to
the enemy with words they would understand. And so Ali said: "I am that person who
has been nicknamed "Lion" by his mother, and I am like the magnificent lion of the
forests! I will defeat in an instant!"
When he heard the word "lion" Marhab lost all color because the night before he
had dreamt that he had been tom apart by a lion and had woken up in great fear.
Maybe Allah was making Ali speak so that Marhab may remember his dream!

--- Sayfa 783 ---
The Martyr without a Prayer
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had worn double the armor
that day and had also put a helmet on his head. He had mounted his horse named Zarib
with his bow and arrow in his hand. At one point a black man by the name of Y asar
came up to him and said that he was Amir's shepherd: "0 Muhammad," he called out.
He had been listening when his master Amir and his friends had been talking as
they prepared for war. He had heard them say 'We will fight with this man who claims
to be a Prophet' and hearing that, affection had formed for the blessed Messenger in
his heart. And so he had come there with his sheep and wanted to learn the truth of the
matter: "What do you say, and what do you invite people to?" he asked.
The blessed Messenger said: "I invite people to Islam, to believe that there is no
deity but Allah and to worship him, and to bear witness that I am His Messenger."
Yasar asked: "So ifl bear witness and believe in Allah, what do I gain?"
"If you die believing, there is Paradise for you," answered the blessed Messenger.
Upon that Yasar said: "0 Messenger of Allah, tell me about Islam and how one
becomes a Muslim!"
This was a sincere address and the sincerity of him turning his face to the faith was
being welcomed by our noble Prophet. He was about to do something that was better
than the world and everything in it; he was becoming a Muslim! While there was a
conflict raging in front of Khaybar, Yasar had come to say the words of witnessing.
He then turned to the blessed Messenger and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! I am
black-and added to that I am ugly, with a bad odor, and a man with no money. If I
fight against the Jews today and die, will I enter Paradise?"
''Yes," replied the Messenger of Allah. It was clear that Y asar had already set his
sights on Paradise and was looking for a way to get there. He turned to the blessed
Messenger once again and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! These sheep and cows have
been entrusted to me; I work for the owner of these animals. What shall I do with them
now?"
Our noble Prophet had understood what he meant by his question and so said: "First
get them out of the camp side! Then throw little stones at their bellies; Allah the
Almighty will help you return your trust and they will return to their owners."
Y asar started to pick small stones at once just as the blessed Messenger had advised
and threw them on the sheep and the cows, and at the same time said to them: "I won't
be able to take care of you anymore; return at once to your owner."
Indeed, the sheep and the cows started to go in the direction of their owner. Now

--- Sayfa 784 ---
Yasar was a subject responsible for his behavior and he joined the soldiers of Ali to
fight.
Before long, one of the stones thrown with a catapult from the castle hit Y asar and
he had become martyr; he was going to the Divine presence without even having
performed one Prayer. They brought his body to the presence of the blessed
Messenger; the black slave whom the Khaybar did not treat as an equal was lying in
front of our noble Prophet. In the blessed Messenger's regard was the love that he felt
towards a subject who had reached the Truth without having had the chance to
perform any deeds or Prayers towards Allah. Seeing his regard, the Companions were
also looking at Yasar. 169 The Messenger of Allah was heard saying: "May Allah the
Almighty beautify your smell and face, and increase your wealth of deeds!"
A Conquest
Meanwhile, a tough war was raging. Marhab and Ali who had taken out their swords
were sizing each other up and were making moves. In front ofKhaybar one could only
hear the clashing of swords and challenges thrown at the other side. At one moment
there was a great noise, everyone understood that a deathly blow had been struck.
They wondered about the result. When the dust settled they could see that it was Ali
who had been left standing, and then the believers started to call out takbirs. Dhu al-
Fiqar had landed on the head of Marhab that had been covered under two helmets and
he had been destroyed.
When the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, saw that Marhab
too had been killed after Yasir, he gave the following good news to his Companions:
"Rejoice; Khaybar is easier now!"
And just as the blessed Messenger said, it became easier. With the death ofMarhab,
the place was a battlefield in the real sense of the word. The Khaybar were giving it
their all in order to defend their castle which was about to fall, and they were attacking
to death! For them, each conquered castle meant another space that they had to leave.
They were fleeing towards the castles remaining in the back and were trying to protect
themselves there.
During this conquest, Ali's shield fell from his hand and he had nothing left to
protect himself with. He looked to both his sides and then saw the door of the castle.
He reached for the door and yanked it loose and used the door of the castle as his
shield-and he used it till the end of the battle. Ali and the Companions were pursuing
the Khaybaris who were fleeing towards the castles from behind. Now the sound of
"Allah is Great!" was echoing throughout Khaybar. The voices of takbir frightened

--- Sayfa 785 ---
the people of Khaybar even more and they felt weak-there was nothing left that they
could do. However much they would try to seek refuge in their castles they could see
that their end had come.
Surrender and Agreement
With the conquest of each castle there were spoils and prisoners in their custody. But
the warriors still did not give themselves up. At one point as the battle continued, a
man named Gazzal came out of one of the castles and came to the presence of the
blessed Messenger. He asked for safe custody for himself and family in return for
some information: "0 Abu'l-Qasim," he said, "you will not be able to conquer this
castle and enter it even if you should lay siege to it for a month. They have water
canals underground and they go there to get water at night and thus see to their needs.
Then they come and take shelter in their castles-if you cut their way to water then
they will perish by drought."
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, gave surety to Gazzal as
well just like the others and he cut the water path according to the information he
gave. The result turned out to be as Gazzal said. When they saw that their path to
water had been cut they became anxious, this meant their lifeline had been cut!
Now the Companions had also started to use catapults with the order of the
Messenger of Allah. This machine, which was made by the people of Khaybar
themselves, was now raining stones on them. During the chaos, an arrow hit the
blessed Messenger and got tangled in his dress. He got a handful of dust from the
ground and threw it in the direction of the Khaybar. The people of Khaybar seemed to
be shaken as if there had been an earthquake and started to fall down one by one.
The castles of Watih and Sulalim were now also under siege, and the Khaybaris
understood that they were about to face extinction, and so they took the decision to
surrender. Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq sent his man Shammah to the blessed Messenger
to let him know of his desire to speak. The blessed Messenger responded favorably to
his request. Upon that Kinana came to the presence of the blessed Messenger with a
number of his men; they looked rather miserable. It looked as though they had now
understood the consequences of their actions. They were going to accept the judgment
passed on them and so they were offering terms of agreement to the blessed
Messenger. For all they wanted to do was to save their lives. Even though he had
conquered their castles with such difficulty, the Messenger of Allah still regarded
these offers in favorable light and made an agreement with the men that he had
defeated:

--- Sayfa 786 ---
1. The blood of the Jews who fought in the castles will not be shed.
2. The families and children of the Jews will be spared and they will be
allowed to leave Khaybar and lands ofKhaybar with their families.
3. When they go they will not take with them more than two mount-load of
possessions: they will leave all their transportable and non-transportable
wealth, including military equipment (accept for what they carry on
themselves) to the blessed Messenger, including the cloth material they
have stocked.
4. Nothing that is supposed to be left to the Messenger of Allah will be
hidden, and those who try to hide such things will be exempt from the
surety promised.
Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq, who was their leader, particularly was giving his word
that he would stay true to these articles. Our noble Prophet, who knew their nature
very well, warned once again: "If you hide some of the spoils and refuse to hand them
over to me, you will be exempt from the surety of Allah and His Messenger."
One could also say that this was a warning despite the fact that he could see where
things were going.
That day there were also revelations concerning new decrees; from then on the meat
of asses was not to be eaten, the spoils that were not yet divided were not going to be
used, and the meat of all terrestrial predatory animals (animals which hunt with their
teeth) would be considered haram, and they could not touch the women who were
taken prisoner.
The Spoils ofKhaybar
It was true, Khaybar was full of food and drink, dried meat, all kinds of fruit, sheep,
camels, clothes, material, weapons-all these were waiting to be distributed among
the Muslims. Among the spoils were copies of the Torah; our noble Prophet would
order the return of these books to their owners and accordingly they would be
returned. There were also barrels of alcohol among the spoils. When the Messenger of
Allah learnt of this he ordered these barrels to be broken and these age-old spirits were
spilled on the streets of Khaybar. Meanwhile Abdullah ibn Hammar had not been able
to stop himself from drinking these spirits. Our beloved Prophet issued a punishment
to this Companion who could not master his own self and had publicly committed this
sin. He first took out his shoe and hit him with it and then the Companions did the
same. Umar was heard shouting: "Dear Lord, chastise him! He has made a habit of
drinking spirits and then to be beaten up."

--- Sayfa 787 ---
Our noble Prophet had heard his words and said: "0 Umar, do not say so! For verily
he loves Allah and His Messenger."
The Companions who approached everything with great sensitivity started to ask
questions about what to do with the copper pots and pans in which spirits and other
prohibited foods had been stored. The Messenger of Allah said:
'Wash them and then use them to cook."
Each step they took with him they learnt something new.
The blessed Messenger had appointed Farwa ibn Amr as spoils officer: "If you have
taken anything from the spoils before they have been distributed, be it a pin or a piece
of thread, return it. Because betraying the spoils is a great sin and would mean Hellfire
on the Day of Judgment," declaring that nobody should take anything from the spoils
before they were distributed. There was permission only for a little amount to be eaten
by the Companions and their horses. The situation of the spoils was very sensitive:
Farwa, who had been appointed as the officer, had taken a piece of cloth to guard
himself against the sun and had been warned by the blessed Messenger saying: "You
have wrapped a piece of Hellfire around your head!" and so he repented and put it
back. He said to someone who asked for a part of the spoils: "I cannot take anything
from the spoils before they have been distributed-not a pin, not a piece of thread. I
can't take anything for myself or for anyone else," responding to someone who had
asked for a piece of string to tie his camel.
They had brought the news of someone who had fallen martyr that day to the
blessed Messenger. They wanted to bring it as a piece of good news, saying this
person was martyr: Our noble Prophet said: "Do not say so! Because I have seen him
in Hellfire because of a cloak he stole from the spoils."
The matter was very grave indeed and the Messenger of Allah turned to Umar said:
"0 son of Khattab! Go and tell people 'No one can enter Paradise other than
believers'." Then he said the following: 'When disloyalty concerning spoils grows
among a people then fear will be planted in their hearts."
When time came to perform the Funeral Prayers of that person, he turned to the
tribe of the person who had fallen and said: "Perform the Prayer of your man
yourself."
This was a grave matter indeed. This meant that taking and using something that
belonged to the public was something that would receive the wrath of Allah. They
started to doubt the martyr status of their friend because the blessed Messenger said:
"Your man was untrue concerning a trust in the path of Allah."

--- Sayfa 788 ---
Upon that the members of the tribe started to search among the man's belongings.
What they found was a number of beads that would not weigh even two dirhams.
They sat down and started to think; there were others who had thought that this was
not much and had taken such beads, and they all came and brought these beads back to
the blessed Messenger. The sensitivity of his Companions pleased the Messenger of
Allah and he turned to them said: "Can you say that you have given back all that you
have taken?"
''Yes," they replied and swore that they did not forget anything and that they had
brought everything back. Upon that the blessed Messenger had a bedstead brought for
the person who had fallen martyr, he had him wrapped in a piece of cloth and then
performed his Funeral Prayer.
Then there were those who were displeased that they were getting a portion of the
spoils. They could not reconcile their conscience to take a portion of the spoil because
of the sweat and hard work they had poured in the path of Allah-they thought that
such earthly recompense was something to be embarrassed about. Even before
Khaybar had started a man called Abu Dayyah had come from the desert to the
presence of the blessed Messenger and spoken "La ilaha illallah" and said to the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him: "I will immigrate to where you
are," saying that he wanted to live with him from then on. The blessed Messenger had
accepted his request and asked his Companions to take care of him. Abu Dayyah was
among the men who had come to Khaybar.
When the first castles had been conquered and some of the spoils had been
distributed, Abu Dayyah was also allotted a share. When they tried to give it to him he
asked: "What is this?"
"This is the portion of the spoils that the Messenger of Allah has allotted to you."
The Companion was rather offended by this and ran to the blessed Messenger: "0
Messenger of Allah! What is this?"
Our noble Prophet said: "This is the portion of the spoils that is allotted to you."
Upon that Abu Dayyah pointed to his throat with his index finger and said: "I did
not come and swear my allegiance to you because ofthis-I have joined you so that I
may receive an arrow here and enter Paradise-that is why I have submitted in faith to
you." He was speaking exactly as he felt and in response to his honorable stance our
noble Prophet said: "If you are speaking what you feel, then Allah will verify you."
It was clear that this person had no interest in worldly goods and as soon as he
grabbed his sword he rejoined the siege. Finally, an arrow hit Abu Dayyah on his

--- Sayfa 789 ---
throat and when the man was brought to the presence of the beloved Messenger he
asked: "Is this him?"
The arrow had hit the Companion exactly where he had pointed with his finger.
People who knew ofthe matter beforehand said: "Yes."
Upon that the blessed Messenger said: "He was telling the truth, and Allah has
verified what he has said."
Then he wrapped the body of Abu Dayyah with his own cloak and placed him in
front of the people so that his Funeral Prayer may be performed, and he himself led
the Prayer. After the Prayer he was praying for him in the following manner: "Dear
Lord! This is your subject and the son of your subject. He started on your path as a
muhajir (migrant) and gave his last breath on your path. I am his witness!"
The Hidden Treasure
People knew that the legendary treasure of Huyayy ibn Akhtab was there somewhere
-but among the spoils they had captured there was no gold or silver. When the Banu
Nadir Jews had left their homeland to go to Khaybar, Abu Rafi Sallam ibn Abi'l-
Huqayq had pointed to the camel skin in which gold and silver and other precious
metal had been stored and said: "This is the thing we have prepared to denigrate and
exalt the world," meaning that with the help of this treasure he was hoping to return to
his previous state of wealth.
This treasure did not belong solely to Abu Rafi, but was a treasure that had been
accumulated by the dynasty of Abi'l-Huqayq. In previous times this treasure would fit
in a sheepskin and it had then grown, first filling up a cow skin and finally it could
hardly be contained in a camel skin. When it was time for a wedding the people of
Mecca would go to this treasure and rent jewelry from it for one month and then return
them back. If some of these goods had been lost, the person had to pay it back as ten
thousand gold. In short, this was a treasure about which there were many stories. The
people of Khaybar did not want to get this treasure out although it was stipulated by
the articles of the agreement. Kinana ibn Rabi who was representing the dynasty of the
Abi'l-Huqayq at the time, his brother and his uncle's son were brought to the presence
of the blessed Messenger-there was a clear violation of the terms of the agreement
and the Messenger of Allah said to them: "0 sons of Abi'l-Huqayq, I know the enmity
you have against Allah and His Messenger; however, your enmity has not stopped me
from giving surety and protection to your men-with the condition that you will not
hide anything from me when it comes to spoils or to smuggle away anything. You
know that should you hide anything from me, then it will be acceptable for me to shed

--- Sayfa 790 ---
your blood and you will no longer have the surety of Allah and His Messenger. Now
tell me, where are the skins in which you stored your precious things and money-the
skins that you took away with you when you were exiled from Medina?"
The issue was not about getting the gold or the silver, but to reveal the hypocrisy of
these people, to stop them from gathering strength to once again harm the Muslims.
But the men were professionals in lying and so they said: "0 Abu'l-Qasim, we have
spent that money and wealth in our wars, we swear we have nothing left of them! We
lived on them since you have exiled us from Medina-the expenses of war and living
have diminished them altogether, there is nothing left."
They were lying with a straight face, and the Messenger of Allah would catch them
on their lie, and remind them that their decision to lie would cost them dearer than the
treasure itself: "Be careful what you say," he warned. "The time that has passed since
that day is not much, and the money you have hidden is greater, how could you have
spent all that in such short a time? What do you say? Shall I lift this surety given to
you by Allah and His Messenger ifl find out this treasure is with you?"
"Okay. You may lift it," they said.
While Kinana was blatantly denying the whereabouts of the treasure, one Jew
approached him and said: "If you have the thing that Muhammad is asking about, and
if you know anything about it, give it away and so save your life. Or else I know that
he will be able to get it himself, for Allah makes him know things that we do not
know!"
Even before he could finish his words the man was met with Kinana' s anger and so
was pushed to a comer. In the face of Kinana' s authority the others had stopped
talking and could not speak their minds. Then a naive Jew by the name of Salaba was
brought to the presence of our noble Prophet, he was saying that he saw Kinana every
morning in some sort of dumping site. Upon that the blessed Messenger turned to
Kinana and said: "What do you say to that, if we find the treasure there, we will have
to kill you."
Kinana again said: "You may," and stubbornly did not divulge his secret.
The blessed Messenger called one of his Companions to his side and told him to dig
the place that Salaba had described and then to bring the revealed things to his
presence. The man who gave him this seemed to be mentally handicapped but what he
had said was correct; for the Companion went to the said place and before long he dug
out a part of the treasure and brought it to the presence of our noble Prophet. But this
was not all of the treasure that had been spoken about. It appeared that they had

--- Sayfa 791 ---
divided it into two and buried it in two different places. The blessed Messenger turned
to Kinana and asked once again but the arrogant man this time was still keeping silent.
This time Zubayr ibn Awwam came to the fore in order to make Kinana talk. The
man's wealth was clearly more precious to him than his life, and he was ready to give
his life away and so kept silent. The issue of the rest of the treasure seemed to be at a
deadlock-people knew that there was a treasure but no one intended to say anything
about it. It was at this moment that the Truthful Gabriel came to the Messenger of
Allah and told him the location of the treasure. Upon that our noble Prophet called a
Companion from the Ansar to his side, described the place that Gabriel had told him,
and ordered him to dig and bring what he would find. The blessed Messenger turned
to Kinana and said: ''Now you are a scoundrel certified from the beyond the heavens."
Our beloved Prophet took another step and held his Companions Abu Bakr, Umar,
Ali and Zubayr, and then eminent men from the Jews as witness. He knew what he
was dealing with and he wanted the decision to be taken in unison. The Ansar who
had gone to the described place had dug out the camel skin and now was holding a
treasure worth ten thousand dinars. When the skin was opened, gold coins, bracelets,
and jewelry made of corals and emeralds fell out. Everything had thus been revealed,
now people were wondering when Kinana would be executed. For Kinana had
preferred death with his own volition to the wealth he would not have been able to
use! The Messenger of Allah handed him and his brother Rabi to Muhammad ibn
Maslama in return for his brother Mahmud whom they had killed.
A Second Agreement
The Jews who had volunteered to leave Khaybar came to the blessed Messenger and
said: "0 Muhammad! Let us stay and engage in work in the fields, and then we can
give half of what we earn to you."
As if it had not been them who had tried to kill him a number of times! These
people who were in cahoots with the Meccans, who made plans to attack Medina by
provoking nearing tribes had now melted like wax and were begging for mercy from
the force they had not been able to defeat. There were two dimensions to the matter:
firstly it was important that it was them who were asking for it, for it showed that they
were in a state in which they were ready to accept anything. The final judgment was to
be the blessed Messenger's; he could allow it now and then annul this agreement.
Khaybar was distant to Medina and it would be difficult to take care of these lands
from afar. The people of Khaybar knew the landscape of their land better and they
knew what to plant where for good results. Another important aspect was that Khaybar

--- Sayfa 792 ---
would then be under constant control. They would have to have dealings with the
Companions for matters of planting and harvesting and thus they would have to
opportunity to observe the beauties of Islam first hand. Then the blessed Messenger
decided that there was nothing to be lost by accepting their offer and he held out his
hand once again, saying: "We leave you in the lands of Khaybar as long as Allah the
Almighty will allow it," and thus gave them back the land that he had conquered. In
return they would give half of their produce every year to the Messenger of Allah.
Abdullah ibn Rawaha was chosen to see to this transaction. Every year he would go
and count the produce of the people of Khaybar, take half of it and return to Medina. 170
Slaves
Among the people who had been taken captive was Huyayy ibn Akhtab's daughter
Safiyyall.!. who came from the lineage of Aaron172 and her uncle's daughter. She had
married Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq before Khaybar, and with her husband killed, she
was now a widow. Dihya al-Kalbi, in whose shape the Truthful Gabriel appeared a
number of times and whom the blessed Messenger sent as envoy to various places,
came to the Messenger of Allah and asked one of the captives to be given to him.
When he was given leave he went and chose our mother Safiyya.
One of the Companions came to our noble Prophet and said: "0 Messenger of
Allah! It would not be appropriate for you to give a lady of the Banu Qurayza and the
Banu Nadir tribes, the daughter of their leader Huyayy ibn Akhtab to Dihyah. You
must take her."
The Companion of the blessed Messenger was speaking the truth; such a choice
would also mean conquering Khaybar from the inside and so the blessed Messenger
called Dihyah to his side and asked him to take someone other than Safiyya. Then he
called out to Bilal to bring her to his presence. Meanwhile, our mother Safiyya was
following the developments closely. A feeling inside her was telling her that the dream
she had had on her wedding night was going to be realized. On the night of her
marriage to Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq she had dreamt that a moon had come from the
direction of Medina and fallen on her lap. In the morning when she had told this
dream to Kinana, he had been enraged and said: "Or is it your intention to marry
Muhammad, the ruler of Hijaz?" and he had not stopped showering her with angry
words and had slapped her hard on the face. 173
At a moment when she felt overwhelmed with all these feelings Bilal had come to
her and told her that he would take her to the Messenger of Allah. Our mother Safiyya,
who was the grandchild of Prophets Aaron and Moses, was about to become the wife

--- Sayfa 793 ---
of a Prophet whose mention she had heard many times from her father. Meanwhile,
the Companions would witness yet another grace on the part of our noble Prophet, for
as Bilal was taking Safiyya and her uncle's daughter to the presence of the blessed
Messenger, her cousin saw two dead bodies of the Khaybar and she started to scream
and throw dust on herself. Our noble Prophet heard the screams as well and said to
those around him that there was no point in causing people needless pain. He walked
over to Bilal and asked: "0 Bilal! Do you not have any feelings of mercy that you
make these women pass beside dead bodies?"
When Safiyya came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
be upon him, he spoke to her and explained Islam to her, and left it to her whether or
not to accept it; he said that if she accepted he would marry her, and if not, he would
give her freedom and send her back to her tribe. Our mother Safiyya started her words
thus: "0 Messenger of Allah, even before you invited me to Islam I wanted to become
a Muslim and bear witness to your Prophethood. I do not have any use for Judaism
any longer, or any relation to it! You now leave me free to choose between denial and
Islam, and I choose Allah and His Messenger. Allah and His Messenger are better for
me than being set free and joining my tribe."
And so our noble Prophet set our mother Safiyya free and accepted her as his wife.
The peace she felt at the realization of her dream was beautiful enough to make her
forget all the difficulties she had faced up until that moment. Anas ibn Malik's mother
Umm Sulaym prepared her and when they entered their tent at night, they heard the
footsteps of someone from outside.
Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, who feared that when a woman whose husband, father and
many people of her tribe had been killed in Khaybar was left alone with the blessed
Messenger she could do him some harm, was keeping vigil outside the tent of the
blessed Messenger with his sword. When our noble Prophet went outside and saw him
in that state, he asked: "What is the matter, 0 Abu Ayyub?"
"0 Messenger of Allah! I feared that this woman will do you some harm because
she is a woman whose father, husband and tribe has been killed in Khaybar and she
has only recently left the state of denial! I feared that she may do something to you."
This was a sensitivity that was to be acknowledged and our noble Prophet would
raise his hands and pray for Abu Ayyub in the following manner: "Dear Lord! Just as
Abu Ayyub has come and wanted to protect me in the dead of night, may You protect
him also!"
The Attempt to Poison the Blessed Messenger

--- Sayfa 794 ---
After the conquest, our noble Prophet had not yet left Khaybar; he probably had
stayed a little longer to take all the necessary steps so that there would be no problems
when he left. This prolonged period of stay had put ideas into the heads of the people
of Khaybar and they devised plans to get rid of the blessed Messenger-they wanted
to kill their enemy whom they had not been able to defeat on the battleground through
deceitful ways. Their plan was to kill not just the Messenger of Allah but also those
closest to him, thus staging a great finale.
For this plan they wanted to make use of our mother Safiyya's proximity to the
blessed Messenger. They sat down and decided to refer this plan to Zaynab hint
Harith. Zaynab hint Harith, who was also the wife of Sallam ibn Mishkam who had
been killed in Khaybar, had also lost her father Harith, her brother Marhad and her
uncle Yasar in the conflict, and so wanted to avenge their deaths. According to their
plan, they would have a goat slaughtered and poisoned and then send it to our noble
Prophet. Because they had learnt that he liked the foreleg of the lamb, they had taken
good care of that part and laid out their plan to kill the blessed Messenger as quickly
as possible. The blessed Messenger had prayed his Evening Prayer and was resting.
Zaynab hint Harith who came with a tray containing the roasted meat of the
poisoned goat pointed to the tray and said: "0 Abu'l-Qasim. This is my gift to you!"
Such a feast after such exhaustion seemed like a great idea to the Companions!
Then the roasted goat was put in front of the Companions. The first to reach out for it
was naturally our noble Prophet and just as expected, he reached for the foreleg of the
goat. But as soon as the blessed Messenger put a morsel in his mouth, he realized that
something was not right. Maybe it was the Truthful Gabriel who told him what was
happening. In any case he let go and said: "Do not touch this, and throw away what
you have in your hands."
Everyone was dead silent. They wondered what the cause of the change in mood
was. The Messenger of Allah would explain it: "Verily, the foreleg of this goat tells
me that it is poisoned."
They had narrowly escaped a grave calamity, but the same could not be said of all.
Bishr ibn Bara had already chewed and swallowed a piece just when the blessed
Messenger was warning the Companions. He tried to get it out of his system by
vomiting when he heard the blessed Messenger's warning, but the poison quickly
showed its effect and Bishr's body had already started to tum purple. The poison was
so strong that he died there and then in front of everybody! 174
Upon that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, called the

--- Sayfa 795 ---
woman who wanted to give them this feast and asked: "Did you poison this goat?"
they had noticed the presence of the poison but it seemed not to have worked. It could
not have been someone from among them who had alerted the blessed Messenger and
so the woman asked: "Who alerted you to this?"
Our noble Prophet said: "This foreleg in front of me."
But he still had not received the answer to his first question and he was waiting. The
woman who saw that there was no escape admitted: "Yes! I did it."
The culprit had been found but they had to learn why she had done it. Our noble
Prophet asked: "What is the reason that made you do it? Why did you do it?"
The woman was very devious and started to say the following: ''You know what has
befallen my tribe; you have done what you have done to them! I said to myself 'If he
is a king, then we will have got rid of him; but if he is really a Prophet, then he will
somehow be informed of it and be saved!"'
Despite all this, the blessed Messenger forgave the woman for he was the
Messenger of mercy and he would never indulge in feelings of revenge for an act
committed against him.
The Companions asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! Shall we kill her?"
''No," answered the noble Messenger. ''You will not touch her or torture her."
But Bishr ibn Barra falling martyr would change everything. Then, in compensation
for his blood, the blessed Messenger would give the woman to the relatives of Bishr
and they would kill her.l2.2.
The New Guests ofKhaybar
Our beloved Prophet had conquered the castles of Khaybar and another threat against
Medina had thus been dealt with. Of course the issue was greater than Khaybar; they
were now going to deal with other elements that were causing threat. At a time when
these were the considerations, Jafar and his friends who had gone to Abyssinia when
Mecca had been a cauldron of hatred came back to the presence of the Messenger of
Allah. Thus the longing had ended and there was great show of emotion. It had not
been easy-they had not seen each other for fifteen years. And all of a sudden the
atmosphere in Khaybar changed; once a battlefield now looked like festival.
As Jafar was walking towards our noble Prophet, his feet did not seem to touch the
ground from the love and respect he felt for him. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, was waiting for him with arms open and finally they embraced
one another. The blessed Messenger kissed his nephew in between his brows and said:

--- Sayfa 796 ---
"I do not know what to rejoice at more: the conquest of Khaybar or the arrival of
Jafar," thus sharing his happiness with his Companions.
Coming with him were more than fifty Muslims, including Abu Musa al-Ash'ari.
They had set off from Yemen and the ship had taken them to Abyssinia. There they
had come across Jafar, and had decided to return to Medina with him, crossing over to
the Arabian peninsula with the ships that the Abyssinian king Najashi had given for
their use. 176
Among those who came to Khaybar on the first day were eighty households from
the tribe of Daws. They had become Muslim and come all the way to Medina after
having performed the Morning Prayer led by Siba ibn Urfuta. They had learnt that the
Messenger of Allah was close by and so they had turned their direction to Khaybar in
order to meet the blessed Messenger as soon as possible. Among them was one very
noble Companion, Abdusshams, who would later become known as Abu Hurayra. 177
Khaybar was hosting its new guests and our noble Prophet gave a portion of the
spoils to these people who had come all the way to Khaybar.
The Circle of Safety Widens
On the other hand the blessed Messenger had sent Muhayyisa ibn Masud to the people
of Fadak, telling him to invite them to Islam. They received conflicting news about
them; some said that they were preparing to attack Medina.
When Muhayyisa came to Fadak he invited them to Islam and stayed there for two
days. The people ofFadak did not seem very interested in listening to his call and they
were waiting for the day the Khaybar would defeat the Muslims. One of them came to
the fore and said: "In Natat there are men like Amir, Yasir, Harith and Marhab, the
master of the Jews. We do not think that Muhammad will be able to equal them in
fierceness. What is more, they also have ten thousand troops with them."
It looked like they were only trying to buy time until the Khaybar triumphed and
were wasting Muhayyisa's time. He had decided to return when they came to him and
said: "We will send some of our men with you in order to sign an agreement," and
asked him to stay a little more. They continued to work this strategy of buying time.
Then they started to receive news from Khaybar which they were not expecting at
all, news that their castles had fallen one by one and the heroes they had trusted had
also fallen on the ground one by one. This was news that disconcerted them and so
they changed their attitude. Seeing that their old plans were now impossible, they
revised their strategy and started looking to see how they could get out of this situation

--- Sayfa 797 ---
with minimum amount of loss. They set off with a delegation led by Nun ibn Yusha
and came to Khaybar to sign a treaty of peace with our noble Prophet. They were
offering to leave their lands without leaving behind any of their possessions, given that
the Muslims guaranteed their safe passage. But the blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, did not accept their offer. Seeing their attitude Muhayyisa
would say to them: "You have no fighting men, no castles to seek shelter in, no power
to protect you, and how is it that you have possessions with you? If the Messenger of
Allah should send you a hundred men, you will have to file up in front of them and
surrender," trying to break their resolve and making it clear that he did not like their
haughty attitude. The people of Fadak who understood that too much politics would
cost them dearly as it had done to their allies had to come to an agreement by
surrendering half their property to the Muslims. According to the agreement, half of
the land of the Fadak would now be at the disposal of the Messenger of Allah-
working on the land, the people of Fadak would keep half the produce and give the
other half to the blessed Messenger. 178
Leaving Khaybar
The issue of Khaybar had finally been solved. After the siege and the war that lasted
for about two months, 179 twenty-eight Companions had fallen martyr180 and ninety-
three of the Khaybar warriors had been killed. The calendar showed the month of
Jamazi al-akhir. Now that Khaybar had been set right, it was time to leave and our
noble Prophet left Khaybar with his Companions. He made his way towards Wadi al-
Qura.
The Jews of Wadi al-Qura and Tayma, like the people of Khaybar, had taken the
decision to act together in the event of an attack on Medina upon the punishment of
the Banu Qurayza. With the setting of the sun they had arrived at Wadi al-Qura and
without losing any time, the Messenger of Allah invited them to Islam. But they were
not prepared to understand from such a discourse, and decided to answer to this
invitation with a shower of arrows. Upon that the blessed Messenger prepared his
Companions for war in order to speak to them in a language they would understand;
the standard was given to Sa'd ibn Ubada and the Companions took their positions for
battle. Still, the blessed Messenger would call out to them and invite them once more
to Islam. He was saying that should they accept this invitation their lives and property
would be under protection, but that they would have to answer to Allah for what they
carried inside their hearts. They did not accept the offer and started to send out their
warrior heroes one by one who were met with Companions such as Zubayr ibn

--- Sayfa 798 ---
Awwam, Abu Dujana and Ali.
After the death of each of their warnors that came out and challenged the
Companions, our noble Prophet would repeat his invitation a third time, calling them
surrender before more blood was shed. That day eleven men of the people of Wadi al-
Qura had been killed and yet they still did not accept to surrender. When it was time to
pray, the blessed Messenger was performing his duty with his Companions and invited
them once again to Islam.
On one of these days, Mid'am, the black slave that the blessed Messenger had given
as a gift to Rifa'a ibn Zayd, died from an arrow wound. The Companions envied him
and said: "Happy is he, for he has gone to Paradise."
Our noble Prophet, who heard this, said: ''No, I swear by He who hold my life in
His hands that he is burning in flames inside a piece of cloth that he took in Khaybar
before the spoils were distributed."
These were expressions that caused much anxiety among the Companions; the
death of a person who had served the Messenger of Allah, who saw to the needs of his
camels on the battlefield, did not necessarily save that person from the fire. This meant
that living Islam was something that required a sensibility finer than a hair, and after
these expressions of our noble Prophet, another Companion came to his presence with
no strength left in his limbs. He was holding a piece of shoe leather in his hands-he
too had taken this at Khaybar before the spoils had been distributed. He first held it
out to the blessed Messenger. He had no color left in his face from fear and was
waiting for the reaction of our noble Prophet. Finally the blessed Messenger said:
"This is a piece of leather for one or two shoes, made from Hell."
From the day that the campaign to Khaybar had started, the Companions were
watching the developments and observing the reactions that the Messenger of Allah
gave to various things-they conferred among themselves and came to the
understanding that they had to act extra careful in the name of religion, for today had a
tomorrow, and tomorrow in front of Truth they would be held accountable for their
actions.
The end was now drawing near. It was a Saturday. It was the fourth day of their
arrival in Wadi al-Qura and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
heightened the siege and started a new attack. The heightening of the siege which
started with the first rays of the sunlight was the last siege for Wadi al-Qura and they
surrendered. The spoils gathered that day in Wadi al-Qura were divided into five, and
four-fifths of it was distributed among the Companions. Just as it was given to the

--- Sayfa 799 ---
people of Khaybar, the people of Wadi al-Qura were given the same rights, and they
were allowed to remain on their land with the condition of sending half of their
produce and/or income every year to Medina. Amr ibn Said was appointed as
governor over them.
Back to Medina
Now, our noble Prophet started heading towards the Medina he had been away from
for a very long time. He continued on his way day and night-taking very few breaks.
The Companions were exhausted, then after midnight they stopped for a break. The
blessed Messenger turned to his Companions and said: "Is there not a man among us
who will be able to wake us up for the Morning Prayer? I fear we may oversleep."
It was conceivable that they would have a hard time waking up, going to sleep as
exhausted as they were, and the blessed Messenger was trying to take extra precaution
so that they would not miss their Prayer. Bilal said: "0 Messenger of Allah! I will
wake you up for Prayer!"
Now everybody could rest m peace and that's what they did. Bilal, who had
volunteered to take on the duty to wake the army up for the Morning Prayer, started to
perform supererogatory Prayers to illuminate the darkness of the night. He directed
himself to his Lord and prayed for a while. But the passing time made him feel his
exhaustion. He then thought of sitting down and leaning against his camel to wait for
morning! When the Messenger of Allah woke up, he saw all his Companions sleeping.
The rays of the sun had just started to warm their faces but it did not seem likely that
they could wake up-so deep was their sleep because of exhaustion. His eyes searched
for Bilal who had leaned against his camel and fallen asleep where he was sitting.
'What did you do to us, 0 Bilal!" the blessed Messenger called out.
Bilal, who jumped from where he was sitting to the velvet voice of the blessed
Messenger, already regretted what he had done. He should not have sat down! But
what was done could not be undone. Meanwhile the Companions woke up as well and
each of them was very sad that they had missed a Prayer. How was it possible for a
believer to pass up a Prayer that Allah deemed obligatory on him! They were all
censuring Bilal who had volunteered to keep vigil.lli
While they were contemplating their sadness, fate continued to advance, and Allah
the Almighty was opening doors to the Ummah of Muhammad even at a moment
when they had missed their Prayers and was, through our noble Prophet, showing
them how to act in the event of missing their Prayer. He first said: "This is a valley

--- Sayfa 800 ---
where the devils roam," and so gave the order to move. After leaving that area our
noble Prophet gave orders to stop at another place, and taking ablution, he called Bilal
to call out the call for Prayer. The honorable Companions had also taken ablution and
prepared for Prayer. He was telling his Companions to pray the sunnah part of their
Prayers as well. Then they formed lines and the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, led them in Prayer. After the Prayer finished the blessed
Messenger turned to his Companions and said the following: "The soul of each of us
is in the hands of Allah; He can arrest it, He can set it free! He is the One who can do
this. And so when you forget your Prayers, perform it as soon as you have
remembered it! For Allah the Almighty says 'Perform the Prayers in order to
remember Me' ."182
As they neared Medina, the Companions were overjoyed both because of the
victory they had at Khaybar and because they had got back to Medina safe and sound.
When they approached Medina, the mountains and the rocks were echoing with the
sounds of takbir.
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, would assess the
situation and say: "Remain quiet, for you are not praying to one Who is distant from
you, nor to one who cannot hear you; Allah the Almighty is the One who hears all and
who is the closest to you all; for He the Almighty is with you at all times." Having
said these our noble Prophet would tum to Abu Musa al-Ashari who was sitting
behind him and say: "0 Abdullah ibn Qays," it was clear that he was going to say a
number of things. Abu Musa responded: "Let my mother and father perish in your
way, tell me 0 Messenger of Allah."
Upon that the blessed Messenger asked him: "Shall I tell you a word that is the
treasure of Paradise?"
It was clear that he wanted everyone's close attention.
"Of course, tell me, let my mother and father perish for you." He said: "La hawla
wa la kuwwata illa billah (There is no strength or power except with Allah)"
The honorable Companions who heard this from our noble Prophet had stopped
saying the takbir and were now repeating this sentence which they had just learnt to be
the treasure of Paradise. In the middle of the night they had come to the place called
Juruf and he turned to his Companions and told them not to hurry to their homes in the
dark of the night.
Before entering Medina, Uhud had saluted them from afar. That day the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his Companions and said,

--- Sayfa 801 ---
concerning Uhud who was now the host of seventy of his Companions: "This is such a
mountain that we love it, and it loves us back."
He was speaking of Uhud to the Companions of Uhud-it was clear that he did not
want a grain of resentment against Uhud in people's hearts; the negativities had
already been left behind and now the sweet memories should be remembered rather
than heart-searing ones! Then he lifted his hands up at the skies and turned towards his
Lord: "Dear Lord!" he said. "I have decreed the things between these two rocky places
of Medina sacred and not to be harmed."
Entering Medina he prayed again: "We have repented our sins and we worship only
our Lord, we go down to prostration in Prayer and tum towards our Lord in thanks."
The Companions who heard these prayers started to repeat the same words and
these words were on their lips till they reached Medina.

--- Sayfa 802 ---
157 Al-Fath 48:20-21
158 It is reported that this Companion was Numayla ibn Abdullah al-Laysi. See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya
wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/207, Sirah, 3/345.
159 When they completed their mission and received their fee, Husayl became Muslim and took his
place among the Companions of the Messenger of Allah. See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 11258,
263.
160 Still, as a precaution the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, told them to keep
the man bound. At the end the man would become Muslim anyway. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 1/641.
ill It is said that the Messenger of Allah repeated this three times See Muslim, Sahih, 211044 (1365);
3/1426 (1365); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/101 (12011); Nasai, Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 3/335
(5576).
162 Khaybar was the name of a series of castles that spanned across a wide space. It was divided into
three major parts called Natat, Shikk and Katiba. At the time there were castles of different sizes
by the names of Nairn, Sa'b ibn Muadh, Zubayr (Kula), Ubayy (Sumran), Nizar (Bari), Qamus,
Watih and Sulalim. They were all built on high places and were very strong structures. See
Hamawi, Mu jamu 'l-Buldan, 2/409.
163 When they received the news of the blessed Messenger's victory, people such as Huwaytib ibn
Abdiluzza who had bet that the Messenger of Allah would triumph, had received the hundred
camels from those who had bet on the other side. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/701; Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51139.
164 However Mahmud ibn Maslama would become a martyr three days later and Marhab who had
injured him died on the same day. It is also said that the person who injured and caused the death
of Ibn Maslama with the millstone was Kinana ibn Abi'l-Huqayq. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/658;
Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 3170; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/283. At one point Marhab, the famous
commander of Khaybar, came out of the castle of Nairn and called out for a warrior that would
fight with him. Amir ibn Ekwa confronted him. Marhab had been quicker and he killed him with
repeated blows from his sword. Our noble Prophet would bury Amir in a cave in Raji along with
Mahmud ibn Maslama. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/658.
165 Amir's brother Salama ibn Akwa had been hurt in his leg. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, spoke words of healing to him, and Salama would never feel pain in his
leg again.
166 It is said that that day a similar offer to the one made to the Ghatafan was made to the Banu
Fazara but that they, too, had not accepted it. See Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/291; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51137.
167 Dabbaba was the name of a big machine that would be placed close to the wall of the castle in
order to make holes in the battlements. This machine's top was covered against the arrows, spears
and hot oil that may be thrown down, and the soldiers placed in this machine would dismantle the
stones of the castle with the tools they had in their hands and thus make a hole in the wall from
where they would enter.
168 When the castles of Watih and Sulalim were conquered as well, the person who had given the
information and made the conquest easier would be reunited with his wife Nufayla and he would
leave Khaybar after having converted. He was not heard of again. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/648.
169 The blessed Messenger was seen to turn his face away from Yasar abruptly. The Companions
wondered what was happening. "0 Messenger of Allah! Why did you turn your face away from
him so?'' He answered: "With him now are two heavenly companions, two of his spouses! When
the martyr is struck down, two heavenly companions came and wiped the dirt off his face and
said, 'May Allah the Almighty put the face of those who put your face in the dirt in the dirt too,
may He kill those who had killed you.' I have seen two heavenly companions with him even
though he had not bowed his head in prostration even once!" See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 4/316;

--- Sayfa 803 ---
Waqidi, Maghazi, 11650; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 1119; Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf, 4/87; Ibn Athir,
Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 1147, 3/129.
170 Meanwhile, Uyayna ibn Hisn and the Banu Fazara had come back to get a portion of the spoils
and they were trying to convince the blessed Messenger. When they realized that they would not
be able to convince him they changed their rhetoric and this time tried to threaten him. But this
yielded no results either, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was even
showing them a point to meet, and was not listening to their threats. As they returned empty
handed, Harith ibn Awf said to them: "Did I not tell you? Did I not tell you that Muhammad
would rule in the East and the West? The Jews kept speaking of this! I swear that I remember like
yesterday Abu Rafi Sallam ibn Mishkam saying: "We are jealous of Muhammad in the issue of
Prophethood; he should have appeared from among the line of Aaron! But what can we do? He is
a Prophet that has been sent!" But the Jews will not listen to me on this issue, and we will have to
give him two sacrifices, one in Yathrib and one in the castles of Khaybar. See Waqidi, Maghazi,
11676; Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/401.
!2l It is said that the real name of our mother Safiyya was Zaynab and that the name Safiyya was
given to her because she had been chosen by our noble Prophet. At the time it was natural for a
commander to have a horse or a slave given to him and this was called Sajiy, from the word
"chosen", and that day the Messenger of Allah had chosen the daughter of Huyayy ibn Akhtab for
himself and Huyayy's daughter Zaynab would thereon be called Safiyya. See Ibn Hajar, Fathu 'l-
Bari, 7/480.
172 One day, the other pure wives of the blessed Messenger had censured our mother Safiyya saying
that they were closer to the Messenger of Allah by way of kinship. When he came to his blessed
home and saw that Safiyya was very sad, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, had her sit in front of him and consoled her by saying "You should have said to them, my
husband is Muhammad, my father is Aaron, and my uncle Moses" See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/127;
Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur'an, 16/326; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 8/101; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-
Ghaba, 3/375.
173 When she was brought to the presence of the blessed Messenger, the purple bruise due to the slap
was still evident on her face; when asked about the cause she would tell the story to the
Messenger of Allah. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11674; Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/374; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-
Ma 'ad, 3/290.
174 It is said that after this the Messenger of Allah said: "Say in the Name of Allah and then eat," and
that when people ate of it, no harm touched anyone; there are also reports that this roasted meat
was then burnt on the order of the Messenger of Allah. There are also reports that a dog that took
a little piece of the leg died. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51134-135.
175 There are also reports that this woman who tried to poison the blessed Messenger became
Muslim; according to this report, when she was asked about the reason of her ugly deed, she said:
"The matter has been revealed now, you truly are our noble Prophet," and saying the "La ilaha
illallah" she became Muslim. See Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf, 4/81.
176 The people who came from Abyssinia that day were sixteen in number; the remaining thirty-four
had decided to stay in Abyssinia. Some of the Companions had compared themselves to the
migrants from Abyssinia, saying that they themselves were better. When such a statement reached
the Messenger of Allah, he had made things clear by saying that the Abyssinia migrants had
earned double the rewards for their hijra. See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/491; Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51136.
177 As soon as he learnt his name, the blessed Messenger said 'The sun has no slave or subject' and
gave him the name Abdurrahman. In following years when the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, saw the kitten that were on his lap, he called him "Abu Hirr" and from
then on he would known as Abu Hurayra, meaning the father of the kitten. See Hakim,
Mustadrak, 3/579 (6141); Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 7 /426; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 3/258.
178 This practice would continue till the time of Umar; that day Umar had exiled the people of Fadak

--- Sayfa 804 ---
along with the Jews of Khaybar and he had paid the fifty thousand dirhams which was half the
price of the land they had with the money he had received from some transaction in Iraq. See
Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/707; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51139.
179 According to a report by Arras, this period is recorded as six months. See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-
Kabir, 6/256 (6337); Haysami,Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 21160.
180 It is also possible that this number was twenty-nine.
ill Bilal, said that that day the person who censured him the least was the Messenger of Allah.
182 There are also reports that this incident happened during the Hunayn War. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51155.

--- Sayfa 805 ---
DEVELOPMENTS AFTER KHAYBAR
T
he blessed Messenger, who returned to Medina with the spoils of Khaybar,
would do two things with the means they had acquired: firstly, he would tell
the Muhajirun to give back the property that the Ansar had given them when
the Muhajirun had left Mecca and their properties, and he too applied this principle.
There was a date grove that Anas's mother Umm Sulaym had given him after the
Hijra, and he would take it away from Umm Ayman to whose use he had given it and
returned it to its owner. The second implementation had to do with Mecca again.
There was a great drought in Mecca at the time and both the people and the animals
were facing famine. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who
heard of this would send aid from the spoils of Khaybar to these people, the same
people who had tried to kill him at every given opportunity. The actions of our noble
Prophet showed the character of mercy and awareness that had to be an integral part of
a believer's behavior. He wanted to help them solely because they were the subjects of
Allah, and the message inherent in his action was a call to being a subject to Allah.
The Companion who brought the aid was Amr ibn Umayya. The names he sent the aid
to were Abu Sufyan, Suhayl ibn Amr and Safwan ibn Umayya, people in a position of
power. Thus they had also tested the waters to, in a way, check their views oflslam.
All three of these leading men would come to the blessed Messenger the next day
and surrender, and would thus attain the honor of being among the Companions, the
shining stars of the Messenger of Allah.
But that day Suhayl ibn Amr and Safwan ibn Umayya would not accept the offer of
help. They were seeing to the needs of people around them-they also could not bring
themselves to accept help from people who they had shown great enmity to till
yesterday. But this was a message that would go deep into their hearts; when they
reviewed the past they could see that an ordinary man would not offer such help; thus
they could see the difference of our noble Prophet once more.
Abu Sufyan was more cautious; even if his friends should regard it suspiciously,
here was a grace that could not be overlooked. That is why he said that day: "May

--- Sayfa 806 ---
Allah reward the son of my brother with goodness; for he has done what becomes
kinship and helped us," and accepted the aid and distributed it among the poor in
Mecca. 183 Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, whose value
Mecca had not been able to appreciate, had understood the difficulties that the Meccan
people were living through and had sent food and gold to them in order to help; a
conquest of hearts was taking place which promised better things for the future.
Meanwhile, Abu Hurayra who came to Medina with the people of Daws had settled in
the Masjid an-Nabawi and had become a member of the Ashab as-Suffa. He was filled
with the contentment of having found what he was looking for; but the fact that his
mother, who had come with him all the way to Medina, insisted on not becoming a
Muslim prevented him from experiencing joy to the full. He decided to speak about
this to our noble Prophet and asked for prayer for his mother: "0 Messenger of
Allah!" he said, "I invited my mother to Islam many times and each time she resists
me and insults me. I made the same offer to her today and again she said things
against you that I do not like and I will never accept. Will you pray for Abu Hurayra's
mother to become Muslim?"
This was a sincere request coming from the heart and so the noble Messenger lifted
up his hands and started to pray for Abu Hurayra's mother. Abu Hurayra seemed to be
floating with happiness. When the blessed Messenger prayed, he knew that that prayer
would surely be answered, and that his mother's life both in this world and the next
would be saved. He left the presence of the blessed Messenger at once; he wanted to
share what he had experienced with his mother! When he came home he saw that the
door was closed and he could hear the sound of water coming from inside. When he
forced the door to enter, his mother called: "Stay where you are."
His mother had put on her garment and then opened the door. She said: "Come in."
It was clear that some things had changed but Abu Hurayra couldn't make out
exactly what was happening. At last Abu Hurayra's mother said: "I bear witness that
there is no deity but Allah and that Muhammad is His subject and Messenger."
It was as if he had been given the entire world and everything in it; Abu Hurayra,
the lion of Daws, was crying from happiness.
For a heart filled with faith this was the greatest happiness and he wanted to share
this happy news with our noble Prophet. He ran to the Masjid: "0 Messenger of Allah!
Good news!" he called out. "Allah the Almighty has accepted your prayer and has
given faith to Abu Hurayra's mother."
This was a piece of news that made the blessed Messenger happy as well, and after

--- Sayfa 807 ---
giving thanks to Allah, he continued to pray that the end would be as auspicious as the
beginning: "Dear Lord!" he was saying. "Put love into the hearts of your believing
subjects concerning this subject of yours and his mother, and put love into their hearts
for the believers as well."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had a house built for his
nephew Jafar who had returned from Abyssinia near Masjid an-Nabawi, and gave him
the cloak of atlas that the Roman emperor had given him as present. 184
When he heard the way that the Abyssinian king Najashi had treated and welcomed
the Muslims, he took ablution and then opening up his hands he prayed to his Lord.
Meanwhile, they did not compromise the measures of security, and they continued to
send security forces to various parts of the Hijaz to make clear that Islam was now
sovereign in the peninsula. With this aim the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings
be upon him, sent a unit of thirty people led by Umar to Turaba, and a platoon led by
Abu Bakr to the Hawazin in the Najd area. Apart from that there had been campaigns
to regions such as the Banu Murra, Mayfa' a and Jinab aiming to institute peace
throughout Hijaz.
Dhatu 'r-Riqa
This campaign directed at where the Ghatafanis were was named "the campaign of
extraordinary states" because of the wondrous things that took place during the fifteen
days in which they had left Medina and came back. 185
As usual, a merchant had come to Medina and sold his wares to the Companions.
After speaking for a while he said:
"Although Anmar ibn Baghidh and the sons of the Banu Sa'd are in preparation to
make war against you, I see that you choose to stay silent."
This was an important piece of news indeed; the people mentioned had tried to
make use of similar situations to come and attack Medina, so as soon as this news
reached our noble Prophet, he left Abu Dharr as his deputy 186 and set off for the said
place with a force of four hundred men. It was a Saturday in the month of
Muharram. 187 He followed the Madiq route and when he reached the valley of Shukra
he camped there for a day. He then divided his Companions into different groups and
sent them around for reconnaissance. The honorable Companions who returned late in
the night said that they had not come across anyone but that they only saw certain
traces. Upon this information the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, gave the order to march once again; they were advancing towards their target

--- Sayfa 808 ---
with great speed. They took breaks when they got tired and when the heat grew too
much to bear, and once the conditions were favorable for walking they would start
again. Then they came to a date grove that was two days distance from Medina. This
was where the tribes that the merchant talked about lived. But there was no one around
except for women. As soon as they had received the news that our noble Prophet was
coming they had fled to the mountains and they were following the developments
from where they were hiding. There was a tense atmosphere; the people of Ghatafan
who had fled to the mountains thought that their end had come; they thought that they
would be eradicated for good. The Companions who were with the blessed Messenger
on the other hand wanted to make sure that these men who had taken to the mountains
would not mount raids on them from where they were. A silent wait had started. Then
it was time for the Noon Prayer and the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, started to prepare to pray with his Companions; the call for Prayer had been
called and the Companions had already lined up. The people ofGhatafan who saw this
thought that it was a great opportunity. They wanted to attack at once and cause great
loss in the Muslim ranks, but then some of them said: "Leave them to their own
devices for now; they will surely pray later as well-Prayer to them is dearer than
their children," and so they postponed their attack till the next Prayer. But there was
one thing they had not reckoned with. Meanwhile the Truthful Gabriel had come and
told the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, about their sly plan.
Upon that the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, would divide his
Companions into two and he would perform the Afternoon Prayer again with the
congregation, the way the Qur'an instructed him to. According to this the Companions
who were praying with him in the first cycle would stand up in the second cycle and
then leave and keep guard against the enemy attack, and at that time the other half of
the Companions would come and he would complete the second cycle with them.
Then, each group who had not been able to perform one cycle would perform that
cycle on their own and so they would prevent the enemy from getting their evil way.
Another light of hope had thus been put out for those who had fled to the mountains
and there would be no other opportunities for them to carry out their plans.
Our noble Prophet stayed in this region for about 10 days, and when it appeared that
the enemies would not come out, he gave the order to return to Medina; he sent Jual
ibn Suraqa as scout beforehand to Medina so that he may give them the good news of
their safety. Meanwhile, someone from the Companions had found a bird nest and
having taken one of the baby birds he was returning to the headquarters. The
Companions who felt that there was a change in their friend's behavior looked at what

--- Sayfa 809 ---
he had in his hands. The Messenger of Allah who looked upon all phenomena as sign
was also looking at him and was waiting for the moment to confer with the
Companions about the matter. Then they saw that a bird kept descending on this
Companion and then taking flight, these were the efforts of a mother bird trying to get
back her offspring from the hands of the Companion. They now understood what was
happening. Because of the affection she felt for her offspring, the mother bird was
attacking this man, trying to save it from him. It was a strange sight indeed. It was
risking its own life in order to reach its goal. Our noble Prophet asked: ''You think this
bird is acting strange, don't you? You have taken its offspring, and it risks its own life
because of the affection it has for it! Do not forget that Allah the Almighty is more
compassionate to His subjects than this bird is to its offspring."
They set off on the road again and they had approached Medina. They made way till
night fell and until they reached the place called Sirar and they camped there. The
blessed Messenger ordered the slaughter of a camel. They had not realized this but
someone from the enemy ranks had taken a decision not to return without having
spilled Muslim blood and had been closely following them from behind. It was a
windy night and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to
his Companions and asked: "And who will protect us tonight?"
The people who stood up were Abbad ibn Bishr and Ammar ibn Y asir: "We will
protect you, 0 Messenger of Allah," they said, and our noble Prophet authorized it and
then retired to rest. 188
The Umrah of Adjudication
It was the month of Dhu al-Qadah, the seventh year after the Hijra; the Truthful
Gabriel had come and brought the verse: ''A sacred month is retributive for another
sacred month, and the inviolate values demand retaliation" (al-Baqarah 2: 194). He
was reminding the blessed Messenger that it was time that the umrah, minor
pilgrimage, that he could not perform last year should be done. 189 The blessed
Messenger, as had been agreed a year ago, told his Companions to make preparations
for the minor pilgrimage. He said that except for those who had fallen martyr or died
of natural causes, no one from those who had been at Hudaybiya should be left
behind.
People whose means were not enough to go on this journey also wanted to join the
umrah. They did not have mounts, nor did they have enough provisions for the road.
"0 Messenger of Allah!" they were saying. "We swear by Allah that we do not
have anything to eat on the road, and we do not have anyone to help us either."

--- Sayfa 810 ---
They were genuinely asking from the heart but they really did not have the means,
there were also people who had come there from outside Medina! And so these people
were to be helped, and they had to be given the necessary aid to enable them to come
on this journey. That is why the blessed Messenger encouraged his Companions to
give alms; there was no doubt that those who gave for Allah would be compensated
manifold by Allah. As such they had the opportunity to transform worldly goods to a
treasure of the afterlife: "Give alms and do not draw away your hand, or else you will
perish!"
But this difficulty of means was not the problem of just a number of people but the
state of the honorable Companions in general and so they said: "0 Messenger of
Allah! How can we give when we have nothing?" "Give whatever you have in your
hands, even if it may be half a date," our noble Prophet informed them. The verse
brought by the Truthful Gabriel said:
(Just retaliation, as well as war or other defensive measures to maintain
your existence, are not possible without expense. So) spend in Allah's
cause (out of whatever you have) and do not ruin yourselves by your own
hands (by refraining from spending. Whatever you do,) do it in the best
way in the awareness that Allah sees it. Surely Allah loves those who are
devoted to doing good, aware that Allah is seeing them. (al-Baqarah
2:195)
It was clear that the real danger was not in running from one battlefield to another,
but to see people in need and not helping them-and thus ruining one's self. They
understood the matter much better now; one ought to not wait to become rich to be
able to give alms, it was about giving whatever one had regardless of how little. The
honorable Companions were giving whatever was within their means, and were trying
to help their brothers who wanted to visit the House of Allah.
Then the most anticipated journey from Medina to Ka'ba began-there were two
thousand people, not including the children. The blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, had left Abu Ruhm al-Ghifari as deputy in Medina. 190
The dream they had a year ago and the good news given to them on the way back to
Medina were about to be realized. They were going to go to the Ka'ba in safety and
they were going to show the whole world, after centuries, how one should really
worship there. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, dressed in
his ihram at the door of the Masjid an-Nabawi and started to speak the talbiya;
everyone who heard him started to say the same supplication. Medina was shaking to
the sounds of: "Labbayk Allahumma labbayk; labbayka la sharika laka labbayk.

--- Sayfa 811 ---
Inna 'l-hamda wa 'n-ni 'mata laka wa 'l-mulk la sharika lak."
They had taken sixty camels with them for sacrifice. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, had prepared his own animal himself and had put a mark
on its neck. He had appointed Najiya ibn Jundab as the keeper of the animals and sent
them, with five other people, to follow a route to graze in the greeneries on the way to
Mecca. Although the real aim of this journey was fulfilling the duty of servanthood to
Allah, our noble Prophet never left caution aside and told his Companions to take their
weapons with them just in case. He had even chosen a group of one hundred men,
appointing Muhammad ibn Maslama as their leader, and sent them on a
reconnaissance mission on horses. He had also appointed Bashir ibn Sa'd as the guard
over weapons such as swords, shields and spears and sent him with Muhammad ibn
Maslama. The Companions were watching the developments very closely. They had
not been able to understand what it was about: "0 Messenger of Allah," they said,
"they had placed the condition that when we enter Mecca we should only have
traveler's knife with us, and that even they should be in their sheaths, and yet you take
so many weapons with you. What is the reason for this?"
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, answered this question
by saying: "We will not enter the Haram with these weapons, but it may be advisable
that they are somewhere near! If they should attack us, then they will be easy to
reach."
It seemed that he still was not sure whether the Quraysh would keep their word.
Maybe he was trying to make his Companions understand that there was need for
caution at all times.
When Dhu'l-Hulayfa left and his friend Muhammad ibn Maslama reached the place
called Marr az-Zahran, they came upon a number of people from the Quraysh; they
were worried and they asked the reason for this commotion. Muhammad ibn Maslama
and his friends told them that the Messenger of Allah was coming behind them. When
especially they saw Bashir ibn Sa' d and the weapons he was in charge of, they were
quite frightened and they had no color left in their faces! They came running to Mecca
and let the leaders know of the situation. The Quraysh was gripped by anxiety.
"How can it be?" they asked, "We did not do anything to violate the terms of the
agreement, we are true to our pact! Then why are Muhammad and his friends coming
on to us with weapons in their hands?"
In order to understand the situation better, they formed a delegation under the
leadership of Mikraz ibn Hafs and sent them to the place called Yajaj. Meanwhile, the

--- Sayfa 812 ---
blessed Messenger had come there as well. They said: "We swear 0 Muhammad, that
you have never been known to lie, neither when you were a child, nor as a grown man,
and now you want to enter the Haram with these guns, and onto your own tribe! In the
agreement you made with your tribe you accepted to carry nothing other than a
traveler's knife and that they would be in their sheaths!"
An answer that would calm them down came from our noble Prophet: "I will not
come unto them with the guns!"
Mikraz and his friends breathed a sigh of relief. They turned to the blessed
Messenger and said: "That is what becomes you; for you have always been for your
goodness and loyalty," and then they made for Mecca. They were saying: "Verily,
Muhammad is loyal to the agreement he had made with you and he will not enter here
with weapons!"
Meanwhile, the Quraysh started to gossip about the Companions saying that they
were not able to walk from weakness and these statements even reached the ears of the
Companions themselves. They were saying that the Companions were very weak
because of having caught the Medina fever and were looking down on them. The
honorable Companions who heard this came to the presence of the Messenger of Allah
and said: "How would it be if we slaughter these camels of ours, eat their meat and
drink their soup so that we may be stronger when we go to them tomorrow?"
But this was not accepted by our noble Prophet. He first said: "Do not by any means
do so!" and then added: "Bring all the provisions you have to me," and said that surely
help would come and a new door would be opened to them.
Everyone brought whatever they had at their disposal; they put a cloth on the
ground and everything that was brought was put on this cloth. Before long a little
hillock had formed! Around two thousand people came and ate from this food and yet
the little hillock remained exactly the size as it was! It was obvious that they were the
recipients of Divine benevolence once again. Each one of them had eaten their full
without having to slaughter their camels.
The Blessed Messenger's Entrance to Mecca
It was the fourth day of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah. With the first light of morning,
the blessed Messenger had started from the place called Marr az-Zahran and now was
entering Mecca; after many years the Ka'ba would meets its twin for the first time! He
was now returning to this place he had left seven years ago, having made an
agreement with its people. The sacrificial animals were going in front, and he was

--- Sayfa 813 ---
following them from behind toward the Ka'ba. When they came to the place called
Dhi Tuwa the sounds of takbir rose, and they continued to recite the talbiya as well.
The people of Mecca were going to learn how to respect the Ka'ba from the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him. Abdullah ibn Rawaha held the
reigns of Qaswa and was walking in front of our noble Prophet, reciting poems that
spoke about the changes in circumstance from yesterday to today. Umar found this
strange and warned him as to the appropriateness of his behavior when the blessed
Messenger intervened: "I hear it too 0 Umar! Do not stop him," asking him to leave
Abdullah ibn Rawaha alone.
The word had its own power and the blessed Messenger pointed and said 'Let it be
0 Umar! It (speech) is more effective than the piercing of an arrow'. Then he turned
to Abdullah and told him to say the following as they entered Mecca: "He is Allah the
Almighty. There is no deity but He. He grants His subject victory, He makes his army
triumph and destroys the masses that stand in front of him."
From then on Abdullah ibn Rawaha was repeating these words that he had learnt
from the Messenger of Allah, and the Companions who heard him repeated what he
was saying as well. Mecca which was in mourning for so many years was now
enjoying the happiness like day of festivity. The Muhajirun were the ones who
rejoiced most, there was a memory awaiting them at every comer of Mecca. The
children ofthe sons of Hashim surrounded the blessed Messenger and were displaying
shows of emotion. They then came to the Ka'ba and met with our noble Prophet at the
same location. The mihrab and the minbar had reunited once again.
In case they would do some harm to him, the honorable Companions had formed a
wall of flesh around him, protecting him all the way. They were going to stay there for
three days according to the agreement and they were going to direct themselves to
Allah the Almighty the whole time!
The awareness of being a subject of Allah was at its zenith; the circumambulation
was about to start. Before saluting the Black Stone, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, took one end of his ihram under his arm and opened his right
shoulder, and let the other end rest on his left one. He also had advice for his
Companions: "May Allah have mercy on those who show themselves to be stronger,"
and thus he prayed and advised them to "Look in a way that will cause the Meccan' s
distress."
His aim was to show these polytheists who gossiped about them being weak how
mighty and strong they were. That is why he asked them, especially in the first three
rounds of their circumambulation, to start with very strong steps and put their chests

--- Sayfa 814 ---
forward-and this is exactly what he did to set an example. The sight of these people
whose numbers were above two thousand, and who had tears in their eyes and strength
in their steps was something incredible to watch-and this is exactly what the
polytheists did, having gone up to the mountains to observe. The sounds of takbir and
talbiya rose up to the mountains of Paran, echoed and came back, and the valley of
Bakkah was resonating with this incredible sound. All these said something to the
polytheists of Mecca, and they knew exactly what it meant. When it was time for the
Noon Prayer, our noble Prophet called out to Bilal and asked him to call out the call
for Prayer; Bilal would chant the Name of Allah for the first time in Ka'ba. This was
the greatest ideal for him, he had not had the opportunity to recite out the Name of
Allah as he willed here where he had lived a life of oppression and torture. He went up
to the top of the Ka'ba and called out at the top of his lungs the beautiful call for
Prayer.
The Attitude of the Quraysh
The polytheists who sat on the side of Mount Quayq that looked towards the Hijr side
to watch the Muslims circumambulate the Ka'ba were startled by this voice that they
were hearing for the first time, and were speaking of their surprise among themselves.
Ikrima, the son of Abu Jahl, said: "I am glad that Allah has been graceful to Abu'l-
Hakam and did not let him hear what this slave says," underlining the fact that his
father would not have been able to bear such a sight where Bilal, once an oppressed
slave, was standing as a free man atop the Ka'ba and professing "Allah is the
Greatest." Safwan ibn Umayya joined him: "Praise be to Allah, Who took my father
away before he could see this moment."
Khalid ibn Asid would join them too and say: "Thanks be to Allah who killed my
father before he could see these days in which Bilal goes on top of the Ka'ba and
shouts out to the people."
Suhayl ibn Amr and the group with him, on the other hand, had closed their ears
and covered their faces in order to not hear the sound of Bilal's call to Prayer-they
could not even bear hearing the word of Allah! They were incensed with hatred,
rancor and jealousy but there was nothing they could do. Everything was going
according to the articles of the agreement they had signed!
Each scene that their eyes caught and each sound that reached their ears proved that
there was a new kind of dynamism near the Ka'ba. They could not be the same men
about whom people had been gossiping days before, these men were supposed to have
been weak and barely able to walk. Either they had been told lies or there was another

--- Sayfa 815 ---
power that held the Messenger of Allah and the honorable Companions so upright!
They asked themselves: "Are these the men you said that had been weakened by the
fever?" and added "They are stronger than so and so, look, they do not seem to be
content just with walking, they are like gazelles springing!" and they were unable to
hide their surprise.
At one point the blessed Messenger, let them know that he wanted to enter the
Ka'ba; they were rather angry and said: "There was no such article in the agreement,"
and refused his request.
The blessed Messenger performed his Circumambulation Prayer and turned to the
hills of Safa and Marwa. He was going to go to and fro between them seven times and
at Marwa the sacrificial animals would be slaughtered. Now was the time to get out of
the ihram and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, called Hirash
ibn Umayya from among his Companions and had his blessed hair razed; and thus his
umrah had been completed.
As soon as the business of umrah was completed, the blessed Messenger ordered
two hundred of his Companions to go to their friends in Yajaj who were keeping
guard with the weapons, and to change guard so that they may be able to come to the
Ka'ba and perform their umrah as well. Thus everyone who had set off on the road
with the intention of umrah would have accomplished their duty.
Leaving Mecca
The numbered days were up. Our noble Prophet, who had given himself totally to
prayer since he had come there, had a tent erected for him in the place called Abtah
and in his remaining time he was coming to this place. On the morning ofthe fourth
day, Suhayl ibn Amr and Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza who were representing the Quraysh
came to the Messenger of Allah and said: "Your time is up, leave this place now."
At the time, our noble Prophet was speaking to a group of the Ansar, and turning to
the Quraysh he said: "Could you give me a couple of more days?"l2!
'We do not need your food," they said. "Leave us at once and go. Three days are
up, 0 Muhammad, for the love of Allah! In the agreement we made with you there is
no alternative to leaving our land at once!"
Sa' d ibn Ubada who saw that they were being rude to the blessed Messenger was
enraged and came to the fore to say: "May you be left without a mother! This is not
your land, neither is it your fathers! I swear that the Messenger of Allah will leave this
place only according to the terms of the agreement and not your extortions!"

--- Sayfa 816 ---
This outburst of Sa'd had brought a smile to the face of our noble Prophet. This was
the kind of sensitivity a person should show his leader. But the delicacy of the
situation was not of a nature to accommodate this and maybe our noble Prophet was
trying to charm the Quraysh with his kindness. That is why he would tum to Sa'd and
say: "0 Sa'd, do not hurt these people who visit us in our home!"
Upon that our noble Prophet called out to Abu Rafi and gave the order for the
journey back. Now was the time to leave Ka'ba. But this departure was a temporary
one that paved the way for future arrivals. The ice cold faces in Mecca were slowly
starting to melt, and now there were different questions in minds. This time Abu
Rafi's voice was echoing throughout the Ka'ba: "There should be no one left here
from the Muslims until evening!"
The Messenger of Allah who was leaving the Ka'ba once again against his own will
also left his heart there and mounted Qaswa. At that moment they heard the touching
voice of a young girl calling out: "Uncle! My dear uncle!" she said, her voice
trembling.
When the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned back to see
where the voice was coming from, he saw that it was Umama, the daughter ofHamza,
his uncle and nursing brother. It was indeed a sight that seared the heart; eyes were
full of tears and hearts were filled with compassion. The orphaned daughter of Hamza,
the lion of Uhud, the was running towards our noble Prophet! Blood was thicker than
water. From her very soul she was asking them not to leave her behind. Ali ran to her
and held her by the hand: "Why should we leave the daughter of our uncle orphaned
among the polytheists?" he called out to the blessed Messenger, and said that he
wanted to take her to Medina. He had no other intention than that and so the daughter
ofHamza, little Umama, would join the Medinajoumeyers. 192
The Messenger of Allah had left so he may bring our mother Maymuna and when
he came to Sarifhe stopped for a break and waited for them to come. When they also
came and there was no one left behind, the journey to Medina would resume. They
were traveling in the night most of the way. And so the dream of a year ago had
become reality.
The Death of Our Mother Zaynab
When they returned to Medina it was the month ofDhu al-Hijjah and the seventh year
after the Hijra. After their return, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, would continue to send out campaigns in order to maintain security. To that end
he would send a cavalry force of fifty under the leadership of Ibn Abi'l-Awja on

--- Sayfa 817 ---
reconnaissance missions, and Shuja' ibn Wahb and a platoon of twenty four men
would be sent in the direction ofHawazin, and he would send Ka'b ibn Umayr with a
unit of fifteen to the Banu Qada.
At the time our mother Zaynab, the blessed Messenger's daughter, was ill. After the
Badr war the blessed Messenger had freed Abu'l-As who had been taken prisoner on
the condition that he would send his daughter to Medina, and so our mother Zaynab
had come to her father's side. She had come but because of some fight that the
Meccans had provoked she had miscarried her child and after this incident she started
to suffer from a chronic illness. Only one year ago in the month of Muharram the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had married her back to her
husband Abu'l-As who had become a Muslim and their marriage was thus renewed.
But now she was leaving her friends in the world and was taking her place among her
loved ones who had already passed away. 193
The death of Zaynab saddened our noble Prophet a great deal. After his son who
had died at a very young age, he had to take leave of our mother Ruqayyah and now
our mother Zaynab. As memory of our mother Khadija, only Umm Kulthum and our
mother Fatima were left! To Umm Atiyya who had to wash and shroud her, he was
describing how everything should be done and he himself would lead her Funeral
Prayer.
Mecca's Beloved Ones
It was clear that the language of the heart and the manner of behavior left very deep
impressions on people. To represent the ideas that one adopts to the best degree was
much more effective than explaining it with words to others. The Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, was doing both. He made use of every opportunity
for his cause and he always wanted more. When he entered the grounds of Ka'ba and
started to worship Allah, there were those who were watching him with curious eyes
just as there were those who fled in order to not come in contact with him. He knew
all of them and he wanted to leave his doors open to all. And so he was sending
messages to people he had not been able to see that day and was trying to make them
think.
Khalid ibn Walid was one of those people. He must have been one of those people
that the Messenger of Allah wished would come and submit to the will of Allah,
because he asked his brother Walid ibn Walid who had already become Muslim and
come to Medina: "Where is Khalid ibn Walid?" 194
That day Walid would not be able to find his brother Khalid even though he looked

--- Sayfa 818 ---
for him everywhere. But he had to reach him at all cost because our noble Prophet had
a message for him, so he wrote his brother a letter. In his letter Walid was talking
about the meeting he had with our noble Prophet and that the blessed Messenger said,
concerning Khalid: "It is not possible for a man like him to know about Islam and to
not recognize it. I wish he had entered all his battles on the side of Muslims and
against polytheists! This would have been best for him; and so we would prefer him
above others and treat him like the apple of our eye."
He finished his letter with: "0 my brother! Make use of these opportunities that
come to you in the most perfect time, and thus compensate for the opportunities that
you have missed!"
Khalid ibn Walid had made his decision; returning from the wars he fought against
the Messenger of Allah he always had a feeling of sourness inside which he could not
give any meaning to. Since Hudaybiya he had been thinking deep and hard. Now he
was looking for a Companion to pour his heart out-if he spoke about it to Abu
Sufyan, Ikrima or Safwan ibn Umayya, he would not get a favorable response. But he
was adamant. After a long period of hesitation he tried to speak of his thoughts to
Uthman ibn Talha. When he saw that he too was ready to meet the blessed Messenger
and embrace the faith, they made plans to go and set off on the road the next day.
When they came to the place called Hadda, they ran into Amr ibn al-As:
'Welcome," he was saying to them.
"And you too," they replied and asked,
'Where is it that you are going?"
Amr would choose to answer the question with question: "And where is it that you
are going?"
There was no need to prolong it and they replied: "To enter Islam and follow
Muhammad."
Amr ibn al-As said: "I am like you, too."
Then the long-standing friends directed their quick steps to Medina. They stopped
at a place near Medina in order to rest and change their clothes; they wanted to go to
the presence of our noble Prophet in the best of appearances!
Meanwhile the blessed Messenger had already received the news of their coming,
and turning to his Companions, he said: "Mecca is sending its beloved ones to your
lap!"
Walid was too happy for words to hear his brother's coming-his brother whom he
had not been able to find in Mecca. He wanted to go out and meet him on the way. It

--- Sayfa 819 ---
was true, Khalid ibn Walid was really coming! He said: "Make haste, the Messenger
of Allah has received the news of your coming and is very happy, he is waiting for
you."
They too were excited and they started to speed walk. When they came to the
presence of the Messenger of mercy, there was no way to describe the smile on his
face-his radiant face was shining bright like the sun!
First Khalid saluted our noble Prophet; the blessed Messenger was so warm that
Khalid could feel his response to his salutation deep in his heart. His arms open and
inviting, the warmth in his smile and the love in his heart-with all this the blessed
Messenger had conquered them. His arms opened wide were inviting him, his smile so
warm was embracing him, his love so deep was melting him. All he could say was: "I
swear that there is no deity but Allah and that you are His Messenger." The blessed
Messenger who was happy at the arrival of a hero who had found his place replied:
"Thanks be to Him who has given you guidance. I saw great reason in you and I was
hoping that one day this reason would carry itself to goodness!"
Khalid realized that now after all those years he felt like the real Khalid; he was met
with compliment over compliment and he was ruing the time he had wasted before
this moment.
"0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "As you can see and know I have acted against
you and against Truth at every tum. I ask you to pray for me to Allah that He may
forgive me!"
Amr ibn al-As and Uthman ibn Talha were experiencing the same emotions.
Amr ibn al-As reached out for the hand of the blessed Messenger, but then took it
away for a while. The blessed Messenger would ask the reason why he withdrew his
hand: "I have conditions," said Amr ibn al-As. Our noble Prophet asked: "What are
they?"
The great man had lowered his head-he was being crushed under the faults of his
previous life: "Being forgiven."
Our noble Prophet held Amr's hands inside his own hands and said: "Islam cleanses
the faults one has made before becoming a Muslim."
Now everyone could see that Hudaybiya had been a conquest; it was true that they
had not been able to enter Mecca that day but now hearts had been opened to Islam
and even the most eminent men were directing themselves towards Medina. From then
on this process would continue at great speed.

--- Sayfa 820 ---
Character Education and the Point Reached
Since the meeting at Hira, each day the Truthful Gabriel came for different reasons
and brought Allah's messages so that humanity could reach the most exalted state
possible. They had entered this path in order for the heart and the soul to be perfected
and this group that was the first addressees of the blessed Messenger was meant to be
a model for the believers to come. Each new message meant a new dynamic for them,
every time a new message came it found its reflection in society and was transformed
into a lived rule. The Truthful Gabriel had come again and was reminding the blessed
Messenger:
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; whether you
reveal what is within yourselves (of intentions, plans) or keep it secret,
Allah will call you to account for it. He forgives whom He wills (either
from His grace or His grace responding to the repentance of the sinful),
and He punishes whom He wills (as a requirement of His justice). Allah
has full power over everything. (al-Baqarah 2:284)
Just like all the new decrees that came, this message too made ripples throughout
Medina, causing a new stir within the Companions. But the excitement now was
different; for whoever heard the verse lost color and felt faint. For Allah the Almighty
was making known that He would hold accounts of not only what a person did
through his acts, but also the feelings that coursed through hearts and minds!
Before long they came in droves to the Masjid an-Nabawi. They went to a comer
and contemplated themselves, and with their pale faces and faint bodies they asked:
"0 Messenger of Allah! We have been asked to do things like Prayer, fasting, striving
in the way of Allah and giving alms-things we can manage easily. But today such a
verse has come that we do not think we will be able to live up to it."
This was not an objection to the verse that came, rather it was the fervor to live
according to the meaning inherent in the Divine message, hence the reason that they
had run to the merciful arms of the blessed Messenger to seek refuge. The Messenger
of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, knew very well the inner worlds of these
people that he had educated by his side; but his Ummah did not consist solely of those
who had run to the Masjid but all believers till the end of time who were,
metaphorically speaking, going to tum the whole world into a masjid. That is why in
the first instance he spoke to them and said: "Do you mean to say, like the people of
the book said before you, 'We have heard but we rebel!' No! What falls upon you is to
say 'We have heard and we obey unconditionally! Graceful Lord! We ask and beg of
You to forgive us at all events, for there is no door to tum to except for You, and to

--- Sayfa 821 ---
You we will return!"'
They were not of a different opinion; they only feared that they may not be able to
master their hearts and were worried that they may not be able act on Allah's orders as
required. It was by no means an act of rebelliousness. They were of course going to
submit to their Lord's desire. Their anxiety was not in not wanting to submit to Divine
order, but the anxiety of failing to do so! They had spoken of their worry to the
Messenger of mercy and they were waiting for him to speak his judgment. He had
advised them absolute obedience to Divine orders. It could not have been otherwise
and with this directive of the blessed Messenger, the Masjid an-Nabawi started to
tremble, at each comer resonated the words: "We have heard and we obey."
This also showed the quality of the Ummah that he had educated. Those who feared
they may not be able to comply with the command had spoken of their worries, and
when they realized that there was no alternative to obedience, they had shown sincere
submission. This was an approach that would make the Merciful and the
Compassionate Allah happy. There was an objective to test the character of the
believers and the Companions had shown that they had reached that level. Before long
the Truthful Gabriel came to the Messenger of Allah and brought the following verses:
The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his
Lord, and so do the believers; each one believes in Allah, and His angels,
and His Books, and His Messengers: "We make no distinction between
any of His Messengers (in believing in them)." And they say: "We have
heard (the call to faith in Allah) and (unlike some of the people of Moses)
obeyed. Our Lord, grant us Your forgiveness, and to You is the
homecoming." (0 believers, if you are worried that Allah will take every
soul to account even for what the soul keeps within it of intentions and
plans, know that) Allah burdens no soul except within its capacity: in its
favor is whatever (good) it earns, and against it whatever (evil) it merits.
(So, pray thus to your Lord:) "Our Lord, take us not to task if we forget or
make mistake. Our Lord, lay not on us a burden such as You laid on those
gone before us. Our Lord, impose not on us what we do not have the
power to bear. And overlook our faults, and forgive us, and have mercy
upon us. You are our Guardian and Owner (to Whom We entrust our
affairs and on Whom we rely) so help us and grant us victory against the
disbelieving people!" (al-Baqarah 2:285-286)
All this showed the kind of character that the honorable Companions had been able
to cultivate; the people who would carry Allah's name and the standard of the

--- Sayfa 822 ---
Messenger of Allah were these very people who had reached such character! When
this was the quality, few would be more than more, and many of those who considered
themselves to be greater would be erased in the face of such character! Muta was one
of the scenes that proved this to be true!
Muta
It was the Jamazi al-awwal month of the eighth year of the Hijra; the conditions of
peace were being put to best use and the developments were closely watched in the
name of communicating the message of Islam. To that end our noble Prophet sent
another letter to the governor of Basra with Harith ibn Umayr.
But something that they had not witnessed before would happen that day and
Harith, the envoy of the blessed Messenger, would be brutally killed by Shurahbil as
he was passing a place called Balka. After cutting his way, Shurahbil had tied Harith
down and when he found out that he was the envoy of the Messenger of Allah, he had
murdered him. This was a crime that could not be forgiven and meant an open
declaration for war. Because even under the harshest circumstances envoys were
meant to be under protection. When the news that Harith was murdered reached the
blessed Messenger, he was very sad and he encouraged his Companions to fight
against Shurahbil who could not even tolerate an envoy going his way, for he was
there to put an end to such acts of banditry and those who had made this a profession
had to be stopped. The direction they were about to go was under Byzantine rule and
so they were handling the matter very carefully and were thinking of every
eventuality.
Soon there was an army of three thousand people. Such a big army had been
gathered only in the Trench before. It seemed as if the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, could sense what was going to happen. He had put Zayd ibn
Harith, his freed slave, at the head of this army by handing him the white standard. He
told him to go all the way to where Harith ibn Umayr was murdered and invite the
people there to Islam. Should they not accept it, then he told him to trust in Allah and
to do what they had to do to reach the result. With the appointment of his slave, the
blessed Messenger was also uprooting certain understandings, showing that a slave
could indeed be a commander, and that in the sight of Allah everyone was equal. He
knew that this raid would not end with Zayd and so he said: "If Zayd should fall
martyr, then Jafar ibn Abi Talib should be commander, and should Jafar fall martyr,
Abdullah ibn Rawaha should be the commander," letting them know the gravity of the
situation. Many of the Companions had already understood from his words that the

--- Sayfa 823 ---
said commanders would fall martyr one by one and their farewells with these friends
became more emotional than usual.
As he saw his army on its way, the Messenger of mercy gave the following advice
which still echoes in our ears today: "Fight in the Name of Allah, fight against those
who deny Allah and rebel against Him in the way of Allah! But do not wrong anyone!
Do not oppress anyone forgetting your covenant! Do not kill women and children, the
old, or people who have devoted themselves to prayer in the temple! Do not cut a
single tree, nor destroy a single date grove! Do not bum the buildings!"
The blessed Messenger would see them on their way till the hills of W ada, and
would gaze after them for a very long while. On their way they would receive the
news that Heraclius had prepared an army of one hundred thousand, and although they
hesitated for a moment about letting the Messenger of Allah know about this, they
decided to continue on their way even though certain death may be awaiting them.
After a two-day stopover at Ma'an they continued on their way. In the place called
Masharif the two armies met. There was a sea of soldiers in front of them that seemed
to have no end. War seemed inevitable. The army of Zayd decided to camp at the
place called Muta and prepared for war there! The right wing was commandeered by
Qutba ibn Qatada, and the left by Ubada ibn Malik.
With the first rays of sun the next day, swords had been drawn in Muta and the
three thousand strong army of faith was confronting the two-hundred thousand strong
army of the Byzantines. This was not a war of equal forces; if the two-hundred
thousand strong army had just walked on straight to trample the army of Islam, they
would be victors. But that is not how things happened. In this war that lasted seven
days, just as the blessed Messenger was saying, Zayd, Jafar and Abdullah all fell
martyr. Thabit ibn Arqam took the standard and after a long search he gave it to
Khalid ibn Walid.
Muta from Medina
On the other hand the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was in
Medina giving news about the stages of the war. It was as if there was a screen in front
of him and the war was being projected on it for him to watch. Tears were streaming
down his radiant face, his blessed beard was wet from crying: "Zayd took the standard
and became a martyr. Then Jafar took it and became a martyr. Then Ibn Rawaha took
it and became a martyr. Now a sword of Allah's swords has taken it! Now the real war
has started and Allah the Almighty has given us an opening through him."

--- Sayfa 824 ---
After saying these words he spoke of the gifts that Allah was preparing for the
martyrs in Paradise. Meanwhile Ya'la ibn Umayya had come to Medina and wanted to
give the news of Muta to the Messenger of Allah. Our noble Prophet said: "You can
tell it to me if you like, or I can tell it to you if you like."
Ya'la was surprised, there had been no opportunity for another person to come and
tell the blessed Messenger what had happened before him. But it was clear that angel
Gabriel had come again and had brought the news of Muta to the blessed Messenger
before everyone else: "0 Messenger of Allah, you tell me!"
Upon that our noble Prophet started to tell what had happened in Muta, going
through all the phases with all the details. As Ya'la listened, his eyes bulged-it was
not less but more than what he knew!
"I swear by He who has sent you with the true word that you have told me what the
fighters have experienced to the finest details; had I given their news, I could only
have done so much!"
After his surprise the blessed Messenger would say the following by way of thanks:
"Allah the Almighty has lifted distances for me and I saw the battlefield with my own
eyes!"
Then the blessed Messenger went to the house of Jafar whom he had been able to
see only after fifteen years of separation. He stroked the heads of the orphans and
embraced them with affection. Asma hint Umays was worried to see this and asked:
"0 Messenger of Allah! May my mother and father perish in your way; are you
looking at my sons as if they are orphans and crying? Have you received bad news
from Jafar and his friends?"
''Yes," said our beloved Prophet. "They became martyr today!"
Hearing this she started to cry: "Woe is me! My Jafar!" and the blessed Messenger
turned to Asma and advised her in the following way: "0 Asma! Do not let unseemly
things come out of your mouth and do not beat yourself up!"
Our noble Prophet, who took Jafar's children on his lap and stroked their innocent
heads, was also crying and the tears had wet his beard-the sad Messenger was even
more sad than ever before. Then he lifted up his hands and prayed: "Dear Lord! There
is no doubt that Jafar has attained the most beautiful good deed. Then reward him with
the gifts that You reward Your good subjects."
Our beloved Prophet stayed in Jafar's house for a while and then left it to go to the
home of his daughter Fatima. Meanwhile she too had received the news and was
crying: "My dear uncle."

--- Sayfa 825 ---
First he said to her: "If you are to cry, then cry for the likes of Jafar," praising Jafar
and then continued: "Do not neglect to cook for the family of Jafar; today they are
busy with their own troubles and the head of the family that they have lost! Cook for
them!" he said.
This was a practice that would become a tradition, and they cooked food for the
martyrs of Muta for three days. After three days had passed the Messenger of Allah
came to the house of Jafar once again and he forbid them to cry anymore and prayed
prayers of bounty and goodness for those who remained. Later, he declared that he
was taking the care of the children of Jafar ibn Abi Talib upon himself and consoled
their mother Asma and assured her that she did not need to worry about the future of
her children. The blessed Messenger showed the same sensitivity for the other martyrs
as well, and he would not be able stop himself from crying when he saw the sad state
of the young daughter of Zayd. When the Companions asked him why he was crying,
he answered: "This is the longing of the lover for the beloved."
The Sword of Allah
Khalid, who was now commander of the Muslim army, had continued to fight without
breaking the course of the war and had left his entire prowess to the dark of the
evening. Such a numerous army had not been able to defeat an army of three thousand
in five full days-an enemy that should have been like a handful to them! This was
because in the evening Khalid had deployed a completely new tactic in the
organization of the army. The ones who had been fighting in the front were now
pulled to the back, the ones on the right exchanged with the ones on the left-and thus
this gave the impression that fresh troops had been sent. The next morning when the
enemy formed their lines, they could understand the rattle they had been hearing
during the night. A fresh new force had been added to the ranks of the Muslim army,
for the men they had in front of them were different to the men they had been fighting
for the last six days. They were experiencing a great shock; how could this army that
had not been able to deal with three thousand soldiers deal with an army that had fresh
troops? They seemed to have accepted defeat even before fighting that day and Khalid
wanted to make use of this situation. He was trying to widen the distance between the
enemy that had retreated and his troops. The Byzantine army saw this and thought it
was a new tactic on the part of Khalid. They conjectured that should they attack, they
would be encircled by the Muslim army and suffer great losses. This situation
continued till evening of that day and it meant the end of battle for both sides. For the
Byzantines did not want to appear weak by losing even more men to a small army, so

--- Sayfa 826 ---
they started to retreat! This had been Khalid's intention from the start. He wanted to
bring back to Medina what the Messenger of Allah had entrusted to him. In this war
that they had fought for seven days-chest to chest-they had given twelve martyrs
including three commanders-this was the sign of true heroism! They had fought
against a state that had a say in the world affairs of the day, and in a confrontation
where there was no balance of power, they had only suffered twelve losses. This could
not be explained with anything other than Divine help and all tribes that heard of this
would regard the army of the Messenger of Allah in another light. This also meant the
first hole to be opened in the Byzantine walls.
There had been some tribes that had posed problems to the Muslim army on the
way and shed blood. Khalid decided to pay them a visit and teach them all a lesson on
his way back to Medina.
The Reception in Medina
Our noble Prophet would call out to his Companions: "Gather together to go and meet
your brothers," and they would all go out of Medina, children and all, to welcome
them. He had taken the children of Jafar on the back of his own mount and came all
the way to the place called Juruf. The heroes of Muta were now standing in front of
him! Allah the Almighty had helped them in all their helplessness; they had returned
without being defeated. But not all was aware of this fact and some of the Companions
were saying: ''You have abandoned the battle?" These were bitter words that hurt and
so they asked: "0 Messenger of Allah! Have we abandoned the battle? Are we
runaways?"
They wanted to know for certain what their status was.
''No, quite the contrary, you are those who get up and prepare to fight the enemy
again," said the blessed Messenger and set their minds at rest. Then he turned to his
Companions and said: "They are soldiers who did not run away from fighting in the
way of Allah but are, by the will of Allah, those who have retreated ready to run to the
front again."
These were words that settled the matter and some of the soldiers who had felt the
need to hide themselves because of censure were breathing a sigh of relief to hear that
they had not committed an error in the eyes of Allah and His Messenger.

--- Sayfa 827 ---
183 The blessed Messenger had asked Abu SufYan to send leather to him. This may have been a
measure against their pride preventing them from accepting the aid. Abu SufYan who received the
aid complied with this request of the noble Messenger and would send the requested leather to
Medina.
184 When he saw Jafar wear the cloak the next day, he said: "I did not give it to you so that you may
wear it" and then he would tell him to send it to Najashi. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/229
(13424); Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 7/298.
185 During this campaign several miracles had taken place such as the trees guarding the blessed
Messenger and returning to their old state after he had seen to his need; the blessed Messenger
picking up two branches from a tree and putting them at the head of a grave saying that these
would lessen the grave torment that the dead person was going through, an epileptic child being
cured with the prayer of the blessed Messenger, Gavras who had tried to assassinate the blessed
Messenger becoming Muslim, a camel that complained about its master being calmed down by
the blessed Messenger; the news of the whereabouts of Jabir's camel which had been lost; having
much bounty of food and drink, and the whole army having its fill from a single bucket of water;
three ostrich eggs found on the way being enough food for the whole army; and a huge fish
washing up on the shore at a moment when they were very hungry. See Haysami, Majmau 'z-
Zawaid, 9/8; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51175.
186 It is also reported that the Companion he left as deputy was Uthman. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah,
41157; Waqidi,Maghazi, 118.
187 There are also reports that this number was seven hundred or eight hundred. See Waqidi,
Maghazi, 11396; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51175.
188 During this watch several arrows would strike Abbad ibn Bishr, but in order not to adulterate the
pleasure he was having from reciting the Surah al-Kahf in his prayer, he would not alert his friend
Ammar to this fact. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 113 96; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/180.
189 This umrah would be called Qadha Umrah, and because it had led to the agreement in the
previous attempt, it was also called Qadhiyya, or because it was to take the place of the umrah
they could not do it was called Qisas, and because it had led to peace it was also called Sulh. See
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51196.
190 It is also reported that this Companion was Uwayf ibn Adbat or Abu Dharr al-Ghifari. See Ibn
Hisham, Sirah, 5117; Balazuri, Ansabu '/-Ashraf, 11155.
l2l Our mother Maymuna was the sister of Ummu'l-Fadl the wife of Abbas and Jafar's wife Asma
bint Umays and with the death of her husband had been left a widow. Abbas, the blessed
Messenger's uncle, who saw that she was living under very difficult circumstances in Mecca
referred the matter to the Messenger of Allah and told him that he had to marry her. Making use
of being in Mecca, our noble Prophet married our mother Maymuna. He wanted the marriage to
be an occasion on which he could invite the Meccans to a wedding dinner and win their hearts.
See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 5/20; Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 41117; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad,
111208.
192 When they came to Medina there would be a disagreement concerning Umama and the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, would resolve this conflict. After praising the virtues
of Zayd, Ali and Jafar, pointing to the fact that Umama's aunt was married to Jafar, said that it
would be most appropriate for her to stay with Jafar. See Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8/159; Waqidi,
Maghazi, 1/739; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 7/706.
193 For more information on our mother Zaynab see En Ondekiler, p. 90.
194 Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 5/423, 424

--- Sayfa 828 ---
VIOLATION OF THE AGREEMENT AND
THE GOOD NEWS OF CONQUEST
T
wenty-two months had passed since the agreement of Hudaybiya, and the
Meccans had kept to their side of the bargain. The calendars were showing
the month of Shahan, the eighth year of the Hijra. In the first hours of the
morning our noble Prophet said to our mother Aisha who was with him: "0 Aisha,
something important has happened in the direction ofHuza'a."
Our mother Aisha was distressed to hear such news all of a sudden: "0 Messenger
of Allah," she said. "Do you think that the Quraysh will have the courage to violate
the terms of the agreement although swords have cut their limbs?"
She was speaking the truth; if they had the slightest reason, they would not create
problems for nothing and incite a force they had no power to fight against. But the
Quraysh was bereft of even that much reason and they had started to act without really
considering the consequences. There was also the dimension of fate to the matter and
our noble Prophet drew attention to that and said to our mother Aisha: "The Quraysh
have violated the agreement because of something Allah wants to happen!"
Our mother Aisha's curiosity continued: "0 Messenger of Allah! Will the results be
favorable?"
As stated in the verse that was revealed on the occasion of lfq, things that could
seem to be troublesome could have favorable outcomes, and Aisha was asking this
question to our noble Prophet particularly for this reason. The answer was not late in
coming: "Yes, it will be favorable! " 195
Three days had passed; the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him,
had led the Morning Prayer when Amr ibn Salim, from the Huza'a, came to him with
forty horsemen by his side. He was trying to let them know what had happened to
them by reciting a poem at the Masjid an-Nabawi, asking for help from the Messenger
of Allah. It appeared that the Quraysh had come together with the Banu Bakr, the
Banu Nufasa and Watir and had attacked the Huza'a who had led a peaceful and quiet

--- Sayfa 829 ---
life since Hudaybiya and killed twenty-three people, most of them women, children
and old men. Safwan ibn Umayya, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl, Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza,
Shayba ibn Uthman and Mikraz ibn Hafs had taken part in this cold blooded raid. 196
They had been so blinded by hatred that the Huza' a people, who had sought refuge
in the Haram area, had not been spared their wrath! They had taken matters so far that
some of them had to raise objections.
Those who had a little bit of humanity left in them were now saying out loud that
they did not approve of what was happening.
When morning came and the gravity of what had happened came to light, the
Quraysh regretted what they had done-yes, this looked like a clear violation of the
Hudaybiya Agreement. Now the die had been cast. They were making impossible
suggestions to save themselves or to justify themselves.
The Blessed Messenger's Attitude
On the other hand the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, listened
to what was being said: "You will be helped, 0 Amr ibn Salim," and comforted the
leader ofHuza'a.
But he was very sad and angry-what conscience could rest calm after twenty-three
people had been brutally murdered in the night, most of them being children, women
and the elderly? And especially if the attackers were people who had promised "we
will not make war with you or your allies for ten years?" It seemed that the Quraysh
would not stop acting impulsive. At that moment a cloud appeared in the sky and there
was very loud thunder. The Messenger of Allah, who did not take much account of
statements made other than the revelations, would know how to listen to the message
given to him by way of phenomena and said: "This cloud is giving me the good news
of the Banu Ka'b's victory."
Since there was no place for coincidence in the universe, this had to be a sign of
Divine wrath.
The blessed Messenger, who had from the very beginning tried to institute peace in
Hijaz, was sending campaigns to other places in order to stop acts of banditry-and
here was the Quraysh committing a despicable crime in Mecca-something he had not
been expecting: "I will help those people; if I do not help the Banu Ka'b today, Allah
will not help me. I swear by He who holds my life in His hands I will protect them as I
protect myself, my family and my house," thus showing his determined state of mind
to all.

--- Sayfa 830 ---
They had to lend a helping hand to these people who had sought their help, but they
first wanted to be sure about the identity of the people who had attacked them. The
blessed Messenger asked Amr ibn Salim and his friends: "Who do you suspect may
have done this thing?"
"the Banu Bakr," they answered.
"All of them?"
''No, particularly the leader of the Banu Nufasa, Nawfal ibn Muawiya."
Then he made the following comment: "They are a branch of the Banu Bakr. Now I
will send a man to Mecca and I will ask them about this incident and will give them
three options to choose from."
He then called a Companion named Damra to his side and asked him to give the
matter some consideration-through a different perspective .197
Damra, who received the blessed Messenger's order, went straight to Mecca and
spoke to the Quraysh, but the last word he would get was: "We tell him that we are
rescinding our agreement with him," and thus the Quraysh would be the side who
preferred war.
Quraysh 's Regret
Although the Quraysh denied committing the act, they were still worried and were
trying to find a way to get out of this situation with minimal losses. In order to voice
their worries, Harith went to Abu Sufyan.
Ibn Hisham and Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia would warn their leader in the following
manner: "This is a wrong that you have to make right-if you do not correct this error
and find another ground for peace, then Muhammad will most certainly come here
with his Companions and will break our backs."
Abu Sufyan who had been listening to them started to think deeply: "This business
is something that I am neither totally involved in nor totally out of."
Meanwhile the leaders ofthe Quraysh had come to his side. He was experiencing a
very critical moment as leader, and turning to the Meccans he started to say the: "This
is not a responsibility that you can lay solely on me! I have not been consulted on this
matter, I did not know about it, and I did not authorize it. I swear by Allah that if my
feelings are not misleading me Muhammad will surely declare war on us; and I fear
my feelings have never been wrong. I do not see any option other than going to
Muhammad and asking him to renew and extend the agreement."
More and more people among the Quraysh were regretful. These people who, till

--- Sayfa 831 ---
yesterday, had not thought of an option other than defiance were now realizing the
gravity of the issue and were becoming more timid.
''You speak the truth!" they were saying.
And at last they decided to send Abu Sufyan to Medina to speak to the Messenger
of Allah and extend the period of the agreement. Before long, Abu Sufyan was on the
road to Medina with his slave! 198
On the other hand our noble Messenger had turned to his Companions in Medina
and said: "Abu Sufyan is about to come to you with the intention of renewing the
agreement and extending its period, but he will return angry and empty handed,"
sharing with the people around him what was happening in Mecca.
This was a very critical moment. Any piece of news that would reach either party
would be very important, and this was the news that our noble Prophet was giving to
his Companions.
Abu Sufyan in Medina
Abu Sufyan who set out on the road again was now in Medina; he was going to ask for
a favor from the people he had been resisting till yesterday, people against whose lives
he had been setting traps. He meant to normalize relations and in order to do that he
first tried to use kinship bonds; he had come to his daughter, our mother Umm Habiba,
and when he tried to sit on the seat that belonged to the blessed Messenger he was
faced with a reaction he did not expect-our mother Umm Habiba pulled the seat of
the Messenger of Allah from under her father and would not let him sit on it. She was
his own daughter, and yet she preferred our noble Prophet over him. Abu Sufyan
turned to her in wonderment and said: "My dear daughter, you do not think me worthy
ofthis cushion?"
The reply that our mother Umm Habiba gave was one that would increase his
bewilderment: "I do not think you are worthy of that cushion because that is the
cushion that the Messenger of Allah sits on. You are a polytheist and an unclean man!
That is why I did not want you to sit on the Messenger of Allah's cushion."
Abu Sufyan was still in shock.
"My dear girl," he said, "I see bad things have happened to you after me!"
"On the contrary," said our mother Umm Habiba. "Allah the Almighty has honored
me with Islam. And you my dear father, you stand in prayer and devotion to a piece of
stone that does not hear or see!"
It seemed that the door of his daughter's house was closed to Abu Sufyan. He now

--- Sayfa 832 ---
had to go to the blessed Messenger. He was in the Masjid. He approached him and
called: "0 Muhammad, I was not present at the Hudaybiya Agreement, now come and
renew that agreement and extend its period."
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, asked in response to his
hurried offer of renewing the agreement: "Is that really why you have come here, 0
Abu Sufyan?"
''Yes," he answered.
Our noble Prophet came straight to the point: "Or is it that you have committed
some act before this?" trying to remind him of what had happened.
"Heaven forbid," said Abu Sufyan, "we still abide by the agreement we have signed
at Hudaybiya-we will not change it or violate it."
He was skirting the issue and was not saying anything more. He acted as if he had
not been the one who had listened to the sorrows of the Huza' a and censured his
friends for their behavior, as if it wasn't he who assessed the situation with his friends
in Mecca, and then sent Damra to Medina and who had spoken of his worries
concerning the violation of the agreement and who had come to Medina with the
purpose of consolidating the violated agreement! He found it in himself to say that
they were still abiding by the Hudaybiya Agreement although they had violated it!
Our noble Prophet turned to him and said: "It is us who still abide by the Hudaybiya
agreement; we have not changed it, nor have we violated it!"
He did not like the attitude of Abu Sufyan who kept saying the same things, who
kept speaking about the Hudaybiya Agreement and yet did not say a thing about what
they had done to the people of Huza' a. In order to not prolong the conversation, the
blessed Messenger left the place. The doors were being closed on Abu Sufyan, the
powerful leader of the Meccans. He ran immediately to Abu Bakr; he was saying
similar things to him and asking him to convince the blessed Messenger. But this door
was closed as well. That day Abu Sufyan would go to all the leading men of the Ansar
and the Muhajirun including Umar, Uthman, Ali, Sa' d ibn Ubada, and he would not be
able to convince any ofthem. 199
And he came to Ali once again: "0 Abu Hasan," he was saying. I see that I will not
be able to manage this business; things are getting more and more difficult! Show me
a way out!"
"I do not know of a formula that can help you today," started Ali. Then he asked
him whether or not he was the master of the Banu Kinana.
''Yes, I am their lord," Abu Sufyan was saying. Then he advised him the following:

--- Sayfa 833 ---
"Then get up and say to the people that the Banu Kinana is now under your protection
and then return to your land!"
"Do you think this will really benefit me?" asked Abu Sufyan.
He was desperate but he had no other option; he had fallen into a stormy sea and
was ready to hold on even to a snake for safety! Ali was well aware of this: ''No," he
answered. "But I do not think there can be another solution for you!"
Abu Sufyan, who had challenged the Muslims at Uhud and requested to meet again
at Badr, who had hired people to have our noble Prophet murdered, who had gathered
despicable men at the Trench to attack the blessed Messenger came to the Masjid with
one last hope; and with the effort of a man who was making his last move, he said: "0
people! I will have you know that in order that I may mediate between people, I have
taken them under my custody. I do not think anyone will break the promise that I have
made on this matter."
Then he went to the Messenger of Allah for one last time: "0 Muhammad," he was
saying. "I have taken them under my custody in order to secure peace between
people!"
He had come, but once again he was not speaking exactly what was inside him. He
was only thinking of the Quraysh and wanted to protect himself from what may
happen. The fact that he was saying these words today did not mean that he would be
behind his words tomorrow. It was difficult to take seriously the words of someone
had made it a habit of turning back on his word. And even if Abu Sufyan should keep
his word, there was another point of view altogether in Mecca. That is why the blessed
Messenger turned to him and said: "It is only you who are saying these, 0 Abu
Hanzala."
And this was the last thing the blessed Messenger had to say to him.
Abu Sufyan was bent in two with the apprehension of what could happen after this.
There was nothing he could do except to return to Mecca. 200
Commanding Information and the Blessed
Messenger's Consultations
A little time after Abu Sufyan's departure, the blessed Messenger turned to our mother
Aisha and said: "Make preparations for the road but keep it secret. "201
This was a critical turning point and a process which had to be followed through
delicately-there was no room for fault. He was going to go to Mecca which Allah
had promised him, but he did not want there to be any bloodshed; he planned to

--- Sayfa 834 ---
surprise them and catch them unawares. That is why he would hold all the routes and
he would see to it that everything that happened in Medina would not be known in
Mecca. Intelligence was the most important thing in war; in the most unpreventable
wars a little piece of news could change the whole course of hostilities and make the
impossible possible. And so they had to be very careful about the dissemination of
news until he entered Mecca.
For this reason he placed men at all the important passages and gave the duty of the
control of these passages to Umar. Umar was going around to the guards and telling
them to question anyone who traveled on this route and not to let anyone pass before
they understood what the traveler's purpose was; and afterwards their job was to
report this back to the Messenger of Allah. And so having taken his precautions as far
as earthly reasons and means went, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, turned to the Maker of Causes and prayed in the following way: "Dear
Lord! Tie the eyes and ears of the Quraysh so that they may see us only when they
least expect it. That they may realize that we have come upon them only when they
see us standing in front of them!"
Then one day he exited his home of happiness and sat in front of his door. At times
when he did this no one would approach him unless he called for them. He was
thoughtful and said: "Call Abu Bakr to me!"
It was clear that he wanted to discuss certain things with him. Before long Abu Bakr
came and they had a silent and long meeting. Then he commanded his loyal friend to
sit on his right side. This time he called out: "Call me Umar." He too came at once,
and sitting next to Abu Bakr, Umar also had a long conversation with him. Umar was
a person whose feelings would be reflected in his mannerisms and the tone of his
voice and he could be heard listing all the crimes that the Meccans had committed: "0
Messenger of Allah! They are the ringleaders of denial! They have also slandered you
by saying you were a magician, an oracle, a liar and a slanderer. .. "
Finally the blessed Messenger commanded him to sit on his left side-now the
three were sitting, the Messenger of mercy with Abu Bakr on his right and Umar on
his left. Then he called out to his Companions, they too had approached them: "Shall I
tell you the state of these friends of yours?"
''Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah, tell us," they replied.
He then first turned to Abu Bakr: "There is no doubt that Abraham was the softer
than the softest butter in front of Allah."
Then he turned his gaze to Umar and said: "There is no doubt that Noah was the

--- Sayfa 835 ---
tougher than stone when it came to the law of Allah. The situation is as Umar paints it!
And so be prepared, in support of each other!"
Yes, it was clear that there was another vista of jihad before them but the honorable
Companions did not know where and against whom this jihad would happen. They
wanted to learn what the blessed Messenger spoke about with Abu Bakr and Umar.
That is why as soon as the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, left
the place they ran to Abu Bakr and asked: "0 Abu Bakr. We hesitate to ask Umar
what the Messenger of Allah spoke about to you. Will you tell us what he spoke to
you about?"
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, started to speak: "He asked me 'What do
you think of fighting against Mecca'. And I said '0 Messenger of Allah, They are
your tribe' and I thought he would adopt my view. But he called Umar and when he
asked him the same question, he started to speak with 'The ringleaders of denial' and
then he started to list all the things that the Meccan polytheists said against the
Messenger of Allah till that day. Then he added 'I swear by Allah that so long as we
do not break the nose of the Meccans, the Arabs will not bow down' and so the
Messenger of Allah has ordered you to fight the Meccans."
The Companions, who had already understood that they were in preparation for war
and were considering different possibilities as to whom they were going to be fighting
against, had now understood what the plan was. The good news that Gabriel had
brought was going to be realized. This news had caused great happiness among the
Muhajirun; they were going to return to their homes, their children, their relatives,
their homeland, their memories, and most important of all the House of Allah and
never have to leave them again.
An Individual Attempt
After it was known that the blessed Messenger was going to walk on to Mecca, Hatib
ibn Abi Balta'ah gave a letter to a woman in return for ten dinars and asked her to take
it to his relatives in Mecca. The strange thing was he was hiding this from the blessed
Messenger and the other Companions: "Keep this a secret as much as you can," was
all he could say to the woman. "Do not go from the main roads; for there are sentries
there."
Sarra, who took this letter from Hatib would hide the letter in her hair. Then she
would set off on the road and taking into account Hatib's warning, she would use the
by-roads. She would go left of Mahajja to Fuluk and then from there to Aqiq. On the
surface everything seemed to be going well, no one had seen her. But no one could

--- Sayfa 836 ---
hide from the Knower of the Unseen. Medina was once again honored by the presence
of the Truthful Gabriel; he was bringing the news of the letter. The Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who found out about the details of the
situation, immediately called Ali and Zubayr to his side and said: "Get on the road at
once. Get to that woman who is bringing the letter that Hatib has given her, the letter
that brings the news of our coming to the Quraysh!"
The Messenger of Allah did not leave it at that and told them that they would find
the woman near the garden ofHah.
Ali and Zubayr who received this Prophetic order set off on the road as quickly as
possible and came to the place that the Messenger of Allah described. Sarra, who was
now quite relaxed thinking that she had left all the worries behind, panicked when she
saw two horsemen catching up with her. They asked her about the letter as soon as
they reached her, but the woman would not say anything. And so Ali and Zubayr had
the woman get down from her mount and they started to search her load, but they
could not find anything. They looked into every bagbut could not find a trace of the
letter. Then Ali turned to the woman in all seriousness and started to say the
following: "I swear by Allah that the Messenger of Allah will not speak anything but
the truth; we are not lying either! And so either you will give us the letter by your own
volition or we will strip you down and find it!"
The woman was frightened. There was no one around that could help her; the
situation was more serious than she had originally thought. The letter would be found
with or without her consent. First she said: "Stay away from me," and then she got the
letter out of her hair and gave it to Ali.
Having received the letter, Ali and his friends made for Medina and went directly to
the Messenger of Allah, and delivered the letter to him. The noble Messenger took it
and read it. The letter was telling the Meccans that the Messenger of Allah was about
to come upon them. The blessed Messenger then called Hatib to his side and asked:
"0 Hatib! What is it that made you do such a thing?"
Hatib, who was already bent in two with the weight of what he had done, was
melting like wax in front of the blessed Messenger: "0 Messenger of Allah," he
started. "I swear by Allah that I am full of faith for Allah and His Messenger. I have
not changed my belief, nor am I after something else; my family and relatives are
among the Meccans and I wanted to warn them as they have no other kin around
here."
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who listened to Hatib

--- Sayfa 837 ---
said: "He is telling the truth. What is wrong here is the step that you have taken
without consulting us."
He had decided individually m a matter that concerned the public and acted
impulsively in a way that could have affected everyone.
This was the sort of moment that Umar would tum red with fury and so he turned to
Hatib and said: "May Allah take your life away! You knew fully well that the
Messenger of Allah had placed guards on all the roads and you actually wrote a letter
to the Quraysh to warn them?" and jumped at Hatib. He could not hold himself any
longer. He turned to the blessed Messenger and said: "Allow me, 0 Messenger of
Allah, to kill this man, for he has become a hypocrite."
But that is not what the Messenger of mercy thought. He turned to Umar and said:
"How can you know that 0 Umar? How can you be sure that Allah the Almighty has
not turned to the warriors of Badr and said: 'Do what you like now I have forgiven
'?"
you.
Umar was known for stepping back when the real nature of the situation was
revealed, and when he heard these words of the Messenger of Allah, he started to cry.
For Hatib was among the warriors of Badr. Clearly, there were other dimensions to the
matter and Umar did not know them all. Before long the Truthful Gabriel would come
to the Messenger of Allah and let him know how he should behave in a similar
situation. 202
Hatib, who was one of the lions of Badr, had thus led another revelation to come
from the skies and thus those to come would know how to act in matters of public
interest, that they should not take individual and impulsive decisions in matters
concerning all.
The blessed Messenger had another precaution at this juncture: he sent Abu Qatada
ibn Rab with a unit to a place called Batn al-Izam on the way to Damascus, and thus
gave the impression that they army that was being prepared was going to take to that
route, countering the news and rumors that the army was meant for the direction of
Mecca. Meanwhile he was sending envoys to all directions and spreading the news:
"All those who believe in Allah and His Messenger should be ready in Medina by the
month of Ramadan."
Now the Companions were coming to Medina in droves; the headquarters had been
set up by the wells of Abu Inaba and everyone coming in was settling there to wait for
the order to move. Meanwhile people like Hasan ibn Thabit were encouraging the
Companions with poems in the struggles to be staged against the enemies of Allah.

--- Sayfa 838 ---
Taking off from Medina
Eight years had passed since their arrival in Medina and now believers had to leave
the city because of the Prophetic invitation. Everyone who had become a Muslim to
that day had responded to the invitation of the Messenger of Allah and had run to
Medina. It was a Wednesday, the first days of Ramadan. Naturally, everyone was
fasting. The Messenger of Allah first turned to his Companions and said: "Those who
want to may continue with their fast, those want to, may break it," he called out. He
himself was one of those who would not break their fast.
Meanwhile, he sent a scout force of two hundred under the leadership of Zubayr ibn
Awwam. Then he prayed the Afternoon Prayer with his Companions and then gave
the order to move. Around him was an army of ten-thousand people, made up of the
Ansar, the Muhajirun and other tribes. 203 Because the road was long, they had taken
their horses with them but were riding their camels. They came to a place called Sulsul
without stopping and here the blessed Messenger pointed to a cloud above and said: "I
see that this cloud is giving me the good news of the Banu Qab victory."
The weather was quite hot and when they reached Aij, our noble Prophet poured
some water over his head and washed his face in order to cool down a little bit. This
route was also the route that he had taken on his migration. He then continued to
advance in the direction of Talub. While the journey continued, the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, separated a hundred horsemen from his
Companions and told them go ahead before them.
Before long, these horsemen would meet a man from the Hawazin and they would
catch the man and bring him to the Messenger of Allah. When the blessed Messenger
questioned the man to learn that the Hawazin was gathering soldiers against him, he
said: "Allah is enough for us, what a beautiful aide He is!" and calling Khalid ibn
Walid to his side, he told him to make sure that no one hears about their campaign.
Meanwhile, he noticed a dog that was suckling its young a little far away; it was
snarling at the people that had gathered around him and was showing its teeth to them.
Prophetic compassion would answer to this compassion of the mother and he would
call Jamil ibn Suraqa to his side. He told him to wait beside this dog that was suckling
its young until everyone had passed and to make sure that neither the dog nor its
young would be hurt, telling him to keep the caravan of people away from them.
As they made their way on the road, people kept joining them. There were also
those who came and became a Muslim. The strange thing was that most of the
Companions did not know who they were going to go to war against. There seemed to

--- Sayfa 839 ---
be three alternatives: Quraysh, Hawazin and Thaqif. Even Companions such as Ka'b
ibn Malik who seemed to be in the front would come to the Messenger of Allah and
try to learn which out of these three they would be fighting.
When they came to Kudayd, they ran into Sulaym. There the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, had them take out the standards and banners and
distributed them among the tribes. Each tribe had been organized under their own
standards and flags and this is how they would enter the battle. There were more than
thirty flags in the army. When they came to Juhfa they were faced with a surprise. The
blessed Messenger's uncle Abbas had his bags on his shoulder and was coming to
Medina. A smile appeared on the face of the Messenger of Allah. He first had Abbas's
load sent to Medina and then said to him: "Just as my Prophethood is the last one, so
is your migration the last one as well."
This compliment also signaled that Mecca was going to become Muslim and that
there would be no more reason to migrate. When they came to the valley called Marr
az-Zahran near Mecca, the sun had set and the army was given the order to relax. But
the Messenger of Allah had another order; each believer was going to go and collect
brushwood and light a fire where they were.
At the head of the watch guards was once again Umar.
Meanwhile some of the Companions had started to collect the fruit of the miswak
tree. The blessed Messenger who saw them said: "I would recommend that you choose
the blackened ones, for those are the sweetest." Upon that the Companions said: "0
Messenger of Allah, it is the shepherds who know the best of this fruit; have you ever
herded sheep?"
''Yes," said the blessed Messenger. "Each Prophet has herded sheep; I used to herd
the sheep of the household of the Ajyad."
The Arrival of Abu Sufyan
The Quraysh still did not know what was happening; they could guess that they were
going to be held accountable for what they did but they did not know when or where
this would happen. That is why they were worried when they had not been able to
receive news from Medina for quite a long time. In the end they decided to send Abu
Sufyan and Hakim ibn Hizam in the direction of Medina: "If you meet Muhammad,
ask for surety for us," they were saying.
On the way the two friends would come across Budayl ibn Warqa. They wanted
him to come with them, and so the three of them set out together in the direction of

--- Sayfa 840 ---
Medina. When they came to the location of Arak which was located in Marr az-
Zahran, in the dark of the night they experienced a great shock for they saw an army
as big as the sea, and army with tents and fires in front of tents. They were frightened
by the neighing of the horses and the bellowing of the camels-they were at the end of
the road.
On the other side the Messenger of Allah had called some of his Companions to his
side and ordered them to catch Abu Sufyan who he told them was in the region of
Arak. When they were approached from behind Abu Sufyan and his two travelling
companions were busy watching the terrifying scene before them. At a moment they
were not expecting they were surrounded and brought to Umar.
Umar was running to the blessed Messenger with happiness. Abbas who saw this
state ofhis had also taken to the road and was making haste to come to the presence of
the Messenger before Umar. His aim was, contrary to Umar's request of solving the
issue through easy methods, was to give Abu Sufyan, his friends of many years, safe
custody. And so it would be. When he saw the power of the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, and his Companions, the obedience they showed
their leaders, and their practice of worship, the expected change would start to take
place in Abu Sufyan, and he would become a different man. For him all roads had
been blocked and there was no other alternative; Abu Sufyan, the mighty leader of
Mecca, was entering a new phase of his life. After long conversations, the following
words would finally be heard coming from his lips: "I bear witness that there is no
deity but Allah, and I also bear witness that Muhammad is His Messenger!"
Meanwhile, Hakim ibn Hizam who had been on the road with him had become a
Muslim as well, and with him they were asking the Messenger of Allah to give surety
to the people. At this moment, the wisdom of Abbas would come into play and he
would speak about the importance that a leader such as Abu Sufyan would receive.
Upon that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Those who
enter Abu Sufyan's house are safe."
Upon request this concession would be widened and it was declared that those in
the Ka'ba and those who had locked themselves in the house of Hakim ibn Hizam
would be under protection.
Just then the Devil had come and was trying to dissuade Abu Sufyan from faith; for
one moment he had the idea of going round the surrounding tribes and gathering an
army to attack the Messenger of Allah. But at that very moment a hand was placed on
his shoulder: "Then Allah will humiliate you and we will triumph once again," said
the voice, as if hearing his inner most thoughts.

--- Sayfa 841 ---
Abu Sufyan was startled; he turned around to see that the hand was none other than
the blessed Messenger's! He was embarrassed: "I bear witness that you are the
Messenger of Allah," he said at first.
It was something that only he knew about; he had not spoken it out loud! Only the
Knower of the Unseen, Allah the Almighty could know of it and could tell it to His
Messenger, and so he added: "I ask of Allah the acceptance of my repentance, I seek
forgiveness from Him for the fault I have fallen into! I had certain doubts about you
being the Messenger of Allah till now, I was debating it with myself-but now all
those doubts are gone! I swear by Allah that what makes me think this way is nothing
but whispers of the Devil and my carnal soul!"204
They had experienced such surprises one after another that they had so many things
to tell the Meccans. They asked for permission to return to Mecca but Abbas had
another offer for the Messenger of Allah: "0 Messenger of Allah," he was saying. "I
am not sure that Abu Sufyan will not tum back on his heels. It may be better if you
keep him by your side for a while longer so that they may see you and the soldiers and
get a better grip of the situation."
Abu Bakr was of the same opinion and so he asked his Companions to go after Abu
Sufyan who was making his way towards Mecca. It was again Abbas who caught up
with him; when he saw him he asked: "Is this a betrayal, 0 you sons of Hashim?" so
voiced Abu Sufyan his worry.
Abbas was not late in answering him: "Know that those who stand in Prayer behind
the Prophet never betray people. We will not persecute you. But we want you to wait
till the morning and see for yourself the soldiers of Allah and what Allah is preparing
for the polytheists!"
The Parade
On the morning of that day the voice of the caller of the Messenger of Allah was
echoing throughout Marr az-Zahran: "Each tribe should start with their preparations
for the road-let them put their weapons on their mounts and let them come together
under their standard with their leader."
With this command the Muslim army started to move and the tribes, with their
leaders, gathered under their standards. Now was the time for the message that would
have the greatest impact on the Quraysh in the person of Abu Sufyan: the people
would pass in front of Abu Sufyan one by one! The sight was magnificent.
The first was Khalid ibn Walid205 with his force of one thousand; they were carrying

--- Sayfa 842 ---
two flags! When he came in front of Abu Sufyan, Khalid started to voice the takbir
which was repeated by his one-thousand strong army, and they would do this three
times. They were like the stars in the dark ofthe night-twelve hundred fires in Marr
az-Zahran, and the place was echoing to the sound of takbirs. This was a scene that
sent shivers down spines. As they passed in front of him, Abu Sufyan asked Abbas
who they were and he told him. The answers he got surprised Abu Sufyan even more.
He found it hard to understand the speed at which people had changed and was
speechless at the maturity that these people had attained.
Now the whole army of conquest was passing in front of him one by one. Zubayr
passed with his force of five hundred, Abu Dharr passed with three hundred, Aslam
with four hundred, the Banu Qab with five hundred, Muzayna with one thousand,
Juhayna with eight hundred, Kinana with two hundred and finally Ashja with three
hundred. Each time Abu Sufyan asked when it was that the unit that the Messenger of
Allah was in would pass by. Finally the thousand strong unit in which the Messenger
of Allah was came, with Sa' d ibn Ubada carrying the standard-one could hear the
deep voice of Umar who was keeping them in order echo through. The flags of the
various branches of the Ansar and the Muhajirun were of various colors; they were
completely equipped with weapons. When Abu Sufyan saw such a spectacular sight,
he sighed: "Who can stand against this army?"
Sa'd ibn Ubada, who was walking in front ofthe army with his standard, raised his
voice as he passed by Abu Sufyan and said: "This is the day that destiny will be
written; today the prohibitions of the Haram will be lifted and it will be prohibited for
us to fight there-and Quraysh will be made to taste defeat."
These were words that worried Abu Sufyan and he turned to Abbas and said: "0
Abbas! This is an important day for you to protect me!"
Then the Messenger of Allah came mounted on Qaswa; on his right was Abu Bakr
and on his left was Usayd ibn Khudayr. Abbas called Abu Sufyan excitedly: "Here is
the Messenger of Allah!"
Abu Sufyan said to him: "The business of the son of your brother has today reached
an irresistible state."
Abbas called out once agam: "0 Abu Sufyan! That IS not sovereignty but
Prophethood!"
What Sa' d ibn Ubada had said as he was passing by Abu Sufyan had hurt him very
much and so he turned to the Messenger of Allah and said: "0 Messenger of Allah!
Have you ordered the killing of your tribe? Have you not heard what Sa' d ibn Ubada

--- Sayfa 843 ---
is saying?"
He didn't know what Sa'd ibn Ubada had said and so asked: 'What did he say?"
Having been given such an opportunity, Abu Sufyan started to list all one by one,
and added: "But you are the best of men, you are someone who cares most for his
relatives, you are the most compassionate of all; and so I ask of you, in the Name of
Allah, to treat your tribe well!"
It was clear once again that someone had taken a step on their own and so the
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "Sa' d is mistaken 0 Abu
Sufyan."
It was essential that Abu Sufyan's worries be allayed and that day was in truth the
day that Mecca would find its real value. The blessed Messenger added the following:
"On the contrary, today is the day of mercy! Today is the day that the good name of
the Ka'ba and Allah will be exalted! This is a day that the Ka'ba will be covered with
cloth! And today is the day that Allah will elevate the Quraysh!"
Then our noble Prophet sent word saying that he had relieved Sa' d of his duty and
that he was giving the standard to Sad's son Qays ibn Sa' d. It was clear that he wanted
to show that taking individual decisions and speaking individually on behalf of others
in a matter that concerned everybody was a grave error. When Sa' d wanted to find out
why the change had occurred and whether it was true, the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, showed him his turban, indicating that the change of office
had been decreed by him.
Shock in Mecca
Now everything was ready for the great conquest; they were going to set off from
Marr az-Zahran and then enter Mecca. Meanwhile Abbas, the uncle of the blessed
Messenger, approached the Messenger of Allah and said he wanted to go to Mecca
before them and give them the news of assurance and invite them to Islam. At first our
beloved Prophet regarded this offer favorably and lent him his mule, but then said: "I
fear that the Quraysh will mistreat him like the tribe of Thaqif mistreated Urwa ibn
Masud," and then changed his mind and asked his uncle to be called back.
It was Abu Sufyan who was unaware of the developments and brought the first
news to the Meccans, but he was not entering Mecca the way he had left it. The
minute he entered Mecca he started to shout out: "0 people of Quraysh! Muhammad
is here! He has come with a great army that you cannot defend against!"
What they had feared had thus come to pass. All hope had gone and Quraysh was

--- Sayfa 844 ---
finished! What could they do against an army that had already come so close to them?
As they were wallowing in their despair, it was once again Abu Sufyan who spoke:
"Best for you would be to become Muslims and thus protect yourselves."
It was not easy to strike out everything at once and accept something new. This
would require strong will and heart! However there seemed to be no other way out.
Abu Sufyan had seen the Muslims and spent time with them, so they knew they had to
listen to what he had to say. They all looked at him to share with them his experiences
among the Muslims, and he spoke. The time came to speak about the assurance that
the Messenger of Allah had given: "Whoever takes refuge in the house of Abu Sufyan
will be protected," he said before he was interrupted: "For Allah's sake! How many
people can the house of Abu Sufyan hold?"
Abu Sufyan continued: 'Whoever closes his door and seeks refuge in his own
home, he too will be protected! The people who take refuge in the Ka'ba are also
secure, and they will not be harmed."
Hind, who could not accept the change she observed in her husband, approached
him and pulled him from his beard, calling out to the Meccans: "Kill this husband of
mine who until yesterday went about claiming to be a hero! What a terrible guardian
and leader he is for a community!"
It was, of course, not easy to tum towards the direction they had held in enmity for
so long, and Hind was attacking her husband who had changed in such a short period
of time. The wife and husband started to argue in front of everybody. Hind, who
believed she had lost her husband, was full of anger. She herself had not witnessed
what Abu Sufyan had seen and had not had the time to think wisely and calmly. She
still had power to influence people; she was the daughter of Utba whom the Meccans
held in high regard. That is why Abu Sufyan pointed to his wife Hind with his hands
and said to the Meccans: "Woe unto you!" He was angry and said to his friends with
whom he had fought side by side until yesterday: "Do not let this woman convince
you to take a wrong step, because Muhammad is at your gates with an army that you
really cannot oppose!"
They were like animals already trapped, their anger was no use to them and they
could summon no power to resist the Muslim army. Hind could see a change coming
and remembered the dream that she had been seeing recently-for the last three nights
she had been seeing Muhammad the Trustworthy, peace and blessings be upon him, in
her dream, calling her to salvation. The last time she had the dream, the Messenger of
Allah had dragged her away from the edge of Hell. These were fearful sights and
when she woke up she was still under the influence of these images: "What could this

--- Sayfa 845 ---
be?" she would ask herself and try to interpret her dream.
Although the majority preferred to wait and act according to how the events would
unfold that day, people like Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl, Suhayl ibn Amr and Safwan ibn
Umayya started preparations for resistance. They were saying: "We cannot let
Muhammad enter Mecca just like that!" and were encouraging people to resist. People
who were convinced of this propaganda from the tribes of Hudhayl, Aslam and the
Banu Bakr and Quraysh had also joined them in the preparations.
They felt encouraged by the fact that the surrounding tribes had answered their call
favorably. In a resistance such as this which held great risks, they were hoping to put
the desert tribes at the frontline and then decide, according to how this would tum out
in front of the Muslim army.
The Great Conquest Begins
On the other hand, the Companions had left Marr az-Zahran and reached a place
called Dhi Tuwa. They were going to gather there and take the first steps of the
conquest here together. It was a Friday, the thirteenth day of Ramadan. Before the
sunrise the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, mounted Qaswa,
and with Usama behind him on the camel, he joined the unit. Everybody wanted to
gather around him and wanted to be with him as he entered the city which he had been
exiled from many years ago.
There was already an atmosphere of triumph among the Companions. The conquest
of Mecca-as it pertained to worldly causes-was about to take place and Allah the
Almighty was about to add another victory to his name! The blessed Messenger, on
the other hand, was bent in two on top of his camel in modesty such that his blessed
beard was about to touch Qaswa's saddle.
"Dear Lord!" he was saying, "What is important is the abode of afterlife!"
With this perhaps he meant, 'Whatever success may be gained in this world, the
real success is in the steps one takes as investment in the afterlife."
He had tied a long turban on his head, and the end of the cloth was hanging down
from his shoulder.
He absolutely did not want any blood to be shed and was warning his Companions
against it. They were given permission to fight only those who resisted them. And so,
our beloved Prophet's entry to Mecca would be unexpected as well; he had divided his
Companions into different groups and ordered them to enter Mecca from different
entry points. He himself was entering from the upper part of Mecca; the women were

--- Sayfa 846 ---
throwing the shawls they had in their hands towards the necks of the horses, thereby
showing their joy. When he saw this he turned to Abu Bakr and asked: "What had
Hasan said?"
The man of perception had already understood, and started to read a poem that
described the scene they were experiencing. This was a poem that Hasan ibn Thabit
had composed and read even before the conquest of Mecca-it was describing the
way that the women of Qada would hit the necks of the horses with their scarves as
they entered Mecca.
The blessed Messenger said to the group he was with: "Enter Mecca from the place
that Hasan had pointed to."
Meanwhile, he had called Zubayr next to him and asked him to erect the standard at
Hajun and wait for him there. At a time when they were taking the great step of
conquering Mecca, our noble Prophet wanted to visit the grave and pray for our
mother Khadija with whom he had shared his life for twenty five years.
Then the conquest started from all four comers; the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, who had left Mecca with eight people was returning to Mecca
with twelve thousand!
When they came to the place called Azahir, he noticed people running about and
shimmering of swords: "What is this shimmering of swords?" he asked. "Did I not
forbid you to fight?"
"0 Messenger of Allah," they replied. "These are Khalid ibn Walid and his friends.
I swear had they not been attacked, they would not have fought! Where he entered, the
Meccans resisted. 0 Messenger of Allah! He neither means to go against you, nor
trespass your word; he is only fighting those who tried to stand in his way!"
He was saddened but there was nothing to be done. Despite all the precautions, the
Meccans had caused problems and Khalid had no option but to use his sword to solve
it. At the same time Hakim ibn Hizam was trying to dissuade the Meccan polytheists
from fighting, reminding them of the security that the Messenger of Allah had
promised, calling them to enter their houses and close their doors. Upon that the
blessed Messenger said: "What Allah wills is always better."
When he saw the houses of Mecca as he passed Azahir, he stopped and thanked
Allah in full gratitude. Then he turned to Jabir who was beside him and said: "0 Jabir!
This is the place we will settle, once it was right here that the Quraysh had gathered
and formed an alliance of denial against us, deciding the attitude they would take
against us ! "206

--- Sayfa 847 ---
Such was the power of Allah that this place would bear witness to the decisions that
the Meccans had taken that day about our noble Prophet and his Companions. Now
the same place would bear witness to the decisions that the Messenger of Allah would
take about them.
Everyone would see the difference between them tomorrow!
While he was making his way on the Qaswa, he was reading the surahs of al-Fath
and an-Nasr, saying: "These are the things that Allah had promised me."
People had come to him that day as he kept riding on his camel, and asked: "0
Messenger of Allah! Where will you stop tomorrow?"
They assumed that he would straight away go to his house. They wanted to verify it
so that if this were the case, the other migrants would do the same. But the blessed
Messenger said: "Akil has left no home for us." The elder son of Abu Talib had sold
everything that the blessed Messenger had left behind, including his home. He would
not accept the offers of other houses either. He decided to rest in his tent in Hajun until
he left Mecca.
Now the conquest was complete; there was no other resistance other than in the
direction that Khalid had entered. As a result of the strategy that had been followed,
Mecca had been conquered easily. Just as he had declared in his aman, or assurance he
had given to Meccans, most of the people decided to stay in their homes, while others
sought refuge in the house of Abu Sufyan and Hakim ibn Hizam and also the Ka'ba.
They were waiting anxiously to see how our noble Prophet was going to treat the
Meccans? There were those who had led the enmity towards our noble Prophet, they
had no doubt that they would be executed. These people were trying to find places to
run to or hide.
Entering the Ka'ba
Things had calmed down and the Meccans were completely silent. The Messenger of
Allah took ablutions in his tent and as an expression of gratitude for the result that
Allah had bestowed on them, he prayed eight cycles and then he asked them to bring
his camel. Qaswa was brought to the door of his tent but our noble Prophet would
return to his tent in order to put on his helmet and armor. Now he had also donned his
weapon and was walking towards the Ka'ba already!
The Companions, meanwhile, were walking in between Handama and Hajun, trying
to provide a safe passageway for the Messenger of Allah. The Ka'ba was getting ready
for a celebration!

--- Sayfa 848 ---
On the way, the children had lined up on both sides of the street and were
welcoming our noble Prophet. Especially the female children had untied the scarves
on their heads and were waving them at the horses that were passing by them.
Now, the Messenger of Allah's destination was the Ka'ba. He was heading towards
the place that the followers of Allah believed to be his twin! On his way, he had come
across Khalid and said to him: "I have forbidden you and yet you carry your sword,
why?"
"They started the conflict," said Khalid. "They showered arrows upon us and pulled
their swords. I tried to stay away from conflict as much as I could; I invited them to
Islam, the religion that all people were accepting, but they refused. Then I had no
choice but to fight. Allah made us victorious in this war and they fled in all directions,
0 Messenger of Allah."
Then our noble Prophet said to him: "Do not pursue them!" and then turning to his
Companions, he called out: "Leave your weapons!"
He said that only the Huzza, in response to the Banu Bakr who had killed twenty-
three of their people, were exempt from this abstaining of violence, and he said that
they only had leave to do what they liked till the Afternoon Prayer time.
Then, the minbar in Medina met the mihrab in Mecca and our noble Prophet came
to the Ka'ba. As soon as the blessed Messenger saw the Ka'ba, he first saluted it with
his body from afar and started to recite the takbir. Everyone who heard the takbir of
the blessed Messenger was repeating the takbir as loud as they could, such that Mecca
was shaking! The polytheists ran to the mountains and they were startled by these
sounds of the takbir and were deeply intimidated by this scene that they saw. Each
passing moment increased their curiosity and they wanted to follow the events more
closely! Then the blessed Messenger lifted his finger to his lips and said: ''Now be
quiet!" for they were going to start the tawaf, the circumambulation of the Ka'ba.
Muhammad ibn Maslama was holding the reins of Qaswa, and the Messenger of
Allah started his circumambulation mounted on his camel! First our noble Prophet
came close to the Black Stone. After saluting it with his hand, he started his tawaf.
That day there were three hundred idols in and around the Ka'ba, all lead-plaited.
The polytheists would come and sacrifice their animals near them, and when they
were in need they would come to these idols, kneel in front of them and tell them their
requests. Now that the Ka'ba had become one with Islam, it had to be cleansed from
all idols, starting with the biggest, Hubal, Isaf and Naila. Our noble Prophet pointed to
each one of them with the bow in his hand, and the idol he pointed to fell to the

--- Sayfa 849 ---
ground. When doing that he read the verse with the meaning: "The truth has come,
and falsehood has vanished. Surely falsehood is ever bound to vanish by its very
nature" (al-Isra 17:81 ).
He was saluting the Black Stone in every tum and now he had completed his
rotation of the Ka'ba seven times. He was going to dismount from his camel; he could
not find a place that he could use as a stool to step down on, and so his Companions
helped him come down. Descending from his mount he directed himself to the Station
of Ibrahim, he still had his helmet and armor on, he shook his blessed head; the turban
was hanging down from his shoulders. He performed two cycles of Prayer and then
turned towards where the Zamzam was: 'Were I to be sure that the sons of Abdul
Muttalib would not overpower me, I would get a bucket of water from there."
Upon that Abbas207 pulled out a bucket of Zamzam water and offered it to the
blessed Messenger. He drank from it and took ablution with it. The Companions, in
the meanwhile, crowded around the blessed Messenger to be able to get a bit of his
ablution water, to rub it on their faces and eyes. Then, the Messenger of Allah ordered
that they should destroy Hubal. Now Hubal, in front of which the Meccan prostrated
themselves as "god" was in pieces, in ruin. He then called Ali to come next to him; Ali
came at once and the blessed Messenger said to him: "Kneel down!"
Ali followed the order of the noble Messenger at once and kneeled down where he
had pointed. The Messenger of Allah was now climbing on the shoulders of Ali. Then
he said: ''Now get up."
When Ali started to get up the Prophetic affection did not allow this to happen and
then he said him: "Sit down." Ali kneeled again and sat.
Now our noble Prophet knelt down and said to Ali: "Now you mount on my
shoulders!"
This too was an order, and now Ali was on the shoulders of our noble Prophet, and
he was lifting him up to the top of the Ka'ba! Ali felt as if he was about to reach the
heavens and beyond with his hand. Now Ali was at the top of the Ka'ba and the
blessed Messenger said to him: "Throw down all the idols that they have put there,"
thus telling him to get rid of the idols. But the copper idol that he was pointing to had
been firmly fastened to the Ka'ba with iron rods and it did not move. Now, the
Messenger of Allah showed Ali how he needed to work at it: "Pluck it like this," he
said. And now it was much easier for Ali to pick it up and throw it down.
Now, the Ka'ba was on its way to returning to its original purpose, and our noble
Prophet, who had himself shown how one was to worship there, had retired to a comer

--- Sayfa 850 ---
now, sitting. Abu Bakr was also sitting by him just in case to keep guard.
The Meccans who were watching everything that was happening were greatly
surprised. They were saying: "We have never seen or heard of a king treated as
respectfully as this until today," They thought all this was crazy.
At one point the blessed Messenger caught sight of Abu Sufyan who was close to
him, and he called out him to say:
''You asked Hind 'Do you really believe that all this is from Allah?' and she replied
'Yes, all this is from Allah', isn't that so?"
Indeed, this is how it had happened. As a result of all the shocks that she had
experienced, Hind had begun to see reason and had softened. She had decided to
submit in faith like her husband Abu Sufyan. In fact, at one point, she had come in
front of the idol they would bind kerchiefs around and had started to pound it with a
sickle, asking how it was that they had fooled themselves for so long. They would
speak of these things whenever they had a chance, but these were known only by Hind
and Abu Sufyan! It was as if the blessed Messenger was keeping a close watch on Abu
Sufyan so that he might reach real maturity in faith. He wanted him to know that he
knew every little action that they were taking. Abu Sufyan called out: "I bear witness
that you are the servant and Messenger of Allah," and then said 'I swear by whose
name one swears that only Allah and Hind heard these words of mine' and this was all
he could muster to say.
The News That Came from Suhayl ibn Amr
At one moment Abdullah, the elder son of Suhayl ibn Amr approached him. Suhayl
ibn Amr had tortured him for years because he had become a Muslim despite his
father's wishes. "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "Would you forgive my father as
well ifhe approached you today?"
Suhayl ibn Amr was a man that our noble Prophet had wanted to welcome for many
years. He was one of the people whom he had reported to be preparing to enter Islam a
few days before Mecca was conquered. In fact at the time, Suhayl along with Ikrima
ibn Abu Jahl and Safwan ibn Umayya, were making plans as to how to resist the
Messenger of Allah. When they were faced with Khalid, they had understood that they
would not be able to stand against him and so they dispersed, Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl and
Safwan ibn Umayya had fled outside Mecca, while Suhayl ibn Amr had chosen to
hide in Mecca.
But a man like him, who was used to leading rather than hiding could not stay

--- Sayfa 851 ---
where he was on such an important day and so he had chosen to take the courageous
route and had sent word with Abdullah saying: "Ask for assurance from Muhammad
for me; because I am not sure that I will not be killed today," and thus he wanted to
find out what the verdict of the blessed Messenger was for him prior to approaching
him. Our noble Prophet smiled at the news brought by Abdullah and spoke in a tone
that would be heard by others: "Suhayl ibn Amr is also under protection with the
protection of Allah."
He knew that what he pronounced would not stay there, and he added the following
words for Suhayl whose coming he had been waiting for years: "Whoever sees Suhayl
ibn Amr today, let him not look at him with a censuring eye, let him not hurt him. I
swear by my life that Suhayl is a man of intellect and honor! I cannot imagine a man
like Suhayl staying ignorant and unresponsive to Islam. It seems that he too has
understood today that the position he has taken until today has not served him well at
all!"
Abdullah hearing these words was overjoyed. He ran to his father at once and told
him what he had heard one by one ...
Suhayl could see the difference very clearly! He melted in the face of this Prophetic
kindness despite everything and the following words flowed from his lips: "I swear he
is the possessor of all that is good, small and big."
He walked back and forth for a while and then upon making his decision, he turned
towards the Ka'ba where the invitation had come from. He was going to go and see
that infinite affection nearby and he was going to surrender in the presence of the
Messenger of Allah!
Inside the Ka'ba
Meanwhile, our noble Prophet called Bilal to his side. He told him to go to Uthman
ibn Talha. Take the keys of the Ka'ba from him and bring them to him. After much
effort Uthman was able to get the keys from his mother208 and he started to run
towards the Ka'ba. When he came close to the blessed Messenger he slipped, and the
keys he had got from his mother against her wishes was now flung on the ground. But
there was some good in this as well-the family of the Banu Talha who kept the keys
of the Ka'ba with them at all times and believed that no one else could open it except
for them had attributed some kind of sacredness to themselves. Now, with one action
of our noble Prophet, this false belief was going to be shattered! The blessed
Messenger went to where the keys had fallen and picked them up with the skirt of his
dress. Then he went and opened the door of the Ka'ba himself-the Ka'ba was

--- Sayfa 852 ---
opening up to its rightful owner for the first time.
The Ka'ba was full of pictures and the Messenger of Allah appointed Umar to get
rid of all of them-he was not going to enter it before it had been cleared of the
remnants of polytheism. Now there was sweet excitement among the Companions:
some were carrying Zamzam, some were cleaning the Ka'ba with whatever cloth they
could find.
When the clean-up was finished and our noble Prophet entered, he saw some
images that were said to be portraying Abraham, Ishmael and Mary-perhaps the
Companions had not cleaned them because of their respect to these figures! But our
beloved Prophet was determined, and turning to Umar, said: "0 Umar. Did I not order
you not to leave any pictures here? Let Allah take away all their life!
They have made an image of Abraham, an image of an old man who is drawing
arrows of fortune. May Allah curse them; they all know very well that neither Ibrahim
nor Ismail drew arrows of fortune. Clear all the images here; may Allah curse these
people who have no strength to create and yet they try to portray these!"
The sensitivity shown by the Messenger of Allah set the Companions in motions
and they started very quickly to wipe the Ka'ba with their own clothes.
Now the deeds had been done and the blessed Messenger entered the Ka'ba with
Usama, Bilal and Uthman ibn Talha by his side. Among his Companions this honor
had been given to these three! With the Prophetic order, the door had been closed from
the inside and they did not allow anyone else to enter. Meanwhile, our noble Prophet
had found a statue of a dove made of date branches and he had broken it with his own
hands. The blessed Messenger was going around in the Ka'ba and reciting the takbir,
thanking Allah. Then he stopped and performed two cycles of Prayer between two
pillars!
Outside, the honorable Companions were waiting with curiosity; they wondered
what the blessed Messenger was doing inside. They wondered even more as the time
he spent inside took longer. Some people such as Khalid ibn Walid were trying to
keep the curious crowds away from the door of the Ka'ba in order to prevent crowd
pile up. And they had been right too. As soon as the doors had opened, everyone tried
to push themselves towards him! Now these curious eyes were directing questions to
those who had been inside the Ka'ba with the blessed Messenger: "What did the
Messenger of Allah do inside? Did he perform Prayers? Where did he perform his
Prayers?"
While Bilal and U sam a were busy answering these questions, our noble Prophet got

--- Sayfa 853 ---
out of the Ka'ba with the keys in his hand. He was now in the courtyard; he turned to
the Ka'ba and performed two cycles of Prayer. Then he stood up and said: "This is the
qibla," and with that he had ended all questions concerning the direction of the qibla.
It was now time for the Noon Prayer and the Messenger of Allah called Bilal to his
side once again, and he wanted him to get on top of the roof of the Ka'ba and call out
the call for Prayer, the adhan.
This meant the last word on Mecca had been said as well. Bilal's voice that once
had called out "Ahad, Ahad!" from the mountains of Paran was now reaching the
hearts ofthe Meccans like an arrow.
Harith ibn Hatim and Attab ibn Asid who were in the courtyard of the Ka'ba, sitting
down with a group of people and speaking among themselves.
Attab, referring to his father Asid, said: "Allah has graced Asid with a great gift; he
cannot hear the voice that he would have been infuriated to hear today!"
Harith said: "Were I to know for certain that he is onto something real, I would be
his follower."
Suhayl ibn Amr said he agreed with Harith, and then someone else added.
"Allah had been gracious indeed by taking away Said's soul so that he did not live
to hear this black slave call out so from the roof of the Ka'ba."
Hakam ibn Abi'l-As's reaction was as follows: "Now we have seen a slave
belonging to the Banu Jumayh go on top of the building of Abu Talha and shout so-
this is a great event indeed."
Abu Sufyan who was listening to them was being cautious as a result of his
previous experience: "I can't say anything on this matter," he said first. "Because if I
should speak I know that even these stones will go to him and tell him what I have
said!"
It was true that what Abu Sufyan had said had been heard by the Prophet; the
Truthful Gabriel had come and alerted the Messenger of Allah. The blessed
Messenger turned to them and said: "I know that you said such and such things." They
were as if struck by lightning; Abu Sufyan had been right!
Attab and Hisham had been particularly moved: "We bear witness that you are
really the Messenger of Allah. No one else had heard what we have said, so no one
could have informed you about them!"
Meanwhile, Uthman brought with him his trading friend from his Mecca days, Saib
ibn Abdullah to the presence of the blessed Messenger. He was introducing his friend
using good words about him. The blessed Messenger said: "Do not try to introduce

--- Sayfa 854 ---
Saib to me; because he had been my partner," Then turning to him, he continued:
"Welcome my dear brother and partner." Now the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, started to introduce Saib to those present; for Saib was a
friendly man who did many good works. That is why the blessed Messenger said: "He
does not deceive his partner, nor did he argue with him for no cause." Then he turned
to Saib once again and said: "0 Saib, during the time of jahiliyya, you were doing
deeds the rewards of which you could not gain as good deeds; now you will do deeds
that will be accepted as good deeds and rewarded!"
Our noble Prophet then turned to Umar who was by his side, and said the following,
reminding them of the day of Hudaybiya: "0 Umar, this was what I mean when I said
that day 'I am the Messenger of Allah', I swear that there is no greater victory in Islam
than the Treaty of Hudaybiya! But at the time, people had not been able to understand
what was happening!"209
Addressing the General Public
Meanwhile, people had formed a circle around the Ka'ba and were following the
developments with interest. They were curious about the judgment our noble Prophet
would pass about them. Now the time had come to address these people and the
blessed Messenger climbed the steps of the door of the Ka'ba to address them. He
began his address by thanking Allah: "I thank Allah who has kept His promise," he
said, "He is Allah and He is One, and He has no peer or partner; He defeated the
armies of the Ahzab on his own, and He has kept His promise of help to His subject."
Then he called out, "0 Quraysh! What kind of judgment do you expect me to pass
onto you today?"
There was a great silence in the Ka'ba. They knew that they had done all they could
against him until that day. They thought they were at the end of the road! For they had
stood in his way many times and they had tried all kinds of torture, they had set all
kinds of unimaginable traps against him and his Companions! They were guilty and
had it been up to them to give the verdict, they knew very well what the punishment
would have been. They did not speak a word-they put their heads down and waited
for the verdict.
While this deep silence continued, they heard an unexpected voice coming behind
them: 'We ask for goodness and expect goodness from you. Because you are the son
of a munificent man, you are a munificent brother, you are the son of a munificent
brother, and you have munificence, and you can show this today."

--- Sayfa 855 ---
Then the eyes turned to where the voice was coming from. These words were
coming from none other than Suhayl ibn Amr, the famous poet of the Quraysh. With
the news that his son Abdullah brought, he had come out of hiding and had come to
the presence in order to start a new life. Fate was deploying him in a very crucial
juncture; he used the power of his tongue once again and at a moment when they had
thought all had finished, he was taking a step that would lead to the forgiveness of the
people of Quraysh.
The blessed Messenger understood what Suhayl had meant with these words. He
reminded him of Prophet Joseph, how he had forgiven his brothers after all the trouble
and torture they had subjected him to, and likewise, he asked the Messenger of Allah
to forgive them! Our noble Prophet was not of a different opinion; he had recognized
the owner of the voice and he had understood his aim! He had been sent to let live! An
embracing smile appeared on his lips at once and with a voice that went deep down
into their hearts he addressed to the faces that had turned pale in fear: "I will say to
you today, like my brother Joseph said, 'No reproach this day shall be on you. May
God forgive you; indeed, He is the Most Merciful of the merciful, ' (Yusuf 12:92) go
all of you, you are all free!"
The Meccans who had been expecting an order of death were shocked to see this
freedom that had been granted to them despite all odds. It was difficult to believe, the
Messenger of Allah did not hold their negative behavior against them and did not
experience rancor! Such nobility could exist only in a Prophet; they were astonished
by the reception they were having at the hands of the blessed Messenger. To forgive at
a moment when one is most powerful, could happen only in a system that had a
Divine source, and they started to feel sharp pangs of regret. Maybe this was the true
moment of conquest; hearts had been softened to a great degree in the affectionate
arms of the Prophet and now they were entering Islam in masses.
He had left Mecca with a hundred and eighty families, and now thousands of people
were embracing Islam in the same town; the Person of Light was full of peace, and he
was thanking his Lord! That day he spoke to them at length about the faith that they
had entered-he was preparing the new believers for the future. Some of them asked
him questions and he was answering these queries. When his sermons ended a man
named Abu Shah asked him to write down the subjects he had talked about and give it
to him. And so he said: "Have these written for Abu Shah," thus complying with his
request.
Now the Ka'ba was the scene of the joy of the Meccans who came to pledge their
allegiance to our noble Prophet. They said they were submitting in faith to Allah, they

--- Sayfa 856 ---
were speaking the kalima taw hid, and swearing their loyalty to the Messenger of Allah
against whom they had been drawing their swords not long ago. Just like the rivulets
of rain that come from the mountains of Paran and meet in the Ka'ba, they were
coming and meeting where the blessed Messenger was. They were racing to come and
hold his blessed hands and this race would continue for many days.
In order to show one's loyalty in the past, the hijra (migration) had been a
prerequisite, but now people were able to embrace Islam without having to leave
Mecca. Mecca had opened its door to Islam and no anxieties remained. One of the
Companions came to the presence of the blessed Messenger, holding his father by his
hand: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "Accept the allegiance of my father on
condition of hijra."
This was the result of the practice until that day but now conditions had changed
and so requirements had changed. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, said: "Know that I am taking his allegiance on condition of jihad, for now
hijra is at an end."
It was clear that the conquest of Mecca was a turning point. The condition of having
to immigrate to Medina was now gone and Mecca was now holding the banner of
Islam.
That is why the blessed Messenger turned to his Companions and said: "No more
hijra after the conquest, there is pure intention and jihad-keep your intentions pure,
and when you are called to jihad on the path of Allah, you must respond to that call
and be quick to run on the path of Allah."
Our noble Prophet also had good news; he turned to his Companions and said:
"This place will experience invasion by denial never again!"
After the allegiance of the men, it was time for women to pledge their allegiance.
Our noble Prophet stood on the hill of Safa and was accepting the allegiance of the
women! Hind, the wife of Abu Sufyan, and the daughter of Utba ibn Abu Rabia who
had been killed in Badr was also among the women pledging allegiance to our beloved
Prophet. She had approached the blessed Messenger only a day before when he was in
Abtah, and had said: "Thanks be to Allah who has exalted the religion He has chosen
for Himself, so that I may benefit from the grace that you have brought, 0
Muhammad! I am a woman who believes in Allah and swears by His existence." Her
face was still covered and our noble Prophet did not know who it was who said that.
Then he lifted her niqab (veil) and, she said: "I am Hind, the daughter ofUtba."
Then the blessed Messenger spoke with a voice full of compliment: "And you are

--- Sayfa 857 ---
welcome as well." He had not condemned her as she feared he would, he had not
spoken of her past. Seeing his approach, Hind gathered more courage and called out:
"0 Messenger of Allah, I swear by Allah that owners of tents who until yesterday
seemed dear to me were those who spoke against you; but today, what is most dear to
me is those in your tent who experience respect and beauty."
On the same day, Hind hint Utba had declared, in the presence of the blessed
Messenger, that she had become a Muslim, had come to the hill of Saga for her
allegiance. Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, was at the side of our noble
Prophet, and he was conveying the words of the women who were pledging their
allegiance from afar. But Hind was still anxious, her heart had been softened and she
had been honored with Islam, but she was still afraid to come to the presence of the
Messenger of Allah fearing that the blessed Messenger would berate her for what she
did to Hamza on the day of Uhud. But all these were unnecessary fears where the
blessed Messenger was concerned. He would not go beyond his customary limit. He
would accept her allegiance as well.
Now that the Meccan polytheists had come and surrendered their weapons, the
following words were being heard in Mecca: "All those who believe in Allah and the
Day of Judgment should leave no trace of idolatry in their houses, let all those
remnants be broken!"
The blessed Messenger had sent out town criers to all parts of the town and told
them to convey this order. Then the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, sent some ofhis Companions to break certain idols. Khalid ibn Walid was given
the task to break Uzza, and Sa'd ibn Zayd, the task of breaking Manat, Khalid ibn
Sa'd was given the task of breaking the idol Urana, and Hisham ibn As was sent to the
direction ofYalamlam for a similar task.
Entrusting the Task to Those Who Deserve It
The keys of the Ka'ba were still in his hands. Ali who saw them in the hands of our
noble Prophet said: "0 Messenger of Allah, will you give us the duty of the services
of the Ka'ba's veil and the keys?"
But it was clear that our noble Prophet was not of the same view; and it was also
clear that he was not content to hear such a suggestion. Turning to Ali, he said: "I am
giving you a task with which you will not reap benefits; instead this will give you
responsibilities and financial obligations that you will have to meet from your own
pocket." It was obvious that he was expecting more sacrifice from those who were
closer to him; when profits were being handed out, he wanted to see those closest to

--- Sayfa 858 ---
him come last. In his world, duties were given to those who did not ask for it, but to
those who did not need it.
The Prophetic gaze made rounds in the courtyard of the Ka'ba; he was looking for
Uthman ibn Talha, and he asked those present: "Where is Uthman ibn Talha?"
Hearing that the blessed Messenger was looking for him, Uthman came to his
presence and the blessed Messenger called out to him: "0 Uthman, continue to do this
duty as you have been doing it before. Whoever takes the keys from you as of this
day, will have done a grave injustice! 0 Uthman! Allah the Almighty has made you
guardians of the House of Allah, and so benefit from those who come to you within
the known limits and guard it well!"
Uthman who took the keys once again was overjoyed. Just as he had turned to go,
the Messenger of Allah called out once again: "0 Uthman, what do you say? Does this
show that what I said to you before has come true?"
These words reminded Uthman ibn Talha of certain things; because one day during
the Meccan period, our noble Prophet had said to him: "One day you will see these
keys pass into my hands, and on that day you will see me give it to the person I
choose."
Time had passed so quickly, and now the words spoken that day had taken place
today, and the blessed Messenger was now giving the keys to the person he chose.
After a few seconds of thought Uthman replied: "Yes, I swear that you are the
Messenger of Allah!"
Of course, he was not going to take the keys away from Uthman ibn Talha, the
message brought by the Truthful Gabriel also said that one should trust business with
those who merit it210 and our noble Prophet had thus said the last word on the matter.
"Let these keys be yours; today is the day of goodness and loyalty."
Meanwhile, there was a disagreement between the Huza'a tribe and Hudhayl, and
the people ofHuza'a who had attacked Hudhayl had shed blood once again. When he
heard this, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, turned towards
the people with his back to the Ka'ba and after thanking Allah, he said: "0 people of
Huza'a! Stop killing people; I swear this is too much! I will pay the blood money of
the man you have killed, I swear! I see what a murderer this Hirash is! Were I to kill a
believer corresponding to a denier, I would kill Hirash today!
0 people! Allah the Almighty made Mecca a place of prohibition even before He
created the heavens and the earth, before He created the sun and the moon and these
two mountains. It is not man who had declared this a holy place, a place of

--- Sayfa 859 ---
prohibitions, it is Allah. This state of holiness and prohibitions will continue until the
day of apocalypse. It is not permissible for someone who believes in Allah and the
Hereafter to shed blood here, to cut trees here. These were not permissible to anyone
before me, why should they be permissible to those after me? It was allowed to me
exceptionally for just one hour-and that was because of the hatred that the Meccans
had for me! But now this state of respect is back in place like it was yesterday. Let
those who are here to hear these and let them tell those who are not here. To anyone
who should say 'The Messenger of Allah also fought here', say 'This was permitted to
the Messenger of Allah only for a temporary period, you cannot make it permissible
for yourselves.'
0 people! The ones who violate the law of Allah most are those who kill in the
prohibited parts of the Haram, who aim to take someone's life other than one's
attacker, or those who are motivated by feelings of revenge, which was the custom
during Jahiliyya times.
After this address of mine, the relatives of a killed person will have the right to
choose between the following two: They can have the full blood money if they like, or
they can kill the killer in return!"
With this sermon, the noble Messenger was establishing his attitude against the
understanding that gave no importance to common law, and he was thus making it
known that from that day on, there would be harsher punishments for those who
committed crimes against the welfare of the society. And that day the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, would pay the blood money of hundred
camels for the murder committed that day although he had in no way been connected
to the incident, in order to prevent a possible blood-feud between the tribes.
That day, in order to see to similar necessities, he asked for debt from Abdullah ibn
Abu Rabia, Safwan ibn Umayya and Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza and they lent him a total
of a hundred and thirty thousand dirhams. That day, none of these had yet become
Muslim. Still, their trust in the Messenger of Allah was complete, and they were sure
that this debt would be paid, and so wholeheartedly they had loaned money to the
Sultan of the Hearts. Abdullah ibn Abi Rabia and Huwaytib ibn Abdiluzza had given
four hundred, and Safwan ibn Umayya had given five hundred dirhams! 211
Speaking to the Ansar
He walked up the hill of Safa and looked at the House of Allah from some height; he
opened up his hands and exalted Allah, and prayed to his Lord. He continued praying
for a while and then he felt the signs of revelation upon himself; another message was

--- Sayfa 860 ---
coming! When the moment of revelation passed and our noble Prophet relaxed a little,
he called out: "0 people ofthe Ansar!"
He was calling out to the Ansar in particular, it was clear that the subject of the
message concerned the Ansar directly.
At the time they were sitting a little way down from where the blessed Messenger
was, and they were talking about whether the blessed Messenger would return to
Medina again. When they heard their name mentioned, they ran to him and said:
"Labbayk, here we are 0 Messenger of Allah." He continued, "You say 'This man has
come back to his home land, he will not return to us, instead he will meet up with this
friends and relatives and stay here' is that so?"
This is indeed what they had said, and with that they had wanted to express their
concerns that having conquered Mecca he would stay in his own motherland. They did
not want to leave our noble Prophet in Mecca and return to Medina alone! Putting
down their heads they said: "Yes, we said this, 0 Messenger of Allah!"
Upon that our beloved Prophet said the following: "Do I not have a name that you
should speak of me as this 'man'? No, no! I am the servant and Messenger of Allah
and I emigrated to Allah and your land! Then my life is your life, and my death is your
death!"
These words of our noble Prophet had affected them much, and they were drowned
in sobs and tears. Meanwhile they came closer to the blessed Messenger and said:
"We swear, 0 Messenger of Allah, we said what we said only because of our deep
attachment to Allah and His Messenger!"
One could not think otherwise; just as they were overjoyed with the conquest of
Mecca, they could not bear separation from the blessed Messenger with whom they
had been together for eight years. They could not share him with those who had been
plotting against him until only yesterday! And so what they said came sincerely from
their hearts. The blessed Messenger said: "There is no doubt that Allah and the
Messenger of Allah see and understand your situation, and verify what you say."
The Believers of the Conquest
With the conquest of Mecca, the hearts of many people had been touched and they
were enjoying an opening in the spiritual arena. That day, almost everyone in Mecca
had come and embraced Islam, but there were some people who no one could
envisage as embracing Islam. These were the people who had been enemies to our
noble Prophet from the very first day of revelation and they had expressed their

--- Sayfa 861 ---
enmity against Islam at every opportunity. There were also those who were at the very
center of the propaganda against Islam. For them, embracing Islam meant that this sort
of thinking would be abolished. Their prejudice had prevented them from coming to
the faith; because of their resentment, they had not been able to sit down with him and
listen to his messages. And as such, the conquest of Mecca had facilitated such a
platform, thereby proving to be a turning point for some.
Fadala ibn Umayr planned to assassinate the blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, as he was circumambulating the Ka'ba. He appeared to have
become Muslim but was holding his own intentions inside. When he approached our
noble Prophet with this intention, he called out: "Are you Fadala?" It was as if he had
understood what he wanted to do. Fadala had to say: "Yes," and then our noble
Prophet asked again:
"Then tell me, what are you thinking of, what are you planning?"
Fadala was now in panic and he said: "Nothing." However the Messenger of Allah,
peace and blessings be upon him, was expecting an answer from him. Trying to get rid
of the blessed Messenger, he said: "I am remembering Allah."
The blessed Messenger who knew this man quite well, smiled and said: "May Allah
forgive me," and then he placed his blessed hand on Fadala's breast. This was a
blessing not everyone would attain and as of now different things started to flourish in
Fadala's heart. It was not the same Fadala who was distant our noble Prophet, but a
perfect believer filled with love for the blessed Messenger. All negativity and hatred
had been cleansed out of his heart and now it was filled with love for Allah and His
Messenger.
At a time when the blessed Messenger was at the Ka'ba, Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him, arrived there with his father in his arms. The old man's beard was
all white, and his back was bent, his eyes had gone blind. Abu Quhafa has waited for
the arrival of his son with the blessed Messenger for eight years, and now the father
and son were united in the Ka'ba. This was a time when father and son would spend
time together. With his joy Abu Bakr had taken his father in his arms and had brought
him to our noble Prophet! The blessed Messenger, who saw them coming said: "Why
didn't you leave the old man at home so that I may be the one to visit him."
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said: "0 Messenger of Allah, it is more
appropriate that he should come to you than you should go to him!"
He had sat Abu Quhafa in front of our noble Prophet; and the blessed Messenger
put his blessed hands on Abu Quhafa's shoulders and said: "Become a Muslim so that

--- Sayfa 862 ---
you may harvest its benefits."
When the invitation came from our beloved Prophet, all that was left for Abu
Quhafa to do was to accept it. He became a Muslim there and then! This was
something that made Abu Bakr and the blessed Messenger just as happy as the
conquest ofMecca! 212
At one point our noble Prophet spoke to his uncle Abbas and said: 'Where are the
sons of your brother Abu Lahab, Utba and Muattib? I cannot see them."
These were sons-in-law to the blessed Messenger in the Meccan period. Not able to
stand against the pressures, they had divorced the daughters of the Messenger of Allah
at that time. But today was the day of remembrance and loyalty. The blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, opened his arms to Utba and Muattib
today, as he opened it up for everyone else. When Abbas replied: "They moved to one
side and went out of sight with the polytheists of Mecca." To this the blessed
Messenger replied: "Bring them to me." It was clear that he was insistent. Abbas
quickly jumped on his horse and started to look for his nephews. He found them in the
place called Urna He told them what our noble Prophet had said about them and so
invited them to Islam. In the face of such magnanimity, the hearts of the two brothers
had softened. They went to the presence of the Messenger of Allah with their uncle.
Seeing their arrival, the face of our beloved Prophet started to shine like the moon. He
stood up and greeted them standing! Then holding their hands he came all the way to
Multazam and opened his hands to pray!
After a while the blessed Messenger returned. Abbas could see the happiness in his
face, and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, may Allah the Almighty make your happiness
last forever! I see a special kind of joy in it now!"
Upon that the blessed Messenger replied: "I asked the Lord to spare the two sons of
my uncle for me, and He responded favorably to my request. They have been spared
for me."
There were people who fled Mecca that day: Abdullah ibn Zib'ara, Ikrima ibn Abu
Jahl, Safwan ibn Umayya, Wahshi ibn Harb, Dhu al-Jawshan, Harith ibn Hisham, Saib
ibn Sayfiyy, Adiyy ibn Khiyar, Uqba ibn Harith and Muawiya ibn Abu Sufyan-these
were some of the names who had fled the affection and mercy of our noble Prophet.
Nevertheless, one way or another they had returned to the presence of that mercy and
peace to find faith. They had submitted themselves to the Messenger of Allah, and
having abandoned their past life, a new life had opened up ahead of them.
Sensitivity in the Name of Religion

--- Sayfa 863 ---
The Messenger of mercy, peace and blessings be upon him, not only had conquered
Mecca, but he was also communicating new decrees that people would adopt as
principles from there on-and then he was showing the way to make these principles
part of daily life. The decrees that religion put in place were not principles and rules
that people could adapt to their understanding and views, instead these were principles
and rules that people had to live by even though these should seem contrary to their
will. The existence of the social order was dependent on these rules. A peaceful social
life would only be possible if these rules were implemented. Because these decrees
and orders were like a prescription written by the Best of the Doctors, Allah; and
societies that made this prescription their law would experience peace. Societies that
tum away from it and acted randomly would experience chaos and anarchy. The
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, addressed his Companions, and
said at one point: "There is no doubt that Allah the Almighty had prohibited the sale of
alcohol and pigs, and the trade of dead animals and idols."
Upon that one of the Companions stood up,
"0 Messenger of Allah," he asked, "What do you say to the fat of the dead animal;
we use it for greasing the ships and leather, and to light lamps with."
It was clear that this man had some of the mentioned material and they were hoping
to sell them to non-Muslims and gain some profit.
But our noble Prophet was rather annoyed by this request. He was not sure what this
attitude oftrying to bend the rules through detail would lead to! Drinking liquids that
made one drunk, pork and the meat of dead animals were already prohibited. The idols
had become history with the conquest of Mecca! And now here was a new decree
prohibiting the trade of these materials that were already prohibited for consumption
and this was what our noble Prophet was declaring. And so to the question of the
Companion he replied: "May Allah the Almighty curse them!"
This meant that a group of Jews, when faced with a similar situation, had tried to
narrow down the scope of the decree and tried to allow things that were prohibited.
The blessed Messenger continued to speak in order to explain: "When Allah the
Almighty had prohibited the meat of dead animals, they started to melt the fat and then
froze it back, sold it and ate from the benefits," thus drawing attention to this point.
This was another step in educating his congregation in all respects. The blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, was giving examples from the previous
people, and showing what kind of calamities waited those who tried to bend and break
Divine rules in order to suit to their own wishes. Each new event meant a new

--- Sayfa 864 ---
experience for everyone. There was another incident in those days: A woman who had
newly entered Islam had committed theft! She had become Muslim but in those days
Islam had not been thoroughly digested by all. The woman was a member of a leading
Meccan family; she had not been able to give up her bad habit and had taken the
property of another person.
There was crime, and so there had to be a punishment as well; a crime that went
unpunished, or justice that came late meant a ticking bomb for the society. Therefore,
the crime that this woman committed had to be punished. However the relatives of the
woman did not want to see a member of their family being punished. They were still
hung up on their old ways, and so they thought if they could somehow reach the
blessed Messenger they could ask for special treatment for her. They did not have the
courage to go to his presence and tell him of their request. So they started looking for
someone who could do this for them. At last they said:
''No one other than the dear friend of the Messenger of Allah, Usama ibn Zayd,
could say this." So they decided that it will be Usama who should ask for it. Even
though, Usama was not yet old enough to understand where this could end, he
conveyed the message he had been given to the blessed Messenger. However, he was
already regretting it, because our noble Prophet became very angry at this request of
asking for special treatment in executing Allah's orders! The blessed Messenger
would always be inclined towards forgiving when the offence was against him, but
when the offence was against the rights of the society in general, he was infuriated. He
said to U sam a: "Are you trying to be the middleman for changing a rule that Allah has
put in place?''
Usama wanted to disappear at that moment; he looked down and said: "0
Messenger of Allah! Will you ask for forgiveness from Allah for me?" Thus he was
asking to be forgiven for the mistake he had committed unintentionally.
But this wasn't an issue that could be solved by simply having Usama forgiven;
there was an issue to be tackled here in order to prevent similar cases in society. That
is why the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, waited for his
Companions to gather for the Prayer. After the Prayer was performed he addressed
them. After thanking and praising Allah, he said: "Verily, the main reason why
peoples before you perished was because while they punished the weak and the
unprotected when they committed a crime, they would forgive a nobleman when he
committed the same crime! I swear by He who holds my life in His hands that should
it be Muhammad's daughter Fatima, I will execute the punishment without
hesitation!" Following these words, he called Bilal to his side and told him to execute

--- Sayfa 865 ---
the punishment of the woman. 213
This was a reaction they did not expect, and at the same time it was a reaction that
would put an end to all considerations for privileges for certain people. The Meccans
were thus learning another new thing; that the believer must fully and unconditionally
submit him/herself to the will and orders of Allah, and that all are equal in the face of
these orders, the weak, the strong, the rich and the poor.

--- Sayfa 866 ---
195 Our mother Maymuna would hear a similar comment from the Messenger of Allah. The blessed
Messenger who had woken up in the night to take ablution would say labbayk three times and say
"I am given help." Our mother Maymuna would ask him "You seem to be speaking to someone,
is there someone with you?" to which he would answer: "Remember the man who talked in
poetry about the misfortune that befell the sons of Ka'b? He is saying that when Bakr ibn Wail
attacked them the Quraysh helped them, and he wants help from me!" See Tabarani, Mu jamu 'l-
Kabir, 23/433 (1052),Mu jamu 's-Saghir, 21167 (968); Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 4/631.
196 They had not just participated in this raid but also had provided logistic support with weapons and
mounts. In order to hide the fact that they had been involved-because they did not want to
appear to be violating the agreement openly-the leading men of the Quraysh had covered their
faces although it was nighttime. There are however some reports that Abu SufYan had opposed
the raid or that he had nothing to do with these actions. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/783; Ibn Sa'd,
Tabaqat, 21134; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/20 1.
197 They had offered three options to Quraysh with Damra: 1. Paying the blood money of the Huza' a,
and thus they would pay the material cost and be absolved 2. Cancelling their agreement with the
Banu Nufasa, and this meant the Banu Nufasa would be free to decide their own relationship with
the Messenger of Allah and he would come on to them and stop this looting tribe 3. Accepting
that the Hudaybiya Agreement was annulled and this would mean declaring war on the part of the
Quraysh. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/787; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/204-205.
198 On the way at a place called Usfan he would come across Budayl ibn Warka and would try to
learn whether they had gone to Medina and given them the news, and when he could not get the
answer he wanted he would look into the droppings of their camels with the stick he had in his
hand and when he saw the seeds of the types of dates called ajwa and "bird's beak," he came to
the conclusion that they were coming from Medina. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 5/50; Waqidi,
Maghazi, 1/792; Tabari, Tarikh, 21154.
199 Abu Sufyan, who did not lose hope although all doors were being closed on him, would go our
mother Fatima, the blessed Messenger's daughter and the wife of Ali, and would ask for
procuring the grounds to speak to her father, but he would return empty handed from that door as
well. He was so desperate that he even sought the help of Hassan, the blessed Messenger's
grandson, who was still a small child. See Ibn Hi sham, Sirah, 5/51; Tabari, Tarikh, 21154;
Suhayli, Rawdhu 'l-Unf, 41148.
200 Difficult days were in store for Abu Sufyan who would go back to Mecca and then tell them the
developments in Medina. The Quraysh had already been worried because he had stayed too long,
they conjectured that he too must have become a Muslim. When he came and told them what had
happened, they voiced their discontent and would leave Abu Sufyan between a rock and a hard
place. Despair was spreading throughout Mecca. They turned to him and said: "You have
conceded to do something no one else will agree to. You have come with a result that suits neither
you nor us! We swear by Allah that your custody or surety means nothing to us; it is easy for
them to violate it! And when it comes to Ali, he has only mocked you!"
201 After this command, our mother Aisha's father Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, would
come to her and ask her the reason for the preparations; he wanted to know where the Messenger
of Allah wanted to go! But our mother Aisha would not speak of the matter that our noble Prophet
had told her to keep a secret even to her father, the blessed Messenger's most loyal friend. But
later when Abu Bakr came to his presence he would speak to him, and after a long conversation
he would tell him the reason for the voyage on condition that he would keep it secret and he
would tell him to make preparations as well. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 1/796.
202 Al-Mumtahana 60:1-3
203 It is said that this number reached twelve thousand with those who joined them on the road. See
Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li Ahkami 'l-Qur 'an, 8/97; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/411; Ibn Athir, Al-
Kamil ji 't-Tarikh, 113 3 5; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 51266.

--- Sayfa 867 ---
204 Here four different reports are combined together. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/214;
Al-Akk, Abdurrahman,Mawsu 'atu Uzamai Hawla'r-Rasul, 211044.
205 It is also reported that the number was nine hundred. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/813; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/219.
206 What Jabir heard that day from the blessed Messenger had reminded him of what he heard in
Medina. One day, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had said to him:
"When Allah the Almighty has helped us achieve the conquest of Mecca, the place we will camp
is going to be the Hayf of the sons ofKinana, where they had come together in denial against us."
That day the polytheists had gathered and decided to exile the Muslims from Mecca and leave them
to their deaths. But the decree of fate would be different and now the Messenger of Allah and his
Companions had come to the place that had been decreed from that day, and were entering Mecca
from the place where their death sentences had been declared. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/825;
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/230.
207 It is also reported that the person who offered Zamzam to the blessed Messenger was another
uncle of his, Harith ibn Abdul Muttalib. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 1/833; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 5/235.
208 When he was late in bringing the key, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
sent a group of his men to his house, and only then would his mother be convinced and relinquish
the key. See Waqidi,Maghazi, 1/833; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/237.
209 With the onset of the conquest, regret had come about and these were words that affected Umar
deeply. And on that day he would promised that, he would pray supererogatory Prayers, fast and
repent because of the way he reacted on the day of Hudaybiya. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11607; Ibn
Sayyidinnas, Uyunu 'l-Athar, 21120; Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/320, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 41192.
210 An-Nisa 4:58
211 The blessed Messenger paid this debt on return from Hawazin. And when paying he would pray
in the following manner: "Verily, the due of a debt taken is thanks and to repay it," and then he
prayed for bounty for the property of the people from whom he had received the debt. See
Waqidi, Maghazi, 1/863; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/258.
212 Later, the blessed Messenger would ask them to change the colour of the hair and beard of Abu
Quhafa, asking them not to dye it black either. So his hair was dyed with henna, and this was a
first in Islam. See Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 311036 (1773); Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 4/453.
213 The abovementioned female Companion would repent after this and turn towards her Lord; she
would live the rest of her life honorably. Our Mother Aisha said that this person would come to
her now and then and speaks to her. Aisha reports that she lived Islam with complete submission
and that she would inform the blessed Messenger of this woman's progress. See Muslim, Sahih,
3/1315 (1688); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 8/267.

--- Sayfa 868 ---
THE NEWS THAT COMES
FROM THE HAW AZIN
N
ineteen days had passed since the conquest. 214 In that period the blessed
Messenger had prayed his Prayers short because he was not intending to
stay in Mecca; he was going to establish authority there and then leave. But
it did not happen that way; because the news that came from the direction of Hawazin
was not good at all.
He sent one of his Companions, Abdullah ibn Abu Hadrad to Hawazin, instructing
him: "Go and bring us their news!"
Abdullah ibn Abu Hadrad went close to where they were living. He was to stay
there for a while and observe the situation and then come back.
He had set off on the road as soon as he received the instructions. When he came to
Hawazin, he saw that they were in intense war preparations. In order to be able to
gather more information he stayed with them for two days. The tribes of Hawazin and
Thaqif thought that following the conquest of Mecca, the Messenger of Allah would
now attack them.
They said: "Now it's our tum! There is no obstacle in front of him. There is no
reason why he should not attack us now. It will be better if we get together and attack
him first! We swear that Muhammad has always fought with people who do not know
how to fight wars. Come, let us go around people and prepare the army, let us attack
him before he comes to us."
They were ready for war. They had been waiting for this moment for a year and
they had been trying to get help from other tribes. The conquest of Mecca showed that
now they had to be quicker in their war preparations.
In a very short while, the Hawazin had convinced the tribes of Thaqif, Nasr and
Jusham. They had got all their support. They had found less support from the tribes of
Sa'd ibn Bakr and the Banu Hilal. Among the ranks ofHawazin, the branches ofKa'b
and Kilab said: "We swear that should you get the support of everyone from the East

--- Sayfa 869 ---
to the West and attack Muhammad, he will still defeat you." Thus they had dismissed
the visitors of the Hawazin, and they had not responded favorably to their call.
They wanted to get a man over hundred years of age, Dared ibn Simma, the chief of
the Jusham tribe, to attempt to gather together this disparate structure. But he refused
due to the weakness in his eyes. So they chose a young man of about thirty years of
age, Malik ibn Awf, as their commander. Malik ibn Awf valued Durayd' s views a lot
and he could not decide on any matter before asking him. At one point Durayd said to
Malik: "0 Malik! You are not going against someone who had defeated the Arabs,
who had frightened the Persians and those in Damascus, who has either executed or
exiled the Jews of Hijaz. Do not forget that your war with Muhammad will not end
here and that it will have an aftermath." The young commander Malik answered:
"You'll be pleased with what you will see tomorrow."
He was not thinking logically, instead he was planning to put all he had into this
fight.
The blessed Messenger's envoy Abdullah who managed to get close to him heard
him say: "In truth, Muhammad has not really fought before this; the people he was
faced with were people who did not know what war was and had no experience, that's
why he defeated them! When tomorrow morning comes, place your women and
animals and hold your positions. Then we will attack them together! Break the sheaths
of your swords; know that you will meet them with twenty thousand swords with
broken sheaths! Move as one body, one man! Know that victory will be with those
who attack first!"
Malik's purpose was to convince them take with them whatever they had in this
world, so that they had no option but to win the war. He thought that they would do
their utmost in order to protect their families. He thought this was the best weapon he
could use against the believers! Then he set up camp in the Awtas and ordered the
army to gather. Durayd came to where the army had gathered and he heard the sounds
of the women, children, sheep and camels. He opposed what was about to happen; but
Malik's insistence would pay off. The army of Hawazin would take the decision to
attack to any living thing that would enter their territory. This was completely against
Durayd's wishes. Durayd's discontent disturbed Malik as well, and he said: "He is
now an old man and he has turned this issue into a personal matter, or 'me or him',"
and thus encouraged people to listen to himself. And indeed, what he suggested would
prevail in the end, and the people chose to listen to a person who had a future rather
than someone who would die quite soon. The old warrior Durayd who watched what
was happening with great disappointment would speak of his yearning for his younger

--- Sayfa 870 ---
years. He asked Malik to leave a group of fighters aside so that they would be able to
set up a trap for the Muslims that were coming.
Departing for Hunayn
Abdullah who had fulfilled his mission of observation spoke of what he saw and heard
to our noble Prophet. Unfortunately the news they had been receiving was true. An
army was coming at them and the Messenger of Allah, who received this news
regarding the Hawazin, said: "Tomorrow our camp will be at the home of the Banu
Kinana where they had plotted against us," thus calling his Companions to arm and
prepare.
For the Companions who had thought that now they could take a break and relax, a
new and difficult war was approaching. However they had to respond before these
tribes attacked Mecca, and this war had to take place outside Mecca!
They needed more weapons for this and the blessed Messenger took another step
and sent word to Safwan ibn Umayya to meet up with him: "0 Abu Umayya," he said.
"Will you loan us weapons against our enemies?"
Safwan had not yet become Muslim, but the blessed Messenger saw the potential of
becoming a Muslim in him, and at such an important juncture as this, he thought that
he could sit down and talk to him, and show him the beauties oflslam. He thought that
with his own manner and style he could speak directly to the heart of Safwan. But
Safwan was thinking of other things and asked:
'Will you be taking them from me and not return them?"
''No," said the Messenger of Allah. "I will use them for a while and I will return
them back to you!"
"There is nothing to worry about then," said Safwan ibn Umayya and brought many
weapons including a hundred shields, 215 and many swords and handed them to the
blessed Messenger. In a similar manner, the blessed Messenger had borrowed three
thousand spears from his uncle's son Nawal ibn Harith and when taking them from
him, by way of compliment he said: "I see your spears break the backs of the
polytheists."
The calendar was showing the sixth day of the month of Shawwal, 216 it was a
Saturday.
An army of fourteen thousand men had been prepared in the homelands of the Banu
Kinana217, and they were waiting for the orders to come from our noble Prophet. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, gave his order, now the army

--- Sayfa 871 ---
was progressmg in the direction of Hawazin! On this journey our mothers Umm
Salama and Maymuna were accompanying the blessed Messenger.
The noble Messenger of Allah had left a man of twenty years of age, Attab ibn
Asid, as deputy in Mecca. He had also appointed Muadh ibn Jabal to preach people
Islam.
Evening came and they gave a break. A horseman approached our noble Prophet
and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! I came here before you and went to the top of these
mountains. I saw that the Hawazin have taken their sheep and camels, their children
and women with them and there they wait; they have gathered there as families."
The blessed Messenger, who listened to what the horseman was excitedly telling
him, answered with a smile and said: "By the will of Allah, tomorrow they will all be
ruins of war for the Muslims," and turning to his Companions, he said: "Who will be
our watch guard tonight?"
It was clear that our noble Prophet based his choice for critical posts on people's
willingness to take the task. Responding to his request, Anas ibn Abu Marsad stood up
and said: "I, 0 Messenger of Allah." He turned to him and said: "Then mount your
horse."
Anas went and mounted his horse at once, then came back to the presence of the
blessed Messenger. This time he said to him: "Climb from this valley to the top of the
mountain, so that we may be warned against an attack that comes from that direction."
When the time for the Morning Prayer came, our noble Prophet came out to lead the
Morning Prayer. After two cycles of Prayer, he asked: "Do you have any news from
your horseman?"
No one had any news and so they answered: "No, 0 Messenger of Allah," and then
they started their Morning Prayer. As soon as he finished his Prayer, the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned towards his Companions once
again and said: "Rejoice! Your horseman is coming!"
When they looked closely, they could see that the horseman was coming. Before
long Anas came and stood in front of the blessed Messenger and gave him his report:
"I went to the top of the mountain as the Messenger of Allah instructed me in the early
hours of the day. I also climbed the other, I looked around carefully and yet I could
not see anyone."
It seemed that they had hidden and having listened to what Anas told him, the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, asked: "Did you get off your
horse at any point last night?"

--- Sayfa 872 ---
''No, I did not get off my horse except for Prayer and for natural necessities," said
Anas.
His was an important quality; realizing the importance of the mission he had been
given, he had not steered away from the direction he had been given. This was an
important characteristic in the eyes of the Prophet and Allah. Therefore, the
Messenger of Allah said to Anas ibn Abu Marsad: "You have earned Paradise even if
you should not do anymore good deeds from now on."
When they reached the place called Eva's, the blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, walked under a big tree and hung his sword and shield on the
branches of the tree in order to relax a little. Then after a short while he called out: "0
Abu Burayda!"
Burayda who heard his blessed voice answered: "Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah?" and
ran towards him. There was a man next to our noble Prophet, who was sitting under
the tree. He had called him so he could hear what he had to say. : 'While I was
sleeping here this man came up to me. He pulled out his sword and yelled '0
Muhammad! Who will save you from me now?' I opened my eyes and said with no
hesitation 'Allah!'."
Abu Burayda had goose bumps and he could hardly stand where he was. He was
also holding the handle of his sword and said to the blessed Messenger: "0 Messenger
of Allah! Leave this man to me, so that I may sever the head of an enemy of Allah; he
may be the spy ofthe polytheists."
But the Messenger of mercy pointed to him and said: "Be silent now Abu Burayda
and put your sword back into its sheath."
Abu Burayda was frustrated because he could not do anything to this man. The
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had forgiven him. He looked at
the other Muslims hoping someone else would be able to do what he was not given
permission to do. But Prophetic affection would not allow any of it. Prophet of Allah
said: "0 Abu Burayda! Stop harassing this man, because there is Allah the Almighty
who sees and protects me. He will protect me until His religion is above all religions,"
and thus he would forgive this man who attempted to assassinate him.
Preparation for the Hunayn
The evening of the tenth day of the month of Shawwal, they reached Hunayn, and it
was a Tuesday. Malik ibn Awf who was the leader of the Hawazin had sent three of
his horsemen to different direction for scouting. When the Hawazin spies returned to

--- Sayfa 873 ---
tell Malik what they had seen regarding the Messenger of Allah and his Companions,
they were shaking with fear. Malik got worried for them and asked: "Woe unto you!
What is wrong with you?" They replied,
'We saw men dressed in white on horses of different colors. We swear by Allah
that we could not stop ourselves from being affected in the way you see us now. It
seems to us that we are preparing to go to war not with mortals who inhabit the earth
but the inhabitants of the seven heavens! If you listen to us, you would return with
your tribe at once! Because when people see tomorrow what we have seen today, they
will end up in the same state as we are in now, their hands and feet will be quite as
useless as ours are!"
It was a scene they could not quite understand. Just as in Badr, Uhud and the
Trench, angels had come and they had appeared to the enemy in support for the
Messenger of Allah! These were the words that upset Malik and he first said to them:
"You may go to Hell, you cowards!" And then added: "I see what cowardly soldiers
you are!"
He took precaution in his own way and had these three soldiers locked up so that
they would not spread the word and effect the morale of the others. Then he called
out: "Send a courageous man to me from among you."
Before long, they sent him what he had asked for. Malik had instructed him with the
same mission! But the result was not different from the previous one. He went and
came back; he too was shaking with fear and describing the scene he saw advising that
they should tum back.
But none of these would be enough to tum Malik back from his way. He gave his
orders late at night He told them to go to the two sides of the valley and hide, and not
to make a move until the battle starts and the Muslims head towards them. His aim
was to surround the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and his
Companions in battle and defeat them.
With the early light of the morning, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, had put his Companions in their positions and had given the instructions
and flags to their bearers. He had two armors and one helmet, and a shield. He was
addressing his Companions encouraging them for the battle. He said that if they
forbore and stuck to it until morning, Allah would give them victory. Now the army
was ready to move and they started to flow towards the valley of Hunayn. Our
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, rode among his Companions, and
visited the ranks one by one. At one point he heard: "We will never be defeated today

--- Sayfa 874 ---
by way of numbers."
The people of Mecca and Medina had come together and now they were thinking
that together they would never be defeated.
It was true that many armies that were smaller in numbers had defeated armies
greater than themselves, and Hijaz had witnessed this as well, starting from Badr.
Victory had always depended on the help that Allah would give to an army; no one
could defeat whom He decided to exalt, and there was no power that could exalt what
He deemed would be defeated! What is important is to trust in Divine help, to do what
is required of the subject and then leave the rest with Allah. The Messenger of Allah
had been disturbed to hear such a conjecture in his ranks. He turned at once to where
the voice had come from. With his gaze he was expressing the thought that what they
said was inappropriate, and thus he was correcting a wrong committed by his
Companions.
This was indeed a view that needed to be corrected, because success was not due to
numbers rather it was due to purity in purpose. And eventually they would face a trap
they had not been expecting in their descent to the valley of Hunayn. At a moment
when they thought they would come face to face with an army and start fighting as
had been the case in previous wars, enemy soldiers had attacked them like locusts
from the two sides of the valley, and they had surrounded the soldiers of Islam from
all sides! There was no challenging or daring as was the custom. On that particular
day, Hawazin had left the conventions of war aside, and rather they had decided to set
up a trap and reach their goal easily. The army of Islam had not yet drawn their
swords. Those in the front were young men from Mecca who believed that victory was
inevitable. Many of them didn't even have weapons in their hands, and even if they
should have something, it was not enough to fight with. Everyone who looked around
realized that they were surrounded by enemy soldiers all around. The Hawazin had put
their women on camels as well and they kept them in battle position in the rear ranks,
they were pushing the camels and sheep they had brought with them in the direction of
the Muslims. There was a frightening scene in Hunayn. The horsemen that had gone in
front had been shaken and they had to tum back. They were followed by the Meccans
who had joined the army with expectations of spoil! This scene had demoralized the
others as well and there was expectation of dissolution in the ranks of the Muslims.
This was no doubt the result of trusting in numbers! 218
There were those who regarded the chaotic situation as an opportunity to kill the
blessed Messenger and Nadir ibn Harith was one of them. He had set off towards
Hawazin with the eminent men of Mecca and they had planned to switch sides when

--- Sayfa 875 ---
they saw the least weakness on the side of the Muslim army. Now, the opportunity
they had been waiting for had come and Nadir was looking for a way to kill the
blessed Messenger! Meanwhile our noble Prophet was spurring his horse towards the
polytheists. When he approached him from behind and raised his sword, a voice was
heard: "Hey you! Stay where you are!"
This voice was coming from somewhere so deep that he was shaken to the bone and
was trembling with fear. When he turned to look where the voice was coming from, he
saw men with white complexion, just like the ones in Badr! Nadir could not move his
arm or his hand nor could he find the strength to even take a step. He now had
understood, the person he meant to kill was the Messenger of Allah, protected by
Allah and aided by His angels. He put his sword in its sheath and fled away.
At the same time, there were rumors that seemed to double fold the calamity.
People who had joined the army because they thought spoils would be guaranteed or
people who had not had time to digest Islam completely said: "Today the spell has
been broken; this is where this ends." Such were their words which were demoralizing
others. These words had angered even Safwan ibn Umayya who had come to Hunayn
with the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, to watch the
developments from afar although he was a polytheist. When they came to him and
shouted: "Rejoice! Muhammad and his friends are being defeated! I swear they will
never be able to rise up again."
It was his stepbrother Qalda ibn Hanbal, and he reacted to him harshly: "Shut up!"
he shouted. "Are you bringing me the news of the victory of the Bedouin of the
desert? I swear that rather than to live under the heels of someone from Hawazin I
would prefer to have the Quraysh as my master!"
He was really angry when he said these; he did not want the Messenger of Allah to
be defeated and could not countenance it. He called one of his slaves to his side to
send him to the battlefield to observe what was happening: "Go and see which
watchword is reigning on the field now."
Meanwhile, a voice rose from the right side: "0 people! Come towards me! I am the
servant and Messenger of Allah, and there is no lie to this! I am Muhammad, the son
of Abdul Muttalib."
In Hunayn where he had around one hundred Companions left, this was an action
that could bring things together again. Our noble Prophet not only addressed his
Companions, but by riding his mule towards the enemy, he was also showing them
what to do! Such that Abbas who was holding the reigns of the blessed Messenger's

--- Sayfa 876 ---
mount, and on the other side Abu Sufyan who had sworn not to leave the blessed
Messenger's side were anxiously trying to keep up with him. On the other hand, our
noble Prophet was not neglecting his connection to his Lord. At this very moment
when war was picking up again, he raised his hands and cried: "0 Allah! Come to our
aide, and give us victory for the sake of all that You have promised me. Dear Lord! If
the reverse happens, there will be no one left on earth who would worship you. Dear
Lord! Gratitude can only be to you, and difficulties are referred to you, and help can
be asked only from You." As he was praying the comforting voice of Truthful Gabriel
was heard: ''You have prayed to Him with the words that Moses was taught by Allah
on the day when he had the sea in front of him and the Pharaoh behind him-the day
he was saved by the sea opening up and he and his Companions were saved from the
waves."
These were words that lifted the worries from the heart of the blessed Messenger
and it also contained the good news that they would be saved that day.
However, the current situation was not to be neglected, and in that respect, the work
at hand was much greater than they presumed. The blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, turned to Abbas and said: "0 Abbas! Call out to the people of
the Ansar and say '0 you who have promised to the death at Hudaybiya! 0 those,
whose hospitality is praised in chapter al-Baqarah, call to them thus!"
How could it be that the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him,
should ask and Abbas not comply? Now the valley of Hunayn was echoing with his
voice: "0 Ansar! 0 people of Samura! 0 people of Baqarah!"
He called out to Abdullah ibn Masud on the same grounds and asked: "Where are
the Ansar and the Muhajirun?" asking him to call them.
This question spread through the field and it accompanied Abbas's voice: "0 people
of the Ansar! 0 Khazraj! Let my mother and father perish for you; how can you run
away from where the Messenger of Allah is," addressing those who were running
away from the battlefield.
And this move had been successful, all who heard this call said: "Here we are, 0
Messenger of Allah! We are all with you," and they all turned back, like bees return to
their hive, all the Companions who heard the voice of our noble Prophet turned back
and advanced towards the enemy.
The blessed Messenger, who saw this said: "Now the real battle has started!"
He was still on his mount and he was advancing towards the enemy; he picked up a
handful of pebbles and threw it over the enemy: "Let faces be black! Let no one come

--- Sayfa 877 ---
to their aide! In the name of Muhammad's Lord, let all of you disappear."
It was as if every single pebble was a horse running towards the enemy, and they
perceived them as to be a mighty army.
That day, the Companions advanced on the enemy once again, and they would not
see anyone who attacked the enemy quite as courageously as the Messenger of Allah!
Now that they had come to the line prescribed by our noble Prophet, they were
experiencing a great peace. Just like at other critical moments before, a peace
descended on them once again and they forgot all the difficulties of the battlefield!
Meanwhile, a great thunder had appeared in the sky and the fear caused by this
thunder hit the enemy at the very core. There was some kind of flow from the heavens
to the earth; Allah the Almighty had sent armies of five thousand angels to increase
the moral of the believers. They were coming in legions, they had the ends of their
turbans hanging from their shoulders and with this appearance they were causing
much fear in the hearts of the enemies. There were those among the Hawazin who fled
that day, fled with such haste that they had sought refuge in the castles ofTaif.
It was as if the pebbles that the blessed Messenger threw had hit the eyes of the
polytheists and they were not able to clearly see what was in front of them.
For the brave Malik and the army ofHawazin, the time of defeat had come. After a
brief moment of dissolution they were now faced with an army that was hammering at
them and so the Hawazin tried to flee.
Meanwhile the slave that Safwan ibn Umayya had sent to observe the battlefield
had come back to him and said that the words on the battlefield were: "0 the Banu
Abdurrahman! 0 the Banu Ubaydullah! 0 the Banu Abdullah!" and these were the
watchwords of the fighters of Islam that day. After hearing this, Safwan said:
"Muhammad is victorious, because these were their watchword on the field, and thus
he would be pleased."
At one point the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned
around and said: "0 Shayba! Come closer to me."
Shayba ibn Uthman did not understand what he meant by this. Because at that
moment, Shayba was right behind him, trying to get closer to him in order to kill him.
He had tried to approach him from the rights side, but he had not had the courage to
take on Abbas. When he tried to attack him from the left, Abu Sufyan did not let him.
The only option left was to approach him from behind and attack, to revenge his father
and his uncles. But right then fires had flared up in front of him and he was left there
with his sword in his hand. He was shielding his eyes with his hands and was going

--- Sayfa 878 ---
backwards in fear! For he had seen horsemen on colored horses, had felt a fear deep
inside his heart. 219 He had realized that he was not going to be able to approach the
Messenger of Allah in order to harm him He also realized that no one else would be
able to do it either, because our noble Prophet was being protected by Allah.
It seemed that the time had come for Shayba ibn Uthman who thought that he
would never become a Muslim even if the whole world should convert to this religion.
He went towards the blessed Messenger who was calling him. The Messenger of Allah
first put his blessed hand on Shayba's chest, and then prayed: "Dear Lord! Make the
Satan stay away from him."
Shayba ibn Uthman had already started to melt. There were storms raging inside
him, and when he lifted up his head, he loved our noble Prophet more than all the
things that were dearest to him! He too had come to kill but now he was finding a new
life; the blessed Messenger called again: "0 Shayba! Come now fight the deniers!"
What a grace, what magnanimity, what a trust this was? At one moment, the
harshest hearts turned to wax in the hands of the Sultan of Hearts. And now they were
brandishing swords against the other side to protect him!
There were those who exceeded the limits on the battlefield on that day fighting
women and children who had swords in their hands. But the fact was that the blessed
Messenger after seeing a woman killed had sent one of his Companions to Khalid ibn
Walid and gave him orders not to touch women and children even during wartime. But
now he was observing the same kind of behavior once again. Our noble Prophet
warned them once again; even ifthey should be there to help the enemy army, he did
not want innocent people to be harmed: 'What is it with these people that they find it
in themselves to kill women and children? Be careful, and do not make their families
and children a target."
Usayd ibn Khudayr who heard him say this replied: "0 Messenger of Allah, are
they not the children of the polytheist?"
With this, he meant that the children of the polytheist would sooner or later oppose
them as polytheists, and that it would be justifiable to kill them. Perhaps he wanted to
the blessed Messenger to give a response to be practiced for generations afterwards
and he wanted to be the one to have instigated the blessed Messenger's remark. The
valley of Hunayn was once again witness to Prophetic resentment; the veins in the
blessed Messenger's neck could now easily be seen. He said: "Are not the best among
you the children of polytheists?"
These words were like live munitions and those who heard it felt like they had been

--- Sayfa 879 ---
pierced through the heart; because there were many Companions present whose
fathers had died polytheist, and many of these Companions were the ones who always
ran in front in battle. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had hit
home once again. He added: "All living things are born upon a pure nature and stays
on that pure nature until they start to speak; it is the mother and father who make
people Christian or Jewish."
An injured man whose courage in war had been highly talked about was brought to
the blessed Messenger who said: "He is from among the inhabitants of Hell."
They were disconcerted. How could a man who had shown such valor in the
battlefield go to Hell? Nevertheless, because it was the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, who gave this news, it had to have a meaning. Then they
started to observe the man very closely. They remembered Quzman who had
committed suicide on the day of Uhud. Like Quzman, this man also pierced his belly
with an arrow when his pains became too much to bear. They ran back to the presence
of our noble Prophet at once and told him what happened. He called Bilal to his side
and said: "Only believers will enter Paradise; do not forget that Allah the Almighty
may consolidate His religion with a disintegrated man."
The army of Hawazin had finished. Their leader Malik ibn Awe had to flee with
some of his men to Taif to seek refuge, and those who had been left behind had
become war prisoners. Now the valley ofHunayn was filled with red camels, herds of
sheep and other animals. There were also precious things as well! Many Meccans who
had doubts about the Muslims' success had now observed the help that Allah had
given to the Messenger of Allah. So they came to the blessed Messenger and became
Muslims as well! The horsemen who had acted in the Name of Allah had become
victorious over those who had spent their life bowing in front of Lat and Uzza. They
had defeated them in a way that the polytheists could not have imagined.
Slaves and Spoils
Now the war had ended; some had fled, and many had been taken prisoner. The
Hawazin who had come to Hunayn with their families and all their possessions, had
left behind a fortune. The spoils that were left on the field included twenty-four
thousand camels, more than forty thousand sheep, and silver of four thousand ukiyya!
There were also six thousand war prisoners. The blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, had warned his Companions regarding women that they should
not be touched. Even if these women should be slaves as part of their share of the
spoils, the Companions were to leave the pregnant women alone until they give birth

--- Sayfa 880 ---
to their children. The Truthful Gabriel who had come on that day brought the news of
these regulations to the Messenger of Allah.220 The blessed Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him, had appointed Abu Sufyan to be responsible for the slaves221
and for the organization of the distribution of the spoils he had appointed Masud ibn
Amr. He told him to have all the spoils transported to Jirana and not to touch them at
all until he had come back. Then he turned to his Companions and said: "0 people! It
is not permissible for me to take anything-not even a pin-other than the one fifth of
what Allah has given you as spoils; and this one fifth will return to you. That is why
bring to me whatever you have by way of spoils-a piece of thread or a pin even. Do
not make spoil property your own, or else this will be great cause of embarrassment
for you on the Day of Judgment!"
Those who heard the blessed Messenger say these words remembered the warning
they had heard on the day of Khaybar. They stayed away from taking even a piece of
thread from the spoils before they were distributed. But among the soldiers were those
who had not witnessed that day and they had taken some things-albeit small-from
the field, and they believed this to be their right.
Ali's brother Uqayl was one of them. When he returned to his wife, blood was
dripping from his sword. His wife said to him: "It is clear that you fought the
polytheists today; what spoils have you got from them?"
When faced with this question he gave her the needle that he had in his hand and
told her that she could dam the clothes with it. But when he went outside and heard
the caller of the Messenger of Allah he felt as if he had been shot in the head, because
he was saying that they were not allowed to take anything home before the distribution
even if it should be needles and thread. This was typical sensitivity of the
Companions, and running back to his wife he said: "I swear you cannot have that
needle," and taking it away from her he took it to where it belonged.
Taif
It seemed like the wrestler who had lost the match was looking for a new challenge.
Those who had fled Hunayn had sought refuge in Taif, closing the castles from
behind, trying to re-gather their forces in order to attack our noble Prophet once again.
They knew that their attitude would not go undetected and so fearing that they would
be sieged, they had stocked the castle with a year's worth of supplies. They had got
into the castle all types of weapons that they could find. They had also asked for the
help of other tribes to help them in this war and they had been successful to get help to
some extent.

--- Sayfa 881 ---
Things were still taking shape and upon this fresh news, the blessed Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his Companions and told them that their
target was now Taif. He had appointed Khalid ibn Walid as the head of the pioneering
force of a thousand men. The Taif people were in their castle and there was no one left
outside. Khalid came all the way to the castle and checked the surroundings, but he
was unable to find anyone with whom he could speak. He then went to the door of the
castle and called out loudly: "Let one of you come down so that I can speak with him,
I guarantee his safety until he is returned to you, or give me that surety that I may
come among you so that we may speak!" The following answer came from the castle:
"No one from us will come to speak with you, nor will we let you come here! 0
Khalid! Your friend has always fought men who did not know how to fight until this
day!"
This was a clear challenge, meaning: "Let him come and see what real fighting is!"
Their eyes were blinded by hatred and rancor, and without knowing what is ahead of
them, they were locked onto enmity!
That is why Khalid thought he should advise them: "Listen to my words, listen to
me carefully! The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, laid siege to
many people including the Yathrib and Khaybar, people who had very strong castles.
He sent one single man to Fadak and yet they had to surrender. I warn you, so that
what befell the Banu Qurayza should not befall you; they were besieged by our noble
Prophet for days and at the end they also had to comply with his judgment. The
warriors had been killed and their families had become slaves! Then he entered Mecca
and he also conquered that city and defeated its people. He then advanced towards the
Hawazin and they also had to kneel before him. You are at such a point in the world
that should he leave you to your own devices, the people around you will not leave
you alone. They would come and kill you."
In response to this clear and sincere advice they said: 'We will never leave our
religion," making it clear that they did not think of any alternative to war. And having
heard their reply Khalid ibn Walid returned to his camp.
After this negative reply that Khalid ibn Walid received, the blessed Messenger set
off from Hunayn in the direction of Taif following the itinerary of Nahlatu'l-
Yamaniyya, Qarn, Mulayh and Buhratu'r-Rugha in Liyya. When he came to
Buhratu'r-Rugha he gave a break, and preparing a particular place as masjid, he led
his Companions in Prayer. Meanwhile, a case was brought to him. A man from the
sons of Lays had killed someone from the Hudhayl and this had been proven with the
statements of witnesses! Killing a single human being was equal to killing the whole

--- Sayfa 882 ---
of humanity. In order to prevent further murders in society, the murderer had to be
killed-the price of killing a man was the killer's own life. And our noble Prophet
applied this order that Allah had communicated. Therefore, the blessed Messenger
decided for the execution of the killer. This was the first act of qisas or reciprocation
in Islam.
He had also given the order for the destruction of Malik ibn Awf's castle, and he
then continued to Taif, by way of Dayka and Nahb. For him Taif was a town full of
bitter memories; he had come there with such hopes about ten years ago and he had
been met with a reaction he had not expected; and had been forced to return covered in
blood all over! The Taif of that day was displaying the same kind of attitude today and
despite all the developments, it was choosing to be the center for denial!
The blessed Messenger was standing at the head of a grave and was saying the
following: "This is the grave of Abu Rigal, the forefather of the Thaqif; he was from
the people of Thamud and he had escaped what happened to his people by seeking
refuge in the Haram! But then he had come out and come out all the way here; but
what happened to his tribe got hold of him here and he was buried here. The proof for
this is the golden branch that was buried with him here; you will find him if you open
up his grave."
While advancing on the Thaqif, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, was revealing facts about the grave of their forefather Abu Rigal, pointing to the
need to solve the problem through peaceful means. The honorable Companions would
indeed start to excavate the grave and before long they would take out the golden
branch, and see that what the Sultan of Messengers said was true!
The Siege
When he approached the castle, they responded to his request to speak, with a shower
of arrows. It was clear that they did not consider an option other than war and so the
siege had started. The people of Taif who stood on the walls of their legendary castle
were showering the soldiers of Islam with arrows, throwing stones with catapults and
hot iron sticks that seared. Arrows were raining from the sky. Twelve of the
Companions were killed in this encounter.
The blessed Messenger, who pulled his fighters back after the first contact, set up
his camp further away from the castle, and the siege would continue from there. They
set up the tents of our mother Umm Salama and our mother Zaynab here and the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, performed his Prayers in
between these two tents. No one had the courage to go outside the castle and engage in

--- Sayfa 883 ---
a face to face com bat.
Khalid ibn Walid called out: "Is there no hero who will come out and fight
bravely?"
But he received no answer. He repeated the same call several times that day; but all
he received by way of answer were the arrows and the hot irons thrown from the
castle. He repeated the call on that day many times, but no one answered. Finally, they
heard the voice of someone named Abdu Yalayl; who said: "No one from us will
confront you this day; we will continue to wait in our castle. We have stock enough to
last us for years and if you wait until we run out of supplies, then we will draw our
swords and fight with you until our last breath!"
There seemed to be no way other than responding to arrows with arrows.
Now and that's what the honorable Companions had exactly done.
Despite the fact that the siege had lasted very long, no sound came from inside the
castle. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had someone from
his Companions call out to them: "All the slaves who come down from the castle and
join us will be freed!"
This call would disturb the harmony of the Thaqifwho had gathered together in the
castle. After this call, that very day, certain people who had been yearning for freedom
came out one by one. Before long, the number of people who had come out of the
castle reached twenty-three. The blessed Messenger freed whoever came to him, and
sending them to his Companions to be taught the Qur'an and Islam.
This was something that greatly disconcerted the people of Thaqif, and they could
not countenance the fact that the slaves preferred the presence of the blessed
Messenger instead ofthem. 222
Even though there were those from among the slaves who had come and submitted,
there still was no sound coming from the Thaqif, so they continued shooting at them.
Our noble Prophet was encouraging his Companions to shoot arrows on the one hand
and was pointing them to new targets such as abolishing slavery. That day he was
heard saying: 'Whoever reaches the target with his arrow there is a certain status for
him in Paradise! Whoever shoots an arrow in the way of Allah; it is as good a deed as
freeing a slave! He whose hair turns white on the way of Allah-his hair will become
a beacon of light on the Day of Judgment. Whoever among you frees a Muslim slave,
he will be protected from Hellfire as much as the number of the bones of that freed
slave. Should a Muslim woman free a Muslim female slave, she will be protected from
Hellfire as much as the number of the bones of that freed slave."

--- Sayfa 884 ---
These expressions made it clear that freedom was a fundamental principle, and it
made the listeners think not only about the slaves that were coming from the Thaqif
but also their own slaves as well.
The blessed Messenger decided to discuss the next strategy with his Companions
seeing that they had not been able to get any results for days. Salman al-Farisi came to
the fore and just like in the trench; he referred to the tactics from the land of the
Persians and said that they had to set up catapults in front of the walls. This was a
suggestion that was accepted and with the approval of the blessed Messenger the
catapult was set up. Now they could throw bigger stones with much better speed. They
also constructed two dabbabas, vehicles that protected the soldiers from the arrows
and hot irons that could come down from the castle. These were being pushed towards
the castle and they were trying to get inside.
Now the Thaqif people had made the dabbaba and the catapult their target, as they
did not want them to approach. Before long, the dabbaba caught fire and started to
bum and the Companions had to get out. This attack had resulted in the martyrdom of
a number of Companions with no success achieved.
Time progressed but the Thaqif did not relent. Upon that the blessed Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, tried another tactic and had the news disseminated
that the vineyards and date trees would be destroyed. The vineyards and the date
groves were the life vein of Taif. Meanwhile he had pointed to the Companions to
start destroying from one side. Property was dear to life, and they were very concerned
about it, and yet they went up on the walls and called out for challengers!
Finally, an intelligent man among them said: 'Why are you cutting out trees? If you
defeat us, they will become yours," and calling Allah's name, he asked to leave them
alone. Upon that the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "I
leave them for Allah and for the sake of kinship." Calling out to the Companions, he
told them to stop the destruction.
At one point Uyayna ibn Hisn, approached the blessed Messenger and asked for
permission to speak to the people of Taif. He said that he would invite them to Allah
and that he hoped that some of them would become Muslims. When the blessed
Messenger gave him permission, he directed himself towards the castle. As he entered
the castle, the people of Thaqif gathered around him. He said to them: "Let my father
perish in your way! Do not leave your positions! I swear we are weaker than the
slaves. I swear that if something happens to him, the Arabs will have honor and
respect again! Do not be disheartened by them cutting up your trees and do not
surrender!"

--- Sayfa 885 ---
After saying these he left the castle and came back to the blessed Messenger. The
Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, called out to Uyayna: "What
did you tell them, 0 Uyayna?"
It was clear that when asking this, he was aware that Uyayna was in a situation
different than how he seemed. He had gleaned what had happened, or maybe he had
once again received a message from the Truthful Gabriel. But Uyayna was in no
situation to understand this and said: "I spoke to them about Islam and invited them to
faith, told them about the ways in which they could attain Paradise."
It was obvious that he had not realized, and he had to be spoken in a clear way that
he could understand. That is why the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, turned to him and said: "You are lying."
And then the beloved Prophet repeated what he said in the castle. It was as if he had
been there with him, and hearing his words. Uyayna was going through a terrible
anxiety. It was not possible for someone wise to have come and told him what had
happened; hence it proved that our noble Prophet did get help from beyond the
heavens. He could not look into the blessed Messenger face from shame: ''You are
right, 0 Messenger of Allah," said Uyayna. "I seek forgiveness from Allah and
apologize to you!"
On the face of it such a request had to be accepted. Our noble Prophet would
respond favorably to this request of Uyayna who had now made his position clear.
Lifting of the Siege
More than twenty days had passed223 since the start of the siege. One day the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his Companions and spoke
about his dream. In it, he was being presented with a bowl full of milk but a rooster
disturbed it with its beak and that it spilt.
It was clear that they had to tread more carefully in order not to spill the whole milk
in the bowl. These true dreams meant something very special for the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him. He had definitely got the message and he
would determine his strategy again accordingly. But for this, he wanted to have his
Companions on board as well, and at one point he turned to Abu Bakr and asked him
to interpret this dream that he had had: "I do not think that you will be able to attain
your aim concerning the Taif today," answered Abu Bakr. The blessed Messenger
replied: "I do not either; I do not think it will happen either."
Then he turned to Nawfal ibn Muawiya and said: "0 Nawfal! What do you think

--- Sayfa 886 ---
about continuing or lifting the siege?"
It seemed that the blessed Messenger, having received his message, was opening the
matter up for discussion again! Nawfal said: "0 Messenger of Allah! They are like a
fox stranded in its den, if you chase after it, you will catch it; if you let it go, it will not
be able to cause you harm either!"
Meanwhile, Hawla hint Hakim, the wife of Uthman ibn Maz'un had come to our
noble Prophet and asked him to give her the jewels of Badiya hint Ghaylan or Faria
hint Akil when the conquest of Taif would end. Hawla herself was known for her
jewelry and she wanted to have the jewels of these women that were legendary.
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, replied: "What will
happen if it is not decreed that we should advance on Thaqif and take their castle, 0
Hawla?" She was surprised. The siege continued and yet the Messenger of Allah was
saying that there was no Divine permission for conquest!
As soon as she walked out, she went to Umar and told him what she had heard.
Umar was also confused; he came to the blessed Messenger and said: "0 Messenger
of Allah, what is it that Hawla is talking about? She believes you have told her that!"
''Yes," answered our noble Prophet. "I told her that!"
"Do you mean there is no permission to fight them?" he asked again.
Our noble Prophet replied: ''No." Umar said: "Then shall I call the people to go
back?"
''Yes," said the blessed Messenger.
There was something going on that no one really could understand for now. The
noble Messenger told his Companions in the early hours of the morning that the siege
was going to be lifted and that they would retreat. This caused a lot of discontent for
some, they had worked hard on this campaign, and now they were about to lift the
siege for no apparent reason! Some asked: "Do you mean that we will return without
having conquered this place?'' insisting that they were not willing to leave before
conquering Tai£.224
The Messenger of Allah told his Companions not to leave their mounts, and told
them again that they would be returning early in the morning.
When the morning came and the blessed Messenger mounted his camel, people
such as Jabir came to him and asked him to curse the people of Thaqif who had given
much trouble to his Companions and led to the shahadah 225 of some of them, but the
blessed Messenger would not respond favorably to this request.
The blessed Messenger turned towards the castles of Taif, opened up his hands and

--- Sayfa 887 ---
said: "Dear Lord! Guide the Thaqif people towards the faith, and take away their
difficulties of making a living, bring them to us" Thus he would pray for people
against whom he had been fighting only a day before. He wanted his Companions to
repeat saying: "He is Allah, and there is no deity but He, He does not have partners
Companions; He had fulfilled His promise, He had kept His word, He has helped His
subject and made his army victorious against the Ahzab army on his own!"
While going towards Jirana on the way back, he wanted them to say: "Now we are
returning, we shall-if Allah wills-be those who repent and be sincere subject to
Allah; we will bow to Him in gratitude."
The Fruits of the Return Journey
He had chosen the route of Dahna, Qamu'l-Manazil and Nahla on his way from Taif
to Jirana. The Companions were learning something new with every step. Each new
matter that they were faced with meant another practice learned regarding religion.
The Companions were following the Messenger of Allah in all walks of life, and they
were studying all the details that they observed in the behavior of our noble Prophet.
When they shared these details with others, they accepted them as indispensable
principles. While they were on the way, the camel of one of the Companions, Abu
Ruhm, had come too close to the mount of the blessed Messenger, and his tough boots
had hurt the leg of the blessed Prophet.
Our beloved Prophet turned to Abu Ruhm and said: "Take your feet away, you are
hurting me," and saying this, he had touched Abu Ruhm lightly with his whip. Abu
Ruhm was greatly troubled. He was thinking of his past and future sins, fearing that a
verse would be revealed about him.
When they reached Jirana, although it was not his tum to graze the camels, Abu
Ruhm took on the job, feeling bad for having hurt the blessed Messenger on the way.
He was not aware that at the same time, the Messenger of Allah was looking for him.
When the news reached him, he was sure that what he feared was going to happen. He
came to his presence with his heart quivering in anxiety As soon as he saw him, the
Messenger of Allah said: "You have hurt my foot, and I have hit and hurt you with my
whip. Take these sheep in return for my hitting you with the whip" and gave him
eighty sheep for hurting him. Abu Ruhm breathed a sigh of relief. He was faced with
great generosity. The fact that the blessed Messenger was pleased with him was far
more important to him than the world and all that it had in it.
And so, a Muslim had to be likewise sensitive about other people's rights. When he
violated someone' s rights, he had to strive hard to pay back that right, and make his

--- Sayfa 888 ---
fellow Muslim feel that his rights had been properly restored.
The journey continued; when they approached Jirana, they came across a person.
The Companions were trying to keep him away so that he may not be able to approach
the Messenger of Allah, and also was trying to find out who he was. At last the man
raised his voice to a pitch that the Messenger of Allah could hear as well holding a
letter with his fingertips, he started to shout: "I am Suraqa ibn Jushm and this is my
letter, "226
The Messenger of Allah had also heard this voice and said: "Today is the day of
loyalty and goodness; bring him closer to me."
Suraqa approached him and first saluted the Messenger of Allah, and then gave him
the possessions he had brought for zakah. At one point he said: "0 Messenger of
Allah. If camels that have no owners come and drink from the pool that I have
reserved for abandoned animals, can I benefit from them as well?"
''Yes," said the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him. "It is a good
deed to give water to any living thing that has a liver!"
Jirana and the Hawazin Delegation
Then they came to Jirana once again; six thousand slaves, four thousand ukiyya worth
of silver, twenty-four thousand camels and more than four thousand sheep. The noble
Prophet was deliberately delaying his decision about the slaves and the spoils. It was
clear that there were things he knew about!
And it was true; more than ten days had passed since they had left Taif. One day the
Hawazin delegation of four had come towards Jirana with Zuhayr ibn Surad leading
them. The blessed Messenger's nursing uncle Abu Burqan was among them; they all
had become Muslims. They had realized that they would not be able to get anywhere
with war and they had come to the Prophet as Muslims to speak of their situation.
They first said: "0 Messenger of Allah! We are a deeply rooted and noble people, but
you know what calamity befell on us; be good to us and be generous to us so that
Allah may be generous to you in return!"
The meaning had been understood; this was a scene that made the Messenger of
Allah very happy. Had he been given the whole world and all that was in it he would
not have been so happy! But there was something else that he was curious about and
he asked: "What is Malik ibn Awf doing?"
Malik ibn Awf was the young commander who had caused the people of Hawazin
to go to the valley of Hunayn and face with disaster. The Messenger of Allah had not

--- Sayfa 889 ---
forgotten him either and was asking about him to the Hawazin delegation: "0
Messenger of Allah," they said, "he fled and took refuge with Taif."
But someone had to hold the hands of those who fall, and therefore our noble
Prophet said to them: "Go and tell him; if he comes to me having embraced Islam, I
will give him back his possessions and family, and also one hundred camels." He had
sent Malik ibn Awfs family to Mecca, to his aunt Umm Abdullah hint Abu Umayya
to be taken special care! The delegation of Hawazin who witnessed the sincerity in the
Prophet said: "0 Messenger of Allah. They are the ones we love most among our
lords!"
"And I wish them well," said our noble Prophet.
The honorable Companions were watching the developments with great curiosity! It
appeared that the reason the blessed Messenger took things slowly to this day, the fact
that he was not being hasty about the spoils and war prisoners taken at Hawazin, was
due to certain reasons that they were not aware of. That the blessed Messenger was
going to treat them with mercy was apparent from the fact that he had given them
clothes of cotton and linen. And now men who had been wielding swords against him
only a couple of weeks ago had come to him and stating that they had become
Muslims.
Meanwhile, their leader and poet Zuhayr ibn Surad who took his tum to speak to the
blessed Messenger said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Some of the slaves present here are
your nursing aunts and the family of those who nursed and looked after you. Had we
been a family who had nursed the king of Damascus, Hars ibn Abu Shimr or the king
of Iraq Numan ibn Munzir and had we been put into a similar situation with him, we
would expect mercy and good treatment from them. We would hope to be saved from
the difficult situation we find ourselves in; you, 0 Messenger of Allah, are the best
among those nursed and brought up, be generous to us!"
The poet Zuhayr who said these in the presence of the blessed Messenger would
hold onto the power in his poetry and speak his mind through poetry as well! This was
a development that our noble Prophet had been expecting and said: "Whatever falls to
my lot and the lot of sons of Abdul Muttalib from the spoils is yours."
He would thus pioneer another course of action for his Companions-to give away
their share of the spoils of their own volition. The Quraysh who saw this practice of
the blessed Messenger said: "Whatever falls to our lot belongs to Allah and His
Messenger," making it known that they were relinquishing their share as well. The
noble Prophet who saw this scene asked: 'What would you prefer? What is the best in

--- Sayfa 890 ---
my eyes is truthful words. Are your women and families or property dearer to you?
Choose either one! I had waited for you and postponed distributing it."
The Hawazin delegation could see that they would not be able to get back
everything that they had lost on the battlefield-they knew that they had to make a
choice: "0 Messenger of Allah," they said, "we see that you are making us choose
between our families and property; of course our families are dearer to us, we will not
bargain with you regarding the camels and the sheep!"
This did not come as a surprise to the blessed Messenger and said: "After I have led
the Prayers, come to me and declare in front of all that you have become Muslims and
say: 'We are your brothers in religion, we name the Messenger of Allah as the
intercessor between us and the Muslims concerning our children and women, and we
name the Muslims intercessors between us and the Messenger of Allah'."
Then, just as I have bequeathed my share to you, I will ask people to donate their
own, thus showing them the day.
He was also instructing them as to how they would say "La ilaha illallah," how
they would take the shahadah, and how they were to speak to people after Prayer!
Then the Afternoon Prayer was prayed and now it was time to put in place the
strategy that the blessed Messenger had decreed! When they were given permission to
speak, they put their spokesperson to the fore and had him express their intentions.
They had turned to the Companions and were making a very strong case for the
release ofthe prisoners.
As a response to their address the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, turned to the people, thanked Allah, exalted Him to be beyond any weakness and
then said: "There is no doubt that they are your brothers; they have come here having
repented. There is no doubt that I believe it is appropriate to give back the prisoners
that are my share; and whoever among you feels this is the appropriate thing to do, let
him do likewise! And whoever thinks that he needs to hold onto his share of the spoils
that Allah has given us, let him do so!"
The honorable Companions were people of great perception and they had already
understood the fine meaning in the words of the blessed Messenger; he wanted to set
the prisoners free! That is why they said together: "We would like to do the same 0
Messenger of Allah!" They were giving up their rights on their own volition!
But the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, did not want this
acceptance to be limited to those who were present at the Masjid at the time, he
wanted this to be a general practice in the society. That is why he said: 'We cannot

--- Sayfa 891 ---
know now who have relinquished their rights and who have not, so now return to your
homes and discuss the matter amongst yourselves once again. Then let your
spokespersons come to me and inform me."
Before long, the representatives of the Ansar and the Muhajirun came to the
presence of the blessed Messenger and said: "Our share is Allah's and His
Messenger's," and so they gave him the good news that everyone had accepted this
proposal. That day, among the honorable Companions, everyone had accepted this
course of action accept for the representative of the Banu Taym Aqra ibn Habis, the
Banu Fazara's leader Uyayna ibn Hisn and the Banu Sulaym's representative Abbas
ibn Mirdas.
They said that they would not release the prisoners that had been given to them as
their share, and that their tribes would act likewise.
When our noble Prophet promised six camels from the spoils for every prisoner
they would set free, the others relented, except for Uyayna ibn Hisn. Uyayna did not
g1ve m.
In the face of this meaningless obstinacy to gam worldly goods, the blessed
Messenger cried out,
"Dear Lord! Decrease what falls to his portion."
Uyayna, who had refused the offers one by one, entered among the slaves and
decided to take an old woman as prisoner thinking she was the matriarch of a rich
tribe. His aim was to make a lot of money out of people who would come to pay for
her freedom! But he would be the victim of his greed and he would not be able to get
any money either from this prisoner or those who came to collect her!
On the other hand, the delegation of Hawazin had conveyed the news of the
Messenger of Allah to their leader Malik ibn Awf, telling him that he should come and
benefit from this assurance of safety. Malik was seized by an anxiety; he feared that
the people of Thaqif would hear the assurance that should he go to the blessed
Messenger as having accepted Islam, he would be given back his family and
possessions. He feared that if the Thaqif people heard of this they would try to
imprison him in the castle!
He had a camel prepared and sent it to Danha with a slave in secret. He instructed
the slave to wait for him until he arrived. He too got on a horse in the middle of the
night and made straight for Danha; no one had realized that Malik ibn Awf had left!
Malik came to Danha and got on his camel: his aim was to reach Jirana, and he made
straight to the presence of our noble Prophet. He was embarrassed, but he also realized

--- Sayfa 892 ---
that he was taking a step towards real happiness now. The blessed Messenger was
happy for his arrival, and he gave back to him his family and possessions as he had
promised, and also one hundred camels! Malik ibn Awfwanted to express his feelings
in the face of such hospitality through poetry. He said that he had not seen a man as
generous and benevolent as the Messenger of Allah; he also tried to explain how the
blessed Messenger had predicted what would happen tomorrow. At the time when the
noble Prophet was in Jirana, he was experiencing surprises. On one of those days
when he was there, his nursing mother Halima Sadiya who had taken him to the Banu
Sad, and her husband Harith ibn Abdiluzza, had come to him with his nursing brother
Abdullah. This was a reunion that moved the blessed Messenger, and he immediately
took off the cloak he was wearing and asked his nursing mother to sit at one of its tails
and Harith ibn Abdiluzza on the other. He sat his nursing brother Abdullah somewhere
in front of him.
The Distribution of the Spoils
And so the prisoners had been handed back to their owners and now only the wares of
spoil remained. Some people wanted the distribution of the Hawazin property, which
had been awaiting distribution for almost a month, to take place quickly. They were
pursuing our noble Prophet and were saying: "0 Messenger of Allah! Can you now
distribute our shares, so that we may take what is our lot?" They wanted to get their
share of the spoils as soon as possible. Such that they had pulled his cloak, mounted as
he was on his camel and on his way. Thus they had obliged him to dismount in the
shade of a tree! Upon that the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him,
said: "0 people!" He was now upset; "Give me back my cloak!" and he added: "I
swear by He who holds my life in His hands that had I had a herd of camels as thick as
the forest of Tihama, I would distribute them all among you, and you would see that I
am no miser or a liar who does not keep his promise."
Then he went to the side of his camel and got out a needle from his sacks, and then
he raised it between his fingers and said: "0 people, I swear I have no right over your
spoils other than one fifth, and that one fifth will return to you eventually! And so
whatever you have from the wares of the spoils, needle or thread, bring it all, do not
make anything your own! Because the person who steals it will be faced with it on the
Judgment Day as a grave offence."
The honorable Companions listened to him and remembered that he had given a
similar warning as they were going to Taif. Those who had been with him since
Medina had heard similar warnings during the distribution of the Khaybar spoils as

--- Sayfa 893 ---
well and since then they had preferred to go hungry rather than take anything from
public property.
Not long had passed after this warning of the blessed Messenger when one of the
Companions started to make his way to his presence with a ball of string in his hands.
His face was all pale and he could not look on the blessed face of our noble Prophet:
"0 Messenger of Allah," he said, "I took this ball of hair so that I may be able to dam
a horse cloth for my camel."
"I relinquish my rights over it," said the blessed Messenger. But the Companion
was resolved, and in a situation where a great price would be paid he had no intentions
to tum back; he gave the ball of hair to the officer.
And now it was time to distribute the spoils. Before they started the distribution
they put aside one fifth, as was the order of Allah. Everyone was wondering who
would get how much! The noble Prophet started a strange kind of distribution that no
one was expecting. He had called forth some of the eminent men from among the
Arabs and in order to win their hearts and the hearts of their tribes for Islam, he was
giving them large portions! 227 When he gave Hakim ibn Hizam one hundred camels he
asked for a hundred more, and upon that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
be upon him, said the following to him: "0 Hakim! Worldly goods are sweet and very
attractive; whoever takes them with sincerity of heart, they will be cause for richness
for them; but whoever takes them following the desire of the self, then all the
blessings in it-baraka of it-will be lost, and that person is like a man who does not
feel full although he eats all the time! The hand that is above and gives is better than
the hand that is below and always takes! And so when it comes to giving, give first to
those that are closest to you!"
Hakim ibn Hizam was feeling great shame and the pallor of his face changed. He
could not look the noble Prophet in the eye.
After slowly lifting up his head, he said: "I swear by Allah who sent you with the
truth that I will not ask for anything after you and I will not take anything from anyone
anymore!"
Safwan ibn Umayya had been watching the developments very carefully until that
moment, and that the blessed Messenger was giving away the camels in hundreds, his
admiration for him grew even more, and he gazed at the sheep and the camels in the
valley before him. The blessed Messenger saw his state, approached him and said: "I
think you like the scene you see in the valley very much 0 Abu Wahb." Safwan
turned back and said: "Yes," and the Messenger of mercy responded: "Let all be yours

--- Sayfa 894 ---
with all that is in it." Safwan, who was not expecting such magnanimity and
generosity, was shocked and gathering himself together after a moment said: "I bear
witness that there is no deity but Allah and you are His Messenger; because such
generosity can only be found in a Prophet."
The feelings of enmity and hatred that he had not been able to get rid of,
disappeared from his heart and left its place to love for Allah and His Messenger.
Safwan ibn Umayya who had fled for fear of death during the conquest of Mecca
and who had returned as the result of the efforts of Umayr ibn Wahb, who had asked
for two months to think it over and who had been given four-the same Safwan had
now relented and become a sincere Muslim.
When Abbas ibn Mirdas was given less of a share compared to others, he was
disappointed and he was showing his disappointment by reciting a poem in public that
criticized the blessed Messenger. People like Safwan ibn Umayya, Aqra ibn Habis,
Uyayna ibn Hisn and Hakim ibn Hizam had been given one hundred camels each
whereas he had been given forty-and he had perceived this as a difference in status.
In his poem he was saying that the share that ought to have been his horse's and his,
was now being distributed between Aqra ibn Habis and Uyayna ibn Hisn, saying that
he was being treated unfairly.
What was given to Aqra ibn Habis or Uyayna ibn Hisn was not a result of their own
earning, likewise, what was given to those whose hearts were to be warmed towards
Islam was unfair. Under the circumstances everyone had to be content with what was
given to them and not compare it with what others received. Allah the Almighty
ordered that a share should be given to those whose hearts were to be warmed to
Islam, and the blessed Messenger was giving them more in order to make their entry
into Islam easier.
Our noble Prophet, who knew of his poems and his attitude, called him to his
presence and asked: "Are you the one who says 'and he divides my share and my
horse's share between Aqra and Uyayna'?"
Abu Bakr was by the side of the blessed Messenger at that time, and he said that
Abbas did not have the ability of saying poetry or repeating it, and that it could not
have been him who reported it to him-and then he read the poem there once again
himself. It was none other than Abbas ibn Mirdas who recited this poem and the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his Companions and
said: "Go and cut his tongue!"
Hearing these words from the blessed Messenger, the Companions were getting

--- Sayfa 895 ---
ready to go and literally cut Abbas ibn Mirdas's tongue, and then they realized what
was meant here was not to cut Abbas's tongue literally but to give the amount he
wanted so that he would stop talking. And as such he had saved his tongue from being
cut and now he was also getting one hundred camels from the spoils and was content.
Thus, his tongue was being cut just as the blessed Messenger put it! When those
whose hearts were to be warmed towards Islam were being given their share a man
called Dhu'l-Huwaysira from the tribe of Tamim came up to the Messenger of Allah:
"0 Muhammad, I have witnessed what you have done today."
The Messenger of Allah who turned to where the voice was coming from asked
him: "Tell me, what did you witness?"
He said to the blessed Messenger: "I see that you are not being fair; be fair."
These were sentences that upset the blessed Messenger and so he said: "If I am not
fair, then I am finished. "
And then: "Woe unto you, if justice is not a virtue that has a value in my esteem,
then by whose side can you speak of justice at all?" he said to Dhu'l-Huwaysira.
This was the kind of behavior that made Umar who was watching the developments
lose his temper as well. He approached the blessed Messenger and said: "0 Messenger
of Allah! Allow me to behead this hypocrite."
This reaction of Umar had worried our noble Prophet and he first said: "I seek
refuge in Allah from doing such a thing."
He did not want even a person who injured him deeply, who slandered the will of
Allah to be faced with the sword because that person, even if only in appearance, was
among his Companions. However he had a warning for the people of the future. He
directed his gaze to the horizon and said the following: "Leave him to his own
devices: there will be other people like him in the future! They may attain great
religious knowledge, they may keep reading the Qur'an, but all this will not pass
further than their throats and they will stray away from religion just like an arrow from
the bow. Once the arrow has left the bow, nothing of the arrow remains in the bow to
be seen, no trace of its point where it was laid! For it had already reached its target,
bloodied in the belly of the animal. Meanwhile you compare your Prayers with theirs,
your fasting with theirs and think that yours is inferior!"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had thus warned his
future ummah from that day-he was pointing to the importance of building bridges of
dialogue so that more people could be introduced to the clear religion of Islam. He
was also thus warning that there would always be those who would think this

--- Sayfa 896 ---
excessive, that these people would censure those who wanted to build the bridges and
that the efforts of dialogue should continue regardless of what such people would say.
The Assessment of the Ansar
The news of the distribution was reverberating through Jirana; such that someone from
the Ansar said, meaning this distribution that the blessed Messenger had organized:
"This is a distribution that is not fair; Allah's will has not been taken into
consideration here."
Ibn Masud who heard this said: "I swear I will report this to the Messenger of
Allah", and so had come directly to the presence of our noble Prophet and informed
him.
The blessed Messenger was greatly saddened; color had gone from his face and
blood seemed to have left his veins! He turned around and asked: "Who can act justly
if not Allah and His Messenger?" And then he added: "May Allah the Almighty have
mercy on Musa."
He had had to face worse than this and had always overcome these with patience!
While these were happening some people had sat aside and were trying to predict the
outcome of the developments. At one point Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas approached the
blessed Messenger and asked: "0 Messenger of Allah, why did you give Uyayna ibn
Hisn and Aqra ibn Habis hundred camels each and not to Juayl ibn Suraqa?"
He was asking him what was on his mind and wanted to learn the meaning behind
this decision and so the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned
to Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and said: "I swear by He who holds Muhammad's life in his
hands, Juayl ibn Suraqa is much more an auspicious man than the likes of Uyayna ibn
Hisn and Aqra ibn Habis and many more like them. I gave so that they may become
Muslims that their hearts may soften! And I refer Juayl ibn Suraqa to his sturdy
Muslimhood! Such that, I give more to and treat more carefully people whom I fear
Allah will throw into Hell compared to people who are dearer to me." And so the
blessed Messenger giving them from the spoils was to generate feelings of faith in
their hearts, to speed their entry to Islam, to warm the hearts of their tribes in their
person, and to prevent the harm that may come from some of them. And so the fact
that some people were given more from the spoils of war did not mean that the
Messenger of Allah loved these people more, or that that person did more deeds that
were beneficial to the religion; but perhaps it was to win over people who would
become dear and who would do good and valuable deeds for religion in the future-
and so this was in a way some kind of up front payment!

--- Sayfa 897 ---
The Teary Eyed Mem hers of the Privy Council
But not all were as close as Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and they had not yet comprehended
the true dimensions of the matter; that is why they were sitting and discussing it in the
following terms: "May Allah the Almighty forgive our noble Prophet; this is a strange
thing indeed! You see that he gives to the Muhajirun and those who have only recently
gained their freedom and he does not give anything to us although blood is still
dripping from our swords. When there is a risky situation we are put to the front and
yet when it comes to the distribution of the spoils they are being treated preferentially!
We wish we knew the reason for this happening; if this is something that Allah has
ordered, then we will shut our mouths and be patient, but if it is a personal practice of
the blessed Messenger, then we should speak to him and tell him of our discontent!"
Meanwhile some, particularly from among the young, said that they had to speak of
their discontent to our noble Prophet as to how when things were going well they were
neglected and others were being preferred. They had the impression, when they looked
at it from the outside, that what was being said was true and this was leading to the
criticism of the practice of the blessed Messenger.
This was iniquity and our noble Prophet had to be informed of these concerns. Sa'd
ibn Ubada who was uncomfortable with these developments ran at once to the blessed
Messenger: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said, "Some people from among the Ansar
feel a certain degree of disappointment towards you."
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, who listened to Sa' d
asked: "About which issue?"
'When distributing the spoils, you gave them away to your own tribe and other
Arab tribes. You gave the Ansar nothing," said Sa' d.
As soon as he learned the cause of the disappointment, the blessed Messenger
asked: "And what do you think about the matter?"
"I am just a single man in my tribe," he said regretfully.
It appeared that Sa'd had not been able to understand either and he did not think
differently. Upon that our noble Prophet said to him: "Then gather your tribe here and
inform me when they have all come."
Sa' d went outside, and tried to gather all the members of the Ansar he laid eyes on.
When everyone came and the Ansar had gathered at the appointed place, he went and
informed the noble Messenger.
"Is there anyone who is not from your tribe among you?" he asked first.
''No, 0 Messenger of Allah! Only the sons of our sisters ... "

--- Sayfa 898 ---
To that our noble Prophet said: "Your sister's son is from your tribe."
He was full of emotion; it was clear that what had reached his ears had saddened
him deeply. On his face seemed to be the sadness of getting a reaction he had not
expected from his dear congregation whom he had taught for eight years. A
congregation that had opened their doors to the extent that their lives had been
endangered, a congregation that had risked their lives in order to protect him had
reacted in such a way! This was unexpected indeed! That is why he wanted to speak in
private to the people who he believed would take his cause to the future; now he was
under the same roof with them, and he would show them the amount of intimacy that
was appropriate in his house! First he thanked Allah and then began to speak: "0
people of the Ansar! When I came to you, you were lost, and did not Allah the
Almighty provide you with guidance through me? You were all poor and did not Allah
the Almighty make you rich through me? You were enemies each onto the other, and
did not Allah the Almighty make your hearts one and abolished all the enmity?"
No sound was heard under the leather dome; how could there be an answer to these
words full of obligation. The deep silence was once again broken by the following
words of the blessed Messenger: "0 you people of the Ansar! Will you not answer
me?"
As answer they could only say: "What can we say to you 0 Messenger of Allah?
How can we answer? All bounty is from Allah and all has been through the presence
of the Messenger of Allah."
This was an acceptance but it was not yet a sufficient answer for our noble Prophet,
and so he would become more personal and say the following: "I swear that you may
say the following if you like 'You came to us as an exiled man, we housed you! You
came to us needy, we helped you! You came to us in fear and anxiety, we protected
you! You came to us abandoned, we supported you, and you came to us denied and we
believed you!' Then you will have said the truth, and I would verify what you say!"
They hung their heads and said: "Obligation is from Allah and His Messenger," and
they could not say anything else. Our noble Prophet asked them: "Then what are these
words that reach me from you?"
They preferred silence again! But the Messenger of Allah was expecting an answer
and asked the same question: "Then what are these words that reach me from you?"
They were afraid to make another false move in this delicate situation and so the
eyes sought out the eminent men among them; they wanted them to answer our noble
Prophet. And so the leading men of the Ansar came to the fore and managed to say the

--- Sayfa 899 ---
following: "When it comes to our leading men, they have not said such a thing! Those
who said such things are only the young whose moustaches are only just growing and
they said things like 'May Allah the Almighty forgive the Messenger of Allah; he is
giving to Quraysh and is leaving us to our own devices! But here, their blood still
drips from our swords!"'
Now the time had come to speak of the strategy in the privy council; our noble
Prophet would explain why he had acted like that concerning the spoils and win their
hearts! The blessed Messenger gazed at the Ansar as if embracing them and then said:
"There is no doubt that the Quraysh have only recently got over their difficulties, they
have only recently abandoned the period of Jahiliyya and come to us; naturally I
wanted to mend their broken hearts and to warm them towards Islam!"
"0 people of the Ansar! Were you really disappointed in me and thought less of me
because I gave worldly goods to a tribe that has recently become Muslim so that I may
win their hearts? I wanted to do this, having left you safe with the Islam that Allah
decreed to your lot! 0 people of the Ansar! Are you not happy that while people return
to their homes with cows and camels while you go to your homes with the Messenger
of Allah? I swear that the thing you return home with is much more auspicious than
what they go home back with. I swear by He who holds my life in His hands that
should all men take one road and the Ansar another, I would, without hesitation, prefer
the road that the Ansar take! For you are the people of the privy council, they are
people who have not yet reached that position.
For me the Ansar are the most select and special people! Had there been no hijra, I
would be one of the Ansar. Dear Lord! Be merciful to the Ansar; and treat their
children with mercy as well!"
Having listened to such heart melting words the Ansar were moved and were
crying. They said: "We are sincerely content to have Allah and His Messenger fall to
our share." They were so upset to have saddened the Messenger of Allah to this extent
all for petty worldly gains that their beards were wet from crying and their eyes had
turned into bowls of blood! Their remorse was such that when the blessed Messenger
offered them some spoils received from the direction of Bahrain, they responded: 'We
do not need worldly goods after you."
Upon that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, advised them:
"Verily you will witness that after me others will be treated better than you when it
comes to possessions, but forbear until you meet me by my abode."
After the spoils were distributed among those whose hearts were to be warmed to

--- Sayfa 900 ---
Islam, it was the tum to give the shares of the sincere people who had fought right
next to the blessed Messenger from the beginning. The number of sheep and camels
and the soldiers had been calculated and each infantry would get four camels and forty
sheep, and each cavalryman would get twelve camels and one hundred and twenty
sheep. For those who had participated in battle with more than one horse did not get
an extra share and now the honorable Companions had the excitement of returning
home after a long wait, with their spoils worth a fortune.
Leaving Jirana
More than eighty days had passed since the day he had conquered Mecca, when one
take into account the thirteen-day journey to Mecca, the time that the Messenger of
Allah had been away from Medina mounted up to three months. He had been in Jirana
for thirteen days; there were thirteen days until the end of the month of Dhu al-Qadah,
and one Wednesday evening the blessed Messenger put on his ihram in a masjid in the
lower part of the valley and started his journey towards Mecca. He was going to go to
the Ka'ba and circumambulate it! He then was in the Ka'ba's presence and united with
it, and he had completed his circumambulation on foot; he then completed his "say",
his walk between the hills of Safa and Marwa, had his head shaved and thus
completed his umrah visit. He then made for Jirana once again. He had left the young
Attab ibn Asid who had become a Muslim on the day of the conquest as deputy once
again, and given the task of informing the people about Islam once more to Muadh ibn
Jabal. He arrived back to Jirana early in the morning and he left it on Thursday for
Medina. The blessed Messenger who left the valley of Jirana followed the Saraf and
Marr az-Zahran route and he reached Medina three days before the month of Dhu al-
Qadah finished. The time that passed between his departure from Medina in order to
conquer Mecca and his return was around three months. 228
In that time Mecca had been conquered, Hawazin had been fought and Hunayn
victory gained, Taif had been laid siege to and then left alone until the day they would
open their doors and come out of their own volition. Most importantly though,
thousands of people who the Muslims feared could attack the blessed Messenger and
invade Medina had become Muslims, chiefly the Meccans. Those who had involved in
the campaign with the Messenger of Allah had returned with large spoils. Our noble
Prophet, who entered Medina after a long absence, made straight for the Masjid as
usual and firstly thanked his Lord as a subject.
A Visit and a Door That Opens up to the Future

--- Sayfa 901 ---
Before returning to his happy home the blessed Messenger knocked on the door of his
daughter, our mother Fatima; it was clear that he wanted to see her after a long
separation! It was our mother Fatima who opened the door; she was very excited to
see her father in front of her all of a sudden. She was looking at the Messenger of
Allah with love, having missed him for very long. After gazing at him for a while she
came back to herself and kissed his blessed hands! But this was not enough and so in
order to make up for all the time they had been apart, she hugged him and started to
sob; the happiness of the reunion was translated into tears rolling down her cheeks like
pearls. It was up to our noble Prophet to console her: "What is it that makes you cry, 0
Fatima? Why is it that you are crying?" he asked.
The sobs were like knots in her throat and she could not answer from crying. She
tried for quite a while to calm herself down and then said: "I could not bear it, 0
Messenger of Allah, for I see that you have been through much trouble, your hair is in
disarray and you are covered in dust! Your pallor has gone and the dress you wear is
in tethers; I could not bear it 0 Messenger of Allah!"
She was basing her assessment on outward appearance, but our noble Prophet could
see what she could not see. That is why he stroked his daughter's head on the one
hand and on the other said the following: "Do not cry my dear daughter! Allah sent me
with such a cause that the day will come when this cause will envelop the earth like
the day and night. There will not be a house in the world, made of mud, brick or stone
that Islam has not entered. There will not be a tent made of camel hair, sheep wool, or
goat hair that Islam will not seeped through!"
This was like seeing the spring when in wintertime, of feeling the rhythm of the
light of day in the dark of night. .. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, always called attention to the light of the future in the darkest hours and
spoke accordingly! These would then be perceived as targets set by those who listened
and the thing he would entrust Usama with included the message "Take it to all the
houses and tents."

--- Sayfa 902 ---
214 There are Companions who report that the period was eighteen, seventeen, fifteen or even ten
days. The differences are probably due to whether they counted the day of arrival and/or
departure. The strongest report seems to be nineteen days. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 8/231.
215 In another report this number is four hundred shields. See Ibn Hazm, Jawamiu 's-Sirah, 11238;
Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/312.
216 There is also a report that they set off two days before Ramadan ended. Other reports say that they
had started their preparations in the last days of Ramadan and that they set off on the sixth day of
Shawwal. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11889; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/346.
217 It is also said that this number was twelve thousand. The blessed Messenger started from Medina
with ten thousand people and with people joining them on the way, their numbers had reached
twelve thousand by the time they reached Mecca. With the conquest of Mecca a further two
thousand strong forces joined them and on their way to Hawazin their numbers had reached
fourteen thousand. See Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 3/615, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/371; Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/314.
218 At-Tawbah 9:25-27
219 When he said that he saw these horsemen, the blessed Messenger said to him: "0 Shayba! Only
the deniers see them!" and it is said that Shayba ibn Uthman became a Muslim after this. See Ibn
Kathir, Sirah, 3/632, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 4/381; Zahabi, Tarikhu 'l-Is lam, 11325.
220 An-Nisa 4:24
221 It is also reported that the Companion who had been appointed to look after the slaves was Budayl
ibn Warqa. See Balazuri, Ansabu '/-Ashraf, 11161.
222 The blessed Messenger said to the people of Thaqif who later became Muslim and wanted their
slaves back "They are free men before Allah; there is no way you can turn them into slaves again"
and thus he would not allow these people to be enslaved once again now that they had tasted
freedom. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11932; Zaylai, Nasbu 'r-Raya, 3/280; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-
Nihaya, 4/398, Sirah, 3/657.
223 There are reports that the siege of Taif lasted some ten odd days or fifteen, twenty, more than
twenty, thirty or forty days. This discrepancy arises probably because Taif was seen as a
continuation of the conquest of Mecca and Hunayn, and the reporters reported only the period in
which they had attended the campaign. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/388.
224 To a group that said "We will not return without having conquered this place" the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said "Then fight" and they would advance towards the
castle in an attempt to do so. But it would not turn out as they expected: the Thaqif were
defending themselves just as fiercely and they were receiving heavy casualties from those
attacking them. Seeing this the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, would smile
and repeat his request to lift the siege. Upon that, those who were asking for the continuation of
the siege changed their minds and they accepted the invitation of our noble Prophet. See Bukhari,
Sahih, 411572 (4070), 5/2259 (5736), 6/2719 (7042); Muslim, Sahih, 3/1402 (1778); Said ibn
Mansur, Sunan, 2/360 (2863); Ibn Abi Shayba,Musannaf, 7/410 (36952).
225 In the siege of Taif twelve people had become martyr including Urfuta ibn Hubab, Yazid ibn
Zam'a, Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr as-Siddiq (Abdullah died later in Medina because of the wounds
he sustained during the siege), Abdullah ibn Abi Umayya, Abdullah ibn Amir, Saib ibn Harith or
Abdullah ibn Harith, Julayha ibn Abdullah, Thabit ibn Jaza', Harith ibn Sahl, Munzir ibn
Abdullah and Ruqaym ibn Thabit. See Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/388-389. Ibn
Hisham gives the number as twelve. See Ibn Hisham, Sirah, 51159-160.
226 As will be remembered, Suraqa was the man who had followed the Messenger of Allah during the
Hijra in order to get the prize put on the blessed Messenger's head. He had returned as a Muslim
from that journey and the letter he was holding in his hand was the letter he had received from the

--- Sayfa 903 ---
blessed Messenger that day. See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya wa 'n-Nihaya, 5/373, Sirah, 4/691; Salihi,
Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/389.
227 These people numbered around fifty, and regarding the shares given to them See Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/396.
228 Although it is said that this period is two months and six days, when we take into account the fact
that the blessed Messenger left Medina on the thirteenth day of Ramadan and returned on the last
three days of the month of Dhu al-Qadah, we see that this period is more likely to be eighty-four
days.

--- Sayfa 904 ---
THE PLATFORM OF TOLERANCE OF AN
ENLIGHTENED WORLD
M
edina, the hub of activities, had become the center of peace, tranquility,
security and trust. The age of chaos had come to an end, and a peaceful
smile had started to appear on the face of a new civilization. Certainly,
this was not meant to be a temporary peace. The blessed Messenger assigned his
Companions to various duties, such as teaching people the subtleties of religion and
carrying his letters of invitation to Islam, thus further spreading the word. Some of the
apostles were in charge of establishing peace and security, forming alliances with
forces that accepted the political authority of Medina without becoming Muslim, and
disbanding those who disturbed the general peace by causing harm to the people.
While others were assigned to collect jizya and zakah, the former was collected from
those who did not accept Islam as their religion but were under the protection of the
Muslim community and the latter from those who accepted Islam. The quantity of the
assigned depended on the nature of the duty. Some were sent alone, while others were
formed into groups of hundreds. With these expansions and developments, no doubt
was left on the people's minds that Hijaz was under the single authority oflslam.
For this very reason, starting with his return to Medina, the blessed Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, at varying times sent Uyayna ibn Hisn to the tribe of
the Banu Tamim; Yazid ibn Husayn to the tribes of Aslam and Ghifar; Abbad ibn
Bishr to the tribes of Sulaym and Muzayna; Rafi ibn Maqis to the Juhayna; Amr ibn
al-As to the Banu Fazara; Dahhaq ibn Sufyan to the Banu Kilab; Bashir ibn Sufyan to
the Banu Ka'b; Ibn Lutaybiyya to the Banu Zubyan; Muhajir ibn Abi Umayya to the
city of San' a; Ziad ibn Labid to Hadramawt; Adiyy ibn Hatim to Tayy and the Banu
Asad; Malik ibn Nuwaira to the Banu Hanzala; Zibrikan ibn Badr and Qays ibn Asim
to the different parts of the Banu Sa'd; Ala ibn al-Hadrami to Bahrain and Ali to
Najran. He was thus going to confirm the authority oflslam at a vast geography.
As another aspect of this matter, when a merciless war launched against the blessed

--- Sayfa 905 ---
Messenger and Islam by the Quraysh ended with defeat, the people who initially
thought "Let us leave him alone with his tribe, so if he is defeated by them, the
problem would be solved, but if he defeats them, we would rethink our position" now
had to make a decision. After some hard thinking, they chose to submit themselves to
the Messenger of Allah.
Henceforward, Medina witnessed not only the outward-heading delegations, but
also those groups of people who flocked into the city. Until recently suffering under
wars, only within a short period of nine years, Medina left the days of chaos behind,
and it became a center from where security and trust emanated to the world. People,
like moths who have been craving for light, rushed and surged in crowds to Medina
from all over the world, to be in the Prophet's presence, and to reach the honor of
being one of his Companions. There, people took shelter in the Messenger's trusted
city. It was the season of observing the beauties of Islam in their simplicity and
without hindrance. They were going to be absolved from their past and future. Some
were filled with the joy of witnessing the beauties that they had not noticed until then,
while others were eager to learn Islam in its totality that previously they came to know
partially. Certainly, just as there were people who wanted to make a decision by
learning more about Islam, there were those opportunists who wanted to shift their
fortune's downturn by receiving concessions from the blessed Messenger.
Nevertheless, all these people would melt down and become purified in the presence
of the blessed Messenger, and will not return without submitting to this light that they
witnessed close-by.
Of course, all these back and forth activities contained their own story. When they
encountered such phenomena that they had not seen before, they inquired about their
nature from the blessed Messenger and took action according to his response. Thus,
they acquired a lot of the religious knowledge.
The Banu Tamim
The Banu Tamim tribe was causing disturbances in the region and not paying the
promised jizya. For these reasons, Uyayna ibn Hisn, who was sent with a retinue of
fifty horsemen, arrived to the region of the Banu Tamim by travelling during the
nights. Later on, Uyayna returned to Medina with sixty-two captives from the region,
of which twenty-one were women and thirty were children. Not long after, the Banu
Tamim came to Medina with a delegation led by Aqra ibn Habis, Utarid ibn Hajib and
Zibrikan ibn Badr and asked to see the blessed Messenger. They were at the door of
the blessed Messenger, shouting and asking him to step outside. It was a disturbing

--- Sayfa 906 ---
event229 however the sake of Allah is above everything else: offering a helping hand to
a person to save their faith has a quintessential meaning above any value. Therefore,
the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, stepped outside to greet
them. They said:
'We came here to show you how great we are! Let's see whose honor is more
sublime? Just let our poets and orators speak their word."
It was a strange situation. The Messenger of Allah said: "We are not sent to recite
poetry and race virtues with each other, nor assume an arrogant atmosphere among
people. But if you wish so, please proceed." This was not the real plan, but those
people did not comprehend it in any other way. This is how a man from the group was
led to step forward, where he started to boast about their tribe using bombastic terms.
It was an undesired situation. The issue had to be handled in a language they knew the
best. Thus, the blessed Messenger turned to Thabit ibn Qays and said: "Stand up and
respond!" Upon this request, Thabit stood up and gave an elaborate response by
talking about how Islam elevated them to a high position.
After the Noon Prayer, the mosque of the Prophet became a racing field for the
poets. At each comer voices of the poets and the preachers were echoing. Supposedly,
this tribe was attempting to defeat a power that they could not overcome at the
battlefield by fighting them on the fields of rhetoric, thus trying to prove that they
were superior. Not long before, the Banu Tamim's spokesperson Utarid ibn Hajib
stood up and recited a long poem. Zibrikan ibn Badr proceeded after him and
displayed his own artistic skills. They seemed to take what they were doing extremely
seriously. The Messenger of Allah turned to his Companions and said: "Call Hasan
ibn Thabit for me."
It did not take long that Hasan ibn Thabit appeared in front of the blessed
Messenger, who asked Hasan to defend him against the accusations of these men.
Taking shifts, one oration followed the other, and it lasted quite a while. While the
poets of the Banu Tamim apparently came prepared, the word-masters of Islam were
able to display high artistic ability. Our noble Prophet was supporting and encouraging
Hasan in his efforts to respond to their poets.
Meanwhile, the blessed Messenger's grandson Hasan came by and ran to his
grandfather's bosom, being embraced by the Messenger's merciful arms. Our beloved
Prophet was kissing and hugging him.
The delegation was taking the advantage of every motion. Aqra ibn Habis said in a
surprised tone: "I have ten children. But I don't kiss them at all." Upon hearing this

--- Sayfa 907 ---
statement, the Messenger of Allah said: "No mercy will be shown to those who show
no mercy" and then added, "If Allah the Almighty has removed the feelings of mercy
from your heart, what can I do?"
For Aqra ibn Habis, this was a watershed moment where his heart was softened
with the message. After evaluating all those that he witnessed and heard, he relented
and gave this talk to friends: "0 people! I swear on my father's name that this person's
vocation is above us all! Behold, since I cannot comprehend this: our orator is
speaking, but their orator's voice is coming out as more convincing and vibrant. Our
poets recite poetry too, but theirs are more effective and influential. The words they
put forward are sweeter than ours."
No doubt the time had come for Aqra. He approached the blessed Messenger and
said: "I bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, and you are His Messenger."
Responding to the blessed Messenger's spoken word with words served the purpose
well. The others in the group followed suit, and the joy of the Messenger was reflected
on his face. The entire the Banu Tamim delegation submitted to Islam, and thus they
took a step to start anew. Upon this, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, distributed many gifts among them, freed the members of the tribe that
were captured, allowing them to leave with the delegation. He saw them off of
Medina. They were one among many who had a change of heart after coming to
Medina with a very different outlook. Acquiring an inner peace, they went back to the
land of the Tamim.
An Important Reminder for Duty-Consciousness
Countless people rushed to Medina. Meanwhile, with varying assignments, people
were sent out of Medina as well. The blessed Messenger had sent Ibn Lutaybiyya to
the Banu Zubyan as a zakah-collector. When he returned, he put forward all the goods
he collected. "These are yours, and these are given to me as gifts," he said. Based on
the principles of those times, he regarded himself as the only one who was authorized
to manage the gifts presented to him.
However, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was not
pleased to hear these words. His officer, whom he sent to notify people in their
fulfillment of a religious duty, was collecting gifts on the side during his assignment.
Duty and gifts were not supposed to be mixed with one another, because for the
human nature there was a chance of feeling under obligation, the weight of which was
proportionate to the value of the gifts. The gifts given to a man of position belonged to
the position rather than the man himself. The blessed Messenger was waiting to share

--- Sayfa 908 ---
his thoughts at a moment that everyone would be present. Soon, they prayed together
with his Companions, and he recited prayers praising Allah. It was obvious that he had
messages for them. After the daily sermon, he brought up the words of Ibn
Lutaybiyya: "What is happening to those who are assigned a duty?" he said as he
started off, "I send a person as a zakah collector, and he comes back to tell me 'These
are yours and those are given to me as gifts!' Could you tell me, if that person had
stayed in his parents' home, would these gifts come and find him there? I swear on the
Almighty who holds my soul in his omnipotent hand, that if one of you receives a gift
and takes it, on the Day of Judgment that very gift will wrap itself around his neck,
and will cause him extreme pain by groaning if it is a camel, or mooing if it is a cow,
or bleating if it is a sheep."
These were spine-chilling admonishments. The blessed Messenger, after these
words, raised his head and held his hands so high up that his armpits could be seen. He
asked his Lord: "0 my Lord! Did I fulfill my duty of communication?"
The Battle of Tabuk
While these developments were taking place in communicating the message, some
news arrived from the region of Damascus. The Christian Arabs of the region had
written a letter to Heraclius to persuade him to take action against the blessed
Messenger: "The person who claims to be a Prophet died, and his supporters are also
dying from hunger. Their possessions are vanished, they have lost everything. If you
have a wish to convert them to your religion, it is just the right time." Meanwhile, the
tribes of Lahm, Juzzam, Amila and Ghassanids revolted and announced that they
would support the Byzantine forces if they were to attack the Muslims.
While on one side, there was the Ghassanid leader Shurahbil ibn Amr, who killed
the envoy of the Messenger of Allah, fought his forces at Muta and planning to attack
Medina with a full-fledged plan, there were the Jews of Medina on the other side,
trying to persuade our noble Prophet to go to Damascus, by saying: "0 Abu'l-Qasim!
If you really are a Prophet, you should go to Damascus, since that is the land of the
Prophets. "230
If the timing of these is taken into consideration, all these have a specific meaning.
Those who could not find the power to withstand this emergent power rallied to
mobilize the strongest power of the era, the Byzantines, hoping that they would reach
their goal from afar. They wanted to play their last card against the power that they
could not overcome themselves. About the same time, the merchants who came to
Medina from the Damascene lands brought the news that a Byzantine contingent was

--- Sayfa 909 ---
advancing, and that they had reached Balka.
This was discomforting news. It meant another interval for those who came running
to the enlightened world of Islam. But it had to be taken care off-it would be
unthinkable to do nothing while armies of thousands were marching toward Medina.
Meanwhile, the messages brought by the Truthful Gabriel were stating that the line
that was drawn between the polytheists and the believers had to be made clearer.
These messages were declaring that they should not refrain from entering a war
against those who had no faith. 231
From one perspective, these were expected developments: the Byzantine Empire at
the time was one of the two powers that shaped the political face on earth, and
eventually if not today, they were going to face each other tomorrow. Since Islamic
community was experiencing a progress generated by its own forces, the important
powers in the world who witnessed this independent progress were not going to digest
it easily.
Soon the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, ordered his
Companions to prepare for war. He was sending word to the tribes in his vicinity,
asking them to be on his side at this critical juncture. He also sent word to Mecca,
requesting them to show the same loyalty.
While previously the blessed Messenger kept the army's agenda a secret by not
informing anyone where and when they would march, now he was openly announcing
each and every step. The season, the physical conditions and also the enemy's nature
necessitated this sort of an open preparation. At the moment, Medina was
experiencing one of its most arid seasons. It was such a season that people could not
dare to step outside the shades. The fruits were ripening, and the people were
preparing to harvest the first fruits of their yearlong labor. A burning sun was above
them, and the gardens offered mesmerizing shades.
Because of all these, some people took position against the war openly: "How could
one fight in this hot weather?" The Truthful Gabriel came with new revelations,
stating that Hellfire was hotter than the weather they were experiencing.232 The day of
the battle of Tabuk was the critical point when the true believers who strived on the
path of Allah with sincere hearts were differentiated from those who did their tasks
halfheartedly and were not able to throw away the seeds of discord from their hearts.
On the one hand, there were those who whole-heartedly accepted the Messenger of
Allah's call and came running, and on the other, there were those who collapsed on
the ground233 presenting the most unimaginable excuses in order not to comply with
this Prophetic invitation to go to Tabuk. 234

--- Sayfa 910 ---
Jadd ibn Qays, with a group of supporters on his side, came to visit our noble
Prophet at the Masjid an-Nabawi. He appealed to him saying: "0 Messenger of Allah!
I am a poor old man. These are my excuses, so please allow me to stay." The blessed
Messenger, after listening to him patiently, said: "Be prepared because you have the
means." However, Jadd was determined. In a shameless way he went on to say: ''You
should allow me to stay, so I don't fall into temptation. As my tribesmen know, I am
very fond of women-actually the fondest among my people. If I go there and come
across the women of the Banu Asfar tribe, I cannot promise to be patient."
Upon this unabashed request, the blessed Messenger turned his face away and with
a reproving voice he said to Jadd: ''You are excused."
When the son of Jadd ibn Qays heard what his father dared to say to the Messenger
of Allah, he admonished him: "How could you oppose his orders? Is there a richer
person than you among the people of the Banu Salima? Why have not you started your
war preparation?" His father tried to convince him: "0 my son! In this hot weather
and burning winds, who am I to leave for the Banu Asfar region? I am scared of the
Banu Asfar people even when I am sitting in my home; with what courage am I going
to oppose them in the battlefield? Know this well, my son, that I already know the
outcome of this war."
Certainly, Abdullah, his son, was not going to be convinced easily. When he
continued to admonish his father even more heavily and accused him of causing
discord, Jadd slapped him on his face violently to silence him. But there was a voice
that could not be silenced. Soon the Truthful Gabriel arrived, bringing the news that it
was the likes of Jadd who were in discord. 235
Meanwhile, some people made up a new occupation for themselves in order not to
go to the war. They showed up in his presence, saying: "0 Messenger of Allah! In
order to protect the old and sick from the heavy night rains on their way to the
mosque, we built a new mosque. We would love to have you lead the Prayer."
On the surface, this seemed to be commendable behavior, but their intention was
neither protecting the old and sick nor the Prayer. Their mere goal was to establish a
center, where they would continue their activity against Islam. Knowing their goal, the
blessed Messenger responded: "I am busy with the preparations right now-but
perhaps upon my return." Thus, he was not revealing their purpose publicly. His
response raised no suspicion, and thus they were not alarmed. In addition, he now
knew where they gathered for their evil activities.
The number of the people who made up excuses and asked permission to stay away

--- Sayfa 911 ---
from the battle was around eighty. The blessed Messenger permitted them to stay
based on the face value of their excuses, and left the rest to Allah. He was conducting
the preparation with those who were sincere in their intentions. For the same reason,
he was not going to allow about thirty people coming from the Banu Ghifar tribe to
stay behind, so requested them to join for Tabuk. 236
Appeal for Benevolence
The condition they were in was difficult, the enemy was formidable, the road was
long, and the resources were scarce. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, took to the minbar daily and encouraged his Companions to offer a helping
hand to those who were in dire condition: "0 my Lord! If something harmful fell upon
my people and destroyed them, on this earth there would be no one to worship you"
Thus he prayed to Allah for the success of these people whose hearts were filled with
faith even though their resources were scarce. There were people who wished to join
the fight whole-heartedly but could not do so because they lacked the means. They
approached the Prophet and appealed to him, since he was the person who found
remedy for those in need. The Companions had already learned to give away their
possessions. Understanding the silent wishes of our noble Prophet, Abu Bakr left his
presence, took all the belongings from home and brought them to the Prophet.
When he saw him doing this, the Messenger of Allah asked: "Have you left
anything to your family?" Abu Bakr responded: "I left them Allah and His
Messenger." He was so sincere and his submission was so complete that he did not
fear at all that he would fall into poverty and misery. This is how he responded to the
necessities ofthe day.
Soon after, Umar followed suit. He too donated many things, thinking that he would
surpass Abu Bakr's donations. But there was no chance; Abu Bakr was an asset that
could not be surpassed by others.
That day, the leading Companions such as Uthman, Talha, Abbas, Sa'd ibn Ubada,
and Asim ibn Adiyy supported those in need by giving up their wealth to the care of
the Messenger of Allah. Uthman financed almost one third of the entire army. Seeing
Uthman coming to his presence with loads in his hands, the Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, opened up his hands for prayer and prayed: "Dear Lord!
Be pleased with Uthman as I am pleased with him!" He touched the silver and gold
that was brought in front of him and turning to his Companions he praised Uthman:
"From now on, whatever Uthman does would not hurt him."237
Seeing that the prominent people of the community donated their wealth, the rest of

--- Sayfa 912 ---
the community also brought in their own valuables. So much so that, people shared
their only camels or donated their scarce provisions with their brothers-in-religion.
The women Companions were also on the scene that day, donating their earrings,
bracelets, anklets and other golden jewelry that they owned for the sake of supporting
the cause of Allah and His Messenger. In her quarters, Aisha exhibited the donated
jewelry to encourage them. The women were bringing the valuables from their homes
and placing them next to the others displayed.
On the day of Tabuk, Wasila ibn Asqa was on the streets of Medina, calling out: "Is
there anyone who would offer their riding animal to me, so that I can go to war? I
would share my share of spoils with him."
Upon hearing these words, Ka'b ibn Ujra asked: "Really? Now, if you merely used
the riding animal to carry the loads through the slopes, would you really share your
share of the booty?" Wasila confirmed. This was an invaluable offer for an old man
like Ka'b. He quickly said: "Then go ahead, with the permission and blessings of
Allah," and he provided him with a riding animal. 238
Despite all these, there were those who were not able to find neither a sword to
bear, nor a camel to ride. They did appeal to the Messenger of Allah, but nothing was
left of the donations. Broken-hearted, their desire to join the fight burnt them to such
extend that their tears turned into streams. 239 Ulba ibn Zayd was one of them. He did
not want to be separated from our noble Prophet. When the Messenger told him, "I
have nothing left to equip you for this war," he was so devastated that he was weeping
like a child while leaving his presence.
Sadness and disappointment in his heart, Ulba arrived home. That night, after he got
up to pray two cycles of Prayer, he supplicated to Allah, saying:
"0 Allah! You ordered us to fight and encouraged us to engage with the enemy. But
I have no resources to accomplish this. Your Messenger could not provide me the
necessary equipment either. Nothing left to do-l simply cannot go. I implore you my
Lord; I would like to waive all my rights for my Muslim brethren if in a possible
circumstance they violate my rights, my honor, and even my life. Please take these as
my charity, since I have nothing else to donate."
Finally, morning arrived. The sound of the Prophet's town crier was echoing in the
streets of Medina: "Who is it that waived all his rights of his honor for the sake of
Allah?"
Nobody knew what all these meant. As everyone else, Ulba too went to the Masjid
an-Nabawi. The noble Prophet turned toward the congregation as soon as he finished

--- Sayfa 913 ---
his Prayer: "Who distributed charity last night?" There was no response from the
congregation. It was apparent that no one understood what was going on. No one gave
charity the night before, since they donated all their possessions for the cause of war
of Tabuk.
The blessed Messenger repeated his question: "Who gave charity last night? Stand
I"
up.
Everyone stared at each other. Soon, the gazes turned toward Ulba, since he seemed
so embarrassed and shy for hearing the secret between him and Allah being revealed.
Feeling very uncomfortable, he was not able to lift up his head. Everyone realized that
it was him who the Prophet was talking about. It was him who donated his rights and
honor for the cause of Allah.
And then, Ulba stood up in the Messenger's presence, and unwillingly narrated how
he cried and prayed to Allah at night. All these were because of hopelessness.
However, his prayers were not going to be overlooked by Allah and His Messenger-
how could it be?
Therefore, when poverty hits the rock-bottom, presenting the most valuable thing
-one's soul-to Allah, received the attention of the Divine Mercy. His prayers were
accepted. The Messenger of Allah uttered these words: "Good news to you! I swear on
the Almighty who holds my soul in his omnipotent hand that last night you were
bestowed a place among those who donated the most and whose struggles were
accepted by Allah."
Thus, if one wishes from the bottom of their heart and insists, Allah Almighty
responds to their prayers and considers them among those who gave all.
Starting off from Medina
All had come and it's time for the army of Islam to be on its way agam. The
Messenger of Allah was telling all the tribes to prepare their standards and flags,
encouraging them to war.
"So long as a man goes on the road with shoes, he is a like a cavalryman," thus
encouraging the Companions to wear shoes. When it came to those who did not have
an animal to ride, covering such distances would be possible only by wearing shoes!
Abu Bakr had been given the duty ofleading the Prayers of those who had started to
advance before the others, and he had also given him the bigger standard.
It was Thursday in the month of Rajah that the blessed Messenger left Ali in his
place in Medina240 and gave marching orders to his army of thirty thousand men. But

--- Sayfa 914 ---
the hypocrites made the fact that Ali had been left behind in Medina a point of
contention: "The Prophet left him behind because he underestimates him and thinks
him incapable," trying to change the agenda.
They had achieved their aim and thus disconcerted Ali. Hearing this, he had run all
the way to Juruf and spoke to the Messenger of Allah about what he had heard. He
said that a man like him had to be on the battlefield. At a time when the Sultan of
Messengers was running on the battlefield he did not want to be sitting in Medina with
women and children! The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned
to him and said: "They are lying; I left you behind so that you may look after those left
behind, my family and your family. Would you not want to be to me what Aaron was
to Moses 0 Ali? It is true that there will not be another Prophet after me."
Most probably our noble Prophet was leaving him in Medina so that he may stay
alert to the dangers as the hypocrites who were fleeing the battle by lying to him were
trying to build up a base in the town. Having received the blessed Messenger's order,
Ali returned to Medina. There was another group of people returning on the road;
these were none other than Ibn Salul and his friends who had not kept their word on
Uhud either.
They were using the same tactics, and Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul was saying:
"Today Muhammad goes to fight people he cannot win because his army is poor, it is
hot and it is too long a way! I think he believes fighting the Banu Asfar is some kind
of a game! I swear I can almost see him and his friends being taken prisoners and tied
down."
This was some kind of purification and it was clear that Allah the Almighty did not
want those who were not pure of heart to be walking with his blessed Messenger. That
day Alqama ibn Faghwa was walking in front of the blessed Messenger as guide for
the road.
As they were passing Wadi al-Qura they came upon an orchard yard. The honorable
Companions were trying to guess what volume of produce they would find. The
Messenger of Allah also joined them in their guessing: "Guess then!" he said, and
everyone guessed something different; the blessed Messenger guessed that it would be
ten wasaks. He turned to the owner of the garden and said: "Record well how much
produce you get out of this garden; because we will pass through here on our way
back and we will ask you then."241
When he was in Wadi al-Qura, a Jewish tribe, the sons of Arid, came and brought
food to the blessed Messenger. He took the food from them for forty wasaks and ate it

--- Sayfa 915 ---
with his Companions.
When they passed Halija and came to Dhi al-Marwa, the Companions were very
tired and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! This is the perfect place to camp; there is both
water and shade." But our beloved Prophet said: "This is someone's grain field; it
would not be appropriate to camp here," and he asked them to loosen his camel's reign
once again. He said that the camel also had its duty and that it would know where to
camp.
True enough, the camel came and sat down under a big tree. The blessed Messenger
gave a break there with his honorable Companions and then prayed and rested for a
little while.
The Ruins of the Tribe ofThamud and Hijr
They started to move again and came to the location called Hijr where there were the
ruins of the Thamud tribe. The Companions were wandering in the ruins and were
getting water from the Thamud wells, filling their water skins. However, the
Messenger of Allah rode his camel faster when they came to this place, and took his
place. When he saw what his Companions were doing, he called out to them and said:
"When you are going through the ruins of what those who wronged themselves left
behind, walk with trepidation and sorrow and be warned that what befell onto them
should not befall onto you. Do not drink from their water and do not take your
ablutions here. Give the dough you have made to the camels." Then he took his
Companions and went up to the rock that Prophet Saleh's camel had climbed. He was
advising his Companions by sharing with them an extraordinary event that had
happened in the past: "Do not ask for miracles all the time," he said.
Prophet Saleh's tribe also asked for miracles all the time, but when the miracle they
asked for was given, and a camel came out of here, their attitude changed. Because
Allah the Almighty had given them a female camel. This camel would go down to the
water, drink from it and return by that route there! However they were not able to bear
it and they were rebellious against their Lord, they ended up strangling the camel! The
truth of it was that it drank from the water one day and the other day it gave enough
milk that would be sufficient for them all! And when they did that, Allah the Almighty
punished the people of Thamud with a great noise. All of them died except for one
who had sought refuge in the Haram. To those who asked who this man was, he
showed his grave on the way to Taif and said: "It was Abu Rishal," and then he added:
"But as soon as he left the Haram what happened to his tribe happened to him too; and
so do not enter the abode of a tribe that had met the Divine wrath."

--- Sayfa 916 ---
When the blessed Messenger was speaking of these, one of them said: "How
interesting!" The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, continued:
"Shall I tell you something even more interesting than that? Someone from among you
tells you about people who have gone before you and those come after you; and so be
upright men and do not stray away from what is most true. Because if you ask for it,
Allah the Almighty will show His wrath to you too Allah the Almighty will also form
a people that cannot do anything against the possible difficulties that they will face! "242
The blessed Messenger had told his Companions not to take water from the wells of
Hijr, but before long the hot weather and the difficulty of the road took a great toll on
the Companions. People were desperate for water; they were cutting the bumps of
their camels and trying to satisfy their thirst. They decided to come to our noble
Prophet and speak of their state; it was again Abu Bakr who knocked on the doors of
Prophetic mercy: "0 Messenger of Allah," he said. "Allah the Almighty has given you
the precious gift of supplication. Can you not pray to Him for us!"
In fact when saying this, Abu Bakr himself had become a supplication through his
very manner. The blessed Messenger asked him: "Do you really want this?"
''Yes," said Abu Bakr.
Upon that the noble Messenger prayed two cycles, raised his hands and started to
pray. It was such a prayer that as soon as he started to move his lips they heard
thunder. Then clouds appeared, and then it started to rain heavily.
The faces were smiling; they were drinking from this rain that came as a Divine gift
and they were filling their water skins. They wanted to make the hypocrites appreciate
this gift they had been given as well, and so some of the Companions approached
them and asked them whether their hesitations were still not over after all they have
witnessed.
It appeared that faith was a different issue altogether! This person was still trying to
say-as if he had not experienced that serious hardship a little while ago-that this
was a natural phenomenon that could happen at any time and said: "This rain was
brought to us by such and such passing cloud," concentrating on the causes where as
he should be thanking the Maker of the Cause.
When they started to move again and made a little way, they saw that the rain
resulting from the Prophetic prayer that had come down only where the soldiers had
been, and their faith was strengthened one more time and they thanked their Lord
sincerely from the heart.
When people had disagreements, they came to the noble Messenger to have their

--- Sayfa 917 ---
disputes resolved. There had been a disagreement between a soldier and his slave, and
in their quarrel the man had bitten the slave's hand; when the slave pulled his hand in
pain, it ripped the front teeth of the man, and this led to a further fight. In the end, the
matter was brought to the Messenger of Allah; he was asked to resolve the fight and
judge between them. Having listened to the two sides the noble Messenger first said:
"I see that some of you have started to bite his brother like the camels bite one
another," and then said: "Did he leave his hand in your mouth so that you may bite it
like a camel?"
And contrary to what the people were expecting he did not judge for a
compensation for the teeth that had been lost.
They had now approached Tabuk; he turned to his Companions and said:
"Insha 'Allah we will have reached the springs of Tabuk tomorrow, we will be there
early morning. If anyone of you should reach it before me, let him not drink from that
water."
There was once again a shortage of water and the noble Messenger wanted to make
the most of what water they had, and to also make it an occasion of bounty for his
Companions. So he had addressed his Companions with the callers and asked them to
be very careful on this account.
The Army of Islam in Tabuk
When the next day came and they reached Tabuk, they saw that two soldiers had
already arrived there before them. The noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, asked them: "Did you touch the waters ofthe spring?"
''Yes," they answered.
He was angry, despite the fact that he had warned the soldiers to be very careful in
keeping his command, they had not listened. So that this behavior would not be
repeated the noble Messenger censured the two men for a period of time.
The waters of the wells had dried up, and only a little water came from one of them.
Our noble Prophet collected the water little by little and put it in a water skin. He
washed his hands, face and mouth and he put the rest of the water back in the spring.
He turned towards his Lord and prayed. As soon as he had put the remaining water
back in the spring, the spring started to boil up like thunder; after the prayer another
miracle was happening right in front of everyone's eyes.
That day, our noble Prophet addressed a quite a long sermon to his Companions,
spoke of good and evil and warned the people about the various issues they may be

--- Sayfa 918 ---
faced with.
He had appointed Abbad ibn Bishr to establish the security and he had given him a
group of his friends to support him. Abbad started to hear voices of takbir from behind
somewhere and so came to the presence of the noble Messenger: "0 Messenger of
Allah," he said, "have you sent sentries other than us as well, that we hear voices of
takbir in the night?"
''No I did not," said our noble Prophet, "but some Muslims may have done this out
of their own volition."
Silkan ibn Salama who witnessed this conversation and came to the fore: "0
Messenger of Allah," he said and added: 'We, twelve men from the Muslims, got on
our horses and went to the back in order to keep guard."
It had happened just the noble Messenger has guessed. He turned to his
congregation who were racing each other in good deeds and said: "May Allah the
Almighty treat those who keep watch in the Name of Allah with His mercy; your
recompense will be as many kirats243 as the people or animals you have watched
over!"
While they were at Tabuk, a Jewish woman came and brought cheese to the noble
Messenger. He took the knife and cut it, and beginning with the name of his Lord, he
shared it with his Companions and ate it with them.
Sincere Volunteers Who Stayed Behind
There were the sincere volunteers like Ka'b ibn Malik, Hilal ibn Umayya, Murara ibn
Rabi, Abu Haysama and Abu Dharr who had been left behind because they had said 'I
will catch up with you as soon as I get ready,' and yet not been able to catch up with
the army and the noble Messenger. They were true believers and no one could doubt
them or question their faith. Maybe Allah the Almighty was going to use them as an
example when speaking to believers who might be late in following the orders of our
noble Prophet and show how one had to behave to make up for it afterwards! Now and
then the Companions said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Such and such was left behind and
couldn't come either," and our noble Prophet said: "Leave him to himself; if there is
some good to come out of him, Allah the Almighty will make him catch up with you
later," and thus made it clear that he was expecting these people who had been left in
Medina to come later and catch up with them.
When the issue came to how Abu Dharr had not been able to come either, he had
said the same thing and had given the good news that he would catch up with them

--- Sayfa 919 ---
later. Abu Dharr had not been able to set off with the army, and instead he stayed
behind to feed his camel that was very weak. Indeed, Abu Dharr was coming from
behind. When he came to the place called Dhi al-Marwa, his camel could no longer
walk.
He waited for a day hoping his camel would get well and move. However, when he
lost all hope, he put his load on his back and tried to catch up with the blessed
Messenger and his Companions. He had become weak in the hot desert and under the
scorching sun; his lips had cracked of thirst, and he had no energy to take another step
because of hunger.
But Abu Dharr had unending determination and one day he did catch up with our
noble Prophet and his Companions. They saw someone coming in the middle of the
day: "0 Messenger of Allah, look, there is someone who has made his way here alone
all the way!"
The noble Messenger looked where they were pointing and as if speaking the names
of people he wanted to see arrive, said: "Must be Abu Dharr!"
And indeed it was Abu Dharr who was coming, and those who knew what the noble
Messenger wished to see ran to him and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, it is indeed Abu
Dharr who's coming," thus giving him the good news he had been expecting.
Upon that, the noble Messenger said to his Companions, regarding Abu Dharr who
had caught up with the caravan even though he was exhausted and almost finished:
"May Allah treat Abu Dharr with His mercy; verily he will walk alone, die alone, and
will be resurrected alone in the Hereafter!"
Having suffered through the difficulties of the road, Abu Dharr came to the
presence of the noble Messenger and told him of all that happened on the journey. The
blessed Messenger said to Abu Dharr: "May Allah embrace you with His compassion,
0 Abu Dharr! Do not forget that each step that you took to reach me is a good deed,
and each step that you have taken has erased one of your bad deeds."
Another person who caught up with them from behind was Abu Haysama, may
Allah be pleased with him. He had come to his wives a couple of days after the noble
Messenger had left Medina, and was very welcome. Tasty dishes, cold water and
people waiting around to serve him-seeing all this he remembered the Messenger of
Allah, who had gone to Tabuk with his Companions. "Glory be to Allah!" he said.
At that moment, while the blessed Messenger, who had never sinned in his life and
there was no way he would in the future either was carrying his weapon under the
scorching sun, there he was sitting in the shade with his wives, enjoying food and his

--- Sayfa 920 ---
property-this would not be fitting for Abu Haysama at all, he thought, what kind of
justice is there in that?
He felt he had to run to the presence of the noble Messenger and so he turned to his
wives and said: "I will not compliment any of you and accept any of your invitations
until I have gone and caught up with the Messenger of Allah" Then he ordered: "Get
my mount ready!"
Now Abu Haysama was also on the way to join the army of the noble Messenger.
When he approached Tabuk, he came across Umayr ibn Wahb. After walking together
for a while
Abu Haysama said to him: "I have a sin; when I speak to our noble Prophet about
my situation, is it all right if you stay away from me," thus making him know that he
did not want to make Umayr party to the reaction he was expecting to get.
Then he reached Tabuk. Those who saw him coming ran to the presence and said:
"0 Messenger of Allah! Another man is coming from that road there."
He gave the same reaction; he looked at the direction pointed to him and said: "And
you be Abu Haysama!"
When the figure approached closer and they saw that it was Abu Haysama, the
Companions shouted excitedly: "It is truly Abu Haysama." They were happy to see
that the wish of the blessed Messenger had become true and that they were united with
a sincere friend such as Abu Haysama.
The noble Messenger asked him about what was happening in Medina, the
difficulties he was faced with on the way, and he was praying for goodness for him. At
one point the subject turned to Ka'b ibn Malik who had been late and not yet been
able to come. The noble Messenger inquired after him, wanting to know where he
was.
Some of his Companions said "Lying down in the shade was sweeter to him" while
others continued to speak well of him. Each step opened the door to gaining some sort
of new knowledge, and thus the honorable Companions would learn how to treat their
believing brothers in good terms and good faith in similar situations. They would also
learn the necessity to stay away from passing judgment without knowing all the
details!
The situation of the hypocrite who had joined the army with hopes of spoils was of
course different. They wanted to find the smallest mistake, exaggerate it and make it
known to the public. They had sat aside once again and were gossiping. Salaba ibn
Hatib was spreading the following words to demoralize the noble Messenger and

--- Sayfa 921 ---
frighten the Companions: "Do you think that fighting the Banu Asfar is like the fights
between the Arabs? I swear I can see all of you being tied up tomorrow."
Julas ibn Amr came to the fore: "I swear if Muhammad is telling the truth, we are
truly in a situation as bad as a donkey."
Umayr who was present turned to them: "There is no doubt about that! You are
already in a situation worse than a donkey, because while the Messenger of Allah
always represents the truth, you keep lying."
Then Muhashin ibn Humayyir took word: "Rather than becoming ashamed that a
verse is revealed to you because of this unnecessary quarrel of yours, I think it would
be better if you are caned a hundred times today," he said, expressing his worry.
Our noble Prophet, who was watching them from afar, called Ammar ibn Y asir to
his side and told him: "Go and have a look at those gathered there, see what they have
started to produce already! They say false things. Go and ask them what words come
out of their mouths, if they deny it tell them that they have said such and such things."
Ammar ibn Yasir approached them to perform his job and when he told them the
thoughts and sentences they had shared between them, they ran to the presence of our
noble Prophet to save themselves and said: "0 Messenger of Allah! We said those
things just so, to pass the time."
Their excuse was bigger than their crime and before long the voice of Truthful
Gabriel was heard. He was talking about what kind of danger there was in being so
offhand when it comes to Divine matters, and that expressing excuses would not save
one from calamity. 244 When the verses came and their situation was revealed, Julas ibn
Amr swore and said that they had not used such expressions. They were lying outright,
and the Gabriel came once again and revealed the truth of the matter! 245
A man named Abdullah ibn Dhu'l-Bijadayn246 had died while our noble Prophet
was in Tabuk; he was a Companion who badly wanted to become a martyr. In fact,
one day when he had sent the news of this wish to the noble Messenger, he had given
him the good news that he would be a martyr even if he should die in his bed, and now
death was catching up with him in Tabuk. The Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, who was saddened by the news of his death came to where the
grave had been dug, had gone down in it and placed him in there. He prayed in the
following way: "Dear Lord! I was content with him so long as he lived; and You be
content with him as well! "247
The nights of the noble Messenger, the Pride of the Universe, were always bright;
he spent most of his nights in supplication to his Lord. Even if he should wake up in

--- Sayfa 922 ---
the middle of the night, he would first go and clean his teeth with a miswak.
The Envoys That Come and Go and
the Consultation at Tabuk
They waited at Tabuk for days but could not see an army or any movement that could
point to the existence of an army. There were two possibilities; either the Byzantine
army had decided not to fight and pulled back its soldiers, or maybe, a slight
possibility, they had prepared a very cunning trap for the Muslim army. But the
passing time diminished the possibility of this latter. The only way to find out was to
get in touch with the other side and the noble Prophet sent Dihyah al-Kalbi to
Heraclius as he had done so many years ago. In the letter he gave him the noble
Messenger listed three options for Heraclius: embracing Islam, staying in their own
lands by giving jizya tax, or to fight. At the time, the Byzantine king Heraclius was in
Hims. As soon as he received the noble Messenger's letter, he held counsel with his
viziers and clergymen. He was reminding them of the information they had at hand,
and saying that a new religion that was developing now was going to reign supreme in
his lands one day! But the viziers and the clergymen were not of the same opinion,
and seeing that they opposed his views strongly he stepped back in order to keep his
position.248 Heraclius chose not to fight the noble Messenger or to ally himself to him.
He kept away from speaking his opinion in front of the army that had come all the
way to Tabuk and displayed a neutral position. Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah had
sent Khalid ibn Walid with a force of four hundred in the direction of Dumat Al-
Jandal.
His orders were to take the king of the Banu Kinda Ukaydar ibn Abd al-Malik
prisoner and then return. Khalid told the noble Messenger that the number of soldiers
he had, would not be enough for the vastness of the geography in which they were
going to carry out this mission. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, said: ''You will find him hunting wild livestock and catch him, but do not kill
him. Bring him to me," thus he told him where he would find Ukaydar, and how he
would be able to catch him and make him prisoner when he does. Indeed, the day that
Khalid came, Ukaydar was hunting wild cattle, but this time he would be the hunted
one!
At the time he had some of his men and his brother Hasan with him. Khalid who
saw that the news that the Messenger of Allah had given had become true in front of
his very eyes, wanted to share his excitement with the blessed Messenger and his
friends. He took the gold cross from Ukaydar's neck and had it sent to the blessed

--- Sayfa 923 ---
Messenger at once. And the Companions who saw it that day could not hide their
admiration of this piece of jewelry. Upon that our noble Prophet said to them: "Is this
what you like? Is this what draws your attention," and then continued to speak: "I
swear by He who holds my life in His hands that the kerchiefs that Sa'd ibn Muadh is
being offered in Paradise are much more beautiful and glittering than this!"
The blessed Messenger communicated Islam to Ukaydar and his men when they
came to Tabuk with Khalid, but they did not accept it. They rather accepted to be
under the rule of Islam and pay yearly tax. Our noble Prophet made an agreement with
the two brothers and set them free.
Meanwhile, fearing that the forces that went and captured Ukaydar would come to
him as well, the king of Ayla, Yuhanna ibn Ruba, came to the blessed Messenger with
presents and made a deal with him, accepted to pay tax. 249
The blessed Messenger gave special importance to forming platforms for dialogue
with people, and he gave a written assurance to Yuhanna. He included the people in
the regions of Damascus, Yemen and Bahr in it, taking on the protection of these
people's lives and property. 250
Even though there had been no direct contact with the Byzantines in Tabuk, the
purpose had been accomplished and people had an opportunity to meet the
encompassing face of Islam. The Jewish tribes of Jarba and Azruh had also come and
made an agreement with the Messenger of Allah. According to this agreement they too
would pay a tax of a hundred dinars to be collected in the month of Rajah and with it
they would have entered the protection oflslam. The blessed Messenger was declaring
that as a result of their free choice, he was taking on the protection of their lives and
property. The people of Jarba and Azruh would come and bring the tax of that year
before our beloved Prophet.
Meanwhile, the people of Makna also came and made a deal with the blessed
Messenger. According to the agreement, they were to give one fourth of their fruit
produce and one fourth of the clothes they weave asjizya tax, thus in return, preferring
to be within the peaceful climate of Islamic rule.
Tabuk had thus given its fruits and our noble Prophet started to speak with his
Companions about not pushing forward towards Damascus demanding for more.
Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said: "0 Messenger of Allah! Ifthis has been
ordered to you, then continue on your way."
But he did not want to continue without consulting with his Companions, because
Allah the Almighty had told him not to proceed in his business without exchanging

--- Sayfa 924 ---
views with his Companions. He said: "Had I been ordered to continue to march
forward, I would not be consulting with you."
Upon that Umar replied: "0 Messenger of Allah! The Romans are a large
community and they have no Muslims among them! We are at very close quarters
with them at the moment, and that you have come all the way here has given them a
great fright! Let us, if you like, return, to see what the developments will be and to
wait to see what Allah tells you to do on this matter."
Since this was the general view, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be
upon him, decided to leave Tabuk; now the destination was Medina. 251
Leaving Tabuk
They had been in Tabuk for about twenty days, and now it was time to leave. However
nothing had been left by way of provisions either by the side of our noble Prophet or
his Companions. Since they had decided to return to Medina, there was no prospect of
war in the near future, the Companions thought this was the right time to come to the
presence of the Prophet. They said: "0 Messenger of Allah. Will you give us
permission to slaughter our camels and thereby see to our need for victuals and also
make use of their fat?"
This was their own request and it seemed reasonable; and some had already started
to slaughter their animals. Umar who saw this asked them to stop the slaughter for a
while and then went to the presence of our beloved Prophet: "0 Messenger of Allah,"
he said. "Did you allow them to slaughter the camels that were for carrying the
loads?"
There was no problem in the permission, or that people were slaughtering their own
animals! But Umar who would be carrying the responsibility of the future was worried
about something else. Our noble Prophet, who saw his anxiety, said: "They came to
me about their hunger and the difficulties they had about procuring food. I told them
that on condition that they take turns riding the ones that are left, and that they choose
from among the ones that carry the loads, I gave permission to each group to slaughter
one or two camels. The people are returning home anyhow."
Upon that Umar took another step and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, it is good that
people should always have some provisions in their hands; the camels are especially
weak these days! But 0 Messenger of Allah, ask them what remains of their
provisions, let us gather than all together and then you can pray to Allah to make it
plenty, like you did on the way back from Uhud. We hope that Allah will respond to

--- Sayfa 925 ---
your prayer favorably on this occasion as well."
This was a cautious approach and the blessed Messenger received it favorably. Now
it was time to make it known to the people. A caller was calling out the decision in
Tabuk; asking all to bring whatever provisions they had to the presence of our noble
Prophet. Before long everyone started to bring whatever they could lay hold of and
three mounds of food that formed in the middle would be enough to feed the army of
thirty thousand. They would witness miracles of water many times on the same
journey, and see that the weak camels would become the fastest of mounts with the
blessing of the prayer of the Messenger of Allah.
Another Attempt of Assassination
At the time, a group from the hypocrites spoke among themselves and made a plan to
set a trap for our noble Prophet to kill him. They were waiting for the right moment:
"We can comer him as he passes the valley and make towards the mountains and then
push him over the edge."
Although they had been together with the Messenger of Allah for so long and had
witnessed so many miracles, they still had not come to their senses and could still
think of harming the blessed Messenger. But the fact that they had thought of it did
not mean that they would have their way; it was just an opportunity for them to
display their true characters. For the Truthful Gabriel had come and informed the
noble Messenger what they were planning to do.
The time was the time for the coal and the diamond to be separated; those who still
worked for denial although they had been living with Muslims for so many years and
those who sincerely believed were going to be separated now and the traders of hate
and those who were true subjects of Allah would become evident. The voice of the
caller of our noble Prophet echoed among the people who were advancing in the
valley: "There is no doubt that the Messenger of Allah will take this route of the
mountain; let no one of you come on this route! Go proceed by the valley, for this
route will be safer and easier for you."
How could it be that there was a Prophetic order and the Companions not follow it?
One group who did not obey the order and who believed that they now had an
opportunity to carry out their plan were already on their way. They had made use of
the dark on the night and covered their faces, and had entered the mountain route. In
these hours in which the honorable Companions were progressing in the valley, the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, who had entered the mountain
route with some of his Companions such as Ammar ibn Y asir, Hamza ibn Amr and

--- Sayfa 926 ---
Hudhayfa ibn Yam an heard the rustling noises made by the conspiratorial group who
had gone there before him; the news he had been given was about to take place. All of
a sudden they were faced with men who had their faces covered. They frightened the
camel of the Messenger of Allah; and that fright caused some of the wares on the
camel to fall down! This was their aim; they were going to disturb and frighten the
camel and then the blessed Messenger would fall down the cliff!
The noble Messenger was angry, and those with him were uneasy and started to
respond to these people who had ganged up on them all of a sudden. Hudhayfa started
to hit the faces of their camels with the staff he had in his hands and shouted: "Go
away, you enemies of Allah!"
It was not possible to understand who these people were in the dark of the night
with their faces covered. But the men were frightened; from his attitude and demeanor
he could see that the noble Messenger knew what their aim was, that he had already
been informed of it! That is why they decided to run away at once before giving them
any clues as to who they are. The Messenger of Allah called out to Hudhayfa and
Ammar and told them to follow the men and find out who they are. But they were not
able to do this; these dark souls who were moving very fast caught up with the people
who were moving down in the valley at once and disappeared in their midst. Our
noble Prophet asked Hudhayfa: 'Were you able to identify any of the men you drew
away?"
"I was not able to see anything other than their camels; their faces were masked and
there was no way to identify them in the dark of the night," answered Hudhayfa, may
Allah be pleased with him.
Upon that our noble Prophet asked: "Do you know why they did that and what their
real aim was?"
'We swear we do not know, 0 Messenger of Allah," they said. Upon that the
blessed Messenger said: "They came up to the mountain route and set up an ambush.
They were going to comer me and push me down when we came to the edge of the
cliff at the pass!"
"Allah the Almighty informed me who their fathers are as well, by the will of Allah
I will tell you who they are"
The Companions were surprised; they could not make out why these people were
still plotting even though they were among the Muslims! The Companions who had
taken oaths to die for his sake wanted to learn at once who these men were so that they
would be able to get rid of them! Some of them came to the fore and said: "0

--- Sayfa 927 ---
Messenger of Allah! If you give the word, we will sever their heads."
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, did not think this was a
good idea because he believed it would ruin the general harmony. Although he told
Ammar and Hudhayfa their names, they would not carry out any punishment for these
men! Some of the Companions went further and claimed that these men could no
longer be considered as Companions. Our noble Prophet said: "Do they not declare
'There is no deity but Allah,' and bear witness?"
When the Companions answered ''Yes" to this question, he asked: "Do they not
declare that I am the Messenger of Allah?"
And he would again receive the answer "Yes." Upon that the blessed Messenger
verified the principle that judgments had to be passed on the base of evidence that
could be seen: "I have not been given permission to kill them,"252 and thus ended the
matter.
Medina
And now the journey had ended; they were about to enter Medina. At one point the
blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, turned to his Companions:
"There are such people in Medina that they are always with you at every step, in every
valley you go."
It was clear that he was trying to explain that not all who had stayed behind was a
hypocrite; for among them were Ka'b ibn Malik, Murara ibn Rabi and Hilal ibn
Umayya who were sincere believers and yet had not been able to come due to personal
circumstances. The Companions were surprised to hear these statements and so they
asked: "Tell us 0 Messenger of Allah, even though they are in Medina?"
They were voicing their surprise and wanted to learn the reason. And so the blessed
Messenger said: "Yes, even though they are in Medina, for what kept them behind was
their true circumstances."
And so there was a difference between those who did not come to Tabuk by making
up excuses and those who had legitimate excuses and our noble Prophet was drawing
attention to this difference. There were other things that the blessed Messenger drew
attention to that day. As soon as he saw Medina, he said: "This is Taba, and it is my
Lord who placed me there, just as the bellows cleanses off the burrs from the iron,
Medina has cleansed itself from all the evil there was in it."
Meanwhile, he had started to gaze on Uhud, and as before, the same sentence was
heard from his lips: "Uhud is such a mountain that we love it, and it loves us."

--- Sayfa 928 ---
Then turning especially towards the Ansar, the blessed Messenger said to them:
"Do you want me to tell you the most auspicious of the Ansar houses?"
''Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah," they said. Upon that the blessed Messenger started to
count: "Among the houses of the Ansar the most auspicious are the Banu Najjar's, and
then the sons of Abdullah ibn Ashhal, and then the houses ofthe Banu Saida."
The sons of the Banu Saida who were behind in this listing were a little sad. Sa' d
came to the presence and said: "0 Messenger of Allah. You made a list of the most
auspicious houses among the Ansar, and you spoke of our houses last on this
placement."
Obviously there would have to be a last in such a ranking. The noble Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, turned to these people and said: "Why is it not
enough for you that you were mentioned among the most auspicious?"
The women and children who had not seen our noble Prophet among them for two
months were very happy to see him come into town-they were on the streets. They
were rejoicing in the light of the full moon that had come upon them from the heights
of the Veda hills. They were singing songs and praise and showing their happiness in
welcoming him. He rushed to the Masjid an-Nabawi as soon as he arrived and prayed
two cycles by way of thanks to Allah: "Thanks be to Allah who had given us
recompense and goodness in our campaign."
On return from Tabuk the Companions believed there would be no battles anymore
and had even started to sell the weapons they had in their hands. They believed that
there was no power left in the Hijaz that could stand against them and so that they
would not need swords or shields anymore! The Messenger of Allah, who knew of
this attitude of theirs, intervened at once and declared: "A group from my ummah will
fight jihad on the right path of Allah until the day that the Dajjal will appear."
The Dirar Masjid
On the way back, the blessed Messenger had been faced with problems that awaited
solutions; the masjid for nifaq, or dissension that had been built when they had started
for Tabuk, the situation of those who had not come to Tabuk with false excuses, and
many other problems that had accumulated in his absence was waiting for his arrival.
When the blessed Messenger approached Medina, the Truthful Gabriel had come to
him and brought him the definite order of Allah regarding Prayer at the Dirar Masjid.
He had said "Maybe" on the way to Tabuk, but now it is a definite "No," meaning that
they should not pray there. 253

--- Sayfa 929 ---
Now everyone had seen the real aspect of the matter. The people who had been
surprised to see the blessed Messenger take it slow in such an auspicious matter
realized that there was deep wisdom in every step that the Messenger of Allah took.
This was a masjid that had become the focal point of the struggles and plots against
our noble Prophet. The place would have been sanctified with the Prayer that the
blessed Messenger performed there, and continue to be a center for efforts of denial.
When the verse came and the real face of the matter was revealed, now was the time
to demolish this building that has served as a center of dissension. The noble
Messenger called some of his Companions to his side and gave this duty to them, and
they went without any hesitations. They burnt the building down and demolished it! 254
And so another attempt at dissension had been dispelled; each step taken was
cleansing the Hijaz from denial and dissension. From then on, Medina became a place
in which they would feel more and more pressure.
Those Who Make Excuses and a Hero of Repentance
These hypocrites whose real intentions were revealed once again came to our
Prophet's presence and explained the blessed Messenger their excuses why they had
not been able to go to Tabuk. In order to keep things within bounds the blessed
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, was acting as if he had accepted the
excuses they were providing and was not reacting negatively. All of them came and
spoke to him and now was the time for the sincere believers who the blessed
Messenger said were with them in every step they took. It was a Ramadan day; and
concerning Hilal ibn Umayya and Murara ibn Rabi the noble Messenger said to his
Companions: "Do not any one of you speak to them until I have given you leave."
When Ka'b ibn Malik came to the Masjid and saluted them, the Messenger of Allah
looked at him with a bitter smile and then turned his face away from this sincere man.
Ka'b's world was falling down on him! The message that our noble Prophet conveyed
through his attitude sat heavy on his heart and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, why do
you tum your face away from me? I swear I am not a hypocrite, nor do I have any
doubts about my religion, neither have I changed my religion."
"Then why did you not come?'' asked the blessed Messenger. ''You had made
preparations, hadn't you?"
''Yes, 0 Messenger of Allah," said Ka'b. "Were I standing not next to you but next
to someone for whom the world is unduly important, then I would make up an excuse
and escape His wrath; for I have the power of convincing people. But I know that

--- Sayfa 930 ---
should I save the day with a lie, tomorrow Allah the Almighty will tell you what the
real situation is. But if I should tell you the truth that may anger you, then I can still
have hope that Allah will forgive me; the truth is I had no excuse."
The Messenger of mercy was watching the truthfulness of his Companion, and
turned to the others and said: "And he, he has told the truth."
This sentence alone explained the situation of some eighty people who had come
before these three Companions. He then added: "Stand up, and wait until Allah the
Almighty has decreed what has to become ofyou."255
People Continue Embracing Islam
Delegations had been coming following the conquest of Mecca and after the blessed
Messenger came back from Tabuk, more kept coming. There seemed to be a new
delegation every day. Those who were resisting or waiting to see what would happen
until yesterday, were coming to "submit" after they saw the success that the
Messenger of Allah and his Companions accomplished such as the conquest of Mecca,
Hunayn and Tabuk. There were those who came on their own to become Muslims and
those who came to Medina in delegations, and thus were introduced to the bright face
of Islam. Around three hundred and fifty delegations256 came to Medina in one year
with this purpose-they were coming, mostly becoming Muslims, and then returning
to their tribes! 257
There was an excitement both in those who came and those who returned to their
tribes; the latter were looking forward to sharing what they had experience there, and
wanted immediately to introduce their close ones to Islam as well.
The noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had tents put up for those
who came to Medina. They were being hosted there for days where they could listen
to the recitation of the Qur' an and witness the peace in the Prayer. The Ansar were as
usual very generous in welcoming them, almost racing each other to provide
hospitality for the guests! The blessed Messenger was encouraging his Companions to
meet the delegations outside Medina and guide them into town; and he gave presents
to all of them before they were sent back.258 Such that this year was to be called "Sanat
al-Wufud" meaning "The Year of the Delegations."
All in different circumstances and with different requests; asking the blessed
Messenger to send them people who could teach Islam, and some wanted answers to
questions they had. Some of them were trying to test the truth of the words of the
Messenger of Allah with their questions, and some prefer not ask any questions at all

--- Sayfa 931 ---
and sought salvation in submitting to him without any reservations.
The Delegation ofNajran
The delegation ofNajran attracted attention among all the other ones. There were sixty
people, fourteen of whom were noblemen. The blessed Messenger had written to them
and said: "I ask you to stop worshiping subjects and invite you to come and worship
Allah; stop relying on the support of the people and to trust all your business with
Allah.
If you do not accept it, you can choose to pay tax. If you don't accept this either,
know that this will be a cause for war," thus making his purpose clear.
And after receiving this letter from the Messenger of Allah, the Najran people had
discussed the matter among themselves, and sent a delegation to make the situation
clearer. Now there they were in Medina, Medina with their poets, viziers and clerics
wearing their robes of silk and rings on their fingers. When they entered the Masjid
an-Nabawi, they turned to their right and started to pray. This was a grave error for the
Companions-how could they tum to the wrong qibla in the Masjid of the Messenger
of Allah. They wanted to intervene at once. Our noble Prophet, a man of tolerance,
who saw this said to his Companions: "Leave them alone."
After they prayed as they wished, they came and greeted the blessed Messenger.
The noble Messenger responded to their greeting and invited them to Islam-but they
said: "We were Muslims before you anyway," and so did not accept his invitation.
The blessed Messenger said to them: "The three things that do not make you
Muslims: that you pray to the cross, that you eat pork, and that you attribute a son to
Allah."
There was a great commotion in the Masjid an-Nabawi; they had not liked the
approach of the Messenger of Allah who had spoken of their fundamental issues.
The blessed Messenger recited the Qur'an to them and was trying to correct their
misunderstandings.
Here was Prophetic understanding and this process would continue for days. They
asked question upon question to the noble Messenger! Their questions were strange
and their attitude to the answers was not understandable. When the questions did not
seem to end, the blessed Messenger started to ask them questions, and it continued like
a question and answer sessions on both sides-and it continued thus for days!
"How can you say these things about our friend and say that he is not the son of
Allah?"

--- Sayfa 932 ---
This was a strange approach and the blessed Messenger answered: ''Yes, verily he is
the servant and Messenger of Allah; a soul He sent to the virgin and virtuous
Maryam."
They were angry,
"Can you show us a person without a father; if you speak the truth, show us an
example."
The Truthful Gabriel came to the rescue once again and communicated the
following to the blessed Messenger: 'With Allah, the position of Jesus is like the
position of Adam. Allah created Adam from earth and said to him "be!" and he was.
Truth comes from your Lord. Have no hesitations about that. After you have been thus
informed, whomever disputes with you concerning Jesus, say 'Come, then! Let us
summon our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, our selves and
your selves, and then let us pray and invoke God's curse upon those who lie"' (Al
Imran 3:59-61).
All was clear but they did not believe the news of the Qur' an and said that what
they said was not true. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, still
showed patience and gave them another day to think it over. But when they came the
next day, it was clear that the situation was not much different and so the blessed
Messenger gathered the people of his house, including Fatima, Hasan and Husayn to
the Masjid and said to them: "When I pray, say 'Amin'," and then started to wait for
the judgment on the Najran delegation.
This was a clear challenge and the Najranis who understood what was happening
asked for time to think. They could see that the situation was more serious than they
thought-turning to their spokesperson they said: "Do not prefer such a thing; for if he
is truly a Prophet, when you make that prayer neither we nor those who come after us
will be saved! Because of us, the smallest hair or nail will be touched by it and
disappear."
It was true; all these signs proved that he was the awaited Prophet! And so they
could not make a choice that would take them to destruction just because of mere
stubbornness and so they came to the presence of the blessed Messenger and said:
"We will give you whatever you want."
They were not choosing to become Muslims and yet they were submitting to live
under what Islam decreed.
Upon that the Messenger of Allah decreed ajizya tax to them-two thousand huZZa
and the same amount of silver to be brought in the Rajah and Safar months-and

--- Sayfa 933 ---
made a new contract with them. As they were returning they had the security
document written by our noble Prophet in their hands; it contained both the rights they
had attained and their responsibilities towards the blessed Messenger: "Send us a man
to whom we can give the due for the peace," they said.
The noble Messenger said: "I will send with you a truly trustworthy man," and then
added: "0 Abu Ubayda ibn Jarrah, stand up."
And then turning to them said: "This is the representative of the ummah, a man you
can trust."
The Delegation of Thaqif
Urwa ibn Masud, the chief of the tribe of Thaqif had come and become a Muslim
when the blessed Messenger came from the Taif campaign. He felt a great excitement;
he wanted to return to his tribe and invite them to Islam as well. But the noble
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had read well the state of excitement his
soul was in and considering the general character of the Thaqif tribe, warned him
saying: "They will kill you," Communicating the word of Allah had to have its own
rules; one had to be as sensitive as feeding a new born baby, one had to follow certain
rules when inviting people to Allah, one had to take the needs of the invitee into
consideration. But Urawa's excitement prevented him from seeing possible drawbacks
and said: "0 Messenger of Allah, I am most dear to them, and they will certainly listen
to me!"
He returned to his land thinking that no one would oppose him because of his rank,
and that all of them would respond favorably to his call to Islam-however, from the
very moment that Urwa started to speak to them, he was met with great reaction and
he was attacked and killed by his own tribe.
This was indeed a sad situation; they were killing their leader whom they had
respected for so many years just because he had become a Muslim.
But things weren't looking very good for them. After the conquest of Mecca and
what happened in Hunayn, the Muslims had also challenged the Byzantines and had
returned victorious from Tabuk! The circle was closing in on them with every passing
day. After a couple of months passed, they considered these facts and sat down to
discuss things. They decided to send one of their men to our noble Prophet.
They knocked on Abdiyalayl ibn Amr' s door for this task; they told him what the
situation was and wanted him to act as envoy for them! But fearing that what
happened to Urwa would happen to him, Abdiyalayl said that he would not be able to

--- Sayfa 934 ---
do this on his own. And so they selected two other men to go with Abdiyalayl to
Medina.
The blessed Messenger had recently returned from Tabuk and he was fasting during
Ramadan. The Companions who saw them coming to Medina ran to the Messenger of
Allah to give the good news; since the blessed Messenger wanted very much the
Thaqifpeople to become Muslims.
The noble Messenger, who found himself facing them, all of a sudden set up a tent
for them in the comer of the Masjid an-Nabawi, so that they would hear the words of
Allah and take heed, that they would see the depth of the servantship that Muslims felt
towards Allah during Prayer.
Days passed and at last, one day Abdiyalayl came to the blessed Messenger and
asked:
"Can you write a document of security for us so that we may be able to return to our
land?''
Upon that the blessed Messenger said to him: "I will, but not under these
circumstances; for you still have not declared that you have become Muslims. Under
these circumstances! As such we cannot have peace nor can I write you a document
for security!"
They had some reservations: they wanted to be exempt from certain responsibilities
such as Daily Prayer if they became Muslims. But there could be no religion without
means ofworship.
And yet they worshipped idols that they made with their own hands, visited it on
certain days of the year and sacrificed animals by it. The Messenger of Allah, peace
and blessings be upon him, said to them: "There can be no good in a religion that does
not have the Prayer in it," and thus closed the issue.
The issue had been closed when it came to worship, and now they were trying to
attain exemptions regarding prohibited things. Abdiyalayl approached our noble
Prophet and said: "And what do you say about adultery? We are a people that travel a
lot, and there is no way we can avoid it; we cannot bear such long separation."
The noble Messenger said to him: "That is a sin that Allah has forbidden to the
believers. Allah has said about this issue: 'Do not draw near to any unlawful sexual
intercourse; surely it is a shameful, indecent thing, and an evil way"' (al-Isra 17:32)
he said.
Abdiyalayl was not able to get the exemptions he wanted, and yet he continued:
"And what do you say about interest?" trying to get some kind of compromise on that

--- Sayfa 935 ---
front. The clarity with which the blessed Messenger answered him did not change. He
first said: "Interest is also forbidden."
Abdiyalayl reacted: "But all our property is interest."
But Divine decree could not take shape according to the wishes of individuals and
the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, said: "You can only get your
capital back," reminding that the rest would be forbidden, and he read to them the
verse: "0 you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God and try to attain piety in
due reverence for Him, and give up what remains (due to you) from interest, if you are
(in truth) believers" (al-Baqarah 2:278).
When they saw that this door was too closed to them, they tried another venue:
"What do you say about the issue of alcohol? We squeeze our grapes and drink the
juice, we cannot avoid that either."
The noble Messenger approached him with the same caution: "Allah has verily
prohibited them saying: "0 you who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance and
(sacrificing to) stones set up and (dividing by) arrows are only an uncleanness, the
devils work; shun it therefore that you may have salvation" (al-Maedah 5:90).
This door was closed as well and seeing that each step they took had led them to a
blind alley, the Thaqif delegation decided to discuss this among themselves.
Abdiyalayl said to them: 'Woe unto you! We will return to our land having been
robbed of these three things! I swear that we, the people of Thaqif, cannot abstain
either from alcohol or fornication!"
Sufyan ibn Abdullah did not think like them; he stood up: "You there," he started:
"If Allah has willed some goodness of them, they will have patience and stay away
from these things! Do you not see? Those who are with him are no different but they
are able to leave aside their old habits and be patient! We have to fear this man; do
you not see that he now reigns over the world from one end to the other, and we are
trapped in our castle, and with each day Islam is encircling us! I swear that should he
come and lay siege to our castle for a month we will all die of hunger! I see no other
way than to become a Muslim today. Or else I fear that a day like the Mecca day will
befall us."
Meanwhile the Messenger of Allah had invited them to dine; but they had more
important business before the dinner and despite all their hesitations they came and
became Muslims! They had become Muslims, but now they were talking about their
idol named Rabba: "And what do you think about Rabba, and what do you want us to
do?"

--- Sayfa 936 ---
The blessed Messenger spoke definitely: ''You have to demolish it!"
"Impossible," they said.
They thought that the women and children of Thaqif would not allow it, and that
such an act would bring many great problems. That is why they asked for time, first
three years, then two and then a year, and when all these offers were rejected they then
asked for a month. But the Messenger of Allah did not approve any of these and did
not consent to them calling unto others beside Him!
Umar could not bear Abdiyalayl's insistence and said: "Woe unto you Abdiyalayl.
What you call Rabba is nothing but a stone; it does not even know who worships it
and who doesn't!"
He was speaking the truth, and they could now see that this door was closed to
them; it was clear that Islam was a system that had been lived on its own, without
hesitation or doubt. They had already started to pray and fast; after staying in Medina
for about fifteen days, they were now going to return to their land.
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, appointed Uthman ibn
Abi'l-As, the youngest among them, as their imam; he was the one who was the most
fastidious in learning and grasping Islam, and he had a very sincere way of
approaching issues! The people of Thaqif returned to their homeland like the others,
and started to introduce their tribes to Islam, and soon these tribes would become
Muslim as well. 259 Before long the Messenger of Allah would send them important
names from his Companions such as Khalid ibn Walid, Mughira ibn Shu'ba, Abu
Sufyan with the mission to break their idols-and although it was difficult for them,
the people of Thaqif were thus cleansed of shirk.
000 and Others
Those who ran to Medina were not limited to these; delegations from Abdiqays, Uzra
and Baliyy had come and returned as Muslims. Our noble Prophet spoke to the Uzra
delegation of twelve who said that they were relations to the blessed Messenger's
grandfather Qusayy from their mother's side, and gave them the good news that the
direction of Damascus would soon be conquered as well, and he forbade them to take
money for soothsaying and to eat the flesh that they had cut in order to exalt people.
Again in that period the Fazara delegation of more than ten people came to Medina,
complaining from the draught and famine they were suffering from, they asked for the
help of the Messenger of Allah. The blessed Messenger took them along to a prayer
for rain and asked for the mercy that they were sincerely hoping for from their Lord.

--- Sayfa 937 ---
Another delegation that drew attention was the delegation of the Banu Hanifa, and it
included Musaylama ibn Sumama, who would later claim to be a Prophet. They had
come from the direction of Yamama and become Muslims! The tribes kept coming
from Yemen, Azd, the Banu Sa'd, the Banu Amir ibn Qays, the Banu Asad, Bahra,
Hawlan, Muharib, the Banu Harith ibn Ka'b, Ghamid, the Banu Muntafiq, Salaman,
the Banu Abas, Muzayna, Murad, Zubayd, Kinda, Dhi Murra, Ghassan and the Banu
lysh ...
The last delegation to come to the blessed Messenger was the Naha delegation.
They had sworn their allegiance in Yemen through Muadh, and in the middle of the
month of Muharram they had come to Medina with two hundred people of his
followers!
These people who kept coming to Medina also showed the need people felt for
Islam. Medina had now undoubtedly had become the capital of the Arabian Peninsula.
Hijaz, which seemed to be a place that no one could impose order to, where each tribe
acted on its own and where the powerful oppressed the weak was now going to be
under the rule of the Messenger of Allah. People would continue their lives in peace
and security, and only the sound of order would be heard in its four comers.
The Envoys of the Noble Messenger
Meanwhile our the blessed Messenger, the Pride of the Universe, peace and blessings
be upon him, continued to send certain of his Companions to different places so that
they may teach the people the religion, that they may invite them to Islam and that
they may represent the beauties of Islam where they went. In order to rout out the
illnesses that the society suffered from during Jahiliyya times, to take the people to a
purity of heart that would allow them to understand great truths and for an Islamic
way of life to be cemented in society, this had to be done. In the Rabi al-akhir month
of the tenth year, the blessed Messenger sent Khalid ibn Walid to Harith Ibn Ka'b and
told him to first invite him to Islam with a letter. Should they not accept it, he should
tell them that then they would have to pay jizya tax. War had to be the last resort for
people who refused the alternatives put to them. Khalid came all the way to where he
had been directed, and in order to do what the blessed Messenger had decreed, he
organized his friends. By sending them to different regions, he invited the people to
Islam. Before long they started to get the fruits of their efforts, and Khalid would
inform the blessed Messenger about the developments in the land of the sons of
Harith.
Six months had passed and the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon

--- Sayfa 938 ---
him, called Khalid ibn Walid to Medina. He came to the presence of the Messenger of
Allah with the same group he took with him. Qays ibn Husain would be appointed as
the emir of the delegation for the sons of Harith.260 It was a vast region, and Amr ibn
Hazm from the Companions was appointed to teach people the religion, to inform
them widely and deeply about Islamic matters, the fard and the haram. And then to
Hamadan Ali was sent, with the aim of providing a great opening for Islam in those
parts ofthe region. 261
The people of Hamadan welcomed Ali heartily who came and read to them the
blessed Messenger's letter, and before long they would become Muslims. Ali wrote to
the noble Messenger about the good news that the people of Hamadan had become
Muslims as well. The blessed Messenger was overjoyed that day for he wanted Islam
to be accepted in the region of Yemen so that the south may be illuminated with this
light. That is why he went down to prostration straight after the letter of Ali was read
to him. When he lifted his head he said: "May peace and harmony be upon the people
of Hamadan! May peace and harmony be upon the people of Hamadan!" responding
to their acceptance all the way from Medina.
In those very days the blessed Messenger gave a letter to one of his Companions,
Malik ibn Murra, and sent him to the leaders of Yemen. He was inviting them to be
Muslims and asking them to stay away from any act that could be construed as shirk.
Telling them of the worldly benefits and spiritual gains they may reap from it, and the
difficulties they may be faced with should they not do so. However, they would not
accept to be Muslims and alternatively accept the blessed Messenger's terms and pay
jizya.
The blessed Messenger was not satisfied with the answers he received because he
really wanted people to become Muslims. Therefore, the noble Messenger sent his
Companions Muadh ibn Jabal and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari to different parts ofYemen.
"Be facilitators, and do not present difficulties; approach people with good news
and do not make them hate, and when you are faced with problems, be on the side of
the solution and do not tend towards dissension," he advised them.
Now, there was a great request to learn Islam and seemed like things were going to
rake root. All these showed that the mission of Prophethood was reaching maturity.
The spreading of Divine light that had started in Hira was continuing with a speed
that no one could have imagined, and it was being consolidated everywhere it went.
As our noble Prophet saw the envoys of peace, he walked with them for a while and
whispered to them the things they had to be careful about where they went.

--- Sayfa 939 ---
As Muadh and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari were making way on their camels, our beloved
Prophet was seeing them off on foot. Meanwhile, he had turned to Muadh and saying
the following to them: "You are going to the people of the book; when you reach them
invite them first of all to the fact that there is no deity but Allah and that Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah! If they accept this and obey you, then tell them that Allah
has decreed Prayer five times a day! If they obey you on that account, then tell them
zakah, alms, has been made mandatory (lard), to be taken from the rich and given to
the poor! If they obey you on that account, tell them not to pick the best among
people's possessions and not to take any step that would incur the curse of the weak;
because there is no barrier between the weak and Allah."
These were the criteria that would always be valid for a believer who set off on the
road for Allah. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was
drawing attention to these already in those days, and was telling those who were
walking on his path, how they should behave where they went. He would tum to them
once again and the following historic conversation would take place among them:
"What will you judge with?"
"I will judge by what I find in Allah's book!"
'When you cannot find basis in Allah's book?"
"Then with the practice (Sunnah) ofthe Prophet?"
"And if you cannot find it in the Sunnah of the Prophet?"
"Then with my own consideration."
The man he had chosen as envoy was exactly of the standing that he wanted and at
that point the Messenger of Allah turned towards his Lord with total care and said:
"Gratitude be to Allah who makes His Messenger's envoy successful."
He was gazing at Muadh as if he did not want to leave him. It was as if Muadh-
one of the four people whom he wanted his Companions to consult due to his deep
understanding of the Qur'an and the rules-and the blessed Messenger were taking
their leave of each other that day. He came close to him and said: "0 Muadh, it is
possible that you may not be able to meet me here next year; then you can visit my
mosque and my grave."
It was as if it was not Muadh but our noble Prophet who was taking his leave! He
too was feeling the pang of separation now. On the one hand he felt the pleasure to be
setting off on the road in order to serve Allah and His Messenger, but on the other, his
heart was burning with the sadness of leaving the presence of the Messenger of Allah.
Now he was also faced with the possibility of not seeing him ever again in this world.

--- Sayfa 940 ---
If this had been forewarned by our noble Prophet, there was definitely something he
knew about it, and in the face of such a situation that he did not even want to think
about, Muadh was already crying in sobs! He then directed his horse towards Yemen,
and left Medina having left his heart there, under the affectionate gaze of the blessed
Messenger! 262
The Important Events of the Ninth Year
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul who was the leader of the hypocrites died after the
return from Tabuk. His son Abdullah also knew what was said about him and he came
to the blessed Messenger to ask him if he could lead his father's Funeral Prayer. He
was a sincere believer despite his father, and the blessed Messenger would have
responded favorably to his request. Although his father had done all types of
destructive things behind doors, he had been a believer in his appearance, and
therefore asked for forgiveness for him. Umar who heard what the blessed Messenger
was about to do, ran to him at once and recited the verse meaning: "You may or may
not ask for forgiveness for them. Even if you should ask for forgiveness seventy times,
Allah will never forgive them. Yes, it is so!"
Because they did not accept Allah and His Messenger and rather opposed him,
Allah will not guide such degenerated people, He will not allow them to have their
way, 263 and told him that he should not lead the Funeral Prayer of a man who had been
the leader of the hypocrites. However, it was the Messenger of Allah's, peace and
blessings be upon him, who always acted for the benefit of his Companions as long as
there wasn't any evidence against them, regarded the words 'you may or may not ask'
as an open door and said: "I have been given the choice of asking or not asking, that
means Allah the Almighty has given me a choice, and so I may ask for forgiveness
even more than seventy times." Then he went all the way to the grave of Ibn Salul to
lead the Prayer himself.
But before long, the Truthful Gabriel came and brought the message with the
meaning: ''And never do the Funeral Prayer over any of them who dies, nor stand by
his grave to pray for him. They surely disbelieved in God and His Messenger, and
died as transgressors," (at-Tawbah 9:84) which explained that the blessed Messenger
had to take a more definite attitude towards the hypocrite, that he should not ask for
forgiveness for them, nor attend their Funeral Prayers to be performed.
Uthman, the son-in-law of the Prophet was sad because one of the blessed
Messenger's daughters, our mother Umm Kulthum died within that year as well. As is
known, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had married her to

--- Sayfa 941 ---
Uthman after the death of our mother Ruqayyah. Now our mother Umm Kulthum had
died as well. The noble Messenger's sadness was doubled with her death and he
turned to Uthman, who was twice his son-in-law, to say: "Had I a third daughter, I
would surely wed her to you," trying thus to console Uthman, who was a pillar of
modesty.
The Hajj as Fard
The verse that was revealed in the month of Dhu al-Qadah264 of the ninth year
declared: "It is Allah's due of the Ka'ba that all who have the means to visit it should
visit the House of Allah," and thus made the Hajj an obligation.
Having received the Divine order and already wanting to visit the Ka'ba with his
whole heart the blessed Messenger would remember the wrong things that the
polytheists did there and said: "They will be there and will circumambulate the Ka'ba
naked; I would not want to perform Hajj as long as this situation continues."
And so he called Abu Bakr to his side, and appointed him as emir of Hajj and sent
him to Mecca. He told him to teach people how to perform the Hajj and what they had
to be careful about. There was going to be an Islamic Hajj in the Ka'ba for the first
time!
Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, set off on the road at once with three
hundred of the Companions, however, the revelations kept coming. After his
departure, the first verses of the Surah at-Tawbah revealed and there were now new
rules regarding the polytheist in the Haram area. The blessed Messenger called Ali at
once and sent him to Abu Bakr to let him know of these rules so that they may be
communicated. Ali took the instructions and went after the Hajj caravan and caught up
with them at the location called Arj, or Dajnan. Abu Bakr was concerned to see him.
He first asked him: "Do you come as an appointed leader, or with a task to do?"
It would not be a good thing to have two leaders for the road and Abu Bakr was
ready to accept Ali as the new leader. The question was directed in order to find out
the will of the blessed Messenger so that he may act accordingly. Ali said: "No, I
come with a task to do."
And Abu Bakr took the verses from him and then they continued their journey to
Mecca.
They performed their circumambulation, and their walks between Safa and Marwa.
They had stood waqfa in Arafat and stayed at Muzdalifa, and now they had reached
Mina. That day Ali came to where the sacrifices were being slaughtered and standing

--- Sayfa 942 ---
next to the Jamra, he communicated to the people all the points that the Messenger of
Allah had given him. He was saying the following: "No unbeliever shall enter
Paradise!
No polytheist will perform the Hajj from now on!
No one will circumambulate the House of Allah naked!
Whoever has an existing agreement with our noble Prophet, that agreement will be
valid until its set time!
For agreements that have no set time limit, they will still be valid for the next four
months!
Apart from these, the polytheists that are not covered by these rules will be given
four months to leave in safety starting from the day they have been warned.
From now on there will be no pacts or patronage with the polytheists; for the
Messenger of Allah cannot act as patron to the polytheists."
Thus, the wishes of our beloved Prophet were becoming true and this declaration
meant that the ideology of idolatry was being dismissed from the Haram altogether.
Other Developments
While these were happening on the one hand, on the other the human voyage
continued, deaths were following births, and births were following deaths and the face
of the earth kept changing.
There was news from Abyssinia; Najashi, who had welcomed the believers for
years in his country, had died. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him, the pinnacle of loyalty first shared this news with his Companions. Then he
called them to pray the Funeral Prayer of Najashi whom he assumed to be a Muslim:
"Today a good brother of yours has died; stand up and pray his Funeral Prayer," he
said and he performed in Medina the Funeral Prayer ofNajashi who was in Abyssinia.
This good brother was none other than Ashama, the king of Abyssinia, who had
welcomed the migrants who had been fleeing the pressures of Mecca. And despite the
distance, our noble Prophet would display great loyalty and pray for him.
It was a Tuesday in the month of Rabi al-awwal and the blessed Messenger had
gone to visit his son who was sick. As he took him in his arms Ibrahim was breathing
his last. Someone who saw the tears roll down his eyes asked: "0 Messenger of Allah!
You are crying as well? Did you not forbid crying after the dead?"
He then turned and said: "Undoubtedly the eye sheds tears, and the heart is
saddened. We do not say anything other than what our Lord would be content with.

--- Sayfa 943 ---
What I forbade was to tear one's clothes and hair like in Jahiliyya times, and to wail
loudly after the dead."
They took the baby that had been washed and put in a shroud to the Baqi Cemetery
and buried him near Uthman ibn Maz'un.
For the first time he asked for water from his Companions and then sprinkled it over
the grave ofhis son Ibrahim!
The same day there was a solar eclipse in Medina. There were those who said: "The
solar eclipse is due to Ibrahim's death."
As soon as he heard what people were saying, he went up to the minbar and said:
"0 people! There is no doubt that the sun and the moon are verses of Allah; they are
not eclipsed because of the birth or death of anyone! When you experience solar or
lunar eclipse run to the mosques and pray to Allah and perform the Prayer till this
phenomenon passes."
Recently the Truthful Gabriel's visits to the Messenger of Allah had become more
frequent. They read the Qur' an to each other from beginning to end twice in the month
of Ramadan that year, and thus the exact places of which verse would be in which
section of what surah, and what the sequence of the chapters would be was set for
certain.
The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, was spending a lot of
time on his own and had kept away from his wives for a month. He was telling them it
was up to them whether to continue to live with him under these circumstances or not.
Some of them had considered their circumstances and asked for worldly good; with
their attitude they seemed to want to make our noble Prophet take a clear stance. This
was a request that saddened the Messenger of Allah whose only aim in the world was
to help and guide people. He was telling them that they could decide between the
world and what was worldly and the afterlife and what was spiritual.
It was clear that with all his actions and attitudes he wanted to bring people to a
certain line; sometimes by speaking at length and sometimes by staying silent-he
was always addressing the people and expecting all to come to him and submit to
Islam. In that period, the Truthful Gabriel came to him in the form of a man and sat
with him. He was asking him what Islam, faith and beneficence were, and when
Judgment Day would come. And so the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be
upon him, explained to him what Islam, faith and beneficence were; and said that no
one could know when the end ofthe world would come, and yet spoke of its signs! To
each answer he received, this stranger Companions said: ''You spoke the truth."

--- Sayfa 944 ---
The Companions were intrigued by this man. When the intention was accomplished
and the man left, the blessed Messenger asked: "Do you know who this man is?"
It was clear that there was something they had not quite understood, and so they let
him explain. He said: "He was Gabriel, he came to teach you your religion."

--- Sayfa 945 ---
229 The 4th verse of the chapter al-Hujurat was revealed upon this event. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-
Bayan, 261122; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3/488; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 21161; Wahidi, Asbabu
Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 11259.
230 The chapter 17 verse 76 is believed to have narrated these activities. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-
Bayan, 151132; Wahidi, Asbabu Nuzuli 'l-Qur 'an, 11197; Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 4/293.
231 At-Tawbah 9:28-29
232 At-Tawbah 9:81-82
233 At-Tawbah 9:38-39
234 At-Tawbah 9:41-42
235 At-Tawbah 9:49
236 At-Tawbah 9:86-93
237 That day, Uthrnan donated upwards one thousand camels with their loads to the blessed
Messenger. He topped this by donating kilograms of gold and silver. Even this did not satisfY him,
so he returned various times to his home contemplating what else he could give up.
238 That day, Abbas provided the war equipment of two people. Uthrnan provided equipment and
riding animals for three people and sent them to Tabuk.
239 For more details, see Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/438, 439.
240 It is reported that there were other names put on duty that day in Medina such as Muhammad ibn
Maslama, Siba ibn Urfuta and Abdullah ibn Umm Maktum. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 11996;
Abdurrazzak, Musannaf, 2/395 (3828); Ibn Sa' d, Tabaqat, 4/205; Ibn Kathir, Sirah, 4112.
241 On return from Tabuk the blessed Messenger did pass near that garden and asked: "How much
produce did your garden give," and he saw that the garden had given ten wasaks of produce as he
had guessed. See Bukhari, Sahih, 2/539 (1411); Muslim, Sahih, 411785 (1392); Abu Dawud,
Sunan, 3/179 (3079).
242 After saying these the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, said that that night a
strong wind would blow, and before long it happened as he said. The Tabuk road was full of
miracles regarding food and drink, on the way to and back. See Bukhari, Sahih, 2/539 (1411);
Muslim, Sahih, 411785 (1392); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5/424 (23652).
243 Kirat: A weighing unit of0.20 grams for jewellery.
244 At-Tawbah 9:65-66
245 At-Tawbah 9:74
246 Abdullah was a Companion whose entire property had been confiscated by his family when he
became Muslim. He had especially been faced with strong reaction from his uncle; he almost took
the clothes off his back. He had found a piece of cloth with the help of his mother, cut it in two
and wore one piece on top and one below, and thus came to Medina. The noble Messenger, who
had seen this situation of his, had given him this name seeing him wear this cloth of two parts.
Umar had censured him for reading the Qur'an too loud, and yet the Messenger of Allah told him
to leave him alone and said that he had come on hijra there, to Allah and His Messenger. See
Waqidi, Maghazi, 1110 12; Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 211 04; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 41162.
247 Such that Ibn Mas'ud who witnessed the blessed Messenger's good treatment said: "I wish I was
the one in that grave." See Waqidi,Maghazi, 111014; Ibn Jawzi, Sifatu 's-Safiva, 11679.
248 There are also reports that that day Heraclius actually sent an envoy to the blessed Messenger and
told him that he was now his follower but that he was not going to reveal it publicly in order not
to lose his position. In this account the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
does not regard this attitude well, does not accept a position in which worldly matters are taken to
be more important than the most important issue of faith. See Suhayli, Rawdu 'l-Unf, 4/300; Ibn
Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 11116; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/457-459, 111356.
249 Among the gifts that were brought was a white horse. The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings

--- Sayfa 946 ---
be upon him, gave him a cloak as present. See Bukhari, Sahih, 2/539 (1411); 3/1153 (2990); Abu
Dawud, Sunan, 3/179 (3079); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/215.
250 Bukhari, Sahih, 2/539 (1411); 3/1153 (2990); Abu Dawud, Sunan, 3/179 (3079); Ibn Abi Shayba,
Musannaf, 7/422 (37006); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9/215.
251 It is also said that the fact that there was pestilence in the direction of Damascus played a role in
the blessed Messenger's deciding not to go further than Tabuk. It is said that his warning "If there
is pestilence where you are, do not leave that place; and if you are somewhere else at the time, do
not enter that place" was made in the days of Tabuk. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5/373
(23214); Tabarani, Mu 'jamu 'l-Kabir, 18115 (21 ); Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/462.
252 The following day the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had Hudhayfa to call
all of them to his presence-it is said that they were twelve people. He asked them why they did
such a thing and left it at that without going any further. The Companions say that all of these
twelve men left this world in strife. See Tabari, Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, 8/207; Ibn Qayyim, Zadu- 'l-
Ma 'ad, 3/477. Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 5/467-468.
253 At-Tawbah 9:107-110
254 The blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, gave the block of land that the Dirar
Masjid had been built on to one of his Companions so that he may built a house there; but as the
Companions also attested, no child would be born to that house, no bird would come and nest, not
a chicken would lay eggs there. See Waqidi, Maghazi, 111 046; Salihi, Subulu 'l-Huda wa 'r-
Rashad, 5/472.
255 These people who had come and spoken sincerely were given the punishment of not spoken to by
the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, and thus ostracizing them for a while.
That day Ka'b ibn Malik, just like Murara ibn Rabi and Hilal ibn Umayya were given the same
punishment and this prohibition to speak would continue for fifty days. See Haylamaz, Re~it,
Saadet Asrzna Dogan Yzldzzlar, (Stars That Were Born into the Period of Happiness) p. 207.
256 Actually, the flow of the delegations had started in the 5th Century after the Hijra, with the
Muzaynas, in the eighth year this process had gained momentum and in the ninth it reached its
zenith. This process would continue until the death of the blessed Messenger and a total of 342
delegations had come to Medina. Ibn Ishaq reports that the number of these delegations was
fifteen and historians such as ibn Sa'd say it was sixty. Scholars like Ibn Qayyim and Kastalani
have determined this number to be 332. The reason behind this difference was probably that they
did not consider groups under a certain number to be delegations, or that they counted only the
visits that happened in the ninth year.
257 Not all those who came to "submit" in faith were accepted. The heart of the envoy that the
Quraysh sent, Abu Rafi, softened when he met the blessed Messenger and he said that he wanted
to become a Muslim as well. To that the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
said: "I cannot make an envoy stay; go now and if you really want to become a Muslim come
again later," he advised. See Abu Dawud, 3/82 (2758); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6/8 (23908);
Tabarani, Mu 'jamu 'l-Kabir, 1/323 (963).
258 The blessed Messenger said that they should take the utmost care with these people who came as
guests to the Masjid an-Nabawi. This was a point he spoke about before his death as well. See
Bukhari, Sahih, 3/1111 (2888), 3/1155 (2997); Muslim, Sahih, 3/1258 (1637); Abu Dawud, 3/165
(3029).
259 It is reported that when they got back to their country the Thaqif delegate hid that they had
become Muslim, and spoke about the suggestions and questions they had put to the blessed
Messenger and that the Messenger of Allah had not accepted and that now they had no option but
war. It is reported that upon this news the people of Thaqif started to prepare for war. Three days
later they had decided that fighting was not a reasonable option, and when they decided that they
were told the truth and facing this fact, the people of Thaqif became Muslim. See Ibn Qayyim,
Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/521; Zahabi, Tarikhu 'l-Is lam, 11350.
260 It is also reported that the blessed Messenger sent a letter to these parts as well to invite the people

--- Sayfa 947 ---
of the region to Islam, and that he appointed Malik ibn Nemat as amir, asking that business be
conducted according to his judgments. See Ibn Qayyim, Zadu 'l-Ma 'ad, 3/539; Salihi, Subulu 'l-
Huda wa 'r-Rashad, 6/427.
261 It is also said that Ali was sent in place of Khalid ibn Walid. See Tabari, Tarikh, 21197; Bayhaqi,
Sunan, 2/369 (3747).
262 And it would indeed happen that way; in the period when Muadh was in Yemen to implement the
blessed Messenger's orders, he would receive the news of the death of the Messenger of Allah
and he would then be able to visit the Masjid an-Nabawi and the blessed Messenger's grave when
he came to Medina. See Ibn Athir, Usdu 'l-Ghaba, 2/217; Ibn Hajar, Al-I saba, 8/41 (11550).
263 At-Tawbah 9:80
264 It is also said that this was revealed in the month of Dhu al-Hijjah.

--- Sayfa 948 ---
AS THE TIME DRAWS CLOSER
The Farewell Hajj
N
ow the Ka'ba had been cleansed from the polytheist and the House of Allah
had been introduced to the form of worship that it deserved; those who
circumambulate it did not clap, nor did they walk around naked! There were
no obstacles to the blessed Messenger coming and performing his Hajj duty. When the
Dhu al-Qadah month of the tenth year was reached, the Messenger of Allah, peace and
blessings be upon him, declared to his Companions that he was setting off to go to
Mecca in order to perform the Hajj duty. People were coming to Medina in groups and
were getting prepared to do their Hajj duty with the noble Messenger!
He started the journey one Saturday when there were five days left till the end of the
month of Dhu al-Qadah, right after the Noon Prayer. He took the Shajara route; he
was to go as far as Dhu'l-Hulayfa and spend the night there. He did, and when the
morning came, he addressed his Companions and said that a messenger from his Lord
came to him and told him that they were to perform Prayer in this blessed valley. He
also told them that his intention for the trip was both Hajj and umrah.
Before he entered the ihram, the blessed Messenger took ghusl, or full body
ablutions, and put on nice scents as he was setting off for the Hajj in a spirit of
celebration. Before he did, he turned to the people and informed them about the
rituals, the takbirs and the talbiyas. He had brought with him around one hundred
sheep as sacrifice, and had marked them all to make them known that they were
sacrificial animals.
Then his Companions joined in his talbiya and said: "Labbayk, Allahumma labbayk,
here we are 0 Lord, Labbayk la sharika laka labbayk, here we are 0 Lord, and You
have no partner, innal hamda, wa 'n-ni 'mata laka wa 'l-mulk," thanks and richness and
property are all Yours, la sharika lak, "You have no partner," and these sounds were
echoing the heavens and the earth!
He was following the route of the Hijra going through Bayda, Malal, Sharafu's-

--- Sayfa 949 ---
Sayyala, Rawha, Irqu'z-Zibya, Munsaraf, Asaya, Aij, Lahy al-Jamal, As-Suqya,
Abwa, Juhfa, Humm, Arzaq, Kudayd, Mushallal, Usfan, Ghamim, Marr az-Zahran,
Sarif and Dhi Tuwa.
The journey took a week and when he came to Dhi Tuwa, he took a break and spent
the night there. It was the fourth day of the month ofDhu al-Hijjah and the Messenger
of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, performed the Morning Prayer and then
took ghusl ablutions and then walked to Mecca. He entered Mecca at the time when
the sun was at its zenith, and his entry was once again from the upper region.
He turned towards the Ka'ba as soon as he arrived; he saluted the Rukn and then
started to circumambulate. In the first three circumambulations, his steps were very
quick. In the remaining four, he was slower and thus he completed his
circumambulations. Then he turned to the place of Abraham, "Rukn istilam," and read
the verse with the meaning:
We made the House (the Ka'ba in Mecca) a resort for people, and a
refuge of safety (a sanctuary, that is, a sign of the truth). Stand in the
Prayer (0 believers, as you did in earlier times) in the Station of
Abraham. And We imposed a duty on Abraham and Ishmael: "Purify My
House for those who go around it as a rite of worship, and those who
abide in devotion, and those who bow and prostrate." (al-Baqarah 2: 125)
Having the place between himself and the Ka'ba, he prayed two cycles; he recited
the chapters al-Kafirun and al-Ikhlas. Then he came back to Rukn, saluted it and then
walked towards Safa. When he came close to Safa, he started to quote the verse with
the meaning:
As-Safa and Marwa are among the emblems God has appointed (to
represent Islam and the Muslim community). Hence, whoever does the
Hajj (the Major Pilgrimage) to the House (of God, the Ka'ba) or the
Umrah (the Minor Pilgrimage), there is no blame on him to run between
them (and let them run after they go round the Ka'ba as an obligatory
rite). And whoever does a good work voluntarily (such as additional
going-round the Ka'ba and running between as-Safa and Marwa, and
other kinds of good works), surely God is All-Responsive to thankfulness,
All-Knowing. (al-Baqarah 2: 158)
And heeding the sequence in which the Qur'an speaks of them, the Messenger of
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, first went to Safa and then started to walk
between Safa and Marwa. When he went on top of Safa, he turned towards the Ka'ba
and called out the takbir, and then raised his hands and prayed. He then turned

--- Sayfa 950 ---
towards Hajun; this was the place he had spent three very difficult years with his
Companions. His uncle, his greatest supporter had died there, his beloved wife, his life
companion of 25 years, our mother Khadija had walked towards Allah from here. Her
grave was also there; the person of loyalty was clearly showing his Companions what
it was to be a real loyal person.
Arafat
The Messenger of Allah stayed in Mecca for four days starting from Sunday; on
Thursday he would tum towards Mina with his Companions at the time of the Duha
(Forenoon) Prayer. A tent was set up for him in the place called Namira and there the
blessed Messenger would pray his five times Daily Prayers. When they passed
Batni'l-Wadi and came to Arafat, he turned towards them and gave a sermon. There
were a hundred and twenty Companions around him; all were listening to him with
great attention: "0 people!" He started his sermon and the continued: "Listen well to
my words! For I do not think I will be able to meet with you here after this year!"
No one even thought that one day the noble Messenger would leave this world; but
it was himself who reminded people of this fact! The hearts were seared, and there
was a great air of sadness now. The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon
him, was giving these signals at the very time when the Muslims were enjoying
success. He was saying: "Your life and property are sacred as ofthis day and month
and land of yours is sacred and protected against injury! Take heed; I have abolished
whatever is to do with Jahiliyya, the ignorance before Islam! The blood feuds of
Jahiliyya have also been lifted; the first I lift is that of the son of Rabia ibn al-Harith
ibn Abdul Muttalib, who was nursed in the area of the tribe of the Banu Sad, and
whom the tribe of Hudhayl killed. It is the first blood feud from the time of Jahiliyya
that I annul. Verily, every transaction of interest is annulled, and the first that I annul
is that Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib was to have-it has certainly been abolished.
Take heed concerning women and fear Allah; for you have taken them as trusts
from Allah, and made them your lawful Companions with the word of Allah. The right
you have over them is that they should not let into your house people you do not
approve; if they do that you can punish them without going too far. It is your duty to
provide for their sustenance and provide them with good clothes! I leave you such a
great value and as long as you hold on to it you will not be misguided after me; it is
the book of Allah!"
These were the fundamental issues to be taken care of in order for the social
structure to continue to work in the absence of our noble Prophet. Therefore the

--- Sayfa 951 ---
blessed Messenger was warning them to be careful about these matters before he left
them, so that they may be able to walk towards the future with firm steps and that the
cause of Allah stand on its feet till the end of time. People such as Rabia ibn Umayya
were repeating these words of his so that they may reach people who were further
away! After saying these, he turned to his Companions and asked: "They will ask you
about me tomorrow; how will you speak of me?"
There was great surprise among the Companions. They lifted their heads and
answered him: "We swear that You have completed the mission of communicating the
word of Allah and have been a guide to us all; you have given your advice most
effectively." This voice that spilled over from Arafat was hitting the mountains of
Paran and come back!
Having had people bear witness, the Messenger of Allah raised his finger to the
skies and said: "My Lord! You bear witness!" And then he repeated this three times.
Then the call for Prayer was called; and so they performed the Noon and the
Afternoon Prayers together! After the Prayer, he would come to the skirts of the
Mount of Mercy (Jabal ar-Rahma) and stand there in waqfa. He had turned towards
the qibla and he prayed to his Lord until the Night Prayer; the person of Light was
now like a pillar of light, asking for mercy from his Lord!
And then the truthful Gabriel came again and the signs of revelation were upon the
blessed Messenger. It was clear that there was a message from Allah once again: "This
day I have perfected for you your Religion (with all its rules, commandments and
universality), completed My favor upon you, and have been pleased to assign for you
Islam as religion" (Al-Maedah 5:3).
And so this was the last fruit of a long process that had started in the Mount of
Light, in the Cave of Hira. There were those who had upon hearing this, had gone in a
comer and cried! This had not escaped from the notice of our noble Prophet. He
approached Umar and asked: "Why are you crying?"
The great Umar was in no state to answer, but then he pulled himself together and
said: "I cry because we were always experiencing more in our religion, now we
understand that since it has been completed, there will now be a process of getting
less."
This was Umar's clear-sightedness and the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings
be upon him, said to him: "You speak the truth."
Then he took U sama with him and went to Muzdalifa. He prayed the Night and
Evening Prayers there together (what is called jam, 'jamming') with a single call for

--- Sayfa 952 ---
Prayer, and two iqamahs (takbirs for the beginning ofPrayer).
Min a
It was the tenth day of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah. When it was time for the Morning
Prayer, the blessed Messenger prayed his Morning Prayer in Muzdalifa. He then came
to the Mashar al-Haram and turned towards the qibla and directed himself to his Lord
in Prayer and supplication, speaking takbirs and tahlils, in deep remembrance of his
Lord. Before the sun rose, he mounted Qaswa again and came to Mina. This time he
had Fadl ibn Abbas on his back. Meanwhile he had told ibn Abbas to collect the
stones that he would use for stoning the Devil. When he came to the valley of
Muhassir, he spurred on his camel; this was the location that the people of the elephant
had been decimated!
He then reached Mina. The sun had just risen, he then came near the Jamra of
Aqaba and started to stone the Devil mounted on his camel. Then the blessed
Messenger turned back to his Companions once again and said the following as an
appendix to his sermon: "There is no doubt that today, time has come to the position
that it was on the day Allah first created the heavens and the earth; a year is twelve
months. Four of these are months of prohibition; three of them are consecutive: Dhu
al-Qadah, Dhu al-Hijjah and Muharram. The other is Rajah, between Shahan and
Jumada al-awwal.
The devil has lost all hope of anyone following him in this land of yours. But that
you should follow him on what you consider to be unimportant, small things will
make him happy. Take your guidance about the Hajj obligation today from me; for I
believe I will not be able to perform the Hajj again after this year!"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, who said this to his
Companions changed his manner and then asked them what month and day it was.
The Companions said: "Allah and His Messenger know best," they responded. They
thought that he was about to rename the month! He asked them: "Is it not the month of
Dhu al-Hijjah?"
''Yes," they said. And now he was asking a question about the place: "And what
land is this?"
The Companions who again thought that he would give it a new name answered:
"Allah and His Messenger know best." He asked them: "Is this not the land of
Haram?" They answered: "Yes."
And then he said: "0 People, just as you regard this month, this day, this city as

--- Sayfa 953 ---
sacred, so regard the life and property of every Muslim as a sacred trust, until the day
you reach your Lord!"
In each of his sentences was a kiss of farewell. He was looking at his work and
experience of twenty-three years with his glistening eyes, and he was trying to prepare
his congregation for the days to come.
They now understood better why he had asked those questions; he was taking his
farewell from his Companions and at the same time he was taking them on a journey
of knowledge through his own method ofteaching.
Then he drew their attention and asked them another question: "Did I fulfill my
duty?"
He was asking his Companions whom he had educated by his side whether he had
done the job given him. The desperate Companions shouted: "Yes," and upon that he
turned to his Lord and said: "Dear Lord! You bear witness!"
Then he advised his Companions: "Let those who are here today take these to those
who aren't here today; many people who are informed afterwards may be more
perceptive than the one who has been listening! And take heed and be not after me like
the deniers who kill each other!"
After giving this advice to his Companions, it was now time to slaughter the
sacrifice. That day the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
slaughtered as many sheep as his age, and he would appoint Ali to see to the slaughter
of the remaining thirty-seven. He then called someone from among his Companions to
his side and asked him to cut his hair. His Companions were opening their hands up so
that the blessed hair would not fall on the ground, and those that did fall were picked
up-they kissed them, rubbed them to their face and cried over them. Some other
Companions, like Abu Bakr, had retired to one side before the imminent farewell and
were gazing upon him with mixed emotions.
The Jamra and Farewell
He then turned towards Mecca; he was going to visit the Ka'ba and do the ifada
circumambulation and then pray the Noon Prayer! He then went to the sons of Abdul
Muttalib; they gave him Zamzam and he drank from it.
He came back to Mina the same day; he was going to stay the night there! He
waited there till the zawal (waning of the sun) time of the next day, when the sun was
in zawal, he went to the first, and then the second and the third }amra and started to
stone the Devil. He stood there and addressed his Companions once again in order to

--- Sayfa 954 ---
strengthen their knowledge of their religion.
Having completed the duty of stoning the Devil in the tashriq days, he went to the
Ka'ba again. He was going to do the 'farewell circumambulation' late in the night. It
was now time for farewell and he would give his Companions the instructions to
prepare for the road!
It was the eighteenth of the month of Dhu al-Hijjah; as the blessed Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him, made way towards Medina. He stopped at the head
of a well called Hum near Juhfa and was giving his Companions advice. He was
saying: "Be careful, 0 people! There is no doubt that I too am a human being and I
believe before long the messenger of my Lord will come and I will respond to his call.
I leave you with two very important things; the first is Allah's book; there is guidance
and light in it; you have to hold firm to it! The second is the people of my house; I call
you to be very cautious when it comes to the people of my house!"
He then took his son-in-law Ali by the hand and raised it: 'Whoever recognizes my
patronage; he is his patron too," he said.
He then raised his hands and prayed: "Dear Lord! Put Your trust in him who puts
his trust in him (Ali), and whoever turns his face away from him and declares him an
enemy, tum Your face away from him and declare him an enemy." He then went on
the road again. When he saw Medina, he recited the takbir three times and then said:
"There is no deity but Allah, and He, the Almighty, is one and only; property is His,
thanks is His, and He is Almighty. We tum to Allah. We direct ourselves to Him and
worship only Him. We prostrate to Him and thank our Lord under all circumstances.
Allah the Almighty kept His promise and helped His subject, He helped us defeat the
army of Ahzab."
After this prayer the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him, had
arrived to Medina in the day! As usual, he first went to the Masjid an-Nabawi and
after performing two cycles of Prayer, he went to his happy home. The business that
was experienced before going to the Hajj started again from where it had left off and
the duty of carrying Islam to other climes continued. To that end Jarir ibn Abdillah
was sent toY em en and to one of the Himyar kings.
False Prophets
The sending of envoys and welcoming of delegations continued after his arrival in
Medina and unexpected things started to happen during the visits of the delegations.
Perhaps the Lord occasioned these complications while the blessed Messenger was

--- Sayfa 955 ---
still alive so that he would be able to show the Muslims how they should act in similar
circumstances in the example of the Messenger of Allah.
The first piece of news came from the direction of Yemen. A man called Aswadu'l-
Ansi was claiming to be a Prophet. He had gathered certain people around him
through clairvoyance and similar tricks and had convinced them of his Prophethood.
One of the letters that our the blessed Messenger sent with Jarir was addressed to him;
but he was encouraged by the illness of our noble Prophet and he did not give up his
claim. He claimed that two angels named Sahik and Sharik came and brought
revelations to him; that they brought him news about what would happen to the
people!
In the letters he wrote, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
asked his governors to be very alert and careful concerning Aswad, to prevent people
from being distracted by these false claims.
Another piece of news came from the direction of Y amama; Musaylima also had
declared to be a Prophet and had gathered certain naive people around him. The man
had come to Medina only a few days ago with the delegation of the Banu Hanifa and
had become a Muslim. And now he was using trickery and sorcery to suggest to
people that he worked miracles,265 displaying supernatural acts.
He was so ambitious that he tried to meddle in everything and was becoming a
laughing stock. People asked him to show a miracle of water as the blessed Messenger
did; he went to the wells and then spat out the water he had been gargling in his mouth
-however, rather than the water becoming plentiful, the wells dried up. People who
expected blessings from him had brought their new born to him; he chewed dates and
put them in the babies' mouths and all the babies that had got this 'treatment' became
either bald or dumb. He was so consumed with his hunger for power that he did not
realize the kind of laughing stock he had become. He was trying to parody the Qur'an,
and saying that he too had received revelation, he was making up sentences! He had
also sent a letter to the Messenger of Allah and had declared himself a peer to him in
Prophethood.
The noble Messenger called Ali to his side and had a letter written to this man who
was now crossing the boundary. In it he said that the earth belonged to Allah and that
it could not be shared with anyone, and that Allah would make reign in His earth
whom He wished, and that at the end the superior ones would always be the ones with
superior piety.
The Army ofUsama

--- Sayfa 956 ---
Four days were left until the end of the month of Safar. It was a Monday and the
Messenger of Allah ordered his Companions to get ready for a campaign. The voices
of threat from the land of the Romans were getting louder and they were subjecting
the believers who lived there under terrifying pressures and tortures. The last drop was
what had happened to Farwa ibn Amr, the governor of Mean, a province close to the
land of the Romans. The Byzantines who were hostile to any trace of Islam in their
lands had found it in themselves to kill the governor of the blessed Messenger as well.
The place where the HQ was going to be set up was Juruf. The excitement of jihad
had already spread among the honorable Companions. They were impatient to go and
pursue another goal! The next day, our noble Prophet pulled his freed slave Zayd ibn
Haritha's eighteen year old son Usama and said to him: "I appoint you as commander
of this army that has been prepared; be quick and advance on those who killed your
father." He then told him which direction he should go and how he should act when he
was there and what he should be careful about.
As he was moving with his army, he said that they should move quicker than the
news, and drew attention to the fact that they could win the battle only if they could
have control over enemy intelligence!
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, gave the young Usama
the standard of the army with his own hands. Having taken the standard, Usama gave
it to the standard bearer of the Hijra, Burayda ibn Husayb, and then went to Juruf to
prepare the army of our noble Prophet. And so whoever was prepared ran to Juruf.
The Illness of the Blessed Messenger
It was on a Wednesday the noble Prophet has fallen ill the day after he had given the
standard to U sam a. He had high fever and a very heavy headache. But this illness of
his did not prevent the formation of the army that he had taken great pains to organize.
He wanted the army to reach its goal and was encouraging his Companions to do all
they could to make it successful. In this army that would be commanded by U sama,
there were very important names such as Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali, may
Allah be pleased with them. It appeared that the blessed Messenger wanted his
Companions to be young; he wanted to build his mission on the youth. This also
meant the dismissal of certain old perceptions; U sama was the son of a freed slave and
the Arabs would never want to see a slave as their commander! And thus the blessed
Messenger was breaking all the 'idols' that were connected with the old ignorance,
was routing them out from the society! But this was not something that everyone
would be able to understand at first and some people considering how young U sama

--- Sayfa 957 ---
was and the greatness of the state they were challenging in battle were vmcmg
different views about his commandership. Especially people like Ayyash ibn Abi
Rabia were saying:
"This youth has been appointed as commander while the first Muhajirun are still
here," expressing his surprise at such a choice. It was a Saturday, and the Messenger
of Allah, who had been informed of the situation, wrapped his turban around his head
and mounted the minbar. Turning to his Companions he said: "0 people! I swear that
just as you are objecting to Usama being the commander, you objected to the issue
with his father, and you also gossiped about his commandership. By Allah, he is the
one who is best suited to lead. It is also a fact that his father was the dearest of people
to me, and after him, the dearest is U sama."
Meanwhile, the leading men from among the Companions who were going to war
with Usama came and took their leave from our noble Prophet. This was the last
farewell he would have with his Companions. The illness of the Messenger of Allah
became worse and yet he advised them: "Do not leave the army of Usama behind at
any cost, and see him off!"
And so the Companions had run to Jurufand they spent Sunday there. Usama came
to our noble Prophet again on Sunday and he could not hold his tears, because the
Messenger of Allah had a very high fever, and they were putting medication in his
mouth in order to lessen his pains. He had come to take his leave but his heart was not
content to leave him in that state and go! He bent down and kissed our noble Prophet.
The blessed Messenger could not speak. He lifted his hands towards the sky for a
while and then put them on U sam a; it was clear that he was praying for the young
commander!
Usama returned to Jurufthat day, but he had left his heart by our noble Prophet; and
so he came back again the next day. It was a Monday; it appeared as if the difficult
phase for the Messenger of Allah was over and U sama returned to his army in order to
fulfill the command of our beloved Prophet!
Towards the Sunset
While this action continued on this side, our noble Prophet had already started to say
his farewells to his Companions and he had turned towards the Exalted Friend, Ar-
Ra.fiq al-A 'la! He had been giving signs of this farewell for a year now; what he had
said when he sent Muadh to Yemen, and the way he asked for their good
commendation when during the Farewell Hajj. Differently from previous years, he had
gone into twenty days of itikaf(retreat) that Ramadan. His custom had been ten days.

--- Sayfa 958 ---
With the Truthful Gabriel they had recited the Qur'an to each other not once but twice
from beginning to end. He had visited Uhud, to which he had entrusted his
Companions. He said farewell to those around him at the time, but also to those who
were buried there. After these farewells he went up the minbar again and addressed
his Companions in the following manner: "There is no doubt that I want to be united
with you. I am your witness. I swear by Allah that now I see my abode. I can see the
keys of the treasures of this world being handed to me. I swear not that you will be in
shirk after I leave, but that you will fight each other surrounding shirk after I leave."266
It was the last Monday of the month of Safar. He had come to the Al-Baqi cemetery
again in order to perform his last duty for a Companion. He had not forgotten his
Companions whom he had entrusted there; he visited them, and his manner suggested
that he was speaking to them and asking good commendation from them as well. After
this conversation with them was over, he turned to his freed slave Abu Muwayhiba
and said: "0 Abu Muwayhiba! I have just been promised the keys that will take me to
all the treasures of this world and eternal life, and then Paradise. I have been given the
choice of meeting my Lord and Paradise and all these!"
Abu Muwayhiba wanted to show his happiness at the prospect of such a choice:
"May my mother and father perish in your way, 0 Messenger of Allah. Choose first
the keys that will take you to all the treasures of this world and eternal life, and then
Paradise."
He had made his choice already: "I swear 0 Abu Muwayhiba! I chose meeting my
Lord and Paradise!"
On the way back, he suffered from a severe headache. He was also running a high
fever. Such that the temperature of his blessed body could be felt from the outside of
the turban they had wrapped around his blessed head. It was clear that this was not an
illness that would go away easily, and during the eleven days that it lasted, he
performed his Prayers with his Companions. He was a lesson in morals in all his
actions. In a period when his illness got worse, he turned to the Pure Wives and said:
"Where am I tomorrow?"
They were people who understood his meaning and so they said they all gave up
their rights and that they wanted him to stay in our mother Aisha's room from then on.
He had a difficult time in standing up and he could only drag them most of the time.
That is why he was supported on the one arm by Fadl ibn Abbas and on the other Ali
and they carried the blessed Messenger to our mother Aisha's room. He was going to
spend his last days there! On Wednesday the illness got more severe still, and when

--- Sayfa 959 ---
his fever rose even more, he fainted. He did not want to leave his Companions even in
that state, and so when he felt just a little bit better, he said: "Pour water collected
from different wells over me seven times so that I may be able to go out and take
covenant with the people."
What he asked for was carried out and when he came to his senses somewhat more
he said: "This is enough! This is enough!" And then stood up and went to the Masjid.
There he said: "0 people! Come close to me," he was speaking to the Companions. It
was clear that he had an important message and he wanted to draw attention to an
important matter. He first spoke of the wrongs that previous Ummahs had fallen into
and then said: "Do not tum my grave into an idol's house where people come to
worship." One could see in him the excitement of being about to leave and so it
appeared he was taking his leave from all, making sure that he would recognize the
dues he owed to anyone present.
'Whomever I have hurt among you; here is my back, let him come and take his due
by hitting on my back! Whomever I said a hurtful word and broke his heart, let him
come and say to me what he feels inside, and take his due."
Yes, he was saying these but no one came to the front. But he was insistent; after
they had prayed the Noon Prayer, he repeated his request.
Then somebody stood up and said that he owed him three dirhams. He called out to
his cousin and said: "Give it to him 0 Fadl!"
Then he said the following about the Ansar: "My parting wish and advice for you is
that you should recognize the importance ofthe Ansar. They are the apple of my eye;
they have done their duty in the best way possible and they will get their reward. Now
the people are many and the Ansar are in the minority; they are like the salt in a dish!
Whoever among you becomes a leader over them and is faced with good or harm from
them, let him accept the good and forgive them the harm!"
He then said: "There is no doubt that Allah the Almighty had let His subject choose
between getting the wealth of this world or attaining what is by His side, and the
subject has chosen what is by Allah's side."
He had not yet finished his words when a cry was heard from where Abu Bakr was:
"Let our mother and father perish for you 0 Messenger of Allah!"
They were looking at where the voice was coming from in surprise, for they did not
understand what he had understood, for he had understood that the subject that had
been given the choice was our noble Prophet himself and that was why he was
reacting that way.

--- Sayfa 960 ---
"Look at that man! The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, is
speaking of a man who has to choose between this world and Divine presence, and
that the man chooses what is by Allah's side, and Abu Bakr shouts out of the blue:
'Let our mothers and fathers perish for you!' and then cries," they were saying.
Well, Abu Bakr had understood! The noble Messenger who saw this sensitivity of
his loyal friend who had not left him since the very first day would point to Abu Bakr
and establish his place among his Companions. He held his hand and said: "For me
Abu Bakr is the most trustworthy of people when it comes to material and spiritual
sacrifice; were I to have any friends other than my Lord, I would certainly have Abu
Bakr as my friend. From now on, one can only speak about the brotherhood of Islam,
and love stemming from that brotherhood. Let all the doors that open to the Masjid be
closed except for that of Abu Bakr!"
Everyone who heard that his illness became graver ran to the Masjid. There was a
large crowd outside and they were following the developments with great curiosity.
They feared that our beloved Prophet would die! First his uncle's son Fadl, and then
Ali and Abbas entered his presence. They all spoke about the crowd that had gathered
outside. That day he went out to them with the help of two people and said the
following to his congregation: "0 people! The reason you have come here is that you
fear the death of your Prophet. I ask you, who among the Prophets lived forever that I
should do so as well? Take heed! I will go to my Lord and so will you!"
And then he said the following to them: "Verily, for you, both my life and death is a
benediction!"
They were revisiting the memories they had; there was a clear farewell. They were
trying to remember his previous statements. For one day, he had come to them and
said the following: "You think that I will be the last person to die among you!"
''Yes," they had said that day. But he had said: "The truth is I will be the one who
dies first among you."
On another day he had said: "There is no doubt that I have received the invitation
for the journey and I have promised to accept the invitation."
About a month ago, he had gathered his close relatives together and then explained
to them who should do what, concerning his body, when his soul left it...
His uncle Abbas had one day told him of his dream, that a strong rope was being
raised to the sky. To that the blessed Messenger had said: "What you saw is the death
of your brother's son," and thus he had interpreted as returning to an exalted
friendship.

--- Sayfa 961 ---
Now each day for our noble Prophet was a farewell. On Thursday, he addressed his
Companions and said: "Come close to me!" He called them near him.
"Let me have you write something so that you should not fall into error after me,"
he said.
But illness seemed to get the better of him. He was forcing himself to stand. That is
why among those present, Umar said: "Do you not see that the pains of the Messenger
of Allah have grown more severe, he suffers so! At all events we have the Qur'an and
the book of Allah will be enough for everything," thus trying to prevent the blessed
Messenger getting even more tired than he was. But some other Companions said that
they had to do as the blessed Messenger said and that what he had to say should be
recorded. And so there was a difference of opinions.
Seeing that the discussion kept going, the blessed Messenger, peace and blessings
be upon him, said that he was being disturbed by this and asked them to leave him
alone.
Until that day, he had gone out to his Companions despite the strength of the pain
and the level of his fever and thus led the Prayers.
After the Prayer, his illness got worse again, and although it was already time for
the Night Prayer he could not come to the Masjid. The last Prayer he had led was the
Evening Prayer on Thursday and in that Prayer, he had read the chapter al-Mursalat.
For the Night Prayer, Bilal had called the call for Prayer; the congregation had run
to the Masjid and started to wait for their leader. They were unaware of what was
happening in his room of happiness; for his illness had gone quite severe and our
noble Prophet had become unconscious. As soon as he woke up, he asked our mother
Aisha: 'Was the Prayer performed?"
''No 0 Messenger of Allah! They are waiting for you," was the reply.
"Prepare water for me to take ablutions," he said. It was clear that his heart was at
the Masjid. Then they did what he asked. He stood up and took ablution with
difficulty. Just as he meant to go out for Prayer, he fainted again where he was. They
ran to help him. He then regained consciousness and asked once again: "Have the
people prayed?"
He wanted to go to Prayer but he did not have the energy to do so; he kept fainting.
At last he asked Abu Bakr to lead the Prayer and he would go out to Prayer later with
the help oftwo people. 267
When he came upon those who were expecting his arrival like the full moon, there
was a wave of excitement that day in the Masjid. Abu Bakr, the man of perception,

--- Sayfa 962 ---
wanted to move back to leave the job to its rightful owner, but our noble Prophet
pointed with his finger, meaning "Stay there!" He came near the imam among the
rows of believers that opened up for him. He had no strength to stand and that day he
was only able to finish his Prayer while sitting. The blessed Messenger, who had
called the Daily Prayers "the light of my eye," was no longer able to lead the Prayer
for his Companions. From then on Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, the
imam that he had appointed, would lead the Prayers in his place.
Time to Part and the Last Day
Since Thursday, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, had not
been able to go out for the Prayers and had not been able to lead his Companions in
Prayer. But the hopeful wait of the Companions continued. They were thinking he
could come today just as he came that day. It was a Monday again and the calendars
showed the twelfth day ofthe month ofRabi al-awwal. They had come to the Morning
Prayer of that day with the same hope; they wanted to see him well again, leading
them in Prayer at the front. The Masjid gathered its usual crowd with the adhan oflbn
Umm Maktum and with that ofBilal; it had been filled to the brim and overflowed.
The blessed Messenger had not been able to come that day either; the Morning
Prayer of that day was being led by the imam he appointed, Abu Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him. At one point there was a commotion in one comer of the Masjid; the
curtain of our mother Aisha's room had been pulled aside a little bit, and his radiant
face rose into the Masjid. He had wrapped his head again and was standing like that at
the door, and that pure face, pure like the pages of the Qur'an, was gazing at the imam
at the mihrab. People could see that smile on his face; he was at peace.
This gaze was the last gaze that the Companions would be able to see in this world!
They almost halted their Prayers due to their happiness! They had stood up for the
second cycle. They had formed orderly rows, and they could sense his coming and
gave him way! He came all the way behind Abu Bakr and put his hands on his
shoulders. Abu Bakr wanted to step back. It was clear that he wanted the blessed
Messenger to remain and continue with the Prayer.
Sitting, he started to pray behind the imam that he himself had appointed. When the
imam finished and saluted both shoulders, the blessed Messenger prayed the cycle he
had missed.
This was his last Prayer. Then, leaning on one of the pillars and raising his voice, he
warned his Companions about the kinds ofjitna and then turned his gaze once again to
the Qur'an. He thought two religions were too much for the Arabian Peninsula, and he

--- Sayfa 963 ---
did not want any other understanding to have a home there. He said the following as
he left: "A Prophet does not die until someone from his congregation has led him in
Prayer!"
He seemed to be better. It was as if all the worries were now over. The congregation
was very happy. He had returned to them once again and had stood with them in
Prayer. It was as if everything was returning to normal.
At one point the young Usama, whom he had appointed as commander to the land
of the Byzantine, came to him. He was about to start on the journey, he wanted to
inform the blessed Messenger about the army and to take his leave. He had come a
day before as well and had been given the order to move "even if this meant farewell."
When U sam a approached him and sat next to him, the blessed Messenger stroked his
head with his blessed hands and he would pray for the young commander U sama, who
was eighteen years of age, before he set off.
When the sun rose and noon time came, he called his daughter Fatima to his side
and whispered something in her ear. His daughter whom he called "a part of me" let
out a cry, and then sobbed: "Woe is me! My dear father!"
He turned to her once again and gave the good news: "From this day on your father
will not face any difficulties again!"
But this was not enough to lessen the pain of separation; Fatima continued to cry.
The Messenger of mercy was not able to bear this scene and so he asked his
daughter to come close to him again. He bent over to her daughter again and
whispered something else in her ear. Fatima who was in complete mourning and
crying her heart out a minute ago was now overjoyed, she was smiling. It was as if the
Fatima of a little while ago had gone and another Fatima had come in her place! 268
He approached her again and gave her the good news that she was the mistress of
all the women in the world. He then took his grandsons Hasan and Husayn in his arms,
kissed them and advised them.
He also addressed his wives who were present and advised them as well.
His uncle Abbas was already too anxious about this separation; he had pulled his
nephew Ali to one side and told him that the Messenger of Allah was about to pass on
to the realm of the eternal and he wanted him to tell them what he would want to have
happen after his death.
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, however, were advising
those near him and reminding them that they should try to work for the Hereafter in
this world while they still had time; the opportunities one had must be used for the

--- Sayfa 964 ---
good and these good works should be dressed in clothes of eternity.
He had turned to his Companions before and advised them: "Take heed! Whoever
feels the signs of death come upon him should die with the good hope and expectation
that Allah will forgive them."
One day before he had let go and freed his servants and slaves, and had told our
mother Aisha that she should distribute the six dinars she had in her keep to the needy
and then fainted. As soon as he woke up he had asked whether they had been
distributed. They had not. He asked for them and then counted them in his palm. Then
he sent them to his nephew and son-in-law Ali and ordered him to distribute them all.
"How can Muhammad go to the presence of his Lord while he still has these with
him?" he asked.
He had also distributed the war weaponry such as swords and shields that he had
among the believers. He was giving away whatever he had by way of worldly
possessions, and when going to the next world he was planning to go alone and with
nothing. Such that the evening of that day our mother Aisha would send her lantern to
a woman and ask: "Can you put a few drops of oil in this lantern?" having to borrow
oil in order to be able to light up her small room in the dark of the night.
When they had no other alternative they had pawned, to a Jew, the shield he had
used in return for some barley.
The sun was about to set, now was the time for the meeting. Then his pains got
worse. He was saying the following to our mother Aisha: "0 Aisha, do not doubt that I
still feel the pain of the meal I had in Khaybar! I feel as if my insides are being tom
apart with the strength of that poison."
Then he covered his blessed face. He then opened it up to get some air. He repeated
the fact that those who transform the graves of their Prophet's would be damned. He
then started to speak about Prayer again and said many times: "Salah! Salah! And
what you have been entrusted with," it was clear that he meant "Do not neglect your
Prayer and be very cautious about those whose responsibility you take upon yourself,
especially the slaves." These were his last advice to his Companions before he bid a
last farewell to the world and those in it.
The Arrival of the Truthful Gabriel and the Angel of Death
The Truthful Gabriel who had come on Saturday and Sunday was near him again but
this time it was different; there were other angels by his side as well. There were
seventy thousand angels, each of whom ruled over seventy thousand ones.

--- Sayfa 965 ---
"0 Muhammad!" He was saying once again. "Allah sends salutations and He sent
me especially to exalt you. He the Almighty knows and yet He wants me to ask you,
how are you feeling? How are you?"
"I am a little weak and I have pains, 0 Gabriel," the blessed Messenger said. He
wanted him to approach him a little more.
''Your Lord says," said Gabriel, "I can cure him if he likes, or take Him to me and
embrace Him with my compassion."
"This is something that belongs to my Lord; He the Almighty will do whatever he
wishes for me," he responded.
Then the angel of death whom the Truthful Gabriel had introduced asked for
permission: "May the peace and compassion of Allah be upon you, 0 Messenger of
Allah," angel Azrail said. "Allah sent me to you and told me to do whatever you tell
me. 0 Ahmad! If you tell me to take away what has been entrusted to you now I will
do it; if you ask me to leave it and go back, I will do that as well!"
There was no difference in his choice: "0 angel of death," the blessed Messenger
called to him. "Do whatever you need to do!"
He stroked his face with his hands which he had sprinkled a little water on. While
doing that he prayed: "Dear Lord! Help me against the difficulties of death."
Time to Depart
The time had come and the signs of the voyage had appeared. Our noble Prophet was
about to pass to the other side of the thin curtain between the world and the Hereafter.
He had put his blessed head on the bosom of our mother Aisha and directed his
shimmering coal-black eyes towards the ceiling.
At that moment Abu Bakr's son, Abdurrahman entered his presence; the miswak in
his hand caught his attention. Aisha who had a great faculty of perception understood
that he wanted the miswak and so asked: "Shall I take it for you?"
The Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, was nodding his head as
ifto say "Yes."
Aisha took it from her brother and wanted to give it to the blessed Messenger. But
the miswak was very hard, and so our mother Aisha asked: "Shall I wet it and make it
softer for you?"
His blessed head moved again to say "Yes."
It was clear that the tongue had now gone silent and the eyes did the talking. What
he meant was understood; she softened it in her mouth and gave it to the noble

--- Sayfa 966 ---
Messenger.
He took it and started to move it across his pearl-like teeth. Even when going to the
eternal realm he was cleaning his teeth. And meanwhile he was saying: "There is no
deity but Allah! There really is great unconsciousness for death."
At one point he looked at our mother Aisha who held his hand and wanted to pray
so that he may be cured: "No," he said.
It appeared that it was not fitting to ask to stay here when he had already entered the
pathway of going to the original home. And so he took his hand away, and then
fainted again.
A little while later he came to his senses. Meanwhile he had lifted his finger
upwards. His eyes turned towards the ceiling once again and it was as if his lips were
moving. Our mother Aisha brought her ear to his blessed lips in order to hear what he
was saying, and she heard him say: "Dear Lord! Forgive me and embrace me with
Your compassion like those among the Prophets, martyrs, the loyal ones and the good
that You have shown Your grace. Accept me to the Ra.fiq al-A 'la, to Your Exalted
Friendship and Company. Dear Lord! I want your exalted friendship."
He ended this journey that he started travelling on a Monday, again on a Monday.
In the twenty three years in which revelations poured like rain he had led a full life
that could answer to all kinds of questions that could possibly be faced till the end of
time. He was leaving the mission of communication of the word of Allah to those who
were left behind him. There was a beautiful scent in the room. Then his hand fell on
the water bowl that was sitting on the side and the miswak he was holding in his hand
fell on the ground. The Messenger of Allah had left the path and those on it to those
who were left behind and now he had attained the union he had hoped for and passed
on to the realm of the eternal.
The standard that he had entrusted to his Companions would now flutter on the
shoulders ofthose who represented conquests and openings, such as Usama.
265 After melting ammonium chloride in strong vinegar, he would put a fresh egg in it and let it soak
for a night and a day, and after it softened enough he would take it and put it in a narrow bottle;
then he would pour cold water over it and then say that he had put the egg in from the narrow
neck of the bottle without breaking its shell as a result of a miracle. See Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya
wa'n-Nihaya, 5/61, Sirah, 4/95; Ibn Sayyidinnas, Uyunu'l-Athar, 2/284; Suhayli, Rawdhu'l-Unf,
4/354.
266 Bukhari, Sahih, 11451 (1279), 3/1317 (340 1); Muslim, Sahih, 411795 (2296)
267 In fact at that moment, he would turn to our mother Aisha who had insisted that someone other
than Abu Bakr should lead the Prayer and likened her attitude to the women who had taken a
position against Prophet Yusuf. See Bukhari, Sahih, 11236 (633), 11240 (646-647); Muslim,
Sahih, 11313 (418), 11316 (420).

--- Sayfa 967 ---
268 Fatima had cried out loud when the blessed Messenger had told her "I am going now", and then
when she heard the words "You will be the first to be reunited with me!" she was overjoyed and
started to smile! See Muslim, Sahih, 4/1905 (2450), Ibn Maja, Sunan, 11518 (1621); Tabarani,
Mu jamu 'l-Kabir, 22/415 (1027).

--- Sayfa 968 ---
A COUPLE OF WORDS BEFORE THE END
N
aturally, I find it hard to leave the life of the noble Messenger, but
everything has an end. I can only hope that the aim has been accomplished
and that people have benefited from it. What we can ask for from now on is
to be able to see the blessed Messenger at all times, as our unique guest who regulates
our behavior. This can be possible only by displaying the will to carry his message-
this standard he passed on to us-everywhere that the sun rises and sets, to every
house built of stone, brick or mud, every tent made up of goat, camel or sheep hair, or
at least by being with those who show that kind of determination.
As I draw to a close I find it necessary to share a few things. Firstly, you will have
noticed that there are fewer footnotes in this volume compared to the first volume. In
one way this was not my choice when we consider the volume of events that happened
in the Medina period and the need to speak of them in a limited number of pages
occasioned us to make a choice, and we first chose to decrease the number of
footnotes. Just as we have spoken about it in the introduction of the first volume, the
sources we made use of when composing this work are the most basic sources and it is
not difficult for those who are specialist in this matter to reach them. For the greater
majority who cannot reach those sources, there is more information than footnote.
When we had to choose between the two, we always tried to give precedence to more
knowledge and thus answer to the needs of the majority. And those who are specialists
in the subject-first asking for their forgiveness-we refer to the bibliography and
believe that this will give them an idea about the works we have made use of.
The decisions we made are naturally not only to do with the footnotes; there is no
way to fit into two volumes a life that cannot be described in a number of limited
pages. That is why in certain places we had to summarize certain events and
sometimes express them in single sentences. Some of which we, regrettably, had to
take out from the book. For instance, we had to speak of the blessed Messenger's
miracles that occurred in relation to different events in a couple of sentences, with the
consideration that these may be the compiled in another work.

--- Sayfa 969 ---
We also had to summarize in many instances the stories of the Messenger of Allah's
efforts to warm people's heart to Islam, his relations with religious people or
polytheists, or people who had different views.
We also had to defer to another work the way our noble Prophet treated the people
who were affected by events in the second degree, methodological approaches that we
are very much in need of today in the field of education.
The need to share and embed certain information that is not traditionally found in
the biographies of the Prophet-although they are present in the Hadith collections
and that, we believe would have made certain sections of the biography more
meaningful in our attempt to contribute to the Prophetic change that is expected in
almost all societies-has also been deferred to another work.
The issues we have thought about but not been able to include in the book are
naturally not limited to these; the care that the blessed Messenger showed in matters of
food and drink, his guidance in business and trade, his family life which was a
veritable educational establishment, his grace and generosity, his relations with his
neighbors, his mercy and affection, his piety (taqwa), his good natured approach, his
patience and steadfastness, his modesty, his depth in his multifaceted servantship and
many others remain to be treated in another work. There is, anyhow, no way in which
we can fit him in the volume of a book! All these remind us of the crucial need to treat
and consider the blessed Messenger's exemplary life anew and comprehensively.
What we have been able to do is to try to speak about the life of our beloved
Prophet through the events. Trying to connect his world to the life of the people of
today through commentary and analysis is a job on its own. I hope that such
inadequacies will encourage those capable to write a work that will encompass all
these.
On the other hand, while trying to recount his world, the insufficiencies that one
comes across makes one feel the vastness of the subject, and the enthusiasm this
instills in someone is truly great. Composing such an encompassing work will be
possible by the coming together of people whose hearts beat with the same enthusiasm
and who work shoulder to shoulder and concentrate all their efforts on one common
focus.
Who knows, maybe this dream will become reality one day!
In short, I accept from the very beginning that all the shortcomings are from myself,
and I ask for forgiveness for all the possible mistakes despite all my good intentions
and great efforts from the Pride of Humanity, the noble Messenger of Allah, peace and

--- Sayfa 970 ---
blessings be upon him, and those who have filled their hearts with his love-and so
that I may not be bent in two under such responsibility, I ask for your good prayers.
Re~it Haylamaz

--- Sayfa 971 ---
REFERENCES
Abdurrazzaq, Abu Bakr Abdurrazzaq ibn Hammam (126-211 AH); Al-Musannaf, I-XI,
AI-Majlisu'I-IIm, Beirut, 1403/1983.
Ahmad b. Abdullah at-Tabari, Abu'I-Abbas Muhibbuddin Ahmad Muhibbuddin (d.
694/1295); Ar-Riyadu 'n-Nadira, 1-11, Daru'I-Gharbi'I-Islami, Beirut, 1996.
Ahmad ibn Hanbal (213-290 AH);Musnad, I-VIII, Muassasatu Qurtuba, Egypt.
Akademi Ara~t1rma Heyeti, En Ondekiler, I~Ik Yaymlan, istanbul, 2005.
Ak<;:ay, Yrd. Do<;:. Dr. Mustafa, Ebeveyn-i Resul Risaleleri, Yeni Akademi Yaymlan, izmir,
2005.
Burak, Bekir,Hazreti Hatice, Rehber Yaymlan, istanbul, 2005.
AI-Akk, Abdurrahman, Mawsu 'atu Uzamai Hawla'r-Rasul, 1-3, Daru'n-Nafais, Beirut,
1991.
AI-Aiusi, Abu's-Sana Shahabaddin Mahmud ibn Abdillah (d. 1270/1854); Ruhu 'l-
Ma'aniji Taftiri'l-Qur'ani'l-Azim wa's-Sab'u'l-Masani, I-XXX, Daru Ihyai't-Turasi'I-
Arabi, Beirut.
AI-Ayni, Abu Muhammad Badraddin Mahmud b. Ahmad b. Musa ai-Hanafi (d.
855/1451); Umdatu'l-Qari Sharhi Sahih al-Bukhari, I-XXXII, Idaratu't-Tibaati'I-
Muniriyya, Cairo.
AI-Baghawi, Abu Muhammad Muhyissunna Husayn ibn Masud, (d. 516/1122);
Ma'alimu't-Tanzil, I-VIII, Daru Tayba, Riyad, 1993.
AI-Balazuri, Abu'I-Abbas Ahmad b. Yahya b. Jabir (d. 279/892); Ansabu '/-Ashraf,
Daru'I-Ma'rifa, Cairo, 1959.
AI-Banna, Ahmad b. Abdurrahman b. Muhammad Sati (d. 1378/1958); Al-Fathu'r-
Rabbani li-Tartibi Musnadi '/-Imam Ahmad; Bulugu 'l-Amani Asrari 'l-Fathi 'l-Bari,
Daru Ihyai't-Turasi'I-Arabi, Beirut, 1976.
AI-Bayhaqi, Abu Bakr Ahmad b. ai-Husayn (384-458 AH); As-Sunanu 'l-Kubra, 1-X,
Maktabatu Dari'I-Baz, Mecca, 1414/1994; Dalailu 'n-Nubuwa wa Ma 'rifatu Ahwali
Sahibi 'sh-Sharia, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1985.
AI-Bazzar, Abubakr Ahmad b. Amr b. Abdulhalik (215-292 AH); Al-Musnad, I-III,
Muassasatu Ulumi'I-Qur'an, Beirut/Medina, 1409 AH.

--- Sayfa 972 ---
AI-Bukhari, Abu Abdillah Muhammad b. Ismail (d. 256 AH); Sahihu al-Bukhari, lVI,
Daru ibn Kathir, Beirut, 1407 /1987; Al-Adabu 'l-Mufrad, I-VIII, Daru'I-Bashairi'I-
Islamiyya, Beirut, 1409/1989.
AI-Buti, Muhammad Said Ramadan; Fikhu 's-Sirah ma 'a Mujazi 't-Tarikhi 'l-Khilafati 'r-
Rashida, Daru'I-Fikri'I-Hadith, Beirut, 1417/1996.
AI-Jazairi, Abu Bakr Jabir, Haza'l-Habibu Muhammad Rasulullah, Ya Muhib, Daru's-
Salam, Cairo, 1425/2004.
Dayf, Shawki,Muhammad: Khatamu 'l-Mursalin, Daru'I-Maarif, Cairo, n.d.
Ad-Daraqutni, Abu'I-Hasan Ali b. Umar b. Ahmad (d. 385/995), As-Sunanu 'd-
Daraqutni, Alamu'I-Kutub, Beirut, n.d.
Ad-Darimi, Abdullah b. Abdirrahman (181-255 AH); As-Sunan, 1-11, Daru'I-Kitabi'I-
Arabi, Beirut, 1407/1987.
Abu Dawud, Sulayman b. Ash'as as-Sijistani (202-275 AH); As-Sunan, I-IV,
Maktabatu'I-Islamiyya, istanbul. n.d.
Abu Nuaym, Ahmad b. Abdillah ai-Isbahani (d. 430 AH); Hilyatu 'l-Awliya wa Taba-
qatu 'l-Asjiya, 1-X, Daru'I-Kitabi'I-Arabi, Beirut, 1405 AH; Dalailu 'n-Nubuwwa, Da-
ru'I-Wai, Aleppo.
Abu'sh-Shabab, Ahmad I wad, Kitabu 'l-Khabari 'l-Yaqin ji Mu 'jizati 'n-Nabiyyi 'l-Amin,
AI-Maktabatu'I-Asriyya, Beirut, 2003/1423.
Abu Shahba, Muhammad b. Muhammad, As-Siratu 'n-Nabawiyyaji Dawi 'l-Qur 'an wa 's-
Sunnah, Darui-Qalam, Damascus, 1414/2003.
Abu Ya'Ia, Ahmad b. Ali b. ai-Musanna (210/307 AH); Al-Musnad, I-XIII, Daru-'1-
Ma'mun li't-Turas, Damascus, 1404/1984.
Abu Zahra, Muhammad (d. 1394/1974), Khatamu 'n-Nabiyyin, Daru'I-Fikri'I-Arabi,
Cairo, 1425/2004.
AI-Fakihi, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ismail ibni'I-Abbas (217-275 AH); Akhbaru
Meccaji Qadimi 'd-Dahri wa Hadisih, I-VI, Daru Hadir, Beirut, 1414 AH.
AI-Hakim, Abu Abdillah Muhammad b. Abdillah an-Naysaburi (321-405 AH); Al-
Mustadrak ala 's-Sahihayn, 1-V, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1411/1990.
AI-Halabi, Ali ibn Burhaniddin (d. 1044/1635); As-Siratu 'l-Halabiyya, I-III, Daru'I-
Ma'rifa, Beirut, 1400.
AI-Hamawi, Yakut b. Abdillah (768-837 AH); Mu'jamu'l-Buldan, 1-V, Daru'I-Fikr,
Beirut, n.d.
AI-Haysami, Ali ibn Abi Bakr (d. 807 AH); Majmau 'z-Zawaid, 1-X, Daru'r-Rayyan li't-
TurasjDaru'I-Kitabi'I-Arabi, Cairo/Beirut, 1407 AH.
AI-Hindi, Alauddin Ali b. Abdulmalik b. Qadi Khan Muttaqi (d. 975/1567); Kanzu 'l-
Ummal ji Sunani 'l-Aqwal wa 'l-Af'al, I-XVIII Muassasatu'r-Risala, Beirut, 1985/

--- Sayfa 973 ---
1405.
AI-Hudari, Muhammad b. Afifi ai-Bajuri, (1345/1925); Nuru 'l-Yaqin ji Sirati Sayyidi 'l-
Mursalin, Daru'I-Marifa, Beirut, 1425/2004.
AI-Husayni, Abdullah Sirajuddin; Sayyiduna Muhammad Rasulullah Shamailuhu 'l-
Hamidatu bihi Salihi 'l-Majidati, Maktabatu Dari'I-Falah, Aleppo, n.d.
Gal wash, Ahmad, Da 'watu 'r-Rusul Alayhimussalam, Muassasatu'r-Risala, Cairo, 1423 j
2002.
Khalid, Muhammad Khalid, Insaniyyatu Muhammad Haza ar-Rasul, AI-Maktam, Cairo,
2004; Kama Tuhaddisu 'r-Rasul, AI-Maktam, Cairo, 2004; Rijalun Haw/a 'r-Rasul,
Daru'I-Kitabi'I-Arabi, Beirut, 1407/1987.
Hamidullah, Muhammad (2002); jsfam Peygamberi: Hayat1 ve Faaliyeti [translated by
Salih Tug], irfan Yaymlan, istanbul, 1980; Majmuatu 'l-Wasaiki 's-Siyasiyya li 'l-
Ahdi 'n-Nabawi wa'l-Khilafati 'r-Rashida, Daru'n-Nafais, Beirut, 2001/1422.
Haylamaz, Re~it, Guller ve Dikenler, I~Ik Yaymlan, istanbul, 2003; Saadet Asrma
Dogan YTldTZlar, I~Ik Yaymlan, istanbul, 2002.
Ibn Abdilbarr, Yusuf b. Abdullah b. Muhammad (d. 463 AH); Al-Istiab, 1-V, Daru'I-Jil,
Beirut, 1412 AH.
Ibn Asakir, Abu'I-Qasim Siqatuddin Ali b. Hasan b. Hibatullah (d. 571/1176); Tarikh
al-Dimashq, I-LXX, Daru'I-Fikr, Beirut, 1417/1996.
Ibn Ashur, Muhammad Tahir b. Muhammad b. Muhammad at-Tunusi (1394/1973);
Taftiru 't-Tahrir wa 't-Tanwir, Ad-Daru't-Tunusiyya, Tun us, 1984.
Ibn ai-Jawzi, Abdurrahman b. Ali b. Muhammad (508-597 AH); Sifatu 's-Sa.fiva, I-IV,
Daru'I-Ma'rifa, Beirut, 1399/1979.
Ibn Abi Shayba, Abdullah b. Muhammad (d. 235 AH); Al-Musannafji'l-Ahadis wa'l-
Athar, I-VII, Maktabatu'r-Rushd, Riyad, 1409 AH.
Ibn ai-Asir, Abu'I-Hasan Izzaddin Ali b. Muhammad b. Abdulkarim (d. 630/1233); Al-
Kamil ji 't-Tarikh, 1-V, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1995; Usdu 'l-Ghaba ji
Ma 'rifati 's-Sahaba, Daru'sh-Shaab, Cairo, 1970.
Ibn Hajar, Ahmad b. Ali ai-Asqalani (773-852 AH); Fathu 'l-Bari, I-XIII, Daru'I Ma'rifa,
Beirut, 1379;Al-Isaba, I-VIII, Daru'I-Jil, Beirut, 1412 AH.
Ibn Hazm, Ali b. Ahmad b. Said az-Zahiri (d. 456 AH); Jawamiu 's-Sira wa Hamsu Rasail
li Ibn Hazm, Daru'I-Ma'arif, Egypt, 1900.
Ibn Hibban, Abu Hatim Muhammad ai-Busti (d. 354/965.); Al-Ihsan ji Taqribi Sahih
Ibn Hibban, I-XVII, Muassasatu'r-Risala, Beirut, 1988; As-Thiqat, I-IX, Daru'I-Fikr,
Beirut, 1395/1975.
Ibn Hisham, Abdulmalik ibn Hisham ibn Ayyub ai-Himyari (d. 213/828); As-Siratu 'n-
Nabawiyya, I-VI, Daru'I-Jil, Beirut, 1411.

--- Sayfa 974 ---
Ibn Ishaq, Abu Abdullah Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Yasar (150/767); Siratu ibn Jshaq, Al-
Wakfli 'l-Khidamati 'l-Khayriyya, Konya, 1981.
Ibn Qayyim ai-Jawziyya, Abu Abdullah Shamsaddin Muhammad (751/1350); Tari-
ku 'l-Hijratayn wa Babu 's-Sa'adatayn, Maktabatu Nizar Mustafa ai-Baz, Mecca,
1425/2004; Zadu 'l-Ma 'adji Hadyi Khayri 'libad, Muassasatu'r-Risala, Beirut, 1981.
Ibn Kathir, Abu'I-Fida Ismail ibn Umar ibn Kathir ad-Dimashqi (d. 774 AH); Taftiru '1-
Qur'ani'l-Azim, I-IV, Daru'I-Fikr, Beirut, 1401 AH; Al-Bidaya wa'n-Nihaya, I-XIV,
Daru'I-Ma'arif, Beirut, n.d.; As-Siratu 'n-Nabawiyya, Daru'I-Ma'rifa, Beirut, 1976.
Ibn Maja, Muhammad b. Yazid ai-Kazwini (207-275 AH); As-Sunan, 1-11, Daru'I-Fikr,
Beirut, n.d.
Ibn Sa'd, Abu Abdullah Muhammad b. Sa'd ai-Mani' (168-230 AH); At-Tabakatu 'l-
Kubra, I-VIII, Daru's-Sadir, Beirut, n.d.
Ibn Sayyidinnas, Abu'I-Fath Fathuddin Muhammad b. Muhammad (734/1334); Uyu-
nu 'l-Athar ji Fununi 'l-Maghazi wa 'sh-Shamail wa 's-Siyar, Daru'I-Afaki'I-Jadida,
Beirut, 1982.
Ibn Taymiyyah, Abu'I-Abbas Ahmad ibn Abdilhalim ibn Taymiyyah ai-Harrani (661-
728 AH); Minhaju 's-Sunnati 'n-Nabawiyya, 1-X, Muassasatu Qurtuba, 1406 AH;
Majmuatu 'l-Fatawa, Maktabah Ubaykan, Riyad, 1997/1418.
Qadi Iyaz, Abu'I-Fazl Iyaz ibn Musa ibn Iyaz ai-Yahsubi (d. 544/1149); Ash-Shifa bi
Ta'rifi Hukuki'l-Mustafa, Daru'I-Arqam, Beirut, 1415/1995.
AI-Kastallani, Abu'I-Abbas Shabaddin Ahmad b. Muhammad, (d. 923/1517); Al-
Mawahibu 'l-Laduniyya bi 'l-minahi 'l-Muhammadiyya, I-IV, Maktabatu'I-Islamiyya,
Beirut, 1991; Irshadu 's-sari li Sharhi Sahihi 'l-Bukhari, Daru Ihyai'I-Turasi'I-Arabi,
Beirut, n.d.
AI-Qurtubi, Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Abu Bakr b. Farah (d.670); Al-Jami' li Ahkami'l-
Qur'an, I-XX, Daru'sh-Sha'b, Cairo, 1372 AH.
AI-Mawardi, Abu'I-Hasan Ali b. Muhammad b. Habib (450/1058); A 'lamu 'n-Nubuwwa,
Daru'I-Kitabi'I-Arabi, Beirut, 1987.
AI-Misri, Abu Ammar Mahmud, Siratu 'r-Rasul, Daru't-Takwa, 2002.
AI-Mubarakfuri, Safiyyurrahman,Ar-Rahiq al-Makhtum, Daru'I-Wafa, 2004.
AI-Munawi, Muhammad Abdurrauf b. Ali (d. 1031/1622); Fayzu'l-Qadir Sharhu
Jami 's-Saghir, I-VI, AI-Maktabatu't-Tijariyyati'I-Kubra, Egypt, 1356 AH.
Muslim, Abu'I-Husayn ai-Hajjaj an-Naysaburi (206-261 AH); Sahih Muslim, 1-V, Daru
Ihyai't-Turasi'I-Arabi, Beirut, n.d.
An-Najdi, Ibn Abdilwahhab Muhammad b. Abdilwahhab b. Sulayman at-Tamimi
Muhammad b. Abdulwahhab (1206/1792); Mukhtasaru Siratu 'r-Rasul, Jamiatu'I-
Islamiyya, Medina, 1412/1991.

--- Sayfa 975 ---
An-Nadwi, Abu'I-Hasan Ali ai-Hasani; Maza Hasira'l-Alam bi 'l-Hitati 'l-Muslimin, AI-
Markazu'I-Aiami li'I-Kitabi'I-Islami, Kuwait, n.d.; As-Siratu 'n-Nabawiyya, Daru'I-
Qalam, Damascus, 1427/2006.
An-Nasai, Abu Abdirrahman Ahmad b. Shuayb (215-303 AH); As-Sunan, I-VIII, Makta-
batu'I-Matbuati'I-Islamiyya, Aleppo, 1406/1986; As-Sunanu 'l-Kubra, I-VI, Daru'I-
Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1411/1991.
Nursi, Bediiizzaman Said, (d. 1380/1960); Mektubat, ~ahdamar Yaymlan, istanbul,
2006.
Said b. Mansur, Abu Uthman Said b. Mansur b. Shu'ba ai-Horasani (227 /842); Sunanu
Said b. Mansur, Daru's-Sami, Riyad, 1993.
As-Sallabi, Ali Muhammad, As-Siratu 'n-Nabawiyya, Daru't-Tawzi' wa'n-Nashri'I-
Islamiyya, Cairo, 1422/2001.
As-Sam'ani, Abu Sa'd Abdulkarim b. Muhammad b. Mansur ai-Marwazi (562/1167);
Al-Ansab, Beirut, 1980/1400.
As-Suyuti, Abdurrahman b. ai-Kamal Jalaladdin (849-911 AH); Al-Hasais al-Kubra, I-
III, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1985; Ad-Durru '/-Mansur, I-VIII, Daru'I-Fikr,
Beirut, 1993; Al-Itkan ji Ulumi 'l-Qur 'an, Daru't-Turas, Cairo, 1985; Asbabu 'n-Nuzul,
Daru Ihyai'I-Kutubi'I-Arabiyya, n.d.
As-Suhayli, Abu'I-Qasim Abdurrahman b. Abdullah b. Ahmad (581/1185); Ar-Raw-
du 'l-Unfji Sharhi 's-Sirati 'n-Nabawiyya li ibn Hisham, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-Hadisa, Cairo,
1967.
Ash-Shami, Muhammad b. Yusuf as-Salihi, (d. 942); Subulu'l-Huda wa'r-Rashad,
Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1414/1993.
Ash-Shahristani, Muhammad ibn Abdilkarim ibn Abi Bakr Ahmad (479-548 AH); Al-
Milal wa 'n-Nihal, 1-II, Daru'I-Ma'rifa, Beirut, 1404 AH.
Ash-Shawkani, Muhammad b. Ali (d.1250 AH); Al-Fathu'l-Qadir, 1-V, Daru'I-Fikr,
Beirut, n.d.
At-Tabarani, Abu'I-Qasim Muhammad b. Ahmad (d. 360 AH); Al-Mu'jamul-Awsat, 1-X,
Daru'I-Haramayn, Cairo, 1415 AH;Al-Mu'jamul-Kabir, I-XX, Maktabatu'I-Uium wa'I-
Hikam, Musul, 1404 AH; Al-Mu'jamus-Saghir, 1-11, AI-Maktabatu'I-IslamijDaru
Amman, Beirut/Amman, 1405/1985.
At-Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Halid (224-310 AH); Al-Jamiu 'l-Bayan, I-
XXX, Daru'I-Fikr, Beirut, 1405 AH; Tarikhu 'l-Umam wa'l-Muluk (Tarikhu't-Tabari),
1-V, Daru'I-Kutubi'I-IImiyya, Beirut, 1407 AH.
Taji, Ahmad, Wahy as-Sira, Sharikat Maktabat wa-Matbaat Mustafa ai-Babi ai-Halabi,
Egypt, 1981.
Tahir, Muhammad, Shamsu 'l-Huda wa '/-!man as-Siratu 'n-Nabawiyya, Daru'r-Rabi,
Aleppo, 2002.

--- Sayfa 976 ---
At-Tayalisi, Abu Dawud Suiayman b. Dawud (d. 204 AH); Al-Musnad, Daru'I-Ma'rifa,
Beirut, n.d.
At-Tabrizi, Abu Abdullah Waliyyuddin Muhammad b. Abdullah (741/1340); Mish-
qatu 'l-Masabih, I-lll, AI-Maktabatu'I-Isiamiyya, Damascus, 1961/1380.
At-Tirmizi, Abu Isa Muhammad b. Isa (209-279 AH); Al-Jamiu's-Sahih, I-V, Daru
Ihyai't-Turasi'I-Arabi, Beirut, n.d.
Urjun, Muhammad Sadiq Ibrahim, Muhammad Rasulullah, Daru'I-Qaiam, Damascus,
1995.
AI-Wahidi, Abu'I-Hasan Ali b. Ahmad b. Muhammad an-Nisaburi (468/1075); Asbabu
Nuzuli'l-Qur'an, Daru'I-Mayman, Riyad, 2005/1426.
AI-Waqidi, Abu Abdullah Muhammad b. Umar b. Waqid ai-Asiami (207 /823); Al-
Maghazi, Aiamu'I-Qutb, Beirut, 1984.
Az-Zahabi, Shamsuddin Muhammad Ahmad (d. 748/1347); Tarikhu'l-Islam wa Wafa-
yatu 'l-Mashahir wa 'l-A 'lam, Daru'I-Kitabi'I-Arabi, Beirut, 1990.
Az-Zayiai, Abdullah b. Yusuf Abu Muhammad (d. 762 AH); Nasbu 'r-Raya, I-IV, Daru'I-
Hadis, Egypt, 1357 AH.
Zubayr b. Bakkar, Abu Abdullah Zubayr b. Bakkar b. Abdullah (256/870); Al-
Muntahab min Kitabi Azwaji 'n-Nabi, AI-Jamiatu'I-Isiamiyya, Medina, 1981/1401.
Az-Zuhri, Abu Bakr ibn Shihab Muhammad b. Muslim b. Ubaydullah (124/742); Tan-
zilu 'l-Qur 'an. n.d.
Az-Zarqani, Muhammad Abduiazim; Manahilu 'l-Irfan ji Ulumi 'l-Qur 'an, Daru Ihyai'I-
Kutubi'I-Arabiyya, Cairo, 1362/1943.