--- Sayfa 1 ---
The future of
Freemasonry
A report by
The Social
Issues Research
Centre
2012

--- Sayfa 2 ---
The common
factor is
and should
be about
fun and
enjoyment

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Foreword by Nigel Brown Grand Secretary

5
1 Introduction

6
1.1 Methods

7
1.2 Reporting

7
2 Bonding

8
2.1 The need to belong

8
2.2 Belonging – the public view

10
2.3 Affiliation – the masons’ view

12
3 Giving

17
3.1 The ‘problem’ of altruism

17
3.2 Charity – the public view

18
3.3 Charity – the masons’ view

20
4 Ritual

25
4.1 Rituals and routines – the public view
26
4.2 Ritual – the masons’ view

30
5 The future of Freemasonry

34
6 Bibliography and selected readings

42
CONTENTS
3
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4
MODERN
FREEMASONS
ARE KEEN TO DISPEL
THE MYTHS AND
MISCONCEPTIONS
THAT HAVE LONG
SURROUNDED THE
ORGANISATION

--- Sayfa 5 ---
As the tercentenary of the United Grand
Lodge of England approaches, we felt
it important to mark the occasion with
a robust and open debate into what it means
to be a Freemason in contemporary society,
and what it will mean for future generations
to come. As the oldest fraternal organisation
in the world, Freemasonry is founded upon
principles of kindness, honesty and fairness
– timeless values that are as relevant to the
world today as they were three hundred
years ago when we were established.
These ideals have remained unchanged
throughout the history of Freemasonry and
will, we hope, continue to do so as long as
the organisation thrives. Yet it is important
to note that while it maintains these central
ideals, Freemasonry in the twenty-first
century has become an amalgamation of the
old and the new, of tradition and innovation,
and therefore fits comfortably into the
modern world.
Modern Freemasons are keen to dispel the
myths and misconceptions that have long
surrounded the organisation. In order to
do this, it was clear we needed to enlist the
help of an independent body to embark
upon an impartial assessment. In doing so,
we anticipated shaping a discussion that
would not only offer an open and transparent
account of Freemasonry to those outside
the organisation, but also provide a fresh
viewpoint to those within it.
It was with these goals in mind that we
approached the Social Issues Research Centre
(SIRC) to undertake this research. As well as
offering the anthropological expertise that
forms the backdrop of much of this report,
they set about compiling the views and
opinions of a cross-section of Freemasons
and non-masons alike. As a result, The
Future of Freemasonry provides an insightful
and timely commentary, not just on the
organisation it set out to examine, but also
on the complex interactions, perceptions
and values of modern society itself.
As we look to the next three hundred years,
this report will form an intrinsic part of
our discussions into how best Freemasonry
can evolve whilst retaining the distinctive
character and ideals that have attracted
members for centuries, and will hopefully
do so for centuries to come.
Nigel Brown
Grand Secretary
The United Grand Lodge of England
FOREWORD
5
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 6 ---
The Social Issues Research Centre (SIRC)
was pleased to receive an approach from the
Grand Secretary of the United Grand Lodge
of England (UGLE) to explore the role and
relevance of Freemasonry in society today
and in the future.
In our preliminary research we consulted
some modern texts on Freemasonry as well
as online resources to help us identify the
central themes of the research. One thing that
immediately became apparent was that the
notion of Freemasonry as a ‘secret society’
was clearly inappropriate. In Tobias Churton’s
Freemasonry: The Reality, for example, we
found more or less all one needed to know
about the central tenets of the movement and
the rituals associated with it. We were also
struck by his conclusion that:
‘Freemasonry cannot forever be associated
with the secret society syndrome. It is not
a secret society, though when persecuted
it has been sensible to be discreet. But
a healthy society will promote greater
openness and understanding for all. It is
not good for Freemasonry to hide itself;
it has no more trade secrets to defend.’
A number of other books opened up the world
of Freemasonry to inspection, including the
details of initiation ceremonies. John Hamill’s
The Craft provided a very useful account of the
origins and history of English Freemasonry,
dispelling a number of myths in the process,
while Freemasonry: A Celebration of the Craft,
edited by Hamill and Robert Gilbert, illustrated
the ‘ideals’ and ‘virtues’ of Freemasonry. In
addition to this background reading we also
examined the content of UGLE’s own website
(www.ugle.org.uk), which hosts a range of
information and opinion pieces penned by
senior masons.
A response to the Grand Secretary’s enquiry
began to form. We proposed to examine the
relevance of two of Freemasonry’s main tenets
Introduction
in twenty-first century Britain – those of
‘brotherly love’ and ‘relief’ – translated into the
more familiar social science terms of ‘affiliation’
and ‘altruism’ – and the surrounding issues
of male bonding and charity. We would also
explore whether there is a desire for a degree
of ritual in our modern lives. We would speak
with lodge members across the country and the
discussions would be forward looking – to what
extent, in their view, can/should Freemasonry
evolve in the twenty-first century? For these
discussions to take place we would need
to test Freemasonry’s claims for openness
and transparency.
In addition, we would examine the connection
between Freemasonry and the wider
community in focus groups with participants
who, to the best of our knowledge, were not
masons. In these we would be concerned
with the same issues as in the interviews with
Freemasons. We would, for example, examine
the presence of, or the need for, an element of
ritual in our lives, our need to belong, the ways
we express our generosity towards others and
the extent to which our everyday lives involve
ritual behaviours. How different are masons
from other people in these contexts? To
what extent does Freemasonry meet timeless
needs and wants that we all, to one degree
or another, share?
This report is, as far as we know, an account of
the first ever study that has been commissioned
by Freemasons from a non-masonic body.
None of the SIRC members involved in the
project are Freemasons, a fact that evoked
surprise and welcome in equal measure
from the lodge members we met. Many
saw it as an opportunity to communicate
‘what the Craft is really all about’ to a wider
audience and provided proof, if it were
needed, of the prevailing openness among
the Freemasonry fraternity.
As outsiders, of course, we have not experienced
at first-hand what it is really like to be
6
1

--- Sayfa 7 ---
a mason in today’s pluralistic society that is,
in fundamental ways, very different from that
which prevailed in the late eighteenth century
when Freemasonry was first formed. We have
faced the dilemma of the social anthropologist
who, as one mason put it, can only ‘scratch the
surface’ of the tribal mores (norms and values)
that are the focus of his or her study.
1.1 Methods
The methods that we have employed, while
recognising the limitations of all ethnographic
research of this nature, have been designed
to provide what is known in anthropology
as an ‘emic’ perspective – an account that
is expressed within the frames of reference
employed by insiders, as opposed to an ‘etic’
framework of understanding that is imposed
from the standpoint of the outsider. Interviews
and less formal discussions with around fifty
masons at varying stages of their journey
through Freemasonry were held. Transcripts
and summaries of these have been produced
that, as in all of SIRC’s qualitative research,
have been ‘signed off’ by the participants as
accurately reflecting their views and insights.
Analysis of the transcripts has been conducted
using MAXQDA – software for the treatment
of qualitative data that allows efficient
identification of the major themes within
the accounts offered and areas of consensus
and divergence. Transcripts of the two focus
groups with non-masons have been subjected
to similar analysis. Extracts from both sets
of summaries have been used liberally in this
report to provide our reading of the balance of
views within Freemasonry that relate to the key
issues under investigation.
1.2 Reporting
In presenting these perspectives we have also
been guided by discussions with the Grand
Secretary, Nigel Brown, about his vision
– one that is shared with senior members
within the organisation – of the direction in
which Freemasonry should now be moving
in order to demonstrate its true role and
relevance in contemporary society. Dispelling
myths, effectively challenging commonplace
misconceptions and demonstrating its genuine
openness have been just a few aspects of the
transition that are already evidently in progress.
In the final section of this report we have, on
the basis of the available evidence, attempted to
identify the specific changes that have already
occurred within Freemasonry in recent times
and where opportunities to demonstrate the
openness and transparency on which the
organisation now prides itself might best lie.
We have done this from a neutral and detached
‘outsider’s’ perspective, but one that has been
very much guided by our understanding of the
views from within, so as to provide a conclusion
to the task with which we have been presented.
7
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 8 ---
2.1 THE NEED
TO BELONG
There is a timeless and universal need for
people to establish a sense of belonging – to feel
rooted in a community of others. In Abraham
Maslow’s influential hierarchy of human needs
our requirement for social contact comes after
only those of physiological need (air, water,
nourishment and sleep) and for safety. Without
social bonding, according to his model, a sense
of personal esteem and what he terms ‘self
actualisation – reaching our full potential’
– are impossible.1
Since Maslow’s time the study of group
belonging and the centrality it plays in our lives
has formed a major part of social psychology.
Roy Baumeister and Mark Leary, for example,
stress that ‘The need for social belonging,
for seeing oneself as socially connected, is
a basic human motivation.’2 They go on to note
that ‘a sense of social connectedness predicts
favourable outcomes … perceived availability
of social support buffers mental and physical
health.’ Gregory Walton and Geoffrey Cohen3
take a similar line, examining the ways in
which a strong sense of group identity improves
performance and well-being in a range of
contexts. Many others in the field have fleshed
out in more detail the ways in which social
bonds are established and the negative
consequences that arise from social alienation
or simple loneliness.
In truth, though, we do not really need
psychologists to tell us how important a sense
of belonging really is. We all know this – and
we have all probably experienced the sense
of personal doubt and low social worth when
close social bonds are disrupted or weakened.
The phrase ‘Man is a social animal’ may sound
rather trite, but it is, nonetheless, true.
Like many other fundamental aspects of the
human condition, it is likely that our need for
social affiliation is wired-in to our brains
– we do not have to learn from scratch to seek
out a sense of belonging, we do it naturally.
As Mary Ainsworth4 and many other
researchers stress, this innate propensity
towards establishing social bonds had distinct
survival and reproductive benefits – e.g. sharing
of food, provision of potential mates, help and
care for offspring, protection from rivals and
greater effectiveness in hunting.
In Freemasonry, of course, the potential for
strong affiliations and lasting friendships is
one of the principal attractions that all masons
identify. Such bonding, however, is an all-male
affair5, encapsulated in the concept of brotherly
love6. In contemporary society, where single-
gender institutions have largely disappeared,
the fact that lodge membership is restricted
to men, and that masonic bonds are to do
with ‘brothers’ only, may seem anachronistic.
‘Male bonding’, however, has its roots in an
earlier period of human evolution – the Upper
Palaeolithic or Late Stone Age period some
forty thousand to one hundred thousand or
more years ago.
The Late Stone Age was the era of the hunter-
gatherer tribes and during this period much of
the formative processes that shaped the ways in
which our brains evolved and our consequent
behaviours were evident. This period, prior to
the development of agriculture, is often referred
to as that of ‘behavioural modernity’, for we see
in it evidence for the development of patterns
of behaviour that are strikingly similar to those
of today. We may think that we are now very
different from what we were when we survived
and prospered by hunting and gathering, but
in truth we have evolved very little as a species
since those times.
The role of women (mainly) as gatherers of
wild fruits, nuts, etc., and men (mainly) as
hunters of animal protein, laid the basis for
gender role separation that still shapes our lives.
Men became hunters because of their (slight)
2
1
 Maslow, A. (1943)
2
 Baumeister, R. F. & Leary, M. R. (1995)
3
 Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007)
4
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989)
5
Or all-female affair in the case of women’s lodges

– see below.
6
The precept of brotherly love is defined as: ‘Every true

Freemason will show tolerance and respect for the

opinions of others and behave with kindness and

understanding to his fellow creatures.’
8
BONDING

--- Sayfa 9 ---
›
physiological advantage over women in terms
of physical strength and speed of running.
Through natural selection these differences
were reinforced and reflected in the ways
in which Late Stone Age communities
organised themselves.
In Lionel Tiger’s book, Men in Groups
– A controversial look at all-male societies,7
he notes:
‘My proposition is that specialization
for hunting widened the gap between the
behaviour of males and females. It favoured
those ‘genetic packages’ which arranged
matters so the males hunted co-operatively
in groups while females engaged in maternal
and some gathering activity.’
It is this long-standing legacy of male bonding,
Tiger and others argue, that lives on in modern
times in many shapes and forms.
This is not to say that bonds between females
were, and are, any less strong. Male fraternities
are mirrored by female sororities of all kinds
– from the Women’s Institute to less formal
female social networks. It is also the case that
while UGLE does not admit women, there
are two orders of women Freemasons that
follow largely unadapted male ceremonies and
traditions – even referring to each other as
‘brother’. Additionally, while membership
of lodges is restricted to men, women are
far from excluded from visiting them, as
we see in Section 2.3.
9
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
7
 Tiger, L. (1970)
In Freemasonry
the potential
for strong
affiliations
and lasting
friendships
is one of the
principal
attractions
that all Masons
identify

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10
we spoke. Core friends, it would seem, are those
special relationships that are secure enough
not to require daily contact. They are built on
a foundation of shared experiences, shared
values and circumstance. To meet up with one’s
core friends was described by members of the
focus groups as akin to ‘coming home’.
 ‘… more important for me is this group of
core friends. It doesn’t matter if I don’t speak
to them for a year; whenever I do it is exactly
the same. There are only five or six of them,
but I know that I will always know these
people and I will always have something
in common with those people for the rest
of my life.’
Others stressed the role of the local community
as well as specific networks of friends as being
central to their feelings of belonging:
‘What defines it are the support network as
well as friends and good times. If I go into
a local shop and I am ten pence down he
will let me have it and will say “Don’t worry
bring it next week.” It is that idea that people
know each other and can support each other
a little bit.’
As we expected, there was a clear divide
between the ‘joiners’ and the ‘non-joiners’.
While some actively joined organisations, clubs
and societies with the intent of broadening
their social networks, others clearly preferred to
remain among the informal networks of existing
friends, family members and neighbours. One
male ‘joiner’ commented:
‘I am definitely a joiner. I have moved
around quite a bit and everywhere I have
gone I have always joined sports clubs,
especially football teams. It has been a real
life-saver at times because you meet people
who are into the same things and that then
leads on to other things. With the football
teams you join … you have a ready-made
social scene; you get invited to gigs, to the
2
BONDING
8
See the SIRC report Belonging – available at

www.sirc.org/publik/belonging.shtml
2.2 Belonging –
the public view
In the focus groups we explored participants’
notions of where they felt a sense of belonging
and the importance that they attached to
it. There were few surprises in any of the
discussions. Earlier work by SIRC8 had already
established the major sources of a sense of
social identity stemming from families and
friends to professional affiliations and team
sports. Such notions were reinforced in the
more recent group sessions.
There was an overwhelming consensus among
other participants, however, that they had
a strong need to belong somewhere or with
definable others. For some, a sense of identity
was mostly driven by the feeling of family
belonging while for others, and the majority,
it was their social networks of friends that were
most dominant in this context. The following
participant stressed that her social networks
provided more than just the opportunity to
get together and socialise; they were more
complex than that, instead providing a two-way
process of self-enrichment:
‘Something that comes from having a social
network, people you see regularly, you will
become part of that with your own set of “I
am good at that, I like this” and from getting
to know people better your own vision of
what you might be interested in expands
vastly. You might find yourself catapulted
over various steps of knowing a little bit
about something by suddenly finding yourself
knowing a lot about something. Depending
on how you treat your friendships. It is not
just about the support network, they will
enrich you and you will hopefully enrich
them by sharing what [you know or enjoy].’
The concept of core friends is one with which
many of us are familiar, and one that certainly
chimed with many of the masons with whom

--- Sayfa 11 ---
pub, dinner, cinema and it snowballs and
you meet other people.’
A female participant also said:
‘I have always joined groups, I like
meeting people and people from different
backgrounds. I quite like being among
people who are not from the same
socio-economic or education background.
I have always liked different groups of
people because they give you, and you
give them, different things in life.’
In contrast, another female participant relied
much more on her network of work colleagues
and was unwilling to join other groups that
might reduce the time she spent with them.
‘I’m not a joiner … I spend so much time at
work that I just don’t want to. It is really
bad, [as] I like meeting new people, I like
different things and I do want to go out
there and do different things. But I spend so
much time at work that I feel that I would
be cheating myself out of my own free time.
I do have a good social network at work
and I really do get on with the people I work
with. Two or three of them are starting to get
into my core group of people. People join the
team and leave the team and there are a lot
of different personalities there.’
All of this was familiar territory. It was,
however, when we moved the conversation on
to the subject of single-sex groups that issues
arose. Among some of the men in the groups
in particular, there was a strong reluctance to
believe in (or admit to) the attraction of all-male
groups. One commented:
‘It’s bravado and that is not necessarily the
bond that you are looking for.’
Others agreed and suggested that this need
for ‘being with just lads’ was outdated. One
participant said:
‘I have always had really close female friends
as well as male friends so I have never
thought about [male-only groups]. I don’t
change my behaviour between the two ...’
There was a distinct sense of political
correctness at work in the groups with men
fearing, perhaps, being labelled as chauvinist if
they claimed to want to be more in the company
of men rather than mixed-sex groups. When
this ‘correctness was challenged’, however,
some rather more revealing sentiments were
expressed. One said:
‘I don’t think I consciously do it [seek out
male-only groups] it just seems to work out
that way.’
Another spoke of his bonds with other players
in his hockey team:
‘That is exactly what we have in the hockey
club, really. I guess it serves some sort of
purpose. You play sport, you go off and
socialise and drink together and have this
slightly exclusive overtly masculine bond.
The idea is that you do that so when you
come to play you give a bit more for each
other because you have been doing whatever
it is the night before.’
There was much less reluctance, however,
among the women participants to recognise
the value of all-female bonds:
‘It is not just a case of all liking the same
things, it is not about that. It is really the
core values in those people that you respect
and you like and the characteristics. These
are all women. I have a lot of male friends
as well as a lot of female friends, but this
core is female.’
›
11
11
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 12 ---
2.3 Affiliation –
the masons’ view
While the sentiments expressed in the focus
groups reflected the strong continuing need
in human societies for a sense of belonging
and social identity, there was considerable
divergence concerning how this could best be
achieved. Among the masons we interviewed,
however, there were far fewer doubts.
The Grand Secretary of UGLE, Nigel Brown,
stressed that Freemasonry is primarily
a social organisation:
‘The key thing is that [Freemasonry] is not
prescriptive and that most people will join
because a friend or somebody they trust has
asked if they are interested. It’s no deeper
than: “I think you will enjoy the company
of the people … you will meet.”’
This principal reason for joining Freemasonry
in the first place was echoed by other masons
all over the country. They were attracted by the
potential for a widened friendship network and
a strong sense of social bonding which, they
believed, the lodges would provide. The ritual
aspects that distinguish Freemasonry from
most other societies were also seen by many
as enhancing the social bonding potential:
‘It is the sense of just belonging to something.
At school you have your mates. After school
I joined the [Forces]; you have got the guys
around you and you have this sense of
belonging. Then after the [Forces] I joined
the bike club. Then I came out of that
and I didn’t have anything I felt belonging
to. This [the opportunity to join the masons]
came along and I thought: “perfect”.
I suppose my sense of ritual is that I need
to belong to some sort of group. The ritual
aspect increases that sense of belonging.
Of course it does. You are part of the
drive train. I am not one for sitting
12
on the side lines, I get bored too easily and
I have to get involved.’
Others emphasised the degree of trust that
being in a group of fellow masons provided:
‘There is something special about the bonds
you develop within the lodge, absolutely.
From my point of view it is the trust. In
Freemasonry people are not there to take
things away from you, the reverse in fact.
Freemasonry is out there by itself [in this
respect]. I fly, I play golf – these are quite
individual [activities]. In golf [and other
competitive sports] you find that people will
put you down; your etiquette or the way you
dress, but in masonry you don’t get that. In
ninety-nine per cent of cases they are there to
help you … It is something very special.’
This sense of trust within the lodge, other
masons thought, extended beyond its physical
boundaries into the wider community. One said:
‘What it means to me is that I don’t believe
everyone is a villain like I did before …
I used to mistrust people and now I don’t.
Especially if they are a mason I know they
are not there to do me any harm. The room
is full of friends, some you have not met
before, but they are all your friends. That is
the relaxation I get and I am prepared to
do anything for anybody now, not just other
Freemasons and it has woken me up over the
last few years. When I was in business I was
a very ambitious person and all the faults
that go with that, now I realise that other
people are more important than me. I don’t
know if that comes with age or with masonry,
but I am going to credit masonry with that
and I have changed my views.’
This kind of ‘transformation’ through
Freemasonry also extended, as we note
elsewhere, into increased confidence and the
ability to stand up before groups of people
and speak without nerves or embarrassment.
2
BONDING

--- Sayfa 13 ---
One mason spoke in this context of the
increased sense of tolerance he had developed
after joining the lodge:
‘I am far more tolerant of other people than
I used to be. If someone is angry or is upset
about something I will try and calm them
down and tell them: “Is it really important
enough to get worried about?” Certainly
within the lodge there have been certain
people who have needed a little bit of help,
or even guidance. If you can show them that
they are valued ... as long as you adopt the
same policy for brethren as those who are
not in Freemasonry, you will go far. Brotherly
love is not just for those within Freemasonry,
you have got to put it out to other people
as well. It has got to be a part of you as
opposed to something that you just practice
within the lodge.’
Others emphasised the ways in which their
social skills and confidence had developed
through being a lodge member:
‘Obviously the social life is very good and you
meet people. Another thing I have found is
that it helps you to talk to people. I used to
be a bit shy and talking to people is so much
easier when you are in Freemasonry. You have
to do a lot of speaking ... that helps an awful
lot with self-confidence and that type of thing.’
It is the case, of course, that the amount of
time masons spend in their lodges, or even in
the company of other masons, can be relatively
limited. For some, it is a matter of only three
to six meetings a year, while others who hold
particular offices within a lodge will devote
considerably more of their time. It is this
flexibility that is seen by many masons as an
attractive proposition, accommodating both
those with limited spare time alongside those
with considerably more.
The sense of personal development expressed
by masons was particularly striking.
›
13
13
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
‘ … you look at people differently after a while.
I think you tend to look at their good points
rather than their bad … Some of the people
that you disliked you suddenly find that they
have got their good points. You have to help
people along and you have to be tolerant.
Freemasonry does teach you patience.’
In our interviews with masons we raised
the specific issues of male bonding. Was
there something special about the fact
that ‘brotherly love’ was, it seemed, about
groups of men rather than about men
and women?
‘Freemasonry is a blokes’ thing. If you are
looking for something which is for both
sexes then there are other things out there.
For me definitely and I think I can speak
for pretty much every other bloke. I think
you need those opportunities for all-male
groups out there.’
Most masons felt there was a strong need for
men to be able, for a small minority of their
time, to be exclusively in the company of other
men. This, combined with the shared ritual
behaviours that characterise Freemasonry,
is what deepens the bonds. Such occasional
bonding, however, did not appear to detract
from masons’ motivations and abilities to
interact with women – in their families, their
workplace or the wider community. In all of
the lodges that we visited there were regular
occasions on which members were accompanied
by their partners and female family members to
social functions and ‘white table’. The regular
open days organised by many lodges were
similarly open to both genders.
One further aspect of the bonds established in
the lodges was that they transcended traditional
demarcations of social status and wealth.
Masons saw lodges as great ‘levellers’. One noted
that when they were all standing in dark suits
wearing aprons and white gloves, one would
be hard pressed to tell who did what. This

--- Sayfa 14 ---
observation is interesting, and one of the main
reasons why members are required to leave
their ‘day jobs’ (and also their political points
of view) at the door, before entering the lodge.
Discussion of politics is not allowed at lodge
meetings or elsewhere within Freemasonry,
and nor is business networking – masons are
prohibited from using membership to promote
their own, or anyone else’s business, professional
or personal interests.
The Grand Secretary also stressed the levelling
nature of masonry:
‘We live in a very diverse society. The joy of
Freemasonry is that members come from all
races, religions, all social economic levels of
society. So actually you get a complete mix of
people sitting next to each other in harmony
and equality. And I would say to you, what
other organisations can do that in a world
that is full of conflict?’
The reasons offered for becoming a lodge
member in the first place were as varied as the
masons themselves. For some it was the fact
that somebody in their family was, or had been,
a member. For others it was a chance encounter
with an existing Freemason who articulated
the benefits of becoming a member. And,
for the most part, it was the emphasis placed
on the network of friendships into which they
would be initiated that was the deciding factor.
The Freemasons do not undertake any
proactive recruitment, although they welcome
opportunities to champion their organisation to
outsiders. And while most new members pass
through informal processes of admission, some
lodges operate more formal procedures. The
Grand Secretary explained:
‘Some people join through a much more
official [process]. They may have been met
by a committee and wives or partners would
have been met. But essentially, when you
come in, like in any club you need a proposer
14
and a seconder. At the meeting before you’re
initiated there would be a notice of motion,
fairly short, but if the proposer and the
seconder are respected people that’s
pretty much passed. Then at the next
meeting there’s a ballot … And then the
guy is initiated.’
A rather less formal route, however, is more
typical, even if one has to be approved
somewhere along the line by a committee.
As one lodge member recalled:
‘I asked a couple of questions: “What is it?
Why do you do it? What do you get out of
it?” It was explained to me that you meet
up with a group of people. You all meet up
on the same premise that you get together
to have a good time. You do a bit of ritual.
This was explained to me at the time as like
a Shakespearean play; it can appear a bit
convoluted until someone explains some
of the meaning to it and [that at first]
you may not fully appreciate the true
underlying message.’
Another moved into Freemasonry through
existing social networks:
‘I knew a few Freemasons, but it wasn’t
something I really wanted to do or something
I wanted to pick up on. It was just that they
were friends and we went down to ladies’
weekends and … they hinted that I would
make a good Freemason and one day I said:
“Ok chaps, let’s just do it.” It was a spur of the
moment decision and I think I can honestly
say that I have never looked back.’
Other masons have joined the organisation
after doing some homework:
‘There were some fairly specific things
about Freemasonry that attracted me:
charity, [and] the ability to open up your
social network. A lot of people seem to find
barriers to meeting people out of their own
2
BONDING

--- Sayfa 15 ---
socio-economic groups and Freemasonry
completely knocks that away. Very early on,
before I was initiated, the behaviour I saw of
Freemasons was one of acceptance and trust.
I made some very good friends here and it
allowed me to socialise more.’
The emphasis then, for most masons, is the
sociable nature of the organisation. While some
may emphasise the attraction of the charitable
aspects of being a mason and others the draw
of enacting one-act plays in the rituals, the
overriding pull is what they anticipate will be
an atmosphere of congenial sociability that
transcends the usual social class barriers.
The issue of ‘fun’ and its immediate appeal
was also mentioned by several of the masons
we interviewed – especially in the context
of the rituals. While to outsiders these
may appear rather serious, the masons
themselves see it very differently.
‘Yes we enjoy ourselves hugely with our
play-acting. If it wasn’t enjoyable we
wouldn’t be doing it. It has got to be fun
and I make sure it is fun.’
This issue was also something that was very
much stressed by the Grand Secretary:
‘The common factor is, and should be, about
fun and enjoyment. We don’t want people
coming in who take themselves too seriously
or who take Freemasonry too seriously.’
The idea that Freemasonry is something that
shouldn’t be taken too seriously may strike
outsiders as surprising – after all this is an
organisation that dates back to the eighteenth
century and is surrounded by tradition, regalia
and ceremonial behaviours that are associated
with strong moral imperatives. Such a view is
also a little at odds with the few masons who
take their Craft rather more seriously, as we
note in Section 4.2.
15
15
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
MASONS ARE
PROHIBITED
FROM USING
MEMBERSHIP
TO PROMOTE
THEIR OWN,
OR ANYONE
ELSE’S BUSINESS,
PROFESSIONAL
OR PERSONAL
INTERESTS

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16
A CONSEQUENCE
OF WHAT WE MIGHT
DESCRIBE AS THE
‘GIVING INSTINCT’ IS
THAT SOME MEMBERS
WILL HAVE, IN CRUDE
TERMS, MORE OF THE
ALTRUISTIC GENE
THAN OTHERS

--- Sayfa 17 ---
3
GIVING
17
17
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
3.1 The ‘problem’
of altruism
The fact that, universally, people are prepared
to act in ways that benefit others at a cost to
themselves has long posed a problem for the
social and biological sciences – and particularly
for theories of evolution. The fundamental
premise of evolutionary biology, for example, is
that costs and benefits are measured in terms
of ‘reproductive fitness’ – an animal’s ability to
mate and to produce offspring, thereby ensuring
the future of its genes. This applies to humans
as much as any other species on the planet. The
difficult issue here, however, is that this form
of natural selection operates at the individual
rather than group level. It is the ability to spread
my genes, or those of my close relatives who
share my genes, rather than those of unrelated
members of my tribe or social group.
It is true that we are most willing to make the
greatest sacrifice for the benefit or survival
of our closest kin. If I save the life of, say, my
son while losing my own I have ensured that
the part of me that is my son (my genes) will
survive into a future generation. But why should
we help our neighbours or those in parts of the
world that we have never met, and never will?
We may, of course, argue that evolutionary
theory no longer applies to the human race,
that we have gone beyond forces that shape
the lives of lower animals. We are conscious
beings whose lives are directed more by moral
codes than by basic instincts. And yet, perhaps
uncomfortably, altruism is as much in evidence
in birds and mammals as it is in us. Many
species sound the alarm to their fellows when
they identify a predator nearby, exposing
themselves to quite considerable risk by
making themselves more visible. Such types
of altruistic behaviour are the same as those
that we see as fundamental characteristics
of a ‘civilised’ human race.
Charles Darwin was himself puzzled by
this – his theory of natural selection – often
inappropriately described as ‘survival of the
fittest’ – with its emphasis on the individual, did
not quite work. On the one hand he argued that
‘He who was ready to sacrifice his life, as many
a savage has been … would leave no offspring to
inherit his noble nature.’1 Undeterred, however,
and almost by sleight of hand, he introduced
a substantial qualification:
‘A tribe including many members who, from
possessing, in a high degree, the spirit of
patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and
sympathy, were always ready to aid one
another, and to sacrifice for the common
good, would be victorious over most other
tribes; and this would be natural selection.’2
What we have here is now a focus on group,
rather than individual, interest. Such an
emphasis is not without its critics, among
them Richard Dawkins.3 Current perspectives,
however, generally support the view that the
genes which prompt us to be generous to our
kin can also prompt us to express altruism
in a more generalised way, so long as it does
not reduce our personal fitness to a damaging
degree. An advantageous product of this is
the increased fitness of the tribe, community
or society in which we live which, in turn,
increases what is known as ‘inclusive’ fitness
– a notion that embraces one’s personal fitness
plus the fitness of every other member of the
species in the population.4
A consequence of what we might describe as
the ‘giving instinct’ is that some members will
have, in crude terms, more of the altruistic gene
than others. We, as in the animal kingdom, will
always have ‘free riders’ – those who benefit
from the altruism of others while giving little
or nothing back in exchange. But this, in itself,
does not pose a serious problem until the
givers are outnumbered by the takers. Natural
selection, it seems, is geared towards the
prevention of this state of affairs.
1
Darwin, C. (1871) The Descent of Man. P.1635
2
Darwin, C. (1871) The Descent of Man. P.166
3
Dawkins, R. (1979) The Selfish Gene
4
See Boyd, R. & McIlreath, R. (2007) Mathematical Models

of Social Evolution. Chicago University Press

--- Sayfa 18 ---
5
See, for example, Mol et al, 2006; Tankersley, et al, 2007
6
World Giving Index, 2010
While our predisposition to give to others, and
to our families in particular, would seem to
have a biological basis, there are many other
ways of explaining individual altruistic acts.
One obvious one is the sense of moral rectitude
that comes from charitable acts – we feel better
about ourselves after ‘doing good’ in this way
and it enables us to confirm our positive self-
perceptions. This ‘feel good’ factor, however,
may also have biological roots. Recent studies
indicate that charitable acts trigger the reward
centres of the brain and those associated with
emotions and social behaviour.5 There are also
increases in the secretion of the neurochemical
dopamine, again leading to rewarding
sensations, at these times. These, in turn,
are responsible for the ‘warm glow’ that we
experience – it is not something that we
‘invent’, it is already wired in to our brains.
3.2 Charity –
the public view
The British in general are, it seems, a generous
people when it comes to charitable giving
compared with many other nationalities – we
come eighth out of one hundred and fifty-three
countries and are joint third with Thailand in
terms of giving money rather than time. We
are seen by foreigners, including Americans,
Canadians, French and five other nationalities,
as being the most generous people in the
world.6 In 2009, seventy-three per cent of the
British population made a donation to charity.
Direct debit donations in 2009 amounted to £26
million with the average individual contribution
in 2008 being £12.26. In spite of the recent
recession this level of giving fell only slightly
to £11.95. Charities actually experienced an
increase in income in that year. Those working
with children, young people and families have
the highest levels of average gift at £13.11.
Scott Gray, the Managing Director of Rapidata
Services who collect this information,
commented on the observed trends:
‘We might see this donor behaviour
in collectivist terms as generous and
empathetic. Key findings … showed that
happier nations, not necessarily wealthier
ones, are likely to donate greater amounts to
charity, that helping strangers was the main
way in which the world as a whole (forty-five
per cent) gives to charity and that globally,
the older we get, the more likely we are to
give to charity.’
Such forms of generosity by British people, both
in terms of monetary donations and the giving
of time for voluntary work, were reflected in the
comments of our focus group participants. One
stressed that his busy working life meant that
he was unable to devote time to voluntary work
but was happy to contribute money:
‘For me I give financially rather than in
terms of time. I have got a lot on at work and
with college and everything else it would be
too much. I would like to do stuff, but at the
moment it is just not practical.’
In contrast, a retired female participant said:
‘It is easier for me to give in time now
because I am retired. I work two afternoons
a week in an Oxfam shop and I value
their collectible books for them at home
sometimes. I have always believed in – I am
not sure “giving something back” is the right
phrase … giving in terms of time, effort and
money. One of the nicest things I did recently
was to sponsor a guide dog for the blind. It
didn’t cost that much and you get updates
on this puppy … I think that is part of life,
being concerned about things and being
concerned about people outside yourself. The
eighties were very “me, me, me” and I grew
up in a time when you did think about what
else was happening in the world and about
18
3
GIVING

--- Sayfa 19 ---
›
people who were less fortunate than yourself
in a variety of ways. I have always been
interested in that and I have got a lot from
it as well.’
Others, and women in particular, stressed
more the obligation to provide help at a local
and familial level:
‘I do really believe that charity begins at
home. I think it is pointless giving money
if you are not decent and helpful to people
around you, especially with your time.’
 ‘I’d rather sit with an old person for an hour
than give five quid to the home they are
living in. I know for a fact that that person
wants to tell their stories to me and wants
to have a chat. And actually I get a lot out
of that. The older people that I know like
having those conversations with people.’
Taking a rather different line, the men talked
more about the direct debits they had taken
out in order to support large charities:
‘I have got two direct debits that go out for
every month; one to Cancer Research and
one to Amnesty.’
‘I have got a [direct] debit to Marie Curie
and give a little bit every month. I don’t feel
like I have got an awful lot of time, whereas
ten years ago I used to do some numeracy
tuition, which was unpaid, helping people
who have some difficulty with numbers.
Hopefully in the future I will have more
time to give.’
There were also concerns expressed in the
focus groups about how much of the monetary
donations actually reached the intended
recipients of aid, as opposed to being swallowed
up in administration and salary costs:
‘Half the battle with people is the apathy:
“What’s the point in doing that because
19
19
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
I THINK THAT
IS PART OF
LIFE, BEING
CONCERNED
ABOUT THINGS
AND BEING
CONCERNED
ABOUT PEOPLE
OUTSIDE
YOURSELF

--- Sayfa 20 ---
committees, or be in the parish council and
that sort of thing. Generally speaking we
have got these decent persons living amongst
their communities, and … amongst the
many things they belong to, they happen
to be a mason.’
This gentle underplaying of the role of
Freemasonry as a ‘charitable’ organisation is
understandable, even though one of its central
tenets or ‘virtues’ is the notion of ‘relief’
– ‘charitable giving and activities to assist the
welfare of Freemasons and the community
as a whole’. The emphasis is placed on the role
and moral responsibility of the individual,
rather than on the organisation per se.
The Freemasons’ Grand Charity, which receives
little attention in the popular media, donates
roughly half of its income to non-masonic
causes at international, national and local
community levels. It is, depending on who
you listen to, either the second or third biggest
contributor to charity after the National Lottery.
The important factor here, however, is that the
money comes ‘out of masons’ own pockets’ and
not from ‘tin-rattling’ or other fund-raising
activities. And they appear to benefit from
knowing how their own money is spent.
Some masons took the view that this
opportunity to have a direct and personal hand
in philanthropic causes was one of the reasons
that they had joined the organisation in the first
place. The Grand Secretary, however, thought
that the issue was a little more complex:
‘You will find that talking to members, the
easiest thing [for them to] talk about is
charity. Yet they didn’t join to give to charity
… one of the main things is that we are
looking for people who are gentlemen (that
is not a social grading) who consider the
needs of others. And therefore when you join
you have a natural progress in that thought
process – thinking of the needs of others you
would then think of charitable things, both
20
you know half of it is going to go somewhere
else?” If it was absolutely visible that say
eighty per cent was going to a good cause
then people would actually give more.’
The rewards that come from engaging in
charitable acts were understated in the group.
The emphasis was on the benefits to the
recipients of altruism whether in monetary
terms or as a result of active assistance through
donated time and effort. One participant,
however, had mentioned that he had done
‘some woodwork for the local preschool and …
saved them from the expense of hiring someone
else to do it’. Another participant asked: ‘Did
you feel better for doing that for them?’ ‘Yes’, he
replied, ‘you are right, I probably did – maybe
some “philanthropic gain”.’ This notion of
‘philanthropic gain’ is an interesting one that
confirms much of psychological theory that
addresses the issue of altruism.
3.3 Charity –
the masons’ view
In our early discussions with the Grand
Secretary he made what seemed to us to be
an interesting observation on the role of charity
within Freemasonry:
‘To be absolutely clear, it’s not Freemasonry
that is doing any good in the community,
because … it’s not a political movement and
it has no influence. I’d rather you looked at
it the other way around. Is a person in their
community playing a full part? Whether in a
big city or a rural community, is that decent
person playing a full part in his community?
[You are likely to get quite a range of
responses] from absolutely zero contribution
to quite big ones because you have got the
full gamut. He may be a church warden, run
3
GIVING

--- Sayfa 21 ---
›
in the sense of physical money, which comes
out of their own pocket because we don’t
do any fund-raising, as well as giving time
and expertise.’
The issue of charity, then, is seen as being
one that is developed by Freemasonry and
its emphasis on moral codes and ‘truth and
integrity’, rather than being the uppermost
attraction of the organisation from the outset.
One mason commented:
‘I didn’t come across the charitable side until
after I joined.’
Another, however, had recognised the attraction
of the charitable side of being a mason, but
in a broader context:
‘And [charity] is another thing that attracted
me to [Freemasonry]. It is easy to give in
Freemasonry because we enjoy ourselves
at the same time.’
In our interviews with masons across the
country members frequently referred to the
opportunities that the organisation provided
not only to give but, at the same time, know
where their money was going. One commented:
‘Giving money to charity – giving money is
easy, but giving it to the right person can be
a little more difficult. What I do not want is
the problem of making that choice. If I give it
to the masons then I know where it is going.
They publish every year who they donate to
and they don’t charge for that; there is no
administration fee.’
Another emphasised:
‘The nice thing about giving to charity
through Freemasonry is that it’s very
well run, it’s very well organised and you
know that any money you give, even small
amounts, is more likely to have a greater
impact at the end of the line than it
GIVING MONEY IS
EASY, BUT GIVING
IT TO THE RIGHT
PERSON CAN BE
A LITTLE MORE
DIFFICULT. WHAT
I DO NOT WANT
IS THE PROBLEM
OF MAKING
THAT CHOICE.
IF I GIVE IT TO THE
MASONS THEN
I KNOW WHERE
IT IS GOING
21
21
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 22 ---
22
‘I am also involved with Freemasonry in the
Community ... we do functions and projects
for senior citizens, Christmas parties. We
also take disabled children to the railway
centre. It is all funded by the Province and
we have been doing it for some years. People
are getting to hear about this and … all of
a sudden people are coming up to me and
thanking me for giving their mum a good day
out. Slowly it is going out, not just through
the media but through people talking. You
get a bit of a buzz out of it.’
Many masons, of course, felt that their
charitable activities were largely unrecognised
by the general public:
‘The problem with Freemasonry and the bad
press, in my opinion, is that nobody tells
anybody anything about it … You take the
Round Table, every day you hear something
about somebody giving something to charity
from the Round Table. The Freemasons give
far more, but we keep quiet about it and
we don’t raise money from other people,
it is our own money. I have never sold a
raffle ticket to any one of my friends outside
… Freemasonry to raise money. The good
publicity that Round Table gets for raising
money for charity we don’t benefit from
because we don’t advertise the fact.’
There was a general consensus that
‘boasting’ about charitable work was not
the Freemasons’ way:
‘I think it [giving to charity] is one of the
most important parts of Freemasonry.
Another thing about it is that it is not
advertised charity giving … We give second
only to the National Lottery. It is highly
important because you are practising aid
to your brothers in life and you are helping
other people. It is one of the key principles ...
I think they have got the balance about right.
Freemasonry has opened sufficiently, let’s
say, to allay some people’s fears as to what
might be if you give it to a collection box
on the street, which has all the associated
administration costs.’
Some masons also emphasised the speed of
delivery of their contributions to the recipients:
‘The other powerful thing about it is the
speed with which the money can be applied.
Everything is done on the basis of trust.
Because we trust each other in the way that
we apply the money, we were able to deliver
£75,000 the day after the tsunami hit and to
the worst affected area.’
Others put the whole issue of charity in a much
broader perspective:
‘I also have the belief that you need to give
back to society as well. Freemasonry is a way
in which you can give back to society ... To be
honest, I like going to [lodge name]; we eat
well, we dine well, we drink well and there is
a good bunch of people. It makes that whole
part of the process more enjoyable. It is a
combination of these factors which “rolled
up” makes it a good path for me to choose
and in which to give to society. I know,
like all the people that have come through
[school name], that we have all come from
extremely privileged backgrounds and I was
always brought up, way before Freemasonry
was a part of my life, with the philosophy
that it is important to give back to society.
I find it a good way to fulfil that.’
Other masons sought to challenge the notion
that ‘masons only look after themselves’,
pointing to their increasing involvement
in the wider community. One noted:
‘This has been happening more in the past
ten to fifteen years where non-masonic
causes have been supported. From the centre
we run about a dozen mobility scooters.
What we are doing now is offering these to
people in real need outside of Freemasonry.’
3
GIVING

--- Sayfa 23 ---
it is there for, but has kept enough humility
behind it not to shout from the rooftops.’
The Grand Secretary also stressed the need for
an element of modesty surrounding masons’
charitable activities …
‘ … as a mason you don’t do anything for
personal gain or for praise; you don’t give
to anyone to receive a knighthood or
anything like that.’
Other masons, however, would like greater
recognition of the organisations’ philanthropic
role, while not advocating ‘shouting it from
the rooftops’:
‘The people that I have been involved with in
masonry would not like to go down the street
shaking a can. We are proud of the money
that we raise among our own ranks. I think it
is better now that we are telling the outside
[about] money that we are raising … I get the
Grand Charity report every year and … they
list each and every one and I think it was
nearly £6-7 million. When there is an
earthquake or a disaster we are among
the first to send money and nobody knows
it. Half a million [went] to Haiti … [and]
not a word is said and I would like to
see more of that in the newspapers:
“United Grand Lodge of England sent...”
That doesn’t happen.’
23
23
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012

--- Sayfa 24 ---
24
WITHOUT AN
UNDERSTANDING
OF THE MEANINGS
ASSOCIATED WITH
SOCIAL ACTS WE
CAN NEVER EXPLAIN
SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR
OR CAPTURE THE
TRUE ESSENCE OF
WHAT IT IS TO BE
A SOCIAL BEING

--- Sayfa 25 ---
25
25
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
4
RITUAL
One element that distinguishes Freemasonry
from almost all other social groups in Britain,
with the exception of organised religious
services, is ritual. For many non-masons this
dominates their perception of Freemasonry.
But masonic rituals extend much further than
in most other contexts; symbolic behaviours
and texts characterise each step through which
a novice will pass in his rites de passage to
becoming a Master Mason. He will learn by
heart and be required to recite quite lengthy
allegorical tales and acquire full knowledge of
the symbolic exchanges in which he will engage
with his brothers.1 All of which may seem out
of place in our ‘modern’ twenty-first century
society – a relic of former times, perhaps even
simple superstition.
Such a view, however, fails to acknowledge the
extent to which everyday life involves repeated
symbolic exchanges and the extent to which
it is, in essence, ritualised. This is now, by
and large, recognised as a truism in the social
sciences. Without an understanding of the
meanings associated with social acts we can
never explain social behaviour or capture the
true nature of what it is to be a social being.
The strand of social science known as symbolic
interactionism first developed in the 1930s in
the work of Herbert Blumer2 who placed great
emphasis on the notion that ‘human beings
interpret or “define” each other’s actions instead
of merely reacting to them. Their “response” is
not made directly to the actions of one another
but instead is based on the meaning that they
attach to such actions.’
This focus on the meaning of behaviours, rather
than on the physical acts themselves, led others,
most significantly Erving Goffman, to recapture
a sentiment expressed so eloquently by William
Shakespeare in As You Like It three and a half
centuries earlier:
‘All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts.’
Goffman’s most significant book in this context
is appropriately titled Interaction Ritual
– a collection of essays that begins with
On Face-Work: An Analysis of Ritual Elements
in Social Interaction. Here he argues:
‘Every person lives in a world of social
encounters involving him either in face-
to-face or mediated contact with other
participants. In each of these contacts, he
tends to act out what is sometimes called
a line – that is a pattern of verbal and non-
verbal acts by which he expresses his view of
the situation and through this his evaluation
of the participants, especially himself.’
There is much emphasis in Goffman’s work on
the notion of ‘face’ – in terms of the personas
that we present to other people with whom we
interact and the need to ‘save face’ in various
encounters. But at the heart of his perspective
is the recognition of the ritualised nature of the
taken-for-granted, seemingly trivial elements of
social interaction that are, in reality, anything
but trivial. Take, for example, the familiar
rituals of greeting. We say ‘good morning’
without an expectation of the judgement of
‘good’ being challenged by the person to whom
we have addressed the phrase. Similarly a ‘how
are you’ is not a question – a serious enquiry
into one’s medical condition – but one form of
greeting that is an essential precursor for other
exchanges and interactions.
We can see other rituals in almost all aspects
of our everyday social behaviour. The ways
in which we express status, deference and
demeanour through subtle non-verbal
behaviours ranging from posture to the
direction of eye gaze are symbolic exchanges
that are tacitly understood rather than
consciously recognised. We are aware of the
tightly defined rules that underlie the rituals
only when we or others are in breach of them
– situations in which emotions ranging from
1
We do not intend to describe in any detail the masonic

rituals associated with initiation and progress through the

Degrees. There are, however, numerous accounts of

precisely what happens in these ceremonies, including

Tobias Churton’s Freemasonry: The Reality.
2
Blumer’s most significant work, however, came later in

the 1960s with the publication of his Symbolic

Interactionism: Perspective and Method.
›

--- Sayfa 26 ---
embarrassment to anger are likely to result.
People who are unable or unwilling to engage
in the prescribed symbolic exchanges are those
who become outcasts – either seen as asocial
or just ‘peculiar’.
The ubiquity of ritual in everyday life is even
more apparent in the social occasions and
ceremonies with which we mark the transitions
of those around us – marriages, births,
achievements, death and so on. They are also
writ large in the calendrical rituals of organised
religion – Easter, Christmas and, in keeping with
the multi-cultural world in which we now live,
Eid and Diwali. While the majority of British
people increasingly lack a strong commitment
towards church attendance or even towards
a formal religious belief, we still feel a need to
engage in the rituals associated with what are,
ostensibly, hallmarks of Christianity, although
in many cases a remodelling of earlier pre-
Christian, pagan ceremonies. In each of these we
reaffirm our social and familial bonds through
symbolic exchanges of gifts and tokens, shared
foods and time out from the equally routine and
ritualised life of work or formal education.
Elsewhere in the world ritual ceremonies stand
out more visibly because of their strangeness
to Western eyes. The Japanese Tea Ceremony,
or Way of Tea, is for us an almost impenetrable
series of ritual acts centred around aching
knees from crouching and the consumption
of powdered green tea. In fact it is a collective
celebration of Wabi – humility and restraint,
quiet and sober refinement, subdued taste and
the recognition of beauty in the simplicity of
unadorned objects.
The initiation rituals and those that mark the
rites of passage of young men in traditional
societies from the status of child to that of
adult similarly strike us as ‘primitive’ and
‘foreign’. And yet the baptisms, christenings, bar
mitzvahs, weddings and funeral occasions with
which we are more familiar have not only similar
symbolic roots (although less dramatic) but
also similar functions. Even in many forms of
common registry office weddings the question is
asked, ‘Who gives this woman?’ – it is normally
the bride’s father who declares ‘I do’ – and in
the most formal ceremonies the couple recite
the rehearsed phrase: ‘To have and to hold from
this day forward, for better for worse, for richer
for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and
to cherish, till death us do part.’ Like all rituals,
however, the marriage vows have evolved to
accord with modern-day notions of correctness.
It is now very rare, for example, for a bride to
promise to ‘honour and obey’ her husband.
4.1 Rituals and routines
– the public view
On top of all these kinds of ceremonial rituals
there are ‘private’ rituals – seemingly little
things that we do in order, sometimes to achieve
a specific end result, but often because of the
sense of security that it brings. We explored
some of these types of ritual in our focus groups.
One man said:
‘I was in the Royal Navy and going to the
bathroom on a ship, in a confined space, you
more or less had to carry out your bathing
and shaving, cleaning your teeth in a certain
order. It was almost like a process, a line
which allowed the maximum number of
people to pass through this process. I still
clean my teeth, shave and shower in the
same order although it fulfils no function.’
Another emphasised the sense of comfort that
rituals provided:
‘To some extent it makes us feel more
comfortable if we are able to keep
a ritual. I feel very uncomfortable if
rituals are disrupted.’
4
RITUAL
26

--- Sayfa 27 ---
27
27
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
A female participant offered a rather more
superstitious example:
‘Like an interview procedure, you might
think that unless you do something or wear
a particular pair of shoes it will not go well
if you are not doing that. That is a ritual
thing that you may have created. There
is an assumption that your ritual is going
to serve you better.’
Others in the group referred to their experiences
of previous religious rituals and the links that
these had with their present-day activities:
‘I do have a Christian background, though
I am not a practising Christian now, but I do
remember very fondly worship lessons and
the euphoria and the unity you get from that
experience, of shared experience, of just
that action ... I go to Tottenham Hotspur
and I get a similar feeling of euphoria.’
For a number of other focus group participants it
was getting to sleep easily at night that required
ritualistic preparations. One man said:
‘I think it is to do with getting a regular
pattern because I have problems sometimes
not sleeping; maybe my mind doesn’t shut
down so easily sometimes. I would do
everything in the same order. I would go
upstairs, get a water bottle. While I was
getting the water bottle I would switch the
bed-side light and the radio on. Then I will go
back downstairs, come back up and read. It is
roughly the same time [every night] I am in.
I will try to do things at the same time and
in the same order to get into the right frame
of mind for sleep. I think it is a ritual and
I recognise it as such.’
A woman said she had similar routines:
‘Mine is similar. I have sleep apnoea, which
I discovered a few years ago. The ritual is
the going to sleep part. Mine is that I turn
the radio on; it always has to be talk radio
because music I concentrate on. Then
I turn it down and I read [until] I just start
nodding off. Then I put the book down and
then I turn the radio up a bit and go to
sleep with the radio on. Once I was abroad
in a hotel and I had forgotten to bring
something to read and I actually couldn’t
fall asleep. In desperation I actually got the
Chicago phone book and I opened it, trying
to be very calm and started reading entries.’
Rituals associated with sleeping seem to be
surprisingly common across all walks of life
and seem to indicate the need for a sense of
security, provided by repeated actions, before
the element of tranquillity required for proper
sleep is achieved.
There are, however, many other aspects of our
lives where fixed routines – though perhaps
lacking the symbolism of true rituals – are
seen as being essential to the performance of
seemingly trivial tasks. One female focus group
participant recounted:
‘I have loads of rituals; everything. At work,
as soon as I get through the door. I have
rituals before I go out at night. I usually
have them going through my head ... I am
quite forgetful, so doing things in a certain
order – it helps me remember things. Like
when I go swimming I have a certain way
of packing my rucksack, which to me is a
ritual. I count everything as I am putting
it into the bag. I have a little purse that is
only used for the ten pence for the locker.
Before I go out I always have an espresso in
a certain little cup before I leave the house.
Then you obviously have the ritual of your
make-up, which all goes on in a certain
order. Doing your hair, laying out your
clothes before you get into the shower …’
For others in the groups, and men in particular,
it was engagement in sport that was surrounded
by the most ritualistic aspects of their lives:
›

--- Sayfa 28 ---
‘When I go to the gym I dress in a particular
order all the time. When I play sport
I approach things in the same way ... I have
got a lot of superstitions about sport; a
certain way of doing things. You see it on
TV, people talking about superstitions and
it just gets into your head that if you break
that cycle then it is going to come back at
you. It is just silly little things like tying your
shoelaces, or putting on your shin pads.’
There is, of course, a distinction to be drawn
here between ritual and superstition. A ritual
is a form of behaviour or set of actions that
a sportsman or sportswoman performs in the
belief that they have a specific purpose or power
to influence their performance. A superstition,
on the other hand, is something that is mostly
gained through hindsight – a favourable
result was obtained after a certain action
or set of actions were performed – and these
are repeated in the expectation that these too
will result in a similarly favourable outcome.
Despite these distinctions, however, most
people, including our focus group participants,
use the terms more or less interchangeably.
There is also a distinction to be made between
rituals and routines, even though many people
again merge the two together. As Barbara
Fiese3 and her colleagues argue, routines lack
the emotional elements of rituals and, once
they are completed, there is little or nothing in
the way of afterthought or emotional residue.
After the performance of rituals, on the other
hand, people tend to replay the actions in
their minds and relive the emotions that they
have experienced. Routines, however, have the
potential to become rituals when they move
from being purely functional behaviours to
largely symbolic acts. In the sports example
above, this would seem to be the case since
the routines are often performed when they
have failed to achieve the functional outcomes
associated with them – e.g. tying shoelaces in
a particular way to achieve a win. At this stage
they are purely symbolic of the individuals’
belief in themselves as effective players.
The association of sport and rituals, of course,
extends beyond the players to the far more
numerous supporters, especially in Britain
in the context of football. Here the repeated
symbolic actions of the fans – in the form
of chants, gestures, etc. – serve to create
a highly emotional atmosphere in which the
bonds between those involved are further
strengthened. The collective clapping to
a specific rhythm is often synchronised
to a remarkable degree – to within one
sixty-fourth of a second – and symbolically
communicates the strength of bonds within
the group to opposing fans.4
Many more mundane rituals, of course, have
a similarly deep social characteristic, as in
the case of the weddings and the calendrical
ceremonies we have mentioned earlier. We have
also noted the seminal work of Erving Goffman
who draws attention to the ritualistic nature of
everyday encounters. Focus group participants
also referred to these Goffman-esque elements
of our lives:
‘Your dress, whatever you do, you always
think about what you are going to wear.
There are rituals now which we didn’t use
to have. When you meet someone who you
don’t necessarily know that well there is the
double kissing. That is interesting and quite
nice in a way. There are some rituals which
I would probably just call tact; not jumping
in when you first meet somebody, holding
back until you get to know people and
getting into a rhythm which seems right.’
One participant referred to the more visible
example of ritual in Japanese society:
‘There are those rituals in Japanese business
where they come to work in the morning, do
some yoga or whatever it is, kick off their day
motivated together.’
28
4
RITUAL
3
Fiese, B. et al (2001); Fiese, B. et al (2002)
4
See for example, Marsh, P. et al (1978)

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Others commented on those situations where
the social rules are less clear and where
ritualistic behaviours serve to clarify them:
‘There are rituals around uneasiness, where
you go around to people’s houses and stand
around and wait to be offered a seat or
a drink. You stand there not entirely sure
what they think is appropriate.’
It is clear, then, that symbolic action, rather
than purely functional behaviour, is deeply
entrenched in both everyday life and what
we might term ‘special occasions’. Through
childhood socialisation and transition
towards adulthood we learn the meaning and
significance of forms of interaction without
which we cannot survive in any society as
competent social beings. The calendrical rituals
that are the hallmarks of all known societies,
both traditional and modern, serve to reinforce
family and friendship bonds and reinforce
notions of social identity in a very precise
and concrete way.
Today, of course, we also have Facebook
and other forms of online social networking
where equally formalised exchanges are
evident – even the coded language of texting
and tweeting that largely excludes those who
stubbornly cling to technophobia. But social
network sites do not replace more traditional
face-to-face encounters. Nor has the mobile
phone, despite cries to the contrary, destroyed
the art of conversation. Rather, both, in their
own ritualised ways, serve to facilitate social
interaction and a sense of belonging. The
most common form of text message, for
example, is along the lines of ‘Will u b in
kings arms at 8.30ish?’
Even at the cutting edge of twenty-first century
information and communication technologies,
our need for symbolic exchanges that reinforce
social bonds remains as evident as ever. The
rituals of everyday life as well as the more
visible symbolism of ‘special occasions’ live
29
29
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
›
even at the
cutting edge
of twenty-first
century
communication
technologies,
our need
for symbolic
exchanges
that reinforce
social bonds
remain as
evident as ever

--- Sayfa 30 ---
30
on through additional media and forms
of communication. At heart is the same
fundamental human need – just expressed
a little differently.
If rituals are so evident in all walks of human
life, to what extent, then, are masonic rituals
different from those in which we all engage?
Are they just extensions of a basic human,
social and cultural need for symbolic exchange
or somehow different?
4.2 Ritual –
the masons’ view
Most people are familiar with the composition
of at least some aspects of masonic ritual.
Rarely, however, do they have much insight into
their symbolic functions and meanings. But
why are these rituals present and what purpose
do they serve?
In the Grand Secretary’s words:
‘The ceremonial side is really one of our
great differentiators, but … they are just
plays … and they are rather nice plays …
they are parables …’
He added:
‘… they are completely open to the public.
You can have copies of them. You can go
across the road and buy them. There’s
nothing secret [about them].’
In a real sense the masonic rituals are theatrical
versions of initiation rites that have always
characterised our societies and continue
into the present day. In traditional societies,
even those that have achieved a degree of
acculturation to Western norms, initiations
marking the transitions from boyhood to
manhood are still enacted.
In our interviews with masons all over the
country we focused on the ritual aspects of
life within the lodges. To what extent did their
previous perceptions of masonic ritual attract
them into the Craft in the first place? Or was
the potential for increased social networking
and bonding a more significant reason for
their joining?
Perhaps surprisingly, it was the younger masons
who put the greatest emphasis on the rituals,
seeing them as a distinct pull of Freemasonry
from the beginning. One made a comment that
was typical of many:
‘What I was aware of was a little bit of
pomp, theatrics going on. My life was very
casual; open-neck shirts, jeans, t-shirts. The
simple fact of the matter is that people like
getting dressed up. There are people in this
lodge that really don’t like the pomp and
ceremony, but I am completely the opposite,
I like that. It probably was, at one point,
a factor that was driving me towards the
armed forces and one of the reasons that
I went into one of the cadet corps. If I am
going out for a night and I can get away with
wearing black tie then I will. I like the pomp
and ceremony, turning out looking smart
and making the effort.’
For at least some youngish men there is a
perceived need for a degree of formality or
‘pomp’ in the otherwise informal and casual
worlds that they inhabit. As the more formal
rituals of British life decay – think of the
church, dressing for dinner, putting on one’s
‘Sunday best’, etc. – the opportunities to meet
in a group, dress up and act out what are
essentially allegorical stories and moral tales
become, for some, a distinct attraction.
The emphasis on the role of ritual and its value
to many of them was expressed very clearly:
30
4
RITUAL

--- Sayfa 31 ---
‘Rituals, where do we start? The language of
the rituals is very old fashioned and, to an
extent, you have to have an educated mind
to investigate the language and make sense
of what [it is] saying. They use words that
are not common English … We have got this
two hour ritual which you sit and you watch
time and again and you start to learn what
the ritual is trying to tell you. If you were to
meet someone who had come into the lodge
six months ago they would probably tell you
that they have no idea what is going on …
You listen to the words over and over again
and a keen mind will analyse them. The
rituals, as they were explained to me,
are more of a teaching about how you can
lead a good life and how you can learn more
about yourself.’
This point about the underlying purpose of the
ritual – the transmission of moral codes – was
highlighted by many other masons. Within
a form of play-acting that may seem unusual
to outsiders, there was a meaning that made
the whole business worthwhile and rewarding.
Above all, there was a sense of ‘becoming
a better person’:
‘The ritual changes you. You hear the
story, and the first time maybe you don’t
understand it, then you go behind it. You
listen to the story over and over again
and there is the whole symbolism of
Freemasonry; the words that are spoken, the
reasons why people do certain things and
say certain things. They all have a purpose
… central to all that is to make you a better
man. It brings up the good things in you.’
It was in this section of the interviews that
masons tended to become the most articulate.
Perhaps their experience of learning by rote
complex and rather arcane phrases and
dialogues was responsible for this and a
number said that the experience of engaging
in masonic ritual had given them a greater
sense of confidence in, for example, business
presentations or public speaking.
The transformation into a ‘better man’ or ‘more
confident speaker’ was not, however, something
that happened overnight – nor indeed from
simple passage through the Degrees. It tended
to come after the dramaturgical aspects and on
later reflection on what the antique phrases that
they had learned to utter actually meant:
‘Once the words have sunk in then maybe
people will start looking for the meaning and
actually get something out of the meaning.
That certainly happened in my case.
I studied the ritual and I looked for words
and phrases and even now there are things
coming out that you were unaware of, or you
didn’t know the real definition. You think:
“I’ve said that so many times but I didn’t
realise it meant that.” People [who] think
they might be bored by the “same old ritual”
are obviously not looking into it.’
Another commented:
‘There is an amazing sense of
accomplishment when you have done your
part. You have been able to impart your
knowledge to the candidate and equally,
everyone else will have played their part
in the ceremony … Equally, the ritual
still teaches you things every time you are
involved. I don’t think there is a single
meeting from which I have come away
without thinking: “I am sure I have heard
that before, but not quite in that light.”
Or it has been explained in a different way.
You are constantly thinking about what
each part of the ritual means. The ritual
is there because it is supposed to teach us,
using various allegories and stories, a moral
code. There is always an underlying current
of what it is trying to teach you and what
can you learn from it.’
For others, however, while acknowledging the
meanings and moral components of the ritual,
31
31
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
›

--- Sayfa 32 ---
the reward came more from the drama aspects:
‘… there’s a sort of enjoyable, dramatical
side to ritual. In terms of substance, it’s
serious and it’s teaching serious elements
of morality, but it’s also got an enjoyable
aspect in the sense that it is allegorical, it’s
a form of entertainment almost; it’s even
more enjoyable because you can actually get
involved, touch and feel …’
Another mason, who holds a senior office in
a university lodge, also highlighted the sense
of drama in masonic ritual and emphasised its
appeal to younger members:
‘The ritual is a strange, seductive thing.
As an outsider you would wonder at this.
As an intelligent man you would say,
“This is extraordinary!” And yet I see these
[undergraduates] come into masonry and they
love it. And they compete with each other in
a sort of serious game. They throw in stray
words in the ritual to catch each other out.
And then the other will come back with
another one. It is like going to a West End play
with an eminent cast … because they play with
the script without spoiling it for the audience.’
Supporting this view, but pointing out the
meanings behind the dramaturgical elements,
another mason said:
‘The drama in ritual is instructive and it is
unique … I think also that with any type of
new learning it can often be the way that
it is delivered as much as what is delivered
that is important. With any initiation rites
in any society there is the actual “carrying
out” of the initiation rite which is the main
thing; it is not the content of the initiation
rite, it is the joining in together and all
sharing that experience – and having the
confidence to know that every single person
in the room, or in the group, has been
through that experience. And what
a wonderful ice-breaker as well.’
Such comments often led to wider discussions
about what, if anything, in Freemasonry needed
to change if it is to have broader appeal in the
twenty-first century, an issue to which we
return in Section 5 of this report.
While it was clear that for some masons the
ritual and the rote learning it required were
a bit of a chore, and that the main attraction of
the Craft lay elsewhere, some emphasised pride
in their lodge’s competence in conducting the
rituals. They referred to other lodges that they
had visited as being a bit ‘sloppy’ in this context.
‘I go to some [other] lodge meetings and there
they are with a book. They are carrying out
the ceremony and they are reading it all!
They are saying: “I’ve got too many other
things that I need to concentrate on so I just
haven’t got the time to spend learning the
actual words.” Hopefully they are, at least,
learning what is behind the words.’
It is important to note that throughout its
nearly three hundred years of organised history,
Freemasonry has welcomed into membership
men of all faiths, and that religious discussion
is prohibited during meetings. It is quietly
proud that in times when non-Christians were
discriminated against in public and social life
Freemasonry welcomed them into its lodges.
For most of its history Freemasonry claims
to have enjoyed good relations with organised
religion, with the exception of the Roman
Catholic Church, which first banned its
members from joining Freemasonry by a Papal
Bull issued in 1737. The basis of that ban was
the supposed secrecy of Freemasonry and the
existence in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries of many quasi-masonic groups
which were anti-clerical but, in fact, had no
connections with regular Freemasonry.
In the twentieth century there was a growing
movement against Freemasonry within the
Evangelical wings of the Anglican and non-
32
4
RITUAL

--- Sayfa 33 ---
conformist churches. By selectively quoting,
and occasionally misquoting, sections of
ritual out of their proper context they claimed
that Freemasonry was a religion offering
salvation by ‘good works’, that in not referring
to Jesus Christ it was anti-Christian, that
using vocatives such as the Great Architect of
the Universe to refer to God is evidence that
Freemasons worshiped a separate masonic god.
Freemasonry vehemently denies such charges,
pointing out that it lacks the basic elements of
religion. It has no theological doctrine. It offers
no sacraments. Nonetheless, it is a requirement
for entering Freemasonry that one subscribes
to a belief in a ‘divine being’. While a number
of masons are active members of religious
congregations from a number of faiths – the
majority expressed little strong commitment
in this context. They recognised that much
masonic ritual involves quasi-religious
teachings and the Volume of the Sacred Law
(VSL) that features prominently in the Degrees
is, in England, most often referred to as the
King James Bible. They also drew a sharp
distinction between lodge and church.
33
33
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
throughout
its nearly
three hundred
years of
organised
history,
Freemasonry
has welcomed
into membership
men of
all faiths

--- Sayfa 34 ---
We have seen that Freemasonry has, at its root,
moral precepts and modes of conduct that
are far from being at odds with mainstream
society. Few would question the organisation’s
emphasis on fellowship and affiliation and
the desire of individual masons to be ‘the best
people they can be’ – a desire which often
manifests itself through the voluntary work
that many undertake, supporting the less
advantaged members of their communities. We
have also seen that the ritual and ceremonial
aspects of Freemasonry that distinguish it from
organisations such as the Round Table are also
not so detached from everyday life as they may
at first appear. Routine social interactions, the
way we address people, the manner in which we
express deference and demeanour and present
our personas are, in all human societies, highly
ritualised. The masonic rituals are perhaps
more elaborate than we experience in everyday
social and family life. They take the form of
one act plays – each of which allegorically
relates moral precepts and ways of behaving in
relation to others. They are, in a very real sense,
akin to parables – largely fictitious stories that
highlight important issues such as the need for
forgiveness or using money wisely.
What then, is the future of Freemasonry and
what else might it do to finally put to rest the
myths that have persisted for so long, and
to ensure that its relevance in contemporary
society is more easily recognised and
understood? We put these questions to
the masons that we interviewed.
An area of consensus was evident that
highlighted the organisation’s new chapter
of openness and transparency that was being
championed at the very highest levels of the
organisation. There was also strong evidence
that this spirit of openness was filtering down
to ‘ordinary’ masons across the country who are
increasingly happy to declare their membership
when they feel that it is relevant to do so.
They also stressed that they were equally
motivated to introduce local communities
5
THE FUTURE OF FREEMASONRY
to their lodges and to play a wider role in
their neighbourhoods.
 ‘Freemasonry needs to open itself to the
wider community, to be more transparent
about why we exist. We need to accept
that there are certain things that some
might regard as peculiar or different about
Freemasons. The key is to make people aware
that we bring good to society … we need to
highlight the things that are happening in
Freemasonry today ... all the good things we
do for society and all the help we offer the
local communities. We have started to open
up, but we have to do more and it has to be
more present.’
Such sentiments were emphasised by
other masons, but with reservations about
changing too much too fast. This comment
was very typical:
‘I think that we should be slightly more open
and try and get people to understand what
we do and perhaps maybe encourage some to
join. There are some good people out there …
some of them would make jolly good masons.
That’s something I think we could look [at] in
the future. Apart from that I am reasonably
happy with it the way it is.’
There was some concern expressed about losing
Freemasonry’s distinctive character as the
organisation ‘modernises’ and in particular
the need to preserve its unique rituals
and traditions:
‘It gives a feeling of timelessness to it. It is
something that is a little more substantial
than some of the fashions and the fads that
you see around.’
‘One of the strengths of Freemasonry is the
maintenance of its traditions and the fact
that it doesn’t change too fast. That provides
an order.’
34
›

--- Sayfa 35 ---
freemasonry has,
at its root, moral
precepts and
modes of
conduct
that are far
from being
at odds with
mainstream
society
35

--- Sayfa 36 ---
‘I was enthralled by [lodge name], its history
and its ritual. It has got an extremely
rich history.’
 ‘I would not like to change the ritual.’
‘I think there is definite merit in retaining
some of the mystique.’
There was a similarly strong consensus
regarding the retention of the core tenets
of Freemasonry in order to preserve
its distinctiveness:
 ‘Brotherly love, relief and truth is about
honesty ... you can’t compromise over
the central tenets of Freemasonry. That’s
its strength.’
On the other hand, there was equal concern
about the relevance and attractiveness of
Freemasonry to today’s younger generation
of men:
‘The only concern I have got … is that some
of the other lodges have got a lot of older
members and they are not getting the
new recruits.’
Some masons thought that the problem with
time commitments could be overcome:
‘A fellow member and I were having a
discussion at our last meeting and I think
he was talking about trying to get lodge
meetings to [occur] at lunchtime to give the
young people, particularly those who are
working, the ability to attend – to give
them more opportunities to turn up on
a regular basis.’
To help overcome this particular issue,
a nationwide mentoring scheme was introduced
two years ago, a key part of what senior masons
see as the organisation’s ‘quiet revolution’ of
modernisation, designed to encourage the
progression and participation of new members.
In the scheme younger members are provided
with continuing support and guidance from
more experienced masons acting as dedicated
mentors as they progress through the various
degree stages. There was evidence of the success
of the scheme from the reduction in new
members leaving within the first two or
three years. There was also evidence of the
mentoring scheme’s value coming from
the members themselves.
As we consider the broader future of
Freemasonry, it is perhaps useful to take
a look back to the early eighteenth century,
in which UGLE was formed. British society,
of course, was very different. This was the Age
of Reason – a time when the superstitions of
the Middle Ages were being replaced by more
rational forms of argument and debate and
consideration of religious tenets. It was also
a time of rapid progress in the natural sciences.
The field of astrology, for example, was being
gradually replaced by that of astronomy
– a genuinely scientific approach to
understanding the workings of the cosmos
that went far beyond religious and secular
dogmas. Isaac Newton, said by many to be a
mason himself, was still alive and his influential
Principia Mathematica was in wide circulation.
The new spirit of scientific enquiry would
shortly be evident in the works of leading
scholars such as Henry Cavendish and Michael
Faraday. Similar moves away from ‘old school
thinking’ were evident in philosophy which
became almost synonymous with ‘scientific’
thought in the Age of Enlightenment of the
mid-eighteenth century. Central to this school
were notions of freedom, democracy and, above
all, reason that stood as challenges to literal
biblical interpretations and notions such
as the ‘Divine Right of Kings’. Notions of
true morality were now, perhaps for the first
time, open to genuine debate.
Today, of course, we take science and
rationalism for granted in a new age of
unprecedented technological innovation
5
THE FUTURE OF FREEMASONRY
36

--- Sayfa 37 ---
and development. In the eighteenth century,
however, the turmoil that accompanied the
new order, following the English Civil War of
the mid-seventeenth century, and at a time
when the United Kingdom was barely a decade
old, was more strongly felt. The ‘modern’
Freemasonry that was established by the
UGLE, in which the ‘Antients’ who had
initially rejected its authority were soon
to be integrated, provided what some historians
see as a ‘safe haven’ for free thinkers. For
example, the Chilean/Israeli masonic historian
Leon Zeldis concludes:
‘The masonic lodge was a refuge of peace
and tranquillity at a time of political
uncertainty, when the memory of religious
warfare was fresh in the memory of all men,
when the first discoveries and inventions
were transforming the economy, and opening
new perspectives of progress, when the hope
that rationality and humanism would
banish from the hearts of men the evils
of fanaticism and intolerance.’
These sentiments have clear – and perhaps
even greater – resonance in the present day.
Sadly, examples of ‘fanaticism and intolerance’
are all around us, in the form of extremist
and sectarian acts of violence around the
world, highlighted all too frequently by the
international media. Events too throughout
much of the Middle East remind us on
a daily basis of the fragility of political orders
based on dogma and elitism rather than
notions of freedom, democracy and reason.
Transformations in our own economic order
– some positive, others quite disastrous – are
even more directly felt. All of which may lead us
back to the role and relevance of Freemasonry,
in the modern context.
As we noted earlier the Grand Secretary, Nigel
Brown, emphasises:
‘The joy of Freemasonry is that members
come from all races, religions, all social
37
37
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
›
the masonic
lodge was
a refuge of
peace and
tranquillity
at a time of
political
uncertainty,
when the
memory of
religious
warfare was
fresh in the
memory
of all men

--- Sayfa 38 ---
tolerance of others, philanthropy and
good will, have a contribution to make in
what has become a global dialogue, just
as it made important contributions in
the eighteenth century. At the same time
Freemasonry has much to learn in engaging
wider civil society as it did so well in the age
of Enlightenment; drawing in and advancing
ideas concerning print culture and the free
and open flow of information.’
The organisation’s continuing commitment to
openness and transparency, an area in which
there is evidence of significant progress, is
as much key to its continuing relevance and
value in the twenty-first century as it was
in the eighteenth.
As we have seen elsewhere in this report, at
an individual level, Freemasonry meets the
timeless needs of people for a sense of affiliation
and belonging. Masons argue strongly that this
in itself makes the organisation more relevant
than ever before, as it provides a unique
combination of friendship and structure in our
currently competitive and fragmented society.
Being akin to a ‘hobby’, as the Grand Secretary
describes it, rather than a vocation, it does not
inhibit similarly strong bonds and a sense of
belonging away from the lodges. And like any
other membership organisation, its members
are encouraged to place other needs – such
as family, work and their community – above
those of Freemasonry.
The relevance of Freemasonry’s role – or
rather that of the Freemasons themselves
– in helping others through voluntary and
charitable work, is equally strong. As the
Grand Secretary points out:
‘It is not Freemasonry itself that is doing
good in the community, rather it is the
individual “decent” members who are
motivated to be concerned with the
welfare of others, and who also happen
to be masons.’
5
THE FUTURE OF FREEMASONRY
38
economic levels of society. So actually you
get a complete mix of people sitting next to
each other in harmony and equality ... what
other organisations can do that in a world
that is full of conflict? The level of conflict in
today’s rapidly changing world is clear to see,
and one can only hope the current turmoil
will lead to a new, more stable and more
peaceful world order.’
Such sentiments chime well with those of the
Roosevelt Center for the study of Civil Society
and Freemasonry in the United States:
‘In the absence of noble public goals,
respected leaders, and the respectful
competition of ideas, there is concern of
a fast eroding civil society or at least a civil
society and public sphere changing in ways
that need to be better understood’.
Looking at the past as a useful guide to
explaining the present, the Center points
out that:
‘Freemasonry was there at the origins
of modern civil society often as the only
organization where there could be free
discussion without fear of censorship and
authoritarian control’.
The point is echoed by the UGLE Grand
Secretary who argues that by avoiding
discussion of politics, religion and business
at lodge meetings, Freemasonry is a great
leveller and can provide what he sees as being a
valuable forum for open and honest discussion
between friends, with no risk of recrimination.
The Roosevelt Center goes further, suggesting
Freemasonry can be a force for good in the
context of societal development, insisting it
can help lead discussion and debate – as well as
listening – in participation with so many others
around the world. It goes on to conclude:
‘Freemasonry’s traditional concern with
comparative philosophy and thought,

--- Sayfa 39 ---
39
39
The Future of Freemasonry: A report by the Social Issues Research Centre 2012
›

Freemasonry was
there at the origins
of modern civil
society often
as the only
organisation
where there could
be free discussion
without fear of
censorship and
authoritarian
control

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Much like the rituals themselves, however,
Freemasonry may deserve a closer look in order
to understand and appreciate it more fully, and
its relevance and role today. If Freemasonry
is able successfully to conclude its ‘quiet
revolution’, while at the same time ensuring
that its central features are retained to preserve
the true ‘spirit’ of Freemasonry, then its future
may well be assured – for the next century
or two at least.
5
THE FUTURE OF FREEMASONRY
It is, of course, possible that becoming
a mason heightens awareness of those in
need and encourages a more active role in the
community, as many masons have reported.
At a collective, rather than individual, level,
Freemasonry makes very sizeable contributions
to charity, with masons stressing that all the
money raised comes straight from their own
pockets rather than street collections or any
other type of external fund-raising. Of the
money raised by The Freemasons’ Grand
Charity, around half is donated to non-masonic
causes at local, national and international levels.
The relevance and impact of such continuing
benevolent activity needs to be viewed in the
context of the current ‘Big Society’ initiative
being pursued by the coalition government.
Irrespective of one’s political stance here, it
is clear that this will result in a shrinking of
the contribution of the state in many areas of
people’s lives, and a correspondingly increasing
focus on the provision of services by third-
sector organisations and through citizens being
obliged to provide assistance to each other.
This transformation is already being felt. An
individual’s sense of ‘duty’ or willingness to give
time or money to help less advantaged people
is not, however, something that can be socially
engineered or achieved through political
manipulation or legislation. It is something
that emerges naturally through strong social
or familial bonds with like-minded people who
share common moral codes. It is in this sense
that Freemasonry and its historical roots in
humanistic benevolence and the rejection of
intolerance arguably makes it more relevant in
today’s uncertain economic and social times,
than it has ever been before.
What attracts masons to Freemasonry varies
greatly, as we have seen earlier in this report.
Some are attracted by the friendships they form
and the sense of belonging it instils, others by
the ‘nudge’ that Freemasonry provides towards
living a more altruistic life. Others still will
be attracted by the rituals of Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Bibliography and selected readings
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachments beyond
infancy. American Psychologist, 44, 709-716.

Banton, M. (1966) The Social Anthropology of Complex
Societies. Tavistock.

Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. (1990) Poetics and
Performance as Critical Perspectives on Language
and Social Life, Annual Review of Anthropology 19:
59-88.

Baumeister, R. F. & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need
to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as
a fundamental human motivation. Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 497- 529.

Churton, T. (2007) Freemasonry: The Reality. Lewis
Masonic

Clark, P. (2000) British Clubs and Societies 1580-1800:
the origins of an associational world. Clarendon Press.

Cohen, A. P. (ed). (1986) Symbolising Boundaries:
Identity and Diversity in British Cultures, Manchester
University Press.

Cohen, Y. A. (1969) Social Boundary Systems, Current
Anthropology 10 (1): 103-26.

Coy, M. (1989) Anthropological Perspectives on
Apprenticeship. SUNY Press.

Fiese, B. et al (2002) A Review of 50 Years of Research
on Naturally Occurring Family Routines and Rituals:
Cause for Celebration? Family Psychology, 16:4.

Fox, K. (2005). Watching the English: the Hidden Rules
of English Behaviour. Hodder & Stoughton.

Fox, R. (1977) Urban Anthropology: Cities in their
Cultural Context. Prentice-Hall.

Frankenberg, R. (1966) Communities in Britain. Penguin
Books.

Gilbert, R. A. (1995) Printer, Publisher, and Freemason,
the role of the printed word in the growth of
freemasonry, Transactions of the Lodge of Research,
No. 2429.

Hamill, J. & Gilbert, R. eds. (2004) Freemasonry:
A Celebration of the Craft. Angus Books.

Hamill, J. (1986) The Craft: A History of English
Freemasonry. Crucible.

Hamilton, J.A. (1987). Dress as a Cultural Sub-system:
A Unifying Meta-theory for Clothing and Textiles.
Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 6(1):1-7.

Hobsbawn, E. (1962) The Age of Revolution: Europe:
1789–1848.

Jackson, A. (ed). (1987) Anthropology at Home.
Tavistock.

Jacobson-Widding, A. (ed.) (1983) Identity: Personal
and Socio-Cultural. Almqvist and Wiksell.

Levine, J.M. & Moreland, R.L. (2006) Key Readings in
Social Psychology. Psychology Press.

Macfarlane, A. (1978) The Origins of English
Individualism: the Family, Property and Social
Transition. Basil Blackwell.

Marsh, P. (1988) Tribes. Pyramid Books.

Marsh, P., Rosser, E. and Harré, R. (1978) Rules of
Disorder, Routledge.

Maslow, A. (1943). A Theory of Human Motivation,
Psychological Review, 50, 370-96.

Mayer, A. (1966) The Significance of Quasi-Groups, in
M.Banton (ed), The Social Anthropology of Complex
Societies (1966). Tavistock.

McVeigh, B. 2001. Wearing Ideology. Berg.

Mitchell, J.C. (1969). The Concept and Use of Social
Networks in J.C. Mitchell (ed.), Social Networks in
Urban Situations: Analyses of Personal Relationships in
Central African Towns, Manchester University Press.

Money, J. (1993). The Masonic Moment: Or, Ritual,
Replica, and Credit: John Wilkes, the Macaroni
Parson, and the Making of the Middle Class Mind,
Journal of British Studies, 32:358-395.

Morgan, D.H.J. (2005) Revisiting Communities in Britain.
Sociological Review. 53(4):641-657.

Morris, D. (2002) People Watching: The Desmond
Morris Guide to Body Language. Vintage.

Morris, R. J. (1983). Voluntary Societies and British
Urban Elites, 1780-1850: An analysis, Historical Journal,
26:95-118.

Mulvey-Roberts, M. and Porter, R. (eds) (1996).
Pleasures Engendered by Gender: Homosociality and
the Club, Pleasure in the Eighteenth Century pp.48-77.
Macmillan.

Newman, A. (1984). Fit and Proper Persons,
Transactions of the Lodge of Research No.
2429,(93):15-25.

Rich, P.J. (1989) Elixir of Empire: The English Public
Schools, Ritualism, Freemasonry and Imperialism.
Regency Press.

Smyth, F. (1991) Brethren in Chivalry 1791-1991: A
Celebration of the Two Hundred Years of the Great
Priory of the United Religious, Military and Masonic
Orders of the Temple and of St John of Jerusalem.
Lewis Masonic.

Tiger, L. (1971) Men in Groups: A Controversial Look at
All-Male Societies. Granada Publishing.

Walton, G. M. & Cohen, G. L. (2007). A question of
belonging: Race, social fit, and achievement. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 82-96.

Wheelan, S.A. (2005) Group Processes: Developmental
Perspectives. (2nd Ed.) Allyn & Bacon.

Wolf, E.R. (1956). Aspects of Group Relations in
a Complex Society, American Anthropologist, 58.

Wykes, D. L. (1996). The Growth of Masonry in
Nineteenth-Century Leicestershire, Transactions of the
Lodge of Research No. 2429, 105:17-25.

Zeldis, L. (1996) England around 1717: The Foundation
of the First Grand Lodge in Context. Pietre-Stones
Review of Freemasonry.
42