--- Sayfa 2 ---
i
THE DUAL STATE

--- Sayfa 3 ---
ii

--- Sayfa 4 ---
1
 
iii
THE DUAL STATE
A CONTRIBUTION TO THE THEORY
OF DICTATORSHIP
ERNST FRAENKEL
translated from the german by e. a. shils,
in collaboration with edith lowenstein
and Klaus Knorr
With an Introduction by
JENS MEIERHENRICH
Including the Preface and Appendices to the
1974 German Edition translated by
JENS MEIERHENRICH

--- Sayfa 5 ---
1
iv
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941; excluding Introduction © Jens Meierhenrich 2017 and excluding
the translation of the 1974 preface and appendices © Jens Meierhenrich 2017
The moral rights of the authors‌ have been asserted
First Edition published in 2017
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Crown copyright material is reproduced under Class Licence
Number C01P0000148 with the permission of OPSI
and the Queen’s Printer for Scotland
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017934727
ISBN 978–0–19–871620–4
Printed in Great Britain by
Ashford Colour Press Ltd, Gosport, Hampshire
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
v
Contents
Preface to the 1941 Edition
ix
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xiii
Introduction to the 1941 Edition
xxiii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law: The Intellectual Foundations
of Ernst Fraenkel’s Theory of Dictatorship
JENS MEIERHENRICH
xxvii
PART I.  THE LEGAL SYSTEM OF THE DUAL STATE
	 I.	 The Prerogative State
3
	1.	 The Origin of the Prerogative State
3
	2.	 The Allocation and Delimitation of Jurisdictions
6
	a.	 General Regulation of Jurisdiction
6
	b.	 The State Police
9
	3.	 The Abolition of the Rule of Law
9
	a.	 Historical Introduction
9
	b.	 The Dissolution of the Rule of Law as Reflected
in the Decisions of the Courts
14
	1.	 The Abolition of Constitutional Restraints
14
	2.	 The Abolition of other Legal Restraints
16
	3.	 The Abolition of Restraints on the Police Power
20
	4.	 The Abolition of Judicial Review
24
	a.	 Introductory Remarks
24
	b.	 Review by Administrative Courts
25
	c.	 Review in Civil Procedure
28
	d.	 Review in Penal Procedure
31
	5.	 The Party as an Instrument of the Prerogative State
33
	6.	 Politics as the Aim of the Prerogative State
37
	4.	 The Prerogative State in Operation
46
	a.	 The Negation of Formal Rationality
46
	b.	 The Persecution of the Heretics
49
	II.	 The Limits of the Prerogative State
57
	III.	 The Normative State
65
	1.	 The Dual State and Separation of Powers
65
	a.	 Prerogative State and the Executive
65
	b.	 Normative State and Discretionary Power
69

--- Sayfa 7 ---
vi
Contents
vi
	2.	 The Guardians of the Normative State
71
	a.	 National-Socialism as the Guardian of the Normative State 	 71
	b.	 The Courts as Guardians of the Normative State
73
	1.	 Internal and External Reservations
73
	2.	 The Normative State as the Guardian of
Legal Institutions
75
	a.	 Entrepreneurial Liberty
75
	b.	 Sanctity of Contracts
76
	c.	 Private Property
77
	d.	 Competition
79
	e.	 Labor Law
80
	f.	 The Law of Non-Tangible Property
82
	3.	 The Normative State and the Party Program
83
	a.	 Public Interest Precedes Self-Interest
83
	b.	 The Racial Idea
87
	c.	 The Legal Status of the Jews
89
	c.	 The Estates as Organs of the Normative State
96
	1.	 Economic Self-Government
96
	2.	 The German Labor Front
101
PART II.  THE LEGAL THEORY OF THE DUAL STATE
	 I.	 The Repudiation of Rational Natural Law
by National-Socialism
107
	II.	 The National-Socialist Campaign Against Natural Law
115
	1.	 The Christian System of Natural Law
115
	2.	 Secular Natural Law
122
	III.	 National-Socialism and Communal Natural Law
133
	1.	 Societal and Communal Natural Law
133
	2.	 Communal Natural Law and Concrete
Theory of Order
139
PART III.  THE LEGAL REALITY OF THE DUAL STATE
	 I.	 The Legal History of the Dual State
153
	1.	 The Dual State and the Dualistic State
153

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Contents
vii
 
vii
	2.	 The History of the Dual State in Prussia and
in Germany
157
	a.	 The Establishment of the Absolute Monarchy
157
	b.	 Enlightened Despotism
159
	c.	 The Absolute Bureaucracy
161
	d.	 The Rechtsstaat
167
	II.	 The Economic Background of the Dual State
171
	III.	 The Sociology of the Dual State
188
	1.	 ‘Plant-Community’ and ‘Shop-Troop’
188
	2.	 Ethnic Community and Armament Boom
197
	3.	 The Concept of Politics in National-Socialist Theory
200
Abbreviations
209
Notes
211
Appendix to the 1941 Edition: Reichsgesetzblatt
(Official Statute Book)
241
Appendix I to the 1974 German Edition: Proceeding
before the Reichsarbeitsgericht (Reich Labour Court)
242
Appendix II to the 1974 German Edition: Proceeding
before the Amtsgericht (District Court) Berlin
245
Table of Cases
247
Index
251

--- Sayfa 9 ---
viii

--- Sayfa 10 ---
ix
Preface to the 1941 Edition
The conditions under which this book was conceived and written
deserve a brief comment. The book is the product of the paradoxical
isolation enforced upon those who lived and carried on their work
in the Germany of National-Socialism although they were opposed
to this regime. The purpose of the author was to describe the basic
principles of the legal and constitutional developments of the Third
Reich. His activity as a practising attorney in Berlin from 1933–38
provided the close and continuous contact with the legal system of
National-Socialism necessary to check and recheck his generaliza-
tions by confronting them with the reality of practice.
In writing this book the author had at his disposal all the National-
Socialist sources pertinent to his subject, including all the sig-
nificant decisions published in the different German law reviews.
Unfortunately it was impossible for him to take account of material
unavailable in Germany, such as the writings of the German emigrés
and many other publications outside Germany. Essentially the manu-
script was completed before the author left Germany.
The course of this work was fraught with many difficulties. Its pub-
lication would have been impossible without the generous assistance
of a number of friends.
For financial assistance, the author gratefully acknowledges his
indebtedness to:
The American Guild for German Cultural Freedom; the Graduate
Faculty of Political and Social Science organized by the New School
for Social Research; the International Institute of Social Research;
Professor Alfred E. Cohn, New York; Dr. Fritz Karsen, New York; and
Dr. Frederick Pollock, New York.
The manuscript has been read and many valuable sugges-
tions have been offered by Professor Arthur Feiler, New School
of Social Research, New  York; Professor C.  J. Friedrich, Harvard

--- Sayfa 11 ---
x
Preface to the 1941 Edition
x
University; Professor Waldemar Gurian, University of Notre Dame;
Professor Friedrich Kessler, University of Chicago; Professor
Wolfgang Kraus, Smith College; Professor Oskar Lange, University of
Chicago; Dr. N. C. Leites, University of Chicago; Dr. Franz Neumann,
New York; Professor Max Rheinstein, University of Chicago; Professor
David Riesman, University of Buffalo; and Professor Albert Salomon,
New School of Social Research, New York.
The author is especially grateful to Dr.  Gerhard Meyer of the
University of Chicago, for his kind permission to use his unpublished
manuscript on the economic system of the Third Reich.
I wish to express my gratitude to Mr. E. A. Shils of the University of
Chicago who so generously made his time and skill available for the
onerous task at hand.
Mr. J. Bryan Allin checked the whole manuscript for points need-
ing clarification for the American reader unfamiliar with the German
legal tradition. Mr. Allin, with Messrs. A. Bell and I. Pool, very kindly
helped the author to adapt the book for this purpose, each with one of
the chapters. Mr. Bell also assisted the author in including certain sec-
tions added to take account of later developments. The author would
like here to express his gratitude for this assistance.
In order that the nature of the book should remain unchanged, it
was decided to take account only of the National-Socialist publica-
tions and decisions concerned. It should be understood that the book
treats of the legal and constitutional development only to the out-
break of the present war.
I should like to thank Mr. George Rothschild, graduate student of
the Law School of the University of Chicago, for helping to prepare
the manuscript for publication.
The author is grateful to the following publishers for permission to
quote from copyright works:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons: A. J. Carlyle, A History of Medieval
Political Theory in the West, Vol. 1; D. Appleton Century
Company: Raymond Gettell, History of American Political
Thought; The Macmillan Company: Charles H.  McIlwain, The

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Preface to the 1941 Edition
xi
 
xi
Growth of Political Thought in the West; J. R. Tanner, Constitutional
Documents of the Reign of James 1; John Neville Figgis, Studies of
Political Thought from Gerson to Grotius; International Publishers
Inc.: Frederick Engels, The Housing Question; Karl Marx, Critique of
the Gotha Programme; Charles H. Kerr & Co.: Karl Marx, Capital, Vols.
I & III, ib., The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte; Harcourt,
Brace & Co.: R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism.
It is unfortunate that I am forced to omit acknowledgment here of
a most important help received in the production of this book. The
conceptions contained here were greatly influenced by the author’s
discussions with a number of his friends who are at present residing
in Germany and must consequently remain unnamed.
Chicago, June 15, 1940

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xii

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xiii
Preface to the 1974 German Edition1
More than a quarter of a century has passed since I completed, on June
15, 1940, the English edition of this book, entitled The Dual State. The
Dual State was a translation of the first version of Der Doppelstaat,
which had been illegally written in and later smuggled out of Nazi
Germany. It was published after a thorough revision of the manu-
script following my emigration from Germany in the fall of 1938. The
revision was necessary in order to remove a number of misunder-
standings and imprecisions that are easily explained by the unusual
circumstances under which the manuscript was written. The neces-
sary changes concerned mostly details. The structure and conclusions
in the original version, the Urdoppelstaat, and the final manuscript of
The Dual State are the same. This is all the more true since both are
based on the same sources.
At the time of writing, I never thought that the book, though origi-
nally drafted in German, would ever be published in German. That
might explain why I kept the first draft of the German language ver-
sion, which held emotional value (“Affektionswert”) for me, but not
the final German manuscript. Therefore, the frequently suggested
publication of a German edition was possible only if the English ver-
sion would be translated back into German. This has since been done.
This book is that retranslation.
While a retranslation is generally more difficult [than publishing a
book in the language in which it was originally written], this is espe-
cially true of a legal-political text—that is, when that text pursues
not just academic, but political aims. In the drafting of the manu-
script and its translation into English, special emphasis was placed
on explaining the Third Reich’s system of rule (“Herrschaftsstruktur”)
in academic categories that are familiar to the social-scientifically
trained American reader—paraphrasing them, if necessary, to ren-
der them comprehensible. I  need only point to such foundational
terms as “Ausnahmezustand” [which most accurately translates as
state of exception] and “Martial Law.” A translation of the German
1  Source:  “Vorwort zu deutschen Ausgabe,” in Ernst Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat,
translated by Manuela Schöps (Frankfurt: Europäische Verlagsanstalt, 1974), 11–18.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
xiv
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xiv
text into English made sense only if it also involved a transposition
(“Transponierung”) of concepts from the National Socialist into the
American system of government (“Regierungssystem”).
When it came to the retranslation, it was therefore unavoidable to
reverse that transposition. This, however, meant that it was necessary,
on more than one occasion, to reconstruct—at the cost of achieving
a less literal translation—the original German text by relying on the
cited sources. Especially in select sections in the first part of the book
was it imperative to do so, whereas such difficulties only arose spo-
radically in the non-legal parts of the manuscript.
Thus, the section concerning the judicial review of police orders
(“polizeilicher Verfügungen”) had to be largely rewritten, while the sec-
tion on the separation of powers was omitted seeing that the German
separation-of-powers doctrine derives primarily from Montesquieu,
whereas in the American separation-of-powers doctrine the influ-
ence of Locke is dominant.
This work could not have been completed without the support of
Studienrat [an academic title conferred to higher ranking civil serv-
ants in Germany, mostly teachers in grammar schools] Mrs. Manuela
Schöps. She undertook the tremendously difficult task of retranslat-
ing the English text and bringing it in line with the language used in
the (still extant) parts of the original German manuscript in order
to produce a [new] German version that corresponds to the English
edition [as well as to the so-called Urdoppelstaat].2 This retranslation
required her to familiarize herself with trains of thought from dis-
ciplines as diverse as jurisprudence, sociology, political science, and
macroeconomics (not to mention history). It is only thanks to her
comprehensive general education and methodological training that
she was able to master this task. I express my heartfelt gratitude to her.
The book only deals with developments that occurred prior to my emi-
gration. (The one exception is that I also took account of Kristallnacht,
which occurred in the weeks following my emigration.) This explains
why the book merely analyzes the Third Reich of the pre-war years.
The Dual State was published by Oxford University Press in
New York around the end of 1940 and the beginning of 1941. The
2  For a discussion of the original German version, the Urdoppelstaat, its gesta-
tion and relation to all other editions of The Dual State, see Jens Meierhenrich, “An
Ethnography of Nazi Law: The Intellectual Foundations of Ernst Fraenkel’s Theory of
Dictatorship,” in this volume.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xv
 
xv
book was reviewed in numerous American and English scholarly
journals. A list of reviews, albeit incomplete, can be found in Book
Review Digest 1941, p. 318. About ten years later, the book went out
of print. In 1969, an unrevised reprint of The Dual State was pub-
lished, with the consent of Oxford University Press, by Octagon Press
(New York).
The book is the result of internal emigration (“innere Emigration”).
Its first version, which is also the foundation for this German edi-
tion, was written in an atmosphere of lawlessness and terror. It was
based on sources that I collected in National Socialist Berlin, and on
impressions that were forced upon me day in, day out (“die sich mir
tagtäglich aufgedrängt haben”). It was conceived out of the need to
make sense of these experiences theoretically in order to be able to
cope with them. They stem mostly, though not exclusively, from my
work as a practising lawyer in Berlin in the years 1933–1938.
Despite being Jewish, I  was permitted, due to my military ser-
vice during the [First World] War, to practice at the bar even after
1933. The ambivalence of my bourgeois existence caused me to be
particularly attuned to the contradictoriness (“Widersprüchlichkeit”)
of the Hitler regime. Though, legally speaking, an equal member of
the bar, wherever I went, I was nonetheless subject to harassments,
discriminations, and humiliations that emanated exclusively from the
staatstragende Partei [literally: state-sustaining political party, i.e., the
ruling Nazi party]. Anyone who did not shut his or her eyes to the
reality of the Hitler dictatorship’s administrative and judicial prac-
tices, must have been affected by the frivolous cynicism with which
the state and the [Nazi] party called into question, for entire spheres
of life, the validity of the legal order while, at the same time, applying,
with bureaucratic exactness (“mit bürokratischer Exaktheit”), exactly
the same legal provisions in situations that were said to be different
(“anders bewerteten Situationen”).
Based on the insights into the functioning of the Hitler regime
that I gleaned from my legal practice, I believed to have found a key
to understanding the National Socialist system of rule (“der nation-
alsozialistischen Herrschaftsordnung”) in the duality or concurrent
existence (“Nebeneinander”) of a “normative state” (“Normenstaat”)
that generally respects its own laws, and a “prerogative state”
(“Maßnahmenstaat”) that violates the very same laws.
From the moment I began to collect and review materials to find
out whether this working hypothesis could lead to an improved

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xvi
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xvi
understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the Hitler regime,
I was fully aware that in a terror-based totalitarian dictatorship, only
apologists of such a system of rule would be able to make use—
unperturbed—of traditional strategies of academic inquiry when
daring to research a highly sensitive topic. Any attempt by supposed ene-
mies of National Socialism to uncover the logic (“Bewegungsgesetze”)
of the Third Reich’s constitutional reality (“Verfassungswirklichkeit des
Dritten Reichs”) was suspected of the crime of “preparation for high
treason” (“Vorbereitung zum Hochverrat”). Not only were all Jews said
to be opponents of the Third Reich, but also those “Aryans” who, dur-
ing the “Kampfzeit” [a Nazi term referring to the years of “struggle”,
i.e., the period 1925–1933, when the NSDAP—the National Socialist
German Workers Party—was an insurgent movement that opposed
and resisted the ostensibly bankrupt political “system” of the Weimar
Republic] had emerged as “opponents of the movement” (“Gegner
der Bewegung”). According to Nazi doctrine, they were, due to their
descent or political past, predestined to arrive in their theoretical
studies of the state (“staatstheoretischer Studien”) at conclusions that
invariably were hostile to the interests of the state (“staatsfeindlichen
Ergebnissen”).
The idea to use empirical research methods to address my research
question had to be abandoned right from the start. It would have been
impossible to keep such an undertaking secret from the Secret State
Police [Geheime Staatspolizei, usually referred to by the contraction
Gestapo]. However, to rely primarily on an analysis of legal proceed-
ings in which I was involved as a lawyer would not have been possible
either. Aside from the fact that doing so would have produced too
narrow an evidence base from which to derive useful conclusions,
such a research design might also have endangered my former clients;
for this reason alone, it was not an option.
More than a few readers of the English-language edition have
expressed regret that I, for the aforementioned reasons, refrained
from demonstrating in at least one or two cases, how the dual
character of the Nazi political order (“der nationalsozialistischen
Herrschaftsordnung”) manifested itself in the administration of jus-
tice. I thought it best to respond to this suggestion by presenting in
an “appendix” the case histories of one labor law proceeding and
one criminal law proceeding. The labor law case, which was heard
twice by the Reichsarbeitsgericht (Federal Labor Court), prompted
me to theorize the phenomenon of the “dual state”; the criminal law

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xvii
 
xvi
case provided an opportunity to assess the practical utility of my
theses.3
It did not seem too far-fetched to also scan hard-to-find judgments
that had been published in official law reports and learned journals to
see whether they offered insights into societal (“gesellschaftliche”) pro-
cesses in the Third Reich, which, in turn, would allow for the drawing
of inferences about the everyday practices of the statist (“staatlichen”)
organs of the National Socialist executive and judiciary. In other
words, the question arises whether and to what extent court judg-
ments (“Gerichtsurteile”) can be relied upon as sources in the study of
the constitutional reality of the Third Reich.
The obvious objection that censorship prevented the publication
of judgments that could have been unpleasant (“unliebsam”) for the
regime is generally valid for judgments of the Volksgericht (“People’s
Court”) and for other judgments handed down by the politicized
criminal courts (“der politischen Strafgerichtsbarkeit”), but not for
the decisions of other courts. In fact, law journals regularly published
judgments that regime loyalists critiqued very sharply in lengthy case
notes. Limited though the insights into the functioning of a dicta-
torial regime may be that can be gained from studying published
case law, it may prove helpful nonetheless in order to correct (“kor-
rigieren”) the schematically constructed image of the Nazi political
order with the help of a multitude of snapshots (“einer Vielzahl von
Momentaufnahmen”). The latter are as authentic (“realitätsnah”) as
they possibly can be in a regime whose defining attribute it is to dis-
guise its true character.
I concluded the preface to the English edition in 1940 by stating
my regret about being unable, for obvious reasons, to thank by name
for their help in the conception and preparation of this book those
friends of mine who had remained in Germany. A general expres-
sion of gratitude had to do. They helped chiefly by expressing a criti-
cal interest in my research question, my theses, and the underlying
theoretical approach. It was invaluable to me to be able to develop,
amend, and correct all of the above in conversation with them—
and before I attempted to formulate it. Even though these conver-
sations could only take place among close friends and colleagues
(“im engsten Kreise”), they were of vital importance to our lives (“ein
3  For a translation of these case histories, see Appendix I and II to the 1974 German
Edition, in this volume. They were not heretofore available in English.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
xviii
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xvii
Lebensbedürfnis”). They saved us from suffocating—intellectually
and emotionally (“geistig und seelisch”)—amidst the loneliness of
our internal emigration. The help that my like-minded comrades
(“Gesinnungsgenossen”) extended to me included their willingness to
safeguard and hide research materials, excerpts, and manuscripts, and
to assist in their “dispatch” (“Verschickung”) abroad [an euphemism
for the smuggling of these documents, including the Urdoppelstaat,
i.e., the original German version of The Dual State which made its
way abroad in the luggage of a French embassy official].
It would be an empty gesture to acknowledge by name now the
like-minded friends (“Gesinnungsfreunde”) who I  was unable to
thank then. All too many have passed away since, others have gone
with the wind, and to yet others I feel no longer connected. I thus
want to limit myself to mentioning, first and foremost, with gratitude
the name Fritz Eberhardt, and, wistfully, the name Martin Gauger.
This book could not have been completed without the encourage-
ment and continuous support of the Internationaler Sozialistischer
Kampfbund (ISK, International Socialist Militant League), which
was very active and exemplarily disciplined in the illegal under-
ground movement. For years, I worked very closely with their Head
of Domestic Affairs (“Inlandsleiter”) Dr. Hellmut von Rauschenplat
(Dr.  Fritz Eberhardt), who was responsible for coordinating the
movement’s local resistance groups as well as for liaising with the
Emigration Directorate (“Emigrationsleitung”), which was based in
Paris. During long walks, we exchanged ideas about the meaning and
purpose of illegal work (“illegaler Arbeit”) and sought to gain greater
clarity about the phenomenon of National Socialism. In the wake of
such exchanges, I repeatedly dictated the conclusions we had reached
in the form of short essays to Fritz Eberhardt who took stenographic
notes (“in das Stenogramm diktiert”). They were intended for publica-
tion in the ISK journal Sozialistische Warte, which was published in
Paris and subsequently distributed in Germany in the form of ille-
gal flyers (“illegale Flugblätter”). Some of these essays were recently
republished in my book Reformismus und Pluralismus [Reformism
and Pluralism]. One of these articles contains the original version
(“Urfassung”) of The Dual State. It appeared under the pseudonym
Conrad Jürgens.
Fritz Eberhardt was in touch with an official at the French embassy,
who agreed to transport an anti-Nazi manuscript from Berlin to
Paris in his diplomatic luggage. It was thus that the first draft (“die

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xix
 
xix
erste Fassung”) of The Dual State found its way to freedom (“in die
Freiheit”).
In the final phase of my legal practice, I frequently described my
work to friends as that of a switchman (“Weichensteller”). That is,
I regarded it an essential part of my efforts to ensure that a given
case was dealt with under the auspices of the “normative state,” and
not end up in the “prerogative state.” Colleagues with whom I was
on friendly terms confirmed that they, too, had repeatedly worked
toward making sure that their clients were punished in a court of law
(“daß ihre Mandanten gerichtlich bestraft würden”) [rather than risk-
ing their arbitrary punishment in the prerogative state].
I first met Martin Gauger—the legal counsel of the Lutheran
Council, who was murdered in Buchenwald in 1941—in 1934 or
1935. We were introduced by Harold Pölchau, the prison chaplain in
Tegel [a suburb in the north of Berlin, the seat of one of Germany’s
oldest and largest prisons]. Back then, any and all organizations and
associations that belonged to or were otherwise connected with the
so-called Bekennende Kirche [literally: “Confessing Church,” a break-
away movement of the Protestant Church led by, among others,
Martin Niemöller, Karl Barth, and Dietrich Bonhoeffer, that opposed
the Nazi government’s attempts to “nazify” the Protestant Church
in Germany, i.e., to turn it into an institution of racial dictatorship]
were subjected to the same persecution and harassment as the Social
Democratic and unionized workers’ movement several years prior.
Because I had repeatedly given legal advice to the latter, I was able to
speak from experience. The case of Delatowsky und Genossen in the
appendix [a case history of which is reproduced below as Appendix I]
may illustrate what could happen in such a proceeding.
My exchanges with Martin Gauger initially revolved around tech-
nical questions of law, not least because such questions had, ever
since the intensification of the church struggle (“Zuspitzung des
Kirchenkampfs”) [i.e., the increasingly contentious politics about the
question of the relationship between the Nazi state and the country’s
churches], begun to take up a great deal of his time. But our talks
were not limited to discussing concrete legal problems. It was inevi-
table that our conversations, many of which lasted until late into the
night, would also touch upon the jurisprudential, philosophical, and
sociological aspects of the phenomenon of the “dual state.” It was not
without astonishment that we both realized how grotesquely dis-
torted the image was that each of us had had of the type of human

--- Sayfa 21 ---
xx
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xx
being (“Menschentyp”) to which the other had belonged prior to the
transition (“Umbruch”) [to Nazi dictatorship]. It was thus that early
one morning we founded the “United Front of Natural Lawyers”
(“Einheitsfront der Naturrechtler”)—an event that informed the juris-
prudential chapter of this book.
I will never forget the evening when Martin Gauger—whose
“humour and skill in dealing with people” Annedore Leber empha-
sized (in her book Das Gewissen steht auf [The Conscience Arises])—
recounted a discussion with Dr. Werner Best, the legal counsel of the
Gestapo. When, after many failed attempts, Gauger finally managed to
arrange for a meeting with Best to demand the return of confiscated
funds belonging to the Confessing Church, he seized the opportunity
to casually explain to Best the theory of the dual state. We came to
view it as a macabre confirmation of our theoretical efforts when Best,
in a contribution to the Jahrbuch der Akademie für Deutsches Recht
(Yearbook of the Academy for German Law) developed an argument
that largely rehearsed ideas that Gauger had shared with him.4
The more unbearable the terror became following the “Anschluß”
[the occupation and annexation of Austria in 1938], and the faster the
“Greater German Reich” (“Großdeutsche Reich”) approached war, the
more dire became the basis of my existence.
In the end phase of my legal practice, I regarded the true value of
my membership of the bar to be in possession of an identity card
that gave me access to the reference collections of the libraries of the
Kammergericht [the provincial high court and court of appeal for the
state of Berlin] and of the Staatsbibliothek. In the “oasis” of the Berlin
State Library there met—entirely coincidentally, of course—such
“reliable enemies of the state” (“zuverlässige Staatsfeinde”) as Theodor
Heuss, Otto Suhr, Ernst von Harnack, Heinrich Acker, and others.
Going for walks up and down the rotunda, we exchanged ideas.
It was in these libraries that I compiled the excerpts that I needed
for the drafting of The Dual State. There, I also wrote a considerable
part of the Urdoppelstaat [the very first incarnation of The Dual State].
The plan to deepen and expand what initially were mere sketches
about the dual state and to turn them into a systematic, political sci-
ence analysis of the phenomenon first arose in the course of deep dis-
cussions, during vacations abroad, with my friends Franz Neumann
4  The publication in question is Werner Best, “Neubegründung des Polizeirechts,”
Jahrbuch der Akademie für Deutsches Recht, vol. 4 (1937), 132–52.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Preface to the 1974 German Edition
xxi
 
xxi
and Otto Kahn-Freund, both of whom had already emigrated
previously.
The publication of the German edition was suggested by Alexander
von Brünneck, lecturer (wissenschaftlicher Assistant) of political sci-
ence at the Technical University of Hannover. He was unstinting in
his commitment to making possible the book’s retranslation and its
publication by the Europäische Verlagsanstalt [a German publish-
ing house of mostly intellectual non-fiction and left-leaning titles
whose postwar founders had been members of the ISK, the social-
ist resistance group with which Fraenkel was closely affiliated in the
1930s]. His efforts are even more significant because, on account of
severe, recurring illnesses, I was unable to support the project with as
much vigor as I would have liked. I owe deep gratitude to him for his
extraordinary commitment, his interest, and his understanding.
I also thank the Europäische Verlagsanstalt, which took on, sup-
ported, and brought off the book’s publication in an exemplary
manner.
Gerichtsreferendarin [law clerk] Mrs. Hela Rischmüller-Pörtner
and Mrs. stud. jur. [law student] Christiane Terveen assisted with the
verification of bibliographic information, thereby making a worthy
contribution to the book’s completion.
Translated by Jens Meierhenrich

--- Sayfa 23 ---
xxi

--- Sayfa 24 ---
xxii
Introduction to the 1941 Edition
‘Totalitarian’ is a word of many meanings too often inadequately
defined. In this treatise we have tried to isolate one important char-
acteristic of the totalitarian state in Germany, and by studying this
fundamental aspect of the National-Socialist regime we hope to make
clearer the legal reality of the Third Reich.
We have not attempted an exhaustive picture of the whole of the
emerging legal system; rather we have sought to analyze the two states,
the ‘Prerogative State’ and the ‘Normative State,’ as we shall call them,
which co-exist in National-Socialist Germany. By the Prerogative
State we mean that governmental system which exercises unlimited
arbitrariness and violence unchecked by any legal guarantees, and by
the Normative State an administrative body endowed with elaborate
powers for safeguarding the legal order as expressed in statutes, deci-
sions of the courts, and activities of the administrative agencies. We
shall try to find the meaning of these simultaneous states through
an analysis of the decisions of the German administrative, civil and
criminal courts, at the same time attempting to indicate the line of
division between the two. Since this problem has not yet been con-
sidered by theorists it will be necessary to quote the original sources
themselves in extenso. In studying the development of judicial prac-
tice as it is embodied in decisions, we learn that there is a constant
friction between the traditional judicial bodies which represent the
Normative State and the instruments of dictatorship, the agents of
the Prerogative State. By the beginning of 1936 the resistance of the
traditional law-enforcing bodies was weakened; thus the decisions of
the courts are an impressive illustration of the progress of political
radicalism in Germany.
The first part of this book is exclusively devoted to a descrip-
tion of the existing legal order. A second theoretical part attempts
to prove that because of the parallel functioning of the traditional
procedure and of a method of making decisions by considering
only the peculiar circumstances of the individual case, the legal

--- Sayfa 25 ---
xxiv
Introduction
xxiv
tradition of the West has been radically changed. In this section we
venture to explain the juridical ‘dualism’ which characterizes the
entire system of private and public law in contemporary Germany.
In the third and concluding section we confront the legal system
and legal theory with the legal reality of the Dual State. In this criti-
cal, sociological part we indicate the relationship of contemporary
German capitalism to the functioning of the Normative State and
of the Prerogative State. We shall inquire whether the legal situation
characterized as the Dual State is not the necessary consequence
of a certain stage of crisis for the directing elements of capitalistic
society. Perhaps it can be shown that they have lost confidence in
rationality and have taken refuge in irrationality, at a time when it
would seem that rationality is needed more than ever as a regula-
tory force within the capitalistic structure.
To demonstrate this it is necessary to do more than compile a list of
cases in constitutional law which do not confirm to the Rule of Law.
The National-Socialist state is remarkable not only for its supreme
arbitrary powers but also for the way in which it has succeeded in
combining arbitrary powers with a capitalistic economic organiza-
tion. One of the basic propositions of Max Weber’s works is that a
rational legal system is indispensable for the operation of a capitalis-
tic economic order. The German reformist labor movement took this
proposition for granted. But we must then resolve the paradox of a
capitalistic order continuing within a system under which there is no
possibility of rationally calculating social chances. Rational calcula-
tion is not consistent with the rule of arbitrary police power which is
characteristic of the Third Reich.
It may be argued, both by those who are sympathetic with and by
those who are opposed to National-Socialism, that the problem of the
Dual State has no fundamental or permanent significance, that it is
merely a transitory phenomenon. To those who think the Prerogative
State transitory we point to the records of judicial proceedings in the
Third Reich, which show that it is gaining rather than losing impor-
tance. And we would remind

--- Sayfa 26 ---
Introduction
xxv
 
xxv
those who think that the Normative State has already disappeared or
that, if it exists, it is a mere remnant of the old state and therefore
doomed to oblivion, that a nation of 80 million people can be con-
trolled by a plan only if certain definite rules exist and are enforced
according to which the relations between the state and its members,
as well as the relations between the citizens themselves, are regulated.
These problems will be dealt with in the third part of the book.
It must be clearly understood that when we speak of the Dual State
we do not refer to the co-existence of the state bureaucracy and the
party bureaucracy. We do not place great importance on this new fea-
ture of German constitutional law. Although National-Socialist litera-
ture often discusses the problem and although this book will refer to it
occasionally, an attempt to find the exact legal distinction between the
two would be futile. State and party are increasingly becoming identi-
cal, the dual organizational form is maintained merely for historical
and political reasons.
In a speech at Weimar in July 1936, Hitler himself defined the line
of demarcation between state and party. He asserted that government
and legislation should be the task of the party, administration the task
of the state. Obviously this statement has little value as a juridical
explanation. Neither in legislation nor in administration is it possible
to distinguish the activities of the state and the party; not even the
administrative activities are a monopoly of the state. When we speak
of the state therefore we are using the term in its broader sense, i.e., as
the entire bureaucratic and public machine consisting of the state in
the narrower sense and of the party with its auxiliary organizations.
Whether this amalgamation of state and party is useful for the analy-
sis of legal social phenomena remains to be seen. In order to facilitate
the analysis of a more significant distinction within this system of
the Third Reich, the author feels justified in neglecting one of lesser
importance. Both the party and the state in its narrower sense func-
tion within the scope of the Normative State and the Prerogative State.
Preoccupation with the superficial distinction between party and
state tends to efface the more significant distinction between the
Normative State and the Prerogative State.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
xxvi
Introduction
xxvi
The fact that National-Socialist jurisprudence gives such emphasis
to the state–party problem is an encouragement to the author and
provides him with an indirect justification for his undertaking, inas-
much as a favorite device of National-Socialist jurisprudence is to
obscure the real significance of certain issues by a clamorous insist-
ence on the importance of incidental ones.
The book is restricted to a discussion of National-Socialist
Germany. Although a comparative study of dictatorships would be
extremely enlightening, it has not been possible for this author. This
book is a first-hand description of the National-Socialist legal system,
seen from the point of view of an anti-National-Socialist participat-
ing observer. First-hand experience in the National-Socialist juridical
system, as well as a study of National-Socialist literature, have had a
part in its construction. A discussion of similar problems in other
dictatorships would require that the author be as familiar with their
situation as he is with that of the Third Reich. Knowledge of the fact
that the German dictatorship thrives by veiling its true face discour-
ages us from judging other dictatorships by their words rather than by
their deeds, to which we have no adequate access.
A superficial view of the German dictatorship might be impressed
either by its arbitrariness or by its efficiency based on order. It is the
thesis of this book that the National-Socialist dictatorship is charac-
terized by the combination of these two elements.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
xxvii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law: The
Intellectual Foundations of Ernst Fraenkel’s
Theory of Dictatorship
Jens Meierhenrich
INTRODUCTION
Though largely forgotten today, Ernst Fraenkel’s The Dual
State: A Contribution to the Theory of Democracy, first published in
1941, is one of the seminal works in the study of law and society. On
September 20, 1938, Fraenkel, a German labor lawyer and social dem-
ocrat of Jewish faith, fled the Nazi dictatorship. From the safety of his
exile in the United States, he published, with Oxford University Press,
an English-language edition of his pioneering account about the com-
plicated relationship between authoritarianism and the rule of law in
the early years of Hitler’s Germany. Fraenkel had secretly drafted the
original manuscript in Germany between 1936 and 1938. Because of
these clandestine origins, one commentator recently described The
Dual State as “the ultimate piece of intellectual resistance” to the Nazi
regime.1
An ethnography of law crafted in the most forbidding of cir-
cumstances, The Dual State is one of the most erudite books on
dictatorship ever written. It contained the first comprehensive,
institutional analysis of the rise and nature of National Socialism,
and it was the only such analysis written from within Germany.
Although well received and widely reviewed upon publication
in the United States in the early 1940s, the concept of the dual
state, with its two halves—the prerogative state and the normative
1  Jakob Zollmann, “The Law in Nazi Germany: Ideology, Opportunism, and the
Perversion of Justice” (Book Review), German History, vol. 32 (2014), 496.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
xxviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxviii
state—has received only scant attention ever since. This is unfor-
tunate, for as I have shown elsewhere, the idea of the dual state is
of immediate relevance not only for the theory of dictatorship in
the twenty-first century but for the theory of democracy as well.2
This republication of Fraenkel’s largely forgotten (and long out-
of-print) monograph aims to restore it to its rightful place as a
classic of law-and-society scholarship. It also endeavors to make
it more widely available to scholars and students in related disci-
plines. Given the burgeoning literature on democracy and the rule
of law—in all of its guises—as well as the ongoing policy concern
with the promotion of both in changing societies the world over,
a re-launch for our times of one of the most prescient accounts of
legal contention is not only opportune, it is overdue.3
What follows is an account of the intellectual foundations of
Fraenkel’s theory of dictatorship. The analysis is organized into
three sections. The first section provides the biographical and his-
torical context necessary for understanding Fraenkel and his time.
The second section turns to the gestation of the first, German-
language manuscript of The Dual State, known as the Urdoppelstaat
of 1938. The third and final section charts the transformation of
this unpublished manuscript into the 1941 book that is reprinted
in this volume.4
2  Jens Meierhenrich, The Legacies of Law:  Long-Run Consequences of Legal
Development in South Africa, 1652–2000 (Cambridge:  Cambridge University
Press, 2008).
3  Relevant rule-of-law scholarship includes Thomas Carothers, Promoting the
Rule of Law Abroad:  In Search of Knowledge (Washington:  Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, 2006); Jane Stromseth, David Wippman, and Rosa Brooks,
eds., Can Might Make Rights? Building the Rule of Law after Military Intervention
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006); James E. Fleming, ed., Getting to the
Rule of Law, Nomos L (New York: New York University Press, 2011); Rachel Kleinfeld,
Advancing the Rule of Law Abroad: Next Generation Reform (Washington: Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, 2012); David Marshall, The International Rule
of Law Movement: A Crisis of Legitimacy and the Way Forward (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2014); and Paul Gowder, The Rule of Law in the Real World
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016).
4  This introductory chapter draws on Jens Meierhenrich, The Remnants of the
Rechtsstaat: An Ethnography of Nazi Law, Book manuscript, September 2016.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxix
 
xxix
THE CONTEXT OF THE DUAL STATE
Ernst Fraenkel was born in Cologne on December 26, 1898. His
father, Georg Fraenkel, a merchant, and his mother, Therese Epstein,
both hailed from bourgeois households that practiced enlightened
forms of Judaism. As a result, he and his two elder siblings grew up
in a religiously progressive home. Yet Fraenkel’s upbringing, though
comfortable, was far from easy. Early on in life, Fraenkel lost both of
his parents and one sibling. After these losses, Fraenkel and his older
sister, Marta, relocated to Frankfurt am Main, where they lived with
their uncle Joseph Epstein.5 Of great significance for Fraenkel’s politi-
cal maturation was the influence of Wilhelm Epstein, who assisted
his brother Joseph—the legal guardian—with the raising of the two
Fraenkel children. The elder Epstein was very active in adult educa-
tion. A pacifist and admirer of the Fabian Society, he helped build the
Frankfurter Ausschuss für Volksvorlesungen, a local, private organiza-
tion associated with the trade unions where he also taught so as to
make education accessible to the masses.6
World War I  cut short Fraenkel’s schooling. He graduated in
November 1916 and immediately joined the ongoing war effort, for
which he had volunteered. As was the case with many of the coun-
try’s Jews, the bellicose atmosphere made Fraenkel feel more German
than ever: “Whatever Jewish consciousness I might have possessed,
it was pushed into the background with the outbreak of war. I was
deeply convinced that the war would mean the end of antisemitism.”7
On April 3, 1917, Fraenkel was ordered to join an infantry reserve
unit stationed in Jablonna, Poland. Sequestered in a camp eighteen
kilometers north of Warsaw, Fraenkel’s unit underwent basic military
training to get the young recruits ready for the Western front to where
they were dispatched in July 1917. The experience of trench warfare
for him was “soul destroying and intellectually sterile,” but Fraenkel
survived the carnage, leaving military service on January 28, 1919.8
5  Simone Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel: Ein politisches Leben (New York: Campus
Verlag, 2009), 21–6.
6  Hubertus Buchstein and Rainer Kühn, “Vorwort zu diesem Band,” in Ernst
Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 1: Recht und Politik in der Weimarer Republik,
edited by Hubertus Buchstein (Baden-Baden: Nomos, 1999), 17.
7  Fraenkel, “Anstatt einer Vorrede,” 15. Unless stated otherwise, all translations
from the German are mine.
8  Ibid., 20.

--- Sayfa 31 ---
xxx
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxx
The Weimar Years
After the war, Fraenkel embarked on a law degree at the University
of Frankfurt, a progressive, privately funded institution that had
opened its doors just a few years earlier. There the lectures of Hugo
Sinzheimer (1875–1945) left the deepest impressions on Fraenkel.
Sinzheimer had joined the law faculty in 1920 to take up the first
chair in Germany in the new field of labor law (Arbeitsrecht). Aside
from advancing this new field, and his related interest, the sociologi-
cal study of law, it was Sinzheimer’s ambition to help train a new gen-
eration of lawyers, one that would be socially aware and committed
to creating a fair and equitable society.9 To this end, Sinzheimer also
founded, and edited between 1925 and 1931, the journal Die Justiz, a
publication of the Republican Federation of Judges (Republikanischer
Richterbund) that sought to push against the dominance of doctrinal-
ism and legal positivism in the legal profession. Sinzheimer’s com-
mitment to social justice—and his conception of labor law as a tool to
advance it—exerted a lasting influence on Fraenkel.
Upon completing his legal education, and the applied training of
his Referendariat, Fraenkel quickly turned to private practice. He also
began to contribute more regularly commentary to left-leaning pub-
lications such as Die Tat, Vorwärts, and the Jungsozialistische Blätter
as well as to specialized scholarly outlets like Arbeitsrecht. His passion
for social causes in general, and labor law in particular, netted him
invitations to workshops and conferences. It followed ever closer con-
tact with the trade union movement.10
In February 1926, Fraenkel took up a position as legal adviser to
the German Metalworkers Union (Deutscher Metallarbeiterverband).
Under its auspices, he assumed a teaching position in Bad
Dürrenberg, near Leipzig, where the trade union had just opened
a Wirtschaftsschule, an educational institution aimed at instructing
metalworkers in questions of law and economics as well as at intro-
ducing them to more general subjects.11 Fraenkel saw his mission
as that of contributing to “the struggle for the emancipation of the
9  See Hugo Sinzheimer, “Was Wir Wollen,” Die Justiz, no. 1 (1925), reprinted
in Hugo Sinzheimer and Ernst Fraenkel, Die Justiz in der Weimarer Republik: Eine
Chronik, edited by Thilo Ramm (Neuwied: Luchterhand, 1968), 19–23.
10  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 56–7.
11  See Ernst Fraenkel, “Die Wirtschaftsschule des Deutschen Metallarbeiterverbandes
in Bad Dürrenberg” [1926], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 1, 163–6.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxi
 
xxxi
proletariat.”12 During his foray into teaching, he continued to publish
widely on the social questions of the time. He also completed his long-
est publication to date, the forty-five-page pamphlet Zur Soziologie
der Klassenjustiz (On the Sociology of Class Justice), first published in
1927.13 It was an attempt to draw attention to structural determinants
of Weimar jurisprudence, notably the reification of capitalist values in
the education of judges. Although his essay bore the mark of Marxist
ideas, his aim, Fraenkel wrote in the pamphlet’s preface, was “not to
indict, but to explain.”14
The publication of Zur Soziologie der Klassenjustiz marked
Fraenkel’s transition from lecturer to lawyer in private practice.
Though he retained close ties with the German Metalworkers Union,
in March 1927 Fraenkel opened a private law firm in Berlin. Located
at Tempelhofer Ufer 16a, in Kreuzberg, he specialized in labor law and
represented private clients as well as the German Metalworkers Union.
He appears to have been a regular at the Landesarbeitsgericht, Berlin’s
regional labor court.15 This time was also an intellectually rewarding
and productive one for Fraenkel. He continued to write on topics in
labor law, though mostly from a strictly doctrinal legal perspective.
In 1928, he managed to publish seventeen essays and articles, eleven
in 1929.16 For the purpose of this introduction, the most important
among them was “Rechtssoziologie als Wissenschaft” (“The Sociology
of Law as Science”).17 In it, Fraenkel contemplated the political util-
ity of the social sciences, notably Sinzheimer’s preferred methodology
for understanding legal developments: the sociology of law. Though
the argument, from our vantage point in the twenty-first century, may
at first glance seem unremarkable, it is important to recognize the
absolute dominance of the doctrinal analysis of law in the early twen-
tieth century, in Germany and elsewhere. Critical approaches to law,
especially mixed or non-legal methodologies, were the exception. But
Fraenkel’s 1929 article was not just pioneering, it was also program-
matic, a sketch of Fraenkel’s analytical trajectory to come.
12  Ibid., 163.
13  Ernst Fraenkel, Zur Soziologie der Klassenjustiz [1927], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte
Schriften, vol. 1, 177–211.
14  Ibid., 177.
15  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 65.
16  Ibid., 75. Most of these writings are available in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften,
vol. 1.
17  Ernst Fraenkel, “Kollektive Demokratie” [1929], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte
Schriften, vol. 1, 343–57; Ernst Fraenkel, “Rechtssoziologie als Wissenschaft” [1929],
in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 1, 370–9.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
xxxii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxii
Fraenkel sought to establish “Rechtssoziologie” (“sociology of
law”) as a legitimate approach to the study of legal phenomena.
He proposed that it was as valuable as—and therefore should be
seen as methodologically equal to—the conventional approach of
“Rechtswissenschaft” (“legal science”) as well as to established auxiliary
approaches in the subfield of “Rechtstheorie” (“legal theory”), namely
“Rechtsphilosophie” (“legal philosophy”), “Rechtsgeschichte” (“legal
history”), and “Rechtspolitik” (“politics of law”).18 For Fraenkel, legal
science was mere “Rechtsanwendungslehre,” nothing more than the
tallying and interpretation of black letter law for the purpose of legal
practice.19 For Fraenkel, it was an applied approach, not a learned one.
He wanted to work with data, not doctrine. He held in higher regard
the auxiliary approaches in legal theory. And yet, Fraenkel did not
think that the philosophical, historical, and political studies of law as
such were sufficient as analytical approaches. A distinctly sociological
approach was also needed, he claimed. He positioned this approach
in direct opposition to Paul Laband’s brand of legal positivism, which
was hugely influential at that time.20
According to Laband, “[a]‌ll historical, political, and philosophi-
cal considerations” were “without significance” in the study of law.
His legal positivism (known as Staatsrechtspositivismus, or state
law positivism) was wary of extra-legal considerations and advo-
cated a “retracing of individual [legal] norms to general [legal]
concepts.”21 Laband’s was legal science par excellence. As Stefan
Korioth writes:
For the first time, attempts were made to offer a state law theory that
could provide rational, logically grounded, and reliable answers in
the field of constitutional law; in short, positivism established a doc-
trine of constitutional law. In addition, positivist procedure linked the
field of law with the methods of the expanding natural sciences and
the tendency, characteristic of nineteenth century thought [as well as
of twenty-first century thought], to turn all of life into science. The
positivist trust in “what is” corresponded to the general trend in the
18  Fraenkel, “Rechtssoziologie als Wissenschaft,” 370–1.
19  Ibid., 370.
20  Paul Laband, Das Staatsrecht des deutschen Reiches, 3 vols., second edition
(Tübingen: Mohr, 1888).
21  I quote Laband in the translation provided in Stefan Korioth, “The Shattering of
Methods in Late Wilhelmine Germany,” in Arthur J. Jacobson and Bernhard Schlink,
eds., Weimar:  A  Jurisprudence of Crisis (Berkeley:  University of California Press,
2000), 43.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxiii
 
xxxiii
humanities that followed the collapse of philosophical idealism in the
first half of the century.22
Methodologically, Fraenkel objected to the theoretical reduction-
ism at the heart of Staatsrechtspositivismus; politically, he objected to
its built-in status-quo bias. Throughout his long life and far-reaching
thought, Fraenkel was driven by, to borrow a phrase of Karl Jaspers,
“the unqualified will to know.”23 As a result of his social democratic
upbringing, he also never ceased to question the status quo. He
had internalized the lesson that it was usually the haves—rarely the
have-nots—who benefit from it. It is for these reasons that Fraenkel
responded so strongly, in methodological terms, to Laband’s legal
positivism. In an effort to upend it, Fraenkel invoked with admiration
the achievements of Anton Menger, Eugen Ehrlich, and Karl Renner.24
He considered the three leading Austrian jurists to be at the forefront
of the sociology of law—the kinds of scholars that Germany sorely
lacked. It did not hurt that Ehrlich formulated a theoretical posi-
tion that was, at the time at least, also Fraenkel’s: “The law and thus
also legal rules are merely a superstructure of the economic order.”25
This article of faith served as the normative foundation for many of
Fraenkel’s occasional writings (as well as of the Urdoppelstaat) in the
Nazi years.
True to his call in 1929 for an interdisciplinary approach to the
study of law, Fraenkel combined, and fully integrated, as we shall see,
insights from legal science, legal theory, legal philosophy, and legal
history to arrive at his sociological account of Nazi law. Unbeknownst
to him, he also relied on techniques from the emerging anthropology
of law. Fraenkel’s use of ethnographic data about the role(s) of law
in everyday life—culled from his own legal practice—underlined the
analytical value of participant observation as yet another useful meth-
odological approach to the study of law in society. The Dual State was
22  Ibid., 43.
23  Karl Jaspers, The Idea of the University, edited by Karl W. Deutsch, translated by
H. A. T. Reich and H. F. Vanderschmidt (London: Peter Owen, 1960), 37.
24  Anton Menger, Das bürgerliche Recht und die besitzlosen Volksklassen
(Tübingen:  Mohr, 1890); Eugen Ehrlich, Grundlegung der Soziologie des Rechts
(Munich:  Duncker & Humblot, 1913); Karl Renner, Die Rechtsinstitute des
Privatrechts und ihre soziale Funktion: Ein Beitrag zur Kritik des bürgerlichen Rechts
(Tübingen: Mohr, 1929).
25  Ehrlich, Grundlegung der Soziologie des Rechts, 172.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
xxxiv
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxiv
an early and pioneering example of interdisciplinary legal scholarship,
daringly conceived and masterfully crafted in extraordinary times.
In the latter half of the twentieth century, Roger Cotterrell
appraised the role of interdisciplinary legal scholarship thus:  “The
list of great men in the history of scholarship who have refused to
limit their vision within the confines of the disciplinary boundaries
of their era is sufficiently impressive to reassure modern teachers and
researchers that, despite all the problem involved in interdisciplinar-
ity, it has a sound and respectable history as one of the eminently
productive and innovatory varieties of intellectual non-conformity.”26
We know from his postwar statements that for Fraenkel, the writing
of the Urdoppelstaat, and subsequently of The Dual State, were such
acts of non-conformity. Except that Fraenkel’s non-conformity was
considerably more dangerous than interdisciplinary research should
be. Fraenkel’s was a valiant act of resistance couched in the form of an
ethnography of Nazi law.
But before Fraenkel was forced to turn his life over to the analysis
of the law of the “Third Reich”—which, in the late 1920s, was still but
a distant fear—he stayed true to the practice of labor law. Fraenkel
joined forces with Neumann and opened a law firm in the newly built
headquarters of the German Metalworkers Union at Alte Jakobstraße
148–155. Designed by the architect Erich Mendelsohn, and com-
pleted in 1930, the imposing building allowed for continued access to
one of Fraenkel’s most important clients.
When Sinzheimer, disillusioned by the state of democracy in
Weimar Germany, relinquished, in 1931, the lead editorship of Die
Justiz, Fraenkel continued in his stead and published, until the journal
ceased publication in 1933, sharply worded commentary in support
of his ideal of a democratic society.27 In eleven incisive essays in total,
Fraenkel analyzed legal and intellectual developments ranging from
proposals for a reform of civil procedure to the increasing use of the
notorious Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution, what he termed the
“Diktaturparagraphen,” or “dictator’s provision”; and from the impli-
cations of Carl Schmitt’s “friend–enemy” distinction for the admin-
istration of criminal justice to the political fallout of the important
26  Roger B. M. Cotterrell, “Interdisciplinarity: The Expansion of Knowledge and
the Design of Research,” Higher Education Review, vol. 11 (1979), 55.
27  Otto Kirchheimer, “Einführung,” in Sinzheimer and Fraenkel, Die Justiz in der
Weimarer Republik, 14–15.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxv
 
xxxv
1932 proceeding Preussen contra Reich before the Staatsgerichtshof,
Weimar Germany’s constitutional court in Leipzig.
The Nazi Years
Just before the burning of the Reichstag in Berlin on February 27,
1933, Fraenkel threw down the gauntlet, issuing a daring challenge
to the insurgent Nazis. In his final article for Die Justiz he voiced his
opposition to the brownshirt revolution in no uncertain terms: “We
proudly fly the flag. On this flag these words are written: Against arbi-
trary rule!”28 We now know that Fraenkel at the time underestimated
the threat that the Nazis posed. He misjudged how few adherents the
democratic ideal truly had in his native Germany and how irreparably
divided the fledgling anti-Nazi alliance was. The gravity of the situa-
tion was driven home on a personal level at the end of March, when
police detained Hugo Sinzheimer, Fraenkel’s mentor, in Frankfurt,
and placed him in protective custody (Schutzhaft), ostensibly for his
own protection.29 It was the beginning of the destruction of Jewish life
and thought in Nazi Germany.30
On May 2, 1933, the new regime outlawed the country’s trade unions,
including the German Metalworkers Union. SA forces stormed the
headquarters at Alte Jakobstraße and systematically rounded up sus-
pected enemies of the state, including Franz Neumann. On May 9,
Fraenkel received his Vertretungsverbot, an official notification that
he, as a Jew, was henceforth prohibited from representing clients in a
German court of law.31 Neumann received the same notice and took
the opportunity to flee abroad before things could get worse. Fraenkel
decided to stay in Berlin. He appealed his prohibition to practice
law, as did around 1,700 other Jewish lawyers in the city. Although
the Nazis were only tolerating Jewish lawyers with a Frontkämpfer-
background, that is, individuals who had been involved in military
28  Ernst Fraenkel, “XLIII,” Die Justiz, February 1933, reprinted in Sinzheimer and
Fraenkel, Die Justiz in der Weimarer Republik, 396.
29  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 92.
30  For a comprehensive overview, see Saul Friedländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews,
vol. 1: The Years of Persecution, 1933–1939 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1997).
See also Martin Dean, Robbing the Jews: The Confiscation of Jewish Property in the
Holocaust, 1933–1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008) and Wolfgang
Benz, ed., Die Juden in Deutschland 1933–1945: Leben unter nationalsozialistischer
Herrschaft (Munich: Beck, 1988).
31  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 99.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
xxxvi
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxvi
combat on the frontlines of World War I, Fraenkel was able to provide
the requisite testimonies and the prohibition against him was lifted
on May 11, 1933.32 Thus began Fraenkel’s adventure inside the belly of
what would become, in the late 1930s, the Nazi behemoth.
Though his file was reviewed once more in 1934, this time for sus-
pected “communist activity,” Fraenkel managed to muddle through,
taking on ever more sensitive cases. While his roster of clients had
previously centered on those caught up in labor law-related disputes,
Fraenkel in the following years became increasingly involved in the
legal representation of political activists on the left. He later recalled
that it was common, even for defense attorneys, to push for lengthy
prison sentences in order to spare clients the terror of the Nazi con-
centration camps to where they would likely have been sent in the
event of an acquittal or lesser sentence.33 Fraenkel readily acknowl-
edged the collusion of “humane judges” (“humane Richter”) who for
the same reason imposed lengthy prison sentences on defendants
who stood to otherwise fall into the hands of the prerogative state.34
But Fraenkel resisted the regime not just in the courtroom but also
in print. In 1934, under the pseudonym “Frank III,” he published a
provocative analysis of Nazi criminal justice in the Sozialistische
Warte, the periodical of the Internationaler Sozialistischer Kampfbund
(International Socialist Militant League, ISK).35 It recounts, pars pro
toto, the criminal proceeding against Oskar Schulze, a metalworker
32  It bears emphasizing that Neumann’s situation was different from Fraenkel’s. He
did not enjoy the limited and temporary privilege of a former Frontsoldat, which is
why his situation in 1933 was more precarious than Fraenkel’s.
33  Fraenkel describes one such case in Appendix II to the 1974 German Edition of
The Dual State. His summary of the proceeding before the Amtsgericht (district court)
Berlin appears in this volume for the first time in English translation.
34  Fraenkel reflected on this time and its legal tactics, in a typically detached fash-
ion, in “Auflösung und Verfall des Rechts im III. Reich” [1960], in Ernst Fraenkel,
Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2: Nationalsozialismus und Widerstand, edited by Alexander
v. Brünneck, Hubertus Buchstein, and Gerhard Göhler (Baden-Baden: Nomos, 1999),
617–18. For a discussion of specific cases, see Douglas G. Morris, “The Dual State
Reframed: Ernst Fraenkel’s Political Clients and His Theory of the Nazi Legal System,”
Leo Baeck Institute Yearbook, vol. 58 (2013), 5–21. For a recent account of a “humane”
Nazi judge, in Fraenkel’s parlance, see Herlinde Pauer-Studer and J. David Velleman,
Konrad Morgen: The Conscience of a Nazi Judge (London: Palgrave, 2015).
35  Ernst Fraenkel, “In der Maschine der politischen Strafjustiz des III. Reiches”
[1934], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 475–484. On the ISK’s role and strat-
egies of contention in the resistance to Nazism, see Sabine Lemke-Müller, ed., Ethik
des Widerstands: Der Kampf des Internationalen Sozialistischen Kampfbundes (ISK)
gegen den Nationalsozialismus (Bonn: Dietz, 1996).

--- Sayfa 38 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxvii
 
xxxvi
from Berlin, its perverse outcome, and the investigation and adjudi-
cation that directly led to it. For Fraenkel, it was meaningful, and thus
important to publicize, because as an example of political justice it
represented “an everyday occurrence” (“eine alltägliche Geschichte”).36
In 1935, this time under the pseudonym “Fritz Dreher,” Fraenkel pub-
lished again in the Sozialistische Warte.37 This time it was a rallying
cry. Fraenkel was seized by a desire to energize and fortify resistance
to Nazi rule. His biographer has observed that it was at this moment
that Fraenkel gave up his analytical detachment and “political action
became the center” of his depleted life.38 During this more overt phase
of his resistance, Fraenkel called upon “socialist workers” to take on
a leadership role.39 Had Nazi authorities uncovered Fraenkel’s pseu-
donymous identity, he would most certainly have been tried—and
sentenced—for high treason. His legal representation of some of the
resisting Jews of Berlin was already a thorn in the Nazi authorities’
side. In the fall of 1938, the Fraenkels left Nazi Germany in great
haste. Fraenkel’s name had appeared on a Gestapo list. His life was
now in danger.
After a brief spell in Great Britain, Fraenkel and his wife found ref-
uge in the United States. It was an extraordinarily trying time for him.
His professional life was in tatters, income meager or non-existent.
With no other prospects, he decided to become a student again. In
the fall of 1939, he enrolled for a J.D. at the University of Chicago
Law School. To finance his studies, Fraenkel applied and received a
highly competitive scholarship from the American Committee for
the Guidance of Professional Personnel. As part of his application,
Fraenkel had included the second English-language draft of The
Dual State.
In the remainder, I chart the long and winding road that led to
the publication of The Dual State. Fraenkel certainly took the one less
traveled by. I show why, and how, this made all the difference: how it
resulted in the making of a slow-burning classic, the intellectual signif-
icance of which far surpasses that of the other, more influential book
about the Nazi dictatorship that appeared in the early 1940s—Franz
36  Fraenkel, “In der Maschine der politischen Strafjustiz des III. Reiches” [1934],
475.
37  Ernst Fraenkel, “Der Sinn illegaler Arbeit,” in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften,
vol. 2, 491–7.
38  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 116.
39  Fraenkel, “Der Sinn illegaler Arbeit,” 495.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
xxxviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxvii
Neumann’s widely known Behemoth:  The Structure and Practice of
National Socialism, also published by Oxford University Press, in
1942, and in a substantially enlarged edition in 1944. Fraenkel’s unique
experiences and dangerous encounters in Nazi Germany alienated
him from most of the German Jewish refugees that he came across
in exile in the United States. But his fiercely independent streak and
intellectual confidence ensured that he weathered unharmed the crit-
icism with which some of the cognoscenti in New York—especially
at the New School for Social Research—greeted his ideas about the
institutional logic(s) of Nazi rule.
THE GESTATION OF THE DUAL STATE
Fraenkel completed the manuscript for the English edition of The Dual
State on June 15, 1940.40 Oxford University Press published it in early
1941. But the journey from the book’s conception to its eventual pub-
lication was arduous and probably more so than Fraenkel anticipated
when he first commenced his research in Nazi Germany in 1936.
Fraenkel was one of the most visible jurists in Weimar Germany.
Alongside Max Alsberg, Hermann Heller, Max Hirschberg, Hans
Kelsen, Otto Kahn-Freund, Otto Kirchheimer, Franz Neumann,
Gustav Radbruch, Carl Schmitt, and Hugo Sinzheimer, to name but
the most recognizable theorists and practitioners, he was a party to
some of the most important legal debates of his time.41 As a veteran of
World War I, he was allowed to practice law until November 30, 1938,
when all remaining lawyers of Jewish ancestry were banned from
their profession. With the “Fifth Ordinance of the Reich Citizenship
Law” (Fünfte Verordnung zum Reichsbürgergesetz) of September 27,
1938, the Nazi regime completed its purge of the legal profession.42
40  Ernst Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” in this volume, xiii–xxi.
41  For biographical sketches of left-leaning jurists in Weimar and Nazi Germany,
see, most notably, Kritische Justiz, ed., Streitbare Juristen:  Eine andere Tradition
(Baden-Baden:  Nomos, 1988); and Bundesrechtsanwaltskammer, ed., Anwalt
ohne Recht:  Schicksale jüdischer Anwälte in Deutschland nach 1933 (Berlin:  be.bra
Verlag, 2007).
42  Reichsgesetzblatt 1938 I, 1403–1406. For a comprehensive compilation of
Nazi decrees, legislation, and other legal instruments, see Ingo von Münch, ed.,
Gesetze des NS-Staates:  Dokumente eines Unrechtssystems, third, enlarged edition
(Paderborn: Schöningh, 1994).

--- Sayfa 40 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xxxix
 
xxxix
The first, partial purge had taken place shortly after Hitler’s seizure
of power in 1933, when the newly installed regime, in connection
with the more general “Law for the Restoration of the Professional
Civil Service” (Gesetz zur Wiederherstellung des Berufsbeamtentums),
on April 7, 1933 adopted a law mandating the disbarment of Jewish
lawyers by September 30 of that year.43 At the time, the 4,394 German
lawyers with a Jewish background accounted for 20 percent of the
approximately 19,500 members of the Bar in Germany.44
Yet to the chagrin of various legal representatives of the Nazi regime,
Fraenkel and a considerable number of other Jewish lawyers were
exempt from the provisions of this “Law on Admission to the Bar”
(Gesetz über die Zulassung zur Rechtsanwaltschaft).45 Either they had,
like Fraenkel, contributed to the war effort, had lost fathers or sons
in World War I, or they had opened their legal practice prior to 1914,
in which case they were classified as Altanwälte (“Old Lawyers”) and
thus also entitled to continued bar membership.46 Konrad Jarausch
estimates that 60 percent of all Jewish lawyers fell into one of these
categories and thus outside of the purview of the legal ban.47 Ingo
Müller found that an even larger percentage escaped the draconian
legislation: He calculated that 2,900 Jewish lawyers, or 65 percent of
their total number, “were still permitted to practice,” whereas 1,500
were stripped off their Bar membership during this first concerted
effort at displacing Germany’s Jews from legal life.48 Saul Friedländer,
finally, suggests that as many as 70 percent of Jewish lawyers were
43  Reichsgesetzblatt 1933 I, 175–7.
44  Ingo Müller, Hitler’s Justice: The Courts of the Third Reich, translated by Deborah
Lucas Schneider (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991), 61. See also Fritz
Osler, “Rechtsanwälte in der NS-Zeit,” Anwaltsblatt, vol. 33 (1983), 59. Jarausch
puts the number of attorneys and notaries who were practicing in Germany in
1933 at 19,364. On his count, the legal profession that year was comprised of 10,450
judges. See Konrad Jarausch, The Unfree Professions:  German Lawyers, Teachers,
and Engineers, 1900–1950 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 237. For an
overview of the development of the German Bar from its establishment in 1878
until 1945, with particular reference to the period of Nazi dictatorship, see Kenneth
C. H. Willig, “The Bar in the Third Reich,” American Journal of Legal History, vol.
20 (1976), 1–14.
45  Reichsgesetzblatt 1933 I, 188–9.
46  This exemption was included in the legislation at the urging of Reich President
Paul von Hindenburg.
47  Jarausch, The Unfree Professions, 129.
48  Müller, Hitler’s Justice, 61. See also Fritz Osler, “Rechstanwälte in der NS-Zeit,”
Anwaltsblatt, vol. 33 (1983), 61.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
xl
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xl
nominally allowed to continue to work in their chosen profession.49
Whatever the exact figure may be, a substantial number of Jewish
lawyers remained visible in public life, if only for a few more years.
But this visibility must not be misinterpreted, and even it declined
almost immediately:
Though still allowed to practice, Jewish lawyers were excluded from the
national association of lawyers and listed not in its annual directory
but in a separate guide; all in all, notwithstanding the support of some
Aryan institutions and individuals, they worked under a “boycott by
fear.”50
The restrictions for Jewish lawyers were becoming ever more compre-
hensive and ultimately culminated in the outright ban of 1938. This
worsening of conditions ultimately caused Fraenkel to flee his native
Germany.
During the five interim years—that is, the period 1933–1938—
Fraenkel was reluctantly afforded a very uncomfortable and often
dangerous front row seat to the gradual destruction of the German
Rechtsstaat. He had horrifying (but scholarly invaluable) access as a
participant observer to one of the most far-reaching—and violent—
legal transformations ever undertaken. The Dual State is the prod-
uct of this extraordinary exposure to, and sustained reflection on,
the legal origins of Nazi dictatorship. From his unique vantage
point, and with a declining roster of clients, Fraenkel made theo-
retical sense, as best he could, of what was happening around him.
Drawing on his disciplinary training in both law and history—and
taking a leaf from the methodology of the social sciences that Max
Weber had propagated—Fraenkel embarked on what he conceived
of as an exercise in the sociology of law.51
49  Friedländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews, vol. 1, 29. Friedländer works with a
slightly larger starting figure than Müller, writing of 4,585 Jewish lawyers to begin
with. Of these he believes, 3,167 initially retained their Bar membership. Out of 717
Jewish judges and state prosecutors, another 336 continued their work. Based on these
figures, Friedländer claims that Jews, in June 1933, still comprised more than 16 per-
cent “of all practicing lawyers in Germany.” Ibid., 29. For his figures, Friedländer draws
on Avraham Barkai, From Boycott to Annihilation: The Economic Struggle of German
Jews, 1933–1943, translated by William Templer (Hanover: University Press of New
England, 1989), 4.
50  Friedländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews, vol. 1, 29.
51  Ernst Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte
Schriften, vol. 2, 504.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xli
 
xli
“The Third Reich as a Dual State” (1937)
The concept of the dual state first found its way into print in 1937 in
an article that Fraenkel wrote under the pseudonym “Conrad Jürgens”
for the Sozialistische Warte, entitled “Das Dritte Reich as Doppelstaat”
(“The Third Reich as a Dual State”).52 In this publication, Fraenkel
chronicled the breakdown of democracy and the rise of dictator-
ship in Weimar Germany. He started with the observation that Nazi
Germany, far from being the unitary state that the Hitler regime pro-
claimed it had established, consisted of two parallel and contending
halves.53 State power (“Staatsgewalt”), Fraenkel argued, resided in
each of these halves. The institutional structures were located side-
by-side (“nebeneinander”) but operating at loggerheads (“gegenein-
ander”).54 But, and this is where Fraenkel’s analysis departed from
other critical perspectives on the Nazi state that existed at the time,
the institutional divide that he thought to be most significant did not
separate the Nazi state from the NSDAP. According to Fraenkel, state
and party were institutionally fused, virtually indistinguishable in
conceptual terms. More important than the superficial (and empiri-
cally meaningless) distinction between state and party, Fraenkel
argued, was the division that existed within the state. He believed it
essential to introduce a standard of institutional differentiation “into
the structure of the state” (“in das Gefüge des Staates”) itself.55 In his
first attempt at theorizing the nature of the Nazi state, Fraenkel dis-
tinguished between what he called “the state as political unity” (“Staat
als politische Einheit”) and “the state as technical apparatus” (“Staat
als technische[r]‌ Apparat”).56 These formulations were the precursors
for Fraenkel’s twin neologisms: the “Massnahmen-Staat” (for which
he subsequently adopted the spelling “Massnahmenstaat” and even-
tually that of “Maßnahmenstaat” and rendered as “prerogative state”
in the English translation that he would authorize in 1940) and the
“Normen-Staat” (later spelled Normenstaat and translated as “norma-
tive state”).57
Fraenkel traced the remote origins of the institutional bifurcation
of the Nazi state back to the transition from “the bureaucratization of
politics” (“Bürokratisierung der Politik”) in Wilhelmine Germany to
“the politicization of the bureaucracy” (“Politisierung der Bürokratie”)
52  Ibid., 504–19.
53  Ibid., 505.
54  Ibid., 505.
55  Ibid., 505.
56  Ibid., 505.
57  For the original spelling, see ibid., 509, 512, 514.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
xlii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlii
in Weimar Germany.58 The legacies of these countervailing devel-
opments in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, he
maintained, threw up a governance challenge that none of the pre-
ceding regimes in Germany had solved. The solution that the new
authoritarian regime devised, according to Fraenkel, was to create an
institutional dispensation in which political and technical logics of
governance co-existed, albeit in an unequal fashion. The duality of the
Nazi state was imbalanced, characterized as it was by the “primacy”
(“Primat”) of the political over the technical apparatus of the state.59
As Fraenkel put it, “Germany today lives by dual law” (“Deutschland
lebt heute nach doppeltem Recht”).60 But, as he hastened to add, it was
not just a question of governance by two types of law; it also gave rise
to governance by different principles of law.
What Fraenkel meant was that legal governance in the technical
apparatus of state was structured by an elaborate and systematic set
of established legal norms, rules, codes, and procedures. By contrast,
legal governance in the “political state” (“politischen Staat”) was not
systematic, but wanton and senseless. In Fraenkel’s reading, the few
legal provisions that were explicitly crafted for the political state,
and which, in theory at least, structured its operation, were “with-
out exception so shallow in substantive terms that they amount to no
more than the appearance of a legal norm” (“ausnahmslos inhaltlich
so farblos, daß sie lediglich den Schein einer Rechtsnorm darstellen”).61
Another way of putting this is that the technical state (that is, the
normative state) abided by the rule of law, whereas the political state
(that is, the prerogative state) embodied rule by law. The former was
governed by formal rationality, the latter by substantive rational-
ity.62 The primacy of the prerogative over the normative state, argued
Fraenkel, was evidenced by the fact that the validity of the pre-Nazi
legal norms, rules, codes, and procedures of the normative state was
contingent; it was contingent on non-abrogation and non-suspension
by the prerogative state.
The question arises why the Nazi regime did not do away with the
remnants of the Rechtsstaat entirely. After all, as Fraenkel pointed out,
the Nazis ridiculed any state that was “merely Rechtsstaat” (“nichts
als Rechtsstaat”), this uniquely German variant of the rule-of-law
58  Ibid., 507.
59  Ibid., 508.
60  Ibid., 509.
61  Ibid., 509.
62  Ibid., 510. See also my discussion of Weber’s typology of law below.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xliii
 
xliii
state.63 He reminded his readers that Ernst Forsthoff, one of the
regime’s young constitutional lawyers, had not long ago declared the
pure Rechtsstaat to be a state lacking in “honor and dignity” (“Ehre
und Würde”).64 But if the Nazis regarded the legacies of Weimar law
as “law without value” (“Recht ohne Wert”), and if they were further
convinced that the NSDAP’s political manifesto was the instrument
for injecting value into the (literally) meaningless legal order, why
did the normative state of old survive? Indeed, why did this (in Nazi
eyes) substantively hollow, formally rational state not only survive but
occupy “a significant place” (“einen bedeutenden Platz”) in the insti-
tutional architecture of the Nazi regime, as Fraenkel claimed it did?65
In this first stab at providing an answer, Fraenkel turned to ortho-
doxy. He believed that a dictator would not embrace a normative
state for the sake of principle. It would always be a strategic choice.
One of the most immediate challenges the Nazis faced was how to
ensure that the country would thrive economically in the midst of
a social and racial revolution.66 Upon seizing power, Hitler and his
newly incumbent government continued on, and heavily fortified, the
well-worn path toward state interventionism into the economy that
governing elites in Weimar Republic had established. But, as Adam
Tooze has pointed out, “though it is important to do justice to the
shift in power relations between state and business that undoubtedly
occurred in the early 1930s, we must be careful to avoid falling into
the trap of viewing German business merely as the passive object of
the regime’s draconian new system of regulation.”67 This brings us
back to Fraenkel, who, in 1937, proffered a Marxist interpretation of
the origins and logic of Nazi Germany’s dual state.
It is worth reconstructing this interpretation in some detail because
it all but disappeared, for reasons to be explained below, from the 1941
edition of The Dual State. In 1937, Fraenkel started with the assump-
tion that capitalism had grown “economically and ideologically impo-
tent.”68 He asserted that Germany’s “high capitalism” of the 1920s was
63  Ibid., 510.
64  Ernst Forsthoff, Der totale Staat (Hamburg:  Hanseatische Verlagsanstalt,
1933), 30.
65  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 512.
66  Generally, see Dan Silverman, Hitler’s Economy: Nazi Work Creation Programs,
1933–1936 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998).
67  Adam Tooze, The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi
Economy (London: Penguin, 2008), 114.
68  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 517.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
xliv
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xliv
doomed to extinction unless revived by a strategic alliance with a
racial state whose ambition to rearm the nation would inject the ail-
ing economy with the funds necessary to secure its survival. With
both the Nazi regime and the weakened “capitalist order,” as Fraenkel
called it, having an immediate interest in preserving the foundations
of economic activity in Germany, it followed that the march of the
prerogative state had to be slowed down. The temporary retention of
the normative state served as the necessary break on the consolida-
tion of totalitarianism in Nazi Germany. Here is how Fraenkel put it
in 1937:
If capitalism wants to remain capitalism, it requires at home a state appa-
ratus that recognizes the rules of formal rationality, for without a pre-
dictability of opportunities, without legal certainty (“Rechtssicherheit”),
capitalist planning is impossible. Capitalism today demands of the state
a double (“ein Doppeltes”): Because capitalism is capitalism, it demands,
first, the formally rational order of a technically intact state. Because
capitalism is impotent, it demands, furthermore, a state that provides
the political supports (“politischen Stützen”) necessary to ensure its
continued existence; a state with enemies against which capitalism is
allowed to arm … 69
The consequences of this capitalist alignment with the Nazi dictator-
ship produced positive externalities for political and economic elites
alike: “What Hitler’s regime positively enabled German business to
do was to recover from the disastrous recession, to accumulate capital
and to engage in high-pressure development of certain key technolo-
gies: the technologies necessary to achieve the regime’s twin objectives
of increased self-sufficiency (autarchy) and rearmament.”70 Fraenkel
was convinced that Germany’s capitalists sacrificed the well-being of
the Nazis’ real and imagined enemies on the altar of economic accu-
mulation. As he put it, borrowing Marxist terminology, “the dual state
is the ideological superstructure (Überbau) of a capitalism that thrives
on politics because it is unable to exist any longer without politics.”71
The root cause for this malaise Fraenkel detected in the changing
character of politics, which he believed had been partially brought
about by a radical transformation of the “concept of the political”
(“Begriff des Politischen”) in interwar Germany.72 For him, the rise of
69  Ibid., 518.
70  Tooze, The Wages of Destruction, 114.
71  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 518.
72  Ibid., 514.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlv
 
xlv
the “political leadership state” (“politische[r]‌ Führer-Staat”), the insti-
tutional antecedent of the full-blown prerogative state, was causally
related to the intellectual redrawing of the boundaries of politics and
of the political by members of what became known as the Konservative
Revolution, a loosely connected movement of conservatives and reac-
tionaries that was intent on interrupting their country’s quickening
march to modernity.73 He wrote with concern about the “depolitici-
zation of the state,” a gradual process that he believed was hastened
when the country’s highest court, the Reichsgericht, the federal high
court for civil and criminal matters, in a decision in which one of its
chambers adjudicated the question of whether a member of the SA
was, legally speaking, a civil servant. Its finding that the individual in
question could not be considered a civil servant because his activities
were of a political nature, and that only members of the normative
state were bureaucrats, properly understood, Fraenkel found unper-
suasive. He rejected the artificial distinction between Nazi state and
Nazi party that underpinned the Reichsgericht’s reasoning. By rely-
ing on an impossibly narrow concept of the state (that is, the state as
the technical apparatus of the normative state), the judges legitimated
the Nazis’ campaign to depoliticize the state. Their decision embod-
ied the infamous Hitlerian injunction that the state did not govern
the NSDAP, but the NSDAP the state.74 This, said Fraenkel, was the
institutional realization of a new concept of the political—that of Carl
Schmitt.75
73  Ibid., 507. On the anatomy of the so-called “Conservative Revolution” in Weimar
Germany, see, most important, Fritz Stern, The Politics of Cultural Despair: A Study
in the Rise of the Germanic Ideology (Berkeley: University of California Press, [1961]
1992); Jeffrey Herf, Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture, and Politics in Weimar
and the Third Reich (Cambridge University Press, 1984); Stefan Breuer, Anatomie
der Konservativen Revolution (Darmstadt:  Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,
1993); Rolf Peter Sieferle, Die Konservative Revolution:  Fünf biographische Skizzen
(Frankfurt: Fischer, 1995); and Martin Travers, Critics of Modernity: The Literature of
the Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1890-1933 (New York: Peter Lang, 2001). For
a sympathetic chronicle of the Konservative Revolution by the scholar who, in 1949,
invented the term, see Armin Mohler, Die Konservative Revolution in Deutschland
1918–1932: Ein Handbuch, second, enlarged edition (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1972). On anti-democratic thought in interwar Germany more gen-
erally, see Kurt Sontheimer, Antidemokratisches Denken in der Weimarer Republik
(Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag, [1962] 1978).
74  Ibid., 514.
75  On Carl Schmitt, see, most recently, the contributions to Jens Meierhenrich and
Oliver Simons, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Carl Schmitt (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2016).

--- Sayfa 47 ---
xlvi
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlvi
In his first exposition of the dual-state argument, Fraenkel described
Schmitt as “the most prominent figure in the neo-German state the-
ory” (“der prominenteste Kopf der neudeutschen Staatsrecht­slehre”).76
He singled him out for opprobrium, holding the famous jurist to
account for having paved the way, especially with the publication of
Die geistesgeschichtliche Lage des heutigen Parlamentarismus (The Crisis
of Parliamentary Democracy) in 1923, for the rise of the “National-
Socialist counter-state” (“nationalsozialistische Gegenstaat”). In addi-
tion to this failing, Fraenkel held Schmitt to task for having deliberately
obscured the nature and meaning of political activity. As Fraenkel
wrote, “It is not at all the case that the substance of politics (“der
Inhalt dessen, was Politik ist”) is explained by the concept of the politi-
cal.”77 This is what Fraenkel called the “political function” (“politische
Funktion”) of Schmitt’s concept of the political.78 He warned that an
insistence on the friend–enemy distinction as the defining attribute
of the concept of the political enabled and legitimated “activity for
activity’s sake” (“Aktivität um der Aktivität willen”) in the pursuit of
contentious politics.79 If politics is no longer about substantive issues,
but only existential enemies, the road via the prerogative state looks
less like a detour and more like a straight path to a more meaning-
ful politics. Fraenkel paraphrased Schmitt: “It is of secondary impor-
tance who the enemy is. Key is that an enemy exists at all. Without an
enemy, there is no politics ….”80 If we believe Fraenkel, what Schmitt
concealed from his readers was that capitalism itself was dependent on
a categorization of “the other,” of a division of the world into friends
and enemies:  “Without a potential enemy, one against whom [the
country] can be mobilized and armed, capitalism will cease to exist in
Germany.”81
Fraenkel was prescient about the political economy of dictatorship.
He warned of the predictable consequences of collusion between big
76  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 506. Carl Schmitt, The Crisis
of Parliamentary Democracy, translated by Ellen Kennedy (Cambridge: MIT Press,
[1923] 1988).
77  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 515.
78  Ibid., 515.
79  Fraenkel here invoked a formulation that Hermann Heller had used in Europa
und der Fascismus (Berlin: De Gruyter, [1929] 2014), the phrase apparently a fascist’s
response to the question of what characterized the nature of fascism. Fraenkel, “Das
Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 515.
80  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 517.
81  Ibid., 517.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlvii
 
xlvii
business and the racial state. The 1937 article ended on a rhetorically
powerful note. Fraenkel declared that embedded in the “substantive
rationality of National Socialism” was a desire for the destruction of
the world. National Socialism was only “alive,” he opined, because “it
was readying itself to kill” (“[der Nationalsozialismus] nur dadurch zu
leben vermag, daß er sich zum Töten vorbereitet”).82
The Urdoppelstaat (1938)
Fraenkel’s first foray in the Sozialistische Warte quickly developed into a
draft, clandestine manuscript, entitled Der Doppelstaat: Ein Beitrag zur
Staatslehre der deutschen Diktatur (The Dual State: A Contribution to the
State Theory of the German Dictatorship; hereinafter Urdoppelstaat).83
The book-length treatment retained the unique blend of reason and
emotion—of, on the one hand, dispassionate analysis that embodied
the Weberian ideal of value neutrality, and, on the other, vociferous
advocacy in opposition to the Nazi destruction of the Rechtsstaat.
Given its explosive nature, one of Fraenkel’s clients, Wilhelm Urban,
a coal merchant active in the anti-Nazi resistance, temporarily hid the
sensitive draft.84 The book manuscript, written in German and only
ever intended for an audience in his fatherland, found its way to the
United States via France by way of a French embassy official. One of
Fraenkel’s most trusted colleagues in this period—Fritz Eberhardt
(the pseudonym of Hellmut von Rauschenplat)—was not only
critical to the beginnings of the Urdoppelstaat but also to its
survival.85 As Fraenkel recalled in his preface to the 1974 German
edition:
This book could not have been completed without the encourage-
ment and continuous support of the Internationaler Sozialistischer
Kampfbund, which was very active and exemplarily disciplined in
82  Ibid., 519.
83  Ernst Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938], in Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2,
267–473.
84  Ernst Fraenkel, “Erklärung über die Tätigkeit des Herrn Wilhelm Urban in den
Jahren 1933 bis 1938 vom 22. Oktober 1953,” BArch N 1274 (Fraenkel, Ernst)/11,
reprinted in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 625.
85  Note that uncertainty surrounds the spelling of von Rauschenplat’s pseudonym.
Fraenkel himself, in the 1974 German edition, rendered it as “Eberhardt,” which
I have adopted. The editors of the 2012 German edition of The Dual State have done
the same. However, both Fraenkel’s biographer and the editors of his collected works
have opted for “Eberhard” instead.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
xlviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlviii
the illegal underground movement. For years, I worked very closely
with their Head of Domestic Affairs (“Inlandsleiter”) Dr. Hellmut von
Rauschenplat (Dr. Fritz Eberhardt), who was responsible for coordinat-
ing the movement’s local resistance groups as well as for liaising with
the Emigration Directorate (“Emigrationsleitung”), which was based in
Paris. During long walks, we exchanged ideas about the meaning and
purpose of illegal work (“illegaler Arbeit”) and sought to gain greater
clarity about the phenomenon of National Socialism. In the wake of
such exchanges, I repeatedly dictated the conclusions we had reached in
the form of short essays to Fritz Eberhardt who took stenographic notes
(“in das Stenogramm diktiert”). They were intended for publication in
the ISK journal Sozialistische Warte, which was published in Paris and
subsequently distributed in Germany in the form of illegal flyers (“ille-
gale Flugblätter”)…. One of these articles contains the original version
(“Urfassung”) of The Dual State.86
Throughout his life, Fraenkel stated that the beginnings of the dual
state concept lay in his personal encounters with the Hitler regime—
as a lawyer, a social democrat, and a Jew. While allowed to practice
law as a veteran of World War I, Fraenkel was simultaneously sub-
jected to official and unofficial discrimination and intimidation. This
schizophrenic experience prompted the idea of the dual state as a
metaphor and concept—a state consisting of two halves, with con-
flicting imperatives. Fraenkel described the origins of his clandestine
manuscript most eloquently (and comprehensively) in the preface to
the 1974 German edition of The Dual State, which appears in this
volume for the first time in English translation:
The book is the result of internal emigration (“innere Emigration”).
Its first version, which is also the foundation for this German edition,
was written in an atmosphere of lawlessness and terror. It was based
on sources that I collected in National Socialist Berlin, and on impres-
sions that were forced upon me day in, day out (“die sich mir tagtäglich
aufgedrängt haben”). It was conceived out of the need to make sense of
these experiences theoretically in order to be able to cope with them.
They stem mostly, though not exclusively, from my work as a practicing
lawyer in Berlin in the years 1933–1938. Despite being Jewish, I was
permitted, due to my military service during the [First World] War, to
practice at the bar even after 1933. The ambivalence of my bourgeois
existence caused me to be particularly attuned to the contradictoriness
(“Widersprüchlichkeit”) of the Hitler regime. Though, legally speaking,
86  Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” xviii.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
xlix
 
xlix
an equal member of the Bar, wherever I went, I was nonetheless subject
to harassments, discriminations, and humiliations that emanated exclu-
sively from the staatstragende Partei [literally: state-sustaining political
party, i.e., the ruling Nazi party]. Anyone who did not shut his or her
eyes to the reality of the Hitler dictatorship’s administrative and judicial
practices, must have been affected by the frivolous cynicism with which
the state and the [Nazi] party called into question, for entire spheres
of life, the validity of the legal order while, at the same time, applying,
with bureaucratic exactness (“mit bürokratischer Exaktheit”), exactly
the same legal provisions in situations that were said to be different
(“anders bewerteten Situationen”).87
In methodological terms, The Dual State exemplifies the practice of
“extracting new ideas at close range.”88 Participant observation aside,
much of the research for the Urdoppelstaat was based on second-
ary sources as well as court cases. Fraenkel undertook it in Berlin’s
famous Staatsbibliothek, at the time the largest library in the German-
speaking world. It is important to fully appreciate Fraenkel’s schol-
arly achievement: He managed to research and write—from inside
Nazi Germany—a sophisticated analysis of the institutional forma-
tion, transformation, and deformation of both law and the state in
the country of his birth, and he did so by relying exclusively on par-
ticipant observation and sources acceptable to the Nazis.89 And with
little regard for his safety. When he recounted, years later, his days of
researching materials for the Urdoppelstaat, Fraenkel recalled that he
tried to confuse and ditch Nazi spies in the Staatsbibliothek by order-
ing a slew of unrelated titles about every topic under the sun.
Despite the fact that Fraenkel’s insurgent scholarship was taking up
a great deal of his time, he continued to practice law in the courts of
the “Third Reich.” He was wont to describe his role in the transition
from authoritarianism to totalitarianism in Nazi Germany to friends
as that of a “switchman” (“Weichensteller”):
That is, I regarded it an essential part of my efforts to ensure that a given
case was dealt with under the auspices of the “normative state,” and
87  Ibid., xv.
88  David Collier, “Data, Field Work, and Extracting New Ideas at Close Range,”
APSA-CP: Newsletter of the Organized Section in Comparative Politics of the American
Political Science Association, no. 10 (1999), 1–6.
89  Ernst Fraenkel, “Preface” [1939], New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and
Archives Division, American Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel
records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst, “The Dual State.”

--- Sayfa 51 ---
l
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
l
not end up in the “prerogative state.” Colleagues with whom I was on
friendly terms confirmed that they, too, had repeatedly worked toward
making sure that their clients were punished in a court of law (“daß
ihre Mandanten gerichtlich bestraft würden”) [rather than risking their
arbitrary punishment in the prerogative state].90
Eventually, the prerogative state turned on Fraenkel himself. When,
in 1935, his name appeared on a Gestapo list of thirteen lawyers
whose representation of SPD defendants had rankled the Nazi
authorities, Fraenkel and his wife decided to seek refuge abroad. They
left Germany on September 20, 1938, a mere six weeks before the
first systematic violent anti-Jewish pogrom—known by the euphe-
mism “Kristallnacht”—in the course of which 267 synagogues were
destroyed, an estimated 7,500 Jewish commercial establishments van-
dalized or looted or both, and 30,000 Jewish males rounded up and
transferred to concentration camps.91
After a brief stay in London, to where Fraenkel’s fellow lawyer
friends Otto Kahn-Freund and Franz Neumann had previously
emigrated, the Fraenkels fled to New  York. Family connections
meant that entry to the United States was assured and a visa easily
obtained. Fraenkel’s most important cargo—what he referred to as the
Urdoppelstaat—made the journey by way of a French embassy official
in Berlin. The brave diplomat, whom Eberhardt had drafted into the
cause, hid the book manuscript in his diplomatic luggage and smug-
gled it to Paris—thus securing the work’s survival.92 We now know that
a carbon copy was buried for safekeeping in the garden of Otto and
Susanne Suhr, but it was the well-travelled copy of the Urdoppelstaat
that would serve as the foundation for the revision in exile.93 This first
draft (“die erste Fassung”) was the nucleus of The Dual State.94
90  Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” xix.
91  Nikolaus Wachsmann, KL:  A  History of the Nazi Concentration Camps
(New York: Little, Brown, 2015), 181.
92  Fraenkel, for example, used the term “Ur-Doppelstaat” (nowadays usually ren-
dered as Urdoppelstaat) in his preface to the first German edition of The Dual State,
published in 1974. See his “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” TBA. At the time,
this original German version was thought lost. It resurfaced only years later.
93  Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” xiii. The source for the anec-
dote about the carbon copy is Wolfgang Müller. He made this claim on September 29,
2009, as quoted in Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 357, fn. 148. Otto Suhr, a Social
Democrat, was a lifelong friend of Fraenkel’s. Between 1955 and his death in 1957,
Suhr was mayor of West Berlin. In 1920, Suhr had founded the Deutsche Hochschule
für Politik, in effect the country’s first department of political science.
94  Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” xiii.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
li
 
li
Alexander v. Brünneck, the editor of Fraenkel’s collected writings
from and about the Nazi period, has detected “significant differences”
between the Urdoppelstaat (completed in 1938) and The Dual State
(completed in 1940). Fraenkel himself downplayed any such differ-
ences, suggesting they were about semantics rather than substance.95
But v.  Brünneck, a long-standing scholar and former student of
Fraenkel, is undeniably correct. Four major differences stand out.
First, the Urdoppelstaat was shorter than The Dual State. By
Fraenkel’s own estimation, the Urdoppelstaat accounted for no more
than 60 percent of the manuscript for The Dual State.96 If we compare
the length of both versions as they appear (in German) in the collected
works, it is obvious that Fraenkel’s estimation was off the mark.97
Although it is true that the published (German) version of 1974 was
longer than the Urdoppelstaat, the difference was less substantial than
Fraenkel thought. Whereas the 1999 reprint in the collected works of
the 1974 German translation (a retranslation of the 1941 OUP edi-
tion) comes in at 226 pages, the reprint of the Urdoppelstaat is 206
pages long. If the latter had comprised the 60 percent of The Dual
State that Fraenkel thought it did, its reprint in the collected works
should not have amounted to more than 136 pages.98 In other words,
the Urdoppelstaat was shorter than The Dual State, but only slightly
so, not significantly, as Fraenkel maintained.
These unexpected similarities in length aside, certain sections in The
Dual State are more elaborate, others less so, than in the Urdoppelstaat.
See Table 1. For the publication of The Dual State, Fraenkel sub-
stantially condensed Chapter 2 in Part II, which analyzed the Nazi
onslaught on natural law in Germany. The revised analysis is five print
pages shorter. Gone is the separate excursus on Hegel’s influence on
Nazi legal theory. Aspects of this account Fraenkel folded into the now
extended analysis of what in 1941 he called “secular natural law” (“das
weltliche Naturrecht”)—and which he distinguished from “Christian
95  Ibid., xiii–xiv.
96  Ernst Fraenkel, Letter to Alexander v. Brünneck, April 23, 1970, BArch N 1274
(Fraenkel, Ernst)/98. See also v. Brünneck, “Vorwort zu diesem Band” [vol. 2], 17.
97  Compare Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat; and Ernst Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat
[1974], in Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 33–266.
98  Ernst Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat [1974], in Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol.
2, 33–259 (excluding three appendices that were neither parts of the Urdoppelstaat
nor the 1941 English edition); Ernst Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938], in Fraenkel,
Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 267–473. By way of comparison, the published English
edition of 1941 was 248 pages long, including end matter.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
lii
Table 1  A Comparison of the Urdoppelstaat (1938) and the Dual State (1941): Structure, Organization, and Length
The Urdoppelstaat (1938)
The Dual State (1941)
Part I: Die Rechtsordnung des Doppelstaates (97 pages)
Part I: Die Rechtsordnung des Doppelstaates (103 pages)
Chapter 1: Der Maßnahmenstaat (52 pages)
Chapter 1: Der Maßnahmenstaat (57 pages)
Chapter 2: Die Grenzen des Maßnahmenstaates (8 pages)
Chapter 2: Die Grenzen des Maßnahmenstaates (6 pages)
Chapter 3: Der Normenstaat (33 pages)
Chapter 3: Der Normenstaat (36 pages)
Part II: Die Rechtslehre des Doppelstaates (49 pages)
Part II: Die Rechtslehre des Doppelstaates (45 pages)
Chapter 1: Die Negation des rationalen Naturrechts durch den
Nationalsozialismus (6 pages)
Chapter 1: Die Ablehnung des rationalen Naturrechts durch den
Nationalsozialismus (7 pages)
Chapter 2: Der Nationalsozialismus im Kampf gegen die Restbestände des
rationalen Naturrechts (22 pages)
Chapter 2: Der Nationalsozialismus im Kampf gegen das Naturrecht (17
pages)
Chapter 3: Nationalsozialismus und gemeinschaftliches Naturrecht (17 pages) Chapter 3: Nationalsozialismus und gemeinschaftliches Naturrecht (17 pages)
Part III: Die Rechtswirklichkeit des Doppelstaates (54 pages)
Part III: Die Rechtswirklichkeit des Doppelstaates (56 pages)
Chapter 1: Die Rechtsgeschichte des Doppelstaates (18 pages)
Chapter 1: Die Rechtsgeschichte des Doppelstaates (17 pages)
Chapter 2: Die Oekonomie des Doppelstaates (8 pages)
Chapter 2: Die ökonomischen Grundlagen des Doppelstaates (16 pages)
Chapter 3: Die Soziologie des Doppelstaates (24 pages)
Chapter 3: Die Soziologie des Doppelstaates (19 pages)
Note: For the sake of accuracy, the comparison is based on the 1999 German editions of both books as they appear in Ernst Fraenkel’s collected works. See Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat
[1938], in Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 267–473; and Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat [1974], in Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 2, 33–266. For the purpose of this exercise, I leave aside for the
moment the editorial and substantive differences between the 1941 English edition and the 1974 German edition. The latter was the product of a slightly modified retranslation of
the former.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
liii
 
liii
natural law” (“das christliche Naturrecht”).99 More significant differ-
ences are noticeable in Part III. There, Fraenkel expanded his analysis
of the political economy of the dual state. In the Urdoppelstaat, he
had devoted eight pages to the topic, three years later the analysis was
twice as long. This is interesting because of a second, substantive dif-
ference between the Urdoppelstaat and The Dual State.
There is diminished evidence in The Dual State of the functional-
ist, class-based analysis of law and society that characterized parts of
the Urdoppelstaat as well as the 1937 article that had preceded it. The
theoretical position of the original argument most certainly owed to
Fraenkel’s left-leaning socialization as well as to the ever-widening social
inequality in interwar Germany that he was witnessing year in, year out.
The turn to class as a conceptual variable came easily, but Fraenkel was
more circumspect in his channeling of the materialist theory of history
than some his contemporaries, including Neumann.100 For example, in
a section of the Urdoppelsaat that did not make it into the 1914 book,
Fraenkel explicitly distanced himself from mainstream, communist
interpretations:
We are far away from claiming that big agriculture (“Großagrarier”) and
heavy industry raised the Hitler movement as their vassal (“Hausknecht”),
so to speak. The course of world history cannot be explained in such sim-
ple terms, nor can the materialist conception of history (“die materialis-
tische Geschichtsauffassung”) be applied in such a crude fashion.101
Fraenkel’s take was more nuanced. He, too, believed that the peculiar
logic of capitalism in Germany had played a role in the rise of the Nazis.
However, his causal logic was less reductionist than that of Germany’s
communists. It was social-democratic in origin, infused with social-
ist ideas, not communist ones. For their elaboration, Fraenkel relied,
among others, on the Austrian-born American economist Joseph
Schumpeter, who would go on to publish, in 1942, Capitalism,
99  Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat [1941], 173–84; Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938],
384–400.
100  See, for example, Franz Neumann’s glowing review of Harold Laski’s 1935 The
State in Theory and Practice, which he praised for coming to “a real Marxist conclu-
sion.” See idem., “On the Marxist Theory of the State” [1935], in Keith Tribe, ed., Social
Democracy and the Rule of Law: Otto Kirchheimer and Franz Neumann (London: Allen
and Unwin, 1987), 76.
101  Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938], 441.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
liv
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
liv
Socialism, and Democracy.102 In the Urdoppelstaat, Fraenkel invoked
Schumpeter’s article “The Sociology of Imperialisms.”103 In the 1918
essay, Schumpeter, while not unsympathetic, cast doubt on the explan-
atory power of “neo-Marxist theory” to account for the phenomenon
of imperialist expansion.104 With the help of a comparative historical
analysis of empirical instances of imperialism, Schumpeter pierced
the universalizing ambition of the materialist conception of history.
Fraenkel applied the essence of Schumpeter’s argument to the case of
Nazism. Reasoning by analogy, he argued that National Socialism was
not a product of capitalism; rather National Socialism (like national-
ism and militarism in Schumpeter’s case) was “capitalized,” with the
effect that National Socialism was recruiting its best personnel (“beste
Kräfte”) from the capitalist ranks.105 Like Schumpeter, Fraenkel was
influenced by Marxist thought. But neither man swallowed the theo-
retical framework whole. The relationship between capitalism and
National Socialism, according to Fraenkel, was mutually constitu-
tive: The former draws in the latter and thereby sustains it; the latter,
in turn, gradually transforms the nature of the former.
Remnants of this interpretation can be found in the draft English
translation (hereinafter the NYPL draft after the New  York Public
Library where it is held). In one part of the typed manuscript, for
example, Fraenkel argued as follows:
The legal order of the Third Reich is thoroughly rationalized in a
functional sense with reference to the regulation of production and
exchange in accordance with capitalistic methods. But late capitalistic
economic activity is not substantially rational. For this reason it has had
recourse to political methods, while giving to these methods the con-
tentlessness [sic] of irrational activity. Capitalism at its high point was a
system of substantial rationality which, relying on the prestabilised [sic]
harmony which guided its destinies, exerted itself to remove irrational
obstacles. When the belief in the substantial rationality of capitalism
disappeared its functionally rationalized organizations still remained.
What is the character of the tension which arises in consequence of this
102  Joseph
A.
Schumpeter,
Capitalism,
Socialism,
and
Democracy
(New York: Harper, 1942).
103  Joseph A. Schumpeter, “The Sociology of Imperialisms” [1918], in Joseph A.
Schumpeter, The Economics and Sociology of Capitalism, edited by Richard Swedberg
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991), 141–219.
104  Schumpeter, “The Sociology of Imperialisms” [1918], 144.
105  Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938], 441.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lv
 
lv
juxtaposition of a substantial rationality in a process of disappearance
and maximally developed functional rationality?106
This section channeled both Marx and Weber. The approach was
Marxist, the argumentation Weberian. But Fraenkel also made recourse
to Karl Mannheim’s recent work on the nature of rationality (which
I discuss in more detail below), notably in his argument about the eco-
nomic origins of dictatorship in the case of Nazi Germany.
Fraenkel toned down this functional interpretation of Nazi dictator-
ship in the transition from Urdoppelstaat to The Dual State. Fraenkel,
likely on the basis of conversations with mentors and colleagues, decided
that the American audience he hoped to reach with the publication of an
English edition might not appreciate an overtly Marxist interpretation
of German history. This brings us to a third major difference between
the Urdoppelstaat and The Dual State: the tone. The Urdoppelstaat was
considerably more passionate than The Dual State. Large chunks of it
had more in common with Fraenkel’s essayistic interventions on behalf
of the ISK in the 1920s and 1930s than with the detached analysis for
which The Dual State is deservedly known. The change in tone was a
consequence of the change in target audience. Whereas Fraenkel drafted
the Urdoppelstaat with German readers in mind, he conceived The
Dual State for a much broader readership. To this end, the language,
terminology, empirical references, and even the argument needed to be
rethought and tweaked. But the efforts were worth it. In the transition
from Urdoppelstaat to The Dual State, an act of resistance turned into a
contribution to scholarship.
Fourth, Fraenkel’s translators, presumably in extensive conversation
with the author himself, translated his concept of Maßnahmenstaat
(literally: state of measures) as “prerogative state.” In order to moti-
vate this conceptual innovation and to avoid misunderstanding,
Fraenkel included in the 1941 English edition a two-page discussion
of John Locke’s concept of the prerogative, with which his notion of
the prerogative state must not be confused.107 As Fraenkel wrote, “[A]‌
connection might be presumed to exist between the neo-German
106  New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State.” Here and in subsequent references to the NYPL draft, I  silently
incorporated all of Fraenkel’s handwritten corrections into the excerpted section.
107  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 66–67. On Locke’s concept of the prerogative, see,
for example, Pasquale Pasquino, “Locke on King’s Prerogative,” Political Theory, vol.
26 (1998), 198–208. More generally, see Clement Fatovic, “The Political Theology

--- Sayfa 57 ---
lvi
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lvi
constitutional doctrine [of the prerogative] and Locke’s theory. Such a
hypothesis would, however, be incorrect.”108 Fraenkel goes on to show
how Locke’s theory failed to make an impression on leading coun-
tries (England, France, United States) and leading thinkers (Thomas
Jefferson, Montesquieu) alike. In The Dual State, Fraenkel quoted a
passage from §158 in the Second Treatise of Two Treatises of Civil
Government to capture Locke’s definition of the concept: “Prerogative
is nothing but the power of doing public good without a rule.”109 The
bearer of the prerogative, in Locke’s conception, governs “without the
prescription of Law … and sometimes even against it”.110
Despite conceptual similarities between Fraenkel’s notion of the
prerogative and Locke’s, Fraenkel was adamant that he was not chan-
neling Locke’s doctrine of the separation of powers. And he was right
to, for Locke’s extra-legal power was not an arbitrary one.111 Locke’s
understanding of the prerogative was imbued with values of paternity.
Although the bearer of the prerogative decided the exception, it was a
benign power. Fraenkel (and his translators) took a key Lockean term
out of context, thereby turning the bearer of the prerogative into an
utterly malign power—a power “tending to evil.”112
The Dual State (1941)
In the United States, Fraenkel rewrote the Urdoppelstaat for American
and English readers. His pathbreaking analysis would have aged con-
siderably less well—and likely not be in need of republication in the
twenty-first century—had Fraenkel not extensively revised it in exile.
In the preface of the 1974 German edition, which appears in this 2017
edition of The Dual State in translation for the first time, he described
the transition from Urdoppelstaat to OUP manuscript thus:
In the drafting of the manuscript and its translation into English, spe-
cial emphasis was placed on explaining the Third Reich’s system of rule
(“Herrschaftsstruktur”) in academic categories that would be familiar to
of Prerogative:  The Jurisprudential Miracle in Liberal Constitutional Thought,”
Perspectives on Politics, vol. 6 (2008), 487–501.
108  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 67.
109  Ibid., 66. See John Locke, Two Treatises of Government, edited by Peter Laslett
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, [1690], 1988), 373, §158.
110  Locke, Two Treatises of Government, 375, §159.
111  Pasquino, “Locke on King’s Prerogative,” 205.
112  “Tending to evil” is the translation of the Latin term “malignus.”

--- Sayfa 58 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lvii
 
lvii
the social-scientifically trained American reader—paraphrasing them,
if necessary, to render them comprehensible. I need only point to such
foundational terms as “Ausnahmezustand” [which most accurately
translates as state of exception] and “Martial Law.” A translation of the
German text into English made sense only if it also involved a transpo-
sition (“Transponierung”) of concepts from the National Socialist into
the American system of government (“Regierungssystem”).113
The resulting manuscript, translated into English by Edward A. Shils,
a sociologist at the University of Chicago who later worked with
Talcott Parsons, in collaboration with Edith Löwenstein (incor-
rectly spelled Lowenstein on the frontispiece) and Klaus Knorr, com-
bined in a compelling way an astute analysis of ethnographic (and
other qualitative) data with a penchant for theoretical reasoning. It
was a powerful analytic narrative of its time. After months of over-
hauling the Urdoppelstaat, Fraenkel secured a contract with Oxford
University Press for its publication. Several organizations, institu-
tions, and individuals provided subventions to aid the book’s com-
pletion and production, including the American Guild for German
Cultural Freedom, the Graduate Faculty at the New School for Social
Research, and the International Institute of Social Research, the latter
being the famous, exiled Institut für Sozialforschung, previously based
in Frankfurt, Germany, and since mid-1934 housed at Columbia
University.114
One would have thought that the large number of emigré schol-
ars from Germany who had found refuge in New York City made
for a stimulating intellectual environment in which to turn the
Urdoppelstaat into The Dual State. After all, Fraenkel’s had been a
household name in Germany, and his Weimar-era publications are
said to have reached more than 100,000 readers.115 This was not to
be. Fraenkel was in for a rude awakening. There was no interest on
the part of the refugee community’s leading intellectuals in a study
of the legal origins of dictatorship. No one seemed to think that a
publication for the English-language market was a necessity. Max
Horkheimer’s positive, yet tepid response illustrates the general
113  Fraenkel, “Preface to the 1974 German Edition,” xiii–xiv.
114  Fraenkel, The Dual State, v; Martin Jay, The Dialectical Imagination: A History
of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research 1923–1950, second edition
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 39.
115  The figure stems from Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 140.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
lviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lviii
mood. In early 1939, Fraenkel had shared one of the versions of the
book manuscript with Horkheimer. The latter replied on February 9:
But the work is not only important because it offers the first analysis
of jurisprudence and scholarship. It also processes a wealth of empiri-
cal details (“Fülle der Einzelheiten”) from a theoretical perspective that,
in my opinion, is of decisive relevance (“entscheidener Bedeutung”) not
only for the production of knowledge (“Erkenntnis”) but also for a cri-
tique of National Socialist viewpoints.116
Horkheimer did not support the publication of The Dual State.
Fraenkel was largely alone in thinking that an in-depth scholarly
analysis of the transition to Nazi dictatorship was required, indeed
essential, for planning for a transition from Nazi dictatorship.
Notwithstanding the general indifference that had greeted him and
his work in the United States, Fraenkel persevered. Several schol-
ars commented on the manuscript-in-progress, including Max
Rheinstein, Franz Neumann, and, perhaps most significantly, Carl
J. Friedrich, Professor of Government at Harvard University and one
of the most influential political scientists in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury. Friedrich’s involvement with, and endorsement of, Fraenkel’s
project will not have hurt in OUP’s deliberations about whether to
publish The Dual State.
The New York Public Library holds a typescript of the manuscript
for what eventually became the OUP book.117 The typescript consists
of a preface, a table of contents, and some chapters, with a large num-
ber of handwritten corrections.118 The preface is dated November 2,
1939, with Chicago listed as the city where it was written. In terms of
organization and substance, the typescript differs in minor rather than
major ways from the published version. Inasmuch as the hundreds of
additions, deletions, insertions, tweaks, and corrections altered the
manuscript, mostly improving it, they did not fundamentally change
the architecture and argument, save perhaps in Part III, Chapter 2
which in the manuscript of November 1939 was still entitled “The
116  Max Horkheimer, Letter to Ernst Fraenkel, February 9, 1939, as quoted in
Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 148.
117  New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State.”
118  The corrections were done in different handwriting styles, one of which was
likely Fraenkel’s.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lix
 
lix
Economics of the Dual State,” as it had been in the Urdoppelstaat
(“Die Oekonomie des Doppelstaates”).119 In the 1941 published ver-
sion, the chapter title was changed to “The Economic Background of
the Dual State,” a formulation that was changed to “The Economic
Foundations of the Dual State” (“Die ökonomischen Grundlagen des
Doppelstaates”) in the retranslation for the 1974 German edition.120
See also Table 1. Both changes could be seen as editorial. Alternatively,
the first tweak can be interpreted as a deliberate, substantive shift
in emphasis with the intended effect of toning down, especially for
American audiences, Fraenkel’s economic interpretation of the rise
and consequences of the dual state phenomenon in Nazi Germany.
Support for this interpretation can be gleaned from a closer reading
of the corrected typescript.
There, in several paragraphs crossed out by hand, we see Fraenkel
soften the language of the original. Unlike in the Urdoppelstaat, the
question of whether Nazism represented a form of capitalism was
no longer at the forefront of the analysis in Part III, Chapter  2.121
Fraenkel instead examined the economic determinants of the dual
state in a less orthodox manner. It was a structuralist perspective still,
but less overtly Marxist in conception. Accordingly, “the economic
structure of the dual state” became “the economic policy of the dual
state,” a semantic change retained in the published book.122 The shift
in tone and perspective—which, to be sure, was one of substance,
not cosmetics—resulted in a nuanced analysis of economic develop-
ments in interwar Germany that was twice as long as it had been in
the Urdoppelstaat. It was a sign of Fraenkel’s intellectual development,
very likely in response to the conversations and exchanges he was
having in the United States, especially in Chicago. In the preface to
the 1941 typescript and book, for example, Fraenkel acknowledged
Gerhard Meyer of the University of Chicago for having provided him
with an “unpublished manuscript on the economic system of the
119  New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State”; Fraenkel, Der Urdoppelstaat [1938], 270, 440.
120  Fraenkel, The Dual State, xi, 171; Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat, 36, 223.
121  Ladwig-Winters, Ernst Fraenkel, 144.
122  Cf. New York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State”; Fraenkel, The Dual State, 172. Emphases added.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
lx
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lx
Third Reich,” a recognition that is worded even more profusely in the
published acknowledgements.123
But there is another plausible explanation for the switch from
“Economics of the Dual State” to “The Economic Background of
the Dual State” as the title for Chapter 2 in Part III. The clue lays in
an excised opening paragraph that was marked for deletion in the
typescript. It read as follows: “The following sketchy remarks do not
pretend to provide final answers. Rather they are intende[d]‌ to give
a perspective to our chief results by way of presenting a series of ques-
tions and preliminary answers.”124 It was a weak opening paragraph
and OUP’s copyeditor would have eventually got rid of the signpost-
ing. But it is equally plausible to assume that Fraenkel changed the
chapter title because of the caveats expressed in the deleted open-
ing sentences. If he indeed thought of his analysis as only tentative
(“sketchy remarks”; “preliminary answers”), a punchy title like “The
Economics of the Dual State” would have raised expectations on the
part of his readers of analytical depth and breadth that Fraenkel may
have been afraid of not meeting. A more prosaic chapter title like
“The Economic Background of the Dual State,” on the other hand,
has the opposite effect: it reduces expectations.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE DUAL STATE
Fraenkel’s principal argument had three parts.125 The first part com-
prised several counterintuitive propositions about the nature of the
123  New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State”; Fraenkel, The Dual State, vi. In an aside, it is perhaps worth noting
that Fraenkel’s time at the University of Chicago overlapped with that of Friedrich
Hayek, who was there completing the book that would make him a household name,
The Road to Serfdom (London: Routledge, 1944).
124  New  York Public Library, Manuscripts and Archives Division, American
Committee for the Guidance of Professional Personnel records, Box 2, Fraenkel, Ernst
“The Dual State.”
125  I  will not dwell in this chapter on Fraenkel’s lengthy—and idiosyncratic—
ruminations in The Dual State about the theory and history of the natural law trad-
ition. See Fraenkel, The Dual State, 107–149. For a recent, comparative analysis, see
Douglas G. Morris, “Write and Resist: Ernst Fraenkel and Franz Neumann on the Role
of Natural Law in Fighting Nazi Tyranny,” New German Critique, vol. 126 (2015), 197–
230. See also William E. Scheuerman, “Social Democracy and the Rule of Law: The

--- Sayfa 62 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxi
 
lxi
institutional design of the Nazi political order. Fraenkel argued that
this structure consisted of two interacting states: a prerogative and
a normative state. The second part of his argument revolved around
the institutional effects of this bifurcated state. Fraenkel claimed that
it facilitated not only violent domination but also allowed for an
orderly transition to and consolidation of authoritarian rule, notably
by reducing incentives for exit from the Nazi polity on the part of so-
called constructive forces, that is, societal groups and sectors, such
as big business, that did not constitute or harbor real or imagined
enemies of state. The third part of Fraenkel’s argument concerned the
institutional origins of the dual state. He was convinced that “[t]‌he
root of the evil” had to be sought in the “community ideology” and
“militant capitalism” that were holding sway in Nazi Germany.126
I will elaborate each of these arguments in turn.
The Institutional Design of the Nazi State
With The Dual State Fraenkel intervened into an ongoing debate
about the nature of the Nazi state—and one that is continuing to
this day.127 It was his mission to correct what he believed were major
misconceptions in this debate. He highlighted the most serious of
these misconceptions in his introduction to the 1941 edition of The
Dual State: “A superficial view of the German dictatorship might be
impressed either by its arbitrariness or by its efficiency based on order.
It is the thesis of this book that the National-Socialist dictatorship is
characterized by a combination of these two elements.”128 Fraenkel’s
lasting contribution to the debate was the ideal typical construction
of the dual state as a conceptual variable.129 What he produced was
a theoretically compelling—and empirically verifiable—account of
institutional hybridity.
Legacy of Ernst Fraenkel,” in Peter C. Caldwell and William E. Scheuerman, eds.,
From Liberal Democracy to Fascism (Boston: Humanities Press, 2000), 76–85.
126  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 153.
127  For an overview of this debate, see Ian Kershaw, The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems
and Perspectives of Interpretation (London:  Bloomsbury, 2016), esp. 23–54. For a
more comprehensive treatment, see Meierhenrich, The Remnants of the Rechtsstaat,
Chapter 2.
128  Fraenkel, The Dual State, xvi.
129  Jens Meierhenrich, “Bringing the ‘Dual State’ Back In,” Paper presented at the
American Political Science Association Meeting, San Francisco, August 30–September
2, 2001.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
lxii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxii
The concept of the dual state is, at first glance, simple and straight-
forward. In his preface to the 1974 German edition, Fraenkel
explained how it came about: “Based on the insights into the func-
tioning of the Hitler regime that I gleaned from my legal practice,
I believed to have found a key to understanding the National Socialist
system of rule (“der nationalsozialistischen Herrschaftsordnung”) in
the duality or concurrent existence (“Nebeneinander”) of a “norma-
tive state” (“Normenstaat”) that generally respects its own laws, and
a “prerogative state” (“Maßnahmenstaat”) that violates the very same
laws.”130 Fraenkel maintained that the early Nazi state was not a uni-
tary state—as most of his contemporaries assumed—but, rather, two
“simultaneous states.”131 Although a “line of division” kept these insti-
tutional loci apart, he argued that they were simultaneously tied to
one another and “in constant friction.”132 As we have seen, he invented
the memorable neologism of the “dual state” to name this mutually
constitutive relationship between the prerogative and normative
halves of the state. It has been remarked, rather unkindly, that “the
most accomplished” (“das Gelungenste”) aspect of The Dual State was
its title.133 Spun more positively, we can think of the term as analytical
shorthand (“eine Art Chiffre”) for the institutional logic of a particular
kind of rule, Nazi and otherwise.134 Fraenkel made sense of this logic,
which he thought of as transitory not permanent in nature, by adopt-
ing a perspective from methodological structuralism.
The hallmark of the prerogative state is arbitrary rule. Fraenkel
argued that the phenomenon of the prerogative state derived from the
institution of martial law and suggested that we think of it as “a con-
tinuous siege.”135 As a “governmental system,” he wrote, the preroga-
tive state exercised “unlimited arbitrariness and violence unchecked
by any legal guarantees.”136 Its acts, or “measures” (“Maßnahmen”)
as Fraenkel called them, are self-legitimating, and thus self-
enforcing: “The political sphere in the Third Reich is governed nei-
ther by objective nor by subjective law, neither by legal guarantees nor
jurisdictional qualifications.”137 In other words, the prerogative state,
as an idea, amounts to institutionalized lawlessness. The absence of
130  Fraenkel, “Preface to the German edition (1974),” xv.
131  Fraenkel, The Dual State, xiii.
132  Ibid., xiii.
133  Helmut Ridder, “Der Doppelstaat: Die Ehe von Kapitalismus und NS-Diktatur,”
Die Zeit, June 12, 1970.
134  Dreier, “Nachwort,” 300; Meierhenrich, The Legacies of Law, esp. 3–5, 76–9.
135  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 24.
136  Ibid., xiii.
137  Ibid., 3.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxiii
 
lxiii
boundaries is the essence of its nature. The prerogative state is what
rulers make of it. To illustrate the pervasiveness of the phenomenon
in Nazi Germany, Fraenkel analyzed briefly (and rather perfunctorily)
several agents of the prerogative state, what he called “instruments,”
and some of their practices. He singled out as key agents of the pre-
rogative state the Gestapo (Secret State Police) and the NSDAP.138
Notable practices, which Fraenkel exemplified with ample references
to Nazi case law, ranged from the abolition of constitutional restraints
to the abolition of restraints on the powers of the police, and from the
abolition of judicial review to the negation of formal rationality.139 In
his argument, “[n]‌o sphere of social or economic life is immune from
the inroads of the Prerogative State.”140
Horst Dreier recently dissected what he termed the “phenomenol-
ogy of the prerogative state.”141 He has introduced greater clarity into
a conceptual analysis that, in The Dual State, occasionally left some-
thing to be desired. To sharpen the contours of the prerogative state as
a conceptual variable, Dreier distinguished three different manifesta-
tions of the formally irrational half of the dual state (see also Figure 1
below). I  base the following discussion on Dreier’s useful analysis
but elaborate on his observations and substitute my own categories
for his. I differentiate three ideal types: (1) the prerogative state as
a transgressive force; (2) the prerogative state as a restrictive force;
and (3) the prerogative state as a constitutive force. What I call the
prerogative state as a transgressive force refers to instances in which
this boundless half of the dual state either undermines or overturns
the operation or activities of the normative state. Fraenkel wrote pas-
sionately about this peculiar logic of domination in his 1937 article
on the dual state: “Germany is a country in which thousands can be
incarcerated for years without being convicted in a court of law, pos-
sessions can be seized without judicial authorization, and lives can be
destroyed without recourse to law.”142
The second subtype—the prerogative state as a restrictive force—
by contrast, operates less overtly and in a less violent fashion. This
variant of the prerogative state is less outcome-oriented, though as
arbitrary in its raison d’état. Its operational logic revolves around
long-term interventions into the affairs of the Volk. What Dreier, on
138  Ibid., 9, 23, 33–7.
139  Ibid., 14–33, 46–9.
140  Ibid., 44.
141  Dreier, “Nachwort,” 282–95.
142  Fraenkel, “Das Dritte Reich als Doppelstaat” [1937], 513–14.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
lxiv
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxiv
whose discussion I draw, has in mind are instances in which agents
and organizations of the Nazi state, especially from its normative half,
respond with anticipatory obedience (what Germans call vorauseilen-
dem Gehorsam) to presumed imperatives of what Carl Schmitt in the
late 1920s had famously theorized as “the political.”143 Consider the
following example:  ordinary courts’ voluntary abdication of their
powers of judicial review. Fraenkel focused especially on a case that
the Kammergericht, the regional court of appeal for Prussia, had
decided on May 31, 1935.144 The judgment in the case concerned the
legality of the executive decree (Durchführungsverordnung) required
to implement in Prussia the notorious Decree of the Reich President
for the Protection of Volk and State (Verordnung des Reichspräsidenten
zum Schutz von Volk und Staat) of March 28, 1933. Fraenkel could
not understand why the Kammergericht thought it necessary, at this
very early stage of Nazi dictatorship, to rule in its judgment that the
so-called Reichstag Fire Decree (“Reichstagsbrandverordnung”), as
the national decree came to be known, “removes all federal and state
restraints on the power of the police to whatever extent is required for
the execution of the aims promulgated in the decree.”145 In addition
to issuing a blank check to the powers at the helm of the preroga-
tive state, the judges placed an arbitrary and immovable limitation
on judicial review: “The question of appropriateness and necessity is
not subject to appeal.”146 Fraenkel noted that other courts in the coun-
try were considerably more circumspect in their adoption of what he
referred to as “[t]‌he constitutional charter of the Third Reich.”147
The case before the Kammergericht was a flagrant example of what
Dreier has discussed for the judiciary under the moniker of “self
143  Dreier, “Nachwort,” 284–5; Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political,
expanded edition, translated with an introduction and notes by George Schwab
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, [1932] 2007). For key treatments of Schmitt’s
infamous concept, see Duncan Kelly, The State of the Political: Conceptions of Politics
and the State in the Thought of Max Weber, Carl Schmitt and Franz Neumann
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), Chapter 4; and Reinhard Mehring, ed., Carl
Schmitt, Der Begriff des Politischen: Ein kooperativer Kommentar (Berlin: Akademie
Verlag, 2003). Most recently, see also Jens Meierhenrich and Oliver Simons, “‘A
Fanatic of Order in an Epoch of Confusing Turmoil’: The Political, Legal, and Cultural
Thought of Carl Schmitt,” in Meierhenrich and Simons, eds., The Oxford Handbook of
Carl Schmitt, esp. 21–5.
144  Kammergericht, May 31, 1935. As quoted in Fraenkel, The Dual State, 16. The
case was reported in Deutsche Richter-Zeitung, vol. 27 (1935), 624.
145  Kammergericht, May 31, 1935.
146  Ibid.
147  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 3.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxv
 
lxv
restriction” (“Selbstrestriktion,” which he distinguishes from “restric-
tion by another,” or “Fremdrestriktion”).148 The first behavioral mode
refers to judicial practices, interpretive or otherwise, that result in
voluntary self-binding. Writes Dreier:  “The possibility of judicial
review gives way to judicial non-review.”149 By reducing from within
the authority and jurisdiction of the judiciary, the power and reach
of the prerogative state are also enhanced. Exemplary of the norma-
tive state’s restriction from without, “by another,” is a case concerning
the institution of the Gestapo. On February 10, 1936, the Nazi regime
passed the “Law Concerning the Gestapo” (Gesetz über die Geheime
Staatspolizei). This important piece of legislation vastly restricted
the powers of administrative review, de jure shielding the Gestapo
from almost any form of judicial oversight. Prussia’s regional court
of appeal for administrative matters (Oberverwaltungericht) weighed
in on the matter in a case concerning the legality of the expulsion of
a missionary from a certain district in Germany. The facts of the case
need not concern us here.150 What matters is that Prussia’s highest
administrative court seized the occasion of the particular, localized
dispute to pronounce on the general conditions under which Gestapo
orders are subject to judicial review.151 The panel held that very few
such conditions existed. The organization of the prerogative state, it
ruled, would only be subject to review in the event that acts of ordi-
nary police (acting as auxiliary forces for the Nazi Secret Police) went
above and beyond the orders they received from the Gestapo. Fraenkel
described the institutional effect:  “The significance of the decision
cited above lies in the acknowledgment of the Gestapo’s power to
transfer entire spheres of life from the jurisdiction of the Normative
State to the Prerogative State.”152 The Berlin proceeding highlights the
power of the prerogative state as a restrictive force.
The prerogative state as a constitutive force represents the third and
final subtype. Although related to the subtype just discussed, here the
emphasis is on the manner in which the prerogative state, through its
manifest facticity, reconstitutes the remnants of the normative state.
The institution of the so-called Sondergerichte come to mind as an
example, which, though located firmly inside the prerogative state,
148  Dreier, “Nachwort,” 286–90.
149  Ibid., 290.
150  For a brief summary, see ibid., 81–3.
151  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 27.
152  Ibid., 28.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
lxvi
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxvi
also had a bearing on Germany’s culture of legality more generally.153
The work of legal institutions in one half of the dual state (for example,
the Sondergerichte in the prerogative state), Fraenkel believed, invari-
ably rubs off on the operation of legal institutions in the other half.
We have since learned from the anthropology of law that Fraenkel
was right to assume that legal mores (and the cultures to which they
combine) do not exist in a vacuum, and, that they, like institutions
and organizations, are subject to transformations and deformations
in response to external stimuli.154
Having said that, not all legal institutions subsumed under the third
subtype of the prerogative state were extra-judicial. In many cases the
locus of (and scope for) action resided in the normative state itself.
Numerous legal proceedings that Fraenkel examined in The Dual
State drew attention to instances of self-immolation by the norma-
tive state. The difference with the second, just discussed subtype lies
in the greater scope for discretion that was usually available to legal
agents, notably judges, in these cases. The fact that lower-ranking
courts in the Nazi judicial system, at least in the early years of dicta-
torship, regularly came to conclusions that differed in fundamental
ways from those of courts of appeal demonstrates that such discre-
tionary scope did indeed exist. This scope was not just a figment of
Fraenkel’s imagination, a logically conceivable but empirically non-
verifiable assumption of his theoretical model. Indeed, in these types
of cases, court findings, decisions, and judgments often embodied the
ethos of the surviving remnants of the Rechtsstaat.155 Fraenkel gave an
example from the jurisprudence of Munich’s regional court of appeal
(Oberlandesgericht) to substantiate his contention that the really exist-
ing scope for discretion was often instrumentalized for the purpose
of expanding the scope of the prerogative state—an example of what
Otto Kirchheimer after the war came to refer to as “political justice,”
that is, “the utilization of judicial proceedings for political ends.”156
The proceeding in question concerned the suspension of the prin-
ciple of ne bis in idem, known as the prohibition of double jeopardy
153  On the nature and function of the Sondergerichte, see the discussion below. For a
comprehensive analysis of cultures of legality, their study, and path dependent effects,
see Meierhenrich, The Legacies of Law, 219–64.
154  Pars pro toto of a vast body of increasingly interdisciplinary scholarship, see
Fernanda Pirie, Anthropology of Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
155  Dreier, “Nachwort,” 291.
156  Otto Kirchheimer, “Politics and Justice,” Social Research, vol. 22 (1955), 377.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxvii
 
lxvii
in the common law. The case revolved around a defendant who had
been convicted of (and already served his sentence for) an act of high
treason, namely the distribution of illegal propaganda. When it was
subsequently discovered that the defendant’s conduct had been graver
than previously thought, the judges of Munich’s Oberlandesgericht
convicted him a second time, and for the same underlying conduct,
thus violating the principle of ne bis in idem.157 Fraenkel used the
example to illustrate the expanding reach of the prerogative state,
its persistent advances into the province of the normative state. The
example slots neatly into the third of the above subtypes—the pre-
rogative state as a constitutive force—because the Bavarian court was
neither coerced nor otherwise compelled to rule in the case the way
it did. Rather, the judges, as nominal representatives of the norma-
tive state, had discretion in reaching their judgment. They used this
discretion to continue the general dismantling of the normative state,
even introducing from the bench a novel principle of law: “In seri-
ous cases of high treason,” they held, “an adequate sentence has to be
imposed in all circumstances regardless of all legal principles! The
protection of state and people is more important than the adherence
to formalistic rules of procedure which are senseless if applied with-
out exception.”158 By internalizing the ethos of the prerogative state,
the court, according to Fraenkel, “degraded its status to that of an
instrument of the Prerogative State.”159 So much for the workings of
the prerogative state, what Fraenkel once called the dual state’s “irra-
tional shell.”160
I now turn to the “rational core” that he thought was contained
within that irrational shell—the normative state.161 Fraenkel grounded
the concept of the dual state solidly in the theoretical scholarship of
his time, drawing extensively on writings in philosophy, law, econom-
ics, and religion.162 He also traced in some detail the historical roots
of the dual state in Prussia, from the establishment of absolute mon-
archy to the prototype of the German Rechtsstaat. In thinking about
the normative state, Fraenkel was heavily influenced by the history of
the authoritarian regime of Frederick the Great (1740–1786), whose
enlightened despotism laid the intellectual foundations for the more
157  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 51.
158  Oberlandesgericht Munich, August 12, 1937, as quoted in The Dual State, 52. The
case was reported in Deutsche Justiz, vol. 100 (1938), 724.
159  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 51–2.
160  Ibid., 206.
161  Ibid., 206.
162  Ibid., Part II, Chapter 3; and Part III, Chapters 1, 2, and 3.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
lxviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxviii
benign half the institutional structure that Fraenkel saw at work in the
“Third Reich.”163 Fraenkel was particularly taken with the Prussian
Allgemeine Landrecht, which, under the influence of Enlightenment
precepts, fundamentally recast the nature and purpose of police pow-
ers. Revolutionary for its time, this pre-German code of law dras-
tically curtailed the powers of the police. Drawing on doctrines of
natural law, the Prussian monarch placed far-reaching and unprec-
edented limits on his own erstwhile prerogative state.
But it is essential not to misconstrue Fraenkel’s idea of the nor-
mative state. To be sure, the normative state is not akin to a rule-of-
law state, what Germans call a Rechtsstaat.164 Fraenkel distinguished
very carefully between the concept of the rule-of-law state and that
of the dual state. He pointed to the institution of extraordinary
courts to drive home the conceptual difference: “The term Special
Court [Sondergericht in German] sums up the difference between the
Rule of Law State (Rechtsstaat) and the Dual State: the Rule of Law
[State] refers political crimes to a special court despite the fact that
they are questions of law; the Dual State refers political crimes to a
special court, despite the fact that they are political questions.”165 In
other words, the normative state is only ever as strong as the pre-
rogative state permits it to be. In the case of the Sondergerichte, the
prerogative state turned law from a regulatory device that reduced
uncertainty into a destructive device that annihilated difference. As
Nikolaus Wachsmann has shown, “the special courts were hailed as
weapons to ‘render harmless’, ‘eradicate’ and ‘exterminate’ the politi-
cal enemy.”166 As instruments of the prerogative state, the example
163  Ibid., 159.
164  For a discussion of the Rechtsstaat concept, see, for example, Ernst-Wolfgang
Böckenförde, “Entstehung und Wandel des Rechtsstaatsbegriffs” [1969], in
idem., Recht, Staat, Freiheit:  Studien zur Rechtsphilosophie, Staatstheorie und
Verfassungsgerichtsbarkeit (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1991), 143–69. On the meaning(s)
of the rule of law, see, for example, Allan C. Hutchinson and Patrick Monahan, eds.,
The Rule of Law: Ideal or Ideology? (Toronto: Carswell, 1987).
165  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 50; 71. Pursuant to the “Decree of the Reich President
for the Defense against Malicious Attacks against the Government of National
Uprising” (Verordnung des Reichspräsidenten zur Abwehr heimtückischer Angriffe
gegen die Regierung der nationalen Erhebung) of March 21, 1933, a Nazi Sondergericht
was established in each of Germany’s judicial districts. See Nikolaus Wachsmann,
Hitler’s Prisons: Legal Terror in Nazi Germany (New Haven: Yale University Press,
2004), 114. For an overview, see also Hans Wüllenweber, Sondergerichte im Dritten
Reich: Vergessene Verbrechen der Justiz (Munich: Luchterhand, 1993).
166  Wachsmann, Hitler’s Prisons, 114.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxix
 
lxix
of the Sondergerichte highlights the unknowable but really existing
limits of the normative state. In Fraenkel’s conception, the existence
of these limits was a defining attribute of the dual state, a necessary
condition for its existence: “The Normative State is a necessary com-
plement to the Prerogative State and can be understood only in that
light. Since the Prerogative and Normative States constitute an inter-
dependent whole, consideration of the Normative State alone is not
permissible.”167
Fraenkel was at pains to establish this theoretical premise. In his argu-
ment, the normative state was at the beck and call of the prerogative
state, so to speak. Law may have governed its practice, but it neither
constituted nor legitimated it. Fraenkel put it concisely elsewhere in
his book: “[S]‌ince the jurisdiction of the Prerogative State is not legally
defined, there is no legal guarantee of the stability of the Normative
State. The existence of the Normative State is not dependent on law. It
depends on the complete permeation of the state by National-Socialist
attitudes and ideas.”168 For this reason, the normative state in Fraenkel’s
theoretical model had little to do with either the idea of the Rechtsstaat
in the civil law tradition or the rule-of-law doctrine in the common law
tradition.
It is essential to be clear about the nature and purpose of Fraenkel’s
argument, to grasp fully what he wrote—and what he did not. Because
those who invoke The Dual State sometimes do so very selectively,
even in a manner that outright contradicts Fraenkel’s theory of dic-
tatorship.169 Having laid out Fraenkel’s conceptions of the two halves
167  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 71.
168  Ibid., 71.
169  Horst Dreier, “Nachwort: Was ist doppelt am ‘Doppelstaat’?,” in Ernst Fraenkel,
Der Doppelstaat, third edition, edited and introduced by Alexander v. Brünneck,
with an afterword by Horst Dreier (Frankfurt:  Europäische Verlagsanstalt, 2012),
277; Horst Möller, “Fraenkel—Analytiker von Demokratie und Diktatur,” in Thomas
Brechenmacher, ed., Identität und Erinnerung:  Schlüsselthemen deutsch-jüdischer
Geschichte und Gegenwart (Munich:  Olzog, 2009), 168. One of the most flagrant
misinterpretations has come from one of Germany’s most respected historians, Karl
Dietrich Bracher, who erroneously maintained that Fraenkel’s Janus-faced concept
referred to an institutional binary—state vs. party—that Fraenkel explicitly and repeat-
edly insisted was not what he had in mind when speaking of the legal reality of the dual
state. See Karl Dietrich Bracher, “Zusammenbruch des Versailler Systems und Zweiter
Weltkrieg,” in Golo Mann and August Nitschke, eds., Propyläen Weltgeschichte: Eine
Universalgeschichte, vol. 9: Das zwanzigste Jahrhundert (Berlin: Propyläen, 1960), 398–
9. More recently, Robert O. Paxton also misread The Dual State. See his The Anatomy
of Fascism (London: Penguin, 2005), 119–127. Like Bracher, Paxton misunderstood
the essence of Fraenkel’s argument, namely that “the line of division” between the
prerogative and normative halves of the Nazi dual state is internal to the institutional

--- Sayfa 71 ---
lxx
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxx
of his dual-state concept, what did he have to say about their inter-
relationship? What, exactly, is the logic of the institutional structure
that they co-constitute? The combination of the two notions—the
prerogative state and the normative state—in one concept sets up a
dynamic tension between these elements. The dual state has built into
it what Reinhard Bendix termed “conflicting imperatives.”170 The nor-
mative state and the prerogative state, though complementary, stand
in tension with one another. The foundational relationship between
the halves of the dual state—from which all dynamic interactions
between them derive—can be stated thus: “the presumption of juris-
diction rests with the Normative State. The jurisdiction over jurisdic-
tion rests with the Prerogative State.”171
It was Emil Lederer who first inspired Fraenkel to embrace the idea
of institutional hybridity. In 1915, Lederer had described the Imperial
state of Wilhelmine Germany as a two-pronged state. Fraenkel cred-
ited Lederer as being the first person to “depict the co-existence of
the Normative State and the Prerogative State.”172 But the metaphor
of a Janus-faced or dual-natured state predates even Lederer’s con-
ceptualization. In fact, it was Georg Jellinek who first theorized an
institutional binary at the heart of the concept of the state, in his
Allgemeine Staatslehre at the turn of the twentieth century.173 Jellinek,
a highly influential legal scholar in his time, developed a two-sided
theory of the state that distinguished between, on the one hand, the
state as a “legal institution” and, on the other, the state as a “social
phenomenon.” Jellinek argued that a constitutional theory of the state
(Staatsrechtslehre) was required to study the former instantiation of
the state, and a social theory of the state (soziale Staatslehre) to study
structure of the state itself. Fraenkel insisted that “when we speak of the Dual State we
do not refer to the co-existence of the state bureaucracy and the party bureaucracy.
We do not place great importance on this feature of German constitutional law….
State and party are increasingly becoming identical, the dual organizational form is
maintained merely for historical and political reasons.” Fraenkel, The Dual State, xv.
Or, as he put it later in the book, the NSDAP was neither identical with nor separate
from, but rather “an instrument of the Prerogative State.” Ibid., 33. Emphasis added.
170  See, e.g., Reinhard Bendix, Nation-Building and Citizenship, enlarged edition
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977. Note that Bendix uses varying terms
to refer to what he calls conflicting imperatives. More recently, see Andrew C. Gould,
“Conflicting Imperatives and Concept Formation,” Review of Politics, vol. 61 (1999),
439–63.
171  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 57.
172  Ibid., 168.
173  Georg Jellinek, Allgemeine Staatslehre (Berlin: Häring, 1900).

--- Sayfa 72 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxi
 
lxxi
the latter.174 It bears emphasizing that in Fraenkel’s argument, the dis-
tinction between the prerogative and normative halves of the dual
state is not just a matter of degree, but of kind. For him the institu-
tional differentiation was of a “qualitative” nature.175 At the same time,
he conceived of the phenomenon of the dual state, whether in Nazi
Germany or elsewhere, as “merely a transitory phenomenon.”176 This
point is key because it implies a response to those who erroneously
claim that Fraenkel set out to capture the defining attributes of the
Nazi state as such. His was never going to be more than a snapshot of
a state-in-formation—albeit one taken with enormous skill and from
an exceptional point of view.
The Institutional Effects of the Nazi State
The institutional effects of the dual state, as theorized by Fraenkel,
were considerable and far-reaching. Some of these effects were direct,
others indirect; some were of a short-term nature, others material-
ized over the long run. Most obviously, the institutionalized arbitrari-
ness of the prerogative state depleted—and destroyed—an inordinate
number of lives, Jewish and otherwise.177 But Fraenkel was more
concerned with the less obvious and hidden institutional effects of
the dual state, for as he wrote, “we are not considering cases touch-
ing on the Jewish problem. To generalize from the treatment of the
Jews … would be misleading.”178 For Fraenkel, their case was straight-
forward: “Once Jews had been eliminated from the economic life, it
was possible to deprive them of all legal protection without adversely
affecting the economic system,” which is why the onset of more viru-
lent forms of antisemitism “forced the Jews beyond the outer limits of
the Normative State.”179
Fraenkel had learned from personal experience that the dual state
in the early years of Nazi dictatorship facilitated not only violent
174  For a brief discussion of Jellinek’s effect on the social sciences, and his contribu-
tion to comparative-historical sociology, see Reinhard Bendix and Guenther Roth,
Scholarship and Partisanship: Essays on Max Weber (Berkeley, University of California
Press, 1970), 260–5.
175  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 69.
176  Fraenkel, The Dual State, xiv.
177  For an account of the entire trajectory of Jewish suffering in particular—from
persecution to destruction—at the hands of an ever-expanding prerogative state
in Nazi Germany, see, most recently, Christian Gerlach, The Extermination of the
European Jews (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016).
178  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 73.
179  Ibid., 90.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
lxxii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxii
domination but also ensured an orderly transition to and consolida-
tion of authoritarian rule, notably by reducing incentives for exit from
the polity on the part of “constructive forces” in the Nazi universe,
by which the Nazi jurist Werner Best, who coined the phrase, meant
societal groups and sectors, such as big business, that did not con-
stitute or harbor so-called enemies of state. Among the most nota-
ble institutional effects of the dual state Fraenkel counted (1) that the
Nazis upheld “the institution of private property in general and of
private ownership in the means of production … in principle and in
fact”; and (2) that “income from private property is now, on the whole
much safer than it was before.”180
Fraenkel thought it especially remarkable that “[t]‌he principle of
private ownership was upheld even for businesses towards which the
National-Socialist program had shown some degree of antipathy, e.g.,
the department stores and banks.”181 Notwithstanding his compre-
hensive catalogue of consequential changes that Nazi authorities had
made to the structure of the country’s economic system and the mem-
bers of its economic society—including the creation and proliferation
of cartels and other monopolies; the steep increase in the rate of pub-
lic investment financed by credit expansion; the buildout of public
investment at the expense of private investment—Fraenkel was suffi-
ciently detached analytically to appreciate that a considerable number
of entrepreneurs, despite Nazi interference with the rules of the eco-
nomic game, “even now … enjoy at least a comparative advantage.”182
It was Fraenkel’s great achievement—and, I  suspect, one of the
principal reasons for The Dual State’s negligible reception during the
Cold War years—to have countered, in the substantive parts of his
analysis, the scholarly trend of treating the German polity as if it were
a totalitarian “black box,” to have resisted the moral urge to depict
the emergent racial order as a monolithic garrison state that emerged
fully formed. What my analysis of Fraenkel’s theory of dictatorship
hopefully shows is that he reasoned and wrote like the analytically
eclectic social scientist that he was.183 He may have started out as a
practicing lawyer, become a public intellectual, and briefly agitated
180  Ibid., 173.
181  Ibid., 173. Emphasis added.
182  Ibid., 173, 176–82.
183  On analytical eclecticism as a research stance, see Rudra Sil and Peter J.
Katzenstein, “Analytic Eclecticism in the Study of World Politics:  Reconfiguring
Problems and Mechanisms across Research Traditions,” Perspectives on Politics, vol.
8 (2010), 411–31.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxiii
 
lxxiii
as a social activist, but by the time he submitted his book manu-
script to OUP’s New York office, sometime in the summer or fall of
1940, Fraenkel was a different man. He was working with a greater
degree of intellectual rigor: he was more analytically astute, theoreti-
cally sophisticated, and empirically innovative than he had ever been
before—and, according to some, than he ever was again. The Dual
State is testament to Fraenkel’s intellectual feat, begun on a dark con-
tinent in the middle of the twentieth century.
William Scheuerman considers Fraenkel’s pre-1945 writings “intel-
lectually more creative and politically more provocative than his
writings from the 1950s and 1960s.”184 Like Scheuerman, I, too, find
Fraenkel’s prewar writings more sophisticated and daring than his
postwar oeuvre. And none was more creative than The Dual State.
Fraenkel never bested that book’s depth of insight and the breadth of
knowledge, both of which he so painstakingly brought to bear on the
subject of his life.185
To his lasting credit, Fraenkel never assumed that the institu-
tional logic of Nazi dictatorship did or would operate seamlessly and
unchanged for the entirety of the “Third Reich.”186 Fraenkel insisted
“that the Third Reich cannot be interpreted as a ‘totalitarian state’ in
an uncritical way.”187 Its changing character had to be taken as a given.
Fraenkel told his readers that he “avoided using the term ‘totalitar-
ian state’ because of its complex connotations.”188 This observation is
related to the topic at hand—the institutional effects of the dual state,
to which I now return.
Earlier I distinguished three subtypes of the prerogative state, one
of which was the prerogative state as a constitutive force. Its opera-
tion sheds light on a causal mechanism that produced a number of
184  Scheuerman, “Social Democracy and the Rule of Law,” 74, Fn. 1. For an insight-
ful discussion of Fraenkel’s postwar influence on the theory, practice, and study of
democracy in the Federal Republic of Germany, see Alexander v. Brünneck, “Vorwort
zu diesem Band,” in Ernst Fraenkel, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 5: Demokratie und
Pluralismus, edited by Alexander v. Brünneck (Baden-Baden: Nomos, 2007), 9–36,
esp. 21–5.
185  Lest my allusion to the formulation’s double meaning is lost, my point is this: the
theory of dictatorship that Fraenkel developed in The Dual State was the subject of his
life, but it was also the subject of his life.
186  The empirical coverage in The Dual State ended with the late 1930s, but
Fraenkel’s postwar commentary suggests he harbored no illusions about having pro-
duced an institutional analysis that was valid for the war years as well.
187  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 59.
188  Ibid., 60.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
lxxiv
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxiv
institutional effects. I call this causal mechanism institutional mimick-
ing. Fraenkel explained how it works:
Since the jurisdiction of the organs of the Prerogative State is unlimited,
a certain tendency exists among the agencies of the Normative State
to imitate this example and to enlarge the scope of their own discre-
tion. Furthermore, since the Prerogative State has completely stifled all
public opinion, resistance against such an encroachment was decisively
weakened.189
If we believe Fraenkel, one of the most significant institutional effects
of the dual state in Nazi Germany was the homogenization of the
institutions of rule—and of expectations about their rule. Channeling
A. V. Dicey, Fraenkel argued that “the mere existence of governmen-
tal arbitrariness, as embodied in the Prerogative State, has dulled the
sense of justice to such a degree that the existence of an agency with
limited jurisdiction is considered as a legal institution even though
the government exercised enormous discretionary power.”190
A more indirect effect, a consequence of the uneven balance of
power between the prerogative and normative halves of the Nazi
state—which, as we have seen, is a defining, structural feature of the
dual state—was the substitution of efficiency for liberty as the raison
d’état. “In National-Socialist Germany,” Fraenkel observed, “the ‘gos-
pel of efficiency’ has been substituted for the worship of liberty.”191
A concomitant effect of this substitution was the retention and con-
tinued maintenance (with a few notable exceptions to be discussed
below) of the existing economic order. As the guardian of the econ-
omy, the normative state, in spite of its co-dependent relationship with
the violent and overzealous prerogative state, managed to restore a
sense of institutional normalcy and predictability in economic affairs,
at least for a while. According to Fraenkel, “[i]‌n spite of the existing
legal possibilities for intervention by the Prerogative State where and
whenever it desires, the legal foundations of the capitalistic economic
order have been maintained.”192 Drawing on an examination of the
extant case law at the time, Fraenkel found that “[t]he legal institu-
tions essential to private capitalism … still exist in Germany.”193 To
substantiate his finding, he presented empirical evidence in the form
189  Ibid., 70.
190  Ibid., 70; A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution,
eighth edition (London: Macmillan, 1926), 198.
191  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 71.
192  Ibid., 72.
193  Ibid., 73.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxv
 
lxxv
of jurisprudence pertaining to freedom of enterprise, the sanctity of
contracts, property rights, copyright, and the regulation of unfair
competition, among others.194
Fraenkel’s analysis of institutional effects of the Nazi dual state, nota-
bly its normative half, was most comprehensive for the economic realm.
Incidentally, this is also the realm most relevant to Fraenkel’s third and
final argument. It was an argument to answer a deceptively simple ques-
tion: whence the dual state?
The Institutional Origins of the Nazi State
Part III, the final part of The Dual State, contains one of the most contro-
versial chapters of the entire book—Chapter 2. There, Fraenkel attempted
to make sense of the economic origins of Nazi dictatorship. Contrary
to the Urdoppelstaat, where he possessed the courage of his convictions
and stated his functionalist argument boldly, he introduced his revised
position more gingerly in the opening pages of the 1941 book:
We shall inquire whether the legal situation characterized as the Dual
State is not the necessary consequence of a certain stage of crisis for
the directing elements if capitalistic society. Perhaps it can be shown
that they have lost confidence in rationality and have taken refuge in
irrationality, at a time when it would seem that rationality is needed
more than ever as a regulatory force within the capitalistic structure.195
This tentative introduction bespeaks Fraenkel’s reservations about the
materialist view of history. These reservations deepened in exile. As
I explained above, Fraenkel substantially revised Part III, Chapter 2
as he moved from Urdoppelstaat to The Dual State.196 Here is his argu-
ment in a nutshell: Fraenkel believed that the fundamental nature of
Germany’s economic order had been fundamentally altered in the
transition from quasi-democracy to dictatorship. In his argument, the
“organized private capitalism” of the Weimar era had been replaced in
Nazi Germany with what he called “quasi-monopolistic capitalism.”197
It all started with the Great Depression, when “the power of the gov-
ernment in the economic sphere sharply increased.”198 The democratic
194  Ibid., 73–82.
195  Ibid., xiv.
196  See the discussion above, xlvii–lx.
197  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 171, 172.
198  On the economics of the interwar order, see Tooze, The Wages of Destruction;
and Nicholas Crafts and Peter Fearon, eds., The Great Depression of the 1930s: Lessons
for Today (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).

--- Sayfa 77 ---
lxxvi
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxvi
state and its institutions behaved like “doctors at the sick-bed of
capitalism,” Fraenkel quoted a trade unionist as saying.199 Extensive
government interventions propped up ailing or failing economic sec-
tors, notably banking and the steel industry. “The Reich,” Fraenkel
wrote, “extended its regulatory power to almost all aspects of eco-
nomic activity, including wage levels.”200 Many of Fraenkel’s contem-
poraries believed (as do economists and economic historians of the
present) that state-led economic interventionism was necessary not
least because, as Richard Overy has shown, in 1932, the year preced-
ing the Nazi ascent of power, German business activity had been in a
“disastrous trough.”201 This institutional transformation, however, had
path-dependent consequences for the Nazi state, at least according
to Fraenkel: “In many aspects, the economic policy of the Dual State
seems a mere continuation, a somewhat more developed phase, of the
‘organized capitalism’ of the Weimar period.”202 Such was the open-
ing salvo of Fraenkel’s analysis. He supported his thesis about insti-
tutional and substantive continuities in the economic realm across
two radically different political regimes with empirical evidence from
various sectors of the economy.
But Chapter III, Part  2 is also about the origins of institutional
hybridity because it advances a theoretical argument as to why an
authoritarian regime—such as the Nazi dictatorship—would have
an interest in institutional self-binding. Fraenkel showed that despite
the Nazification of economic norms and institutions, and despite the
comprehensive domination or violent destruction of other spheres
of social life, a most remarkable situation existed in early Nazi
Germany in which the supposedly constructive forces continued
to enjoy the protection of the normative state, of these remnants of
the Rechtsstaat. But what was “the precise function of the Normative
State and what [were] the functions of the Prerogative State in the
economic sphere?”203
In the governance of the economy, the prerogative state took a
backseat to the normative state. Fraenkel hypothesized as follows: “If
our analysis of the relations between the world of business and the
Normative State is correct, then it follows, that the Prerogative State
199  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 172.
200  Ibid., 172.
201  Richard Overy, The Nazi Economic Recovery 1932–1938, second edition
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 1.
202  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 172.
203  Ibid., 185.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxvii
 
lxxvii
cannot be a direct and positively controlling power, but rather a limit-
ing and indirectly supporting power.”204 But the prerogative state had
roles to play nonetheless: inter alia, it protected economic life from
political disturbances, by deterring or crushing protests and demon-
strations; it held in check the underground trade union movement,
thus suppressing open class struggle; and it enforced—through either
the threat or application of violence—the more restrictive legal norms
devised in the normative state for the regulation of the economy.205
The normative state played a considerably larger role than the pre-
rogative state in the economic reconstruction and development of
Germany under the Nazi dictatorship. I have already discussed many
of its functions in the foregoing analysis. According to the causal logic
of Fraenkel’s argument, the normative state administers and adjudi-
cates the rules of the game for the participation of producers and con-
sumers in the marketplace. It maintains:
“the legal frame-work [sic] for private property, market activities of the
individual business units, all other kinds of contractual relations, and
for the regulations of the control relations between government and
business. Even if the rules of the game are changed by the lawmaker,
some are indispensable in order to secure a minimum of predictability
of the probably consequences of given economic decisions.206
This will be the case, Fraenkel argued, whenever “the necessity of
decentralization of certain functions in any large-scale society with
advanced technology” arises.207 It is for this reason that Fraenkel
believed that “the field of economics remains the most important
domain of the qualified ‘Rule of Law’ in present-day Germany.”208
A seminal theoretical analysis of the institutional determinants
of economic activity, with which Fraenkel’s analysis of the norma-
tive state Part III, Chapter 2 of The Dual State shares several traits
is Douglass North’s Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic
Performance.209 Consider, for example, the similarity between the
just quoted passage from The Dual State with this well-known and
204  Ibid., 186.
205  Ibid., 186–7.
206  Ibid., 185.
207  Ibid., 185.
208  Ibid., 185.
209  Douglass C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). Whereas Fraenkel’s book is a for-
gotten classic, North’s book by the summer of 2016 had a racked up total of 48,038
citations on Google Scholar. See <https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?view_
op=view_citation&hl=en&user=-LcMZqMAAAAJ&citation_for_view=-
LcMZqMAAAAJ:u5HHmVD_uO8C>, last accessed on July 24, 2016.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
lxxviii
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxviii
oft-cited argument from North’s 1990 book: “Institutions are the rules
of the game in a society or, more formally, are the humanly devised
constraints that shape human interaction.”210 Fraenkel and North
both, independently, referred to the institutional framework govern-
ing social life as “rules of the game.” This superficial semblance, but
even more so the considerable underlying similarities in the theories
(and intellectual concerns) of both scholars, has convinced me to
count Fraenkel’s approach as one that belongs to what social scientists
for more than twenty years have been calling the new institutional-
ism, an approach that North helped to pioneer. More particularly,
Fraenkel’s way of seeing has a great deal in common with what has
become known as “historical institutionalism,” a variant of the new
institutionalism that emphasizes how institutions emerge from and
are embedded in concrete temporal processes.211 Given its approach
to explanation and understanding, and its sophistication in the suc-
cessful blending of nomothetic and ideographic reasoning, The Dual
State deserves a place in the canon of historical institutionalism.
In his analysis of the normative state, Fraenkel regularly reminded
readers of the prerogative state’s power of “jurisdiction over jurisdic-
tion,” that is, that organization’s awesome ability to play overlord over
the normative state, and, if necessary, to put the latter in its subor-
dinate place in the institutional architecture of the Nazi state. At the
same time, he was convinced that it would be a grave mistake not to
take seriously the nature and effects of an institutional structure—
such as the dual state—just because its independence was compro-
mised in the process of its creation, and its members are known to
have abused the institutional discretion that a prerogative state may
have permitted them to exercise.212 Scheuerman is correct, and he
summarizes the underlying assumption of Fraenkel’s theoretical
argument pithily: “discretion is not wholesale arbitrariness.”213
210  North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, 3.
211  For a solid overview, see Kathleen Thelen, “Historical Institutionalism in
Comparative Politics,” Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 2 (1999), 369–404.
For a more recent set of treatments of historical institutionalism as an approach to,
inter alia, the study of comparative politics, international relations, American poli-
tics, and European politics, see Orfeo Fioretos, Tulia G. Falleti, and Adam Sheingate,
eds., The Oxford Handbook of Historical Institutionalism (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2016).
212  See my discussion above and Fraenkel, The Dual State, 57.
213  Scheuerman, “Social Democracy and the Rule of Law,” 90.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxix
 
lxxix
This brings us to the second aspect of Fraenkel’s argument about
“the economic background of the Dual State,” specifically the question
of why this remnant of the Rechtsstaat survived in Nazi Germany. His
answer: German capitalism needed “state aid.”214 Fraenkel believed
that prior to the onset of Nazi dictatorship, “[t]‌he defenders of capi-
talism in post-[World War I] Germany were unable to convince the
masses of the German people that it was the best of all economic sys-
tems. Capitalism had no chance in a democratic struggle against pro-
letarian socialism, in whose extirpation its salvation lay.”215 Fraenkel
hypothesized that violent entrepreneurs were in demand from the
agents of capitalism to defeat agitators on the left. The provision of
state aid did not exhaust itself with the destruction of the “socialist
opponent,” however. If we believe Fraenkel, “[c]ontemporary German
capitalism” also wanted to be supplied with a new enemy once the old
socialist enemy was defeated. It was thus that capitalism was com-
plicit in substituting the Jewish opponent (and others like it, such as
purported foreign enemies) for the hurting and soon to be crushed
socialist opponent. German capitalism, Fraenkel implied, was indif-
ferent to the identity of its new opponent(s) as long as it would enable
the economic sector to “arm itself as a sine qua non for its preser-
vation.”216 But it was not just violence that capitalism demanded the
sovereign state supply. Another commodity was in demand: law. As
Fraenkel put it in The Dual State, German capitalism also needed
state aid:
in its role as guarantor of that legal order which is the pre-condition
of exact calculability without which capitalist enterprise cannot exist.
German capitalism requires for its salvation a dual, not a unitary state,
based on arbitrariness in the political sphere and on rational law in the
economic sphere.217
Ever since Max Weber’s theory of law, the attainment of legal pre-
dictability, especially in the economic sphere, has been associated
with formally rational law. Translated into Weberian terms, Fraenkel’s
argument about the institutional foundations of the Nazi economy
can be restated thus: The remnants of formally rational law that were
encased in the normative half of the dual Nazi state proved capable of
providing a durable and predictable institutional framework within
214  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 205.
215  Ibid., 203.
216  Ibid., 205.
217  Ibid., 205–6.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
lxxx
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxx
which economic actors felt sufficiently confident about the protection
of their private property and associated rights that they contributed,
in an informal quid pro quo arrangement, to the maintenance and
expansion of an inherently violent regime whose substantially irra-
tional ideology they might not otherwise have countenanced.
In contradistinction to the law of the normative state, the law pro-
duced by the prerogative state was, in Weberian terms, substantively
irrational: it was the result of Nazi officials making arbitrary decisions
from case to case without recourse to general rules. But even though
this prerogative state was driven by extralegal motivations and gov-
erned by emotion, and thus potentially detrimental to economic
growth and expansions, the appeal of the normative institutional
reserves in the “rational core” of an otherwise highly “irrational shell,”
to use Fraenkel’s language, was sufficient to appease the fears of the
country’s wealthiest barons and bankers. In return, they accepted the
Nazis as political bedfellows, “capitalizing” their racial regime.
This interpretation betrays traces of the more mechanistic argu-
ment about the political economy of Nazi dictatorship that Fraenkel
had made in his 1937 article and the Urdoppelstaat. But as Scheuerman
has pointed out, it still avoided the shortcomings of Franz Neumann’s
considerably more reductionist analysis of the economic dimensions
of Nazi rule.218 Fraenkel was careful to distance himself—explicitly—
from more radical interpretations of Nazi dictatorship that in the
1930s were en vogue on the left: “There are many people who believe
that National-Socialism is, so to speak, nothing but the house-servant
of German monopoloy capitalism…. These oversimplified theories
tend quite unnecessarily to discredit the economic interpretation of
fascism. Such an interpretation should be formulated in terms of far
more minute and deeper reaching categories.”219
Although dated, Fraenkel’s argument provides a useful entry point
into the ongoing, highly policy-relevant debate about the economic
origins of dictatorship and democracy.220 Not only does it tell us
218  Scheuerman, “Social Democracy and the Rule of Law,” 88. For a comparison of
Neumann’s Behemoth and Fraenkel’s The Dual State, see Meierhenrich, The Remnants
of the Rechtsstaat.
219  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 183.
220  For a seminal, but controversial contribution to this debate, see Daron
Acemoglu and James A. Morrison, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy
(Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 2006), a response by two economists
to Barrington Moore’s social science classic, Social Origins of Dictatorship and

--- Sayfa 82 ---
An Ethnography of Nazi Law
lxxxi
 
lxxxi
something important about the institutional determinants of Nazi
economic restructuring and policy, it simultaneously, and perhaps
more crucially, sheds light on the larger theoretical question of how
such a schizophrenic state can come about in the first place. Here is
Fraenkel with a final word about the nature of the state that chased
him out of his country:
This symbiosis of capitalism and National-Socialism finds its institu-
tional form in the Dual State. The conflict within society is expressed
in the dual nature of the state. The Dual State is the necessary political
outgrowth of a transitional period wrought with tension.221
There is ample evidence to suggest that Fraenkel’s argument about the
nature and logic of institutional dualism, this peculiar form of institu-
tional hybridity, is relevant for understanding not just his time—but
ours as well.222
Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1966).
221  Fraenkel, The Dual State, 208.
222  For this argument, see my The Remnants of the Rechtsstaat, which also comprises
an analysis of the uneven reception of The Dual State since its publication in 1941.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
1
Part I
The Legal System of the Dual State
Do you believe that a state in which the decisions of the courts can
have no validity, but can be reversed and nullified by particular
persons, would subsist rather than perish?
SOCRATES

--- Sayfa 84 ---
2

--- Sayfa 85 ---
3
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
I
The Prerogative State
1.  THE ORIGIN OF THE PREROGATIVE STATE
Martial law provides the constitution of the Third Reich.
The constitutional charter of the Third Reich is the Emergency
Decree of February 28, 1933.1
On the basis of this decree the political sphere2 of German pub-
lic life has been removed from the jurisdiction of the general law.
Administrative and general courts aided in the achievement of this
condition. The guiding basic principle of political administration is
not justice; law is applied in the light of ‘the circumstances of the indi-
vidual case,’ the purpose being achievement of a political aim.
The political sphere is a vacuum as far as law is concerned. Of
course it contains a certain element of factual order and predictability
but only in so far as there is a certain regularity and predictability in
the behavior of officials. There is, however, no legal regulation of the
official bodies. The political sphere in the Third Reich is governed nei-
ther by objective nor by subjective law, neither by legal guarantees nor
jurisdictional qualifications. There are no legal rules governing the
political sphere. It is regulated by arbitrary measures (Massnahmen),
in which the dominant officials exercise their discretionary preroga-
tives. Hence the expression ‘Prerogative State’ (Massnahmenstaat).
In the following pages an attempt will be made to show in detail
the systematic growth of the absolute dictatorship of National-
Socialism which has arisen on the basis of the ‘Emergency Decree
for the Defense against Communism.’ Supplementing this Emer-

--- Sayfa 86 ---
4
The Dual State
4
gency Decree against acts of violence endangering the state, the law of
March 24, 1933 gave National-Socialism unlimited legislative power.
The official legend which the Third Reich seeks to propagate main-
tains that the National-Socialist state is founded on valid laws, issued
by the legally appointed Hitler Cabinet and passed by the legally
elected Reichstag. It would be futile to deny the significance of this
legislation in the transformation of the German legal order. A study of
this legislation and its influence on the activity of the courts presents
a clear picture of the existing German legal order in so far as it can be
said to exist. But it should be remembered that on the statute books
after February 28, 1933, can be found almost no legislation referring
to the part of political and social life, which we have labelled ‘political
sphere,’ now outside the sphere of ordinary law. Legislation regarding
politics would be futile inasmuch as legal declarations in this field are
not considered binding.
The National-Socialist legend of the ‘legal revolution’ is contra-
dicted by the reality of the illegal coup d’état.3 The events leading up
to the Decree of February 28, 1933 are known generally and need not
be repeated here. What is significant, however, is that the coup d’état
consists neither in the Reichstag fire of February 27, 1933, nor in the
Emergency Decree of February 28, 1933, but rather in the execution
of this decree itself. Three acts of President Hindenburg between
January 30 and March 24, 1933, helped National-Socialism into the
saddle: the appointment of Hitler to the post of Reichs-Chancellor,
the proclamation of civil siege by issuing the Reichstag Fire Decree
and the signing of the Enabling Law of March 24, 1933. Two of these
acts could scarcely have been avoided, but the third was entirely vol-
untary. The appointment of Hitler, the leader of the strongest party,
to the post of Reichs-Chancellor was in conformity with the Weimar
Constitution; historically, the proclamation of a state of ‘civil’ instead
of military siege subsequent to the Reichstag fire was the decisive
act of Hindenburg’s career. It was the necessary consequence of the
instigated coup d’état (based on the Reichstag Fire Decree), when
Hindenburg signed the law of March 24, 1933, and thus sounded his
own death knell.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
The Prerogative State
5
 
5
Endowed with all the powers required by a state of siege, the
National-Socialists were able to transform the constitutional and tem-
porary dictatorship (intended to restore public order) into an uncon-
stitutional and permanent dictatorship and to provide the framework
of the National-Socialist state with unlimited powers. The National-
Socialist coup d’état resulted from the arbitrary application of the
Emergency Decree of February 28, 1933, which made a mandatory
dictatorship absolute.4 The extension and maintenance of this abso-
lute dictatorship is the task of the Prerogative State.
In contrast to the earlier Prussian law which contained provisions
only for military martial law, the Weimar Constitution conferred on
the President the power to decide whether ‘measures necessary for
the re-establishment of public safety and order’ were to be enforced
by civil or military authorities. In conjunction with the tremendous
power accorded to the ‘executive authority’ by the decree-issuing
potentialities of Art. 48 of the Weimar Constitution, the deci-
sion whether the National-Socialist ministers or the conservative
Reichswehr generals should be given the responsibility of restoring
public order had most weighty implications. The failure of von Papen,
Hugenberg and Blomberg to perceive the critical importance of this
question was decisive in settling their political fates. Of course it is
idle to speculate concerning unrealized possibilities; nevertheless one
thing may be said with certainty: on February 28, 1933, the fight-
ing power of the National-Socialist Storm Troopers was negligible
in comparison with the power of the police and the Reichswehr. But
when Hitler was enabled to add to the strength of Storm Troopers the
decree power of martial law, the Reichstag fire became a sound politi-
cal investment.
No doubt, the National-Socialist coup d’état of 1933 was, at least
technically, facilitated by the executive and judicial practice of the
Weimar Republic. Long before Hitler’s dictatorship, the courts had
held that questions as to the necessity and expediency of martial law
were not subject to review by the courts.5 The German law never
recognized the principle of English law, expressed in the following
decision:

--- Sayfa 88 ---
6
The Dual State
6
A somewhat startling argument was addressed to us by Mr. Serjeant
Hanna, that it was not competent for this Court to decide whether a
state of war existed or not and that we were bound to accept the state-
ment of Sir Nevil Macready in this respect as binding upon the Court.
This contention is absolutely opposed to our judgment in Allen’s case
(1921) … and is destitute of authority, and we desire to state, in the
clearest possible language that this Court has the power and the duty
to decide whether a state of war exists which justifies the application of
martial law.6
The traditions of the monarchic period, when the declaration of
martial law was the privilege of the government and was independ-
ent of the jurisdiction of the courts, carried over into the Weimar
Republic. The German courts, possessing no guiding traditions in
questions of constitutional law, never succeeded in establishing a
claim to jurisdiction in these particularly crucial cases.
However, the National-Socialists would probably have been suc-
cessful even had such constitutional-judicial safeguards existed. The
absence of a legal tradition analogous to the Anglo-American tradi-
tion enabled them, however, to render lip service to the laws, a proce-
dure found useful during the transitional period, when the army and
the officialdom were not entirely dependable.
2.  THE ALLOCATION AND DELIMITATION
OF JURISDICTIONS
A.  General Regulation of Jurisdiction
Absolute dictatorial power is exercised by the Leader and Chancellor
either personally or through his subordinate authorities. His sole decision
determines how this power shall be wielded. The steps taken by Hitler on
June 30, 1934,7 therefore needed no special justification. His powers were
derived from the new German ‘constitution’ and analogous actions may
be taken at any time. The measures taken on June 30, 1934, may differ in
quantity but not in content from like measures taken on other occasions.
The law passed by the government on July 2, 1934, expressly

--- Sayfa 89 ---
The Prerogative State
7
 
7
legalizing the steps taken on June 30, is of declaratory significance
only. To issue such laws now would be superfluous, since the devel-
opments of the past years have entirely clarified the ‘constitutional’
situation.
The sovereign power of the Leader and Chancellor to act unham-
pered by restrictions is now thoroughly legalized. With few excep-
tions the Leader and Chancellor exercises absolute dictatorial powers
through political authorities. No delimitation of jurisdictions is pro-
vided for. Political officials may be instruments of the state or the
party. The jurisdiction of party and state officials is not subjected
to general regulations and in practice is flexible. According to the
theory formulated by the outstanding National-Socialist constitu-
tional lawyer Reinhard Hoehn, the party makes assignments to the
Secret Police. One of the heads of the Prussian Secret State Police
(Gestapo), Heydrich, advances the following theory: All Black Shirts
(SS), whether civil servants or not, must cooperate. The results of
their espionage activities will be utilized by those Black Shirts with
civil service standing.8 According to a view accepted by a considerable
number of laymen as well as officials, the supreme task of the German
Labor Front is to act as the agent of the Secret Police within industrial
enterprises. Whenever jurisdiction between state and party is delim-
ited it is by unofficial orders inaccessible to the outsider. They can be
changed at any time by the Leader and Chancellor, as demonstrated
at the Nürnberg Party Congress of 1935, where Hitler proclaimed that
he would delegate the solution of the Jewish question, under certain
conditions, exclusively to party authorities.
In order to justify the fact that in these pages no distinction is
made between the state and the party as executive powers, we quote
some decisions which may amply illustrate the impossibility of such
a distinction.
I.  A decision of the Court of Appeals of Karlsruhe dealt with the
confiscation of trade union property by the Prosecuting Attorney of
Berlin. When the Court questioned the Chief Prosecuting Attorney as
to whether the confiscation was still in force he replied that he could
answer this question only after consultation with the legal depart-
ment of the German Labor Front.9

--- Sayfa 90 ---
8
The Dual State
8
II.  A  Reich Press Leader was appointed by a party order of
January 19, 1934. He was to exert ‘every influence’ and had author-
ity to ‘take all steps necessary for the fulfillment of his tasks.’ Thus
authorized by the party, the Reich Press Leader ousted the editor-in-
chief of a newspaper, although this man was under irrevocable con-
tract until 1940. An action by the editor for payment of his salary
was dismissed. The Court held that the order of January 19, 1934,
was an order of the Leader which, although not issued in the cor-
rect form provided by the Enabling Law of March 24, 1933, must
be considered binding for all the state, party and private officials
affected by the decree and that ‘the objections made by the plaintiff
against the validity of this order ignored the close, confidential rela-
tionship between the Leader and his followers, which is the basis for
the unlimited power given to the government in the field of legisla-
tion.’10 The Leader’s order of January 19, 1934, was therefore consid-
ered to be within the scope of this power. Whether this obviously
illogical argument by which the general power of the party leader
is derived from the general power granted to the government of the
state is deliberate, or whether it is a mere lack of understanding, is
irrelevant. The result, however, is that, according to the court, ‘even
if the position of Press Leader is a party function … the decree of the
Leader endowed him with certain governmental functions. There
are no valid objections to the delegation of governmental functions
to important party authorities….’11
The validity of the decisions of the Reich Press Leader was not
questioned by the Hamburg Appellate Court, which decided that
‘such decisions must be accepted by the Court even if they seem
inequitable.’12
III.  In contrast to this rather supine capitulation of the judiciary,
we find an admirable frankness in a decision of the District Labor
Court of Berlin. It concerns an order which had been signed by Hitler
and which had never been officially published. According to this
Court ‘the Leader of the Movement is at the same time the Leader of
the Nation. It is up to him to decide whether he is acting in one func-
tion or the other…. To us it is sufficient that the name Adolf Hitler is
affixed to the order.’13

--- Sayfa 91 ---
The Prerogative State
9
 
9
B.  The State Police
Outstanding among the executive branches of the absolute dictator-
ship is the Secret State Police (Gestapo). This body has always been
and still is organized in accordance with state law. In Prussia, the
functions of the Gestapo are regulated by three statutes. The Office of
the Secret Police was established in April 1933. The Secret State Police
was transformed into a special police force in November 1933. The
general powers of the Gestapo were finally defined by the Prussian
statute of February 10, 1936, which revoked the earlier statutes.14
Section 7 of the law of February 10, 1936, besides correcting a
printing error (which will be discussed below), and announcing some
organizational regulations, contains a provision of substantive law
concerning the examination by administrative courts of decrees in
matters relating to the Gestapo.
Following the Prussian example, the other German states enacted
statutes building up Secret State Police systems. In some German
states, where the jurisdiction of the administrative courts is regulated
by a general clause, every decree issued by an administrative authority
was made subject to review by administrative courts. In other states,
the courts review the act if the situation is enumerated in the stat-
ute regulating the jurisdiction of the administrative courts. Prussia,
in the pre-Hitler-period, adhered to the latter method, but required
review of police orders in so far as they were explicitly enumerated
in the relevant statute. The extent to which changes have occurred in
the principles governing the acts of the Gestapo in Prussia and other
states will be examined below.15
3.  THE ABOLITION OF THE RULE OF LAW
A.  Historical Introduction
Since February 28, 1933, Germany has been under martial
law. Martial law as such does not necessarily clash with the rule
of civil law. Martial law, as it has developed in the constitutional his-

--- Sayfa 92 ---
10
The Dual State
10
tory of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, supplements the
Rule of Law. At times when the Rule of Law is endangered or dis-
turbed, martial law is invoked to restore the constitutional order nec-
essary for the existence of the Rule of Law. If we consider the situation
which led to the proclamation of a state of martial law as a negation
of the Rule of Law, it can be stated that a constitutional martial law
situation is a ‘negation of a negation,’ whose purpose is the restoration
of the (positive) rule of law.
The constitutional invocation of the martial law requires that
(1) the civil rule of law be threatened or infringed; (2) martial law be
declared with the intention of restoring the Rule of Law at the earliest
possible date, and (3) martial law remain in force only until the Rule
of Law is restored.
The National-Socialist coup d’état consisted in the fact that the
National-Socialists, as the dominant party in the government, (1) did
not prevent but rather caused the infringement of the Rule of Law,
(2) abused the state of martial law which they had fraudulently pro-
moted in order to abolish the Constitution, and (3) now maintain
a state of martial law despite their assurances that Germany, in the
midst of a world corrupt with inner strife, is an ‘island of peace.’ On
the ‘island of peace’ there is a continuous state of martial law. This
method was not invented by the Nazis; such tendencies have fre-
quently appeared in modern history. More than thirty years ago,
Figgis characterized such methods as Machiavellian:
Every nation would allow that there are emergencies in which it is the
right and the duty of a government to proclaim a state of siege and
authorize the suppression of the common rules of remedy by the rapid
methods of martial law. Now what Machiavelli did, or what his follow-
ers have been doing ever since, is to elevate this principle into the nor-
mal rule for statesmen’s actions. When his books are made into a system
they must result in a perpetual suspension of the Habeas Corpus Acts of
the whole human race. It is not the removal of restraints under extraor-
dinary emergencies that is the fallacy of Machiavelli, it is the erection of
this removal into an ordinary and everyday rule of action.16
But not only in political theory but also in practical life these

--- Sayfa 93 ---
The Prerogative State
11
 
11
methods were utilized. In 1633 (three hundred years before the
Reichstag fire), Wallenstein realized that martial law was a particu-
larly useful instrument for the suspension and also for the abolition
of the existing legal order.
Carl Schmitt, not without approbation, quotes the following pas-
sage of a letter of Wallenstein: ‘I hope with all my heart that the gentry
will be difficult, since this would cause them the loss of all their privi-
leges.’17 As early as 1921 Carl Schmitt pointed out the parallel between
the privileges of the gentry and the Bill of Rights enjoyed by citizens
living under the civil Rule of Law.
It is interesting that in the early seventeenth century, contempora-
neous with Wallenstein, an attempt was made in England to create the
impression of an emergency in order to provide a legitimate excuse
of absolute tyranny. While Parliament was suspended, Charles I tried
to raise ship money by asserting that peace was threatened by ‘certain
thieves, pirates, and robbers of the sea, as well as Turks, enemies of the
Christian name….’ (First ship money writ, 163418)
His success, however, was short lived and the claim made by
Charles I to override the law on a ‘fancied emergency’ was defeated in
the revolution.19 The Anglo-Saxon world has since then been wary of
‘fancied emergencies.’20
The absence of a similar tradition in Germany has had the most
weighty consequences for its constitutional history. For a short
period, during the March Revolution of 1848 and the reaction follow-
ing it, there was a certain wariness of the dangers connected with the
abuse of martial law. Mittermaier, the most famous liberal German
jurist of this period, said: ‘A revolt, caused, favored, or provoked by a
ruse of the government party itself may easily serve it as a pretext for
suspension of the law. An exaggerated fear, which sees the threatening
specter of anarchy everywhere, may induce the political party (pos-
sibly in good faith) to suppress the alleged rebellion by emergency
decree.’21
Consequently, in view of this danger, he says that ‘we must never
use emergency laws as a pretext in order to continue violence beyond
the immediate need of warding off a threatened attack.’22 The experi-
ence of the unsuccessful revolution of 1848

--- Sayfa 94 ---
12
The Dual State
12
caused Mittermaier to be apprehensive of the political dangers of
martial law. A Bavarian legal scholar of this period, Ruthardt, painted
a vivid picture of the condition characteristic of a state of martial law.
He explains that ‘war is regulated and restrained by war itself; but
when it is over, when the Te Deum laudamus is mixed with Vae victis,
when revenge and hatred are let loose, all laws are suspended or the
victor uses them for his own purposes.’23
Attempts to use a temporary emergency as a stepping-stone to the
establishment of an absolute dictatorship had been made in Germany
long before 1933 and were foreseen by Max Weber even as early as in
the Hohenzollern epoch.24
Even National-Socialists occasionally admit that the Reichstag fire
came at an opportune time and that the ensuing temporary dicta-
torship was a welcome occasion for the abolition of the civil Rule of
Law. The mouthpieces of National-Socialism themselves state that
the threat of Communism was merely the excuse for the breaking
of the old laws. Hamel, a Nazi expert in police law and Professor of
Constitutional Law at the University of Cologne, says that ‘the fight
against Communism merely gave the National-Socialist state the
opportunity to break down barriers which now must be regarded as
senseless.’25 The same attitude is expressed in Hamel’s statement that
protective custody is not merely incidental to the revolution, disap-
pearing upon the return to normal conditions or being absorbed by
the general penal law.26 The fiction that protective custody is a neces-
sary means of dealing with the enemies of the state long since has
been abandoned. It is now recognized to be what it actually was in the
beginning, a means of preserving the absolute power of the National-
Socialist Party, i.e., of establishing an absolute dictatorship. As this
author writes: ‘If the education, the formation of a nationalistic point
of view is the proper task of the state, the means of education and
especially the most effective means, arrest, must be at the disposal
of the police.’27 Therefore it is not surprising for Hamel to assert that
‘protective custody is a feature of a truly political state which is purged
of all traces of liberalism.’28 From such statements we may conclude
that the concentration camp is not only an essen-

--- Sayfa 95 ---
The Prerogative State
13
 
13
tial component in the functioning of the National-Socialist state, but
also an indication of the enduring character of the sovereign National-
Socialist dictatorship.
An even more frank expression is to be found in the decision of
a special court in Hamburg. While discussing Art. 48 (the dictato-
rial article of the Weimar Constitution) which is found satisfactory
to National-Socialism, the court pointed out that ‘the destruction of
this constitution has been one of the outstanding goals of National-
Socialism for many years. It is only natural, that, when finally victori-
ous, it has used its power to overthrow that constitution.’29
The ideal type of all coups d’état attempting to establish a Caesaristic,
formal plebiscitarian dictatorship, is to be found in The Eighteenth
Brumaire of Louis Napoleon (December 2, 1851). In this book Karl
Marx made a classic formulation of the procedure used by this type of
dictatorship when he said that Bonaparte, ‘while seeming to identify
his own person with the cause of order, rather identifies the cause of
order with his own person.’30
The legend of the legal revolution is built around Adolf Hitler’s
identification of his person with public ‘order’; the history of the ille-
gal coup d’état is characterized by the identification of ‘order’ with
Hitler’s person. This attempt to veil the true character of the martial
law dictatorship by legalistic tricks was brought about by the means
of plebiscitary democracy. ‘The cloak of plebiscitary democracy is,
however, very broad and covers a great deal,’31 as Carl Schmitt said
in 1932. It covers the Prerogative State as well as the Normative State,
and only intensive investigation can uncover the real forms which are
hidden beneath it.32
The consequences in the Prerogative State of identifying ‘order’
with the person of Adolf Hitler will be studied from the official docu-
ments of the Third Reich. We shall take particular note of the German
administrative, civil, and criminal court decisions bearing on prob-
lems of the Prerogative State. In the Third Reich there are no decisions
on constitutional questions as such. The courts touch on them only
in so far as their discussion is necessary, to enable them to deal with
other problems. Nevertheless the deci-

--- Sayfa 96 ---
14
The Dual State
14
sions furnish a fairly comprehensive picture of the ‘constitutional law’
of the Third Reich.
B.  The Dissolution of the Rule of Law as Reflected
in the Decisions of the Courts
1.  The Abolition of Constitutional Restraints
During the first years of the National-Socialist regime, the decisions
of the courts revealed many attempts to preserve at least theoreti-
cally the supremacy of law in the Third Reich. This is indicated, for
instance, by the endeavor of the Supreme Court (Reichsgericht), to
consider the Reichstag Fire Decree (Brand-Verordnung) as effective
for only a limited time.
A decision of October 22, 1934, considered expropriation proceed-
ings. This involved discussing whether the protection of property, as
guaranteed by Art. 153 of the Weimar Constitution, was affected by
the Decree of February 28, 1933. It was held that ‘§ 1 of the decree
suspended the constitutional guarantee of property (Art. 153 of the
Weimar Constitution) until further notice … since the relevant sec-
tion of the decree clearly declares the suspension of Art. 153 with the
limitation that the new regulation be valid only until further notice
be given.’33
It was this emphasis on the temporary character of the decree that
aroused the critical comment of Professor Huber, the occupant of
the Chair of Constitutional Law at the University of Kiel. Professor
Huber declares that ‘contemporary legislation has used the formal
procedures of the Weimar Constitution for reasons of public order
and safety (legality), but this does not mean that this legislation is
based on the substance of the Weimar Constitution or that it derives
its legitimacy therefrom.’34
Of greater importance is the question whether the Reichstag
Fire Decree, which is based on Art. 48 of the Weimar Constitution,
suspends those basic rights which this very Constitution declares
inviolable and not to be suspended by emergency measures under
Art. 48.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
The Prerogative State
15
 
15
This problem became rather acute in connection with the dissolu-
tion of the German branch of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Ernste Bibelforscher
as they are called in Germany. This dissolution was justified by the
Decree of February 28, 1933. Jehovah’s Witnesses based their claim
on Art. 137 of the Weimar Constitution, which guaranteed freedom
of worship and belief, and they pointed out that the right guaran-
teed in Art. 137 is one of the fundamental rights which could not be
suspended under Art. 48 of the Weimar Constitution. Their conten-
tion was sustained, and they were acquitted by the Special Court of
Darmstadt.35 This decision, however, represents a rather isolated phe-
nomenon. The courts have sought to circumvent this constitutional
restriction by a great variety of arguments. In a decision of the District
Court of Dresden, the court interpreted the decree of the Minister of
the Interior, which dissolved the association of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
as a constitutional amendment voiding Art. 137 of the Constitution.
According to the view of the court, ‘the Constitution is amendable by
administrative decrees and similar measures.’36 Thus, in the decision
of the Dresden Court, the prohibition of the Police Minister (based
on the Emergency Decree) was interpreted as a legislative action
based on the Enabling Law.
Although the Reichsgericht, in a decision of September 24, 1935,
accepted the validity of Art. 137, it did not interpret it as including
the unrestricted freedom of religious association. ‘Granted the valid-
ity of Art. 137,’ said the court, ‘its correct application does not pre-
vent the suppression of a religious association if the activities of that
association are incompatible with public order.’37 This decision puts
even the so-called fundamental rights at the disposition of the police
power. Religious freedom is thereby reduced to the category of rights
dependent on the discretion of the authorities.
This decision of September 24, 1935 still has recognized certain
fundamental rights. But in a later case, both the Reichsgericht and
the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court(Oberverwaltungs-
gericht) went a step further in their curtailment of fundamental
rights.38 They abolished the right of the civil servant to examine
his official records. The court held: ‘Art. 129, section 3, sentence

--- Sayfa 98 ---
16
The Dual State
16
3 of the Weimar Constitution entitles the civil servant to examine
his official record. This provision is in contradiction to the National-
Socialist conception of the relationship between civil servant and
state, and, without special legislation, is therefore no longer in force.
The leadership principle does not admit the questioning and criti-
cism of the rulings of his superiors by the civil servant.’39 Thus, we can
safely state that constitutional restraints on the sovereign dictatorship
have been disregarded.
2.  The Abolition of other Legal Restraints
In their enforcement of the Decree of February 28, 1933, the police
are neither bound by the provisions of the Constitution nor by any
other law. The Prussian Supreme Court (Kammergericht) in a deci-
sion of May 31, 1935, held that ‘the Prussian Executive Decree
(Durchführungsverordnung) of March 3, 1933,40 leaves no doubt that
Par. 1 of the Decree of February 28, 1933, … removes all federal
and state restraints on the power of the police to whatever extent is
required for the execution of the aims promulgated in the decree. The
question of appropriateness and necessity is not subject to appeal.’41
We shall show that this decision of the Prussian Supreme Court
(Kammergericht) foreshadowed the conclusion at which the majority
of the courts arrived only after long and involved developments.
A reluctance to acknowledge a legally unrestrained police as a con-
sequence of dictatorship was evinced by the Supreme Labor Court
(Reichsarbeitsgericht). Creating the conception of ‘self-defense of
the state,’ it dismissed the action of an employee of the Soviet Trade
Delegation who had been discharged by a commissar appointed by
the police. The court recognized the commissar’s right to discharge
employees with the following rationalization:
It is doubtful whether the police power under normal condition enti-
tles the Prussian Minister of the Interior to endow a State Commissar
with such broad powers. However, even if the appointment could not be
upheld under the Decree of February

--- Sayfa 99 ---
The Prerogative State
17
 
17
28, 1933, it might be justified with reference to the necessities of the
self-defense of the state…. In the first half of the year of 1933 the situa-
tion of the National-Socialist state could not be regarded as secure. As
long as the Communist threat lasted, the state of insecurity continued
and necessitated the extension of police powers beyond their regular
limits.42
It is not accidental that the court uses the past tense in its justifica-
tion of the law of the self-defense of the state. It seems to have desired
to indicate that the emergency had ended by the time this decision
was rendered, thus reopening the period of normal conditions. In like
manner the decision of the Reichsgericht had opened the way for the
re-establishment of the rule of the law (see p. 14).
This trend, however, did not persist. It had originated with the
assumption of the preamble of the February 28, 1933, Decree, that
the sole motive of the law was the overthrowing of Communism.
Hamel declares this interpretation of the Decree of February 28, 1933,
to be erroneous. ‘It would be a mistake,’ he writes, ‘to assume that
the authorities are freed of liberal fetters only in their fight against
Communism. Liberal restraints are not just suspended by the laws
for the fighting of Communism; they are abolished without reserva-
tion.’43 This view has been followed by a great number of the higher
courts. The Special Court of Hamburg (Sondergericht), in a decision
regarding Jehovah’s Witnesses, holds that the decree was issued after
the Reichstag fire in a major emergency and with great haste and that
it was ‘directed against dangers threatening the state not only from
Communist but from any other sources as well.’44 The theory, how-
ever, that the special mention of the Communists is an editorial error
cannot be reasonably upheld.
To justify its application to churches, sects, anti-vaccinationists and
Boy Scouts, the Prussian Supreme Court (Kammergericht) created the
theory of the indirect Communist danger. A decision of December 8,
1935, of the criminal division of the Prussian Supreme Court reversed
a decision of the Municipal Court of Hagen (Westfalen) and acquitted
the defendants who were members of a Catholic youth organization.
The defendants had participated in hiking trips and athletic contests.
The complaint stated

--- Sayfa 100 ---
18
The Dual State
18
that by so doing they had violated an ordinance issued by the District
President (Regierungspräsident) which was based on the Decree of
February 28, 1933. The decision declared that the goal of National-
Socialism was the realization of the ideal ‘ethnic community’
(Volksgemeinschaft) and the elimination of all conflicts and tensions.
For that reason, manifestations of religious differences, aside from
church activities in the narrowest sense, met with the disapproval of
National-Socialism, or, in the words of the Kammergericht: ‘This type
of accentuation of existing cleavages bears in itself the germ of the
disintegration of the German people. Such disruption will only aid
the spread of Communist aims.’45
The fact that the defendants were directly opposed to ‘Atheistic
Communism’ did not safeguard them from punishment for ‘indi-
rect Communist activities,’ because according to the court ‘the public
expression of a private opinion will all too easily serve only to encour-
age persons who believe in or who sympathize with Communism or
who are politically undecided. This encouragement will lead such
persons to form and diffuse the opinion that the National-Socialist
state is not supported by the entirety of the people.’46 This theory
of the indirect war on Communism permits the extirpation of any
movement which in the slightest sense can be construed as support-
ing Communism.
In a decision of March 5, 1935, the Prussian Supreme Court
(Kammergericht) reversed a decision of the lower court and con-
demned a minister of the Confessional Church for violating an ordi-
nance (issued by the chief of police) prohibiting ‘demagogic polemics
in the church conflict’ (the Confessional Church is the part of the
Protestant Church which stands—at least in religious questions—in
opposition to the regime). This ordinance was based on the Reichstag
Fire Decree. The minister had distributed to the parents of his Sunday
School students a letter criticizing the ‘German Christians’ (the
section of the official Protestant Church which sympathizes with
National-Socialism). In deciding this case, a connection between the
church struggle existing inside the Church between both these groups
and Communistic violence was established as follows:

--- Sayfa 101 ---
The Prerogative State
19
 
19
It is sufficient for the application of the decree that an indirect dan-
ger to the state is created by an expression of disaffection with the new
order. Such disaffection provides fertile soil for the reemergence of
Communist activities.47
The participation of National-Socialism in the church struggle and
the abuse of the anti-Communist decree for the persecution of the
Confessional Church was justified by the contention that ‘such criti-
cism naturally provokes dissatisfaction … especially since the inimi-
cal attitude of Communism towards the church might acquire new
hope and strength from this situation.’48
It is not surprising that the theory of the indirect war on Communism
has been used as the basis for a prohibition of the anti-vaccinationists,
as was expressly recognized by a decision of the Reichsgericht of
August 6, 1936.49 Here again there is a historical parallel mentioned
by Carl Schmitt in his discussion of Wallenstein’s legal position: ‘The
right of expropriation is allowed only against rebels and enemies. But
in every revolution it has been the rule to brand political opponents as
enemies of the fatherland and so to justify completely depriving them
of legal protection and property.’50 The courts have since adopted this
theory with little hesitation.
The Administrative Court of Württemberg, in a decision of
September 9, 1936, dealing with the Innere Mission (Missionary
Work of the Protestant Church), dropped all pretence of a connec-
tion between police actions (based on the Reichstag Fire Decree)
and the anti-Communist campaign. It bluntly declared that ‘the
decree was not intended exclusively as a protection from the threat of
Communism but from any danger to public safety and order regard-
less of its source.’51 This decision emphasized a legal condition which
had already been foreshadowed by the District Court of Berlin when,
on November 1, 1933, this court declared in a decision, unique at that
time, that ‘all attacks upon public safety and order are to be regarded
as Communistic in a broader sense.’52
No discrimination was made among the various opponents of
National-Socialism. They were all labelled as Communists. Martial
law was applied equally against all opponents of the present

--- Sayfa 102 ---
20
The Dual State
20
regime. Through the application of martial law, the National-
Socialists obtained a monopoly of power and have maintained it
through continuous use.
3.  The Abolition of Restraints on the Police Power
The wider application of the Decree of February 28, 1933, to include
all non-National-Socialists can only be explained if it is assumed that
‘the preamble of the decree expresses only its motive and not its sub-
stance.’53 Whether the police authorities may act upon the decree only
as a defensive measure or in all cases which they decide within its
scope also depends upon the interpretation of the preamble.
The crucial question is whether the usual limitation of the police
power should be observed in the application of the Reichstag Fire
Decree.54 At first the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court
(Oberverwaltungsgericht) attempted to uphold these restraints
on dictatorial power. In consistency with its past traditions, the
court declared on January 10, 1935, that ‘the Decree of February
28, 1933, did not extend the police power beyond its fundamental
scope…. A police order exceeding these limits, unless based on an
explicit law, violates § 1 of the Prussian Police Administrative Law
(Polizeiverwaltungsgesetz) which has thus far been valid. Such a
police order would therefore be void.’55 Had this opinion been fol-
lowed in later decisions the use of state terrorism to accomplish the
Gleichschaltung of the whole of German society would have been
impossible. Accordingly, it is not very surprising that on March 3,
1933, a Prussian ministerial order declared: ‘The police are permitted
to exceed the restrictions of their power specified in § 14 and § 41 of
the Prussian Police Administrative Law.’56 This was the beginning of a
crucial conflict between the executive power and the judiciary.
Although the Reichsgericht supported the Supreme Administrative
Court,57 the Gestapo disregarded its decisions. A leading official of
the Gestapo, Ministerialrat Eickhoff, characterized the

--- Sayfa 103 ---
The Prerogative State
21
 
21
Gestapo as a ‘general staff, responsible for the defense measures as
well as the equally necessary offensive measures against all the ene-
mies of the state.’58
Before showing how further developments in this matter culmi-
nated in a victory for the police, we must return to the decision of the
Württemberg Administrative Court of September 9, 1936. A private
association devoted to the care of children applied for a modification
of its charter by a transfer of its property to the Innere Mission. The
County Magistrate (Landrat) objected to this, arguing that the prop-
erty should go to the National-Socialist Welfare Organization (NSV)
which ‘bestows its charities on all citizens equally’.59 Objections were
filed against this decision but they were overruled by the Ministry
of the Interior in Württemberg on grounds drawn from § 1 of the
Decree of February 28, 1933. The association then appealed to the
Administrative Court, arguing that ‘the proposed change in the char-
ter cannot be considered a danger to the state nor can it be claimed
that the application of the decree would constitute an action in self-
defense of the state. The decision of the County Magistrate was moti-
vated not by the intention to defend the state from a threatened attack
but by the desire to expropriate the association.’60 The complaint of
the child welfare association was dismissed. The association was said
to have erred in its interpretation of the law, having conceived the aim
and scope of the Decree of February 28, 1933, too narrowly. The deci-
sion reads: ‘The protection of public order and safety carries with it
the preservation of the wealth of the ethnic community. If the decree
had been framed with the intention of allowing not general but only
specified infringements on the restraints which have been previously
in effect, such would have been expressly stated in § 1 of the decree.’61
It was indeed unmistakably stated in the preamble. It would be
wrong to suppose that the National-Socialist legal doctrine generally
pays no attention to the preamble of statutes. Whether it heeds them
depends on ‘the nature of the individual case.’ In interpreting the ‘con-
stitutional’ document of the Third Reich (the Decree of February 28,
1933), the introductory phrases are ignored. Nevertheless when other
governments use similar methods,

--- Sayfa 104 ---
22
The Dual State
22
National-Socialist writers vehemently express their contempt.
Thus Swoboda, the National-Socialist Professor of Law at the
German University of Prague, assails this method of interpretation
but only with regard to the Czecho-Slovak Constitution. After he
stated that during the 20 years of the Czecho-Slovakian Republic, the
dominant attitude of pure positivism had prevailed and that during
that time the preambles to statutes were considered mere rhetoric
he emphasized: ‘This, in the eyes of the National-Socialists, branded
both the constitution and its interpretation as insincere and dishonest.
National-Socialism, of course, is alien to so irresponsible a method.’62
But the National-Socialist authorities not only disregard the pream-
ble of the Decree of February 28, 1933; they also interpret the decree
directly opposed to its significance. The decision of the Administrative
Court of Wurttemberg indicates that a fundamental shift in the set-
ting of the problem has occurred. The Decree of February 28, 1933,
broadly interpreted, took cognizance of the problems involved in
the relationship between individual and state. With the increasing
mingling of party and state functions, the conflict between indi-
vidual liberty and state coercion yielded its pre-eminent position to
the problem of the relationship between corporate competition and
party monopoly. In order to obtain spoils for party organizations and
party finances the National-Socialist Party has, through the use of the
Prerogative State, managed to abolish competing organizations.
A decision of the Administrative Court of Baden shows that even
the pretense of concealing this tendency has ceased. In a small town
in Baden, a conflict had arisen between the Protestant women’s
organization and the local Red Cross organization, which was under
National-Socialist leadership. Apparently, personal quarrels lay at the
bottom of the feud. This quarrel became to a degree historically sig-
nificant when the government tried to deprive the religious organiza-
tion of its function of caring for the ill, a privilege regarded by the
church as its own for almost two thousand years. The police solved
the problem by banning the religious association on the basis of the
Decree of February 28, 1933, and the court affirmed the action of the
police.63

--- Sayfa 105 ---
The Prerogative State
23
 
23
No attempt was made to establish a connection between the dis-
solution of the nursing association and the anti-Communist decree.
The National-Socialist antagonism toward competing organizations
is clearly evident in the decision. The court asserts that ‘it is demon-
strated that an association founded under the pretense of church inter-
ests was visibly injuring the local unit of the Red Cross.’64 Therefore
the court decided that this fact in itself was sufficient grounds for the
prohibition.
‘Since the Minister of the Interior declares that the admitted com-
petition between the two organizations is a disadvantage to important
concerns of the state … it is not within the domain of the court to
refuse to acknowledge the decision of the political leadership.’65 These
decisions have, at least in the cases of Württemberg and Baden, abol-
ished all traditional restrictions on the police power.
If free access to the courts had still been permitted in Germany, the
child welfare and the nursing associations might have been able to
appeal the decision on grounds of an arbitrary application of justice.
If the legal literature on this question is indicative of judicial opin-
ion, however, it is doubtful whether such a hearing could have been
obtained.66
When the restrictions on the police power were abolished, the
question of ‘indispensability’ fell into discard. The police need no
longer show that any action undertaken by them is indispensable
to the attainment of their purpose. Only when we view the discon-
tinuance of the ‘indispensability’ clause as a consequence of the dis-
solution of the Police Law can we appreciate the significance of the
decision of the Appellate Court (Oberlandesgericht) of Braunschweig
of May 29, 1935. In that case the closing of a publishing house belong-
ing to the Wachtturm Bible Tract Society was justified by the con-
sideration that ‘as a defense measure against Communist violence
which endangers the state it may be expedient to prohibit associa-
tions the officers of which may even unintentionally provide shelter
for Communist sympathizers.’67 The decision states nothing as to
whether the police should have first asked the officials of the sect for
the expulsion of ‘Communist sympathizers.’ The police are accorded
complete discretionary power

--- Sayfa 106 ---
24
The Dual State
24
in all questions involving the harboring of Communists. Their actions
are not subject to the control of the courts.
4.  The Abolition of Judicial Review
a. Introductory Remarks.
Before we discuss the right of the courts to review the acts of the
police, a few introductory remarks are pertinent. Legal review of acts
of the police is possible only if legal norms exist which the police
must respect. This is only true, however, as long as the normal legal
order prevails. In the German legal system, as well as in the Anglo-
American, the opposite is true under martial law. The derivation of
the Prerogative State from martial law should facilitate an under-
standing of the co-existence of legal order and lawlessness to the
Anglo-Saxon reader. The state of ‘siege’ is unknown to English law
as a legal institution in it. Martial law is a type of self-defense of the
state against disturbances of the public peace. In case of actual war
(the existence of which has to be determined by the courts), the acts
of martial law, which are to be regarded as self-defense, are outside
the jurisdiction of the legal system. According to a statement of Chief
Justice Cockburn, ‘Martial law, when applied to the civilian, is no law
at all, but a shadowy, uncertain, precarious something depending
entirely on the conscience, or rather, on the despotic and arbitrary
rule of those who administer it.’68 The Prerogative State is thus defined
as a continuous siege. Since martial law is a part of every constitution,
the extent to which it is subject to control is decisive.
American law also emphasizes the proposition that the activity of
the state under conditions of martial law is not legal activity in the
proper sense, as Field said in ex parte Milligan:
People imagine, when they hear the expression ‘martial law’, that there
is a system of law known by that name, which can upon occasion be
substituted for the ordinary system; and there is a prevalent notion that
under certain circumstances a military commander may, by issuing a
proclamation, displace one system, the civil law, and substitute another,
the martial…. Let us call the thing by its right name; it is not martial
law, but martial rule.69
In recognizing that a state of permanent martial rule obtains in

--- Sayfa 107 ---
The Prerogative State
25
 
25
Germany today, it must also be appreciated that the opposite of the
legal order of the rule of law is the lawlessness and arbitrariness of the
Prerogative State.
Martial law, according to Carl Schmitt, ‘is characterized by its prac-
tically unlimited authority, i.e., the suspension of the entire hitherto
prevailing legal order. It is characterized by the fact that the state con-
tinues to exist while the legal order is inoperative. This situation can-
not be branded as anarchy or chaos. An order in the juristic sense still
exists even though it is not a legal order. This existence of the state is
accorded priority over the continued application of legal norms. The
decisions of the state are freed from normative restrictions. The state
becomes absolute in the literal sense of the word. In an emergency
situation the state suspends the existing legal system in response to
the so-called “higher law of self-preservation”.’70
Schmitt’s theory has been adopted by the Gestapo. Dr. Best, legal
adviser to the Gestapo writes:
The task of combatting all movements dangerous to the state implies
the power of using all necessary means, provided they are not in con-
flict with the law. Such conflicts with the law, however, are no longer
possible since all restrictions have been removed following the Decree
of February 28, 1933, and the triumph of National-Socialist legal and
political theory.71
These open statements of the most prominent authors of National-
Socialist constitutional theory find their expression in the decisions
of the courts only in connection with the problems of judicial review.
Thus the question whether the decrees of the dictatorial power are
subject to judicial review illustrates again how a question of substan-
tive law may be concealed behind procedural issues.
b. Review by Administrative Courts.
The Prussian Supreme Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungs­
gericht) was at one time of the opinion that even in the Third Reich
dictatorial measures were subject to judicial review. Thus, in a deci-
sion of October 25, 1934, this court claimed the unqualified right of
judicial review on the ground that ‘the fact that the decree was within

--- Sayfa 108 ---
26
The Dual State
26
the sphere of authority of the so-called “political police,” does not
deprive the affected persons of the right of appeal.’72 But by May 2,
1935, the court retreated from this stand.73 The second law regarding
the jurisdiction of the Gestapo (Gesetz über die Geheime Staatspolizei,
November 30, 1933)74 offered an occasion to differentiate between
acts of the state police and acts of the ordinary police. The court
argued that the State Police (Stapo) and the Gestapo were a special
police and that no particular law providing for the judicial review of
its actions existed. For this reason, the Supreme Administrative Court
(Oberverwaltungsgericht) on the basis of the principle of enumer-
ated powers, denied the right of judicial review. Acts of the ordinary
police, however, even when performed in the service of the Gestapo,
remained subject to judicial review.75
On March 19, 1936, a case came before the Prussian Supreme
Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungsgericht) concerning the
legality of the expulsion of a missionary from a certain district. The
expulsion order was issued by a district magistrate and was justi-
fied by a reference to the church conflict. This involved the general
question whether the police were justified in compelling people to
leave their residences. A short time previously, the Prussian Supreme
Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungsgericht) had passed on the
validity of the order of the District President of Sigmaringen to expel
German subjects of foreign race (in this case gypsies) from a certain
district. The court held that ‘the police may not expel members of
the German Reich from their permanent or temporary residence
for reasons other than those specifically enumerated in the Law
Regulating the Right of Movement (Freizügigkeitsgesetz).76 The police
order requiring the plaintiff to leave the municipality of St. is declared
void.’77
According to general administrative law, the steps taken against
the missionary would have been pronounced invalid. The police are
not empowered to issue orders which are clearly forbidden by law.
Nevertheless the missionary’s appeal was dismissed on the grounds
that the law of February 10, 1936, concerning the Gestapo (Gesetz
über die Geheime Staatspolizei),78 which had meanwhile been passed,
prohibited a review. The Supreme Administra-

--- Sayfa 109 ---
The Prerogative State
27
 
27
tive Court of Prussia (Oberverwaltungsgericht) refused to review the
case because the magistrate had acted within ‘the sphere of authority
allotted to the Secret Police.’79 § 7 of the Law of February 10, 1936,
stated that orders and affairs within the jurisdiction of the Gestapo are
not subject to the review of the Administrative Courts. A ‘printer’s
error’80 had turned the ‘and’ into an ‘in.’ Since the magistrate’s order
for the expulsion of the missionary was, in the opinion of the Supreme
Administrative Court, an order which ‘was obviously intended to con-
tribute to the foreign and domestic security of the State,’81 it treated
the police measure of the magistrate as an order ‘in’ affairs within the
jurisdiction of the Gestapo.
The Völkische Beobachter (March 1, 1936) had violently assaulted
the ‘reactionary’ attitude of the Prussian Supreme Administrative
Court and the latter finally capitulated on March 19, 1936, in the fore-
going case of the missionary. The last vestige of the Rule of Law in
Germany was abolished by exploiting a printer’s error. This is typi-
cal of the cynical contempt for law which prevails among the power-
intoxicated clique now dominating Germany. By refusing to dismiss
an absolutely illegal police order, the Supreme Administrative Court
gave the police a blank check for the performance of every type of
illegal action.82
The Supreme Administrative Court left itself a loophole by saying
that it was not of decisive importance whether the order was outside
the sphere of the Gestapo or apparently within it, though not substan-
tially so. In a decision of November 10, 1938, the Prussian Supreme
Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungsgericht) clarified the princi-
ples of judicial review. The theory that orders of the Gestapo are not
subject to review is interpreted in such a way that the following acts
are exempt from state administrative review: (1) all direct acts of
the Gestapo; (2) all acts of the ordinary police pursuant upon special
orders of the Gestapo; (3) all acts of the ordinary police pursuant
upon general orders of the Gestapo; (4) all acts of the ordinary police
which fall within the jurisdiction of the Gestapo. Review is limited
to those instances when, in cases 2 and 3, the ordinary police have
transcended the orders of the Gestapo, and in case 4, when the

--- Sayfa 110 ---
28
The Dual State
28
ordinary police took the prerogative of the Gestapo.83 The significance
of the decision cited above lies in the acknowledgment of the Gestapo’s
power to transfer entire spheres of life from the jurisdiction of the
Normative State to the Prerogative State (case 3). If, as in the above
decision, the Gestapo decide that the promoting of sharpshooting lies
in the province of the ‘German Defense Association,’ the owner of a
shooting gallery has no resort against the banning of a rifle match,
even if the ban was the result of ‘personal antagonism between him
and the shooting association.’84
The use of the Decree of February 28, 1933, (which was intended to
suppress political opposition) as a decree for dealing with competing
organizations that threaten to infringe on monopolies is characteristic
of recent developments. How this distinction between ‘political’ and
‘non-political’ cases works in practice may be illustrated by the fact
that the courts cannot interfere with the confiscation of a papal encyc-
lical, whereas the seizure of ‘six dream books, two sets of fortune-teller
cards and two copies of an astrological periodical entitled Kosmisches
Tagebuch der Gesellschaft für astrologische Propaganda may give rise
to administrative proceeding,’85 because obviously these are not of
political significance.
With the decision of March 19, 1936, when it refused to uphold
its autonomy in political cases, the Prussian Administrative Court
passed into the ranks of those who had previously denounced it.86
c. Review in Civil Procedure.
The law of February 10, 1936,87 placed actions of the Gestapo out-
side the reviewing authority of the administrative courts. Does the
law apply equally to ordinary courts? A certain attorney brought suit
for damages caused by disbarment following unjustified suspicions
that he had been engaged in Communist activities.88 It was held that
the Reichsgericht could not re-examine ‘decisions which on account
of their political character are not adapted to review by ordinary
courts.’89
On the other hand, a later decision of the Reichsgericht held that the
statute making the state liable for any damage caused by an unlawful
act of its servants90 is valid regardless of whether the

--- Sayfa 111 ---
The Prerogative State
29
 
29
unlawful acts are political or non-political. Disregarding its previous
decision, the court claimed that ‘the mere facts that the act of state in
question was of a more or less political significance does not neces-
sitate a restriction.’91 The phrasing of this decision indicates that the
Reichsgericht intentionally dissented from the doctrine that political
questions are outside the jurisdiction of the court. For ‘even the leg-
islation of the Third Reich … did not limit the application of Art. 131
of the Constitution to non-political acts of the state.’92
The contradiction between the two decisions dealing with almost
identical cases might conceivably be interpreted as a return of the
courts to the Rule of Law after having approached the very thresh-
old of legal anarchy. In reality, however, the second decision does not
involve a return to the Rule of Law. On the contrary, it directly leads
toward the Dual State.
During the period elapsing between the two decisions, an impor-
tant innovation was introduced in the form of § 147 of the Civil
Servants’ Law93 which reintroduced the so-called Konflikt into the
German legal system. Konflikt entitles the supreme administrative
authority in actions for damages against the state to substitute the
Supreme Administrative Court for the civil court which would ordi-
narily have jurisdiction. The Supreme Administrative Court, then,
represents the court of last appeal as far as the claimant is concerned.94
The consequence of this seemingly unimportant innovation is that
the rule of the Supreme Administrative Court not to review actions
of the Gestapo is extended to civil law cases concerning damage suits
against the state. This preserves the integrity of the principle that
political actions are not subject to review in so far as the administra-
tive authorities through the application of § 147 of the Civil Servants’
Law have withdrawn the case in question from the jurisdiction of the
ordinary courts. It also leaves the way open for the courts to assert the
rule of the Normative State (in substantive matters) within the juris-
diction allotted to them. In damage suits against the state the supreme
administrative authority, by using its judicial discretion in applying
the Konflikt procedure, decides whether legal norms or the refusal of
judicial review will govern future litiga-

--- Sayfa 112 ---
30
The Dual State
30
tion. The final word rests with the political authorities. Konflikt is the
technical instrument which draws the line between government by
law (the Normative State) and government by individual decree (the
Prerogative State).
§ 147 of the Civil Servants’ Law gave permanent form to a pro-
vision which had been in force as a special decree during the tran-
sition between democracy and dictatorship. During this period the
Adjustment of the Civil Claims Law (issued December 13, 1934)95
entitled the Minister of the Interior to interrupt judicial proceedings
and refer the case to the administrative authority provided claims
arising from the National-Socialist revolution were involved. The
administrative authority was not bound by the legal code, but made
its decisions according to ‘equitable considerations.’ This was held
necessary in order to prevent the Normative State from cancelling the
gains of the coup d’état. The way in which this statute works becomes
clear in a decision of the Reichsgericht delivered on September 7, 1937,
which reveals at the same time the true methods of the ‘legal revo-
lution.’ At the outset of the National Socialist revolution, the mayor
of Eutin was removed from office. Originally the authorities wished
to institute proceedings against him for malfeasance in office under
the legal provisions of the Normative State. But this plan was soon
dropped, and they pursued the course prescribed by the Prerogative
State. The mayor was placed under protective arrest on July 24, 1933.
Negotiations between his counsel and the government representative
resulted in a written statement (August 4, 1933) in which the mayor
waived his salary—as well as all other claims—and obligated himself
to pay 3,000 marks to the government for the damage he was alleged
to have inflicted on the reputation of Eutin, although German law
does not recognize restitution for moral damages in cases such as the
foregoing. In this case, the state ordered protective custody and threat-
ened internment in a concentration camp in order to prevail upon
one of its citizens to waive his lawful claims against it. Furthermore it
induced him to make payments for which there was not the slightest
legal justification. (The legal term for such conduct of course is rob-
bery and extortion.) The highest official in the county (Regierungsprä-

--- Sayfa 113 ---
The Prerogative State
31
 
31
sident) and the newly appointed mayor of Eutin, once their booty was
secured, became generous. The Reichsgericht records that ‘the govern-
ment and the mayor of the city of Eutin declare that the state and
the city are now willing to regard the matter as closed. They have no
intention of taking any actions which might cause difficulties for the
plaintiff. The plaintiff is hereby dismissed from protective custody.’96
This procedure, however, was apparently not entirely satisfactory
to the National-Socialist officials, and to preclude any expression of
doubt concerning their conduct they offered the following explana-
tion: ‘The plaintiff and his counsel declare that all their statements
and agreements were made of their own free will and that no duress
of any kind was exercised.’97
This decision has an epilogue. The plaintiff, after the first storm of
the National-Socialist revolution had subsided, tried to withdraw his
waiver on the ground of duress. Since the Minister of the Interior, on
the basis of the Adjustment Law of December 13, 1934, declared that
the case was within his jurisdiction, his appeal was not heard. The
courts refused to hear the complaint and it was dismissed forthwith.
The slightest legal control over its authoritarian decisions is viewed
by the National-Socialist Prerogative State as a greater evil than the
perpetuation of injustice.
d. Review in Penal Procedure.
Theoretically, political acts are still subject to judicial review in
the sphere of penal law. In practice, however, this power of review
is meaningless, as was demonstrated by a decision of the Bavarian
Supreme Court (Oberlandesgericht München) of November 4, 1937.
The Reichsminister of the Interior issued an order (based on the
Reichstag Fire Decree) penalizing any minister announcing from
the pulpit the names of those members of his congregation who had
resigned from the Church. A minister who had been accused of vio-
lating this order argued that the decree was invalid.
The purpose of the Decree of February 28, 1933 was the defense of
the state against Communist violence. Is it conceivable that the prohi-
bition of the public announcement of the names of

--- Sayfa 114 ---
32
The Dual State
32
persons who had withdrawn their church membership promoted
rather than diminished Communist propaganda? And how does it
represent ‘positive Christianity’ — according to Art. 24 of the Nazi
platform one of the aims of the National-Socialist Party — to prevent
a minister’s fulfilling his ecclesiastical obligation of counteracting the
anti-religious movement?
The declaration in favor of ‘positive Christianity’ in the National-
Socialist Party program was merely a political maneuver. The more
radical members of the party had long broken with the church and
turned to Neo-Paganism. But since formal resignations from church
membership might engender unrest among those sections of the pop-
ulation which are still attached to the church, a method of combin-
ing the furtherance of church resignations while still maintaining the
pretense of ‘positive Christianity’ was found through the invocation
of the Reichstag Fire Decree.
This decree was thus used to prohibit the announcement of resig-
nations from church-membership, and the Supreme Court of Munich
found a close relationship between the prevention of Communist vio-
lence and the prohibition of the announcement of church resigna-
tions: accordingly it declared valid the order of the Minister of the
Interior. It then rationalized its decision by claiming that the pream-
ble is not a legal part of the decree. It holds that the decree ‘applies
to all sorts of situations and hence any measure is admissible which
is necessary for the restoration of public safety and order, no matter
what the source of the threat.’98 Nor did the court hesitate to invoke
the Weimar Constitution in order to create a connection between a
long-established practise of the church and a danger to public safety.
The National-Socialist state, though it has boasted time and again that
it has abolished the Weimar Constitution, and although it has sus-
pended all the civil rights specified in the second part of this constitu-
tion, has none the less asserted, through one of the highest German
courts, that ‘announcement of church resignations from the pulpit,
although not a legal threat to the freedom of worship and conscience
as guaranteed by the constitution, is in practise a restriction of that
freedom … It might also cause resentment and dissatisfaction with a
state which permits such pressure on freedom

--- Sayfa 115 ---
The Prerogative State
33
 
33
of religion in direct contradiction with the constitution, and might
thereby easily endanger public safety and order.’99
A casual reading of this argument does not reveal its significance.
According to this decision it is not the Third Reich which exerts
pressure on the freedom of worship and conscience, nor is it the
National-Socialist Party: it is rather the clergy itself. Hence, in order
to protect the rights which the National-Socialist Party has destroyed,
action is taken against the clergy. In order to justify these acts of the
Prerogative State, the courts designate the police authorities as guard-
ians of the Weimar Constitution with its civil liberties provisions. The
exploitation of ‘this forcibly extended interpretation of the concept of
“defence against danger” bears within itself the essence of fictiousness,’
a reproach against the judiciary made by none other than one of the
highest leaders of the Gestapo, Dr. Best.100 This decision indicates that
the last vestige of judicial review, namely the right to review adminis-
trative acts, which was at least theoretically preserved in penal law, is
reduced to a ‘mere fiction’ in the Prerogative State. Dr. Best suggests
therefore that the right of judicial review be abolished in penal proce-
dure as well. It is highly probable that the ‘Law concerning the Secret
State Police’ will be extended to include penal cases. The ‘Principles of
a German Penal Code’ formulated by Minister Hans Frank paved the
way for their inclusion when he wrote: ‘The extent to which this prin-
ciple is to be extended in the future to the consideration of all crimes
with a political motive or of political significance is a decision for the
Leader alone to make.’101
5.  The Party as an Instrument of the Prerogative State
Decisions of a political nature are made not only by state authorities
but also by party authorities.
The District Labor Court (Landesarbeitsgericht) of Gleiwitz,
in handling the complaint of an employee dismissed for alleged
political unreliability, was confronted with the review of a politi-
cal decision rendered by a party authority. The employer based
the dismissal upon a memorandum of the District Leader of the

--- Sayfa 116 ---
34
The Dual State
34
National-Socialist Party, but the employee was unsuccessful in his
attempt to dispute the correctness of the memorandum. According
to this court ‘the evaluation of a person’s political character is the
exclusive prerogative of the District Leadership of the
National-Socialist Party. The District Leadership alone is responsi-
ble for this task and the courts have neither the right nor the duty of
review.’102
This view, in theory at least, has not been confirmed by the deci-
sion of the Supreme Labor Court (Reichsarbeitsgericht). In a paral-
lel case of April 14, 1937, the Supreme Labor Court argued that the
memorandum of the District Leader of the party did not relieve the
court of its duty of independent consideration. On the other hand
the court emphasized, however, that the question of the legal status of
a decision of a party authority should be clearly distinguished from
the question of the actual influence of the District Leader. The court
recognized that ‘unfounded charges and even an unjustified suspicion
coming from influential quarters may carry enough weight to consti-
tute a major cause for dismissal.’103 It is superfluous to point out that
in reality the opinion of the District Leader is decisive.104
The relationship between the National-Socialist Party and the
courts can be clearly perceived in the Supreme Labor Court’s
(Reichsarbeitsgericht) decision of February 10, 1937. This involved the
case of an employee of the Storm Troopers (SA) who had been dis-
missed from his position. The dismissed employee sued the SA for the
salary to which he was entitled under the law providing for previous
dismissal notice. Appealing to Adolf Hitler’s Pronouncement at the
Nürnberg Party Congress of 1935, that ‘the Party controls the State,’
the SA refused to acknowledge its subordination to the courts. The
Supreme Labor Court thereupon had to decide whether the National-
Socialist Party enjoyed immunities from the law of the land analo-
gous to those of accredited diplomats representing foreign powers.
To this contention the court gave a negative answer. It referred to an
earlier decision of the Appellate Court of Stettin105 and declared that
‘although it has been pointed out that the Party as such is superior to
the State, this does not exclude the principle that in its relations to

--- Sayfa 117 ---
The Prerogative State
35
 
35
the individuals it is subject to the general rules of public life.’ And
therefore the court concluded that ‘the application of legal principles
to the party’s relations with individuals is not affected by the position
of the Party in the State.’106
This decision is basic to the propositions set forth in the present
book. A general exemption of the National-Socialist Party from the
jurisdiction of the courts would be a denial of the Normative State.
The ruling of the Supreme Labor Court that the party is subject to
certain laws, however, does not prevent it from exercising the sover-
eign powers in the Prerogative State. From the principle that political
acts of the party are acts of sovereignty, it follows that acts of party
officials, in so far as they are within the scope of their political author-
ity, are beyond the jurisdiction of the courts. This doctrine was at first
developed by Carl Schmitt, who pointed out that ‘disputes between
individuals and party officials cannot be submitted to the courts,
since these conflicts generally deal with questions which are to be set-
tled outside the sphere of judicial authority.’107
The following case illustrates the practical consequences of these
theories: an Aryan merchant of Wuppertal applied for an injunction
against the son of one of his competitors who had damaged his busi-
ness by spreading rumors to the effect that he was Jewish. The lower
court decided for the plaintiff. The defendant then appealed the case,
changing his defense by emphasizing that he was a leading officer
in the National-Socialist Artisan Guild (N.S.–Hago). The Appellate
Court of Düsseldorf (Oberlandesgericht) reversed the decision in
favor of the defendant. The court decided that the defendant held
public office (N.S.–Hago) and that he had to be dealt with as a public
official and that the diffusion of the philosophy of the party (includ-
ing anti-Semitic propaganda) was therefore strictly in his line of duty.
Said the court: ‘An official act is not changed by the fact that an error
has been committed or that it constitutes an abuse of official orders.
The legality or appropriateness of such political acts cannot be made
to depend on the judgment of the courts.’108 The complaint was dis-
missed on grounds based on claims which, by

--- Sayfa 118 ---
36
The Dual State
36
virtue of their political character, are outside the jurisdiction of the
courts.
This line of argument was also used in one of the decisions of the
Reichsgericht. An injunction was demanded against a mayor who had
spread false allegations as to the parentage of the plaintiff by asserting
that he was an illegitimate child, actually the son of a Jewish horse-
dealer who had employed the plaintiff’s mother as a kitchen maid. In
spite of the fact that the plaintiff could prove that the mayor had made
the statements in the presence of both party officials and outsiders,
the Reichsgericht overruled the lower courts and refused to grant an
injunction, holding that ‘the official position of the defendant and the
contents of his allegation, which are of great concern to the party (i.e.
non-Aryan descent), raise the presumption, in the absence of con-
trary evidence, that the defendant was acting in his official capacity.’
The plaintiff’s allegation that the defendant’s motives were personal
in character did not influence the decision. ‘An official act,’ said the
court, ‘does not fall within the jurisdiction of ordinary courts merely
because it arose from unjustifiable motives.’109
A decision of the Kompetenzgerichtshof shows, however, that even
National-Socialists doubt that the denial of the jurisdiction of the
courts was justified in the case we have just discussed. At a meet-
ing of the Winter Relief Organization a National-Socialist official
charged that a certain business man had not given his contribution.
The business man applied for an injunction. He was successful in the
lower courts. But before the matter came before the Appellate Court
of Königsberg the governor of the province of East Prussia applied
Konflikt, (cf. p. 29) contending that this was a political question and
therefore within the jurisdiction of the Leader. The Court in Charge
of Questions of Jurisdiction (Kompetenzgerichtshof) denied its juris-
diction in this matter on technical grounds (June 27, 1936).110 It can-
not be denied, however, that the East Prussia president’s claim that
political questions may be decided only in the light of political con-
siderations and only by political authorities is entirely consistent with
the development. In the near future we may expect the establishment
of a rule for party authorities on the same order as § 147 of the Law

--- Sayfa 119 ---
The Prerogative State
37
 
37
concerning Civil Servants (Deutsches Beamtengesetz).111 That is, while
generally recognizing law, it will withdraw the political acts of the
party from the jurisdiction of the Normative State and turn their reg-
ulation over to the Prerogative State.
6.  Politics as the Aim of the Prerogative State
One of the major problems of the legal theory of dictatorship is that of
determining the dividing line between political and non-political acts.
The courts have tried to confine the Prerogative State to the purely
political sphere, and in so doing have been faced with the necessity of
giving a practicable form to this distinction.
It is a rather grotesque aspect of recent German legal developments
that the general legal principles of the Normative State are applied
in proceedings against gypsies, while in parallel cases access to the
courts has been denied on the ground that ‘political’ considerations
were involved. Thus several gypsies were once taken into protective
custody by the police on the ground that their presence caused distur-
bances among the population. The Supreme Administrative Court of
Prussia (Oberverwaltungsgericht) annulled the order, arguing that ‘the
fact that the population of St. considers the mere presence of gypsies
a molestation potentially giving rise to aggressive defensive actions
on the part of the populace does not mean that the gypsies constitute
a menace to public order and safety…. The police were therefore not
entitled to proceed against the gypsies.’112
These principles were of no avail, however, to Koeppen, Director of
the Reichsbank, when he was taken into protective custody because of
a popular demonstration against him. His crime consisted in execut-
ing an eviction order against a tenant who had failed to pay his rent.
The Angriff, Dr. Goebbels’ paper in Berlin, took up the case for lack
of anything more sensational, and the representative Party District
Leader of Berlin, Goerlitzer, thinking the case might provide good
propaganda material, decided to lead the demonstration himself. The
arrest of the Director of the Reichsbank was then declared to be neces-
sary because of politi-

--- Sayfa 120 ---
38
The Dual State
38
cal considerations, and he was denied the protection of the law.113
The decisive factor here is that considerations operative in dealing
with political cases are outside the domain in which they can be
‘properly handled’ by the judiciary.
The, attempt of the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court
(Oberverwaltungsgericht) to compromise by permitting practically
unlimited discretionary powers to the political authorities was not
sufficient.114 The National-Socialist state has insisted that law be
eliminated from the sphere of politics and that the definition of the
boundary lines between the two rests in the hands of the political
authorities themselves. Minister Frick left nothing further to be said
on this subject when he declared: ‘It is self-evident that questions of
political discretion should not be subject to review in the adminis-
trative courts.’115 Not content with this, Frick went even further by
stating that it would not be feasible for the administrative courts to
review those matters which—regardless of their ‘political’ significance
from a general viewpoint—were of special importance in furthering
the interests of the state.
More than 300 years ago a similar demand was made in England.
King James I, in his famous message to the Star Chamber (June 20,
1616),115a declared that in political questions the decision rested with
the Crown and not with the Courts.
Encroach not upon the prerogative of the Crown. If there fall out a
question that concerns my prerogative or mystery of State, deal not
with it till you consult with the King or his Council or both; for they are
transcendent matters … As for the absolute prerogative of the Crown,
that is no subject for the tongue of a lawyer, nor is it lawful to be dis-
puted. It is atheism and blasphemy to dispute what God can do … so it
is presumption and high contempt in a subject to dispute what a King
can do, or say that a King cannot do this or that.116
The straightforwardness of this message has scarcely been sur-
passed by any spokesman of the Third Reich.
The important result of the co-existence of authorities bound by
law and of others independent of law are these: when it is politically
desirable, the decisions of the courts are corrected by

--- Sayfa 121 ---
The Prerogative State
39
 
39
the police authorities who confine persons acquitted by the judiciary
in concentration camps for indefinite periods (the Niemöller case),
and who set aside judgments rendered in civil courts, and reverse the
decisions of the ‘Court of Social Honor’ by the activity of the Labor
Front. The co-existence of legal and arbitrary actions, most impres-
sively demonstrated by the confinement in concentration camps of
persons who have been acquitted by the courts, is a crucial devel-
opment of the recent German constitutional status. Significantly
enough, the National-Socialist state does not acknowledge this fact
willingly. The Dual State lives by veiling its true nature.
This is clearly shown by a decision of the Reichsgericht rendered
on September 22, 1938, in regard to a minister of the Confessional
Church who had offered the following prayer at the end of the ser-
mon:  ‘Now we shall pray for those brothers and sisters who are
in prison. I shall read their names…. Social worker L., Berlin, in
protective custody since February 2, 1937, although the court had
decided in her favor….’117 The Reichsgericht declared the minister
guilty of committing a breach of the peace (affirming a decision of
the lower court). The Reichsgericht stated that ‘the minister’s asser-
tion about L. implied — by connecting the two sentences — the
criticism that L.  should have been freed and that the protective
custody was unjustified’118 and, according to the Reichsgericht, this
endangered the public peace since the minister, ‘in reading the list,
might have led the congregation and others to the belief that the
state was acting arbitrarily rather than in accordance with justice
and law.’119
The fact that the Reichsgericht, highest authority of the Normative
State, condemns as a disturbance of the peace the public announce-
ment of an activity of the most important body of the Prerogative
State speaks for itself. Although one key to the understanding of the
National-Socialist state lies in its dual nature, none but a few high
officials are permitted to allude to this fact.120 One of them, Dr. Best,
describes the activities of his agency in relationship to the activities
of the court:
If the administrative courts repeatedly grant peddler’s licenses to Jews,
to former members of the French Foreign Legion, or to

--- Sayfa 122 ---
40
The Dual State
40
other undesirables, the Gestapo, in executing its commission to protect
the people and the state from the danger resident in such elements, will
confiscate those licenses. If this entails a loss of prestige to someone, the
Gestapo will not suffer the loss, since it always has the last word in such
matters.121
This statement is one of the most outspoken repudiations of the
Rule of Law which we have found in National-Socialist literature. The
difference between a Rechtsstaat (Rule of Law state) and the Third
Reich may be summed up as follows: in the Rechtsstaat the courts
control the executive branch of the government in the interest of
legality. In the Third Reich the police power controls the courts in the
interest of political expediency.122
The claim that the decisions of the regular courts can be and are
rendered ineffective by the political authorities is difficult to prove by
official evidence since those measures, lacking a foundation in law,
cannot be justified by legal arguments and naturally are not published.
All the more interesting for this reason is an article by Dr. Thieme, of
the University of Breslau, in which he takes for granted the use of
this procedure in cases before the Courts of Social Honor (Soziale
Ehrengerichte) in the manner set forth in the revised Penal Code.
Thieme argues that ‘anyone acquitted in a case which is punishable in
the light of wholesome popular sentiment should be handled through
publicity or protective custody.’123 This circumlocution may well be
interpreted as an indication of the control the political authorities
exercise over the courts.
If the political authorities go beyond the jurisdiction of the law
their measures need not be justified by the attribution of illegality to
the actions of those against whom they are invoked. In an article in
the Reichsverwaltungsblatt, which discussed whether a citizen may be
forced by the police to hoist a swastika banner on festive occasions,
the author concluded that though it is not a legal duty to hoist a flag, it
is evidence of the citizen’s devotion to the Leader. Moreover failure to
display the flag might be taken to indicate that the citizen in question
lacked a National-Socialist background. The author suggests that the
deficiency may be remedied in a concentration camp.124

--- Sayfa 123 ---
The Prerogative State
41
 
41
This relationship between law and politics is a consequence of con-
flicting value-orientations. Awareness of this value-conflict has been
expressed by the former National-Socialist Minister Franzen in his
book Gesetz und Richter
The criterion or the value-standpoint in accordance with which con-
flicts are adjudicated is in the case of the vast majority of legal norms
a certain conception of justice. There are many norms, however, which
contain no element of justice but which are based on simple political
principles and are politically legitimated. Things to which we may be
politically opposed are not necessarily bad. A political attitude is one
which opposes its enemies and seeks to maintain its own existence. This
is the prevailing criterion in the Third Reich.125
With a typically National-Socialist cynicism Franzen emphasizes
this point as an arcanum imperii. Since the broad masses of the popu-
lation would not be able to appreciate this point of view it is necessary
to deprecate the moral character of one’s political enemy. According
to Franzen, the political struggle must be so conducted that its fol-
lowers will think of it as a moral and legal crusade.126 The Prerogative
State does not merely supplement and supersede the Normative State;
it also uses it to disguise its political aims under the cloak of the Rule
of Law.
In present day Germany, there is a double jurisdiction for all cases
regarded as ‘political.’ The police execute administrative punishments
in addition to or instead of the criminal punishments executed by
the courts. This situation is illustrated by a decision of the Prussian
Supreme Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungsgericht) regard-
ing the refusal of a driver’s license to an applicant who had spent six
months in a concentration camp because of his attacks on the govern-
ment.127 Attacking the government is a crime within the jurisdiction
of the courts.128 The reason why this case did not come before the
special court cannot be determined by an examination of the deci-
sion. Perhaps the facts were insufficient to provide grounds for an
action. But in this case the applicant was deprived of any possibility
of defense, subjected to heavier penalties and branded as an enemy of
the state for the future without receiving ‘due process of law.’

--- Sayfa 124 ---
42
The Dual State
42
Not only does the Prerogative State replace the court but it also
actively intervenes in pending proceedings.
A survey of legal developments in 1936 by an official of the Ministry
of Justice in the course of a discussion of political crime and the con-
flict between the State and the Catholic Church has supplied us with
a characteristic document on the relations between the courts and
the political authorities of the Third Reich. In it we find the following
statement:
Among the more important political crimes are the ecclesiastical delin-
quencies, which can be classified into three groups: exchange manipu-
lations, moral transgressions and malicious attacks on the state. Since
August 1936, by order of the Leader, for political reasons none of these
matters may be brought before the courts.129
Thus the defendants may be kept in jail for political reasons indefi-
nitely awaiting trial. The courts, whose legal duty is to speed up trials
in cases where the defendants are under arrest, must postpone the
trial by order of the Leader and thereby deviate from the law.
This self-revelation of the policy underlying the National-Socialist
administration of justice is of particular significance for its disclo-
sure of the wide range of actions which are designated as ‘political.’
Offenses against exchange regulations may be classified as ‘political’
in contemporary Germany, and malicious attacks against the govern-
ment are, of course, political crimes. Why the homosexual practices of
two monks should be considered a political offense, however, is more
difficult to explain. It is clear that there is no intrinsic connection
between such actions and those falling under the category, the ‘politi-
cal,’ which is defined by the Prussian Supreme Court (Kammergericht)
as ‘that which involves the domestic and foreign security of the state.’130
Neither the offense as such nor the person of a completely inconse-
quential monk has even the slightest connection with politics. In the
Third Reich, sodomy becomes a political offense whenever the politi-
cal treatment of such offenses is regarded as desirable to the political
authorities. The conclusion one must come to is that politics is that
which political authorities choose to define as political.

--- Sayfa 125 ---
The Prerogative State
43
 
43
The classification of an action as political or non-political deter-
mines whether it will be dealt with according to law or according to
the arbitrary preferences of the political authorities.
The legal system of present day Germany is characterized by the
fact that there are no matters safe from the intervention of the politi-
cal authorities who, without any legal guarantees, are free to exercise
discretion for political ends.
In the first phase of the Hitler regime in 1935, the Reichsgericht
had tried to prevent an ‘arbitrary interpretation’ of the Reichstag Fire
Decree, but significantly enough, even then, when the Reichsgericht
sought something absolutely immune from political intervention
and therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the Gestapo, it could think
of nothing but traffic regulations.131 Meanwhile, however, the courts
have systematically extended the sphere of the ‘political.’ Thus the
Court of Appeals (Oberlandesgericht) of Kiel decided that the prohibi-
tion of a newspaper which ‘defamed the medical profession and dam-
aged its reputation’ was a political question.132 The reason given was
that the newspaper obstructed ‘the policy and aims of the state with
respect to the protection of public health.’133 The Third Reich does not
confine its political concerns to questions of sanitation but extends
them to the ownership of taxicabs as well. Whoever disagrees with
the Third Reich regarding taxis runs the risk of being considered an
‘enemy of the state in the wider sense.’ For political reasons he may
then be expelled from the executive committee of the local taxi own-
er’s association of which he is a member. It was in such terms that the
Supreme Court of Bavaria (Oberlandesgericht München) acknowl-
edged the legality of a police order of the Ministry of the Interior.134
The Supreme Administrative Court of Prussia (Oberverwal-
tungsgericht) finally took the revolutionary step of revealing the polit-
ical character of traffic regulation. The above-mentioned decision in
the driver’s license case, although admitting that political considera-
tions had hitherto been irrelevant to the granting of drivers’ licenses,
justified its change of attitude by pointing out that the multi-party-
state had since been succeeded by the one-party-state. The decisive
point is, according to the court, that ‘in the

--- Sayfa 126 ---
44
The Dual State
44
struggle for self-preservation which the German people are waging
there are no longer any aspects of life which are non-political.’135 In
this way street traffic became a political question and an application
for a driver’s license may be rejected on the ground that the appli-
cant spent six months in a concentration camp. For ‘the community
has a right to be protected from its enemies in every sphere of life.’136
A decision of the Appellate Court of Stettin echoed this construc-
tion. It was held that an auto trip made by a Storm Trooper while in
service must be considered a political act since ‘all the activities of
a Storm Trooper take place within the framework of the National-
Socialist program and are therefore “political.” ’137 No sphere of social
or economic life is immune from the inroads of the Prerogative State.
A further illustration of this thesis is to be found in the litigation
involving a request for the issuance of a birth certificate by a Jewish
attorney who had emigrated after 1933.138 One should first make clear
that according to the German Law Regarding Vital Statistics (Gesetz
über die Beurkundung des Personenstands und der Eheschliessung)139
the registrar is required to issue birth certificates upon request. In
this case the registrar submitted the application to the state police,
who forbade its issuance. Accordingly the registrar refused to issue
the certificate and upon the applicant’s appeal to the Municipal Court,
the court ordered that it be issued. The District Court reversed the
decision and the reversal was affirmed by the Reichsgericht. The latter
based its decision on the statement of the Gestapo that ‘the issuance
of a birth certificate to the applicant was out of the question…. The
registrar is obliged to follow the instruction of the Gestapo. The court
cannot review the grounds for the instruction. This is the necessary
consequence of § 7 of the law of February 10, 1936…. But it was true
even before this law was enacted…. since it exceeds the jurisdiction
of the courts to examine whether certain executive orders are actually
necessary for the preservation of public safety. It is unnecessary to
state the reasons why the right of the individual to the issuance of a
document prescribed in § 16 of the Law concerning Vital Statistics is
being disregarded where the safety of the state is involved.’140

--- Sayfa 127 ---
The Prerogative State
45
 
45
In a discussion of this decision an official in the Ministry of Justice,
Dr. Massfeller, stated that further discussion was superfluous since
any other decision ‘would have been impossible.’141 But for this very
reason we think the decision worthy of discussion especially in three
aspects:  1.  The Supreme Court did not regard a jus cogens clause
of the law as binding for the state police. It thereby recognized the
theory that political authorities are not bound by legal norms. 2. The
Supreme Court recognized the subordination of the courts to the
political authorities although the law explicitly subordinates the regis-
trar to the supervision of the courts. 3. The Supreme Court acknowl-
edged the right of interference of the state police out of considerations
of ‘public safety’ even though the area of intervention was entirely
non-political in the narrower sense of the word.
If it be admitted that a certificate of birth may threaten the ‘secu-
rity of the state’ we have conclusive evidence that nothing is immune
from police intervention and therefore we may say that any activity
whatsoever may be dealt with as a political activity in the Third Reich.
Since our whole thesis turns on this point it is perhaps permissible to
add another decision which contributes to its corroboration.
In the above-mentioned decision of the highest Bavarian court
(Oberlandesgericht München), the court, after having declared that
the Reichstag Fire Decree was applicable to non-Communists, stated
that the name of a member of the executive committee of the taxi
drivers’ association could be struck from the register of that society if
the police authority ordered it. The court said:
It is irrelevant to discuss whether S. is an enemy of the state in the
broader sense of the word. Those regulations which derived from the
second sentence of the Decree of February 28, 1933, confer authority on
the police. The hitherto prevailing legal guarantees are now suspended
in favour of the police. It makes no difference whether the association
in question is an economic one—such as a commercial enterprise or
a joint stock company. Any previous laws concerning associations are
now superseded by the relevant sections of the Decree of February 28,
1933.142
These words pronounced the death sentence on the Rule of Law.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
46
The Dual State
46
The Rule of Law no longer exists. It has been supplanted by the
Dual State, which is the joint product of the Prerogative State and of
the Normative State.
4.  THE PREROGATIVE STATE IN OPERATION
A.  The Negation of Formal Rationality
The Normative and the Prerogative States are competitive and not
complementary parts of the German Reich. To illuminate their rela-
tionship one might draw a parallel between temporal and ecclesias-
tical law on the one hand and between normative and prerogative
forms of domination on the other.
But in what sense can we say that the Prerogative State resem-
bles the church? More than 50 years ago Dostoevski, in The Brothers
Karamazov, said that the state tends to become like the church, a com-
ment which becomes especially significant when we interpret it in the
light of a statement by Rudolf Sohm,143 the greatest German authority
in ecclesiastical law, to the effect that the state and the church differed
in their leading structures; the church concerned itself with material
truth, the state was more interested in formal issues. The essence of
the Prerogative State is its refusal to accept legal restraint, i.e., any
‘formal’ bonds. The Prerogative State claims that it represents mate-
rial justice and that it can therefore dispense with formal justice.144
Professor Forsthoff of the University of Königsberg calls the formal-
istically oriented Rule of Law State (Rechtsstaat) ‘a state bare of honor
and dignity.’145 National-Socialism seeks to supplant the ethically
neutral administration of law with a system of ethics which abolishes
law. In 1930 Hermann Heller called National-Socialism ‘Catholicism
without Christianity.’146
National-Socialism makes no attempt to hide its contempt for the
legal regulation of the administration and for the strict control over
all activities of public officials. ‘Formal justice’ has no intrinsic value
for National-Socialism, as we can see in a quotation from an official
document, the Program of the Central Office of the Na-

--- Sayfa 129 ---
The Prerogative State
47
 
47
tional-Socialist Party for the Redrafting of the Penal Code: ‘In the
criminal law of the National-Socialist state there is no room for for-
mal justice; we are concerned only with material or substantive jus-
tice.’147 The first part of this quotation disregards formal justice in the
German legal system. Whether formal justice has been replaced by
a new type of material justice can be determined only by the exami-
nation of what National-Socialism calls ‘material justice.’ The second
part of this treatise will amply demonstrate what kind of justice this
new ‘material justice’ is. It will be shown that the Rule of Law has
not given way to higher ideals of justice, but rather that it has been
destroyed in accordance with National-Socialist doctrine for the pur-
pose of strengthening the ‘race.’
The practical significance of this point may be demonstrated by a
decision of the Supreme Disciplinary Court (Reichsdienststrafhof).
The question before the court was whether a public servant who
refused to contribute to the Winter Relief Fund (Winterhilfe) was
guilty of a misdemeanor in office. The accused, who for many decades
had been a member of the nationalist movement, pointed out that he
contributed a considerable share of his income to private charities and
that his refusal to contribute to the Winter Relief Fund was without
legal significance, since it always had been officially emphasized as
entirely ‘voluntary.’ In a legal system adhering to principles of formal
rationality it would be impossible to attach legal significance to the
non-fulfillment of ‘voluntary’ obligations. The National-Socialist state
ignores this ‘merely’ formal restriction. The Supreme Disciplinary
Court dealt with the significance of the voluntary character of the
contribution in the following argument:
Even today the defendant’s conception of liberty is of an extreme char-
acter…. For him liberty is the right to neglect all of his duties except
where they are explicitly required by law. He has abstained from par-
ticipation in community enterprises merely because he wanted to show
that as a ‘free’ man he could not be coerced.148
Because he believed that he was free, the state itself having empha-
sized the fact, he is now blamed for ‘a despicable abuse of the

--- Sayfa 130 ---
48
The Dual State
48
liberty which the Leader had granted in full confidence that the
German people would not abuse it.’149 It was for this that he was pun-
ished. The wrongdoing of the public servant did not consist in his lack
of charitable intentions. National-Socialism is not interested in char-
ity as such. It is primarily interested in enlisting and co-ordinating
everyone in the official National-Socialist charity organization. The
‘despicable abuse of liberty’ consisted in having contributed to private
charity. The ‘value’ which National-Socialism attributes to activities
in the welfare field is a function not of charitable interests but of the
desire to add to the party’s prestige.
Here again a parallel can be found with the period of personal
government in England between 1629 and 1640 dominated by the
regime of Archbishop Laud. Professor Tawney tells us that the eccle-
siastical courts, when confronted by cases similar to that dealt with
by the Supreme Disciplinary Court, imposed similar punishment.
He explains that since the activity of the ecclesiastical courts had not
ceased with the Reformation these courts tried to enforce the obli-
gations of charity. They punished “the man who refused to ‘pay to
the poor men’s box,’ or who was ‘detected for being an uncharitable
person and for not giving to the poor and impotent.’ ”150 Laud’s the-
ocracy was guided by principles of material justice and was therefore
opposed to formal rationality.151
From this point of view, the great English revolutionary movement
of the seventeenth century acquires a tremendous interest for those
seeking to understand our present situation. The political movements
of the twentieth century which have culminated in National-Socialism
and Fascism are a reaction against the heritage of the English revolu-
tionary movements of the seventeenth century. Despite this similar-
ity, there is a marked difference between the ‘eleven years of personal
government’ in England and the National-Socialist dictatorship.
Although the National-Socialist state is by no means an agnostic
state152 it also lacks some of the central features of the theocratic state.
If a paradox were permitted it might be said that the Third Reich is
a theocracy without a god. The structure of the Third Reich approxi-
mates that of a church, although it is a church which is not devoted
to a metaphysical idea. The National-Socialist state seeks only its own
glorification. But as

--- Sayfa 131 ---
The Prerogative State
49
 
49
a quasi-ecclesiastical institution, it views those who transgress against
its rules not as criminals but as heretics.
B.  The Persecution of the Heretics
National-Socialist theorists who first asserted that the repressive
activities of the state were directed against political ‘criminals’ now
see the state’s activity as a crusade against heresy. Thus Professor
Dahm of Kiel University has distinguished between ‘crime’ and ‘trea-
son.’153 Acts constituting ‘high treason,’ according to Dahm, cannot be
precisely defined; therefore it is necessary to provide a ‘general clause’
which will allow sufficient discretionary power to determine whether
a breach of faith is treason.
Another National-Socialist theorist, Diener, criticizes the hitherto
predominant definition of treasonable actions as those attempting to
overthrow the constitutional order by violence. He regards the ‘tech-
nical illegality of treason against the constitution’ as far inferior to
the National-Socialist concept of high treason for the reason that ‘the
National-Socialist revolution has created a conception of the state for
which every hostile attitude is treasonable.’154
A decision of the Special Court (Sondergericht) of Hamburg of
May 5, 1935, demonstrates practical consequences of this doctrine.
The question before the court was whether, in case of violence dur-
ing a treasonable enterprise, prosecution for a breach of the peace
should be added to the charge of treason. Contrary to the ruling of the
Reichsgericht, the Special Court ordered a penalty for breach of the
peace in addition to punishment for treason. It offered no explanation
for the fact that the Penal Code155 explicitly mentions violence in the
high treason paragraph (§ 80) but held that ‘as applied to temporary
Communism, preparations for treasonable actions include the organ-
ization and execution of large scale political murder. The Penal Code
which was enacted in 1871 did not make violence a test of preparation
for treason.’156
The Special Court of Hamburg seems to have forgotten that the

--- Sayfa 132 ---
50
The Dual State
50
Penal Code of 1871 was prepared under the immediate influence of
the Paris Commune. The political courts of Germany have applied
the provision concerning treason in many cases for which the clause
was not suitable. Frequently they have given maximum sentences for
the preparation of treasonable actions although the acts themselves
involved no violence whatever. When the facts of the case really
demanded a verdict for treason, the use of violence having been defi-
nitely proved, the court interpreted the provisions for treason as not
covering those facts and considered it necessary to supplement the
charge with one dealing with a breach of peace committed by the
accused.
Dr. Freissler, State Secretary of Justice, greeted Dahm’s analysis as
a theoretical achievement of revolutionary importance.157 Its impor-
tance lies in the revelation that not only political authorities but courts
also must handle political questions from a political instead of a legal
point of view. As Professor Dahm says: ‘We are faced with the general
problem whether the substantive rules of law applicable to ordinary
cases are also valid in the realm of politics…. Do not special standards
obtain here just as they do in the procedural law of political trials?’158
National-Socialism has no general ‘standards.’ A  standard presup-
poses a scale of ethical values; but politics in Germany is entirely free
from the controls imposed by ethical values. The treatment of political
crimes in German ‘courts’ today is a fraud. The People’s Tribunal and
the other Special Courts are the creation of the Prerogative State. The
term Special Court sums up the difference between the Rule of Law
State (Rechtsstaat) and the Dual State: the Rule of Law refers political
crimes to a special court despite the fact that they are questions of law;
the Dual State refers political crimes to a special court, despite the fact
that they are political questions.
That the political courts of Germany which function as agencies of
the Prerogative State are courts in name only can be proved neither
by the interpretation of the high treason statutes nor by pointing to
the heavy sentences which they have imposed. Falsely reasoned deci-
sions demonstrate nothing concerning the legal character of a judicial
body. The situation is, however, quite different if we can prove that the
‘courts,’ unlike other judicial bodies, have

--- Sayfa 133 ---
The Prerogative State
51
 
51
failed to apply fundamental legal principles when political questions
were brought before them.
One of the central principles of criminal law in all civilized states
is the principle ne bis in idem, i.e. the prohibition of double jeop-
ardy. The Reichsgericht adhered to this principle even as recently as
September 8, 1938, and October 27, 1938.159 This makes it all the
more significant that the People’s Court (Volksgericht) as well as the
Prussian Supreme Court (Kammergericht) and the Bavarian Supreme
Court (Oberlandesgericht München) have suspended this principle in
decisions dealing with treason. The highest Bavarian court sentenced
a defendant for distributing illegal propaganda, an action which in
Germany is considered ‘high treason.’ The defendant had already
served his sentence when the court, in a second trial, discovered that
the facts of the case were of a more important character than had
originally been realized. Although the court stated especially that
‘general juridical theory and practice do not permit new proceedings
against R., because of the identity of the act with the one for which
he has already been punished, and that the fundamental principle ne
bis in idem forbids the further punishment of the defendant,’160 the
court condemned the man once again. The court tried to belittle this
principle by pointing out that it is based only on the law of procedure.
This may have been correct from the judicial point of view, but
when the court denied the principle by condemning the man for a
second time it set itself in opposition to universal juridical experience
and observation. The significance of procedural questions is by no
means inferior to those of substantive law. The prohibition of extraor-
dinary courts, the institution of the jury, judicial review of the actions
of state agencies are evidence of this. There is no proposition in the
substantive law which can be compared in fundamental importance
with the principle of res judicata. The distinction between a judgment
of court and an administrative order is that the decision, once ren-
dered, stands, while the order may be changed. The Bavarian Court
showed little appreciation of the nature of judicial procedure when it
declared that the application of the principle of res judicata should not
interfere with the substantive law. Thus the court degraded its

--- Sayfa 134 ---
52
The Dual State
52
status to that of an instrument of the Prerogative State by laying down
the following principle:
In serious cases of high treason an adequate sentence has to be imposed
in all circumstances regardless of all legal principles! The protection of
state and people is more important than the adherence to formalistic
rules of procedure which are senseless if applied without exception.161
Since other courts followed this decision162 the opinion of the
Bavarian court is not an isolated phenomenon. The principle of the
inviolability of legal validity has yielded to political considerations
and has been replaced by political reservations. Courts making their
decisions only in the light of political considerations, i.e., courts
which recognize their own decisions only with reservations, cease to
be judicial organs and their decisions are no longer real decisions;
they are measures (Massnahmen). This distinction was formulated by
Carl Schmitt very clearly about 1924: ‘The judicial decision has to be
just, it must be ruled by the idea of law … the legal structure of the
measure is characterized by the principle of the clausula rebus sic stan-
tibus.’163 A decision under reservation is controlled by the principle of
clausula rebus sic stantibus, the principal element of martial law.
Although German and Anglo-American martial law differ in their
presuppositions and legal content, the German political courts may
nonetheless be compared to those military courts which, according
to English law, are legal only in case of open insurrection. An English
court held in 1866 that ‘the courts-martial, as they are called, by which
martial law … is administered, are not, properly speaking, courts-
martial or courts at all. They are mere committees formed for the pur-
pose of carrying into execution the discretionary power assumed by
the Government.’164
Only when actual rebellion exists are they ‘justified in doing, with
any forms and in any manner, whatever is necessary to suppress
insurrection, and to restore peace and the authority of the law.’165
In present-day Germany political courts are permanent institu-
tions. Thus, what is permissible only in consequence of actual conflict
in the Anglo-Saxon countries is ‘normal law’ in Germany.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
The Prerogative State
53
 
53
‘The existence of this system,’ said the above-mentioned English
opinion, ‘in cases of foreign service or actual warfare, appears to have
led to attempts on the parts of various sovereigns to introduce the
same system in times of peace on emergencies, and especially for the
punishment of breaches of the peace. This was declared to be illegal
by the Petition of Rights.’166
What has been considered a nightmare in English law for more
than 300 years has now become the law of the land in Germany.
It is, however, impossible to present a completely satisfactory
account of the political judicature of the Third Reich since decisions
in political criminal cases are generally not published.167 A general
impression of German political justice can, however, be gained from
a study of the political decisions of civil and administrative courts. Of
course, it must be kept in mind that those decisions merely deal with
the economic existence and not with the life and liberty of the persons
involved.
A woman sympathetic to the Jehovah’s Witnesses applied for a ped-
dler’s permit. The request was denied by the Bavarian Administrative
Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof) which supported its refusal by the fol-
lowing argument:
Although no proof has been offered that Maria S. is a member of the
forbidden association … it has been shown that she is a warm sympa-
thizer…. She has also refused to promise that she would not work on
behalf of the association in the future…. This mode of thought and the
diffusion of such thinking is dangerous to the state … since it defames
both state and church, alienates people and state and renders aid to
pacifism, which is an ideology irreconcilable with the heroic attitude
characteristic of our nation today.168
The Supreme Administrative Court of Saxony (Oberver­
waltungsgericht) refused to be outdone by this decision and denied a
permit to a midwife because she was suspected of being a member of
the Jehovah’s Witnesses with the following argument:
It is indeed true that until now Mrs. K. has not participated in any activ-
ities hostile to the people or the state. Nonetheless, her remarks leave
no doubt that if a situation were to arise in which the orders of the state
clashed with her interpretation of the Bible

--- Sayfa 136 ---
54
The Dual State
54
and with the commandments of ‘Jehovah,’ she would not hesitate to
decide against the people and its leadership…. Although persons of the
type of Mrs. K. individually can scarcely be said to constitute a danger
to the state, their attitudes and opinions encourage those who actually
are enemies of the state and promote their destructive activities.169
A similar tendency is revealed in a case involving the dismissal of a
postal clerk who was a member of the Jehovah’s Witnesses Association
but who, following its prohibition, had not participated in its meet-
ings. According to his religious conviction, the Bible commanded that
no mortal being should be greeted with ‘Heil’ since such a greeting
was due only to God. Accordingly, when he greeted anyone he raised
his right hand and said only ‘Heil.’ His saying only ‘Heil,’ and not ‘Heil
Hitler’ as was officially required, resulted in his dismissal as a postal
clerk, a position which he otherwise would have held for life. In this
struggle for his existence ‘the accused was not allowed,’ as the court
said, ‘to appeal to religious scruples.’170
The Third Reich does not merely persecute those who spread dan-
gerous doctrines; it wages a perpetual warfare against all those dic-
tates of conscience not in harmony with its teachings. A decision of
the Reichsgericht of February 17, 1938, is ample evidence of this. In
this case a sectarian family from Solingen was alleged to have con-
ducted family worship at home. The charge was dismissed by the
District Court, which argued that family worship did not infringe
on the order prohibiting the sect. The Reichsgericht then reversed the
decision and pronounced sentence on the grounds that ‘services of
this type are prohibited and punishable even if held within the family
circle among the former members of the prohibited sect.’171
National-Socialism gives neither mercy nor justice to any German
suspected of harboring ideas which are not in harmony with its own
principles. This was quite clearly expressed by Alfred Rosenberg
when he said that ‘he who is not devoted to the interests of the people
cannot claim their protection. He who is not devoted to the com-
munity needs no police protection.’172 Three hundred years earlier
Archbishop Laud enunciated the same idea

--- Sayfa 137 ---
The Prerogative State
55
 
55
in other words: ‘If any be so addicted to his private that he neglect the
common state he is void of the sense of piety and wishes peace and
happiness for himself in vain.’173
Having destroyed all voluntary associations and abridged the free-
dom of worship, National-Socialism next turned its attention to the
destruction of the family. The saying of grace in a form required by the
conscience of the members of a given family is prohibited by the state
authorities. Interference with parents who are educating their children
in a religion or philosophy not acceptable to National-Socialism is to
be taken for granted. By a decision of the District Court (Landgericht)
of Hamburg several members of the Jehovah’s Witnesses Association
were denied the custody of their children because ‘their [the chil-
dren’s] spiritual welfare was endangered’ by the fact that the parents
wanted to bring them up in their own faith.174
Such dangers to minors are considered by the National-Socialist
authorities more serious than moral dangers. Two decisions rendered
simultaneously in Municipal Courts (Amtsgericht) provide a strik-
ing demonstration to the fact. Moreover they show that political and
‘non-political’ cases are not only differently handled in Germany but
that the differentiation in treatment persists even when the facts in
the case in question are practically identical. The Municipal Court
(Amtsgericht) of Berlin-Lichterfelde held that ‘exposing a child to
Communist or atheistic influences is adequate reason for depriv-
ing the parent of the custody of the child.’ 175On the same day the
Municipal Court of Hamburg declared that ‘the fact that the mother
of the child is a prostitute is not sufficient justification for the court to
deny her the custody of her children who have been placed in unob-
jectionable foster homes.’176
The suspension of legal guarantees has affected the entire range of
life in present-day Germany and has had disastrous consequences in
the political sphere. No less disastrous have been the consequences of
the outlawing of the parties in opposition to the regime. On April 15,
1935, the Municipal Court deprived certain persons of the custody of
their children because they were Communists. On January 5, 1936, a
similar decision was rendered but

--- Sayfa 138 ---
56
The Dual State
56
on the grounds that the parents in question were Jehovah’s
Witnesses. In 1937, the Municipal Court of Frankfurt a.M.—Höchst
deprived a mother of the custody of her child because she wished to
educate her in a Catholic convent.177 In 1938 the Municipal Court of
Wilsen placed several children in a foster home because their father
had not enrolled them in the Hitler Youth movement. ‘In this case the
father kept his children out of the Hitler Youth and thereby abused his
right of custody of his children.’178
According to the National-Socialist view, children who are edu-
cated according to tenets at variance with those of the Hitler Youth
movement are ‘neglected’ by their parents.179
The National-Socialist state demands control over the minds of
the growing generation. A Catholic priest who, during confession,
warned a mother against sending her child away for the Landjahr (the
‘year in the country’) because her child might ‘lose his faith there’
was sentenced to six months in jail for malicious attacks against the
government.180
National-Socialism at first justified its extreme measures by say-
ing that the struggle against Communism made them necessary.
Many persons at that time gave their approval to this outlawing of the
Communist Party. But since then many more have come to under-
stand the truth of Shakespeare’s words (Merchant of Venice, Act 4,
Scene 1):
bassiano:  ‘To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.’
portia:     ‘It must not be. There is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established.
‘Twill be recorded for a precedent;
And many an error by the same example
Will rush into the state. It cannot be.’

--- Sayfa 139 ---
57
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
II
THE LIMITS OF THE
PREROGATIVE STATE
The entire legal system has become an instrument of the political
authorities. But insofar as the political authorities do not exercise
their power, private and public life are regulated either by the tradi-
tionally prevailing or the newly enacted law. The birth certificate case
page 44) is particularly enlightening. Hundreds of birth certificates
are issued every day in Germany in accordance with the provisions
of the law. Normal life is ruled by legal norms. But since martial law
has become permanent in Germany, exceptions to the normal law are
continually made. It must be presumed that all spheres of life are to
be subjected to regulation by law. Whether the decision in an indi-
vidual case is made in accordance with the law or with ‘expediency’ is
entirely in the hands of those in whom the sovereign power is vested.
Their sovereignty consists in the very fact that they determine the
permanent emergency. ‘The sovereign is he who has the legal power
to command in an emergency’ as Carl Schmitt has formulated in his
book Politische Theologie.181
From this follows the principle that the presumption of jurisdiction
rests with the Normative State. The jurisdiction over jurisdiction rests
with the Prerogative State.
The limits of the Prerogative State are not imposed upon it; there
is not a single issue in which the Prerogative State cannot claim juris-
diction. According to the practice of the courts, as we have already
shown, the Decree of February 28, 1933 is valid for the entire field of
the ‘political.’ In present-day Germany there is nothing which cannot
be classified as ‘political.’
The possibility, however, of treating everything as if it were

--- Sayfa 140 ---
58
The Dual State
58
’political’ does not imply that this method is always resorted to. Reuss,
a National-Socialist authority on Administrative Law, distinguishes
between ‘actual’ and ‘potential’ political relevance:
The range of the ‘political’ is variable. Even within the Third Reich and
even within our own historical period, the sphere of the ‘political’ wid-
ens and narrows at different moments, in different situations. The so-
called ‘private sphere’ is only relatively private; it is at the same time
potentially political.182
When Reuss speaks of the ‘potentially’ political character of pri-
vate life he has in mind what we have called the jurisdiction over
jurisdictions of the Prerogative State: i.e., where the Prerogative State
requires the ‘political’ treatment of private and non-state matters, law
is suspended. Where the Prerogative State does not require jurisdic-
tion, the Normative State is allowed to function. The limits of the
Prerogative State are not imposed from the outside; they are imposed
by the Prerogative State itself.183 These self-imposed restraints of the
Prerogative State are of cardinal importance for the understanding of
the Dual State. The self-limitation of the Prerogative State is as deeply
rooted in the nature of National-Socialism as its existence.
Legally the Prerogative State has unlimited jurisdiction. Actually,
however, its jurisdiction is limited. This is the most significant crite-
rion of the constitution of present-day Germany.
In a decision of the Supreme Administrative Court (Oberver­
waltungsgericht) of Saxony of November 25, 1938, these facts, so
important to an understanding of the Third Reich, became especially
apparent. The court had to determine whether it could deny a build-
ing permit without citing the grounds for the refusal. This raises the
question whether building construction also falls within the scope of
the Reichstag Fire Decree. The court said that it did because ‘a build-
ing permit, such as is required under present building laws, may be
denied on grounds deriving from the Decree of February 28, 1933. It
must also be recognized that in such a case the reasons for the deci-
sion need not be adduced.’184 The possibility of excluding decisions in
building construction cases from the jurisdiction of the administra-
tive courts by refusing to state the reasoning underlying the decision
is limited to the sphere

--- Sayfa 141 ---
Limits of Prerogative State
59
 
59
of the Prerogative State. The court vigorously opposed the exten-
sion of this principle of the Prerogative State into the sphere of the
Normative State with the words: ‘Nevertheless, the above-mentioned
Decree of the Reichspräsident of February 28, 1933, involves an excep-
tional ruling, which leaves untouched the laws and procedural rules
which are otherwise generally valid.’185
The same point of view was expressed with equal lucidity by the
Prussian Supreme Administrative Court (Oberverwaltungsgericht) in
a decision of December 15, 1938, involving the Association Law. The
Supreme Administrative Court repeated its earlier declaration that,
in consequence of the Decree of February 28, 1933, all legislation
concerning associations was under the jurisdiction of the police and
declared that ‘it still remained to be determined whether the admin-
istrative authorities in questions of associational law were deprived
of the rule of the Civil Code186 only in the sphere of the Decree of
February 28, 1933, or whether they are generally deprived of the
Civil Code. The court is of the opinion that insofar as the Decree of
February 28, 1933, is not applied, the hitherto obtaining laws govern-
ing associations are still to be regarded as valid.’187
The existence of these self-imposed restraints indicates that the
Third Reich cannot be interpreted as a ‘totalitarian state’ in an uncriti-
cal way. Dr. Herrfahrdt, Professor at the University of Marburg, con-
sidering whether or not the Third Reich should be called totalitarian,
concluded: ‘Either it is true of every state or it is particularly untrue of
National-Socialism.’188 What Herrfahrdt meant was that although the
Third Reich reserves for itself the power of regulating every aspect of
social life, it deliberately limits its use of this power. This, however, is
nothing more than the repetition of an idea which had been energeti-
cally propagated by another opponent of the catchword ‘Totalitarian
State,’ Secretary of Justice Freissler, who said that ‘the National-
Socialist state does not believe that the state is necessarily the best
leader in all spheres of life. On the contrary, it prefers to leave large
spheres of life to other organs of leadership.’189
The concept of the ‘totalitarian state’ is not unambiguous. The
ambiguity in the term ‘totalitarian state’ may be explained by the

--- Sayfa 142 ---
60
The Dual State
60
fact that there are two types of states with totalitarian tendencies. The
common character of the totalitarian tendencies is the subordination
of all activities to the ends of the state. This may be done on the one
hand in the name of the masses. In the state dominated by the masses,
conservatives like Jacob Burckhardt and contemporaries of the French
Revolution like Hegel and John Adams are likely to view with horror
the swallowing up of other values in the all-consuming interests of the
society which is considered to be identical with the state. Burckhardt
characterizes democracy as a Weltanschauung in which the ‘power
of the state over the individual cannot be too great.’190 On the other
hand a state may be called totalitarian because of its absolute exercise
of power in order to strengthen the state in its external relationship.
This state may be a monarchy or an aristocracy; it is not necessarily a
democratic state. Erich Kaufmann, in 1913, in his book Die clausula
rebus sic stantibus und das Völkerrecht191 has expressed the idea of the
Machtstaat as exponent of totalitarianism.
Thus the totalitarian state may be attacked by conservatives inso-
far as it is a state reflecting the purposes of the masses, while it may
be attacked by liberals because of its authoritarianism. The Third
Reich may be interpreted as a confluence of both of these tendencies
towards the totalitarian state. It is similar to France in the revolution-
ary period insofar as it combines the Jacobinist movement within the
Massenstaat and the Napoleonic policy towards the outside world of
the Machtstaat.
We have avoided using the term ‘totalitarian state’ because of its
complex connotations. Its use in Germany goes back to Carl Schmitt’s
book Der Hüter der Verfassung192 where the term totalitarian state was
used for the first time in connection with Ernst Jünger’s concept of
‘total mobilization.’193 Carl Schmitt refused to accept a definition of the
‘totalitarian state’ as one which controls every aspect of social and eco-
nomic life. He distinguished between two types of totalitarianism, the
qualitative and the quantitative type. The significance of this distinction
becomes clearer if one takes into account the occasion on which it was
formulated. In November 1932 the Rheinische-Westfälische Langnamen-
Verein (Heavy Industry Employers’ Association of the Ruhr Val-

--- Sayfa 143 ---
Limits of Prerogative State
61
 
61
ley) invited Schmitt to lecture on ‘Majority or Authority.’ In this lec-
ture, Schmitt stated that a totalitarian state in the qualitative sense ‘is
a state which would refuse to tolerate movements hostile to the state.
Fascism is a good illustration of this type.’194
A ‘quantitatively totalitarian state,’ however, represents a ‘totality of
weakness.’ The Weimar Republic was, according to Schmitt, a quanti-
tatively totalitarian state but not a qualitatively totalitarian state. ‘The
qualitatively totalitarian state concentrates in its hands all the major
means of mass influence. But, alongside of this realm reserved for
the rule of the state, there must in the qualitatively totalitarian state
be room for a free individual business enterprise and for a public
sphere which does not overlap the sphere of the state.’195 In view of
this speech it cannot be said that Schmitt’s conversion to National-
Socialism a few weeks later represented any significant inconsistency.
Merely terminological issues separate Freissler’s theory of the totali-
tarian state from Schmitt’s theory of the qualitatively but not quanti-
tatively totalitarian state.
In both its program and its actual fact, the so-called ‘qualita-
tively totalitarian state’ bases itself on private property.196 In his first
Reichstag speech on March 25, 1933, Adolf Hitler said:
The government will on principle safeguard the interests of the German
Nation not by the roundabout ways of a bureaucracy organized by the
state but by encouraging private initiative and by recognizing private
property.
If the economic system of present-day Germany may be described
as ‘regulated capitalism based on private property’ (as will be later
demonstrated) it cannot be called a totalitarian state in the broader
sense. To the extent that the Third Reich permits private enterprise
to exist, National-Socialism limits the scope of the Prerogative State.
Regulated capitalism is characterized by state activity in the economic
field; but generally, state intervention in this sphere is not of the type
associated with the Prerogative State. Werner Best, the legal counsel of
the Gestapo, has perceived this situation more clearly than anyone who
has written on the problem. In an article of the Jahrbuch der Akademie

--- Sayfa 144 ---
62
The Dual State
62
für Deutsches Recht, Best reiterated a theory already well known
in Germany as a result of his earlier writings, namely, that the
National-Socialist state recognizes a policy power free from all legal
restraints. After describing the Prerogative State, Best turns to the
Normative State:
Our discussion of the National-Socialist state does not imply that any
political activity may be undertaken without regard to rules and accord-
ing to the arbitrary decision of any individual political authority. It is
essential that many of the activities of the state should be carried out
according to legal rules and that they should be calculable in advance,
in order that the persons concerned may be able to orient themselves
satisfactorily.197
Once having laid bare the central fact of National-Socialist consti-
tutional law, i.e. the co-existence of the Normative and Prerogative
State, he approaches the decisive legal problem, the definition of the
specific point at which the Prerogative State yields its jurisdiction to
the Normative State. This self-restraint, the regulation of its future
activities by legal rules, is according to Best ‘appropriate where it
satisfies the requirements of the constructive forces of the nation. In
order that these forces maintain their ends, it is desirable that they
should be able to predict the activities of the state.’198 Best does not
pursue this idea further. It is not by chance that the clearest analy-
sis of the structure of the Third Reich available in National-Socialist
juridical literature is the product of a man who, since he represents
the Prerogative State (or rather its most powerful instrument i.e., the
Gestapo) need not fear its criticism. Nor is it strange that Best should
leave unanswered the pressing question as to exactly which ‘construc-
tive forces’ of the nation require the protection of the Normative State.
The relevance of such an ‘abstract’ question would be denied by
National-Socialism. If it were forced to take a general position on
the question, National-Socialist theory would probably assert that
racial forces are the ‘constructive forces’ of contemporary Germany.
Accordingly, National-Socialism denies the protection of the
Normative State to all non-Aryan subjects. Furthermore, whether or
not any particular Aryan citizen is individually

--- Sayfa 145 ---
Limits of Prerogative State
63
 
63
included in the ‘constructive forces’ of the nation is to be decided in
each particular case.
A detailed analysis of the National-Socialist legal system will show
that this viewpoint is inadequate for the solution of the problem
under consideration. In the preceding pages, it was shown that any
case, once it is declared to be ‘politically’ relevant, may be shifted
from the jurisdiction of the Normative State to the Prerogative State.
No person in contemporary Germany has any guarantee that his sta-
tus as a ‘constructive force’ will not be denied by some agency of the
party or of the state and that he will not lose the protection of the
Normative State. A theoretical analysis of neo-German constitutional
law, however, must not rest content with such a statement. Although
National-Socialism would refuse to recognize such a question, it is
still necessary to discover whether any criterion is available for distin-
guishing between ‘destructive’ and ‘constructive’ forces other than the
racial ones and those which are adduced in individual cases.
This problem is a crucial one for any realistic analysis of the legal
order. Because of its paramount importance, we shall attempt to state
it as clearly as possible.
Thesis:   The ‘constructive forces’ of the nation are, as a matter of
principle, protected by the Normative State.
Question:  1. Is there a general distinction among the various groups
of the Aryan German nation with respect to the extent to
which they enjoy the protection of the Normative State?
2. Assuming that this question is answered affirmatively,
is the extent to which the various groups enjoy the general
protection of the Normative State indicative of the degree
to which the respective groups are regarded as ‘construc-
tive elements’?
3. This in its turn raises the question of the class structure
of the Third Reich.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
64
The Dual State
64
Here we need only point to the existence of the problem. (A more
detailed discussion will be found at the end of the first part of this
book—vide infra ‘The Estates.’) But perhaps at this stage of the discus-
sion it may be noted that the leaders of private business are generally
classified with the ‘constructive forces’ of the nation.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
65
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
III
THE NORMATIVE STATE
1.  THE DUAL STATE AND SEPARATION OF POWERS
A.  Prerogative State and the Executive
One reservation always lurks in the background of the Normative
State: considerations of political expediency. This political reservation
is apparent throughout the entire German legal system. The character
of this reservation was first made explicit in certain treatises on inter-
national law by Professor Carl Bilfinger of the University of Halle.
In 1929, Bilfinger wrote an article the fundamental importance of
which is concealed by its non-committal title: ‘Reflections on Political
Law.’199 In his discussion of certain questions of international law,
Bilfinger asked how far political activity may be regulated by norms.
Although he did not entirely reject the normative regulation of politi-
cal activity, he emphasized the fact that general norms must be sus-
pended whenever issues vital to the existence of the state are involved.
The validity of all rules of international law is limited by the reserva-
tion that a state may repudiate anyone of them if and when its security
is threatened. In the field of constitutional law, Bilfinger sees the same
reservation contained in the provisions for emergency decrees and
martial law.200
Proceeding from Bilfinger’s ideas, Carl Schmitt, in his pamphlet
Nationalsozialismus und Völkerrecht201 pointed out that ‘the “reserva-
tion” is to a great extent a more fundamental principle of interna-
tional law than is a treaty.’ A system of international law,

--- Sayfa 148 ---
66
The Dual State
66
according to Schmitt, may be useful and expedient for certain admin-
istrative institutions, but it should not be taken ‘too seriously.’202 The
issues involved in questions bearing on the existence or non-existence
of political entities transcend the limits of normative regulation.
The legal theory of the post-war German counter-revolutionists
was decisively influenced by international events and the concept
which permitted an unlimited sovereignty to ignore international
law is the source of the theory that political activity is not subject
to legal regulation. This was the presupposition for the theory of the
Prerogative State.203
Even before the war of 1914-18 German jurisprudence had recog-
nized certain legal limitations in the field of domestic politics. It had
singled out one section of the functions of the state which it desig-
nated as ‘government’ (Regierung) in contradiction to the three func-
tions defined in the classical theory of the separation of powers.204
We quote from a leading textbook: ‘Not everything is “administra-
tive” that is neither legislative nor judicial. There is a fourth field in
existence … excluded from administration are all those activities of
the state which for the realization of its purpose lead it beyond those
purposes.’205 Eminent constitutional lawyers of Imperial Germany
generally denied that the doctrine of the ‘separation of powers’ was
of importance in Bismarckian Germany. However, the prevailing
doctrine of constitutional law correctly pointed out that the consti-
tutional structure of the limited monarchy could not be understood
without reference to the theory of separation of powers.
But it must not be forgotten that during the course of the centuries
the doctrine of the separation of powers has undergone considerable
change especially in regard to the executive function.206 Although
Locke is generally looked upon as the father of the modern doctrine
of the separation of powers he exerted no significant influence on the
absolutist Germany of his time. It has frequently been pointed out
that Locke not only recognized three separate powers, the ‘legislative,’
the ‘executive,’ and the ‘federative’ power, but that he also included the
‘prerogative’: ‘Prerogative is nothing but the power of doing public
good without a rule’.207

--- Sayfa 149 ---
The Normative State
67
 
67
According to Locke, ‘prerogative’ is not a fourth power in the
framework of the doctrine of the separation of powers but a deduc-
tion from a principle which was not integrated with the structure of
the separation of powers.208 Since the bearer of the ‘prerogative’ may,
according to Locke, act not only independently of law but, if neces-
sary, in opposition to it, and since there are no legal restraints imposed
on him beyond the vague formula: Salus rei publicae suprema lex, a
connection might be presumed to exist between the neo-German
constitutional doctrine and Locke’s theory. Such a hypothesis would,
however, be incorrect.
Locke’s doctrine of the prerogative was never accepted in England.
When George III tried to invoke that doctrine in a politically incon-
sequential case he encountered the energetic and successful opposi-
tion of Parliament.209 Nor was it influential in France or in the United
States, in spite of the otherwise enormous influence Locke exercised
on the political thought of these countries. Thomas Jefferson vigor-
ously denied that the executive power was associated with the ‘prerog-
ative’ as it had been during the colonial period.210 By the identification
of ‘government’ and the ‘execution of the law’ Jefferson is able to say
that he ‘proscribes under the name of prerogative the exercise of all
powers undefined by the laws.’211 Nor did Montesquieu adopt Locke’s
prerogative theory. Furthermore, he modified Locke’s doctrine of the
separation of powers decisively by declaring that the judiciary was an
independent power, while Locke had placed it under the executive
power. On the other hand, he maintained that the executive power
included both the maintenance of public safety and the federative
power as defined by Locke.
The doctrine of the separation of powers in Montesquieu’s formu-
lation exercised a deep influence on German constitutional devel-
opment. There was, however, one point of difference:  the German
monarchs never admitted that government was nothing else but the
execution of laws or that governmental functions were identical with
administration. Ultimately influenced by Hegel, the German ruling
groups always stressed the special importance of the governmen-
tal function as distinguished from the executive. This distinction
between administrative and govern-

--- Sayfa 150 ---
68
The Dual State
68
mental function was very clearly expressed by Metternich in a letter
written in April 1848:
The major evil consisted in the failure of the government to govern and
this was the result of the confusion of administration and government.
Wherever this confusion exists an empire may appear to continue its
existence without disturbance. Unused power, however, finds its way
from the highest levels to the lowest and results in the overthrow of the
existing order.212
Pre-war German doctrine merely noted the existence of this spe-
cific function of government while stressing the function of adminis-
tration in order to train efficient civil servants. In the postwar period,
however, the constitutional theory, influenced by Rudolf Smend,213
dealt with the state from the political viewpoint, a viewpoint which
had previously been neglected. Smend went so far as to consider the
legal order as a ‘foreign body’ (Fremdkörper) in the framework of the
constitutional, i.e., the political system.214
The question arises whether the theory of the National-Socialist
legal system is substantially different from the theory first put forth
by Otto Mayer and later elaborated by Rudolf Smend. The question
might also well be raised whether the ‘fourth power’ corresponds
to what we have called the Prerogative State. If it does, no great
change has occurred. Carl Schmitt wrote in 1927 that ‘the legal state
[Rechtsstaat], despite its legalism and normativism, is essentially a
state and hence always contains, in addition to its legalistic and nor-
mative elements, certain special political elements.’215 But is not this
co-existence of administrative and governmental elements identical
with the distinction between Normative and Prerogative State and is
not our thesis that the dual form is peculiar to the National-Socialist
state thus refuted? The answer to this question is ‘no.’ The crucial dis-
tinction between the ‘fourth power’ legal state and the Third Reich
consists in the fact that in the Third Reich the ‘political’ does not rep-
resent a single segment of the state activities (rigorously delimited by
legal restraints) but that potentially it comprises the entire political
and private life. The ‘political’ sphere is not one sphere of the state
separated from the others by law; it is an omnicompetent sphere

--- Sayfa 151 ---
The Normative State
69
 
69
independent of all legal regulation.216 Since it claims unlimited juris-
diction for itself, it cannot be considered as one ‘power’ among several
(as is the case according to the doctrine of the separation of powers).
‘The separation and distinction of powers presupposes in principle
the delimitability of all the activities of the state.’217
A potentially unlimited power, however, is the antithesis of a
limitable one.
B.  The Normative State and Discretionary Power
The German theory of administrative law always considered discre-
tionary power to be a characteristic of the executive power. It must
be recognized that under National-Socialism all executive authorities,
whether or not they are parts of the Prerogative State, have extended
the scope of their discretion. Authorities belonging to the Normative
State such as Foreign Exchange Control Offices (Devisenstellen),
Reich Food Provision Estate (Reichsnährstand), Trustees of Labor
(Treuhänder der Arbeit), and many other regulatory bodies operate
under statutory provisions which are usually so vague that they are
only general enabling clauses. These vague general principles author-
ize administrative bodies to intervene in the social and economic life
of the nation, not only in matters which have always been subject to
government regulation, but also in many new fields which prior to
1933 had not been subject to the state.
This raises the problem as to the existence of any fundamental dif-
ference between these activities and those of the authorities which
we designated as organs of the Prerogative State. Might it not be
argued that the Prerogative State is nothing but an extreme case of the
administrative power in which the discretion of the administration is
even greater than usual? If this were true, the qualitative distinctions
between the Prerogative and the Normative State would disappear,
since the difference would be a matter of degree only. A systematic
treatment would then be impossible.
A decisive distinction between the administrative agencies of

--- Sayfa 152 ---
70
The Dual State
70
the Normative State and the organs of the Prerogative State rests on
the differences between their respective sphere of jurisdiction and is
not a problem of varying degrees of discretionary power. However
extensive the discretion of an administrative agency — such as the
Foreign Exchange Control Office — its discretion can be exercised
only within the limits of its clearly defined jurisdiction. Were the
Foreign Exchange Control Office to exceed its jurisdiction, its acts
could be declared null and void in a proceeding before the ordinary
courts. The organs of the Prerogative State, however, are not so lim-
ited in their jurisdiction. There are no legally defined restraints which
narrow their jurisdiction. Since the jurisdiction of these authorities
is unlimited, they cannot be considered as regular administrative
agencies. Administration may be defined negatively as the state func-
tion which is neither legislative nor judicial, while the organs of the
Prerogative State are characterized by their unlimited jurisdiction.
Although a clear distinction exists between administrative agen-
cies and the organs of the Prerogative State it must be pointed out
that the activities of the ordinary administrative agencies have been
greatly influenced by the existence of the Prerogative State. Since the
jurisdiction of the organs of the Prerogative State is unlimited, a cer-
tain tendency exists among the agencies of the Normative State to
imitate this example and to enlarge the scope of their own discre-
tion. Furthermore, since the Prerogative State has completely stifled
all public opinion, resistance against such an encroachment was deci-
sively weakened. Such a development was closely connected with the
changes in the economic sphere. In the period of competitive capi-
talism there were very far-reaching limitations on the discretionary
powers of administrative agencies. The continuously increasing activ-
ity of the state in all fields of social and economic life has brought with
it a corresponding enlargement of the area of discretion. Moreover,
the mere existence of governmental arbitrariness, as embodied in the
Prerogative State, has dulled the sense of justice to such a degree that
the existence of an agency with limited jurisdiction is considered as
a legal institution even though the government exercises enormous
discretionary power.218

--- Sayfa 153 ---
The Normative State
71
 
71
The Normative State, however, is by no means identical with a state
in which the ‘Rule of Law’ prevails, i.e., with the Rechtsstaat of the
liberal period. The Normative State is a necessary complement to
the Prerogative State and can be understood only in that light. Since
the Prerogative and Normative States constitute an interdependent
whole, consideration of the Normative State alone is not permissible.
The co-existence of the Normative and Prerogative States is
indicative of the National-Socialist policy of promoting the power
of efficiency of the state by means of increased arbitrariness. Justice
Brandeis’ statement, ‘the doctrine of the separation of powers was
adopted by the Convention of 1787 not to promote efficiency but to
preclude the exercise of arbitrary power,’219 has no meaning for the
Dual State. The Prerogative State’s jurisdiction over all other jurisdic-
tions guarantees that the efficiency of the state shall have priority over
the liberty of the individual. In National-Socialist Germany the ‘gos-
pel of efficiency’ has been substituted for the worship of liberty.
2.  THE GUARDIANS OF THE NORMATIVE STATE
A.  National Socialism as the Guardian of the
Normative State
Since the jurisdiction of the Prerogative State is not legally defined,
there is no legal guarantee of the stability of the Normative State. The
existence of the Normative State is not dependent on law. It depends
on the complete permeation of the state by National-Socialist atti-
tudes and ideas.
This view will appear paradoxical only to those who have not per-
ceived that National-Socialism is a political phenomenon arising out
of the recent stage of capitalistic development in Germany. Since,
according to National-Socialism, the freedom of the entrepreneur
within the economic sphere should in principle be unconfined, ques-
tions of economic policy are usually regarded as

--- Sayfa 154 ---
72
The Dual State
72
falling within the domain of the Normative State. This is not a func-
tion of law but of the preferences of National-Socialism. We quote a
National-Socialist author:
It would be a misinterpretation of the concept of substantive political
issues if police authorities directed economic policy for political aims
and for the use of the police power, and further, if they were to attempt
to pass measures of economic policy as political issues. It would not be
satisfactory to withdraw from the control which is implicit in judicial
review such measures of the ordinary police authorities. The tasks of
the Gestapo do not lie in the field of economic policy but rather in the
investigation and suppression of activities which are dangerous to the
state. In other words, all their duties fall in the sphere of state policy in
its narrower sense.220
In order to prevent a repetition of the experience of the sorcerer’s
apprentice (i.e., in order to master the spirits which he has invoked),
Reuss, the author of the above quotation, appealed to the principles
of the traditional administrative law as it functioned under the Rule
of Law (Rechtsstaat), since he sensed ‘the danger of excès de pouvoir
in a particularly acute form.’221 Legally speaking, however, there can
be no abuse of discretionary power in contemporary Germany, no
excès de pouvoir, of political authorities. The ‘particularly’ acute form
in which the abuse of discretionary power takes place in National-
Socialist Germany consists in informing the responsible official that
he has infringed the basic principles of National-Socialism by dis-
turbing economic life through the exercise of prerogative measures.
In spite of the existing legal possibilities for intervention by the
Prerogative State where and whenever it desires, the legal founda-
tions of the capitalistic economic order have been maintained. If one
picks at random a volume of the decisions of a German civil court and
examines it systematically, this conception will find complete corrob-
oration. Freissler, Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, has clearly real-
ized that economic law in a narrower sense (the National-Socialists
call it ‘community law’) was left relatively untouched by the revolu-
tion of 1933. Even Freissler recognizes that the mores of the ‘ethnic
community’ did not affect it. As late as 1937 Dr. Freissler said in his
article ‘Der

--- Sayfa 155 ---
The Normative State
73
 
73
Heimweg des Rechts in die völkische Sittenordnung’ that although
‘Penal Law has now oriented itself towards the mores of the ethnic
community, economic law has not in any legally effective way appre-
ciated the biological position of the individual as a cell in the German
ethnic organism.’222
B.  The Courts as Guardians of the Normative State
1.  Internal and External Reservations
The courts are responsible for seeing that the principles of the capi-
talist order are maintained—even though the Prerogative State occa-
sionally exercises its right to deal with individual cases in the light of
expediency and the special nature of the case at hand. The decisions
show that the courts have successfully maintained the legal system
necessary for the functioning of private capitalism. The legal institu-
tions essential to private capitalism, such as freedom of enterprise,
sanctity of contracts, private property, the right of the entrepreneur to
control labor, regulation of unfair competition, regulation of patent,
trade-mark rights, etc., legal protection for interest agreements, prop-
erty and transfer for purposes of security, still exist in Germany. To
this extent the courts have striven to maintain the supremacy of the
law. In order that we may not complicate our analysis, we are not con-
sidering cases touching on the Jewish problem. To generalize from
the treatment of the Jews in the economic field would be mislead-
ing. At the same time, it would be equally misleading to cite cases in
which the Normative State protected the rights of the Jews. Whether
a Normative State exists in Germany and whether it extends protec-
tion to Jews are two separate problems. We shall deal with the Jewish
problem in § 3 of this chapter.
The parallel existence of the Normative and the Prerogative States
is well demonstrated by the legal regulations governing in those areas
where economic life and police functions overlap, i.e. in the areas
controlled by the Industrial Police (Gewerbepolizei). It is not neces-
sary to discuss the question as to the power

--- Sayfa 156 ---
74
The Dual State
74
of the political police to deal with individual cases as they please; we
realize by now that they can. Of greater interest is an investigation
of the cases in which there has been no intervention by the politi-
cal police. Has the supremacy of rational law been abolished by the
National-Socialist coup d’état? It would not be legitimate to speak of
a Normative State if, in cases of conflict, the courts ignored the exist-
ing law in favor of general principles of National-Socialist origin. The
Normative State would not exist if, even in cases where the political
police do not intervene, the legal authority had to contend with this
second reservation.
Of course, we realize that in addition to the already existing ‘exter-
nal’ political reservations attempts have been made in Germany to
establish ‘internal’ reservations which would not be subject to the will
of the political authorities. So far, these efforts have been ineffective
except where Jews are concerned.
Whether authorities are to adhere strictly to the law in cases which
have not been defined as ‘political’ or whether all laws are to be applied
with an ‘internal’ reservation has been treated by no less a person than
Hermann Goering. In an important lecture entitled ‘The Stability
of the Legal System as the Foundation of the Ethnic Community,’
Goering energetically rejected the latter possibility when he said:
There may be circumstances in which the application of the ordinary
law may lead to a profound injustice. The application of the law even
in such cases is not a matter to be decided arbitrarily. The judges are
bound by the law which is the promulgation of the Leader’s will. An
arbitrary deviation from the law would constitute a violation of the
judge’s loyalty to the Leader.223
Thus even National-Socialism had been unable to avoid the
dilemma of legal stability versus political expediency. In attempting to
explain why Goering advocated the maintenance of formal rationality
it would be unfortunate if we were to overlook the nature of his audi-
ence. The lecture of November 16, 1934, was given before a group of
prosecuting attorneys and judges. Goering would probably have used
a somewhat different tone had he been speaking to his appointees in
the Gestapo — i.e., to the officials of the Prerogative State. Such lec-
tures, however, are not published.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
The Normative State
75
 
75
2.  The Normative State as the Guardian of Legal Institutions
a. Entrepreneurial Liberty.
The dispute over the ‘internal reservation’ and therewith over the
existence of the Normative State was bitterly fought in relation to
the Economic Enterprise Law (Gewerbeordnung). This law is based
on the principle of entrepreneurial freedom. Extreme National-
Socialist circles tried to destroy this principle. They tried to brand
entrepreneurial freedom as a holdover from the liberal epoch and,
accordingly, antiquated and automatically rendered inoperative by
National-Socialism. They asserted that restrictions on entrepreneur-
ial liberty should be introduced not only when specially required by
statute, but whenever desirable in the light of the general principles of
National-Socialism.224
If we assume a case which stands outside the jurisdiction of the
Prerogative State, it is still undecided whether the prevailing sub-
stantive law or vague principles allowing unrestricted discretion are
to govern the actions of the inspectorial staff. But, in its decision
of August 10, 1936, the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court
(Oberverwaltungsgericht) declared itself in favor of the Normative
State. The court referred to the fact that ‘it has recently been claimed
that in consequence of the revolution in legal conceptions associated
with the triumph of National-Socialism, the fundamental principles
of entrepreneurial freedom no longer obtain.’225 As early as 1934 the
Prussian Supreme Administrative Court had rejected this conten-
tion although other courts accepted it. Despite vigorous criticism, the
Supreme Administrative Court held its ground; although, as the court
said: ‘It is true that National-Socialist law has added new legal regula-
tions to those which were already in existence. As yet, entrepreneurial
freedom has not been legally abolished. Further restraints and regula-
tions may be imposed only through a new law.’226 The court empha-
sized the dangers which would flow from the abolition of the trade
regulation laws. One argument which the court offered was that: ‘if
the inspectorial staff are given the general power to regulate entrepre-
neurs, all the laws which are concerned with the

--- Sayfa 158 ---
76
The Dual State
76
regulation of economic activity are out of date and practically sus-
pended.’227 Thus the court emphatically refused to renounce the basic
principles of the traditional legal and economic order by proclaiming
the general principle:
The suspension and modification of the law is not the task of the judici-
ary, even when it considers the law to be in conflict with the National-
Socialist outlook. Legislation is the domain of the Leader and the courts
may not intervene in this sphere.228
b. Sanctity of Contracts.
A similar attitude was expressed by a court in a case which was in
many respects political and which involved the sanctity of con-
tract. In the capitalistic society credits can be given and goods can
be transferred only if one has the guarantee that contracts will be
honored: Pacta sunt servand. National-Socialism has not abolished
this principle though it by no means treats it as a corollary of Natural
Law. The difference between the western democracies and National-
Socialist Germany becomes particularly clear in their attitude towards
the Natural Law status of the sanctity of contracts as expressed in the
sphere of International Law. The foreign policy of Germany in the last
years has amply demonstrated the practical application of this system
of ethics which regards contracts as terminable whenever it appears
desirable. The clausula rebus sic stantibus which had been worked out
by German international lawyers before the war plays a central role
in National-Socialist theory and practice in the field of international
law. As early as 1930 Carl Schmitt referred to the principle pacta sunt
servanda as a tendency of ‘loan shark’ ethics.229
Is this attitude also dominant in the sphere of private legal rela-
tions? If it were possible to terminate any contract at will by appealing
to general National-Socialist principles, the Normative State could
not exist. This in turn would mean the destruction of the capitalistic
system. Some courts have at least definitely sounded a warning on this
point. The Bavarian Administrative Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof)
had to decide whether a specific National-Socialist clausula rebus sic
stantibus was valid in the internal legal order of the Third Reich. In
1882 a Bavarian munic-

--- Sayfa 159 ---
The Normative State
77
 
77
ipality contracted with the Catholic congregation of the town to
contribute to the living of the Catholic priest. When the National-
Socialists came to power the municipality sought to terminate the
contract, arguing that it was entered into under very different political
circumstances and could not be considered binding after the National-
Socialist revolution. The attempt of the municipality to evade its con-
tractual responsibilities by appealing to general National-Socialist
principles was blocked by the court, which held that ‘the sanctity of
contract is the foundation of the existing legal order. The sanctity of
contract is an ethical value and an ethical imperative with which no
legal order can dispense.’ The court characterized the sanctity of con-
tract as ‘the basis of economic life and of the orderly existence of the
ethnic community’230 and declared that formal rationality had priority
over National-Socialist ideas by proclaiming the following principles:
A realistic attitude must be taken towards the objection basing itself
on National-Socialist principles. This attitude must be grounded in the
positive norms of the existing legal order which is the emanation of
the ethical principles accepted as binding by the ethnic community.
The court does not exclude all possibility of applying the clausula rebus
sic stantibus … but reserves its right to do so for especially exceptional
cases.231
But this was also the attitude of the courts in pre-National-Socialist
Germany. Where the capitalistic system is endangered the courts
must function as guardians of the law. The Bavarian court emphasizes
the fact that ‘the judiciary has as its domain the care of the legal order.
Political leadership is not within its domain.’232
c. Private Property.
If the courts look at the traditional legal order as ‘the emanation of
the ethical principles accepted as binding by the ethnic community’
they would be inconsistent if they refused their protection to prop-
erty owners who are threatened with the intervention of non-political
authorities hiding themselves under National-Socialist phraseology.
A case dealing with the farm-land law, a sphere in which National-
Socialist ideology has allegedly made its most important

--- Sayfa 160 ---
78
The Dual State
78
gains, is instructive. This case centered around the question whether
the owner of a herd of sheep had the right to let them graze on a piece
of land belonging to another person. The owner of the sheep argued
that the woods in which the sheep grazed had hitherto not been
exploited for economic purposes, and that the refusal of the owner
of the land to permit the sheep to graze there represented an interest
in private gain which should be sacrificed for the benefit of the com-
munity (Gemeinnutz geht vor Eigennutz). The Prefect of the District
(Landrat) had concurred in this argument and he had, by a special
decree, decided in favor of the sheep-owner. The Prussian Supreme
Court (Kammergericht) was impressed neither by the decree of the
Prefect of the District nor by the National-Socialist argument that pri-
vate gain should be sacrificed for the benefit of the community. The
court clearly upheld the law of property as contained in the German
Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch).233 The court declared that limi-
tations on property rights could be imposed only in legally specified
exceptions and these must be made in the regular legal forms.234
The property system of Germany has not been transformed by the
National-Socialist catchwords. Private property still enjoys the pro-
tection of the courts from official interference, except where political
considerations are involved. The Rule of Law as it bears on the protec-
tion of property is especially relevant to the question of assessment of
taxes. Rational calculation as part of the conduct of a business enter-
prise is impossible if tax assessments are unpredictable. The Third
Reich therefore upholds the rule of the Normative State in regard to
tax administration.
A decision of the Supreme Disciplinary Court (Reichsdisciplinarhof)
discusses the question whether the Rule of Law still prevails with
regard to fiscal problems. The case was one in which the mayor of
a town had deviated from the letter of the law by assessing and col-
lecting highway taxes. He defended himself with the argument that
‘the urgency of the situation had necessitated immediate action’235
and that National-Socialist principles emphasized the secondary sig-
nificance of strict application of the law when there were undesirable
conditions to be eliminated. The

--- Sayfa 161 ---
The Normative State
79
 
79
court, however, did not follow this reasoning, and acting in accord-
ance with the principles of the Normative State, declared that
‘although National-Socialism seeks to overcome the inadequacies of
the former regime with speedy and energetic actions its extensive leg-
islative activity demonstrates that statutory measures and legal pro-
cedures are required for this end.’236 The court emphasized that the
fiscal administrators are as much bound by the pre-National-Socialist
laws as they are by the laws and orders of the Leader. The mayor was
informed that inasmuch as he was not an agent of the Prerogative
State he had to assure himself that ‘in the National-Socialist state the
head of a community should avoid arbitrary measures.’237 In questions
of road constructions and highway taxes the Third Reich permits the
majesty of the law to prevail.
d. Competition.
The German courts have continued to uphold the previously prevail-
ing laws regulating unfair competition among business enterprises.
The Appellate Court (Oberlandesgericht) of Cologne denied an injunc-
tion to an association of oil dealers who, with permission of the Board
of Trade and the Trustee of Labor, had fixed gas prices. The injunc-
tion was to be applied against a non-member selling at lower prices.
The association pointed out that the prices which they had fixed had
been approved not only by the Board of Trade but by the Trustee of
Labor as well, i.e., by an authority erected by the National-Socialist
state in order to protect the interests of the community. In denying
the motion for the injunction, the court declared it ‘irrelevant that the
price fixing of the applicant had the approval of the Trustee of Labor
of Düsseldorf and of the Board of Trade and Industry of Cologne
because these organizations are not legally empowered to fix prices in
a binding way on the motor fuel market…. The approval of the said
organizations does not make the prices binding on outsiders.’238
Three years later there occurred a case which indicated that the
capitalistic laws of the market, involving the right of the producer to
set any price upon his product, were still operative where they did not
come into opposition with the special regulations of the

--- Sayfa 162 ---
80
The Dual State
80
government. A German statute in 1909 (Gesetz betreffend unlauteren
Wettbewerb)239 had provided that, although in general competition in
the market was not to be regulated, in special cases of unfair trade
practices legal actions could be taken by the competitors injured
by these practices or by the association to which the merchant or
manufacturer belonged. On the basis of this statute the alarm-clock
manufacturers’ association in 1937 initiated a suit against one of its
members for selling inferior articles at an exorbitant price. The plain-
tiff argued that the conduct of the defendant was contrary to the doc-
trine of the justum pretium which is inherent in National-Socialism.
Unjust prices are immoral and are therefore at the very least contrary
to the Law against Unfair Competition.
The Appellate Court of Hamburg rejected this argument in its deci-
sion of May 12, 1937. The court recognized that ‘a transgression of the
price regulations set by the National-Socialist government is unethi-
cal … but this did not apply to the case of the merchandise sold by the
defendant since the price of alarm-clocks was not specially regulated
by the state.’240 The court based its decision on the argument that the
prices of merchandise not regulated by the state ‘are even now deter-
mined by the conditions of supply and demand, that is, the price is
determined in the last analysis in accordance with the interest of the
consumer. So long as the conduct of the business is in accord with the
other requirements of fair trade practice there is no restriction on the
prices it sets for its products. Thus there may be cases of very high, or
even exorbitant prices in which there cannot be attributed unethical
conduct on the basis of the exorbitance of the price alone.’241 It is fit-
ting that this expression of commercial policy occurred in Hamburg,
with its definite commercial tradition.
e. Labor Law.
The Normative State has also warded off threats against the posi-
tion of the entrepreneur in the firm. In a case before the Supreme
Labor Court (Reichsarbeitsgericht) a branch manager complained of
dismissal, without adequate notice. Sheltered by the German Labor
Front, she had attempted to rent for herself the shop in which she was
employed. The Labor Front had con-

--- Sayfa 163 ---
The Normative State
81
 
81
ducted the renting negotiations while the employee remained in the
background. The court was called upon to decide whether the Labor
Front had overstepped its jurisdiction in interfering with the rights
of the defendant in favor of the plaintiff. The court held that ‘even if
the Labor Front acted in its official capacity and within its jurisdic-
tion, it was subject to the laws as was any other public corporation
and might act only within the framework of the laws.’ According to
the court, ‘a direct interference with the right of others in the case
at hand in which the negotiations were carried on with the building
owner behind the back of the defendant for the purpose of making a
lease for the plaintiff is illegal.’242 Even the German Labor Front must
acknowledge the principle that the entrepreneur is ‘master in his own
house.’ The complaint of the branch manager was dismissed.
A decision of the Court of Social Honor (Sozialer Ehrengerichtshof),
an institution which is among the proudest accomplishments of
National-Socialism, provides clear evidence that the Normative State
is still operative. § 36 of the National Labor Code (Gesetz zur Ordnung
der nationalen Arbeit)243 prescribes penalties for certain specified
offenses. Soon after this law went into force, the question arose
whether the list of offenses in § 36 was an exhaustive enumeration
or whether it was merely a list of examples which should occasion-
ally be supplemented by practice and analogy. The Supreme Court
of Social Honor ruled out analogy244 as a method for applying law
for all cases within its jurisdiction when it decided that ‘§36 of the
Labor Code specifically enumerates the serious violations of the act
which are punishable by the Court of Social Honor. It unambiguously
indicates thereby that the inclusion of less important violations was
not intended by the legislator.’245 The foregoing again demonstrates
that National-Socialism, although it passionately repudiates formal
rationality in the application of the law as a vestige of a bygone era,
adheres to the principle of formal rationality when the case concerns
fundamental economic problems. The capitalistic system cannot exist
without a minimum of formal rationality. It is no wonder then that
Dr. Mansfeld referred to the decision of the Court of Social Honor as
‘wise moderation.’246

--- Sayfa 164 ---
82
The Dual State
82
f. The Law of Non-Tangible Property.
The law of non-tangible property (copyright, patents, rights of pub-
lication, trade-marks, etc.) raises a crucial point in our theory of the
Dual State, since it is here that the capitalistic system can least easily
submit to interference with the existing system of private law.
The case which we shall cite is perhaps the most important civil
case in Germany of recent years. It involved the suit of a phonograph
record manufacturer against the German Broadcasting Company
(Reichs-Rundfunkgesellschaft) in which the former sought to restrain
the latter from playing his records without paying a fee. Two lower
courts sustained the Broadcasting Company but the Reichsgericht on
November 14, 1936, decided against it. The company had claimed
that the courts had no jurisdiction in the case, since radio stations
supplying vital political information were therefore an integral part of
national policy. The court refused to accept this argument and, fur-
thermore, denied that the radio station was entitled to use records
without charge, because they were used in the interest of the national
welfare. The court held that, even though the activities of the radio
station were partly public, the obtaining of material for broadcast-
ing purposes fell within private law since ‘the broadcasting of a work
without the consent of its author or owner, merely on the ground of
the public position of the radio station, would amount practically to
expropriation.’247 This decision was all the more significant in view of
the fact that during the course of the trial the press took an attitude
conflicting with that of the court.
The same tendency was evident in a copyright litigation. The
litigants disagreed over the question whether the German national
anthem — the Horst Wessel-Song — had been composed by Horst
Wessel or whether it had been plagiarized. If someone in a public
gathering had put forth the view that Horst Wessel had plagiarized
the melody from an old song he would have suffered serious conse-
quences. But when the same charge was made in court by representa-
tives of a music publisher the court examined all the details of the case
thoroughly, calling in experts, etc. This actually happened in a case
decided by the Reichsgericht on December 2, 1936.248

--- Sayfa 165 ---
The Normative State
83
 
83
3.  The Normative State and the Party Program
a. Public Interest precedes Self-Interest.
The general principles of the National-Socialist Party were formulated
in the Party Platform of February 24, 1920. Followers of National-
Socialism contend that the program of the party is the real constitu-
tion of the Third Reich. Its relationship to substantive law, therefore,
is of interest, especially in case of conflict between the substantive law
and the program. The National-Socialists who favor the acceptance
of the platform argue that judges are empowered to review those pre-
National-Socialist laws which have not been formally rescinded as
incompatible with the ‘constitution.’ According to their opinion, the
judge is forbidden to apply ‘unconstitutional’ laws or to make deci-
sions which will lead to results opposed by the party program. Even
opponents of National-Socialism reluctantly admit the tenability of
this view, recognizing that Hitler has worked on the fulfilment of the
program with uncompromising energy. As evidence of this conten-
tion, the National-Socialist solution of the Jewish question is cited.
Whether the Jewish question really has been treated in conformity
with the program will be discussed later.249 But even if it had been
so we should still not know the degree of completeness with which
the platform as a whole has been realized.250 For our examination of
the achievements of the party, it is important to discover the extent
to which the principle, ‘general welfare precedes private welfare’, has
been honored.
The realization of this principle would have involved the repudia-
tion of the Normative State and of formal rationality. This, however,
did not occur. The courts, it is true, paid verbal deference to it while
actually ‘co-ordinating’ it with the needs of the Normative State and
the structure of private law; the Reichsgericht especially performed
this task with deftness:
Although the most recent tendencies of German law particularly
emphasize the old saying ‘general welfare comes before private welfare’
and seek to realize it, it must be recognized that it is not entirely new
since older laws had already recognized the principle. (Graf und Ziether,
Deutsche Rechtssprichwörter, II. Auflage 1869, p.  487; Preussisches
Allgemeines Landrecht § 73, 74)251

--- Sayfa 166 ---
84
The Dual State
84
This decision enabled the Reichsgericht to maintain the tradi-
tional principles of German private law in the economic sphere and
to provide them with new legitimation by concealing old arguments
under new phrases. In the course of revaluation proceedings the
Reichsgericht formulated the principle that ‘economic considerations
cannot induce a court to render a decision clearly in conflict with
the law.’ The Reichsgericht emphasized in this decision that ‘the old
principle which guaranteed the stability of the law. i.e., the preamble
to the Code of Court Procedure252 which stated that the judge must
obey the law, is still in force and that Art. 336 of the Penal Code,253
which punishes anyone who tampers with the law with penitentiary
sentences up to five years is still valid.’254
To date the higher courts have not abandoned these principles,
although the lower courts sometimes tried to revolt. The District
Court of Breslau (Landgericht) for example attempted to abandon the
formal rationality of private law by holding that the transference of
property for purpose of security (Sicherheitsübereignung) could not
be reconciled with National-Socialist principles. It justified its deci-
sion by saying that ‘the transaction made the debtor the slave of the
creditor and that this would be contrary to National-Socialist philoso-
phy and should not be permitted by the courts.’255 The District Court,
however, was admonished in the official journal of the Department
of Justice (Deutsche Justiz) and was advised that this type of judicial
conduct was not admissible in the field of private law. In commenting
upon this decision of the Breslau Court, Paetzold not only criticized it
but warned against its repetition256 and said that ‘the necessities origi-
nating from the existing economic order cannot be ignored.’257
The attempt to replace the rational legal order of German capital-
ism as it was embodied in private law by the principles of the party
program was too abstract and much too general to serve as a source
of judicial decisions. In almost all borderline cases concerning eco-
nomic problems it has been possible to construe the general princi-
ples of the party program so as to satisfy both of the conflicting views.
The discussion within the National-Socialist Party in connection with
a decision of the Joint Civil Senates of the Su-

--- Sayfa 167 ---
The Normative State
85
 
85
preme Court (Vereinigte Senate des Reichsgerichts) on November
16, 1937, serves to illustrate this point. As a result of compulsory
inoculation a child developed paralytic symptoms from which he
did not recover. Neither the physician nor any other authorities were
to blame. Claiming that inoculation had been made compulsory in
the interest of the general public, the child demanded damages from
the state for his injury. The complaint was dismissed on the basis of
positive law, the Reichsgericht, in its comment on the decision, assert-
ing that ‘according to the National-Socialist conception of the state,
the duty of sacrifice should be too strong to permit a claim for dam-
ages.’258 This supplementary National-Socialist argument had met
with violent criticism. Arguing from the same theory of the ethnic
community, the critics of the Reichsgericht arrived at diametrically
opposite results, contending that their conclusion alone expressed the
true National-Socialist spirit. As long as National-Socialist arguments
are only used to justify in political terms a decision based on legal
principles this method is innocuous.
In a case before the District Court of Hamburg (Landgericht),
however, the problem arose whether the party program had been
substituted for positive law. A debtor who had failed to pay interests
on a mortgage invoked as his defense Art. 11 of the party program.
He argued that the charge against him was ‘unconstitutional’ since
the party program had promised the ‘destruction of interest-slavery’
(Brechung der Zinsknechtschaft). The court did not take this argument
seriously and decided in favor of the plaintiff. The court stated that it
must ‘be left to the Leader and the government to decide when and
to what extent they wish to realize this goal (the abolition of interest)
and to choose the means therefor.’259 As long as the courts decide that
‘there is no danger under such circumstances that a contract entered
into according to law and the claims deriving therefrom will be dealt
with in a manner contrary to “good faith” and “good morals,” ’260 the
German creditors need not be disturbed. These anti-capitalistic sec-
tions of the party program are not being enforced.
The Third Reich has not transformed its economic organization in
accordance with the demands of the party program. The capi-

--- Sayfa 168 ---
86
The Dual State
86
talist economy, founded upon self-interest, has no more been replaced
by a predominance of public interests than ‘class society’ has been
supplanted by ‘ethnic community.’ The National-Socialists boast that
by an intensification of racial consciousness they have eradicated class
hatred and arrogance. They pride themselves especially on having
acquired social honor for the German worker and on having freed
him from his feelings of social inferiority. In the course of a deci-
sion in a penal case, the Bavarian Supreme Court (Oberlandesgericht
München) had an opportunity to test whether the National-Socialist
revolution was more than a façade which tried to disguise its empti-
ness with anti-Semitic propaganda. The court was in a position to set
a precedent for certain changes in the class structure. It did nothing.
According to a Bavarian police decree of November 18, 1887, unmar-
ried laborers were to be punished if they possessed a certain type of
knife. The possession of such knives in general was not prohibited
by the decree. The decree dealt only with special groups in the popu-
lation: ‘unmarried laborers, beggars, vagrants, gypsies, and mentally
deficient persons.’ It hardly seems consistent with National-Socialist
protestations regarding the ‘National Community’ that unmar-
ried workers should be classed with outcasts. Despite its ostensible
acceptance of the desirability of revising antiquated statutes in the
spirit of National-Socialism, the Appellate Court of Munich refused
to renounce its adherence to formal rationality in the application of
the law. For, as the court said, ‘it cannot be claimed that the decree
arranges members of the national community into a class system
which is contradictory to the National-Socialist philosophy or that it
accords them different amounts of social status.’261 The fact that it was
not found legally necessary in a Bavarian decree to classify unmar-
ried workers with unmarried farmers, artisans, and students, but with
beggars, vagrants, gypsies and the mentally deficient, has not caused
National-Socialists to replace ‘formal juristic’ considerations with
‘German principles.’ We seek in vain in this decision of the Appellate
Court of Munich ideas like the following: ‘Now that German ideas
are victorious, we cannot let their practical application be defeated by
formal juristic considerations.’262 They are, however, found in a deci-
sion of the Probate Court of Berlin

--- Sayfa 169 ---
The Normative State
87
 
87
in which the court withdrew an adopted Aryan child from its Jewish
foster-parents. The most precious thing which these parents pos-
sessed, their adopted child, was taken away from them in a decision,
typical of National-Socialist cynicism, which read:  ‘The principle,
public welfare precedes self-interest, applies particularly to the Jewish
members of the German state.’263 This last decision certainly sacrificed
the positive law in favor of the party program. It is no accident that
the decision was one dealing with a Jew.264
b. The Racial Idea.
Although the party program as a whole has not been substituted for
the legal system which prevailed before 1933 we must raise the ques-
tion to what extent one of the central points in the program, the racial
idea, has been successful against the Normative State. To what extent
have the authorities of the Normative State respected the claims of the
racial idea? The racial problem in Germany includes the Jewish prob-
lem as its most important, though not sole, concern. In conformity
with a previous procedure we shall suspend our consideration of the
Jewish problem and deal only with the relationship between the non-
Jewish aspects of the racial program and the Normative State.
During the first years of the National-Socialist regime, the courts
generally tried to restrict the bearing of the racial idea to those areas
where it was legislatively required. This is well illustrated by a decision
of the Reichsgericht stating that ‘the courts are not required to accord
validity to National-Socialist views beyond the limits which legisla-
tive activity of the National-Socialist state itself has drawn.’ The court
underlined in this connection ‘that National-Socialist legislation con-
cerning racial problems has by no means attempted to enforce all the
points of the National-Socialist program.’265 This decision, however,
has been obsolete for some time. It should not be overlooked that
the ‘Non-Aryan Laws’ of 1933 were followed by the ‘Anti-Jewish’ leg-
islation (Nürnberg Laws) of 1935.266 Since 1935, persons classified
as Jewish are subject not only to the Aryan Laws of 1933 but to the
extremely rigorous ‘exceptional’ laws (Ausnahmegesetze) as well.
The racial laws are primarily directed towards family problems.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
88
The Dual State
88
Family law is not of great relevance to the functioning of the existing
economic system. Insofar, however, as the abolition of the Normative
State in one section of the legal system may create a dangerous prec-
edent, the regulation of family relations is of highest importance for
the maintenance of the system. Actually after a long struggle the judi-
cial authorities have refused to recognize a general racial reservation.
The question arose with respect to the problem of denial of pater-
nity, which, according to the German Civil Code,267 can only be
accomplished within one year from the birth of the child.268 This regu-
lation is in conflict with National-Socialist ideas of blood relationship,
which are of supreme importance in National-Socialist ideology. In
order to prevent infringements of the National-Socialist ideology it
would seem logical to abolish this section of the Civil Code. Although
a number of appellate courts had ruled otherwise, the Reichsgericht
rendered a decision on November 23, 1937, fundamentally in accord
with the rules of the Normative State when it said that ‘the judge is
not entitled to make such great breaches in the substantive family law
of the Civil Code as long as the limitations which it imposes on the
question of the paternity of the child affect only the determination
of the true blood relationship.’269 The Reichsgericht, however, left an
important loophole insofar as ‘the question whether the court would
have decided in another way if … racial differences were involved
was not to be discussed.’270 Thus the Reichsgericht which, in 1934, had
proclaimed the general supremacy of the law over National-Socialist
ideology still adheres to this principle but indicates the possibility of
deviation where Jews are concerned. In a trial hearing on family law
the Naumburg Appellate Court (Oberlandesgericht) on April 20, 1937
had decided that ‘the law now — no less than before — is binding for
every judge. He may, of course, interpret it within the framework of a
racially oriented conception of law, but he cannot disregard it without
very good reasons. Such judicial conduct is indispensable if the law is
to possess stability and calculability. This feature must be regarded as
essential to the state even when in individual cases they obstruct the
dispensation of material justice. Even the interests of the ethnic com-
munity in the maintenance of

--- Sayfa 171 ---
The Normative State
89
 
89
German racial purity cannot afford to ignore the pressing demand
that the law be applied and legal stability be preserved.’271 Massfeller, a
high official in the Ministry of Justice, concedes the correctness of the
Naumburg court in this particular case. But he doubts whether these
principles should be universally applied.272 They are inadmissible in
the system of the National-Socialist law because they grant the Jews
the protection of the law.
c. The Legal Status of the Jews.
Inasmuch as the legal protection of the Normative State is reserved
only for the ‘constructive forces of the nation’ (Best),273 and inasmuch
as the Jews are not considered a part of the German nation but rather
are regarded as enemies, all questions in which Jews are involved fall
within the jurisdiction of the Prerogative State. Although this was
at first only a theoretical principle of National-Socialism, it has now
become the regular practice of the Third Reich. The completion of
the subjugation of the Jews to the Prerogative State was realized at
the moment it was resolved to extirpate the Jews from economic life.
As long as the Jews were allowed to operate small and middle-
sized shops and to carry on certain types of industrial production,
a contradiction existed in the National-Socialist policy towards the
Jews. Since the Jews at that time were more or less integrated into
the capitalistic system of the Third Reich,274 a strict application of the
procedures of the Prerogative State would have disturbed the normal
course of economic life. Therefore it was the task of the judiciary to
guard the economy against disruption, even when that necessitated a
certain protection of Jews. Some examples from the earlier phase of
National-Socialism may illustrate this statement, although today they
are only historically significant.
Since the rules of the practice of competitive capitalism are embod-
ied in the Law governing Unfair Competition (Reichsgesetz gegen den
unlauteren Wettbewerb)275 one decision of the Reichsgericht which
bears on this sphere of the law is especially relevant. With the inten-
tion of obtaining some of his competitor’s clients, an insurance agent
circulated a list of the directors of a competing company whose names
appeared to be Jewish. The court was

--- Sayfa 172 ---
90
The Dual State
90
called upon to decide whether this method of competition was in
accord with the Law governing Unfair Competition. The decision was
in the negative. It asserted that ‘to refer to the Jewish character of a
firm is to adduce facts which are totally irrelevant to the commercial
merits of an insurance company …. Nor can the defendant claim that
the National-Socialist philosophy requires the protection of the rural
population from Jewish influences.’276
From the very beginning, however, any effort to grant the Jews
a minimum of legal security was bitterly opposed by the extrem-
ist wing of National-Socialism. For years an intensive battle was
waged among the various state and party authorities. The process
by which the extremist groups gained ascendancy is reflected in
successive decisions of the courts. It was only against the strongest
resistance that in 1935 the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court
(Oberverwaltungsgericht) could still protect the entrepreneurial free-
dom of the Jews. The tremendous pressure which was brought to bear
against the legal guarantees of the Jews is shown in the decision of the
District Administrative Court of Cologne (Bezirksverwaltungsgericht),
the court of first instance in this case: ‘On the basis of centuries of
experiences,’ said this court, ‘and on the basis of the National-Socialist
theory which expresses the nation’s ideas of honest and lawful trade, it
must be said that Jewish merchants have a reputation for unreliability
and must therefore be excluded from economic life. This is a general
conviction of the nation and official bodies must respect it.’277 At that
time the superior court (the Oberverwaltungsgericht) paid no atten-
tion to the argument of the District Administrative Court of Cologne
and required that Jews be dealt with according to the law in order to
safeguard the principle of entrepreneurial freedom.278
Once Jews had been eliminated from the economic life, it was pos-
sible to deprive them of all legal protection without adversely affect-
ing the economic system. Thus, the progress of anti-Semitism forced
the Jews beyond the outer limits of the Normative State. A decision in
the field of commercial law may serve to illustrate this. A half-Aryan
and half-Jewish partnership owned

--- Sayfa 173 ---
The Normative State
91
 
91
a cigar and cigarette store for sailors whose ships were docked in the
free port of Hamburg. Although the Jewish partner had fought in
the Great War and was by far the more efficient of the two partners,
the Aryan partner applied for an immediate dissolution of the part-
nership. He gave as a reason that the district leader of the National-
Socialist Party had threatened to confiscate the store license because
the ‘economic activities of a non-Aryan firm caused unrest among the
seamen.’279 The application was successful. The behavior of the district
leader conflicted directly with two orders issued by the Ministry of
Economics. These ‘orders did not influence the district leader,’ as was
demonstrated by his testimony. Even though the pressure brought by
the district leader was in violation of the law, it had a legal bearing on
the Jewish question. For according to the court ‘the plaintiff cannot
be expected to oppose the wish of the district leader…. If he were to
do so he would be opposing the general sentiment of the people and
also the National-Socialist Party which rules the state.’280 This deci-
sion marked the defeat of Dr. Schacht’s policy and the triumph of his
opponents among the party authorities. Since 1937, the situation dis-
cussed in the foregoing decision has frequently recurred. The party
authorities, as agents of the Prerogative State, have used their power
to exclude the Jews from all economic activities.
A parallel case came before the Reichsgericht. A partnership between
a Jew and an Aryan was being dissolved. When the Jew requested that
he be provided with monthly reports according to the law, the Aryan
partner refused, declaring that ‘the district leadership of the party
has forbidden the defendant or his employees to prepare and send an
account to the plaintiff. It has indeed prohibited all direct communica-
tion between the defendant and the plaintiff.’281 The defendant argued
that ‘under such conditions his failure to obey an explicit prohibition
of the district leadership cannot constitute any ground for issuing
judgment against him.’282 In a state wherein the dominant party uses
such methods, it does not really matter whether a Jewish complaint is
occasionally successful. Only in the most unusual circumstances will
a Jew bring a charge in court against an Aryan. A municipal

--- Sayfa 174 ---
92
The Dual State
92
government alleged before the Supreme Labor Court (Reichsar­
beitsgericht) that a complaint should be dismissed for the sole rea-
son that the plaintiff was Jewish, and justified this attitude by saying
that ‘among the regulations designed to solve the Jewish problem is
included the order withdrawing from the jurisdiction of the courts
claims of state employees dismissed because of their non-Aryan
origin.’283
The courts capitulated to the political authorities. It has become
pointless for Jews to appeal to them for the protection of their rights.
In 1937 the Supreme Labor Court (Reichsarbeitsgericht) justified the
denial of all legal protection to the Jews by saying that ‘the racial prin-
ciples expounded by the National-Socialist Party have been accepted
by the broad mass of the population, even by those who do not belong
to the party.’284 If the higher court is supine before the terror of the
street, it is not surprising that the lower courts fail to resist the anti-
Semitic measures of the Prerogative State.
The Labor Court of Saalfeld (Arbeitsgericht) was required to deal
with the case of a dismissal of a Jewish employee of a textile factory.
The employer defended himself by saying that ‘the Leadership of
the National-Socialist Party would have withdrawn its patronage if
after June 30, 1937 Jews were still employed in the firm.’285 The dis-
missal was justified, the court holding that ‘the employer could not
be expected to run such a risk which, aside from financial hardship,
would generally be understood as a withdrawal of confidence by the
Party Leadership. The employer was further justified by the fact that
the retention of a single Jewish employee would exclude him from
the Berufswettkampf of the German Labor Front.’286 By means of such
procedures, the Labor Front has succeeded in achieving the dismissal
of nearly every Jew still employed in an Aryan firm. We know of no
German court which has dared oppose the prerogative exercised by
the German Labor Front.
Until 1938 the war of annihilation against the German Jews aimed
at narrowing, and finally denying, their access to sources of liveli-
hood. In 1938 a new stage was begun. National-Socialism, having cut
off all opportunities for Jews to earn money, began to

--- Sayfa 175 ---
The Normative State
93
 
93
make it almost impossible for them to get food or lodging, or to
engage in the most elementary life processes.
The legal manifestation of this new development was most unam-
biguously formulated in connection with the problem of living
accommodations. German law protects the tenant from eviction
unless he is in arrears with his rent or otherwise guilty of violation
of a lease.287 At least as early as the beginning of 1938 the problem
whether Jewish tenants should enjoy this protection was raised.
Without it the Jews would be unable to rent living quarters in many
sections of Germany, since Aryan landlords either would not wish or
would not dare to accept Jewish tenants. The tenancy law did not dif-
ferentiate between Jews and Aryans and no attempt to change this law
had been made by the National-Socialists. The courts therefore had to
choose between doing their duty and applying the law for the protec-
tion of the defenseless victim or sacrificing justice to the demands
of National-Socialism. A  number of municipal courts dared to
uphold the law for Jews and Aryans alike and for this were insultingly
attacked by the National-Socialist press.288 As a result, the courts then
attempted to show by a ‘National-Socialist interpretation of the law’
that it did not apply to Jews. The municipal court of Charlottenburg
denied Jews the right to inhabit apartments built from public funds
on the grounds that the Jews had been excluded from membership in
the German ethnic community (Volksgemeinschaft).289 This decision
prevented Jews from exercising a legal claim to utilize institutions
erected for the public welfare. Still more extreme was the decision
of the Municipal Court of Berlin-Schöneberg of September 16, 1938,
which refused to apply the law to Jews on the basis of the law itself.
This court explicitly denied that it was transcending the law when it
declared that inasmuch as Jews were not members of the ethnic com-
munity (Volksgemeinschaft), they could not be considered members
of ‘residential communities’ (Hausgemeinschaften) which constituted
an essential part of the ‘ethnic community.’ Actually, the part of Berlin
falling within the jurisdiction of this court was a tenement district
and the judge was familiar with the fact that families could live in
those tenements for years without even

--- Sayfa 176 ---
94
The Dual State
94
greeting each other; moreover he knew that a ‘residential community’
did not exist in the area in question. To prove that ‘residential com-
munity’ existed the judge pointed out that the necessity of air raid
protection made it potentially significant.290
The step from these artificial legal constructions to an outright
denial of the application of the civil law in general was not difficult
and was finally made by the Appellate Court of Berlin (Landgericht),
which held that ‘the question before the court is not a problem of the
law of landlord and tenant, but a question involving a fundamental
outlook on life.’291
This was the decisive step. National-Socialist actions are placed
above the laws. In the struggle between political aims and legal order,
the former was victorious, as the following quotation proves:
The view that every single act against Jews must be ordered by the gov-
ernment individually is not correct. If this were the case, it would not be
permissible to interpret the law to the disadvantage of the Jew and the
Jew would enjoy the protection of the law. It is obvious that this makes
no sense.292
This judge had rather a strange conception of what ‘makes sense’
in judicial matters. While this decision was being rendered, the
party and the government were busily engaged in the preparation of
the burning of synagogues as part of the pogrom of November 10,
1938. An outbreak of extreme fury exercised by the agencies of the
National-Socialist Party coincided with the declaration of allegiance
by the Berlin Court to the principle of barbarism, both representing
different kinds of inhumanity:
Man can be opposed to himself in a twofold manner: either as a sav-
age, when his feelings rule over his principles; or as a barbarian, when
his principles destroy his feelings. (Friedrich Schiller, 4. Brief über die
aesthetische Erziehung des Menschen).293
The absolute withdrawal of legal guarantees from one group in
the population has serious consequences for the functioning of the
Normative State. This is clear to any observer who is capable of per-
ceiving the deeper significance of these developments. Kohlrausch,
Professor in Criminal Law at the University of Berlin, criticizes a
decision of the Reichsgericht on ‘racial disgrace’

--- Sayfa 177 ---
The Normative State
95
 
95
(Rassenschande) thus: ‘A judicial decision not derived from a legal
principle neither convinces nor educates. It does not increase respect
for the law but arouses doubts as to its correctness…. Another danger
is that arbitrary decisions influence other courts which before never
would have dared to apply the principle Sic voleo, sic jubeo; stat pro
ratione voluntas with sanction of the highest court.’294
In the early years of the Hitler regime, a theoretical treatise on the
legal status of the Jews would have had to investigate whether the Jews
were being more or less justly treated. Such a question would not be
relevant today. It must be remembered that in dictatorial countries
the dichotomy of justice and injustice has been supplanted by one of
legality and lawlessness. Finally, the Reichsgericht itself has refused
to recognize Jews living in Germany as ‘persons’ in the legal sense.
In a decision of June 27, 1936 the highest German court condemned
German Jews to ‘civil death.’ In February 1933 a contract was signed
between a motion-picture stage manager and a film company. The
contractual reasons for the termination of the relationship were: ‘sick-
ness, death or similar causes rendering the stage manager’s work
impossible.’295 A short time after the signing of the contract, when the
anti-Semitic wave started on the grand scale, the company denounced
the contract and refused to pay the salary agreed upon. The court
had to determine whether the Jewish origin of a motion-picture stage
manager was equivalent to ‘sickness and death’ as a reason for the
dissolution of the contract. The Reichsgericht declared that an analogy
did exist and dismissed the complaint of the stage manager. It argued
that ‘the former (liberal) theory of the legal status of the “person”
made no distinction between races…. The National-Socialist phi-
losophy, however, requires that German law recognize only persons
of German origin or those who by law are declared equal to them
and that only Aryans should enjoy all legal rights and privileges. It is
merely a renewal of old principles to distinguish between groups hav-
ing all legal rights and those who have only a limited number of rights.
The complete deprivation of all rights is described a “civil” death: the
case before this court permits an analogy. Since the contract in

--- Sayfa 178 ---
96
The Dual State
96
this case could be dissolved only if “sickness, death, etc.” prevented
the plaintiff from fulfilling his obligations the analogy to “civil death”
is regarded as unqualifiedly applicable because the racial characteris-
tics of the plaintiff were equated with sickness and death.’296
‘Unqualifiedly applicable’ (‘unbedenklich anwendbar’)  — only an
understanding of the nuances of the German usage can reveal the
enormity of this decision. When the highest court of Germany does
not hesitate to condemn more than 600,000 persons to ‘civil death’
and then justifies itself with a few technical terms, little remains to
be said.
In 1920 the National-Socialist program demanded that the Jews
be dealt with according to laws regulating the behavior of foreign-
ers. Since 1938, the Jews are no longer protected by a law for aliens.
They are outlawed, hors la loi. The party program does not account
for the ‘legal status’ of the Jews in Germany. Only the nature of the
Prerogative State can account for it. Not the party program but mar-
tial law is the constitution of the Third Reich. Permanent martial law
has notoriously allowed a curtailment of the legal rights of whole sec-
tions of the population — it has deprived one minority of the most
elementary rights. This ‘unqualified application’ of permanent martial
law in the future is likely to affect even the majority adversely. The
extirpation of all but the most primitive ethical values from the law
must ultimately injure all those connected with it.
Goethe’s words:
Sollt Ihr strafen, sollt Ihr schonen,
Müsst Ihr Menschen menschlich sehen.
have found no echo in National-Socialist Germany.
C.  The Estates as Organs of the Normative State
1.  Economic Self-Government
In Jewish affairs the courts surrendered to the pressure of the
Prerogative State. Fearing political pressure on the courts in other

--- Sayfa 179 ---
The Normative State
97
 
97
spheres, business circles have supported all efforts to prevent political
authorities from intervening in the administration of their internal
economic affairs and to establish autonomous administration wher-
ever possible. This is clear in the law concerning cartels. An order
of the Minister of Economics of November 12, 1936, transferred a
great deal of responsibility for the supervision of the activities of the
cartels from governmental authorities to bodies of the economic self-
administration. The Minister wrote:
It is my intention to obtain the co-operation of private economic
organizations in the execution of the supervisory activities of the car-
tels which my ministry has hitherto exercised alone. The administrative
bodies of the private economic organizations should be responsible for
seeing that the cartels are in harmony with the economic policy of the
government in every respect.297
The most important attempt of private business, however, to free
itself from the intervention of the police authorities is to be found in
the estate system (Ständewesen). In order to realize the theory that the
jurisdiction of the political authorities must be limited, and to pre-
serve the essence of National-Socialist economic policy, the organiza-
tion of economic life into a ‘system of estates’ has been undertaken.
This name, however, is not very revealing; the ‘estate system’ of
the Third Reich resembles the old estate system about as much as
National-Socialism resembles Socialism. The symbol ‘estates’ merely
serves as a protective ideological coloring adopted by business-men
to protect themselves from the interference of the Prerogative State.
Their protection is simply this  — that matters within the juris-
diction of the estates are de facto outside the police power. That the
creation of the estates is an indication of the National-Socialist repu-
diation of the ‘totalitarian state’ in the quantitative sense is shown by
a contribution to the official Handwörterbuch der Rechtswissenschaft,
which reads:  ‘In an epoch in which the state was regarded as the
exclusive bearer of public power, the estates, as far as they could be
said to exist, could be regarded as bearers of delegated power only.
National-Socialism, which views the state only as a means, not as an
end, as form, not as content, deprived the state of its omnipotence.’298
One axiom of the National-

--- Sayfa 180 ---
98
The Dual State
98
Socialist theory of law is that the police power has been replaced by
the estates in those matters solely of interest to the estates. Since this
allegation may seem astonishing and contrary to the usual concept of
totalitarianism, we quote several well-known writers on police law.
Knauth:
There are two diametrically opposed theories: one gives fundamentally
unlimited jurisdiction to the police power … and the other views its
scope as smaller than heretofore. For this reason the creation of inde-
pendent organizations, which has taken place in many spheres, is evi-
dence of the tendency to restrict the power of the police in the sphere
in question. The true reason for this development is that the consid-
erations in the light of which these matters are to be settled usually lie
outside the jurisdiction of the police.299
Schmidt:
The police must keep in the background in matters connected with sys-
tems of a different nature. The police are not concerned with the estate
system, their jurisdiction is limited to issues involving the regulation of
the whole community.300
Hoehn:
The limits of the police power are set by the tasks which the existing
concrete orders impose on the police.301
Hamel:
The exclusion of certain organizations from the jurisdiction of the
police has gained new importance. The police are not totalitarian … the
natural structure of these groups is neither the responsibility nor the
concern of the police.302
Koehler:
Although in some ways the police power has been increased, it has been
indirectly diminished to the extent that the new estate organizations
operate as self-supervising bodies…. The

--- Sayfa 181 ---
The Normative State
99
 
99
state does not subject the vested rights of ethnic comrades to unjustified
or arbitrary restrictions.303
The final opinion we shall quote is one of the most extreme.
Professor Koettgen requires on the one hand the death penalty for all
violations of the ethnic code and on the other argues: ‘The function
of the police in an ethnic community comprising numerous groups
is merely supplementary. They are required to become active only
where particular norms have shown themselves to be inadequate.
Where concrete orders inside the state are operative the police have
no function.’304
In summarizing this point we may say that the police, who are the
embodiment of the state, are qualitatively but not quantitatively ‘total-
itarian’ (cf. p. 60).
The statement that the estates protect the business world against
interference from the Prerogative State does not present the complete
picture. In order to attain their goals, business-men in contemporary
Germany require not only that the Prerogative State abstain from
intervening in their enterprises but also that the state help them in a
positive way. One of the most important writers of National-Socialist
legal theory, Reinhard Hoehn, claims that the police authorities must
execute the decisions of the estates without any review. The police
authorities are no longer organs of the state exclusively (as in the
period of competitive capitalism) but are now also the organs of the
business-men’s estates. Hoehn formulates this:
The new conception of administration leads to a transformation of
police law. In the hitherto prevailing system the police were an organ of
the state administration — now the functions of the new estate organi-
zations overlap with those of the police and a change in the previous
position of the police is necessitated. Police action is no longer initiated
by the police administration alone; but it is also responsive to the estate
organization which it is supposed to serve. It is for this reason that the
old liberal conception of the status of the police must be given up.305
Thus the estates, which are the most inclusive associations of business-
men, give the purest expression of the Normative State.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
100
The Dual State
100
They are a part of the Normative State, and in principle, their activi-
ties are treated as non-political. Though the police authorities have
the power to intervene in these activities (since their jurisdiction is
unlimited), they do not regularly do so. Membership in the guilds is
(within the jurisdictions of the guilds) a de facto guarantee against
the Prerogative State. To the extent that the estates abstain from
actions which the police call ‘political,’ they enjoy security from the
Prerogative State.
The principles governing the relations between the estates and the
political authorities were formulated by the Reichsgericht on April 28,
1936, in a decision dealing with freedom of the press in National-
Socialist Germany. The defendant was charged with a malevolent
attack on the government because of his statement that there was no
freedom of the press in Germany. The Supreme Court distinguished
between unlimited and regulated freedom of the press and admitted
that National-Socialism had eliminated unlimited freedom of the
press. The new Press Law was formulated in the legislation regard-
ing the Press Chambers and the journalistic profession.306 Within
the limitations specified by these statutes, the ‘orderly’ press ‘enjoys
a freedom of a special type’ — ‘regulated freedom of the press.’ The
supervision of this ‘regulated freedom’ is the responsibility of the self-
governing bodies of the press. Those bodies, however, do not possess
an unrestricted monopoly over the supervision of the press. Although
pre-censorship does not exist, the Reichsgericht has recognized that
‘any conceivable violation can be dealt with (aside from the measures
of the self-governing bodies) by the state on the basis of the Decree
of February 28, 1933.’307 This decision is interesting because of its atti-
tude towards the competition between political and estate authori-
ties. No profession borders so closely on the ‘political’ as journalism.
A collision between the estates and political officials is scarcely avoid-
able. In spite of this, the Third Reich preferred to form a press estate
so that it could at least deal with economic aspects of the press within
the framework of the Normative State. The estate should be adequate
to take care of the everyday economic questions of the press, while as
a last resort the Decree of February 28, 1933, can always be

--- Sayfa 183 ---
The Normative State
101
 
101
applied. This example typifies the relationship between estates and
police power.
2.  The German Labor Front
There are certain groups not included in the estate system of
National-Socialist Germany, the most important one being the indus-
trial working class. The claim that the German Labor Front (Deutsche
Arbeitsfront) is the estate of the working class is not very convinc-
ing. Even National-Socialists admit that the German Labor Front is
not an estate ‘but rather the inclusive organization of producers who
accept the viewpoint that all economic and social activities belong to
an integrated national process.’308 The same opinion is to be found in
an article by Dr. Mansfeld, the head of the Section for Labor Law of
the Reich Ministry of Labor, who makes the Labor Front responsible
for the soul and spirit of all working Germans. ‘Better things,’ he says,
‘can be achieved here than in the destructive struggle over industrial
working conditions.’309 The destructive struggle for better wages and
hours is not just an activity outside the jurisdiction of the Labor Front.
It is entirely prohibited to German workers. The National-Socialist
leadership principle allots the determination of wages and working
conditions to the entrepreneur, within the limits set by the state.
The Third Reich has created estates to regulate the economic affairs
of all non-proletarian groups. These estates must be left untouched by
the political authorities as long as questions of economic policy are at
issue. The justification of this attitude may be found in a recent article
of Professor Koettgen who emphasizes that ‘the economic duties of
artisans or journalists can be passed on only by persons intimately
acquainted with the problems of the group interests in question. The
practical consequence is that problems of professional or vocational
honor can be decided only by members of the particular profession or
vocation, and that the police thereby are deprived of the right to inter-
fere in questions of professional duty….’ Thus, according to Koettgen,
‘vocational law does not nullify police law and a complete occu-

--- Sayfa 184 ---
102
The Dual State
102
pational self-government will exclude police interference with special
exceptions.’310
But what about the workers? The workers have no special code
of duty, nor is their honor protected by persons in their own voca-
tions. They are subject to unrestricted police interference. An attempt
to arrive at an independent decision regarding economic problems
on the part of the working classes is branded as ‘class-struggle’ — a
political matter to be dealt with by the Prerogative State. Whether a
person in Germany is entitled to come to independent conclusions
concerning economic policy and has the right to be protected by the
Normative State depends on whether he is a member of an estate.
Those who are not members of an estate are not protected against
the Prerogative State. Whereas the estates are largely exempt from the
control of the Prerogative State, the German Labor Front is consid-
ered a political body and subject to the Prerogative State.
The estates and the Labor Front represent the two extremes of the
National-Socialist state.311 If we acknowledge the fact that the workers
have been deprived of any right to participate in the determination
of economic policy and are considered as enemies of the state if they
attempt to influence it, while all other vocational groups are allowed
considerable autonomy in the resolution of their own problems, the
class character of the National-Socialist state should be evident.
The chief legal adviser of the Gestapo, Dr. Best, is of the opinion
(p. 62) that the state’s restriction of its own power is entirely appro-
priate if the restrictions apply only to ‘the constructive forces of the
German people.’ Especially significant is Best’s statement that it is
essential to the effectiveness of ‘these constructive forces of the nation
that the activity of the state shall be predictable.’ With but one excep-
tion, the whole German nation is ‘constructive.’ This exception, which
is outside the estate system, is the working class.
An apparently unimportant amendment to the Law concerning
Social Insurance (Art. 3 § 8, which amends § 615 of the Insurance
Law) gives an unambiguous clue to the class structure of the Third
Reich. It reads: ‘A pension may be suspended if the

--- Sayfa 185 ---
The Normative State
103
 
103
recipient has committed acts hostile to the state after January 30,
1933. Whether such activities actually took place shall be submit-
ted to the decision of the Minister of the Interior and the Minister
of Labor.’312 This provision did not pretend to be a protection against
violence and it retroactively deprived helpless cripples and invalids of
their pensions (their only source of income). It is no accident that the
Third Reich chose the Law concerning Social Insurance as the first
instance in which the activities of the unrestrained Prerogative State
were enacted in statute form.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
104

--- Sayfa 187 ---
105
Part II
The Legal Theory of the Dual State
Justitia remota quid aliud est regnum quam grande latrocinium?
AUGUSTINUS

--- Sayfa 188 ---
106

--- Sayfa 189 ---
107
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
I
THE REPUDIATION OF
RATIONAL NATURAL LAW
BY NATIONAL-SOCIALISM
The complete abolition of the inviolability of law is the chief charac-
teristic of the Prerogative State. This repudiation carries with it the
elimination of the fundamental principle of the inviolability of law
from the entire legal order. If inviolability within the sphere of the
Normative State exists only under certain conditions, then it does not
hold true as a principle, and conditional inviolability is necessarily
the opposite of inviolability. This repudiation of the principle of the
inviolability of law (its actual as well as its potential abrogation) raises
the general question of the significance of law.
Shortly before the National-Socialists’ accession to power in 1933,
Gustav Radbruch313 discussed the principle of the inviolability of
law as defined by Otto Mayer, a well-known German authority on
administrative law. According to Radbruch, the principle grew out
of Natural Law and was later incorporated into the system of posi-
tive law. The principle is that, once the sovereign has promulgated
a law, he may not violate it at his discretion. Thus the principle that
legislative power is vested in the sovereign because he is sovereign is
restricted by Natural Law.314
Since the doctrine of the inviolability of law is part of the heritage
of rational Natural Law, its explicit rejection in the legal system of
the Third Reich raises the question of the whole attitude of National-
Socialism towards Natural Law. Regarding this question an important
source is available. In his speech to the Reichstag on the occasion of
the fourth anniversary of his advent to power,

--- Sayfa 190 ---
108
The Dual State
108
on January 30, 1937, Adolf Hitler made several important com-
ments upon the relationship between law and National-Socialism. He
declared:
Man is incapable of perceiving the meaning and purpose inherent in
the existence of the races which have been created by Providence. The
meaning and purpose of human institutions can, however, be measured
by their utility for the preservation of ethnic groups…. Only the rec-
ognition of this axiom can prevent man from adopting rigid doctrines
where there can be no doctrines and to falsify means into imperatives
where the end ought to be regarded as the sole imperative. In the course
of time our attitude towards law has been led astray, partly through the
incorporation of foreign ideas and partly due to our own inadequate
understanding. Two opposite extremes characterize this state of affairs:
	1.	 the assumption that law as such has any intrinsic value,
	2.	 the assumption that the main function of the law is the protection of
the individual.
Besides these potentialities, claims of the higher interests of the com-
munity as a whole were acknowledged only in the form of concessions
granted to the Raison d’état. The National-Socialist revolution, on the
other hand, provided law, jurisprudence and the administration of law
with an unambiguous basis. Their task is the maintenance and protec-
tion of the people against anti-social groups which desire to evade or
who otherwise fail to fulfil all obligations required by the community.315
In this speech Hitler officially promulgated only what National-
Socialist theories had always acknowledged. The same line of thought
was succinctly expressed by Professor Gerber in declaring that
National-Socialist political thought is ‘existential and biological, its
data being the primal unique life process.’316 Unlike liberal political
thoughts, it does not consist in ‘rational abstract constructions which
possess universal validity’317 and which are on that account worthy
only of contempt. Gerber states explicitly that the traditional notions
concerning the nature of justice have lost their validity. ‘National-
Socialism insists that justice is not a

--- Sayfa 191 ---
Rational Natural Law
109
 
109
system of abstract and autonomous values such as the various types of
Natural Law systems. This perception helps us appreciate the histori-
cal fact that each state has its own concept of justice.’318 Consequently,
justice cannot be viewed independently of a particular existing state.
Tot res publicae, tot justitiae! After showing how the cosmopolitan
idea of a divinely appointed universal justice has been supplanted by
the doctrine of a Danish monarchical and of a Portuguese republican
justice, Professor Gerber presents his conception of the real nature of
justice as ‘nothing more than the certainty of the people that it repre-
sents a primal social individuality.’319
With this conclusion, Gerber is in agreement with Alfred
Rosenberg, who, in a somewhat more popularized formulation, had
already presented the same ideas in 1934.320 Rosenberg stated that the
distinction between ‘good’ and ‘evil’ is obsolete – an idea which he
had expressed in his much reproduced quotation of an Indian prov-
erb: ‘Right and wrong do not walk about saying: “Here we are.” Right
is what Aryan people think is right.’321
It was not by accident that the first act after the National Socialist
coup d’état (i.e., after the Decree of February 28, 1933) resulted in
the abolition of the rule of Nulla poena sine lege, heretofore a major
principle of German positive law. The Lex van der Lubbe provided
retroactive capital punishment for a crime, subject at the time of
its commission only to imprisonment. By the promulgation of this
act, National-Socialism demonstrated unmistakably that it deemed
itself bound neither in theory nor in practice by this old principle
of Natural Law, which, until the coup d’état, had formed an unques-
tioned component of the German conception of justice. The Lex van
der Lubbe made perfectly apparent the transvaluation of values. The
National-Socialist legal theory perceives this clearly and even empha-
sizes it. The Lex van der Lubbe ‘struck the intellectual revolt of the
nineteenth century at its very heart. It attacked a system which had
dared to substitute a hypostatized order of values, norms and rules for
the creative vigor and power of living peoples and which therewith
wholly destroyed the immediacy of ethical and political life.’322

--- Sayfa 192 ---
110
The Dual State
110
It is interesting to note that in 1928 Rudolf Smend had envisaged
the emancipation of the modern state from any ‘non-political legiti-
mation as the very inception of the modern Rechtsstaat.’323 But the
reduction of the legal state to a precisely articulated legal machine
meant the beginning of its end. Smend had denounced the legitima-
tion of the state in the name of any kind of ‘transcendental order’ as
intolerable. The significant silence which he maintains today may jus-
tify the conjecture that the legitimation of the state by biological facts
(which, to be sure, are non-transcendent) is no less intolerable. In the
preface of his My thus des 20. Jahrhunderts,324 Rosenberg stressed the
fact that his book expressed the attitude of a generation which had
lost its faith in the traditional absolute and universal values. Since this
spokesman of disillusionment and cynicism has become the supreme
director of the ‘philosophical’ education of a party which, in turn,
rules a people of eighty millions, the conclusion is perhaps justified
that the skepticism of the preceding generation had become the faith
of the generation now coming to maturity. Carl Schmitt’s statement
that we are today experiencing the bankruptcy of idées génerales325
therefore seems less important than the following declaration of a
member of the young National-Socialist generation. In the review
Jugend und Recht, Leuner states with striking frankness that ‘there is
no right residing in the stars; there is no equal right which is innate
in the individual; there is therefore no universal transethnic Natural
Law. There is only one norm which is equally valid for all individu-
als, namely that they live in accordance with the imperatives of their
race.’326
In connection with the National-Socialist assertion that law has no
intrinsic value of its own it is apropos to cite Hitler’s famous assertion
that in the Third Reich law and morality are identical. However, it
should not be overlooked that this dogma327 may have a double mean-
ing. On the one hand, Hitler’s remark may imply that contemporary
German law can claim validity only insofar as it corresponds to the
maxims of morality. On the other, it may imply that, in the National-
Socialist state, moral norms can claim validity only insofar as they
are in harmony with a legal system which is based on its own values.
Actually the iden-

--- Sayfa 193 ---
Rational Natural Law
111
 
111
tification of law and morality in the Third Reich has resulted in the
assimilation of morality to National-Socialist law. This opinion has
been expressed unambiguously in the National-Socialist literature.
Dernedde, for example, writes:  ‘The present promulgation of the
indissoluble identity of law and morality signifies the integration of
both of these categories into the ethnic community. It is the opposite
of an acknowledgment of a transethnic universal Natural Law which
limits the power of the legislator.’328
It is evident that such a sweeping simplification of the deepest
problems of political theory contributes greatly to huge propagandis-
tic successes among the masses of the people. Ideas which Machiavelli
presented to a small circle of initiates are disseminated by Adolf Hitler
by means of all the modern techniques of communication even to the
adolescent members of the Hitler Youth organizations. Figgis’ com-
ment on Machiavelli applies equally to Hitler: ‘He did not start from
any ideals of government or desire to find them, he did not meditate
on the philosophy of law. Social justice has to him no meaning apart
from the one great end of the salvation of his country. He had the
limited horizon and the unlimited influence which always come of
narrowing the problem.’329 But the reverse side of this outwardly suc-
cessful enterprise is the destruction of the ethical tradition of Western
civilization. Hermann Heller said that ‘once conscience becomes a
problem of cattle breeding, moral problems lose their inescapability.’330
The actual repudiation of Natural Law is less surprising than the
form in which it is renounced. The doctrine of Natural Law, after all,
has been discredited for more than a century. It has been refuted time
and again by political science, and yet it has not lost its vitality. For
more than a hundred years, we have been intellectually denying every
type of Natural Law while our conscience has simultaneously been
demanding its acknowledgment. At a time when, thanks to Bergbohn’s
unfortunate influence, positivism flourished in Germany, American
legal philosophy was fully aware of this discrepancy. Morris Cohen,
in a lecture delivered in 1914, said: ‘To defend a doctrine of natural
rights today requires either insensibility of the world’s progress or else

--- Sayfa 194 ---
112
The Dual State
112
considerable courage in the face of it.’331 The quarter of a century
which has since elapsed has not accomplished the removal of these
intellectual obstacles, yet the demands for the recognition of Natural
Law principles have increased. Carl Becker, pleading for the cause of
Natural Law against intellectual doubts, states that although we have
lost the formula, something of the old faith remained…. ‘We hold to
it, if not from assured conviction, then from necessity, seeing no alter-
native except cynicism or despair.’332 This ambivalent attitude towards
Natural Law reflects the twofold origin of our culture; in the words
of Werner Jaeger: ‘No theoretical attempts to bridge the gulf between
them can change the historical fact that our morality goes back to the
Christian religion and our politics to the Greco-Roman conception
of the state.’333
Whereas Italian Fascism deliberately identifies itself with the idea of
the Imperium Romanum and the Roman theory of the state, National-
Socialism explicitly announces its antipathy towards Roman Law.
Sophisticated analyses of the legal evolution in the new Germany have,
however, already revealed just what is involved in the substitution of
‘German Common Law’ for Roman Law. Referring to Hoehn’s studies,
which claim to demonstrate that Otto von Gierke, the prophet of the
German Law of Associations (Genossenschaftsrecht), is no longer sig-
nificant,334 Manigk explains that ‘the philosophical kernel of German
Law (particularly the concept of the Genossenschaft) is in contradic-
tion with our state as it exists today…. The idea of authoritarian lead-
ership was realized in Roman antiquity. The separation of powers was
unknown and the Senate called the Princeps “our Leader”.’335
When we discuss the classical conception of the state, we do not
refer to the politeia, the political Utopia. We have in mind rather the
polis, the historical reality, as it existed in the Greek city-states. Late
Grecian antiquity did of course produce Stoicism, a political theory
which stood in direct contradiction to the ideal of the polis. A.  J.
Carlyle writes that ‘there is no change in political theory so startling
in its completeness as the change from the theory of Aristotle to the
later philosophical view repre-

--- Sayfa 195 ---
Rational Natural Law
113
 
113
sented by Cicero and Seneca.’336 Carlyle sees the same cleavage in the
various notions concerning the equality or inequality of man. He sets
the doctrine of primitive equality alongside the ancient view of ine-
quality. The specifically ‘modern’ political theory is of Stoic origin and
has been influential both in Christianity and in the Enlightenment.
In this doctrine ‘there is only one possible definition for all mankind,
reason is common to all … there is no race which under the guid-
ance of nature cannot attain to virtue.’337 For Germany, however, this
doctrine had ceased to be ‘modern.’ National-Socialism postulates its
opposite–namely, the racially conditioned and humanly unchange-
able inequality of man. Therewith the decisive step from Aristotle to
Cicero comes to nought and the long tradition of Christianity and
Humanism, of occidental science and philosophy passes into discard.
Moreover, owing to its repudiation of Natural Law, National-
Socialism is opposed to the medieval doctrine of the power of the
absolute prince. The foremost characteristic of the dictator is not
the fact that he makes law in accordance with his will. The theory of
modern dictatorship can only be apprehended by considering again
a distinction current in the Middle Ages which was forgotten in the
era of democracy and the Rule of Law. McIlwain338 points out that in
present times distinctions which were made during the Middle Ages
are ignored. The medieval king was considered to be absolute and
practically irresponsible, but his power was not an arbitrary one. The
old maxim, ‘What the king has willed has the force of the law,’ was–
according to Mcllwain–only valid if this will was expressed in a way
prescribed by law and tradition and was restricted to certain purposes.
There existed definite limitations for the will of the medieval prince
which were usually expressed by the formula: ‘The king is bound by
the Law of God and the Law of Nature.’ This distinction sheds new
light on the approach pursued in the first section of this book. By the
‘Enabling Law’339 Hitler became Germany’s absolute ruler after he had
previously (by the Decree of February 28, 1933) acquired the power
of a despot. Mcllwain, who obviously alludes to the present German
situation, regrets that at present both concepts are regarded as being
practically identical.340 Furthermore, he points

--- Sayfa 196 ---
114
The Dual State
114
out that antiquity conceived of law as a matter of politics, whereas
‘modern’ thought attaches politics to the category of law. From this
point of view, also National-Socialism cannot claim to be ‘modern.’
With this repudiation of every trace of rational Natural Law,
Germany has turned her back on the community of nations which
consciously adheres to the traditions of occidental civilization.
National-Socialism certainly cannot be said to be  — as Friedrich
Engels once said of Marxian Socialism — the heir of Classical German
Philosophy. It is rather its complete negation.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
115
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
II
THE NATIONAL-SOCIALIST CAMPAIGN
AGAINST NATURAL LAW
1.  THE CHRISTIAN SYSTEM OF NATURAL LAW
The flat rejection of the rationalistic traditions of Natural Law
resulted in a conflict between National-Socialism and the proponents
of Natural Law traditions. Only a study of the two opposing groups
will enable us to fathom the historical significance of the National-
Socialist attitude towards Natural Law.
The evolution of Natural Law in Western Europe cannot be com-
prehended without reference to the role of the religious elements. It is
no longer possible, in view of Ernst Troeltsch’s341 solidly ground con-
clusions, to disregard the religion component in the development of
Natural Law. Troeltsch did not hesitate to regard the Christian theory
of Natural Law in its final development as the Kulturdogma of the
church. He asserted that for the church this dogma held the same
importance as, for example, the dogma of the Holy Trinity. Though
the various churches and sects assumed different attitudes against
Natural Law, none has ever completely repudiated it. The Christian
tradition is, in this respect, closely connected with Zeno, the founder
of Stoicism. Zeno, who witnessed as a contemporary the absorption
of the small Greek city-states into the empire of Alexander the Great,
came to glorify the ‘Empire of Reason’ which is independent of politi-
cal frontiers.342 After the establishment of the Roman Empire, this
concept attracted new admirers such as Cicero, Seneca and Marcus
Aurelius, and was given its most significant expres-

--- Sayfa 198 ---
116
The Dual State
116
sion in the legal system of the Corpus Juris. As the heir of the Imperium
Romanum, the Roman Catholic Church took over its Natural Law
doctrines although they were subjected to extensive modifications in
order to adapt them to the needs of the Church.
The adaption of the abstract principles of a universal and rational
Natural Law to the requirements of a church intimately involved in
temporal concerns was effected by the medieval doctrine of ‘relative’
Natural Law. According to this theory man was unable, after the Fall,
to acquire anew the pure Natural Law of his previous state. Therefore
he has had to be content with ‘relative’ Natural Law although he is still
accorded the privilege of striving to approximate a state of ‘absolute’
Natural Law as nearly as possible. Troeltsch has shown343 how this
theory, in the course of centuries, was time and again opposed by
those who never doubted the possibility of the realization of an abso-
lute Natural Law. This opposition, coming from those who believed
in the existence of a community regulated by the principles of an
absolute Natural Law, was crystallized in the sects which, despite
merciless persecutions, steadfastly adhered to the belief in absolute
Natural Law.
While these sects denied the relativistic character of the Catholic
theory of Natural Law, Lutheranism asserted its relativity. Holding
that the legal regulation of interhuman relationships is a worldly
affair bearing the strains of sinfulness, Lutheranism preached uncon-
ditional obedience to every secular regime. This ‘extremist conserva-
tive glorification of autocracy’ (Troeltsch) by Lutheranism was the
consequence of an attitude which attributed only slight importance
to worldly affairs. To Lutheranism, true Christianity resides in the
inner soul of man (‘Innere Herzens-Christlichkeit’). It is independ-
ent of the political and legal order of the temporal world as long as
freedom of religious conscience is not violated. The Christian must
submit humbly to a harsh and unjust regime which he is to regard as a
punishment imposed by the Lord. But any restriction of the freedom
of conscience constitutes an attack on the fundamental principles of
Christian Natural Law.
The National-Socialist doctrine, with its intense enmity to

--- Sayfa 199 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
117
 
117
Natural Law, could only be established in a country where abso-
lute Natural Law theories, as represented by Christian sectarianism,
though always present to a small degree, were never consolidated
into a real tradition. Christian sectarianism in Germany seldom tran-
scended the stage of inchoate local movements after the total suppres-
sion of Thomas Münzer’s Anabaptist movement, in which Luther’s
unequivocal attitude was not the least important factor. Hence, it is
all the more remarkable that the sectarian movement of the Jehovah’s
Witnesses experienced such an astonishing growth during the last
seven years. These sectarians, whose absolute pacifism requires them
to eschew all compromise and whose exclusive worship of Jehovah
involves the negation of every kind of secular authority, must be con-
sidered as the embodiment of behavior exclusively in accordance
with norms derived from absolute Natural Law. No illegal group in
Germany is more uncompromisingly opposed to National-Socialism
than this obstinate sect. Its rapid growth must be interpreted as a
reaction to the contemptuous negation of all Natural Law principles
by the Third Reich. Only this fundamental antagonism explains the
profound National-Socialist hatred for Jehovah’s Witnesses, who have
become true martyrs in the religious wars of contemporary Germany.
The lack of any tradition of absolute Natural Law principles presum-
ably furnishes one of the deeper reasons for the incomplete under-
standing of present-day Germany in the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Influenced by a variety of sectarian movements, the whole public life
of the Anglo-Saxon countries has been penetrated by the principles
of Natural Law.
It was predictable that the purely political National-Socialist doc-
trine (which at bottom is devoid of any rational principles) would
clash with the relative Natural Law institutionalized in the Roman
Catholic Church. More surprising, however, was the conflict with
the Confessional Church, especially in view of the fact that the
Lutheran Church had not only failed to offer any resistance to the
National-Socialist regime but had actually assisted it during the first
phases of the Third Reich. The Lutheran Church in Germany is now
divided into two groups in respect to their attitude towards National-
Socialism: the ‘German Christians’

--- Sayfa 200 ---
118
The Dual State
118
have capitulated to the requirements of the National-Socialist regime,
the Confessional Church, soon after Hitler came into power, came
into opposition with Nazi doctrines. Yet, compared with the abso-
lute resistance of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the attitude of the Confessional
Church seems somewhat ambiguous. Its resistance is limited to the
defense of the Christian freedom of religious belief and offers no
opposition to the dissolution of the Rechtsstaat and the establishment
of tyranny. It refrained from doing so even when it was still possible.
The Confessional Church is a Lutheran Church, and because of this it
could not have acted differently.
Luther proclaimed: ‘If you are oppressed and wronged accept it; it
is the essence of the worldly regime. If you want to live in this world
you must expect this. The wish to undergo a different fate from that
of Christ is not realizable. If you want to live among the wolves, you
have to howl with them. We serve in a house where the devil is master
and the world is mistress and many wicked desires are the servants.
All of them are foes and adversaries of the Gospel. If your money is
stolen and your honor destroyed – such are the ways in this house.’344
The conflict between National-Socialism on the one hand, and
the Catholic and Lutheran Churches on the other may be explained
in part by the fact that the doctrine of the Third Reich (until 1938
predominantly a Protestant country) was formulated largely by apos-
tate Catholics. The existentialist philosopher Heidegger, the jurist
Carl Schmitt, the propagandist Goebbels, and many other leading
National-Socialist intellectuals have tried to disintegrate the solid
structure of Catholicism which had shaped their spiritual develop-
ment. As apostates from a theory of the state based predominantly
upon Natural Law, they adopted the Prussian idea of the state with
the passionate enthusiasm of converts. Since this Prussian idea of
the state had been elaborated largely by Lutheran thinkers these con-
verts, as former Catholics, were unable to appreciate the specifically
Lutheran check on the power of the state: namely, freedom of con-
science. Luther had declared: ‘The worldly regime has laws which are
supreme over body and property and every thing earthly, yet over
the soul the Lord will not recognize any ruler but himself. Hence,
whenever

--- Sayfa 201 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
119
 
119
worldly power dares to make laws affecting the soul the Lord
interferes.’345
In its conflict with the Confessional Church, National-Socialism
points to Hitler’s declarations that he did not conceive himself as a reli-
gious reformer. Yet his repeated assurances that National-Socialism is
only a temporal movement, leaving the regulation of man’s relations
with the Lord to the churches, could not allay existing suspicions. As
long as National-Socialism claims the power to decide authoritatively
what is temporal and what is spiritual, and as long as the Third Reich
seeks to ‘govern the souls of men,’ it will be unable to establish peace-
ful relations with the Confessional Church. For the latter would have
to renounce its most fundamental principles in order to assent to the
political control of the conscience.
For Confessional Lutheranism freedom of conscience is an absolute
value; to compromise it is equivalent to a renunciation of principle.
In order to understand the tensions between church and state in
the Third Reich one should not emphasize superficial characteristics
or attach undue importance to the new cult of Wotan, in which a
few secondary-school teachers take particular interest. Devotion to
the latter cult would never have provided National-Socialism with the
impetus necessary to initiate and conduct the church struggle. The
strife arose when National-Socialism was confronted with remnants
of a faith in absolute Natural Law asserting its independence in the
face of the will of the state. National-Socialism has always been willing,
and is still willing, to acknowledge the claims of Christianity except
where they are incongruous with Art. 24 of the National-Socialist
Party Program, which requires that the Christian religion subordi-
nate itself to the vital necessities of the German people. Thus in the
sphere of religion we meet the same reservation as in the sphere of
law, the potential superiority of political considerations which impels
National-Socialism to fight the representatives of all ideologies influ-
enced by Natural Law doctrines. In ‘Christianity with reservations’
Christianity is of less importance than the reservations. Although for
propagandist reasons National-Socialism does not dis-

--- Sayfa 202 ---
120
The Dual State
120
close its religious policy as unambiguously as its legal policy there is
no basic difference. National-Socialism refuses to regard either reli-
gious or ethical values (as embodied in legal systems) as absolute. The
value of a religion is not judged according to its inner truth but accord-
ing to its political expediency. Ludendorff’s hatred of Christianity
rested on the assumption that in the next war Christianity would be
unable to implement the maximum exploitation of all the psychic
resources of the soldier. During the Party Congress of Nürnberg in
1937, Adolf Hitler hinted that ‘since we ascribe eternal existence to it,
the Volk is the embodiment of the ultimate value…. Religions are only
of value if they help to preserve the living substance of mankind.’346
It is only a question of time until cynicism of a National-Socialist
Reichskommissar of Religion will apply this subjectively sincere for-
mula to religion, i.e. that its value is determined by its relevance to the
vital necessities of the German people.
Machiavelli may be regarded as the spiritual father of this politi-
cally oriented critique of Christianity. In his Discorsi we find ideas
which recur very frequently in the anti-Christian racial pamphlets
of National-Socialism. Of course Machiavelli is not quoted, and the
Machiavellian references to classic antiquity are replaced by glorifica-
tions of German tribes. According to Machiavelli ‘the Pagan religion
deified only men who had achieved great glory, such as command-
ers of armies and chiefs of republics, whilst ours glorifies more the
humble and contemplative men than the men of action. Our religion,
moreover, places the supreme happiness in humility, lowliness, and a
contempt for worldly objects, whilst the other, on the contrary, places
the supreme good in grandeur of soul, strength of body, and all such
other qualities as render men formidable; and if our religion claims
of us fortitude of soul, it is more to enable us to suffer than to achieve
great deeds. These principles seem to me to have made men feeble.’347
Historians, in their evaluations of Machiavelli, have always con-
cluded that a religion oriented towards the requirements of the tribal
state is equivalent to paganism. The tendency to deny the absolute
character of all but political values and to recognize them only insofar
as they serve political ends is Neo-Machiavellian

--- Sayfa 203 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
121
 
121
paganism, which represents one of the most essential elements in
the National-Socialist outlook. Machiavelli praises the Roman king
Numa Pompilius because he invented gods particularly appropriate
for the city of Rome: ‘… if the question were discussed whether Rome
was more indebted to Romulus or to Numa, I believe that the high-
est merit would be conceded to Numa; for where religion exists it is
easy to introduce armies and discipline, but where there are armies
and no religion it is difficult to introduce the latter.’348 This admira-
tion for early antiquity is expressive of a yearning for a polis in which
there was no conflict between universalistic ethics and particularistic
raison d’état.
In rejecting belief in the validity of all universal ideas of justice,
National-Socialism substitutes a nationally restricted idea of utility
for the humanistic values of Natural Law. Considering the close rela-
tionship between Christianity and Natural Law, the conclusion seems
justified that the Third Reich is tending from the universal God to the
local Deity, from Monotheism to Xenotheism.349
However, the rejection of all universal values by the National-
Socialist Prerogative State is a two-edged sword. Whereas the
Prerogative State has a particular power arising from its rejection of
all universal values, this is partly compensated for by the new enemies
it makes. These allies for its adversaries come from groups on which
the foes of National-Socialism had never counted as possible sources
of assistance. Gürke, a National-Socialist international lawyer, hits the
nail on the head when he states that the various enemies of National-
Socialism (Democrats, Socialists, Catholics) despite their differing
outlooks, have in common ‘doctrines aiming at the inclusion and
liberation of the whole of mankind.’350 In Germany today all the pro-
ponents of the various types of rational Natural Law are being con-
solidated into a single bloc as a reaction against the complete negation
of all absolute values by an opportunistic Leviathan.
The two main groups in the Natural Law bloc base their Natural
Law views respectively on religious and on secular presuppositions.
The following section will examine the special characteristics of the
secular Natural Law group.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
122
The Dual State
122
2.  SECULAR NATURAL LAW
While it is true that the Christian religion is both historically and doc-
trinally bound to Natural Law, rationalistic Natural Law is not nec-
essarily dependent on the Christian notions with which it has often
been associated.
The schoolmen of the later Middle Ages had already examined
the question whether law is rational because it is the will of God or
whether God willed it because it is rational.351 The schoolmen finally
chose the latter alternative and by doing so prepared the way for the
doctrine of the existence of rational law independent of God. With
the proposition of Hugo Grotius that an eternal absolute law dictated
by reason would exist even if there were no God, the classical age of
secular Natural Law was initiated. In Pufendorff’s writing, the theory
of rational law, far from constituting a revolutionary ideology, pro-
vided a justification for absolutist monarchy, while in Rousseau it
legitimized a radical form of democracy. Secular Natural Law influ-
enced Frederic the Great’s legislation and found its most enthusiastic
interpreters in the philosophers of German idealism, Immanuel Kant
and the young Fichte. Kant calls Law the apple of God’s eye, and the
state the guarantor of the law. Despite the attacks of National-Socialist
theorists who claim that it is un-German, Natural Law, as it is known
today, is largely the creation of German thinkers.352 To what extent do
residues of the classical type of Natural Law still persist in Germany?
How are they related to contemporary National-Socialist doctrines
which express their hostility towards universally oriented Natural
Law in the crude form of anti-Liberalism?
During the eighteenth century, Natural Law legitimized the exist-
ing distribution of powers.353 When, however, in the course of the
French Revolution, it became apparent that it could also legitimize
revolutionary demands, Natural Law incurred the hatred of all those
who were interested in the preservation of the status quo. The reac-
tion against Natural Law (which had thus been compromised by the
radicalism of the French Revolution) is best represented by Burke and
Hegel.354

--- Sayfa 205 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
123
 
123
In opposing the revolutionary form of rational Natural Law, Burke
appealed to the tradition of centuries of evolution. When he con-
fronted the judgment of reason with the pre-judgments of history,
Natural Law with Historical Law, when he stated that prescription
is the most sacred of all legal titles, Burke was laying the ground for
the romantic concept of history and for the Historical School of Law
and ultimately for the theory of the Restoration.355 It is superfluous to
point out that Burke’s ideas, particularly in the form given them by
Savigny, exerted a tremendous influence on the evolution of the nine-
teenth century legal thought. He particularly influenced the move-
ment which demanded the repudiation of rational Natural Law. For
our present purposes we need only state that National-Socialism has
denied its connection with Burke and Savigny, despite their common
rejection of rational Natural Law. Burke’s appeal to irrational forces
of historical development is indeed applicable only where tradition
is unbroken but not where all traditions have disintegrated. The
National-Socialists are not the protectors of an inherited tradition.
They represent a generation which has lost its guiding tradition. The
‘good old law’ is no more sacred to them than new law derived from
rational principles. The notion that a right must be respected because
it has been respected for a long time and is supported by an old tradi-
tion is as alien to National-Socialism (which is guided strictly by con-
siderations of political opportunism) as the belief in rational Natural
Law. National-Socialism would have respected Burke for his assault
on the French Revolution. But they would have regarded as treason-
able his sympathy with the revolt of the North-American colonists,
whose vested rights had been denied. However much the rational and
the traditional theories of sovereignty may differ, they agree in their
acknowledgment of law as the decisive element in social and political
life. In this respect they are sharply opposed to National-Socialism,
which declares that law has no intrinsic value. Thus there exists an
unbridgeable abyss between traditionalistic respect for irrational law
and irrationalistic contempt for traditional law.
It is true that the National-Socialist legal theory tries to explain its
rejection of the Historical School of Law on other grounds.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
124
The Dual State
124
Larenz asserts that National-Socialism and the Historical School
of Law share the same conviction that all law derives from the cus-
toms of the ‘ethnic groups’ (Volk und Volkstum). But he continues by
asserting that their conceptions of the ‘ethnic spirit’ (Volksgeist) are
poles apart. ‘Our criticism of the Historical School of Law’, he says,
‘must in the first place be directed against the identification of the
spirit of the ethnic group [Volksgeist] with the totality of the group’s
beliefs.’356 National-Socialism rejects the romantic view that the law
can be ‘discovered’ if the judge immerses himself into the soul of the
nation and follows traditional legal usages. The Historical School
of Law is reproached for its hostility towards enacted laws. It is not
for the judge to determine the legal belief of the nation. That is the
task of the Leader, of the ‘great man.’ The Historical School of Law
regarded the legal feeling of the ethnic group as the genuine source
of law. Larenz, however, places on the ‘great man’ the responsibility
for deciding whether the group beliefs are to be followed. He alone
can decide whether group beliefs are ‘genuine’ and are therefore to
be acknowledged, or whether they ‘merely represent public opinion’
and are therefore to be disregarded. If the Leader can decide whether
or not he will endorse the convictions of the group concerning ‘good’
and ‘evil,’ then the doctrine of the ‘spirit of the ethnic group’ has been
subtly supplanted by an ideology which permits the Leader to decide
in accordance with his own convictions regardless of the legal status
of his decisions.
Hegel changed his attitude towards Natural Law during the course
of the French Revolution and the ensuing decades. Hegel’s book on
the constitution of Germany,357 written in 1803, seems of special
importance for the purpose of the present study. Burke had been
impressed by the social dangers to his class arising in consequence of
the French Revolution. Hegel, however, considered these dangers as
reacting upon the political weakness of the Holy Roman Empire. In
view of this danger, Hegel postulated the supremacy of ‘politics’ over
all law, whether written or based on traditional customs. Hegel’s idea
that the essence of the state is politically determined by its antago-
nism towards other states was entirely alien to the rational theory of
Natural Law. What ap-

--- Sayfa 207 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
125
 
125
peared essential to the viewpoint of Natural Law, namely, the coop-
eration of the citizen for the promotion of peaceful objects, is not rec-
ognized by Hegel as belonging to the sphere of the ‘state.’ Hegel goes
even so far as to attack contemporary state theorists, because they
have identified the ‘state’ with civic society.358
Hegel’s thesis opposes Kant’s idea of securing permanent peace
through the erection of a League of Nations. Hegel explains that
even a League of Nations is bound to have enemies because interstate
antagonism is an essential characteristic of any state.
Since the state is an individual Hegel believes that it can only be
conceived of as an enemy to other states. Hegel emphasizes that, by
definition, a state must create enemies.359
Notwithstanding his acceptance of the doctrine of political inter-
ests, Hegel does not discard the concept of Natural Law. Through the
argument that ‘the absolute moral totality is nothing but a nation’360
he uses Natural Law to justify the existing state whose raison d’état
cannot otherwise be justified. Thus Hegel legitimized the appeal to
the raison d’état just as one would ‘give legitimacy to a bastard.’361 (In
the age in which Natural Law was dominant, the raison d’état, though
playing an important role in practice, was generally despised by polit-
ical thinkers.)
National-Socialist philosophers are by no means unanimous in
their attitude towards Hegel. Reichsminister Dr. Hans Frank speaks
of him as perhaps Germany’s greatest political philosopher.362 Alfred
Rosenberg, on the other hand, denounces Hegel’s theory of the state as
an ‘empty construction.’363 But even writers who are to be taken seri-
ously, such as Koellreutter, state that National-Socialism and Hegel’s
theory of the state are ‘philosophical antitheses.’364 He maintains that
Adolf Hitler has nothing to do with Hegel’s deification of the state, for
he (Hitler) builds his philosophy upon the Volk (nation) and not upon
the state. In contrast with these, Huber and Larenz claim Hegel for
National-Socialism. Larenz,365 a Hegelian himself, points out that in
his earlier writings Hegel saw the embodiment of morality less in the
state than in the community and in the Volk. This discussion of Hegel,
however, as it is carried on in National-Socialist literature, dwells
exclusively on superficial textual problems. Loewenstein366 has al-

--- Sayfa 208 ---
126
The Dual State
126
ready pointed out that Hegel employed the terms Volk and Staat
indiscriminately and that in two references to the same Greek pas-
sage, he once used the word Volk and at another time the word
Staat. Behind these philological skirmishes, however, deeper differ-
ences of opinion are to be discovered. Insofar as National-Socialism
rejects rational Natural Law and accepts a conception of the ‘political’
derived from the notion of the ‘enemy,’ there are indeed close con-
nections between itself and Hegelianism. To the extent, however, that
National-Socialism gives a specific content to its concepts of politics
(as in its racial theory and its theory of ‘blood and soil’), not even the
remotest relationship exists.
Dealing with the Jewish question, Hegel asks for civil rights for the
Jews. He condemns a policy by which the Jews would be deprived of
full rights both in state and society. This attitude of Hegel’s is the more
interesting since he characterizes the Jews as a nation. He justifies his
attitude towards the Jews by the idea that the Jews are men and there-
fore have a right to be treated as men.367
Hegel swept away the remnants of rational Natural Law which the
Historical School had not destroyed. His work and that of Savigny
undermined the great German tradition of secularized Natural Law
and the attempts of some Kantians to restore it were of no avail.
Nevertheless, the scientific refutation of secularized Natural Law did
not lead to its disappearance. As early as 1910, Ernst Troeltsch raised
the question of how much the socialist-labor movement had been
influenced by ideas derived from Natural Law. At this time, how-
ever, he did not attribute much importance to this influence, assert-
ing that ‘contemporary Marxian Socialism does not base its theories
on the absolute Natural Law theory of freedom and love as found in
Christian doctrine … it rests rather on a conception of the natural
laws of economic development.’368 Only three years later, however,
Troeltsch strikingly enough modified his opinion and characterized
Social-Democracy as the heir of ‘radical Natural Law’369 declaring that
Social-Democracy was now the bearer of the traditions of the sects.370
This discussion of the interrelationships between Socialism and
Natural Law371 raises the question as to what extent the remnants

--- Sayfa 209 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
127
 
127
of proletarian Socialism can co-operate with groups believing in
rationalist Natural Law in a common front against National-Socialism.
The advocates of proletarian socialism have today the problem of
determining what expression they can give to their spontaneous reac-
tion against the arbitrariness of National-Socialism and its hostility
towards Natural Law, without running the risk of becoming utopian.
The reawakening proletarian Socialist movement must, during its pre-
sent period of illegality, decide on this crucial question. It is an actual
fact being discussed by many illegal groups within Germany today.
It is a well-known fact that Marx and Engels fought for more than
four decades against the attempt to base the claims of Socialism on
rational Natural Law. Their opposition to every variety of ‘Natural
Law Socialism’ recurs constantly in their writings. They derided such
attempts as absolutely utopian. Engels wrote: ‘Proudhon … demands
from present-day society that it shall transform itself not according to
the laws of its own economic development, but according to the pre-
scriptions of justice…. Where we prove, Proudhon … preaches and
laments.’372 In his Critique of the Gotha Programme, Marx emphati-
cally dismisses justification for Socialism on the basis of Natural Law
rather than on that of social science. He says: ‘The German Worker’s
Party … shows that its socialistic ideas are not even skin-deep, in that,
instead of treating existing society (and that holds good for any future
one) as the basis of the existing state (or the future state in the case
of future society) it treats the state rather as an independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, moral and free basis.’373 In his Anti-
Duehring, Engels, like his conservative adversaries, emphasized the
destructive consequences which a rationalistic Natural Law attitude
had produced during the French Revolution. Engels, of course, was
referring not to the revolution as such but to its degeneration into the
Napoleonic dictatorship. The progress from ‘Utopia to Science’ con-
sists in substituting historical sociological laws for the rationalistic
constructions of Natural Law.
Marx would not have been a true disciple of Hegel had he not
assimilated Hegel’s sharp and unclouded eye for political realities.
Hegel proved with relentless clarity that there is no legal solution

--- Sayfa 210 ---
128
The Dual State
128
of political conflicts, but only the test of power. Marx was perfectly in
accord with the Hegelian tradition, justifying the class struggle for the
shortening of the working day in the words spoken by the laborer in
Capital: ‘I demand … a working day of normal length, and I demand
it without any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment
is out of place. You may be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of
sanctity to boot; but the thing that you represent face to face with me
has no heart in its breast.’ And Marx sums up the argument: ‘There is
here, therefore, an antinomy, right against right, both equally bearing
the seal of the law of exchanges. Between equal rights force decides.’374
Thus Marx dissolves the concept of justice in toto and substitutes
for it ‘relative justices’ which are appropriate to the existing economic
situations. He says:
The juristic forms, in which these economic transactions appear as activ-
ities of the will of the parties concerned, as expressions of their com-
mon will and as contracts which may be enforced by law against some
individual party, cannot determine their content, since they are only
forms. They merely express this content. This content is just, whenever
it corresponds, and is adequate to, the mode of production. It is unjust,
whenever it contradicts that mode. Slavery on the basis of capitalistic
production is unjust, likewise fraud in the quality of commodities.375
It is quite understandable that the liberal Benedetto Croce should
have referred to Marx as Machiavellian. And yet this characteriza-
tion is misleading since it takes into consideration only one aspect of
Marx.376 Even the most influential thinker of the nineteenth century
could not transcend the contradiction inherent in our epoch between
conscience, guided by a belief in Natural Law, and intellect, demanding
its rejection. The famous slogan, ‘the proletariat has no ideals to real-
ize’ is supplemented by another, ‘the proletariat should set in motion
the process of liberation.’ Karl Marx states that Utopianism consists in
thinking that, under the present circumstances, good intentions will
suffice to establish a regime of justice. However, according to Marx,
this state of har-

--- Sayfa 211 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
129
 
129
mony will, with historical certainty, be achieved as soon as the
conflict-creating capitalistic society has been displaced as a conse-
quence of the class struggle. The class struggle itself, to be sure, is
governed by the laws of political reality, but the classless society which
is its outcome is the fulfilment of the imperatives of Natural Law. In
one of the last chapters of the third volume of Capital, Marx wrote:
Freedom in this field (i.e., the field of production) cannot consist of any-
thing else but of the fact that socialized men, the associated producers,
regulate their interchange with nature rationally, bring it under their
common control instead of being ruled by it as by some blind power;
that they accomplish their task with the least expenditure of energy and
under conditions most adequate to their human nature and most wor-
thy of it. But it always remains a realm of necessity. Beyond it begins
that development of human power, which is its own end, the true realm
of freedom, which, however, can flourish only upon that realm of neces-
sity as its basis.377
The historic function of the class struggle, therefore, is the creation
of an economic basis for the order of Reason, as Marx expressed in
one of his earliest writings: ‘Only under Communism does the nobil-
ity of man become perceptible. Already today this can be seen in a
meeting of French workers in which the establishment of the true
society is the concern of all and where brotherhood is truth and not
an empty phrase.’378
Thus Marxian theory is characterized both by the rejection of all
utopian applications of Natural Law for the duration of the class strug-
gle, and by the vision of an order governed by Natural Law following
the termination of class conflict. If this interpretation of Marxism is
correct, there can be no objection to the affiliation of the German
Marxists with the United Front, which is composed of groups whose
ethical demands are based on Natural Law. The Marxists, however,
insist that their opposition to National-Socialism is owing primarily
not to its suspension of the inviolability of law for a limited period,
but rather to the refusal of National-Socialism ever to subordinate its
state to a legal ideology derived from absolute values.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
130
The Dual State
130
The clarification of the relationship between Marxian Socialism and
Natural Law is of decisive significance because, to a certain degree, the
failure of Syndicalism and Reformism to consider the problem paved
the way for Fascism. It is of the most vital significance that the intel-
lectual origins of George Sorel were Marxist. Sorel379 shared Marx’s
hatred of ‘l’arbitraire,’ i.e., the utopian attempt to derive political deci-
sions from rational calculations. Sorel stripped the class struggle of
its visionary goal and approved it as a movement for its own sake.
He transformed it into a myth because, to him, the movement was
everything and the goal was nothing. Thus Sorel became the prophet
of politics without ultimate goal – the advocate of action for the sake
of action. In the course of his life he applauded the various militant
movements not because he believed in their aims but because he loved
their militancy. Vaugeois, who was a member of l’Action Française and
who had been close to Sorel, once exclaimed: ‘Toute force est bonne
autant qu’elle est belle et triomphe.’380 This aspect of Sorelian philoso-
phy is expressed in the writing of Ernst Jünger, the most gifted nation-
alist author of post-war Germany, who formulated this attitude: ‘Not
what we fight for, but how we fight, is essential.’381
Whoever believes that political action is nothing more than
acquiescence in the laws of social development will share the fate of
Sorel. Like Sorel, he will pass from Syndicalism to l’Action Française;
like Mussolini, a disciple of Sorel, he will shift from Socialism to
Fascism; like Carl Schmitt, an admirer of Sorel, he will desert political
Catholicism for National-Socialism, as soon as he is convinced that
integral nationalism is the order of the day. In the respects in which
Machiavelli and Hegel can be regarded as the spiritual ancestors of
National-Socialism, Sorel should also be so regarded. Even though
Sorel’s influence was indirect, through the medium of Italian Fascism,
and its direct influence was exerted only upon a small group of intel-
lectuals, the following credo indicates his influence:
One of the most important experiences which led me as a jurist
to National-Socialism was the conversation with a world-famous
American jurist. In 1932 he summarized his diagnosis of the con-

--- Sayfa 213 ---
National-Socialist Campaign
131
 
131
temporary world in one sentence: ‘We are witnessing today the bank-
ruptcy of idées génerales.’ (Carl Schmitt)382
The fact that the most brilliant political theorist of post-war
Germany adheres to a political movement, not because of its ideas,
but because of its lack of ideas, is a symptom of the degree of devel-
opment of that political estheticism that worships violence for its
own sake. It should be noted, however, that the bankruptcy of the
idées génerales does not constitute the experience of a whole genera-
tion, but only that of an uprooted social group of that generation.
This group transforms its necessity into a virtue, its lack of general
principles into a principle, and its spiritual poverty into a political
theory.383 Whether one is a Fascist or an anti-Fascist may depend on
one’s attitude towards the validity of idées génerales. Only a believer in
the existence of such principles will be ready to struggle, at the pos-
sible cost of his life, against National-Socialism as a political system
and as a philosophical nihilism. It is the personal sacrifice exacted of
every antagonist of National-Socialism in Germany which keeps the
remnants of the Marxist opposition aware of the relevance of Natural
Law: no-one has ever been willing to risk his life because of his belief
in the ‘laws of social development.’ As Leon Trotsky has remarked,
‘Awareness of the relativity of values does not give one the courage to
practice violence and shed blood.’
On the other hand, the present political impotence of Marxism
in Germany prevents it from repeating the fatal mistake to which it
has been especially subject, i.e., propounding Natural Law impera-
tives as programs for practical political activity. The tragedy of the
Marxian political movements in Germany lies in part in the fact that
they became, in spite of many warnings of their founders, the victims
of their belief in Natural Law even under the rule of capitalism. Alfred
Meusel384 has convincingly shown that Social-Democracy gradu-
ally replaced the Marxian analysis of imperialism with an analysis
motivated by a utopian pacifism. He says that Kautsky had correctly
analyzed the dominant trends in the age of imperialism and had pre-
dicted their consequences. However, his morally admirable devotion
to peace impelled him to find a way out of the vicious circle of world
war and world revolution. Hence

--- Sayfa 214 ---
132
The Dual State
132
he endowed political democracy with a golden glamor and inclined
toward the belief that it is possible to replace imperialism by free trade
and disarmament, not, it is true, without a struggle, but still with-
out the painful expense of war and revolution. The theoretical issue
of 1912 became the fateful decision of 1919. Trusting in democracy
and the League of Nations, German Social-Democracy found itself
in the current of Wilsonian thoughts, which were based on princi-
ples of absolute Natural Law. Hence Social-Democracy developed
from a Marxist to a utopian party whose program was formulated
by reference to Natural Law. Social-Democracy, which originally had
torn the ideological veil from the economic system of capitalistic
society, in turn witnessed its ideology being unveiled as utopian by
National-Socialism. The premature attempt to realize an order based
on utopian Natural Law was fatal to SociaDemocracy. The National-
Socialist Party matured during its battle against the democratic and
pacifist utopianism of post-war Social-Democracy. The attempt of
National-Socialism to extirpate all traces of Natural Law represents
the other extreme and awakens the conscience of all those who think
that life is purposeless unless one strives to achieve a state in which
principles of justice prevail.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
133
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
III
NATIONAL-SOCIALISM AND
COMMUNAL NATURAL LAW
1.  SOCIETAL AND COMMUNAL NATURAL LAW
The national-socialist rejection of rational Natural Law has
aroused all social groups for whom rational Natural Law is still of
positive importance, but this is only one phase of the relationship
between National-Socialism and Natural Law.
The conception of Natural Law lacks precision as far as the term
‘law’ is concerned; but it is no less ambiguous in regard to the phe-
nomena which can be classed as ‘natural.’ Professor Carl Becker has
pointed out this difficulty in his analysis of the intellectual and his-
torical development preceding the Declaration of Independence. His
exposition makes especially clear the relationship between the classi-
cal Natural Law of the Age of Enlightenment and the development of
Newtonian physics. After having explained that the higher law (which
is identified with Natural Law) has taken on different forms in dif-
ferent times, Becker deals especially with the law of God as revealed
in nature. Becker distinguishes with regard to the concept of Natural
Law between two kinds of nature. According to Becker, ‘nature’ may
be conceived either as ‘subject to rational control’ or as a ‘blind force
subjecting men and things to its compulsion.’385 Since Natural Law at
any period is related to the current system of natural science, it was to
be expected that there would be changes in the conception of Natural
Law with the replacement of classical physics as the predominant nat-
ural science by evolutionary biology.
Insofar as National-Socialism is based upon a race concept it has
already accepted the dominance of biology.386 Its race theory

--- Sayfa 216 ---
134
The Dual State
134
rejects the rational optimism associated with classical physics which
viewed the discovery of universally valid natural rules as the high-
est aim of scientific work. What we may call its ‘biologistic’ political
thought and action is based upon the recognition and promotion of
‘vital’ forces. These vital, irrational forces are the basis of race and
their political form is the racial community. Thus, in addition to
rational and societal Natural Law, we may add to the long list of his-
torical variants an irrational and communal Natural Law, founded in
biology.
The distinction between societal and communal Natural Law was
stressed by the publicists as early as the 17th century. This distinc-
tion is indicated in the terms societas and socialitas. Gierke discusses
several long-forgotten legal theorists who must be viewed as expo-
nents of a kind of communal Natural Law.387 These men would hardly
deserve attention were it not that Leibniz was among those who, as
Gierke says, ‘derive law from the community and sees in every com-
munity an organic component of the realm of spirits in universum.’388
Leibniz’ theory of communal Natural Law is contained in his unfin-
ished Vom Naturrecht. A few passages from this should be quoted
because of the importance of distinguishing societal Natural Law
originating in Reason from communal Natural Law originating in
instinct. Leibniz wrote: ‘A natural community exists if Nature wishes
it to exist. Signs which permit the conclusion that Nature wishes
something are given whenever Nature endows us with impulses and
with capacities to satisfy them; for nature creates nothing without a
purpose.’389 Leibniz never went very far in differentiating the forms of
the natural community from the connubial community, the family,
the household community and finally from the civil community. It is
all the more remarkable that Gurvitch,390 a French jurist, has recently
concerned himself with this almost forgotten theory of communal
Natural Law.391
In the following pages a number of features of the ideal types of
the two main forms of Natural Law will be presented. However, the
numerous concrete subtleties of Natural Law will be left undiscussed.
The aim of this procedure is not the description of particular facts but
the formulation of ideal types.

--- Sayfa 217 ---
Communal Natural Law
135
 
135
Societal Natural Law assumes the isolated individual living in a
constant struggle with all other isolated individuals except when the
war of one against all is replaced by an order created through a delib-
erate act of Reason.
Communal Natural Law teaches that there exists among individu-
als harmonious order based on natural impulses. It originates in and
takes its form from the spontaneous impulse of the members of the
community (Wesenswillen).
Societal Natural Law views Law as the primary source of human
co-operation.
Communal Natural Law views Law merely as a manifestation of the
community, the cohesion of which is a function of other than legal
forces. Law, at best, has a reinforcing function.
Societal Natural Law is supreme. As a manifestation of omnipotent
Reason it is unlimited. Societal Natural Law represents the triumph
of the mind over the body; it despises biological impulses because it
exists only through their suppression. Actually, its legitimation rests
on the suppression of these impulses.
Communal Natural Law is the bearer of delegated power. Its content
is determined by the earthly forces which gave it birth. From these, it
derives its dominion, which is limited both temporally and spatially.
Communal Natural Law rejects Reason if Reason questions the legiti-
macy of those biological instincts upon whose sanction Communal
Natural Law is based.
Societal Natural Law is universal. Limitations on the scope of law
would create an era of anarchy. The prevention of anarchy is the very
essence of Societal Natural Law. Societal Natural Law is valid for the
whole world (jus gentium). Jus gentium as Natural Law is in contrast
with jus civile as positive law.
The validity of Communal Natural Law is limited in space and time
and to the persons under it. The communal consciousness to which it
owes its existence emerges only in the course of differentiation from
other communities. Since Communal Natural Law applies only to a
particular societal group, it is particular law which is Natural Law,
whereas international law is by definition positive law.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
136
The Dual State
136
Societal Natural Law is equalitarian. It presupposes the existence
of equal, rational individuals who have by common agreement willed
the creation of law.
Communal Natural Law is non-equalitarian in analogy with the
family which is the elementary form of all communities and which is
organized on the basis of unequal relationships among its members.
Before terminating this series of contrasts, the respective rela-
tions between ‘state’ and ‘ethnic group’ under societal and communal
Natural Law should be pointed out.
To the Societal Natural Law the nation appears as a plurality of citi-
zens who form a unified group by virtue of their common citizenship.
The people (Volk) is a juridical concept derived from the state which
is legal in nature.
To Communal Natural Law the state is merely the superficial form
of the essential unity of all Volksgenossen (ethnic comrades). The eth-
nic community is a biological entity which exists even when it is not
organized into a state. The state is an organic phenomenon derived
from the biological ethnic community.
This fundamental difference in modes of thinking is well exempli-
fied by two passages from Justice Holmes and Adolf Hitler respec-
tively. In Missouri v. Holland, Justice Holmes said of the Fathers of
the American Constitution that ‘it was enough for them to realize or
to hope that they had created an organism, it has taken a century and
has cost their successors much sweat and blood to prove that they
created a nation.’392
On the other hand, Adolf Hitler argued that the state, far from being
an end itself, is only a means. According to Hitler there must be cre-
ated and maintained a community of members equal both physically
and spiritually. It is the purpose of the state to serve this community,
and states which do not do so are unjustified in their existence. Since
this passage of Hitler’s Mein Kampf which has been summarized above
is frequently quoted as the kernel of National-Socialist political philos-
ophy, we are reproducing the German text: ‘Der Staat ist ein Mittel zum
Zweck. Sein Zweck liegt in der Erhaltung und Förderung einer Gemein-

--- Sayfa 219 ---
Communal Natural Law
137
 
137
schaft physisch und seelisch gleichartiger Lebewesen…. Staaten, die nicht
diesem Zweck dienen, sind Fehlerscheinungen, ja sogar Missgeburten.
Die Tatsache ihres Bestehens ändert sowenig daran, als etwa der Erfolg
einer Filibustergemeinschaft die Räuberei zu rechtfertigen vermag.’393
The rational Natural Law concept prevailed at the time of the emer-
gence of the United States, while irrational Natural Law thinking was
in the background of the creation of the Third Reich. The present-
day German interpretation of Communal Natural Law is perhaps best
expressed by Theodor Buddeberg, who states that ‘the legal system of
a state can exist in the long run only if it is based on the close ethnic
kinship of its citizens…. Only ethnic kinship provides them with the
common view of what is law (Natural Law) and with the common
belief without which law cannot exist (Divine Law).’394 According
to this conception, Divine Law manifests itself in the subconscious
ethnic impulses. It becomes secularized into Natural Law as soon as
it passes the threshold of consciousness. As a further illustration of
this attitude we quote Pfenning: ‘Only men of the same race and of
the same hereditary biological qualities can co-operate in a collec-
tive understanding…. The members of a Gemeinschaft, because of
their racial identity, will react in the same way to any crisis which will
threaten the whole ethnic community.’395
As long as we consider only the rejection of rational Natural Law by
National-Socialism, it remains possible to find its intellectual roots in
occidental civilization. The biological mysticism frequently encoun-
tered in National-Socialist literature was, however, imported with
those White-Russian émigrés whose influence on National-Socialism
cannot be overemphasized. It is not surprising that Alfred Rosenberg,
the author of the Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts; the preacher of the cru-
sade against Bolshevism, the pope of National-Socialism, is a White-
Russian émigré.396
It was about this particular type of thought that Max Weber
said: ‘The central idea of the oriental mystic conception of the Church
is the firm conviction that Christian brotherly love, if pure and strong
enough, must lead to unity in all things, including matters of belief.
Thus if human beings love one another mys-

--- Sayfa 220 ---
138
The Dual State
138
tically in the Johannean sense  — they will all think in the same
way, and motivated by the irrationality of this feeling will act with a
divinely willed solidarity … this is the kernel of the Slavic conception
of Gemeinschaft inside and outside of the Church.’397
The practical significance of the theoretically intriguing difference
between the concepts of societal and communal Natural Law is to be
found in National-Socialist theories of international law as they have
been revealed by the foreign policy of the Third Reich.
There is an interesting inconsistency in Dietze’s study Naturrecht
der Gegenwart.398 After attacking the application of societal Natural
Law to domestic politics, he accepts without reserve all those prin-
ciples drawn from Natural Law which in the field of foreign politics
legitimized the remilitarization of Germany:  the principles of the
equality of rights, self-determination and the freedom to choose
instruments of defense, etc.
If, however, we study the more recent German literature, espe-
cially publications after March 7, 1936 (when the Rhineland
was remilitarized), we discover a remarkable change.399 Gürke,
Professor of International Law at the University of Munich, for-
mulated with especial clarity the new National-Socialist theory of
international law as derived from the concept of ‘International Law
Community’: ‘International law presupposes the racial and cultural
affinity of states in addition to their continuous relationship.’400 The
practical consequences of this theory are likewise indicated by Gürke.
He points out, for example, that as long as Bolshevist Russia is ruled
by Jews and inspired by Marxism, it remains a racial and cultural alien
to the concrete ‘community’ of nations, and therefore stands, accord-
ing to the National-Socialist doctrine, outside the pale of interna-
tional law. It is no less important that in National-Socialist thinking,
the ethnic community (Volk) extends beyond the boundaries of the
state. The fact that there were ethnic comrades (Volksgenossen) living
under the sovereignty of foreign states had definite implications for
National-Socialism. Societal Natural Law served as the basis of inter-
national law as the Third Reich was rearming. In the second phase of
its development, the National-Socialist regime regarded com-

--- Sayfa 221 ---
Communal Natural Law
139
 
139
munal Natural Law as a more adequate basis for international law.
The German-Russian pact on the eve of the second world war indi-
cated the sacrifice of these ideological distinctions and the adoption
of a course of pure opportunism. Thus National-Socialism adopted
in international relations the same ideology of transgression of law
as was used to justify opportunism in the conduct of domestic affairs.
In analyzing the differences between societal and communal
Natural Law the author has been guided by the categories of Ferdinand
Toennies, the great German sociologist. Toennies,401 in discussing
Hobbes’ theory, elaborated the main propositions of societal Natural
Law which he then contrasted with the hypothesis of communal
Natural Law. Toennies was influenced by Maine’s thesis concerning
the evolution of law ‘from Status to Contract.’402 He regarded the com-
munal Natural Law as a mere hypothesis and believed that in Western
civilization the age of the ‘community’ (Gemeinschaft) was undergo-
ing a progressive disintegration.
Wolgast and Dietze, who incessantly claim to be disciples of
Toennies, treated communal Natural Law as a political reality,
whereas Toennies had envisaged it only as a hypothesis. However,
in their attempt to monopolize Toennies for National-Socialism,
Wolgast and Dietze wilfully distorted his theories. The German
Youth Movement had distorted Toennies’ sociological concept of
Gemeinschaft into a panacea for all the sufferings of society.403 It was
from the Youth Movement that National-Socialism took over the fet-
ish of the Gemeinschaft which Hans Freyer in 1930 called the ‘vital lie
of our age.’404 Thus Ernst Troeltsch’s prophecy that the end of the ide-
alization of groups would be ‘to brutalize romance and to romanticize
cynicism’405 has proven true.
2.  COMMUNAL NATURAL LAW AND CONCRETE
THEORY OF ORDER
In National-Socialist doctrine, the theory of community is the crite-
rion of what is purely German and therefore National-

--- Sayfa 222 ---
140
The Dual State
140
Socialist.406 This attitude is evident in an article by Professor Heckel
of the University of Munich,407 in which he seeks to discredit Stahl,
the founder of the Prussian Conservative Party, because he was a Jew.
He completes the argument by pointing out that Stahl at heart was a
liberal Marxist. As evidence, Heckel offers the fact that Stahl did not
view the state as a Gemeinschaft and that his attitude was therefore
un-German.408
A pure Aryan German attitude does not necessarily lead to the
adoption of the theory of the Gemeinschaft. The claim that there
is a connection between German race and thinking in terms of
Gemeinschaft is as false as the claim that Jewishness and normative
thinking are related. The characterization of any system of thought
as Jewish constitutes, in the eyes of National-Socialism, its most
vigorous condemnation. Accordingly, the foremost requirement of
‘German’ thinking is an uncompromising opposition to ‘Jewish’ intel-
lectuality, which is condemned because its main concepts are said
to be abstract and universal. This rather negative characterization of
National-Socialist communal theory serves as a justification of what
we have called the Prerogative State. The proposition that there should
be norms of general validity in order to protect the individual’s lib-
erty from infringement by the political sovereign, the dictum that the
individual can only be punished in accordance with law, the doctrine
of equality before law – all these ideas are labelled and condemned
as ‘Jewish’ normativism. The coldly impersonal and abstract norm
which is rationally arrived at and rigidly fixed does not guarantee the
welfare of the community and hence is prejudicial to the triumph of
‘justice.’ Only the completely unrestricted power of action based on
‘the circumstances of the case’ guarantees the supremacy of the legal
system, the aim of which is the protection of the central value of life,
i.e., the protection of the community.
The idea that the community constitutes the sole source of law has
a corollary, the doctrine that there can be no law outside the com-
munity. Dernedde expresses this dogma by insisting that ‘beyond the
vital needs of the ethnic group there are no legal values. These needs
should not be opposed by restraints deriving from

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Communal Natural Law
141
 
141
the law.’409 According to National-Socialist doctrine, in the relations
with those who are outside the community, only political impera-
tives are valid. Those who stand outside the community are actual or
potential enemies. Relations within the community are marked by the
prevalence of peace, order and justice. Relations with those outside
the community are marked by power, war and destruction. From the
viewpoint of National-Socialism the establishment of a legal norm
governing extra-community as well as intra-community relations
would hamper the successful prosecution of politics. The doctrine of
communal Natural Law, therefore, is not in conflict with the arbitrary
regime of the Prerogative State. Rather it presupposes its existence,
for only the community and nothing but the community is of value.
Gerber writes: ‘The political system of National-Socialism rests upon
the Gemeinschaft as the supreme value, i.e., on the essential nature of
the German ethnic group; National-Socialism is the expression of the
German people’s conception of justice.’410
In addition to expressing the German conception of justice, the
National-Socialist theory of communal Natural Law also has another
function. This function is the legitimation of the existing economic
and social order. Professor Herrfahrdt of the University of Marburg
has shown how the legitimation of the present social order on the
basis of the ideology of community is brought about. He says that it is
‘precisely in matters of the rule of law and legal security that German
judicial activity has proceeded along lines which correspond to the
communal theory of National-Socialism. As far as residues of lib-
eralism still exist, they constitute permanent values which are also
accepted by National-Socialism. Among these is the free existence
of the maximum number of independent individuals in the field of
business.’411
Since the community has been elevated to semi-divine status, it is
necessary only to characterize an institution as communal in order to
glorify and legitimize it. But why should the concept of community be
restricted to the nation as a whole? Is not the family the prototype of
the community? And if the family is a community, is not the house-
hold also one? And if this is true, then is not the workshop a commu-
nity and the factory as well?

--- Sayfa 224 ---
142
The Dual State
142
Thus the doctrine of community revolutionizes the legal relationship
among members of the ethnic group.
The doctrine of community is the pivot of the whole National-
Socialist system. The doctrine of the Gemeinschaft acknowledges
the dualism of two legal systems: of the Normative State and of the
Prerogative State.
The relationship between communal Natural Law and the Normative
State still remains to be demonstrated. This relationship emerges most
clearly in Carl Schmitt’s Über die drei Arten des rechtswissenschaftli-
chen Denkens, which is the most influential juridical study of recent
years. In this essay Schmitt distinguishes three kinds of legal thinking:
	1.	 Normativism, characterized as thinking in terms of laws and
abstract norms,
	2.	 Decisionism, as thinking in terms of decision without regard
to any legal basis.
He places in juxtaposition to both the ‘concrete theory of order’
(konkretes Ordnungsdenken) which he describes as thinking with ref-
erence to the concrete communities existing within the ethnic group.
Schmitt states: ‘To the concrete theory of order, order, even juridi-
cally, does not consist primarily of individual rules or the total system
of rules. Rules are rather components of order and means for main-
taining it.’412
This is not an especially new idea in the sociology of law in
Germany. It is simply a re-formulation of the proposition asserted by
Eugen Ehrlich that the law actually being enforced in a given situation
is not to be found in statutes but in the legal customs practiced by the
members of the legal unit in question. The statement, however, that
the ‘concrete theory of order’ (konkretes Ordnungsdenken) is neither
original nor even characteristic of National-Socialist thought does
not exhaust the significance of Schmitt’s theory, which, as Maunz413
rightly maintains, represents a new stage in the development of
National-Socialist legal philosophy. It is not the ‘concrete theory of
order’ as such but its association with the concept of ‘community’
(Gemeinschaft) which gives it significance. Ehrlich went no further
than to state that social order is spontaneously produced by members

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Communal Natural Law
143
 
143
of the society more frequently than academic jurisprudence imagi-
nes. When Schmitt remarks that ‘the introduction of the concept of
community revived the concrete theory of order’414 he attributes to
the bearers of the concrete order the same mystic quality that charac-
terizes the National-Socialist concept of the community.
Schmitt’s opposition to legal normativism is in complete consist-
ency with his attitude during the Republican period. Schmitt also
stole from Hegel the tendency to use the ‘concreteness’ as a weapon
against ‘abstraction.’ According to Hegel the principles of reason must
be conceived as concrete in order that true freedom may come to rule.
Hegel characterizes the school of thought which clings to abstraction
as liberalism and emphasizes that the concrete is always victorious
against the abstract and that the abstract always becomes bankrupt
against the concrete.415 However, Schmitt, who had discovered the
sovereignty of the state under martial law, who had frequently reit-
erated Hobbes’ doctrine that authority and not truth is the creator
of law, and who in 1932 had coined the phrase that ‘the best thing
in the world is a command,’416 turned away from decisionism after
dictatorship had been achieved and martial law made permanent
under the authoritarian state. This naturally caused some distress to
his admirers.417
A critical analysis of Schmitt’s theories reveals that, according to
the theory of concrete order, the concrete communities are not the
primary sources of law. If they were, then every concrete group, so
long as it constitutes an orderly whole, would have to be regarded
as equivalent to a concrete community order. But if this were the
case Schmitt’s theory would logically imply a liberal theory of group
autonomy. But this conclusion does not follow because Schmitt’s ‘con-
crete theory of order’ really contains a decisionist element connected
with the conception of the ‘community.’ Only those groups are to be
regarded as the bearers of the ‘concrete order’ to which the character
of the ‘community’ is granted by National-Socialism.
The clarification of this problem is not merely of theoretical import.
It is a practical problem of considerable political im-

--- Sayfa 226 ---
144
The Dual State
144
portance as well. Völtzer, the Labor Trustee for the District of
Northwestern Germany,418 wrote an article which, considered
together with Kühn’s article on the organization of industry, acquires
considerable significance. After examining the relationship between
the National-Socialist conception of the state and the newly founded
estate-system, Kühn concludes that the new organization of indus-
try has grown organically out of National-Socialism. He says that in
the sphere of the estates ‘self-administration was firmly established
when the National-Socialist state was organized. National-Socialism
adopted self-administration in complete consistency with its own
principles.’419 Kühn also points out the intellectual bond between the
National-Socialist theory of the state and the ‘estate-system.’ ‘The co-
ordination of occupations as it is embodied in the estates today con-
tributes greatly to the formation of the community.’420
But if the co-ordination of occupations is a particularly adequate
basis for a community which is the embodiment of concrete order,
why, then, are all occupational groups deemed fit to form such com-
munities with the single exception of the proletariat? According to
the National-Socialist viewpoint, the labor unions before 1933 were
infected by Marxism and infested with Jews. But on May 2, 1933,
the National-Socialists took the labor unions in hand and extermi-
nated every trace of Marxism and Jewry. Why were the purified labor
unions not preserved? Why were the entrepreneurs, the craftsmen,
the peasants, professional people, the artists deemed fit to form com-
munities, but not the workers? Why must the worker be satisfied with
the German Labor Front of all Productive Germans (Front aller schaf-
fenden Deutschen), while the other groups form autonomous estates
which are accorded the status of communities above and beyond their
affiliation with the German Labor Front? Völtzer answers this ques-
tion directly. After describing the seizures of the union headquarters
by the Storm Troopers, he continues: ‘In practise the result was the
existence of two independent bodies of employers and employees,
each internally co-ordinated. Today it can be admitted that these
organizations did their best to wage a spiritual class struggle under
the aegis of National-Socialism.’421

--- Sayfa 227 ---
Communal Natural Law
145
 
145
The experiences of this labor trustee are a valuable source of infor-
mation. They reveal that the German labor unions’ adherence to the
ideas of the class struggle is not due to their ‘infection by Marxism
or their corruption by Jewry.’ Since the same labor unions, under
National-Socialist auspices, were about to engage in the same kind
of class struggle as before, it must be inferred that organized labor
tends to carry on the class struggle even if its chiefs are ideologically
opposed. Therefore, from the National-Socialist viewpoint, labor
unions cannot be regarded as ‘communities.’
There is no norm or abstract principle by which it can be decided
whether or not a given group is a community. The problem of the
concrete theory of order transcends the limits of the system of the
concrete ‘communities.’ This problem demands solution by decision-
ism and, since there is no norm, this decision—to employ Schmitt’s
terminology  — must be derived from a ‘void.’ In reality, however,
this ‘void’ is not a ‘void’ at all. It is the value system associated with
the class structure of present-day society. This decision is a politi-
cal decision par excellence. Therefore it falls within the scope of the
Prerogative State.
Viewed in this light, the essence of Schmitt’s theory may be sum-
marized as follows: the National-Socialist legal system is embodied
in concrete communities. The question as to which groups constitute
concrete communities is decided politically, i.e., the decision is not
made in accordance with pre-existent norms, but in accordance with
the ‘demands of the situation.’ The theoretical shortcomings of the con-
crete theory of order have been obvious even to National-Socialists.
Havestädt,422 in an article in the Verwaltungs-Archiv, cautions his read-
ers against the attitude which opposes the concrete theory of order to
the theory of law. He says that such an abandonment of normativistic
thinking would only result in a kind of pluralism. Havestädt also very
clearly penetrates to the decisionistic element on which the concrete
theory of order is based when he says that ‘any occupational commu-
nity which forgets its task ceases to form a “community” and there-
with renounces the claim to be an order.’423 The ‘reality’ of an order
thus consists not in the fact of its ex-

--- Sayfa 228 ---
146
The Dual State
146
istence but in fulfilling a purpose which is imposed on it externally.
The concrete theory of order evaporates completely once it is reduced
to its normativistic and decisionistic elements.
It is not by accident that Schmitt has neglected the analysis of deci-
sionistic elements in his recent writings. National-Socialist literature
is replete with treatises on the ‘community’ as the prototype of the
National-Socialist theory of law. There are also a considerable num-
ber of studies dealing with problems of political law. There is, how-
ever, not a single systematic treatment of the relationship of political
law to what is called the law of the ‘community.’ Professor Huber of
Kiel is the only one who even touches on the problem. He raises the
question as to whether legal principles have as much validity in poli-
tics as they have in the other spheres of life. He writes: ‘If the follower
in the political order enjoyed no legal status comparable to the legal
status of the member of the community, we would be confronted by
a tremendous unbridgeable disjunction within the legal order. The
dualism between the political law of the political order and the unpo-
litical law of the other spheres of life would be worse than the old
dichotomy between public and private law.’424
It is worthy of emphasis, however, that Huber arbitrarily confines
his discussion of various types of principles in the political and non-
political sphere to the problem of the status of ‘followers.’ First of all it
should be pointed out that on June 30, 1934 Röhm and his associates
were not accorded the benefit of the legal guarantees appropriate to
their legal status as Adolf Hitler’s political followers. Further, a serious
academic treatise should have pointed out that the desired subjection
of the followers of a political party to legal norms would constitute an
extraordinary exception to the contrary principle that political ques-
tions stand outside the law.
In the course of this study, Professor Huber has shown himself to
be one of the most extreme proponents of the substitution of the Rule
of Law for a state whose political order is unconfined by binding legal
norms. Scarcely a single writer has contributed more than Huber to
the introduction into the German legal order of that ‘extraordinarily
important distinction’ and thus to the

--- Sayfa 229 ---
Communal Natural Law
147
 
147
construction of a ‘dualism which is worse than the old distinction
between private and public law.’ Now that it is no longer the politi-
cal foes, but the political friends and followers of the leader, who are
endangered, he shrinks from the conclusion which he and his like-
minded colleagues have advocated for years  — namely the elimi-
nation of law from the realm of politics! If Huber had not avoided
the question which he himself raised he would have had to face
the phenomenon of the Dual State with its distinction between the
Prerogative and the Normative State, two alternatives between which
there can be no reconciliation.
Hans Peter Ipsen believes it possible to evade the problems of the
Dual State by shifting them from the realm of substantive law to that of
jurisdictions. Ipsen’s treatment of the question of Politik und Justiz425
narrows the cardinal problem of recent German constitutional law to
mere formalism. The legal criterion of what Ipsen calls ‘acts of sover-
eignty’ is not to be found in their Justizlosigkeit, i.e. their independ-
ence from judicial control, but in their exemption from the rule of
material law. Hence, Ipsen describes not the phenomena themselves
but their symptoms. He says:  ‘Independence from judicial control
begins where the qualified bearer of sovereignty — of the state or of
the party — decides, in concreto. The normatively determined limit
of the judiciary against acts of sovereignty as fixed by legal norms,
i.e., the jurisdiction of the judiciary — is valid only in general, and is
suspended whenever a concrete qualification provides otherwise.’426
Although Ipsen believes that all acts of state, whether independent of
or subject to judicial control, are consequences of one and the same
legal system,427 he is unable to disregard the question whether or not
such acts are justifiable from the viewpoint of justice. In the preface to
his book, Ipsen makes the idea of justice even more relative than other
National-Socialist jurists. He states that there is not only a ‘German
justice’ in contrast to other ‘national justices’ but that in addition there
is a special justice for National-Socialists which is valid only for the
party followers of Adolf Hitler. The main conclusions of his treatise,
he says, ‘can be accepted only by those who are convinced by their
sense of justice that the given order is just and who are certain that

--- Sayfa 230 ---
148
The Dual State
148
the resolution of litigations independently of the judiciary and its
norms is just…. In the National-Socialist state all who approve of it
can be sure that their expectations will be fulfilled.’428 But what about
those who do not ‘approve of it’? Does Ipsen imply that the ethnic
outsiders, the foreigners or the Germans whose attitude towards the
regime is neutral or hostile, cannot expect justice? It is probably not
moral scruples which prevent Ipsen from declaring overtly: ‘Justice is
only for us, others are to be judged as we see fit.’ The inhibitions are
intellectual. If Ipsen would acknowledge that the National-Socialist
state not only treats friend and foe differently within the same system,
but that in reality there are two contradictory systems of domination
in contemporary Germany, his whole thesis would be untenable and
would serve only to mask the real problem. Thus Ipsen has no choice
but to evade the embarrassing question. This is all the more signifi-
cant since Ipsen reveals exceptional knowledge and intellectual skill
and his book is one of the very best that has appeared in National-
Socialist Germany. Ipsen actually ends his preface by writing: ‘He who
does not approve of the National-Socialist state cannot contribute
to the scientific analysis of German law.’429 That the essential point
is not the contribution to German legal theory but equality in the
German legal order has become clear to everyone who has had the
opportunity of clashing with the Prerogative State. Ipsen’s evasion of
this problem is ample evidence that even the most specialized mono-
graph cannot be written in a scholarly manner so long as there is no
freedom of scientific research. Furthermore, Ipsen’s contention that
only a National-Socialist can contribute to the analysis of National-
Socialist law must be rejected as groundless. If it were to be accepted,
a complete repudiation of all Conflict of Laws would follow in as
much as Conflict of Laws is based on the fact that a judge from one
legal system is accorded competence to interpret the norms of a dif-
ferent legal system.
This whole problem has been thoroughly treated by Max Weber
in his Der Sinn der Wertfreiheit der soziologischen und ökonomischen
Wissenschaften. Regarding a hypothetical case of an anarchist as a
legal scholar, despite his rejection of the norms

--- Sayfa 231 ---
Communal Natural Law
149
 
149
which he is analyzing, Weber said: ‘That Archimedian point beyond
the self-evident conventions and presuppositions (i.e., his rejection of
law) can give him the capacity to perceive problems in the accepted
legal theory which escape those to whom they are self-evident.
Radical doubt is the source of knowledge.’430 These remarks constitute
the methodological justification of the present book.
In the National-Socialist state, the primary function of science is
not the scientific analysis of legal and social phenomena. Hans Frank,
German Minister of Justice, unequivocally stated the task of science:
The substance as well as the objectives of scientific work must be
National-Socialism. Empty abstraction and the satisfaction in highly
theoretical results for their own sake must not be the content of intel-
lectual studies. Their objective must rather be the furtherance of our
people. Neither the book itself … nor the satisfaction “that my work has
led to the perfection of a new approach” should be the goal. Only the
conviction that the scientific work undertaken serves the promotion of
National-Socialism is acceptable as justification for science.431
This quotation illustrates the fact that in present-day Germany the
‘political’ is supreme not only in law and religion but also in science.
Frank, the author of the much quoted phrase: ‘Law is all that is useful
to the German people,’ clearly expresses in the above passage the idea
that National-Socialist Germany recognizes as truth only that which
promotes the current aims of the ruling party. Such a theory of ‘con-
ditional truth’ would mean the end of science.432

--- Sayfa 232 ---
150

--- Sayfa 233 ---
151
Part III
The Legal Reality of the Dual State
Les institutions périssent par leur victoires.
RENAN

--- Sayfa 234 ---
152

--- Sayfa 235 ---
153
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
I
THE LEGAL HISTORY
OF THE DUAL STATE
1.  THE DUAL STATE AND THE DUALISTIC STATE
In present-day Germany, many people find the arbitrary rule of the
Third Reich unbearable. These same people acknowledge, however,
that the idea of ‘community,’ as there understood, is something truly
great. Those who take up this ambivalent attitude towards National-
Socialism suffer from the two principal misconceptions:
	1.	 The present German ideology of Gemeinschaft (‘community’)
is nothing but a mask hiding the still existing capitalistic
structure of society.
	2.	 This ideological mask (the ‘community’) equally hides the
existence of the Prerogative State operating by arbitrary
measures.
The replacement of the Rechtsstaat (Legal State) by the Dual State
is but a symptom. The root of the evil lies at the exact point where
the uncritical opponents of National-Socialism discover grounds for
admiration, namely in the community ideology and in the militant
capitalism which this very notion of the Gemeinschaft is supposed to
hide. It is indeed for the maintenance of capitalism in Germany that
the authoritarian Dual State is necessary.
Any critical examination which attempts to reveal the social struc-
ture of the National-Socialist state must discover whether or not the
essential criteria of the Dual State have appeared in any earlier histori-
cal period. In contrast to similar ‘dualistic’ forms in previous epochs
the organization of the National-Socialist Dual

--- Sayfa 236 ---
154
The Dual State
154
State is monistic. In the early ‘dualistic state,’ two independent pow-
ers (prince and peers, king and people) had to collaborate in order
to produce a legal act of state; the Dual State, on the other hand, is
characterized by the unity of its leadership. ‘One Leader, one People,
one Reich!’ Despite its organizational unity, vast variety and contrast
in the contents of the degrees and statutes issued by the state may
well exist.
In the dualistic state every single act of legislation or fiscal policy
expressing the will of the state is the result of a particular agreement.
The constitutional history of the dualistic state is the history of per-
petual compromises. The Dual State, however, is primarily character-
ized by the prevalence of one general and all-inclusive compromise.
A Dual State may be said to exist whenever there is organizational
unification of leadership, regardless of whether there is any internal
differentiation in the substantive law. Viewed sociologically, the Dual
State is characterized by the fact that the ruling class assents to the
absolute integration of state power on the following conditions:
	1.	 that those actions which are relevant to its economic situation
be regulated in accordance with laws which they consider
satisfactory,
	2.	 that the subordinate classes, after having been deprived of the
protection of the law, be economically disarmed.
Ferdinand Toennies and Werner Sombart saw the principal charac-
teristic of the modern state in its dual nature (‘Zwieschlächtigkeit’).433
This is true not only of the dualistic but also of the monistic, absolut-
ist state in which the two-sideness is disguised by organizational and
juridical forms.
Only in England, a country which has never known the phenom-
enon of the Dual State, do these distinctions lose all significance.
Hintze, one of the leading historians of modern German government,
says that there is only one state in which one could say that the Rule
of Law has existed: England. The militaristic, absolutistic and bureau-
cratic governments on the continent faced different problems. Here
the question was not how to secure the supremacy of law but how
the two antagonistic legal systems, the old common law and the new
administrative law, could be bal-

--- Sayfa 237 ---
The Legal History
155
 
155
anced and harmonized. Hintze considers this antagonism between
these fundamentally different systems a decisive factor in the history
of German law. ‘I am inclined to assert,’ he remarks, ‘that at bottom it
remained in Germany the essential problem of the state.’434
We lack space for a discussion of the basic reasons for the diver-
gence between England and the Continent. Some importance must
be attributed to the effect of the armed forces (the German army and
the English navy) on the domestic politics of the respective countries.
According to Hintze, ‘the army is an organization which penetrates
and shapes the structure of the state. The navy is only a mailed fist
which extends into the outside world. It cannot be employed against
the “internal enemies.” ’435 This observation may serve as a starting
point in our attempt to discover the reasons why England never
has been a Dual State. Her insular condition and the overwhelming
importance of her navy for defensive purposes have prevented the
intermingling of the spheres of law and power. Michael Freund says
that ‘English political theory in the sixteenth and seventeenth centu-
ries was able to elaborate a distinction between the spheres of law and
power which was intended to apply not merely structurally but spa-
tially as well…. Absolute on the high seas and in the colonies, the seat
of the Empire was ruled by common law and the laws of the estates.’436
When, in the course of the struggle over the ship-money writs, the
threat of a Dual State really became acute in England, the central legal
issues were formulated in a way which is still relevant to our analysis
of contemporary Germany.
In the case Rex v. Richard Chambers, one of the judges, in char-
acterizing the threatening change, said that ‘there was a Rule of Law
and a Rule of Government, and that many things which might not be
done by the Rule of Law might be done by the Rule of Government.’437
In England, however, the danger was recognized and overcome in
time in a great struggle for the preservation of law. Three hundred
years ago the principal participants of this struggle were aware of the
fact that the partial elimination of law would necessarily bring about
the destruction

--- Sayfa 238 ---
156
The Dual State
156
of all values. D’Ewes, in his autobiography, had remarked that ‘if this
could be done lawfully, then by the same right … no man was, in
conclusion, worth anything.’438 This English aversion to the Dual State
was brought to America by those emigrants who were driven out of
England by Archbishop Laud.
When, some centuries later, during the Civil War, a Dual State
seemed imminent, the Supreme Court halted the development. In ex
parte Milligan, Justice Davis upheld the Rule of Law:
No doctrine, involving more pernicious consequences, was ever
invented by the wit of man than that any of its provisions can be sus-
pended during any of the great emergencies of government. Such a doc-
trine leads directly to anarchy or despotism, but the theory of necessity
… is false…. Martial Law cannot arise from a threatened invasion. The
necessity must be actual and present…. Martial Law can never exist
where the courts are open, and in the proper and unobstructed exercise
of their jurisdiction.439
When this opinion is compared with the permanent state of martial
law in Germany today, one sees the correctness of Morstein-Marx’s440
statement that the German and American constitutional situations
represent opposite extremes. The more astonishing is that Reinhard
Hoehn, who expounds National-Socialist political theory at the
University of Berlin, has asserted that between the National-Socialist
antipathy to legal norms and the Anglo-Saxon adherence to the Rule
of Law ‘there is not a real but only a verbal conflict.’441 According to
Dicey’s classical definition ‘the Rule of Law may be used as a formula
for expressing the fact that with us the law of the constitution, the
rules which in foreign countries naturally form part of a constitu-
tional code, are not the source but the consequence of the rights of
individuals, as defined and enforced by the Courts.’442 According to
National-Socialism, rights of the individual in the sphere of public
law are, at best, reflexes of the statutes of public law, whereas under
the Rule of Law public law is nothing but a bundle of individual
rights.443 Hoehn’s statements only further corroborate the contention
that one cannot take seriously the study of political science and juris-
prudence in National-Socialist Germany as intellectual disciplines.
Since February 1933 an unbridgeable gap

--- Sayfa 239 ---
The Legal History
157
 
157
between German and Anglo-Saxon thinking has become apparent.
At present the legal situation of the seventeenth century has been
reincarnated. The tendency defeated in England in the seventeenth
century gradually attained success in Germany. During that period a
fateful decision took place. After having broken the political backbone
of the estates, the monarchy supplemented the traditional law of the
estates by a system of absolute power directed towards political goals.
A historical sketch of the changes in Brandenburg and Prussia
after the establishment of absolutism by Friedrich Wilhelm, the Great
Elector (1640-88), may show the ‘dual nature’ of the state with refer-
ence to the Dual State. This sketch will be confined to the territories
dominated by the Hohenzollerns. Southern, western and north-
western Germany (the free peasant country), developed somewhat
differently.
2.  THE HISTORY OF THE DUAL STATE
IN PRUSSIA AND GERMANY
A.  The Establishment of the Absolute Monarchy
With the destruction of the feudal power of the nobility by the abso-
lute monarch during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
‘dual nature’ of the state did not by any means come to an end. At
first the renunciation of political power by the estates could only be
obtained in return for other social privileges. For example, the Diet
of Berlin, in its resolution of August 5, 1653, expressly stated that ‘the
institution of serfdom will be preserved wherever it has been intro-
duced or is customary.’444 In addition, the Diet’s decree precluded the
possibility that the authority of the Electorate Treasury would inter-
fere with the judicial jurisdiction of the courts of the nobility. In these
courts the legal burden of proof was fixed in a manner which clearly
reflects the realities of power: in all cases in which the Junkers laid
claim to services the peasant had to provide the evidence that these
services were not due. After the Law of 1681 concerning Farm-Hands
had approved of migration from one village or estate to another, the
new socio-political compromise was given full effect in an-

--- Sayfa 240 ---
158
The Dual State
158
other Law concerning Farm-Hands (Gesindeordnung) which was
decreed in 1722 and confirmed in 1769. Henceforth, local customs
were sanctioned even to the extent of permitting the sale of serfs.445
Only in exchange for such important concessions would the landed
nobility renounce its political power and allow the institution of the
miles perpetuus to be established.446 The result was an absolute but not
totalitarian monarchy, since the well-nigh complete surrender of the
peasants to the landed nobility placed restrictions on the power of the
state in its relations to the economic position of the serfs. Thus the
power of the Prussian state ended with the Landrat.447
But more significant than the concessions which were obtained by
the Junkers was the fact that, apart from traditional law which was
applied by the courts, there grew up an administrative order guided
by the monarchical raison d’état. This new administrative practice was
organizationally and functionally independent of the traditional sub-
stantive law and of the jurisdiction of the courts. This innovation was
based on the principle that ‘in political questions there is no right of
appeal.’ The absolute state was strong enough to suspend or abolish
both the jurisdiction of the estates and the rule of the status oriented
laws in any matter important to it. However, it was neither able nor
willing to eliminate the rule of this substantive status law from those
spheres which did not seem vital to its aims.448 Thus the estates were
able not only to preserve the integrity of the traditional law in all mat-
ters which were of importance to their economic privileges. They even
succeeded in laying the foundations for a system of autonomy in eco-
nomic matters. Not only did the Ständisches Kreditwerk (Agricultural
Financing Institute for Mortgaging the Manors of the Junkers) remain
intact (it was not terminated until 1820): in 1719 there was added a
Marsch-und Molestienkasse providing (significantly enough) for the
‘liturgical’ defraying of military expenses by the individual members
of the estates. Of even greater significance were the provincial loan
societies (Landschaften) supervised by the nobility. The structure of
these bodies is adequately portrayed in § 28 of the Reglements of the
Ritter-

--- Sayfa 241 ---
The Legal History
159
 
159
schaftliches Pfandbriefinstitut für die Kur-und Neumark. These units
were exclusively ruled by the nobility and royal officials were explic-
itly excluded from participation.449
If one examines the legal position of the estates in the German prin-
cipalities at the turn of the eighteenth century, one sees a reduction
of their traditional privileges to a merely intermediate position. The
power of the princes had been extended above them and the power of
the feudal lords beneath them. The protection of the court was fully
accorded only to the privileged landed nobility.450 On the basis of the
absolute power of the estates over the serfs, a state was erected which
eliminated the dualism of powers which had previously existed. But
its ‘dual nature’ persisted in a different form, in the sense that a legally
regulated order functioned alongside of a politically regulated order.
Max Weber characterized this situation when he spoke of the coexist-
ence of both the indestructible power of traditions and the arbitrary
power of the cabinet (as a substitute for the supremacy of rational
rules.)451
B.  Enlightened Despotism
During the second half of the eighteenth century the realm of law
was extended into spheres which it had hitherto left untouched. The
absolute monarch, Frederic the Great (1740-86), by way of introduc-
ing certain protective rules on behalf of the peasantry, placed certain
legal restrictions on the power of the landed nobility. Guided by the
Enlightenment, the strengthened monarchical absolutism tended to
impose the doctrines of Natural Law on those spheres which had been
regarded as the proper domain of the raison d’état, and which were,
therefore, outside the legal order. Otto Hintze views these activities of
the enlightened despotism as the beginning of the Rechtsstaat (Rule
of Law State), the characteristic system of the nineteenth century.452
Enlightened despotism, represented in its purest form by Joseph II
of Austria (1765-90) and, to a lesser degree, by Frederic the Great of
Prussia, involved an attempt to eliminate completely the two-sideness
of the state. Its aim was the absolute supremacy of

--- Sayfa 242 ---
160
The Dual State
160
the monarchy as the exclusive bearer of political authority and, con-
currently, its subjection to Natural Law. The program of the absolute
monarchy required not only the centralization of authority but a uni-
versally valid legal system as well.
Of course there was a considerable discrepancy between the pro-
gram and its realization. Professor Hugo Preuss said: ‘the Preussisches
Allgemeines Landrecht [Prussian Code of Public and Private Law 1792]
sounded as if the premises had been written by the philosopher of
Sanssouci, while the practically more important conclusions had
been written by the King of Prussia.’453
The Enlightenment did not alleviate the unnatural tyranny of the
estates over the serfs or the despotic raison d’état. Frederic the Great
thus described the tension between the ideology of Natural Law and
the reality of the positive legal order: ‘There are provinces in most of
the states of Europe in which the peasants fixed to the soil are the serfs
of their masters. This is the most miserable of all conditions and the
most revolting to mankind. Such abuses are justly detested and it may
be thought that it is only necessary to desire to abolish this barbarous
custom in order for it to disappear. But this is not true. This custom
rests on old contracts between the owners of the soil and the colonists.
In attempting to abolish this abominable institution, the whole rural
economy would be disrupted. It would be necessary to indemnify the
nobility in part for the losses which their revenues would suffer.’454
In the face of this deep-rooted skepticism as to ‘what the economic
system could bear,’ it is incomprehensible why all attempts at reducing
compulsory service from six to two or three days a week should have
failed,455 and why the Neumark Farm Labor Law remained in effect
despite the existence of the Allgemeinen Landrecht guaranteeing civil
freedom to the peasantry.456
The same failure can be observed in the state. The instructions
for the General Directory which the Natural Law theorist Coceji
(Secretary of Justice under Frederic the Great) wrote in 1747 contain
the rule, ‘all complaints and lawsuits must be handled by the ordi-
nary courts even when they involve the state or the treasury.’ But a
new regulation of June 6, 1749, contradicts this. It upheld the above-
mentioned general principle, but it specified

--- Sayfa 243 ---
The Legal History
161
 
161
numerous exceptions to the applicability of the law and it is of particu-
lar significance that all matters which concern the status oeconomicus
et politicus fall under the jurisdiction of the political agencies, i.e., the
Chambers and Boards (even if they are only slightly connected with
the status politicus).457 Thus, in spite of Natural Law, the absolute mon-
archy of Frederic the Great was ruled by the principle that all political
questions are beyond the competence of the judiciary. The sphere of
the status politicus remained isolated from the rule of positive law.
The two decades between the death of Frederic the Great and the
temporary downfall of his state in the Napoleonic era are marked by
the developments toward the Rechtsstaat. The Prussian Allgemeine
Landrecht contains the famous definition of police functions. Under
the influence of Natural Law, the tasks of the police are defined as
protection from danger and maintenance of order. It is true that the
Allgemeine Landrecht also contains a provision to the effect that the
royal prerogative is not subject to legal control. Even this provision
represents definite progress over the previous rules because the con-
cept of royal prerogative is undoubtedly much narrower than the
vague concept of status politicus. The decree of 1797 for the prov-
ince of New East Prussia provided for far-reaching judicial control of
administrative acts. A decree of the Cabinet in 1803 provided that the
courts and not administrative boards should have jurisdiction in all
cases of private and public law.458
After the catastrophe of 1806 this development towards the
Rechtsstaat, instead of continuing and being perfected by the reforms
of Stein and Hardenberg, actually suffered a serious reverse.
C.  The Absolute Bureaucracy
The French Revolution and its consequences brought to an end the
association of rational Natural Law and utilitarian raison d’état which
had developed in the course of the eighteenth century. With the abo-
lition of serfdom, the precarious basis on which enlightened despot-
ism rested disintegrated. Simultaneously, as a result of the French
Revolution, the politically dominant circles

--- Sayfa 244 ---
162
The Dual State
162
discarded Natural Law because its potential dangers had become only
too apparent. The partial restitution of bureaucratic for patrimonial
methods of administration, which had become necessary after the
liberation of the peasantry, was not confined to the rural areas. It per-
meated the whole state and transformed the despotism of the enlight-
ened monarchy into the absolute domination of the state bureaucracy.
It was this absolute bureaucracy which Hegel had in mind when he
wrote about the state in his Philosophy of Right.
Georg Friedrich Knapp’s pioneer investigations into the social con-
sequences of the liberation of the peasantry render it unnecessary for
us to dwell upon this particular point. The abolition of serfdom can
only be understood in the light of the Regulatory Decree of September
14, 1811 and the Declaration of May 29, 1816.459
At the same time, the legal protection which the absolute mon-
archy had introduced for the prevention of the eviction or ‘putting
down’ of peasants (Bauernlegen) failed. Consequently the economi-
cally weaker strata of the peasantry became agricultural day-laborers.
Otto Hintze460 calculated that of the 145,000 serfs in the old Prussian
provinces (excluding Silesia) only about 45,000 became independent
farmers after the abolition of serfdom. The rest were ‘put down’ by the
Junkers and became part of the agricultural proletariat.461
The abolition of hereditary serfdom was accompanied by a strength-
ening of the tendencies towards a police state. The modification of the
police-idea which had been effected under the influence of Natural
Law during the age of enlightened despotism can be fully appraised
only with reference to the social structure of the period. The over-
whelming majority of the population had not even been touched by
the new Natural Law oriented legislation since they were under the
patrimonial jurisdiction of the Junkers and not of the agencies of the
state. For the upper classes, enlightened despotism meant a lessening
of the pressure of the police administration since the formerly auton-
omous estates were now socially and economically assimilated into
the absolute monarchy. The more the large estates in eastern Germany
were trans-

--- Sayfa 245 ---
The Legal History
163
 
163
formed into agricultural capitalistic enterprises the better they were
adapted to the rigorously organized Prussian state.462
This economic development had highly significant political reper-
cussions. The younger sons of the Prussian Junkers were forced to gain
their livelihood as officers in the Prussian army. Mercantilist policy
was supported by the large landed estate system, and is itself the effect
of the operation of the capitalistic system on the manor.463
The abolition of hereditary serfdom by the decree of October 9,
1807 presented new problems to the Prussian administration. The
administrative domain of the Prussian state, which hitherto had not
extended over the Landrat, now included the lowest strata of the pop-
ulation. The simultaneous introduction of freedom of movement, the
termination of the compulsory guild system and other restrictions on
industry liberated the urban population from the bonds which before
had facilitated the state’s control over the industrial and commercial
population. Even before the decree of October 9, 1807 (which stipu-
lated that after St. Martin’s Day 1810 there should be only free per-
sons in Prussia) had come into force, the police law had undergone a
decisive change. By § 3 of the decree of December 26, 1808, the police
legislation of the Allgemeine Landrecht, which had borne the imprint
of Natural Law, was repealed. ‘The negative as well as positive care
for the welfare of our faithful subjects’ was turned over to the police
administration of the provincial governments. The elaboration of the
police law begun by the enlightened despotism was cut short by the
liberation of the peasantry and replaced by a grant of unrestrained
police powers to the absolutist bureaucracy. Insofar as the exercise
of the police power remained with the Junkers, the newly introduced
police law compensated them for the power over the serfs which they
had lost.
The new police law greatly diminished judicial control over police
activities. Friese, the spiritual father of the decree of December 26,
1808, clearly recognized this change. If the police exercised not only
negative and protective functions  – as the Allgemeine Landrecht
allowed – but also ‘positive’ ones (involving unlimited jurisdiction),
and if it were admitted that ‘a certain

--- Sayfa 246 ---
164
The Dual State
164
degree of legislative power was inherent in police administration,’
then the police were also entitled ‘to intervene in lawful activities and
to decree actions for which they had no specific legal jurisdiction.’464
Correspondingly, § 38 of the decree reduced control over the police to
a minimum. This meant that, in practice, the police (to the extent that
the Allgemeine Landrecht did not otherwise specify explicitly) were
able to erect an independent system of authority alongside the legal
order of the state.
Thus, the events of 1653 were repeated under more complex con-
ditions in the years 1808-1816. Just as in 1653, following the Thirty
Years’ War, a basis for the absolutism of the territorial princes was cre-
ated after the politically dispossessed estates had been compensated
by an extension of their social power, so the defeat in the Napoleonic
wars provided the ground for a new compromise. ‘The absolute mon-
arch was able to strengthen himself vis-à-vis the nobility in return
for a reinforcement of hereditary serfdom. The absolute bureaucracy
sought to strengthen itself vis-à-vis the nobility by turning over to it
peasantry in a modernized way: by the abolition of serfdom.’465
Does German history provide a corroboration of the hypothesis
that military defeat promotes political absolutism? The military reor-
ganization which followed the Treaty of Westphalia brought with it
the miles perpetuus, while the Peace of Tilsit (1807) was followed by
the introduction of universal military service. Both of these reforms
which deeply affected the structure of the state were closely connected
at least with the strengthening if not with the establishment of the
absolute state. This process could be consummated only by a com-
promise with the dominant classes. The power position of the upper
classes in Germany seems to have arisen partially from the consolida-
tion of the power of the state in the absolutistic period, for this could
only be realized with the collaboration of the dominant classes and at
the cost of the lower classes.
However that may be, the political structure of the Prussian state
in the period of post-Napoleonic reaction differs essentially from
the monarchical absolutism of the period of enlightened despotism,
despite the retention of a monistic form of state organ-

--- Sayfa 247 ---
The Legal History
165
 
165
ization. The liberation of the peasantry meant that the landed nobility
exchanged social privileges for economic power. The losses and gains
of this change made it possible for the Junkers, adapting themselves to
the pattern of economic development, to transform their patrimonial
estates into capitalistic enterprises oriented towards export. This new
type of enterprise was easily integrated into bourgeois legal order,
which was being modernized by concurrent reforms of the legal
regulation of industry and commerce. The interests of the dominant
landed aristocracy were, to a large extent, in harmony with the eco-
nomic aims of the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, which had
been freed from the shackles of mercantilism. For ‘as long as indus-
trial backwardness forces large-scale agriculturalists to export, the
landed proprietor will be well disposed towards industry and trade.’466
The free trade tendencies of German tariff policy were the expression
of this attitude, which made possible the strengthening of the bour-
geoisie, whose political weakening was the chief goal of the absolut-
istic bureaucracy. However, the subsequent development of industry
reinforced the influence of the bourgeoisie and threatened the politi-
cal power of the landed Junkers.
The domestic policy of the governing aristocratic bureaucracy467
had as its mainspring the persecution of popular agitators and fore-
runners of national unity by the police. In other words, its domestic
policy was essentially oriented towards defending itself against the
revolutionary democratic movements (in this period identical with
the national movements) which were surging over Europe subse-
quent to the formation of an industrial proletariat. At the same time
the governing aristocratic bureaucracy, in its role as executive organ
of the agrarian-capitalist Junker aristocracy, was moving towards a
liberal free-trade policy and a rational system of private law. During
the Restoration the dual nature of the monarchy manifested itself in
the conflict between the judiciary and the administration.
The Restoration saw a revival of the study of law. Its most distin-
guished theorist, Savigny, denied the possibility of changing the his-
torically developed law by means of legislation. Characteristically, his
definition of law referred only to private law.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
166
The Dual State
166
The same Savigny, as Minister of Justice, asserted that the state could
declare its police organs independent of judicial control. This rejec-
tion of the Natural Law doctrine of the Enlightenment implied (in the
sphere of private law) that law as it had historically developed, was
inviolable, whereas in the sphere of state administration the rejection
of Natural Law tended to be associated with the scrapping of what-
ever had been public law in favor of the legally unrestricted power
of the police. Illustrative of this trend are the repeated attempts to
obstruct the judicial control of punishments imposed by the police.
Conditions reverted to what they had been in 1749. The rescript of
April 17, 1812 assigned jurisdiction over the lesser criminal cases con-
cerning domestic servants exclusively to the police, and specifically
excluded the right of appeal. It is interesting to note that punishments
of lower class persons by the police included corporal punishments
and that in the rural areas the Junker nobility in most cases remained
in possession of the patrimonial police authority. Thus, along with
the law administered by the courts, there existed another body of law
created and applied exclusively by the police. In the succeeding years,
the police-state increasingly blocked the legal control of police meas-
ures, even in those cases in which the unrestricted power of the police
could have been limited by legalistic interpretation of the decree of
December 26, 1808.
The end of this evolution was foreshadowed by the first signs of
the revolution of 1848. § 6 of the ‘Law concerning Admissibility of
Legal Appeal from Orders of the Police’ of May 11, 1842 provided
that a review of police cases by the courts is admissible only if the
police order has been declared by a higher administrative body to be
in conflict with law. The year 1847 witnessed the introduction of the
Konflikt (see p. 29) which National-Socialist Germany has adopted
from the Restoration — the darkest period of reaction in modern
Prussian history.
If one takes into account that the police had also ‘positive tasks,’
that the control of the police by administrative courts did not exist
and judicial control no longer existed, it can easily be seen why the
concept of the Dual State emerged at that time. It was perceived that
administrative matters were settled, not in

--- Sayfa 249 ---
The Legal History
167
 
167
accordance with law, but according to considerations of politi-
cal expediency and the conceptions of raison d’état.468 When Franz
Schnabel wrote that ‘although the period of the reforms of Stein and
Hardenberg sought to reduce the activities of the state and make the
citizen self-reliant, it succeeded only in maintaining and renewing
the old Police State,’469 he approximated but did not completely grasp
the significance of the period.
The conflict between the liberal individualistic economic legal
order on the one hand, and the authoritarian absolute police state on
the other, became all the more acute as the economic developments
strengthened the bourgeoisie, since the chief aim of the police state of
the Restoration was to prevent the political ascent of that very class.
The Revolution of 1848 was an attempt to resolve this conflict. It was
fought in the name of the Rule of Law under which the courts would
reign supreme. The Frankfurter Constitution provided that all viola-
tions of law be dealt with by ordinary courts. The entire activity of
the state was to be examined by the same types of judicial bodies and
by the same legal methods which had been developed in the field of
private law.
Would this attempt to permeate the entire legal system with
the ideals of legal positivism be more successful than the previous
attempt to permeate it with Natural Law? The Rule of Law for which
the Revolution of 1848 strove represented another attempt to real-
ize the ideal of the universality of law. But the effort was fruitless
against the vitality of the feudal-bureaucratic groups which thought
in political rather than in legal terms.
D.  The Rechtsstaat
The vigour of these political forces was amply demonstrated by
the resistance they offered to the liberal democratic forces after the
delay of the feudal forces and the defeat of absolutism. It is especially
revealing that, during the conflict between Bismarck and the liberal
opposition in the ‘sixties, the groups demanding the rule of law and
parliamentary system of government never succeeded in dominating
the entire structure of the state. By retaining unlimited control of the
military, the crown pre-

--- Sayfa 250 ---
168
The Dual State
168
served the nucleus of political power. Thus, in constitutional monar-
chy, the control of military and foreign affairs and the power to declare
martial law remained ‘Prerogatives of the Crown’ independent of and
separate from parliamentary constitutionalism and the Rule of Law.
While to the free trade liberals of the ‘sixties the political preroga-
tives of the Crown appeared as vestiges of a bygone age, the protec-
tionist National Liberals of the Wilhelmian era strove to strengthen
the political and military power of the monarch.
At the beginning of the first world war Emil Lederer470 already
clearly saw that, within the dualistic Bismarckian state, the monarchi-
cal power was greater than that of the parliamentary Rule of Law. In
discussing the martial law of the first years of the war, Lederer stated
the proposition that the modern state has a dual nature. Lederer
understood that the armed forces which were then in charge of the
administration of martial law were not affected by the constitution
and that for the modern power state (Machtstaat), the constitution
does not exist. ‘The last trace of Natural Law was erased.’471 The mili-
tary forces demonstrated their absolute independence of the civil
government and emerged victorious whenever there was a con-
flict between the army command and the civil government. To our
knowledge, Lederer’s article was the first to depict the co-existence
of the Normative State and the Prerogative State. Lederer’s statement
of 1915 to the effect that these conflicts were really clashes between
two types of state was borne out in 1917, when the majority of the
Reichstag crossed swords with the Vaterlandspartei. The foes of par-
liamentarism and democracy were represented both by monarchical
aristocratic groups and by imperialistic sections of the upper bour-
geoisie (Grand-Admiral Tirpitz was their most important leader.)
Both groups wanted to bring the dual nature of the state to an end.
Indeed, it seemed to have been definitely overcome when the Reich
became a parliamentary republic after the revolution of November
1918. The independence of the military prerogative was abolished.
The previous victory of the conservative forces seemed to have been
reversed.
The Weimar Republic aimed at organizing and regulating the

--- Sayfa 251 ---
The Legal History
169
 
169
totality of political activity within a framework of norms. Yet, one of
the fatal illusions of the authors of the Weimar Constitution was the
belief that the elimination of monarchical power meant the reduc-
tion to impotence of those groups which by propagating the idea of
the Machtstaat (power state) sought only the aggrandizement of their
own power. The case of the Vaterlandspartei should have furnished an
adequate demonstration to the representatives of German democracy
that the specifically political functions of the state were no longer an
attribute of the Crown and that the Crown had become a façade hid-
ing the real intentions of these power-oriented groups. The revolution
of 1918 had permanently terminated the formal dual nature of the
structure of the state, but the political influence of those imperialist,
plutocratic, and protectionist circles which had been the proponents
of Machtpolitik since Bismarck’s time was not terminated.
The history of the Weimar Republic should serve as evidence that
the constitutionally recognized political power of the monarchy was
less dangerous to the existence of the Rule of Law than the legal nega-
tion of any specific political power whatsoever, as pronounced in the
Weimar Constitution. The real political power, in its monarchical
disguise, was legitimized by traditions which provided the justifica-
tion of the monarchy itself. The traditional legitimation of the exer-
cise of power limits not only the source of power but also its scope.
When these traditionally legitimized bearers of power had been
swept from the stage, groups which were primarily oriented towards
power had to choose between the following alternatives: Either (a) to
establish praeter legem a political power outside the legal order and
to revise the constitution with the aim of establishing the authoritar-
ian Machtstaat, or (b) to substitute contra legem a dictatorial state for
the rational constitution of the Rechtsstaat. This dictatorship would
have to be detached from the traditionalist limits of the monarchy
and from the rational limits of the republic.
The attempt to make an authoritarian power-oriented revision of
the Weimar Constitution was actually undertaken during Brüning’s
government. With the juxtaposition of the extraordin-

--- Sayfa 252 ---
170
The Dual State
170
ary presidential powers (permitted under Art. 48 of the Constitution)
and the maintenance of a considerable part of the Rule of Law, there
reappeared for a time the familiar picture of the dualistic state but
the failure of the Brüning experiment paved the way for the complete
annulment of the decision of 1918.
It was no accident that the National-Socialist Party was formed
originally from a section of the Vaterlandspartei472 nor is it less sig-
nificant that the Third Reich endeavors to link itself directly to the
Bismarckian era while trying to expunge the intervening fourteen
years (1919-33) from German history. In a deeper historical sense, the
National-Socialist Party is the continuation of the Vaterlandspartei.
The latter had been founded by the plutocratic proponents of the
power state in order to supplement the military and the economic
with political mobilization. The National-Socialist Party, as the agent
of political mobilization, has undertaken an economic mobilization
(Four Year Plan) which in its turn has served as the indispensable
basis of military mobilization.
Hitler’s prototypes in German history are Friedrich Wilhelm,
the Great Elector, and Hardenberg. Adolf Hitler not only restored
the achievement of the Great Elector (miles perpetuus) and that of
Hardenberg (military conscription); Adolf Hitler’s achievement is
total mobilization. Like the Great Elector and Hardenberg, he is the
creator of a new form of absolutism. Monarchical and bureaucratic
absolutism are followed by dictatorial absolutism.
We have indicated the groups which made the compromises which
resulted in monarchical and bureaucratic absolutism — in the miles
perpetuus and in the revival of universal military service. It is now our
task to determine which social groups are entered into the formation
of the present-day German Dual State.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
171
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
II
THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND
OF THE DUAL STATE
Though the author is not an economist it is essential to discuss
certain economic aspects of the present German system in order to
understand some fundamental problems. Only against an economic
background can we understand why it is that the state in Germany is
neither completely ‘prerogative’ nor completely ‘normative’ but rather
‘dual.’ We must know the kind and the degree of historical ‘necessity’
involved in the emergence of the Dual State in Germany. For it is in
the Dual State that we shall find the starting point towards a solution
of the much-debated problem: Is the German economic system capi-
talistic or non-capitalistic?
Although the German economic system has undergone many
modifications it remains predominantly capitalistic. Until now at
least the modifications which have been mainly towards étatisme and
bureaucracy have been of less significance than the persistent capi-
talistic traits; but they have been sufficiently numerous to justify our
considering the present German system as a new type or phase of cap-
italism. And this new type is so closely interwoven with the Dual State
that neither would be possible in its present form without the other.
When the National-Socialists came into power the German econ-
omy, as far as its institutional structure was concerned, could be char-
acterized as organized private capitalism with many monopolistic
features and much state intervention. Liberal, competitive capitalism
was no longer the order of the day; what pre-

--- Sayfa 254 ---
172
The Dual State
172
vailed was rather ‘organized’ quasi-monopolistic capitalism with huge
concerns and many cartels which were, on the whole, subject to only
slight governmental supervision. This system was supported by pro-
tective tariffs and government subsidies. Public ownership and partial
control was of some significance in certain branches of industry but,
in general, this control was restricted to ‘overhead industries’ (such as
transportation and power) and to industries where state participation
in ownership or control supported rather than modified the capitalis-
tic system. During the great depression, the power of the government
in the economic sphere sharply increased. In the field of banking
and in the steel industry, bankruptcies were avoided by governmen-
tal intervention. The Reich extended its regulatory power to almost
all aspects of economic activity, including wage-levels. As a leading
trade-unionist put it, the democratic state and the groups which sup-
ported it intended to act as ‘doctors at the sick-bed of capitalism.’473
In many aspects, the economic policy of the Dual State seems a
mere continuation, a somewhat more developed phase, of the ‘organ-
ized capitalism’ of the Weimar period. This similarity becomes par-
ticularly clear if both phases are contrasted with ‘liberal’ capitalism
on the one side and any consistent type of socialism on the other.
However, the maintenance of these particular institutional features
was accompanied by a modification of others. These modifications
usually occurred along lines which had been visible for a long time.
But they were sufficiently sharp to justify the characterization of
National-Socialist economy as a distinct phase. The following pages
will attempt to apply this twofold perspective to the institutional
aspects of property control and the organization of group interests.
As far as the institution of private property in general and of pri-
vate ownership in the means of production is concerned, we should
note first that it was upheld by National-Socialists both in principle
and in fact. Only Jewish property was attacked. One may note that
the German Reich increased the sphere of private ownership as com-
pared with 1932 by returning its controlling shares in the steel indus-
try and in some of the biggest banks to

--- Sayfa 255 ---
The Economic Background
173
 
173
private corporations and owners. The principle of private ownership
was upheld even for businesses towards which the National-Socialist
program had shown some degree of antipathy, e.g., department stores
and banks. This preservation of the traditional realm of private prop-
erty is, however, accompanied by important changes in specific prop-
erty rights. The right to dispose of private property and the income
derived from private property is being modified in many directions,
e.g., by investment control, by control of foreign trade and especially
capital export, by stock exchange control, by limitations on the distri-
bution of dividends, by decommercialization of a considerable area of
landed property, by control of prices and consumption, and last but
not least, by taxation. As far as the private property in the means of
production is concerned, there is general agreement that the small-
and middle-capitalist entrepreneurs have suffered more than the
bigger ones. With the intensification of the re-armament campaign
even the larger entrepreneurs and capitalists increased their com-
plaints concerning the restrictions imposed upon private property.
All known facts indicate, however, that even now they enjoy at least a
comparative advantage.
Even though private property rights have been somewhat qualified,
they still exist and, with them, the differentiation of German society
into propertied and propertyless groups. It is also a significant fact
that income from private property is now, on the whole, much safer
than it was before. These individual risks are, so to speak, pooled into
the general political risk necessarily involved in re-armament and war.
As to the importance of public control, it is obvious from the fore-
going summary of rather well-known facts that government control,
already considerable in the Weimar period, has been increased and
is still increasing. However, the intensity and thoroughness of the
present system of control suggest the presence of additional causes,
such as the requirements of a deliberate control of business cycles.
The present regime is determined to use all its power to prevent the
recurrence of a new depression. For this determination, it has many
reasons, partly economic and partly political and military. Successful
control or, rather, prevention of

--- Sayfa 256 ---
174
The Dual State
174
depressions requires an especially high degree of government inter-
vention. The justification of an increase in political control is also
interwoven with military preparedness. In addition to these factors,
we may mention another: in any developed bureaucracy, an inher-
ent tendency exists to widen the sphere of governmental control.
Historically this propensity has been checked by the constitution, leg-
islation, parliamentary control and social and political influence of
the objects of bureaucratic control. Of course, some specific controls
will be required only for a temporary reason and will later be abol-
ished. Furthermore, any intelligent bureaucracy will try to decrease
possible resistance by emphasizing the merely temporary character of
any imposed hardship even though it has no idea when the emergency
will end and even if it knows that the new control, by its very exist-
ence and through the vested interests it creates, will tend to become
permanent. There are also certain sectors in the bureaucracy which
work in closer co-operation with important private interests. These
will attempt to encourage and console private interests by pointing
to future opportunities for private initiative. But, very probably, all
this does not affect the general trend which, throughout the fluctua-
tions in the degree of government control, points toward a permanent
increase in the importance of public control in economic matters as
well as in others.
As to the methods of central control, only some general remarks are
necessary. They vary from direct command to more indirect forms of
control. It is important to consider these variations in the degree of
control because every step away from direct command implies the
preservation of some sphere of private initiative. The most typical
case seems to be a combination of a general regulation by means of
law and more concrete decisions by an authority endowed with dis-
cretionary, but not arbitrary, power. Where necessary, state subsidies
are given.
The general rule that the individual enterprises (if not all the indi-
vidual investors) should earn a fair profit, suggests that some sphere
of bargaining power and corresponding initiative has been left to the
entrepreneur. There are two major developments in the sphere of pri-
vate initiative and control. The first is the further

--- Sayfa 257 ---
The Economic Background
175
 
175
growth of monopolistic associations under National-Socialism. Many
cartels have been created which strengthen the bigger and more influ-
ential members of the cartel. The second development is the further
growth of individual ‘concerns and trusts’ despite the ideological hos-
tility of National-Socialism towards trusts. This development is partly
the effect of anti-Semitism, partly the consequence of the increase in
profits which were often used to buy up shares of other corporations,
and partly due to the fact that the growth of the concern became
imperative because of the difficulties of obtaining raw materials.
Finally one should inquire into the role of interest groups. The
fundamental fact is, of course, that all labor organizations have been
destroyed. Unlike Italy, Germany does not have even state syndi-
cates for workers’ organizations, towards which the introduction of
compulsory arbitration and the corresponding tendency of the trade
unions to become state organs during the Weimar period seemed to
form a preliminary step. On the other hand, the interest organizations
of other groups have not been destroyed. In industry and commerce
not only the various ‘estates’ but also the many advisory committees
and cartel organizations are used to promote the interests of particu-
lar groups.
After this description of the ‘structural’ aspects of the National-
Socialist economic system, let us turn to a brief summary of the eco-
nomic policies which the National-Socialist state pursues.
The chief objectives of National-Socialist economic policy may be
summarized under three headings:
	1.	 The establishing of the politico-economic power of the
National-Socialist state.
	2.	 The extension of employment and production.
	3.	 The salvation and promotion of two main sectors of German
economy: the ‘heavy’ industries and the grain-growers of the
large East-German agricultural estates. Both of those were
threatened with ruin by the great depression and – in spite
of all their political influence  – they were thought to be in
political danger during the last phase of the Weimar Republic.
For an understanding of National-Socialist economic policy, it seems
indispensable first to deal with each problem separately,

--- Sayfa 258 ---
176
The Dual State
176
although it will be found later that all three converge on and support
each other.
1. Power as the aim of economic policy means the subjugation
of all ‘economic’ policies to considerations of political necessity or
expediency. In the present world situation, striving for an increase
in power is identical with striving for economic nationalism and
imperialism. This force always works both externally and internally.
Characteristically, force applied internally was considered and justi-
fied as a means of increasing the strength of the group in its external
relations. The main task became that of organizing the economic sys-
tem as an instrument for the increase and preservation of the power
of the state and of the groups which aspired to greater power in which
this power has been invested and centralized. Correspondingly the
direction of economic affairs had to aim chiefly at increasing the
power of the state for protective and expansionist purposes even
when such a policy involved considerable hardship for many produc-
ers and consumer groups.
The pursuit of the second and third policies listed above, also served
the first and most important objective. The solution of the problem of
unemployment and of the special slump in the heavy industry and
in eastern agriculture helped greatly to strengthen the power of the
regime in Germany. The expansion of production — particularly of
foodstuffs and steel — strengthened the power of the regime exter-
nally. This aspect of the German economic system appeared increas-
ingly in the foreground and, in its later phases, overshadowed all
other considerations. Even in periods of ‘peace,’ the German economy
was a war economy.
This supreme aim of making the German state as powerful as possi-
ble in a short time imposed several conditions upon the concrete poli-
cies to be pursued and upon the methods to be applied. In the light of
the guiding objective, every waste of possibly employable resources is
a failure from the point of view of providing the necessary war equip-
ment. Resources must be exploited to an abnormally high degree —
even if political pressure is necessary.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
The Economic Background
177
 
177
For an effective re-armament program not only a rapid increase in
production, but also a permanently high level of production, was nec-
essary. If for no other reasons than simply for military ‘preparedness’
any cyclical reaction or depression had to be prevented. The danger of
a reaction is increased, however, by the very intensity of the ‘recovery’
brought about by public spending. Therefore a high degree of direct
and indirect control is required. Such a degree of control has been
more easily accepted in the German economic system than in most
other countries since German capitalism was, from its inception,
more closely connected with the state than most other capitalisms.
In addition to the two points discussed thus far — i.e., full and
stable use of all resources — there is a third implication of extreme
importance:  economic preparation for expansionist power politics
requires a definite direction of the economic process in reference to
what should be produced and consumed. Two consequences may be
distinguished, namely: (a) foreign trade, and (b) internal aspects.
a. Since Bismarck’s famous change of policy in 1878, German capi-
talism has been more tied up with protectionism than the capitalism
of any other country. Even in the Weimar period (since 1925) pro-
tectionist interests were supreme. Even in the time of Locarno and
Geneva the most important argument behind the revival of German
economic nationalism was the ‘war’ argument coupled with the fear
that any serious attack upon the national branches of German economy
(western heavy industries and eastern big estates) would completely
disturb the social, political and economic structure of Germany. In
the great depression, increased protectionism and other methods of
strangling world trade were practiced in Germany in the same fash-
ion as in every other country. With the arrival of Hitler, nationalistic
protectionism or ‘autarchy’ was bound to increase sharply. The new
regime favored those economic groups which were most important
from a ‘national’ point of view: the steel and iron industry and the
grain producing sector of German agriculture.
In the field of foreign economic policy the re-armament program
demanded a sharp increase in the traditional protectionist

--- Sayfa 260 ---
178
The Dual State
178
policies and a combination of two somewhat antagonistic tenden-
cies: as much autarchy as possible and, at the same time, the importa-
tion of raw materials vital for re-armament. This situation (rendered
even more difficult by the lack of gold and foreign exchange) com-
pelled the National-Socialist government to use and expand to an
unheard degree all means of controlling imports which had been
introduced by the Bruning government in 1931. This type of control
proved to be perhaps the most outstanding encroachment upon the
freedom of the enterprises. This control of imports was accompa-
nied by many economic and political attempts to expand and redi-
rect exports in order that new markets might be opened in countries
which were considered especially important from the point of view of
military and economic expansion.
b. In the field of internal economic policy, two main facts stand out:
1.  The increase of investment was much greater than the total
increase in production of consumers’ goods.
2.  In the sphere of consumption, the share of the state rose
strongly as compared with the share allotted to private
consumers for private purposes.
Taking 1928 = 100, the index of total industrial production rose
from 54 in 1932 to 132,7 in the first quarter of 1939. The index for the
production of all consumers’ goods rose from 74 in 1932 to 118,1 in
1938; the index for the production of investment goods from 35,4 in
1932 to 140,5 in the first quarter of 1939. The production of consum-
ers’ goods rose by about 60 per cent, the production of investment
goods by about 260 per cent.474 The fact that in a recovery period
investments should expand at a higher rate than consumption is in
itself nothing unusual. However, there are four closely interrelated
features of the German expansion which distinguish it from other
expansions.
First, total production expanded more than one could have
expected under normal conditions. This high degree of total expan-
sion is all the more remarkable in view of the overcapacities in many
industries which had developed during the rationalization period
before 1929. The cause of this high degree of expansion

--- Sayfa 261 ---
The Economic Background
179
 
179
after 1932 lies, of course, in the high rate of public investment financed
by credit expansion.
A second particular feature of the Hitler prosperity was the degree
to which investment, as compared with consumption, was expanded.
This was certainly made possible by the fact that at the beginning of
the process there existed huge unused productive capacities in these
investment industries. But those capacities could be used only if some
new fields of investment were opened up or created. This was done
precisely by the re-armament program with its cumulatively increas-
ing pace. However, ordinarily the expansion of the investment good’s
industries is checked by the expansion of the wage-earning with its
consequent expenditure on consumers’ goods and increase in interest
rates. This reaction is highly undesirable from the point of view of any
policy which is interested in the prevention of slump or even of a slow-
ing down in the rate of expansion. The Hitler regime had to expect
the emergence of such a situation when it embarked upon a policy of
rapid expansion for the purpose of re-armament. Therefore especially
strong checks upon the expansion of consumption had to be intro-
duced. This became the major problem of German economic policy
and almost all repressive and directive control measures in Germany
served primarily this one purpose: to restrict consumption as far as
possible and to put as many productive resources as possible in the
service of war preparations. This was one of the major functions of the
control of imports, of investments, of prices, of capital markets and
interest rates, and finally of the most important means of all: the keep-
ing down of the wage rates. On the whole, the policy of keeping down
consumption was highly successful, although the intentions of the
government could not be realized completely. There were important
increases in prices, if only because of deteriorations in quality. It was
imperative for the whole policy of investment expansion to prevent
any considerable increase of nominal wage rates beyond their depres-
sion level. This wage policy implied a tremendous pressure upon the
working class. Hitler would not have been able to carry through his
policy with a working class whose economic organizations were still
functioning. The fact that Hitler did not

--- Sayfa 262 ---
180
The Dual State
180
copy Mussolini at this particular point cannot be explained by the
higher stage of development of the German labor organization in
general; it must be explained by an examination of the implications of
the whole re-armament and investment policy with respect to wage
conditions.
A third special feature of the ‘Hitler recovery’ is the persistence of,
and increase in, the proportion of public investment to total invest-
ment. In early Hitler Germany, the main function of public investment
was thought to consist in ‘pump-priming,’ that is: in the stimulation of
private investment (through an increase in total national income) until
private investment could once more stand on its own feet. In present-
day Germany, however, the role of public investment has proved to be
quite different. When German economy approached the point of full
employment, public and private investment clearly became rivals. But
the Hitler government has maintained public investment at its very
high level through its re-armament policy. As a consequence, restric-
tion of private investment was added to the restriction of private con-
sumption. Practically, only such private investments were permitted
which directly or indirectly served the re-armament program.
There is one further feature of the German rearmament ‘boom’
closely related to the price and wage policies discussed above: though
a large part of the public investments were financed out of additional
credit there have been no significant indications of real inflation
in Germany even during the stage of full employment. This can be
explained chiefly by the deliberate policy of keeping prices down and
the policy of maintaining nominal wage rates. In addition, the taxing
of a part of the profits has time and again prevented the appearance of
additional purchasing power on less controlled markets which would
normally tend to push prices upward. The short time in which the
Hitler regime has attempted to fulfil the tasks of re-armament was
obviously qualified by one important limitation:  it had to be per-
formed without inflation. The German people, however, were forced
to pay rather heavily for this protection against inflation: they had to
submit to a whole set of controls which advanced far into the

--- Sayfa 263 ---
The Economic Background
181
 
181
realm of production, consumption and other traditional forms of
freedom like the freedom of movement and the freedom of occupa-
tional choice.
As compared to the situation at the beginning of the Hitler regime,
most of those who had been employed at that time were faced with
complete economic loss. Those who had been out of work gained in
the absolute sense, but lost relatively in comparison with what would
have been their lot under other regimes. This relative loss was subjec-
tively balanced or overcompensated by the feeling of greater ‘security.’
Objectively speaking, the relative loss was aggravated by the increas-
ing probability that this kind of re-armament policy would lead
to war.
Most of these considerations hold true also for the propertied
classes. The qualifications on property rights and on the freedom
of enterprise were matched by a considerable increase in property
incomes and in profits. The simple fact that their property rights and
their social position had been saved at all was regarded as a positive
value which was not to be outweighed by the sacrifices which they
had to make, particularly in the field of politics.
This consideration leads to a last implication of the Hitler policy
of rearmament. If the supreme task consists in using all available
resources for the sake of war preparation in a minimum time, then
major experiments in social reforms are out of the question. Such
reforms, in the direction of socialism for example, require time and
energy and would, for a rather long period, slow down total output.
The decision to protect the institution of private property as the basis
of the existing social order was not only politically necessary in view
of the preferences of the supporters of the party, but was also an una-
voidable consequence of the rearmament policy.
2. We must now consider the other possible major objective of
National-Socialist economic policy:  re-employment of the unem-
ployed at all costs and the salvation of those politically and economi-
cally powerful but (before 1932) seriously threatened sectors of the
German economy mentioned above, i.e. western heavy industry and
eastern grain-producing estates.
First, to take the objective of re-employment, one may argue

--- Sayfa 264 ---
182
The Dual State
182
that in 1933 at least this was the most important, the almost only
visible and the only professed aim of National-Socialist policy. This
objective was emphasized in the beginning, because the other two
objectives were either not useful for propaganda or not as yet ripe
for realization. In order to stimulate re-employment, the Hitler gov-
ernment used many devices already utilized by former governments
and put the pressure of the party machine behind this campaign. The
first period was one of mere makeshift. For a time this system was
reasonably successful, but when it reached its limit, the Hitler regime
was ready to give the general program of re-employment a specific
object: re-armament. From that time on, the aim of re-employment
becomes practically identical with the objective of war preparation.
Under the conditions prevailing in Germany, the great difficulties of
the program of re-employment pure and simple would have led the
existing system in the direction of economic and political national-
ism. After a period of makeshifts it would have become imperative
either to wait until world economy recovered  — a solution which
from a political and psychological viewpoint was unbearable — or to
organize all efforts of re-employment in some ‘plan.’ As soon as the
regime decided to make a more systematic and co-ordinated attack
upon the problem of unemployment, it became indispensable to give
a clear direction to the ‘plan’: re-employment for what? Because of
the hardship implicit in such a policy, the main objective had to be
popular. The easiest way out was a nationalist policy. This choice was
supported by the very implications of an independent policy of recov-
ery itself.
In order to make the program for re-employment popular it was
necessary only to point to the unused material resources which had to
be re-employed as well as the unemployed workers. Unemployment
of both men and equipment was especially serious in the heavy indus-
tries. Did not these industries and their allies, the large scale farms,
utilize the resources of the ‘national soil’? Thus the program of re-
employment became dovetailed not only with re-armament but also
with the salvation of those sectors of German economy which had
been dominant for so many decades.

--- Sayfa 265 ---
The Economic Background
183
 
183
3. Within the scope of this chapter it is neither possible nor necessary
to inquire whether the National-Socialist leaders deliberately shaped
their economic policies to save eastern grain-producing agriculture
and the coal, iron and steel industries in the west. There are many
people who believe that National-Socialism is, so to speak, nothing
but the house-servant of German monopoly capitalism. They point
to the important role which representatives of both groups played in
the decisive days which brought Hitler to power and to the benefits
which these sectors of the nation received from the National-Socialist
government. These oversimplified theories tend quite unnecessarily
to discredit the economic interpretation of fascism. Such an interpre-
tation should be formulated in terms of far more minute and deeper
reaching categories.
A quotation from Schumpeter’s paper ‘Zur Soziologie der
Imperialismen,’ seems especially pertinent to a description of the
relationship between National-Socialism and private capitalism or
between the politics and economics of the present German order.
Nationalism and militarism are not created by capitalism. They become,
however, capitalized and, finally they take their best strength out of
capitalism. Capitalism is gradually drawing nationalism and militarism
into its own circles, thereby maintaining and nourishing them. They
again influence and modify capitalism.475
The industrialists in the west and the landlords in the east sup-
ported Hitler in the hope that they would be able to remain masters,
to use Hitler for their purposes: if necessary, to get rid of him and of
his movement. It is true that those same groups received certain spe-
cial favors from the government, that, thanks to the policy of the gov-
ernment, they actually were enabled to reap considerable profits and
gains in capital values and to strengthen their position in the leading
concerns. People who emphasize these benefits should not entirely
overlook the price which had to be paid for them. At best, the former
masters must now share power with the élite of the party and with the
bureaucracy of the state and party. Their prosperity and control rights
have also been considerably qualified. Actually they are not free

--- Sayfa 266 ---
184
The Dual State
184
to change the National-Socialist leadership and they depend mainly
on the chance that this leadership will not be interested in removing
them from their economic and social positions.
It has been shown by many theoretical and empirical investigations
that ‘monopoly capitalism’ on the one side and the growth of eco-
nomic nationalism and imperialism on the other are closely interre-
lated. Each of these phenomena reinforces the other.
The present National-Socialist government added many monopo-
listic organizations to those which had previously been created and,
so to speak, inherited from them the same type of foreign policy they
had always promoted, sharp nationalism and imperialism. With all
this, however, the question is still open whether the National-Socialist
regime pursued its policies along the patterns worked out by monop-
olistic interests or by continuous effects of ‘monopoly situations,’ i.e.,
whether the favors given to the more monopolistic sectors of the
German economy are a by-product of National-Socialist policy more
than of its deliberate main objectives. Although the present author
is inclined to attach considerable importance to the salvation of the
mentioned capitalistic interests in the whole complex of National-
Socialist objectives, it seems best to say that the National-Socialists
have consistently acted as if the protection of monopolistic interests
and the salvation of the most endangered sectors of the German econ-
omy were the most important objectives of their economic policy. It
can then be left for further investigation, to determine how much his-
torical truth is contained in the words ‘as if.’
We may now sum up the result of our analysis of the present
German economic order:
	1.	 Although the rights of the owners of private property have been
limited, the kinds and the extent of private property modified,
and state control increased, the fundamental institutions of
capitalism have not been abolished.
	2.	 All private activities, through the medium of state controls,
have been put to the service of political, chiefly military,
expansion.
	3.	 The total public investment is closely correlated with the wage
policy of the regime, which is based on the destruction of all
labor organizations.

--- Sayfa 267 ---
The Economic Background
185
 
185
	4.	 There still exist: capitalistic enterprises, markets in which these
enterprises sell and buy, markets for property titles, private
credit transactions and all kinds of accompanying disputes
over claims and obligations.
	5.	 The system of private economic activities is surrounded,
supported and limited by a vastly increased public bureaucracy
which acts partly on the basis of generally clear, circumscribed
laws and partly on the basis of more or less wide discretionary
powers with the reservation that each matter may be regulated
arbitrarily.
We must prove not only that a close relationship exists between
political and economic events, but also that it exists between the
economic and political structure. The problem to be dealt with is
this: what is the precise function of the Normative State and what
are the functions of the Prerogative State in the economic sphere?
Which aspects of the political and economic order correspond with
each other?
The Normative State functions clearly as the legal frame-work for
private property, market activities of the individual business units,
all other kinds of contractual relations, and for the regulations of the
control relations between government and business. Even if the rules
of the game are changed by the lawmaker, some are indispensable in
order to secure a minimum of predictability of the probable conse-
quences of given economic decisions. In order to avoid misunder-
standings, it is important to note that the activities of the bureaucracy
which interfere with the ‘free enterprise system’ are also regulated by
the Normative State, even though its interference greatly reduces for-
mer spheres of freedom. To that extent, legal ways of defining and pro-
tecting individual rights against other members of the economy and
against the encroachment of state authorities are still open and used.
Although the Normative State retains some powers in spheres
that are not strictly economic, the field of economics remains the
most important domain of the qualified ‘Rule of Law’ in present-day
Germany. Not only private business, but also public enterprises are
regulated and protected by the Normative State. The underlying fact
is the necessity for decentralization of certain functions in any large-
scale society with advanced technology.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
186
The Dual State
186
This decentralization requires a stable and yet flexible framework of
rules. In present-day Germany, this decentralization of socially vital
functions is effected through a complex of institutions called private
property, contract and private enterprise. Private business is pro-
tected by the Normative State even under National-Socialism because
it happens to be accepted as the main form of decentralization of
social economic functions.
When we suggest that the Normative State in the Third Reich is
closely related to the existing (although modified) private property
and enterprise system, we do so chiefly to indicate the striking differ-
ence between the treatment of property and labor interests. It is in the
field of labor that the Prerogative State has advanced into the sphere
of economic affairs, through the destruction of all genuine labor
organizations and through the constant persecution of all former and
all potential new labor leaders as ‘enemies of the state.’
If our analysis of the relations between the world of business and
the Normative State is correct, then it follows, that the Prerogative
State cannot be a direct and positively controlling power, but rather a
limiting and indirectly supporting power.
1. After the fundamental decision in favor of radical nationalism
was made in 1933, this daring program required safeguards against
political disturbances and premature interruptions. Such a guarantee
was indispensable in view of the many sacrifices and pressures which
this policy was to impose on almost all classes and especially on the
working and lower middle classes. The activities of the agencies of the
Prerogative State were therefore prerequisite to the continuous execu-
tion of the economic program of the government.
2. Because of the magnitude and intensity of the effort required
of German society and because open class struggles arising from
the continuance of relatively free class organizations would impair
the efficiency of the regime, through waste of energy and dead-
locks, the National-Socialists demanded the suppression at least of
open class struggles.
3. The Prerogative State is also important to the success of the eco-
nomic policies of the government because it can use direct

--- Sayfa 269 ---
The Economic Background
187
 
187
threats to enforce the more severe regulations of the Normative
State. Because these threats cannot be calculated or predicted the
Prerogative State is far more powerful than the Normative State: in
fact the mere potentiality of such threats is, in doubtful cases, suffi-
cient to keep men on the safe side, even though their too frequent use
may upset the whole economic process. In this way the Prerogative
State is able to influence the behavior of capitalists and enterprisers
although they are nominally not only controlled but also protected by
the Normative State.
The best analysis of the National-Socialist revolution which could
be offered on the basis of the economic interpretation of history has
been made before the Reichstag on May 21, 1935 by Adolf Hitler
himself:
In order to assure the functioning of the national economy it became
necessary to arrest the movement of wages and prices. It was also nec-
essary to stop all interferences which are not in accord with the higher
interests of our national economy, i.e., it was imperative to eliminate
all class organizations which pursued their own policies with regard to
wages and prices. The destruction of the class-struggle organizations of
employers as well as of employees required the analogous elimination
of those political parties which were financed and supported by those
interest groups. This process, in its turn, caused the introduction of a
new constructive and effective ‘living constitution’ and the refounda-
tion of Reich and State.476

--- Sayfa 270 ---
188
The Duel State: A Contribution to the Theory of Dictatorship. Ernst Fraenkel
© Ernst Fraenkel 1941. Published 2017 by Oxford University Press.
III
THE SOCIOLOGY OF THE DUAL STATE
1.  ‘PLANT-COMMUNITY’ AND ‘SHOP TROOP’
Any sociological analysis which involves the use of the concept of
‘community’ must make use of the work of Ferdinand Toennies.477
The distinction between ‘community’ and ‘society’ is not primarily
a distinction between two types of relationships. It is rather a dis-
tinction between structural types, the emergence, development and
decline of which are bound to premises which can be definitely deter-
mined.478 In spite of his own personal predilection for the community,
which derives its coherence from kinship and traditional ties (as it
still does in the village community), Toennies had no illusions about
the course which Western civilization is traversing: from community
to society.
Alfred von Martin raised a very significant question therefore when
he asked ‘whether and to what extent the re-establishment of a com-
munal form of social organization is possible today.’479 Von Martin
uses sharp words against those for whom the longing for ‘community’
is nothing but romantic yearning. In this connection he cites Werner
Sombart’s perverse book on German Socialism.480
In comparison with the common mass of National-Socialist glorifi-
cations of the Gemeinschaft, Sombart’s book has at least the virtue that
in addition to wishing to erase the two hellish centuries which have
disordered the world since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution,
and to return to the conditions of 1750, he also has the courage to call
for the restoration of the economic conditions which would make a
communal form of organization possible. It is more important to rec-
ognize Sombart’s consistency

--- Sayfa 271 ---
The Sociology
189
 
189
than to ridicule it. The vision of a communal organization established
after certain necessary economic conditions have been created, is, at
any rate, much less fantastic than the promotion of further industri-
alization while hoping for the re-establishment of the pre-capitalistic
community.
It should not be forgotten that National-Socialism in its early stages
contained elements who were interested in constructing the economic
prerequisites for the existence of community. Those tendencies which
were directed at the strengthening of the lower middle-classes, the
demands for the abolition of department stores, the dissolution of the
consumers’ co-operatives and the elimination of trusts, as well as the
anti-rationalization-laws of 1933, were representative of this aspect
of the National-Socialist Program. But this section of the National-
Socialist Program has long since been discarded. The National-
Socialists who came to power as a result of middle class opposition to
socialism are sacrificing to their aspiration of a new German empire
the very substance of their raison d’être.481
Under the Four Year Plans, the industrialization of Germany, the
modernization of its mills and factories, and the accumulation of
capital have made rapid strides. Unwittingly, National-Socialism has
corroborated Ferdinand Toennies’ proposition that the trend from
community to society cannot be stayed. This is especially true in the
economic field.
The only German sociological study which has dealt with this
problem – Heinz Marr’s Die Massenwelt im Kampf um ihre Form482 –
is now of interest only for the history of National-Socialist ideologies,
for Marr contended that labor problems were no longer of central
importance in Germany. He stated that they had been replaced — by
the problems involved in the situation of the peasant and small crafts-
man. Marr wrote under the inspiration of a kind of peasant social-
ism and all his expectations were built on the assumption that ‘urban
industrial society, though still comprising by far the larger part of
the population, was steadily decreasing in relative importance.’483 But
the years 1934-9 have amply shown the fallacies in Marr’s assump-
tion. Since National-Socialism has associated its destiny with the
remilitarization of

--- Sayfa 272 ---
190
The Dual State
190
the German economy, all idyllic schemes built around peasants and
craftsmen have become impossible of realization. Gigantic factories
are so to speak springing out of the ground, armies of specialized
laborers are feverishly busy ten and more hours a day and, at least
since 1935, the army demanded as a military necessity that industry
be so mechanized that women and children would be able to replace
skilled workers needed for the armed forces. Thus National-Socialism
has not retraced the path of the Industrial Revolution of the nine-
teenth century. It has rather sought to accelerate it.
Is the type of rationalized, impersonal and complex system neces-
sitated by industrialization compatible with a ‘communal’ ideology?
And what are the causes and consequences of this experiment which
National-Socialism has announced itself ready to carry out?
The National-Socialists are no academic theorists. In order to prove
the correctness of their communal ideology, they point to their suc-
cess. They claim that they have created new communal forms dur-
ing their struggle for power. For them the SA (Storm Troopers)
and the SS (Blackshirts), the Labor Service and the Hitler Youth are
great manifestations of the new communal ideology. The National-
Socialists claim to have proved (and this is one of their supreme dog-
mas) that a ‘communal’ ideology and a ‘communal’ social structure
can be had if the real will to have it exists. If this was possible in the
case of the SA, the SS and the HJ (Hitler Youth) why should it not
also be possible outside of and beyond such political organizations?
Thus the National-Socialists have tried to reorganize non-political
groups — the family, the farm, the factory, the apartment house, the
business and craftsmen groups along the lines of the militant political
organizations.
Once the spirit of the SA has penetrated the workshops and facto-
ries with a ‘communal sense,’ the aims of National-Socialism will have
been achieved. Every social, group will then become a community
and constitute as such a source of thinking according to the concrete
theory of order. The above ideas form the nucleus of the social theory
of National-Socialism. The most important

--- Sayfa 273 ---
The Sociology
191
 
191
academic interpreter of this theory of the ‘totalitarian community,’
designed after the model of the political formations, is Professor
Reinhard Hoehn of the University of Berlin. This National-Socialist
attitude is very prominent in the discussion between Koellreutter,
Professor of Constitutional Law at the University of Munich, and
Hoehn, Professor of Political Science at the University of Berlin.
Koellreutter had claimed that it is the task of law to give a certain
degree of calculability to acts of the state so that the people may have a
certain degree of legal security. To this view, Hoehn responds that ‘this
problem does not exist for a communally oriented point of view.’484
In this connection the problem of ideology becomes particularly
acute. If it is true that the processes of rationalization and imperson-
alization have been accelerated, what then is the significance of the
diffusion of this communally oriented outlook? This apparent con-
tradiction between the relationship involved in economic life and the
National-Socialist Weltanschauung is dissolved once we grasp the fal-
sity of the communally oriented ideology. Even if the entire popula-
tion had become National-Socialist, the attitudes of the members of
the various social groups (the workers of a factory, the inhabitants of
an apartment-house, the people of a farm etc.) would not necessarily
be communally oriented, and, as will be demonstrated, this was least
so in those groups most exposed to the ‘SA spirit.’
The extension of the communally oriented attitudes from the realm
of politics to the field of non-political relations has been expressed
by National-Socialist theorists in this syllogism:  SA attitudes are
communally oriented attitudes, attitudes of the factory groups are
identical with SA attitudes, hence attitudes of factory groups are com-
munally oriented.
If we examine the major premise the fallacy will immediately be
obvious. We are not interested here in the correctness or falsity of
National-Socialism’s interpretation of its own history, but rather in
the validity of the proposition that the attitudes of Storm Troopers are
communally oriented. For, even if the whole legend of the period of
struggle were actually true, there could still be no doubt that during
its classical phase the SA was not a Gemein-

--- Sayfa 274 ---
192
The Dual State
192
schaft (community) as modern sociologists understand the term.
It formed rather, during the period of the ‘struggle for power,’ what
might be called a ‘fraternity’ (Bund).
In one of the best sociological analyses by a National-Socialist,
Andreas Pfenning’s ‘Gemeinschaft und Staatswissenschaft,’ the term
‘community’ is used for the National-Socialist military associations;
but when he characterizes these groups with the following words we
see that he has something different in mind: ‘The basic experience
was not idealistic, it was not the will to fight for an ideal, for an idea
which presides with eternal validity over the activities of mankind.
The SA did not emerge in the struggle for an ideal, the True, the Good
and the Beautiful. This basic experience came into existence in the
course of the struggle.’485 Reinhard Hoehn has a similar concept when
he writes that ‘the SA is not defined by a common set of beliefs.’486
These negative criteria justify our designation of the National-
Socialist battle formations as fraternities (Bünde). The sociological
category of the Bund was first developed by Hermann Schmalenbach.
This notion has since been employed by numerous German sociolo-
gists, e.g. von Martin, Marr and Behrendt.
Hermann Schmalenbach’s investigations487 of the Bund, which are
indispensable to the scientific analysis of National-Socialism, are
somewhat influenced by Max Weber’s theory of domination, espe-
cially by his distinctions between rational, traditional, and charismatic
domination. Schmalenbach presents his own work as an extension
of Toennies’ treatment of community and society, and in the course
of his discussion it becomes clear that the counterpart of commu-
nity in the power sphere is what Weber called ‘traditional domina-
tion,’ while the counterpart of rationalized impersonal society is Max
Weber’s ‘rational domination.’ From this, Schmalenbach proceeded to
the conclusion that the counterpart of charismatic domination is the
‘fraternity’ (Bund).
The followers of a charismatic leader (Führer) do not constitute a
community (Gemeinschaft) but rather a fraternity (Bund). They are
associated not on the basis of traditionally valid norms and habitual
patterns of conduct but rather on the basis of common emotional
experiences. The individual is born into the com-

--- Sayfa 275 ---
The Sociology
193
 
193
munity but he enters the fraternity on his own decision. The com-
munity aims at the preservation of traditional values, while a frater-
nity unites those individuals who have been freed from all traditional
norms. The community exists even when the individual member is
not fully conscious of his membership in the group, but member-
ship in the fraternity involves an act of self-conscious decision. The
community lives by traditional values and transmits them to the next
generation. The Bund, made up of the organized followers of a char-
ismatic leader, is (like charism itself) transitory, and unstable. The
community is a stable and continuous formation. Like charism, the
fraternity stands in contrast to the matter-of-fact routines of daily life.
As soon as the authority of the charismatic leader becomes routinized
and continuous, the ‘fraternity’ ceases to be a fraternity. Routinization
leads to the dissolution of the fraternity or to its transformation, either
into society or community.
Friedrich Schiller’s Die Räuber provides a classical description of
the ‘fraternity.’ Around Karl Moor, the leader, whose career has been
disrupted, equally uprooted comrades assemble in order to transform
the world. But at bottom, they do not want a revolution in the struc-
ture of society. They do not attack the present order; rather they com-
plain that other people and not they are in power within this order.
They desire only the supplanting of the ruling élite by a new élite
formed from their fraternity. Unfavorable circumstances compelled
Karl Moor’s fraternity to take refuge in the Bohemian forests and
there to lead the life of robbers. Under more favorable circumstances,
Moor would have attained political dominance; his followers would
have become the new élite, divided up the spoils, but would have left
the structure, of society unchanged. The successful charismatic revo-
lution is the ideal type of the circulation des élites.
Shortly after their accession to power, the National-Socialists made
a genuine attempt to reorganize the factories in accordance with the
model of the Storm Troops. By roll-calls, daily flag ceremonies and
evenings of comradely entertainment, they attempted to engender the
spirit of the SA in the factories. The experiment failed, however, after
a short time. Werner Mansfeld,

--- Sayfa 276 ---
194
The Dual State
194
the National-Socialist expert on labor law, has formulated the effect
of this transplanting of the fraternity ideology into other social
groups, affirming that ‘even if no reference had been made to his
role as leader, the dominant position of the employer would legally
have been the same.’488 Heinz Marr, though an enthusiastic National-
Socialist, is a sufficiently good sociologist to see the serious difficul-
ties to be overcome in any reconstruction of social groups in order to
bring them closer to the spirit of National-Socialist battle formations.
‘The fraternity may make very intense impressions on its members,
but these impressions do not last in their original forms.’ And he con-
tinues ‘purely economic and legal relationships are incompatible with
fraternity attitudes.’489 But Marr touches only the real problem as to
whether it would be possible to implant communally oriented atti-
tudes in non-communal groups. ‘One quickly realizes,’ he says, ‘how
much more difficult it is to transplant the attitudes of the fraternity
which now prevail in the political sphere of the state into the sphere
of business and particularly into big enterprises.’490
After the failure of the most diverse experiments, such as the
establishment and dissolution of the NSBO (Nationalsozialistische
Betriebszellen-Organisation), the National-Socialists realized that
their object could not be achieved in the plants. Hence, at present,
they are trying a new mode of attack: the Werkscharen (Shop Troops).
In 1938 Dr. Ley, the leader of the German Labor Front, remarked
that ‘without a firmly organized Shop Troop … the factory commu-
nity would ultimately degenerate into a yellow trade union.’491 Thus
Dr. Ley attests the fact that the destruction of the labor unions, the
elimination of the factory council and the violent suppression of all
manifestations of proletarian class consciousness had led exactly to
the result which the foes of National-Socialism always predicted: the
yellow trade union. Having admitted failure, National-Socialism has
adopted a new means of transforming private capitalistic enterprises
into ‘communities’ — the Shop Troop. ‘It is,’ says Dr. Ley, ‘the soldier-
like nucleus of the factory community which obeys the Führer blindly.
Its motto is: the Leader is always right.’492 Thus the project to organize
the whole factory as a fraternity and then to call it a community

--- Sayfa 277 ---
The Sociology
195
 
195
has been dropped. Instead the vanguard within the factory is formed
to represent a fraternity. Dr. Ley left nothing unsaid when he outlined
the tasks of the Shop Troops: ‘Should Germany once more have to
undergo a severe trial of strength and should this process lead to seri-
ous disturbances in the factories as it did during the last war … every
factory must be organized so that it will itself be able to take the meas-
ures necessary for the creation of order.’493 The ‘soldierlike nucleus
of the factory community’ is intended to suppress any independent
expression of the workers’ demands and to ‘create order.’ Shop Troops
are organizations for the suppression of strikes, but, says Dr. Ley, ‘the
Shop Troop must be prevented by all means from becoming — if not
at present, then perhaps in fifty or a hundred years — a class-troop.’494
Dr. Ley expressly rejects the possibility of organizing the Shop Troops
of the different enterprises into large associations. On the contrary,
‘the factory is the center of the Shop Troop. Hence the Shop Troops
cannot constitute a hierarchical organization embracing all the Shop
Troops in a city, or a district, or in the Reich as a whole.’495
In his description of the Shop Troops Dr. Ley stresses the differ-
ences between them and the other quasi-military organizations of the
SA and SS. This structure of the Shop Troops differs also from those
of the estate organization of the non-manual occupations. In the
various entrepreneurial and professional groups, no objections have
been raised against organizations transcending local boundaries. But
Dr. Ley and the National-Socialist leadership have deliberately sought
to prevent such translocal organization of the Shop Troops in order to
avoid the danger of distracting these groups whose class homogene-
ity is pronounced from their proper tasks. The Shop Troops recruit a
small group from within the whole force of the plant to counteract any
defections on the part of the rest of the working force. Without this
institution, Dr. Ley believes that the factories would remain a poten-
tial source of disorder. And the dangers would only be re-introduced
if translocal organization of the Shop Troops were allowed. Thus all
that Dr. Ley has done is to confer the honorable title of community on
a strike-breaking agency. The Shop Troops are noth-

--- Sayfa 278 ---
196
The Dual State
196
ing but a factory police agency appropriating certain fraternal charac-
teristics and veiled by the community ideology.
Meanwhile, even the National-Socialist Storm Troops, which had
been genuine fraternities, continue to lose their fraternal character
and become bureaucratized and rationalized. This evolution became
most clear in the case of the SS, which had been transformed into a
real police force. The unstable character of the fraternity is responsible
for the continual failures of the efforts to impose fraternal character
on rationalized social and economic structures. The incompatibility
between the emotional and unspecific character of fraternal attitudes
and the sober necessities of modern economic enterprise constitutes
a further obstacle to the realization of the National-Socialist program.
These theoretical considerations are corroborated by experience.
The social and economic organizations of the Third Reich have
remained what they were before Hitler’s seizure of power: rational-
ized and co-ordinated entities, governed by calculations of gain and
loss. That these social structures are called ‘communities’ and that in
unimportant matters concessions are made to communally oriented
attitudes, changes nothing. They serve only to veil the true character
of these structures and to reinforce the existing system of domination.
Mansfeld, giving the most explicit form to this aspect of
National-Socialism, says:  ‘The faithfulness of the ethnic comrades
(Volksgenossen) to the Leader and of the Leader to the ethnic com-
rades must not be confused with material considerations.’496 The
pseudo-’community’ of present-day Germany is nothing but the
capitalistic system of production incidentally modified, though fun-
damentally the same as before. The communally oriented concrete
theory of order is nothing but the new legitimation of this capitalis-
tic legal order. Romantic enthusiasm for the ‘community’ should not
prevent our seeing the highly unromantic re-inforcement of certain
aspects of modern capitalism.
The political economist applies the conceptions of law and property of
the pre-capitalistic era to this completed world of capital, and, the more
the facts are at variance with his ideology,

--- Sayfa 279 ---
The Sociology
197
 
197
all the more anxious is his zeal and all the greater his function.497
Pfenning has stated with unusual directness that the function of
all Fascist undertakings is ‘to galvanize with the aid of a strong state
the tradition of bourgeois-capitalistic class society and to preserve
this order by means of state interference at those points where dif-
ficulties arise.’498 Pfenning’s view is by no means rare in the National-
Socialist literature. Neese goes so far as to infer a general law from
this common tendency of all Fascist revolutions by saying that ‘today
every revolutionary movement must be concerned with preserving
the integrity of the economic system.’499 Theoretically competent
National-Socialists are well aware of the social character of Fascism;
they do not deny that it is the political structure appropriate to the
imperialistic phase of capitalism. Pfenning remarks: ‘Community is
a cleverly designed necessity for the maintenance of certain social
relationships.’500 According to him, the German community, which is
constituted by ‘blood’ and not by any rational concept has, thanks to
its racial basis, a ‘natural system of ranks’ the nature of which entitles
it to acceptance.
2.  ETHNIC COMMUNITY AND
ARMAMENT BOOM
The refutation of the opinion that certain economic and social struc-
tures have been permeated with communally oriented attitudes does
not settle this question as to the extent to which National-Socialism
has succeeded in fusing the German people into an ethnic commu-
nity (Volksgemeinschaft).
At this point, we should recall what we said earlier about one of the
primary conditions for the triumph of National-Socialism, namely,
the successful refutation of utopian pacifism which the German
parties of the Left espoused after the war. National-Socialists chal-
lenged the faith in salvation through international order as repre-
sented by the rational League of Nations and proposed instead the
dogma that the resurrection of the Fatherland could be attained
only by the union of all Germans against the common enemy. The
idea of the ethnic community undoubted-

--- Sayfa 280 ---
198
The Dual State
198
ly arose out of the defeat in the last war, and the subsequent misery,
and out of the conscious opposition to foreign powers.
This connection between belief in an external threat and the awak-
ening of domestic solidarity is not a chance phenomenon. ‘Only in
cases of a common danger can communal action be expected with
some degree of probability.’501 At the same time it should be remem-
bered that ‘no community is so strong as to be indissoluble.’502 It is
obvious that if belief in external threats is the principal source of
communally oriented attitudes, internal cleavages will increase as this
belief diminishes.
Communally oriented attitudes are accorded the status of absolute
values in National-Socialist Germany. The National-Socialist Party
views the preservation of these values as its chief task. However, if
devotion to the community is immediately dependent on the magni-
tude of an actual or imagined threat, it is possible to explain the para-
dox which we will call the ‘political scissors’ of National-Socialism,
i.e., the more successful the foreign policy of National-Socialism, the
greater the contradiction between the National-Socialistic domestic
policy and the international position of Germany.
If the ethnic community has an absolute value in itself, then it is
dependent upon the existence of an enemy. If communally oriented
attitudes are intensified by the existence of an actual or imagined
enemy, then the preservation of the ethnic community is favored by
the existence of an enemy whose hostility endures as long as the eth-
nic community itself. It does not matter whether this enemy is real or
imaginary. Nor is it of much importance who the enemy is. The mere
fact that an enemy exists is the important point. The continuous exist-
ence of an enemy is a substitute for rational goal.503 ‘War is the source
of everything. The form of the state as a whole is determined by the
nature of the total war … the total war, however, obtains its meaning
from the total enemy.’504
Adolf Hitler expressed the same idea at the Nürnberg Party
Congress in September 1935: ‘Driven by savage impulses, peoples and
races fight without knowing the objectives for which they

--- Sayfa 281 ---
The Sociology
199
 
199
fight.’505 An editorial of the Völkischer Beobachter of December 21,
1931 stated, in like vein:
The Rechtsstaat (Rule of Law State) is the organization which unifies
all the energies of the ethnical group for the protection of its right,
both domestically and in the world at large…. This can only be accom-
plished by the concentrated force of the people as a whole, just as only
concentrated explosives were able to stop the tanks which attacked the
front line. This organized application of the concentrated energies of
the people for the protection of its life represents our conception of the
Rechtsstaat.
It may be noted that it was not the author of this book who exhumed
this editorial. The Secretary of the Ministry of Justice Freissler — the
author of this article — thought it good enough to be reproduced in
the Handwörterbuch der Rechtswissenschaft.506 The fact that the opin-
ion of a politically motivated lawyer during the period of the strug-
gle for power has become the official opinion of a high state official
and has been incorporated into the chief publication of National-
Socialist legal theory is evidence enough that even the best-trained
National-Socialist jurists are still living in the ideological atmosphere
of the days before 1933. To define the Rechtsstaat as a concentrated
explosive may have been effective during the period of preparation
for the charismatic revolution. But that the figure should have been
repeated three years after the National-Socialists had taken power
reveals that the movement had no substantial aims. Once the restora-
tion of regularity which followed the charismatic revolution had been
consummated, nothing remained but recollections and the quest for
enemies — old or new.
At this point we are able to perceive the significance of the Jewish
problem for National-Socialist policy. The threat of racial dan-
ger which the Jews constitute (according to the National-Socialist
theory) is intended to have an integrating influence. According to
the National-Socialist conviction, the Jew is incessantly striving to
undermine Germany in order to attain complete domination over
the world. Hence Germany is faced by a lasting state of emergency
which can be overcome only by establishing the ethnic community.
National-Socialist propagandists have en-

--- Sayfa 282 ---
200
The Dual State
200
deavored to present the Jew as a demon.507 Any restriction on freedom
and material well-being can be justified on the ground of its necessity
for protection from this demon.
The ethnic community is the supreme value in the National-
Socialist value system. Everything which might injure this commu-
nity is considered a disintegrating element. In any discussion or any
dispute over religious, ethical or social questions lies the possibility
of disrupting the integrity of the community. Every type of group
which is devoted to substantive values other than the ethnic com-
munity presents this danger. In the words of Professor Hoehn of the
University of Berlin: ‘From the standpoint of the ethnical community
every association for which values other than the community itself
are central is destructive of the community.’508 Making a fetish of the
ethnic community implies the refusal to tolerate associations based
upon values other than its own, the rejection of the autonomy of the
law, the repudiation of all norms of rational Natural Law, the identifi-
cation of justice and convenience.
Belief in the reality of external threats contributed to the estab-
lishment of the ethnic community; its preservation necessitates the
discovery or creation of external dangers. The myth of a ‘permanent
emergency’ would not find credence if it could not be shown that a
hostile army is permanently ready to attack. Thus, if there are no real
enemies, they have to be created. Without enemies, there can be no
danger, and without danger, there can be no communally oriented
attitudes, and without communally oriented attitudes there could be
no ethnic community. Were there no ethnic community then associa-
tions based on religious, ethical, social or political values could not
be suppressed.
3.  THE CONCEPT OF POLITICS
IN NATIONAL-SOCIALIST THEORY
In National-Socialist thought the concept of politics is defined by ref-
erence to ‘the enemy.’ All deeper understanding of National-Socialist
policies depends on our grasp of the nature of politics as interpreted
by National-Socialism. Many misunderstandings of

--- Sayfa 283 ---
The Sociology
201
 
201
National-Socialist policies arise from erroneous conceptions of the
meaning of political activity for National-Socialism.
It would be well to open our discussion with an analysis of the con-
ceptions of politics implicit in each of the major types of domination.
Traditional domination is characterized by the fact that neither
the dominator nor the dominated gives evidence of having a notion
of what we call politics. In the Middle Ages (the period par excel-
lence of traditional domination), as F. Kern509 once pointed out, social
thought allowed no place for this specifically political aspect of the
state. The realm of the state and politics was completely controlled by
law. Actions which today would be viewed as political were regarded
by the age of traditional domination as controversies over subjective
rights.
Rational domination has been associated with the attempt to organ-
ize and canalize conflicts over values through political institutions.
The late Austrian historian Ludo Moritz Hartmann, a rationalistic
democratic-socialist, once defined politics as ‘the art of canalizing
social activity into legal form.’510 This definition is as appropriate to
the rational type of domination as it is foreign to the other types.
The special character of this definition becomes all the more clear
when we contrast it with Carl Schmitt’s511 definition of politics as the
‘friend-enemy’ relationship. This definition of political activity has
a rather interesting ancestry. It is based directly on Rudolf Smend’s
essay on political power in the constitutional state. Smend inquires
into the distinguishing characteristics of government and adminis-
tration. He concludes that the decisive criterion of government is its
‘political’ character and that the mark of administration is its ‘techni-
cal’ character. Smend claims that this distinction is equally applicable
to both domestic and foreign politics. ‘Contentlessness,’ he says, ‘is a
characteristic of all foreign policy in so far as it has political and not
technical objectives…. The political element which in domestic affairs
distinguishes political statecraft from technical administration is
exactly the same.’512 In a footnote, Smend acknowledges, as his source
for this idea, Josef Schumpeter’s famous essay Zur Soziologle der

--- Sayfa 284 ---
202
The Dual State
202
Imperialismen.513 There Schumpeter asserted that the aimless quest
for power is the central element in imperialistic expansionism.
From Smend’s assertion that aimlessness is the essential charac-
teristic of all political activity, Schmitt deduced the proposition that
the existence of an enemy is the essential element in political activ-
ity. Thus, Schmitt furnished a legitimation for National-Socialism by
showing that the absence of a positive content to political activity is
not a shortcoming but rather a complete realization of the nature of
political activity. Schmitt’s definition of politics hypostatizes a politi-
cal conception of fraternity (Bund). This kind of politics, in a situation
in which traditional values have lost their binding power and rational
values are not acceptable, is oriented towards the attainment of power
for its own sake. In 1932 the American journalist Knickerbocker
asked leading National-Socialists what the National-Socialist Party
would do after it seized power. The reply was: ‘Keep it!’514
This briefly was the National-Socialist conception of politics. To
consider the fight for power neither as a struggle for subjective rights
nor as a fight for the realization of objective ideas of justice, to gain
and to hold power without legal title and without legal objective
regardless of legal principles — all these are only corollaries of the
central interest in power for the sake of power.515
A major element in the victory of the Rightist elements in postwar
Germany was the fact that they were seized by the furor politicus in
the debacle of 1918-19, and, impelled by its force, came to triumph
over the largely depoliticized Leftist elements. The defeat of the Left
was preceded by its renunciation of ‘political politics’ — expressed
perhaps most characteristically by Walther Rathenau in the introduc-
tion to his book Vom neuen Staate, published in March 1919. ‘The
war and its aftermath, the peace,’ he said, ‘seem to have been the flo-
rescence of all the great questions of “political policy”; in reality, how-
ever, they have destroyed “political policy” … foreign and political
policy will remain on the stage a little while longer but will soon be
replaced by economic

--- Sayfa 285 ---
The Sociology
203
 
203
and social policy.’516 Contrary to Rathenau’s expectations, economic
and social policy were to remain on the stage for only a short time,
yielding their places to those men who realized that political activity
and not pure economic policy would be decisive.
It seems necessary repeatedly to point out the role of foreign policy
in the development of National-Socialism. It should not be forgotten
that faith in law in international relations had been abused. The fact
that war indemnities were called ‘reparations’ and a predatory inva-
sion like the occupation of the Ruhr Basin was called a ‘sanction’ was a
blow to those Leftist groups in Germany which believed in the valid-
ity of Natural Law programs. They never recovered from this blow.
The emergence of National-Socialism cannot be understood with-
out taking into account the effects of Poincaré’s foreign policy on the
internal situation in Germany.
National-Socialist negation of all universally valid values and its
suppression of all communities based upon such values, its negation
of an order sanctioned by Natural Law may be said to be at least par-
tially due to foreign threats; at the same time, it is necessary to recog-
nize that the relaxation of the international threat was accompanied
by an intensification of the war against internal disintegration.
The international threat was seized upon by German capitalism as
an opportunity to stabilize the social and economic order and thus to
facilitate the realization of its own interests. When the threat declined,
it became necessary to invent one. The defenders of capitalism in
post-war Germany were unable to convince the masses of the German
people that it was the best of all economic systems. Capitalism had
no chance in a democratic struggle against proletarian socialism, in
whose extirpation its salvation lay. The violence of the German tyr-
anny is indicative not only of its power but also of its fear of losing
that power, a sign not only of its political strength but also of its social
weakness. ‘Early capitalism … as well as capitalism in its decadent
period, characterized by a highly unstabled social equilibrium, stands
under the sign of state autocracy,’517 as Hans Kelsen has formulated
this phenomenon.

--- Sayfa 286 ---
204
The Dual State
204
In an ideologically distorted form, this proposition has been sup-
ported by Professor Herrfahrdt of Marburg University. To his own
heretical question: ‘May we assume the people to be united by the
National-Socialist idea, or is a Leader necessary because the idea has
no real unifying power?’ he answers: ‘The German people, because of
their disunity, are united in their need of a Leader.’518
How spurious is the ethnic community of a people whose Leader
finds it necessary to punish a few youths for hiking in unauthorized
uniforms, because such an ‘offence’ might undermine national unity!
How fundamentally different is this attitude from the one expressed
by the English statesman Balfour: ‘… it is evident that our whole polit-
ical machinery presupposes a people so fundamentally at one that
they can safely afford to bicker; and so sure of their own moderation
that they are not dangerously disturbed by the never-ending din of
political conflict.’519 How fundamentally different is it from the proud
words of Thomas Jefferson’s first Inaugural Address, written after one
of the bitterest fights in American history:
If there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this Union, or to
change its Republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments
of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason
is left free to combat it.520
In present-day Germany, the forces which might create a real unity
have been shattered. Hitler does not dare to follow Hegel’s recom-
mendations regarding the toleration of religious sects. A  policy
which cancels a peddler’s permit if he is suspected of sympathy with
Jehovah’s Witnesses, regrets Hegel’s plea for tolerance — and it should
be remembered that Hegel has always been looked on as the most
extreme idolator of the state. The toleration which Hegel demanded
for the religious sects obviously did not involve a public danger in the
Prussia of 1820.
Hegel mentions in this connection the Quakers and Anabaptists
and characterizes both as members of civic society who are not citi-
zens of the state. He proposes that the state shall exercise tolerance
towards the members of these groups as long as the state may rely
upon the ‘inner reason’ of its institutions.521

--- Sayfa 287 ---
The Sociology
205
 
205
Adolf Hitler’s Germany, however, cannot rely upon the ‘reason of
its institutions’; the social body of the people is, at bottom, not homo-
geneous enough.
German capitalism once sincerely believed that its own devel-
opment would contribute to world peace, well-being and culture.
Present-day German capitalism has lost this belief in its humanitarian
mission. Having lost the belief in its own rationale, it elevates the cult
of the irrational to the status of a modern religion. Both early capital-
ism and mature capitalism have faced crises and mastered them by
economic means. The late-capitalism of the post-war Germany used
only one method to overcome the crisis which threatened its exist-
ence, the armament boom. Early liberal capitalism sought to reduce
the functions of the state to a minimum because it had faith in its own
inherent laws. Contemporary German capitalism, however, needs a
state which removes its socialist opponent, proves that ‘private benefit
is public benefit’ and provides it with the external enemies against
whom it must arm itself as a sine qua non for its preservation.
In 1653 the noble-estates were willing to tolerate the absolute rule
of the Great Elector in exchange for absolute authority over the serfs.
In the same manner the German business dealers recognized the rule
of the National-Socialist Party in 1933 in exchange for the strengthen-
ing of their own power.
The National-Socialist Party promised that as far as possible inter-
ferences with business would be avoided, that the entrepreneur would
again be master of his enterprise, and that free initiative would be
preserved. Another important guarantee which the National-Socialist
Party had to extend to German capitalism was (as Dr.  Schacht522
declared to the heavy applause of German business leaders) the pres-
ervation of an objective orderly legal system, the Normative State.
German
capitalism
today
requires
state
aid
in
two
respects: (a) against the social enemies in order to guarantee its exist-
ence, and (b) in its role as guarantor of that legal order which is the
pre-condition of exact calculability without which capitalist enter-
prise cannot exist. German capitalism requires for its salvation a dual,
not a unitary state, based on arbitrariness in the politi-

--- Sayfa 288 ---
206
The Dual State
206
cal sphere and on rational law in the economic sphere. Contemporary
German capitalism is dependent on the Dual State for its existence.
Alfred von Martin perceived the dual character of the contempo-
rary German state and expressed his conclusions as directly as one
is permitted to do so in Germany: ‘When the masses are organized
by means of irrational ideologies the real nature of the prevailing
method of domination is tinged with a communal tone. This type of
domination combines rational bureaucratic methods with irrational
or — to use Max Weber’s terminology — charismatic ones.’523
The only political scientist in National-Socialist Germany who has
so much as caught a glimpse of this problem is Professor Koettgen of
the University of Greifswald. His debt to Max Weber is apparent: ‘It
is precisely the Leader-state which cannot dispense with charismatic
forms of leadership, but at the same time the rulers of the modern
state, in order to satisfy the diverse, numerous demands of the popu-
lation, are inevitably forced to depend upon highly rationalized and
bureaucratized forms of organization.’524
This integration of rational and irrational activities which is pecu-
liar to the Dual State — this rational core within an irrational shell —
brings us to the culmination of our investigation. The author accepts
Karl Mannheim’s distinction between substantial and functional
rationality as particularly relevant to this problem. This distinction
can perhaps be best exemplified by reference to chess. When it is said
that chess is too serious for a game and too much of a game to be seri-
ous, the word ‘game’ implies the lack of substantial rationality (char-
acteristic of any game) whereas the word ‘serious’ represents the high
degree of functional rationality which many consider ‘too high.’525
The legal order of the Reich is thoroughly rationalized in a func-
tional sense for the regulation of production and exchange in accord-
ance with capitalistic methods. But late capitalistic economic activity
is not substantially rational. For this reason, it has had recourse to
political methods, while giving to these methods the contentlessness
of irrational activity. Capitalism at its best was

--- Sayfa 289 ---
The Sociology
207
 
207
a system of substantial rationality which, relying on the pre-established
harmony which guided its destinies, exerted itself to remove irra-
tional obstacles. When the belief in the substantial rationality of capi-
talism disappeared its highly rationalized functional organizations
still remained. What is the character of the tension which arises out of
the juxtaposition of disappearing substantial rationality and an over-
developed functional rationality?
Carl Schmitt, while writing still in the name of political Catholicism,
described the incongruity between functional and substantial ration-
ality with the acuteness and lucidity characteristic of his earlier
writings: ‘Our economic organization,’ Schmitt wrote, ‘represents a
thoroughly non-rational consumption hand in hand with a highly
rationalized production. A mechanism which is a marvel of techni-
cal achievement caters indifferently and with equal thoroughness and
exactitude to any and every demand, whether it be for silk blouses
or poison gas.’526 As long as Carl Schmitt still believed that Roman-
Catholicism would eventually be triumphant — that ‘the inheritance
will be hers’  — he was profoundly disturbed by this incongruity.
He wrote:
This alarm felt by genuine Catholics arises from the knowledge that the
notion of rationality has been distorted in an utterly fantastic manner; a
mechanical system of production purporting to cater to any and every
material requirement is described as “rational,” though at the same
time the rationality of the purpose served by this supremely rational
machine (which purpose is the only essential point) is left wholly out
of account.527
After he had turned his back on the Catholic Church, Schmitt lost
this ‘genuine Catholic alarm’ as well as the realization that the only
essential rationality is the rationality of ends. He sought security
in Sorel’s theory of the myth, which an intelligent young National-
Socialist, Heyne, once characterized as ‘irrational, and therefore
irrefutable and absolutely safe from the attack of rational criticism.’528
Thus a myth proves to be the haven in which the capitalistic system
in Germany seeks refuge. The ‘myth of the twentieth century’ is not
only the title of the National-Socialist Bible; it is also one of the means
by which there was established and maintained a state which defends
itself against

--- Sayfa 290 ---
208
The Dual State
208
rational criticism by denying the validity of substantial rational-
ity itself, as Heyne said: ‘The correctness of an idea is of no interest
to the political community and the political movement … ideas are
only ideologies, they are exposed to criticism and hence subjected to
decomposition…. Only that is true which works and which helps and
supports man and his community in the struggle for existence.’529
Thus German capitalism, finally realizing the irrationality of its
own existence, discards substantial rationality. The tension which
arose from the interplay of the disappearance of substantial ration-
ality and the high development of functional rationality is rendered
more acute by the self-consciousness with which the two processes
are fostered. In order to augment technical rationality, the irrational-
ity of the ends in intensified; and the belt to attain these irrational
ends, technical rationality, is heightened. For the sake of the arma-
ment industries, armaments pile up; for the sake of armaments, arma-
ment industries prosper.
Faced with the choice between substantial rationality and substan-
tial irrationality, German capitalism casts its vote for the latter. It will
accommodate itself to any substantial irrationality if only the neces-
sary pre-requisites for its technically rational order are preserved.
German capitalism has preferred an irrational ideology, which main-
tains the existing conditions of technical rationality, but at the same
time destroys all forms of substantial rationality.530 If such substan-
tially irrational ideology is useful to capitalism, the latter is ready
to accept the programmatic aims of this ideology. This symbiosis of
capitalism and National-Socialism finds its institutional form in the
Dual State. The conflict within society is expressed in the dual nature
of the state. The Dual State is the necessary political outgrowth of a
transitional period wrought with tension.
The solution of these tensions depends ultimately on ourselves.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
209
Abbreviations
Akademie Ztschr.
Zeitschrift der Akademie für
Deutsches Recht
ALR.
Preussisches Allgemeines Landrecht
Arbeitsr. Entsch.
Arbeitsrechtliche Entscheidungen
Arb. R. S.
Arbeitsrechtssammlung
Arch. f. öff. Recht
Archiv für öffentliches Recht
Arch. f. Rechts- u. Soz. Phil.
Archiv für Rechts- und
Sozialphilosophie
Arch. f. Szw.
Archiv für Sozialwissenschaften und
Sozialpolitik
Bad. Verw. Ztschr.
Badische Verwaltungszeitschrift
BGB.
Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch
BGBl.
Bundesgesetzblatt
Bl. f. Gefk.
Blätter für Gefängniskunde
D. A. Z.
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung
D. J. Z.
Deutsche Juristenzeitung
D. Jstz.
Deutsche Justiz
Dt. Bergw. Ztg.
Deutsche Bergwerks-Zeitung
Dtsch. Arb. R.
Deutsches Arbeitsrecht
Dtsch. Recht
Deutsches Recht
Dtsch. Rpfl.
Deutsche Rechtspflege
Dtsch. Rw.
Deutsche Rechtswissenschaft
Dtsch. R. Z.
Deutsche Richter-Zeitung
Dtsch. Str.
Deutsches Strafrecht
Dtsch. Verw.
Deutsche Verwaltung
Dtsch. Verw. R.
Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht
Entsch. des KG. und
OLG.München
Entscheidungen des
Kammergerichts und
Oberlandesgerichts München
Fft. Ztg.
Frankfurter Zeitung
Hans. R. u. Ger. Ztg.
Hanseatische Rechts- und
Gerichtszeitung

--- Sayfa 292 ---
210
Abbreviations
210
HGB.
Handelsgesetzbuch
Höchst. R. Rspr.
Höchstrichterliche Rechtsprechung
H. Z.
Historische Zeitschrift
Jahrb. f. Entsch. der freiw. Gbk.	 Jahrbuch für Entscheidungen der
freiwilligen Gerichtsbarkeit
Jgdr. u. Jgdwohlf.
Jugendrecht und Jugendwohlfahrt
J. W.
Juristische Wochenschrift
Kart. Rundsch.
Kartellrundschau
Mbl. f. i. Verw.
Ministerialblatt für innere
Verwaltung
N. F.
Neue Folge (New Series)
OVG.
Entscheidungen des Preussischen
Oberverwaltungsgerichts
PGS.
Preussische Gesetzessammlung
RAG.
Entscheidungen des
Reichsarbeitsgerichts
Reger
Entscheidungen der Gerichte
und Verwaltungsbehörden auf
dem Gebiete des Verwaltungs-
u. Polizeistrafrechts, begründet
von Reger
RGBl.
Reichsgesetzblatt
RGSt.
Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts
in Strafsachen
RGZ.
Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts
in Zivilsachen
R. Verw. Bl.
Reichsverwaltungsblatt
Verkehrsr. Abh.
Verkehrsrechtliche Abhandlungen
V. B.
Völkischer Beobachter
Ztschr. f. ausl. öff. u. Völkerr.
Zeitschrift für ausländisches
öffentliches und Völkerrecht
Ztschr. f. Beamtenr.
Zeitschrift für Beamtenrecht
Ztsch. f. dtsch. Kult. Philos.
Zeitschrift für deutsche
Kulturphilosophie
Ztsch. f. d. ges. Staatsw.
Zeitschrift für die gesamte
Staatswissenschaft

--- Sayfa 293 ---
211
Notes
PART I
Chapter I
	 1	 The decree is reproduced in the appendix.
	 2	 The expression ‘sphere’ is not exact and is merely used provisionally.
	 3	 Regarding the opportunities for revolutions and coups d’état in pres-
ent-day society, see Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen,
1922), p. 670.
	 4	 The distinction between ‘mandatory’ and ‘absolute’ dictatorship was
created by Carl Schmitt in Die Diktatur (München, 1921). Our use of
these terms is identical with that of Carl Schmitt.
	 5	 RGSt 59, 187-8.
	 6	 Garde v. Strickland (1921), quoted in D. L. Keir and F. H. Lawson, Cases
in Constitutional Law (Oxford, 1928), p. 373.
	 7	 The assassination of Röhm, Schleicher and many other opponents of
the Hitler government.
	 8	 Reinhard Heydrich, ‘Die Bekämpfung der Staatsfeinde’ Dtsch. Rw.
Band I, Heft 2, p. 97.
	 9	 Oberlandesgericht Karlsruhe, June 25, 1936 (J. W. 1936, p. 3268).
	10	 Oberlandesgericht Hamburg, March 31, 1936 (D. J. Z. 1936, p. 771).
	11	 Ib.
	12	 Ib.
	13	 Landesarbeitsgericht Berlin, November 17, 1934 (D. Jstz. 1935, p. 73).
	14	 PGS. 1933, pp. 122, 413; 1936, p. 21.
	15	 We find certain technical differences in various statutes, caused by
the fact that the police law is state law (Landesrecht) and that it must
be adjusted to the administrative laws of the states (Länder). The legal
functions of the Gestapo are dependent on the police laws of the sev-
eral states. The same is true with regard to the review of actions of the
Gestapo by the administrative courts.
	16	 John Neville Figgis, Studies of Political Thought from Gerson to Grotius,
1414-1625 (Cambridge, 1907), p. 86.
	17	 Carl Schmitt, Die Diktatur (Von den Anfängen des modernen
Souveränitätsgedankens bis zum proletarischen Klassenkampf) (2nd.
ed. München 1928) p. 59, note 3. This book is the first of many scholarly
and literary efforts to ‘exploit’ the practical possibilities of Art. 48 of the
Weimar Constitution.
	18	 Samuel Rawson Gardiner, The Constitutional Documents of the Puritan
Revolution (Oxford, 1899), p. 105.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
212
Notes
212
	19	 J. R. Tanner, English Constitutional Conflicts of the Seventeenth Century
(Cambridge, 1928), p. 78.
	20	 Cf. Justice Breese in Johnson v. Jones (44 Ill. 166) who characterized
emergency as something that ‘placed the dearest rights of the citizen
at the mercy of a dominant party who have only to declare the “emer-
gency” which they can readily create, pretext for which, bad men are
keen to find and eager to act upon.’
	21	 Mittermaier, ‘Die Gesetzgebung über Belagerungszustand, Kriegsrecht,
Standrecht und Suspension der Gesetze über persönliche Freiheit,’
Archiv für Criminalrecht, 1849, p. 29.
	22	 Ib.
	23	 Ruthardt, Entwurf eines Gesetzes über das Verfahren in Strafsachen
(Regensburg, 1849), p. 211.
	24	 ‘In order to cope with rebellion, sabotage and similar politically sterile
outbreaks … any government would have resort to martial law… . The
firm traditions of politically more mature nations which are less easily
intimidated have been maintained in such a situation. In such nations
the people have kept their heads overcoming violence by violence while
remaining sensible enough to seek to eliminate the tensions which
resulted in the outburst, above all restoring all guarantees of liberty as
soon as the emergency is over and remaining uninfluenced by the revo-
lutionary events in their approach to other questions of government.
We (Germans) may expect with certainty that the representatives of the
old order of the unchecked bureaucracy … will exploit every syndicalist
Putsch … however insignificant, to exert pressure on the “weak nerves”
of the lower middle classes. The reaction to this will show whether the
German nation has achieved political maturity. We may well despair of
our political future if they should be successful, although unfortunately
past experience indicates that such a success is entirely in the realm of
possibility.’ ( Max Weber, ‘Parlament und Regierung im neugeordne-
ten Deutschland’ in Gesammelte politische Schriften, München, 1921,
p. 223).
	25	 Walther Hamel, in Frank, Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht (München,
1937), pp. 387, 394.
	26	 Ib.
	27	 Walther Hamel, ‘Die Polizei im neuen Reich,’ Dtsch. Recht, 1935, p. 414.
	28	 See note 25.
	29	 Sondergericht Hamburg, March 15, 1935 (Dtsch. R. Z. 1935, p. 553).
	30	 The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon (translated by Daniel De
Leon), 3rd edition (Chicago, 1913) p. 61.
	31	 Carl Schmitt, Legalität und Legitimität (München, 1932), pp. 93-4.
	32	 A  historically correct analysis of the events of 1933 is to be found
only in one National-Socialist document. A decision of the Appellate

--- Sayfa 295 ---
Notes
213
 
213
Court of Berlin of November 1, 1933 (D. Jstz. 1934 p. 64) stated that
‘the Decree of February 28, 1933, by suspending fundamental rights,
deliberately creates an emergency situation for the purpose of realizing
the National-Socialist state.’
	33	 Reichsgericht, October 22, 1934 (RGZ. 145, p. 367).
	34	 Ernst Huber, in a comment on a decision of the Sondergericht
Darmstadt, March 26, 1934 (J. W. 1934, p. 1747).
	35	 Sondergericht Darmstadt, March 26, 1934 (J. W. 1934, p. 1747).
	36	 Landgericht Dresden, March 18, 1935 (J. W. 1935, p. 1949).
	37	 Reichsgericht, September 24, 1935 (J. W. 1935, p. 3377).
	38	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, May 27, 1936 (J. W. 1936,
p. 2277). [Cf. Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, April 17, 1935 (J.
W. 1935, p. 2676)].
	39	 Ib.
	40	 Published in Mbl. f. i. Verw. 1933, p. 233.
	41	 Kammergericht, May 31, 1935 (Dtsch. R. Z. 1935, p. 624).
	42	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, October 17, 1934 (J. W. 1935, p. 378). It is of con-
siderable interest to note that at about the same time the Supreme
Court of the United States was called upon to decide whether, in deal-
ing with a great national crisis, a constitutional agency can lay claim to
extra-constitutional powers owing to the existence of an emergency.
Chief Justice Hughes denied this in the Schlechter case in words which
have already become classical: ‘Extraordinary conditions may call for
extraordinary remedies. But the argument necessarily stops short of
an attempt to justify action which lies outside the sphere of constitu-
tional authority. Extraordinary conditions do not create or enlarge
constitutional powers.’ Schlechter v. United States, 295 US 495, 528; May
27, 1935.
	43	 Walther Hamel, in Frank, Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht (München,
1937), pp. 386-7.
	44	 Sondergericht Hamburg, March 15, 1935 (Dtsch. R. Z. 1935, p. 553; also
quoted in J. W. 1935, p. 2988).
	45	 Kammergericht, July 12, 1935 (R. Verw. Bl. 1936, p. 61).
	46	 Ib.
	47	 Kammergericht, March 5, 1935 (D. Jstz, 1935, p. 1831).
	48	 Ib.
	49	 Reichsgericht, August 6, 1936 (Dtsch. Str. 1936, p. 429).
	50	 Carl Schmitt, Die Diktatur, (2d ed., München, 1928), p. 94.
	51	 Württembergischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof, September 9, 1936 (Dtsch.
Verw. 1936, p. 385).
	52	 Landgericht Berlin, November 1, 1933 (D. Jstz. 1934, p. 64).
	53	 Ullrich Scheuner, ‘Die Neugestaltung des Vereins-und Verbandsrechts’
D. J. Z. 1935, p. 666.

--- Sayfa 296 ---
214
Notes
214
	54	 The limitations of the police power are set forth in § 14 of Preussisches
Polizeiverwaltungsgesetz (PGS. 1931, p. 77). They are taken over almost
literally from the Allgemeines Preussisches Landrecht of 1794 and,
owing to their acceptance by the courts and by custom, have prevailed
in Germany for many decades.
	55	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, January 10, 1935 (R. Verw. Bl.
1935, p. 923).
	56	 Mbl. f. i. Verw. 1933, p. 233.
	57	 See Reichsgericht, January 23, 1934 (J. W. 1934, p. 767).
	58	 Ludwig Eickhoff, ‘Die Preussische Geheime Staatspolizei,’ Dtsch. Verw.
1936, p. 91.
	59	 See note 51.
	60	 Ib.
	61	 Ib.
	62	 Ernst Swoboda, ‘Das Protektorat in Böhmen und Mähren,’ R. Verw. Bl.
April 2, 1939, pp. 281-4.
	63	 Badischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof, January 11, 1938 (Bad. Verw. Ztscbr.
1938, p. 87). Inasmuch as the courts of Baden at this time still claimed
competence in reviewing the actions of the police, the decision of the
administrative court has a definite historical significance, for it is the
last decision in which a German administrative court reviewed politi-
cal acts by the police authorities. (Since that time Baden has followed
the example of Prussia and of the other German states).
	64	 Ib.
	65	 Ib.
	66	 Dannebeck
deals
with
this
question
in
Frank,
Deutsches
Verwaltungsrecht (München, 1937), p. 307. He condemns the review of
political measures with reference to abuse or arbitrariness. (Cf. Lauer in
J. W. 1934, p. 2833).
	67	 Oberlandesgericht Braunschweig, May 29, 1935 (Höchst. R.  Rspr.
36, 98).
	68	 Regina v. Nelson & Brand. (Charge of the Lord Chief Justice of England
to the Grand Jury at the Central Criminal Court in the case of the
Queen against Nelson & Brand. 2nd ed., London, 1867, p. 86.)
	69	 Field in ‘ex parte Milligan’ 1864, 4 Wallace 2,35.
	70	 Carl Schmitt, Politische Theologie (München, 1922), p. 13.
	71	 Ministerialdirigent und SS-Oberführer Dr.  Werner Best in D.
A.  Z. July 1, 1937, (reprinted in Frank, Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht,
München, 1937).
	72	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, October 25, 1934 (R. Verw. Bl.
1935, p. 458).
	73	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, May 2, 1935 (R. Verw. Bl. 1935, p. 577).
	74	 PGS. 1933, p. 41.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
Notes
215
 
215
	75	 This view has been upheld by the Supreme Administrative Court of
Prussia in its decision of May 23, 1935 (J. W. 1935, p. 2670), which explic-
itly denied that the political character of a police order was in itself suffi-
cient to exclude review. The Prussian Supreme Court (Kammergericht)
in decisions of May 3, 1935, and January 9, 1936, expressed the same
view. (D. Jstz. 1935, p. 1831; J. W. 1936, p. 3187).
	76	 Gesetz über die Freizügigkeit, November 1, 1867 (BGBl. 1867, p. 55).
	77	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, December 5, 1935 (OVG.
97, 103).
	78	 Gesetz über die Geheime Staatspolizei, February 10, 1936 (PGS.
1936, 21).
	79	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, March 19, 1936 (J. W.
1936 p. 2189).
	80	 PGS. 1936, No. 6.
	81	 See note 79.
	82	 Cf. Dtsch. Verw. 1936, p. 318 and R. Verw. Bl. 1936, p. 549.
	83	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, November 10, 1938 (J. W. 1939,
p. 382).
	84	 Ib.
	85	 See Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, December 15, 1938 (R. Verw.
Bl. 1939, p. 544).
	86	 The first decision of this type was rendered by the District Court
(Landgericht) of Tübingen on January 25, 1934 (J. W. 1934, p.  627)
which refused to invoke the provisions of the poor law in the case of
a man wanting to sue the state for unjust imprisonment in a concen-
tration camp. It held ‘that the state cannot set aside actions which it
has found politically necessary.’ Of greater significance is the deci-
sion of the Supreme Administrative Court of Hamburg (Hamburger
Oberverwaltungsgericht) of October 7, 1934 (R. Verw. Bl. 1935, p. 1045).
The political police had dissolved a Bürgerverein of mixed Aryan and
Jewish membership. The court refused to hear the appeal of the associa-
tion, declaring that its dissolution was a political act and, accordingly,
not subject to review.
	87	 See note 78.
	88	 Gesetz über die Zulassung zur Rechtsanwaltschaft, April 7, 1933 (RGBl,
1933, p. 188).
	89	 Reichsgericht, May 6, 1936 (J. W. 1936, p. 2982).
	90	 BGB. §839; Reichsverfassung Art. 131.
	91	 Reichsgericht, March 3, 1937 (J. W. 1937, p. 1723).
	92	 Ib.
	93	 Deutsches Beamtengesetz, January 26, 1937 (RGBl. 1937, p. 39).
	 94	 This interpretation of the importance of the Konflikt is opposed to the
opinion of the Reichsgericht, which interprets §147 only as a shift in

--- Sayfa 298 ---
216
Notes
216
jurisdiction and not as a change in substantive law. Needless to say, we
cannot regard this interpretation as correct.
	 95	 Gesetz über den Ausgleich bürgerlich-rechtlicher Ansprüche,
December 13, 1934 (RGBl. 1934, p. 1235).
	 96	 Reichsgericht, September 7, 1937 (RGZ. 155, p. 296).
	 97	 Ib.
	 98	 Oberlandesgericht München, November 4, 1937 (Entsch. des KG. und
OLG. München 17, p. 273).
	 99	 Ib.
	100	 Dr. Best, ‘Werdendes Polizeirecht’ Dtsch. Recht, 1938, p. 224.
	101	 V. B., July 5, 1935.
	102	 Landesarbeitsgericht Gleiwitz (Dtsch. Rpfl. 1936, p. 59).
	103	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, April 14, 1937 (J. W. 1937, p.  2311). Cf.
Landesarbeitsgericht München, July 31, 1937 (D. Jstz. 1937, p. 1159).
	104	 In a decision of the Supreme Administrative Court of Prussia
(Preussischer Oberverwaltungsgerichtshof) of June 29, 1937 (R. Verw.
Bl. 1937, p. 762), a parallel case dealt with the exclusion of a civil ser-
vant from the National-Socialist Party on his continued service as an
official. The prosecuting attorney contended that the exclusion of an
official from the National-Socialist Party necessitated his dismissal
from the public service. The Supreme Administrative Court did not,
however, share the view, but held that actions of the party cannot
have such far-reaching consequences unless they are supported by
legislation.
	105	 The Appellate Court (Oberlandesgericht) of Stettin, on March 25, 1936,
had granted damages to a plaintiff who had been injured by an auto-
mobile owned by the National-Socialist Party, although the defendant
argued that since the party was an institution the funds and purposes
of which were devoted to the public weal, it could not be ordered to
make payments to private persons (J. W. 1937, p. 241). A parallel case
was decided by the Reichsgericht on February 17, 1939 (R. Verw. Bl.
1939, p. 727).
	106	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, February 10, 1937 (RAG. 18, p. 170).
	107	 Carl Schmitt commenting on a decision of the Kammergericht of
March 22, 1935 (D. Jstz. 1935, p. 686) in D. J. Z. 1935, p. 618.
	108	 Oberlandesgericht Düsseldorf, July 10, 1935 (D. J. Z. 1935, p. 1123).
	109	 Reichsgericht February 28, 1936 (Höchst. R. Rspr. 1936, p. 900). This
decision was followed by several courts regarding various branches
of the National-Socialist Party [Hitler Youth Movement Decision,
Appellate Court of Dresden, January 31, 1935 (D. J. Z. 1935, p. 439);
National-Socialist Party Decision, Appellate Court of Zweibrücken,
December 24, 1934 (D. J. Z. 1935, p. 442)]. All these decisions indicate
that this theory has become an established rule.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
Notes
217
 
217
	110	 Kompetenzgerichtshof June 27, 1936 (R. Verw. Bl. 1936 p. 860).
	111	 See note 93.
	112	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, December 5, 1935 (OVG. 97,
p. 117).
	113	 ‘The Gestapo protect the community rather than the individuals and
are therefore exempt from the restraint imposed by the ordinary police
law.’ Lauer, ‘Die richterliche Nachprüfung polizeilicher Massnahmen,’
J. W. 1934, p. 832.
	114	 ‘The compelling and supreme necessity of strengthening the new state
requires the widest possible extension of discretion in political cases.’
Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, October 24, 1934 (OVG. 94,
p. 138).
	115	 Wilhelm Frick, ‘Auf dem Wege zum Einheitsstaat’ Dtsch. Verw. 1936,
p. 334.
	115a	James I, Works (ed. of 1616) pp. 553 ff.
	 116	 Quoted in J. R. Tanner, Constitutional Documents of the Reign of James I
(Cambridge, 1930), p. 19.
	117	 Reichsgericht, September 22, 1938 (J. W. 1938, p. 2955).
	118	 Ib.
	119	 Ib.
	120	 Heinrich Himmler, ‘Aufgaben und Aufbau der Polizei’ Festschrift für
Dr. Frick, edited by Pfundtner, Berlin, 1937, reviewed in Fft. Ztg., March
12, 1937; Hans Frank, ‘Strafrechts – und Strafvollzugs-Probleme’ Bl.
f. Gefk. 1937, Band 68, p. 259.
	121	 Ministerialdirigent und SS-Oberführer Dr. Werner Best (Gestapo) in
D. A. Z., June 22, 1938.
	122	 At this point we will not discuss whether this form of state may be
called a ‘Justice State’ (Gerechtigkeitsstaat) as suggested by Carl
Schmitt (see Frank, Nationalsozialistisches Handbuch für Recht und
Gesetzgebung, München, 1935, p.  6). It is, however, of interest that
Schmitt derives his concept from the Czarist Russian Gosudarstwo
Prwady.
	123	 HansThieme, ‘Nationalsozialistisches Arbeitsrecht’ Dtsch. Recht,
1935, p. 215.
	124	 Weimar, Attorney in Cologne in R. Verw. Bl. 1937, p. 479.
	125	 Hans Franzen, Gesetz und Richter; eine Abgrenzung nach den
Grundsätzen
des
nationalsozialistischen
Staates
(Hamburg,
1935), p. 11.
	126	 It may be noted that Franzen supplements Carl Schmitt’s concept of
‘politics’ with the propositions that the ‘friend-enemy’ dichotomy has
nothing to do with the ‘just-unjust’ dichotomy.
	127	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, January 28, 1937 (Verkehrsr.
Abh. 1937, p. 319).

--- Sayfa 300 ---
218
Notes
218
	128	 Gesetz gegen heimtückische Angriffe auf Staat und Partei und zum
Schutz der Parteiuniformen, December 20, 1934 (RGBl. 1934, p. 1269).
	129	 Dr. Crohne, ‘Die Strafrechtspflege 1936’ D. Jstz. 1937, p. 7-12.
	130	 Kammergericht, May 3, 1935 (D. Jstz. 1935 p. 1831).
	131	 See note 37.
	132	 Oberlandesgericht Kiel, November 25, 1935 (Höchst. R.  Rspr. 1936,
p. 592).
	133	 Ib.
	134	 Oberlandesgericht München, January 27, 1937 (Jahrb. f. Entsch. der
freiw. Gbk., Band 15, p. 58).
	135	 See note 127.
	136	 Ib.
	137	 Oberlandesgericht Stettin, April 14, 1937 (J. W. 1937, p. 2212).
	138	 Criminal proceedings for tax evasion were instituted against the
attorney.
	139	 February 6, 1875 (RGBl. 1875, p. 23).
	140	 Reichsgericht, November 2, 1936 (J. W. 1937, p. 98).
	141	 Massfeller, Akademie Ztschr. 1937, p. 119.
	142	 See note 134.
	143	 Rudolf Sohm, Kirchenrecht (Systematisches Handbuch der Dt. Recht­
swissenschaft, Band VIII) (München, 1923), p. 1.
	144	 Cf. Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, (Tübingen, 1922),
p. 59, 396.
	145	 Ernst Forsthoff, Der totale Staat (Hamburg, 1933), p. 30.
	146	 Hermann Heller, Rechtsstaat und Diktatur (Tübingen, 1930), p. 19.
	147	 V. B., July 5, 1935; also formulated by Huber, ‘Die Verwirkung der
rechtsgenössischen Rechtsstellung im Verwaltungsrecht’ Akademie
Ztschr. 1937, p. 368, insofar as administrative law is concerned: ‘The
administrative authorities are not only entitled to act when explicitly
empowered to do so by statute but also upon demand of the unwritten
principle of the ethnic community.’
	148	 Reichsdienststrafhof, June 15, 1937 Ztschr. f. Beamtenr. 1937, p. 104.
	149	 Ib.
	150	 R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (New York, 1926),
p. 161.
	151	 This relationship has been pointed out by Max Weber, General
Economic History (translation by Frank H. Knight, New  York,
1927), p. 342, and by George Jellinek, Allgemeine Staatslehre (Berlin,
1900), p. 89.
	152	 The concept of the ‘agnostic state’ has been elaborated by the Fascist
theory of the state. In German theory it was developed by Carl
Schmitt, Staatsethik und pluralistischer Staat (Kant-Studien, 1931,
Band XXXV), pp. 28-42, especially p. 31.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
Notes
219
 
219
	153	 Georg Dahm, ‘Verrat und Verbrechen’ Ztschr. f. d. ges. Staatsw. Band
95, p. 283, 288.
	154	 Dr. Diener, ‘System des Staatsverbrechens,’ Dtsch. Recht, Band IV,
pp. 322-29.
	155	 Reichsstrafgesetzbuch, May 15, 1871, RGBl. 1876, p. 40.
	156	 Sondergericht Hamburg, May 5, 1935 (J. W. 1935, p. 2988).
	157	 Roland Freissler, ‘Der Volksverrat (Hoch-und Landesverrat) im Lichte
des National-Sozialismus,’ D. J. Z. 1935, p. 907.
	158	 Georg Dahm, in a comment on a decision of the Reichsgericht. (J. W.
1934, p. 904).
	159	 Reichsgericht, September 8, 1938, (J. W. 1938, p. 2899) and October 27,
1938 (J. W. 1939, p. 29).
	160	 Oberlandesgericht München, August 12, 1937 (D. Jstz. 1938, p. 724).
	161	 Ib.
	162	 Volksgerichtshof, May 6, 1938 (D. Jstz. 1938, p. 1193); Kammergericht,
March 26, 1938 (D. Jstz. 1938, p. 1752). Detailed discussion of the prob-
lem by Mittelsbach (J. W. 1938, p. 3155), and Niederreuther (D. Jstz.
1938, p. 1752). The decision of the Kammergericht is not published.
Parts of the decision are quoted in Niederreuther’s article.
	163	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Die Diktatur des Reichspräsidenten nach Artikel 48 der
Weimarer Verfassung’; appendix to Die Diktatur, (2d ed., München,
1928) p. 248 (paper read on the meeting of the Vereinigung deutscher
Staatsrechtslehrer, 1924). This distinction goes back to Robespierre’s
speech in the Convention Nationale on December 3, 1792, when he
indicted Louis XVI with these famous words: ‘Vous n’avez point une
sentence à rendre pour ou contre un homme mais une mésure de salut
public à prendre, une acte de providence nationale à exercer.’
	164	 Joint opinion of James and Stephen on Martial Law with refer-
ence to the Jamaica Insurrection 1866, quoted in William Forsyth,
Constitutional Law, (London, 1869), appendix, pp. 551-563, especially
pp. 560-1.
	165	 Ib., especially p. 561.
	166	 Ib., especially p. 552.
	167	 One high-treason decision of the Oberlandesgericht Hamburg of
April 15, 1937 was apparently published by accident in Funkarchiv,
1937, p. 257.
	168	 Bayerischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof, May 8, 1936 (Reger, Band 37,
p. 533).
	169	 Sächsisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, December 4, 1936 (J. W. 1937,
p. 1368).
	170	 Reichsdienststrafhof, February 11, 1935 (Ztschr. f.  Beamtenr. 1936,
p. 104).
	171	 Reichsgericht, February 17, 1938 (J. W. 1938, p. 1018).

--- Sayfa 302 ---
220
Notes
220
	172	 Alfred Rosenberg, ‘Die nationalsozialistische Weltanschauung und
das Recht,’ D. Jstz. 1938, p. 358.
	173	 Sermon on King James’ birthday, 1621: The Works of William Laud,
D. D., ed. Wm. Scott, vol. I, London 1847, p. 28.
	174	 Landgericht Hamburg, May 6, 1936 (Jgdr. u. Jgdwohlf. 1936, p. 281).
The above-mentioned matters belong to the jurisdiction of the lower
courts. We quote therefore decisions of the district and municipal
courts concerning the relations of children and parent.
	175	 Amtsgericht Berlin-Lichterfelde, April 15, 1935 (Das Recht, 1935,
No. 8015).
	176	 Amtsgericht Hamburg, April 15, 1935 (Das Recht, 1935, No. 8016).
	177	 Amtsgericht Frankfurt Main-Höchst, May 4, 1937 (Dtsch. Recht, 1937,
p. 466).
	178	 Amtsgericht Wilsen, February 26, 1938 (J. W. 1938, p. 1264).
	179	 Landgericht Zwickau, March 14, 1937 (J. W. 1938, p. 2145).
	180	 Sondergericht Breslau (Dtsch. R. Z. 1935, p. 554).
Chapter II
	181	 Carl Schmitt, Politische Theologie (2d. ed., München, 1934), p. 1.
	182	 Hermann Reuss, in a comment on a decision of the Prussian Supreme
Administrative Courts (Preussischer Oberverwaltungsgerichtshof) of
June 30, 1936 (J. W. 1937, pp. 422-3).
	183	 At this point the American reader will probably recall the famous pas-
sage of Justice Stone’s dissenting opinion in United States v. Butler (297,
US 79). Justice Stone defined the supremacy of the courts over legislative
and administrative actions as follows: ‘…the other is that while uncon-
stitutional exercise of power by the executive and legislative branches
of the government is subject to judicial restraint, the only check upon
our exercise of power is our own sense of self-restraint.’ Underlying this
statement is the insight that in every legal and constitutional system
the old problem, quis custodiet custodem? can be answered only by an
appeal to conscience. The parallel with the problem of the Dual State
should not be extended further, since the question discussed in the
American decision deals with the relationship of governmental bodies
within the framework of legal order, while the line which separates the
Normative and the Prerogative States is the borderline between legal
order and lawlessness.
	184	 Sächsisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, November 25, 1938 (R. Verw. Bl.
1939, p. 103).
	185	 Ib.
	186	 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, August 18, 1896. RGBl. 1898, p. 195.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
Notes
221
 
221
	187	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, December 15, 1938 (R. Verw.
Bl. 1939, p. 544).
	188	 Heinrich Herrfahrdt, ‘Politische Verfassungslehre,’ Arch. f. Rechts –
u. Soz. Phil., Band XXX, p. 110.
	189	 Roland Freissler, ‘Totaler Staat? Nationalsozialistischer Staat!’ D. Jstz.
1934, p.  44; Cf. Otto Koellreutter, ‘Leviathan und totaler Staat,’ R.
Verw. Bl. 1938, pp. 803-7; Alfred Rosenberg in V. B. of January 9 & 10,
1934, and Ernst Huber, ‘Die Totalität des völkischen Staates,’ Die Tat,
1934, p. 60.
	190	 Jacob
Burckhardt.
Weltgeschichtliche
Betrachtungen
(Kröner’s
Taschenausgabe, Band 55, Leipzig), p.  197. Cf. Hegel, Die
Verfassung Deutschlands (Lasson, Hegels Schriften zur Politik und
Rechtsphilosophie, Leipzig, 1913), p. 28.
	191	 Erich Kaufmann, Die clausula rebus sic stantibus und das Völkerrecht
(Tübingen, 1911), p. 136.
	192	 Carl Schmitt, Der Hüter der Verfassung (Tübingen, 1931), p. 79.
	193	 Ernst Jünger, ‘Die totale Mobilmachung,’ in Krieg und Krieger (edited
by Ernst Jünger, Berlin 1930).
	194	 Dt. Bergw. Ztg., November 24, 1932 (partly reprinted in Europäische
Revue, February 1933).
	195	 Ib.
	196	 Ernst Huber, ‘Die Rechtsstellung des Volksgenossen erläutert am
Beispiel der Eigentumsordnung,’ Ztschr. f. d. ges. Staatsw. 1936, p. 452.
	197	 Werner Best, Jahrbuch der Akademie für deutsches Recht, 1937, p. 133.
	198	 Ib.
Chapter III
	199	 Carl Bilfinger, ‘Betrachtungen über politisches Recht,’ Ztschr. f. ausl.
öff. u. Völkerr., Band I, pp. 57-76.
	200	 Bilfinger demonstrated that the international arbitration treaties of
the post-war period considered the political element insofar as they
excluded questions touching on the existence of states from their
scope. Those questions were segregated and relegated to the extra-
legal field. Wherever existential questions were made the object of
normative regulations, Bilfinger argued that such treaties were made
among unequal parties and involved the renunciation of the principle
of equality.
	201	 Carl Schmitt, Nationalsozialismus und Völkerrecht (Schriften der
Hochschule für Politik, Heft ix, Berlin 1934).
	202	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Die Kernfrage des Völkerbunds,’ Schmoller’s Jahrbücher,
Band 48, p. 25.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
222
Notes
222
	203	 This structural identity between National-Socialist domestic law
and international law abolished the dualism which had existed in
pre-war Germany between the domestic legal system, dominated by
the Rule of Law, and the system of international relations which was
completely governed by power politics. Cf. Hermann Heller, ‘Staat,’
in Handwörterbuch der Soziologie (Stuttgart, 1931), Band II, p. 610;
Karl Mannheim, Rational and Irrational Elements in Contemporary
Society. L. T. Hobhouse Memorial Trust Lectures No. 4, delivered on 7
March 1934 (London, 1934), p. 34.
	204	 Hans Kelsen always opposed this doctrine and pointed out the dangers
connected with this concept of government. [ Allgemeine Staatslehre
(Berlin, 1925), p. 254].
	205	 Otto Mayer, Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht (Systematisches Handbuch
der Deutschen Rechtswissenschaft, Teil VI,) 3rd ed. (München, 1924)
Band 1, p. 8.
	206	 Carl J. Friedrich, ‘Separation of Powers,’ in Encyclopaedia of the Social
Sciences, ed. by Seligman and Johnson, vol. 13 (New  York, 1934),
pp. 663-6.
	207	 John Locke, Two treatises of civil government, §158.
	208	 Ernst Wolgast, ‘Die auswärtige Gewalt des Deutschen Reiches unter
besonderer Berücksichtigung des Auswärtigen Amtes’ (Arch. f.  öff.
Recht, N. F. Band V, p. 96); Friedmann ‘Geschichte und Struktur der
Notstandsverordnungen,’ Kirchenrechtliche Abhandlungen, 1905, p. 41.
	209	 ‘A speech in behalf of the Constitution against the Suspending and
Dispensing Prerogative. House of Lords, Dec. 10, 1766.’ (Published in
Hansard, Parlamentary History of England, (London 1813) vol. XVI,
pp. 251-313, especially pp. 265-6.)
	210	 ‘By executive power we mean no reference to those powers exercised
under our former government by the Crown as of its prerogative.’
The executive power, according to Jefferson, comprises ‘those powers
which are necessary to execute the laws (and administer the govern-
ment) and which are not in their nature either legislative or judiciary.’
( Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia, Richmond, 1853,
p. 230, appendix).
	211	 Ib., p. 137.
	212	 Metternich, Nachgelassene Schriften, Band VIII, p.  114. This letter
is extremely significant because its author had wielded tremendous
political powers during more than forty years as Chancellor of Austria
and had been overthrown by a political revolution only a few weeks
previously.
	213	 Rudolf Smend, Verfassung und Verfassungsrecht (München, 1928); Die
politische Gewalt im Verfassungsstaat und das Problem der Staatsform
(Festgabe für Wilhelm Kahl) (Tübingen, 1923).

--- Sayfa 305 ---
Notes
223
 
223
	214	 Rudolf Smend, Verfassung und Verfassungsrecht, pp. 97-98.
	215	 Carl Schmitt, Verfassungslehre (München, 1928), p. 131.
	216	 We are now able to correct our preliminary formulation to the effect
that the political sphere is a ‘sector of the state.’ Cf. note 2, and Ernst
Huber, ‘Die Einheit der Staatsgewalt,’ D. J. Z. 1934, pp. 954-5.
	217	 See note 215.
	218	 A. V. Dicey’s statement (Law of the Constitution, 8th ed., p.  198,
London, 1926) that ‘the predominance of regular law is opposed to the
influence of arbitrary power and excludes the existence of arbitrari-
ness of prerogative or even wide discretionary authority’ insofar as it
referred to discretionary authority, was never accepted in Germany.
Cf. Harold J. Laski, ‘Discretionary Power,’ Politica vol. I, pp. 284-5.
	219	 Supreme Court of the U. S.: Myers v. United States 272 US 52, 293.
	220	 Hermann Reuss, in a comment on a decision of the Prussian Supreme
Administrative Court (Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht) of June
30, 1936, J. W. 1937, p. 423.
	221	 Ib.
	222	 Festschrift zum 60. Geburtstag des Staatssekretärs Schlegelberger
(Berlin, 1937), p. 43.
	223	 Hermann Goering, ‘Die Rechtssicherheit als Grundlage der
Volksgemeinschaft,’ D. Jstz. 1934, p. 1427.
	224	 Entrepreneurial freedom has always been restricted by exceptional
decrees introduced into the Gewerbeordnung of June 21, 1869 RGBl.
1900, p. 87.
	225	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, August 10, 1936 (J. W. 1937,
p. 1032).
	226	 Ib.
	227	 Ib.
	228	 Ib.
	229	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Staatsethik und pluralistischer Staat,’ (Kant-Studien,
Band XXXV, p. 41).
	230	 Bayerischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof, June 5, 1936 (R. Verw. Bl. 1938,
p. 17).
	231	 Ib.
	232	 Ib.
	233	 August 18, 1896 (RGBl. 1898, 195).
	234	 Kammergericht, June 25, 1937 (Recht des Nährstandes 1938, No. 63 of
the decisions).
	235	 Reichsdisziplinarhof, August 30, 1938 (Dtsch. Verw. 1939, p. 281).
	236	 Ib.
	237	 Ib.
	238	 Oberlandesgericht Köln, February 1, 1935 (J. W. 1935, p. 1106).
	239	 June 7, 1909 (RGBl. 1909, 499).

--- Sayfa 306 ---
224
Notes
224
	240	 Oberlandesgericht Hamburg, May 12, 1937 (D. Jstz. 1937, p. 1712).
	241	 Ib.
	242	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, April 25, 1936 (J. W. 1936, p. 2945).
	243	 January 20, 1934 (RGBl. 1934, 45).
	244	 This question is especially significant because one of the most impor-
tant features of the new penal law introduced by National-Socialism
is the authority granted to punish acts, not mentioned in the code, by
analogy with acts specified by the court as punishable. This change in
penal law does not apply to labor law.
	245	 Reichsehrengerichtshof, September 30, 1935 (Arb. R. S. Band 25, p. 89).
	246	 Werner Mansfeld, ‘Die soziale Ehre,’ Dtsch. Recht 1934, p. 125.
	247	 Reichsgericht, November 14, 1936 (D. Jstz. 1936, p. 1941).
	248	 Reichsgericht, December 2, 1936 (RGZ. 153, p. 71).
	249	 Cf. below, ‘The Legal Status of the Jews,’ pp. 89-96.
	250	 The discrepancy between the ‘authoritarian leader state’ and the ‘sov-
ereign central parliament’ as proposed in the program is obvious. Nor
have the trusts been abolished, etc.
	251	 Reichsgericht, March 10, 1934 (RGZ. 144, p. 106 [112]).
	252	 Zivilprozessordnung, May 17, 1898 (RGBl. 1933, 821).
	253	 Reichsstrafgesetzbuch, May 15, 1871 (RGBl. 1876, 40).
	254	 Reichsgericht, July 6, 1934 (RGZ. 144, p. 306 [310]).
	255	 Landgericht Breslau, November 18, 1934 (D. Jstz. 1935, p. 413).
	256	 As a matter of fact the Breslau decision was an exceptional one and
was reversed by the next higher court.
	257	 Paetzold, in a comment on the decision of the Landgericht Breslau. (D.
Jstz. 1935, p. 413).
	258	 Reichsgericht (Plenarentscheidung), November 16, 1937 (RGZ. 156,
p. 305).
	259	 Landgericht Hamburg (Dtsch. R. Z. 1935, No. 631).
	260	 Ib.
	261	 Oberlandesgericht München, August 10, 1936 (Reger 1937, p. 571).
	262	 Amtsgericht Berlin, August 12, 1936 (Jgdr. u. Jgdwohlf. 1936, p. 283).
	263	 Ib.
	264	 A closer examination of the decision shows that the ‘self-interest’ of
the Jewish parents consisted in the fact that even after they knew the
racial laws ‘the father still clung to the child.’ Actually the father had
no choice in the matter under the German Civil Code. In the name of
‘public interest,’ the court held that the father had to give up the child
while continuing to provide for its support.
	265	 Reichsgericht, July 12, 1934 (RGZ. 145, p. 1).
	266	 Gesetz zum Schutz des deutschen Blutes und der deutschen Ehre,
September 15, 1935 (RGBl. 1935, 1146). (So-called ‘Nürnberger
Gesetze.’)

--- Sayfa 307 ---
Notes
225
 
225
	267	 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, August 18, 1896 (RGBl. 1898, 195).
	268	 This short period was set to prevent upsetting the family status of the
child and disturbance of the family peace over a long period of time.
	269	 Reichsgericht, November 23, 1937 (RGZ. 152, p. 390).
	270	 Ib.
	271	 Oberlandesgericht Naumburg, April 20, 1937 (Akademie Ztschr. 1937,
p. 587).
	272	 Massfeller, in a comment on the decision of the Oberlandesgericht
Naumburg (Akademie Ztschr. 1937, p. 587).
	273	 See p. 62 of this book.
	274	 This was a consequence of Dr. Schacht’s policy.
	275	 June 7, 1909, (RGBl. 1909, 499).
	276	 Reichsgericht, February 25, 1936 (RGZ. 150, p. 299). This decision was
overruled by the Reichsgericht on February 4, 1939 (J. W. 1939, p. 437).
	277	 Preussisches Oberverwaltungsgericht, November 21, 1935 (R. Verw.
Bl. 1936, p. 553; see Jugend und Recht, October 1936).
	278	 Ib.
	279	 Hamburger (Hanseatisches) Oberlandesgericht, May 4, 1937 (Hans.
R. u. Ger. Ztg. 1937, p. 216).
	280	 Ib.
	281	 Reichsgericht, March 30, 1938 (J. W. 1938, p. 1826).
	282	 Ib.
	283	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, June 2, 1937 (Arbeitsr. Entsch. 30, p. 153).
	284	 Reichsarbeitsgericht, March 20, 1937 (J. W. 1937, p. 2310).
	285	 Arbeitsgericht Saalfeld, July 13, 1937 (J. W. 1937, p. 2851).
	286	 Ib.
	287	 Gesetz über Mieterschutz und Mieteinigungsämter, June 29, 1926
(RGBl. 1926, 347).
	288	 Cf. Adami in J. W. 1938, p. 3217 and the official declaration of the Reich
Ministry of Justice: ‘Veröffentlichungen der Zeitschrift “Das Schwarze
Korps,”‘ (item 7) published in D. Jstz. 1939, p. 175.
	289	 Amtsgericht Berlin-Charlottenburg, March 9, 1938 (J. W. 1938,
p. 3173).
	290	 Amtsgericht Berlin-Schöneberg, September 16, 1938 (J. W. 1938,
p. 3045).
	291	 Landgericht Berlin, November 7, 1938 (J. W. 1938, p. 3242).
	292	 Ib.
	293	 Friedrich Schiller, ‘Letters upon the Aesthetic Education of Man,’
in Literary and Philosophical Essays (ed. by C. W. Eliot, New York,
1910), p.  229. ‘Der Mensch kann sich aber auf eine doppelte Weise
entgegengesetzt sein:  entweder als Wilder, wenn seine Gefühle über
seine Grundsätze herrschen; oder als Barbar, wenn seine Grundsätze
seine Gefühle zerstören.’

--- Sayfa 308 ---
226
Notes
226
	294	 Professor Kohlrausch, ‘Rassenverrat im Ausland’ Akademie Ztschr.
1938, p.  336, discussing a decision of the Grosser Strafsenat des
Reichsgerichts of February 23, 1938 (Akademie Ztschr. 1938, p. 349).
	295	 Reichsgericht, June 27, 1936 (Seufferts Archiv, Band 91, p. 65).
	296	 Ib.
	297	 Erlass des Reichswirtschaftsministers, Kart. Rundsch. 1936, p. 754.
	298	 Handwörterbuch der Rechtswissenschaft, Band VIII (Berlin, 1936),
article: ‘Stand,’ p. 683.
	299	 Dr.  Knauth, ‘Die Aufgaben der Polizei im nationalsozialistischen
Staat,’ D. J. Z. 1936, p. 1206, 1210.
	300	 Georg Schmidt, ‘Zu einem Reichspolizeigesetz,’ R. Verw. Bl. 1935,
p. 838.
	301	 Reinhard Hoehn, ‘Die Wandlungen im Polizeirecht,’ Dtsch. Rw. 1936,
p. 100.
	302	 Walther Hamel, in Frank, Deutsches Verwaltungsrecht (München,
1937), p. 391.
	303	 Ludwig von Koehler, Grundlehren des Verwaltungsrechts (Berlin und
Stuttgart, 1935), pp. 347-8.
	304	 Arnold Koettgen, Deutsche Verwaltung (2nd ed., Berlin, 1937), p. 143.
	305	 Reinhard Hoehn, ‘Das Führerprinzip in der Verwaltung,’ Dtsch.
Recht, 1936, p. 306.
	306	 Schriftleitergesetz of October 4, 1933 (RGBl. 1933, 713).
	307	 Reichsgericht, April 28, 1936 (D. Jstz. 1936, p.  1131). The author of
the rumor that there was no freedom of the press in the Third Reich
was not unconditionally acquitted. The court decided to investigate
whether by ‘freedom’ he meant the freedom of the Weimar System or
the regulated freedom of the Third Reich. Had it been determined that
he meant the latter, he would have been found guilty and sentenced to
the penitentiary for a maximum of five years.
	308	 Franz Wieacker, ‘Der Stand der Rechtsemeuerung auf dem Gebiet des
bürgerlichen Rechts,’ Dtsch. Rw. 1937, p. 7.
	309	 Werner Mansfeld, ‘Die Deutsche Arbeitsfront,’ Dtsch. Arb. R. 1933,
p. 139.
	310	 Arnold Koettgen, ‘Polizei und Gesetz,’ R. Verw. Bl. 1938, p. 173.
	311	 At this point in our discussion, the justification of our undifferenti-
ated treatment of state and party authorities is quite evident. A purely
juristic analysis of the situation would treat the Labor Front and the
Estates as public corporations. But this would only obscure the real
situation.
	312	 Gesetz über Änderung einiger Vorschriften der Reichsversicherung­
sordnung, December 23, 1936 (RGBl. 1936, 1128); Reichsversicherung­
sordnung of July 19, 1911 (RGBl. 1926, 9, originally published RGBl.
1911, 509).

--- Sayfa 309 ---
Notes
227
 
227
PART II
Chapter I
	313	 Gustav Radbruch, Rechtsphilosophie (3rd ed., Leipzig, 1932), pp. 182 ff.
	314	 The fact that, historically viewed, the principle of inviolability of law
originated in Natural Law is purposely stressed by Radbruch, who
in the preface of his book announces his opposition to certain more
fashionable currents of thought and identifies himself with an epoch
which the National-Socialist legal philosopher Larenz had ridiculed as
the ‘Night of the Enlightenment.’
	315	 The authoritative character of these utterances is indicated by their
conspicuous publication in most law reviews.
	316	 Hans Gerber, ‘Volk und Staat (Grundlinien einer deutschen
Staatsphilosophie),’ Ztschr. f. dtsch. Kult. Philos., N. F. 1936, Band III
pp. 15-56, especially p. 24.
	317	 Ib., p. 23.
	318	 Ib., p. 42.
	319	 Ib., p. 41.
	320	 Alfred Rosenberg, ‘Lebensrecht, nicht Formalrecht,’ Dtsch. Recht
1934, p. 233.
	321	 Alfred Rosenberg, Der Mythos des 20. Jahrhunderts (53rd-4th ed.,
München, 1934), pp. 571-2.
	322	 Gustav Walz, ‘Der Führerstaat,’ D. Jstz., 1936, p. 814-15.
	323	 Rudolf Smend, Verfassung und Verfassungsrecht (München, 1928),
p. 102.
	324	 See note 321.
	325	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Nationalsozialistiches Rechtsdenken,’ Dtsch. Recht,
1934, p. 225.
	326	 Leuner, ‘Spekulatives und Lebensgesundes Staatsrecht,’ Jugend und
Recht, 1937, p. 49.
	327	 Hitler proclaimed this principle on the meeting of German lawyers in
Leipzig in a famous speech (October 1933). This dogma, incidentally,
completely denies the Kantian distinction between legality and moral-
ity. Cf. Georg Rusche and Otto Kirchheimer, Punishment and Social
Structure (New York 1939) p. 179.
	328	 Carl Dernedde, ‘Gesetz und Einzelanordnung,’ Ztschr. f.  d. ges.
Staatsw, vol. 97, p. 377.
	329	 See note 16.
	330	 Hermann Heller, ‘Bürger und Bourgeois,’ Neue Rundschau 1932,
p. 725.
	331	 Speech delivered before the conference on legal and social philosophy
April 11, 1914 (Chicago University); published in The Philosophical
Review, vol. XXV, 1916. pp. 761-777, especially p. 761.

--- Sayfa 310 ---
228
Notes
228
	332	 Carl L. Becker, ‘Afterthoughts on Constitutions,’ in C. J. Read, The
Constitution Reconsidered (New  York, 1938), p.  396. Cf. Otto von
Gierke, Johannes Althusius und die Entwicklung der naturrechtlichen
Staatstheorien (4th ed., Breslau 1929) pp. 318, 366, 391.
	333	 T. Werner Jaeger, Paideia, the Ideals of Greek Culture (translated by
Gilbert Highet) (New York, 1939), p. 323. Smend was partly correct
when, in his praise of Carl Schmitt’s earlier writings (especially Die
Diktatur), he wrote: ‘The attitude of antiquity towards the state and
the antiquarian approach are beautifully combined in this book.’
(Smend: Verfassung und Verfassungsrecht, München, 1928, p. 104).
	334	 Reinhard Hoehn, Otto von Gierke’s Staatslehre und unsere Zeit
(Hamburg, 1936).
	335	 Alfred Manigk, ‘Rechtsfindung im neuen Staat,’ Arch. f. Rechts-u. Soz.
Phil. 1936, p. 176.
	336	 A. J. Carlyle, A History of Medieval Political Theory in the West
(Edinburgh and London, 1903), vol. I, p. 8.
	337	 Ib.
	338	 Charles H. McIlwain, The Growth of Political Thought in the West
(New York, 1932), pp. 364-5.
	339	 Gesetz
zur
Behebung
der
Not
von
Volk
und
Reich
(Ermächtigungsgesetz), March 24, 1933 (RGBl. 1933, 141).
	340	 Charles H. Mcllwain, ‘The Fundamental Law behind the Constitution
of the United States,’ in C. J. Read, The Constitution Reconsidered
(New  York, 1938), pp. 5, 7, and McIlwain, Constitutionalism and
the Changing World (Collected Papers), article ‘Liberalism and the
Totalitarian Ideals’ (New York, 1939), p. 263.
Chapter II
	341	 Ernst Troeltsch, Die Soziallehren der christlichen Kirchen und Gruppen,
3rd ed. (Tübingen, 1923), English translation by Olive Wyon, The
Social Teachings of the Christian Churches (London, 1931).
	342	 Eduard Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen (5th ed., Leipzig 1909),
English translation by Alleyne, A History of Greek Philosophy
(London, 1881).
	343	 See note 341.
	344	 Martin Luther’s Sämtliche Werke (Deutsch), Band 50 (Frankfurt
a.  M.  — Erlangen, 1851), p.  349. Cf. Erich Brandenburg, Martin
Luther’s Anschauung vom Staate und der Gesellschaft (Halle, 1901),
p. 5, note 6.
	345	 Martin Luther, Von weltlicher Obrigkeit, Sämtliche Werke, Band 27,
(Frankfurt a.  M.  — Erlangen, 1851), p.  83. In his latest work, Der
Leviathan in der Staatslehre des Thomas Hobbes (Hamburg 1938),

--- Sayfa 311 ---
Notes
229
 
229
Carl Schmitt tries to prove that modern freedom of thought and con-
science did not have its historical origin, as ordinarily assumed, in
Protestantism. Schmitt argues that, according to Hobbes, the indi-
vidual is free to believe what he desires to believe, provided he submits
to the religious cult prescribed by the state. Thus the undermining of
the omnipotent Leviathan was started by Hobbes himself. ‘A few years
after the publication of the Leviathan the first liberal Jew came across
this ordinarily unperceivable inconsistency’ (Schmitt, op. cit. p. 86.)
This ‘first liberal Jew,’ by a ‘simple logical maneuver’ characteristic
of ‘Jewish mentality,’ managed to pervert Hobbes’ line of reasoning.
Whereas Hobbes speaks of a sphere of reservation which the omnipo-
tent state graciously grants to the individual regarding his religion,
Spinoza (for Schmitt refers to no-one else by the application ‘first lib-
eral Jew’) postulates the principle of the freedom of belief in a man-
ner which makes it the duty of the state to respect all opinions in the
sphere of religion except when they undermine public safety. Spinoza,
according to Schmitt, thus took the decisive step in developing the
conception of the neutral and agnostic state of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, i. e., the conception of the very state which evokes
the deepest contempt on the part of National-Socialist Germany.
It is not difficult to detect the political purpose of this novel histori-
cal interpretation. By declaring the doctrine of freedom of conscience
to be a product of Jewish thought, Schmitt attempts to denounce the
fight of the Confessional Church for this doctrine as a Jewish affair.
Schmitt, however, overlooks two things. First:  the principle of
tolerance as developed by Spinoza in his Tractatus Politicus had
been realized by Roger Williams in Rhode Island at a time when
Spinoza was only two years old. Secondly: Spinoza’s conception that
the freedom of thought must be granted to everyone and that the
right of intervention is limited only to the public manifestation, not
to the private creed, is in no way a product of ‘Jewish mentality.’ It
was a German of pure Aryan origin who developed the same idea
in his doctoral dissertation: Johann Wolfgang Goethe (cf. Dichtung
und Wahrheit, 3.  Band 11. Buch; English translation by John
Oxenford: The Autobiography of Goethe, ‘From my own Life, Truth
and Poetry.’ London, 1891, p. 408).
	346	 Published in D. Jstz. 1937, p. 873.
	347	 Niccolo Machiavelli, ‘Discourses on the first ten Books of Titus Livius,
Book II, Chap. 2,’ in The Historical, Political, and Diplomatic Writings
of Niccolo Machiavelli (translated from the Italian by Christian E.
Detmold, Boston 1882), vol. II, p. 232.
	348	 Op. cit., Book I, Chap. 11 (vol. II, p. 127).
	349	 Hermann Heller, Staatslehre (Leyden, 1934), p. 218.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
230
Notes
230
	350	 Norbert Gürke, ‘Der Stand der Völkerrechtswissenschaft,’ Dtsch. Rw.
Band II, p. 75.
	351	 Otto von Gierke, Johannes Althusius und die Entwicklung der natur-
rechtlichen Staatstheorien (2nd ed., Breslau, 1902), p. 73.
	352	 Hugo Preuss, Verfassungspolitische Entwicklungen in Deutschland
und Westeuropa (Historische Grundlegung zu einem Staatsrecht der
Deutschen Republik). (Aus dem Nachlass von Dr. Hugo Preuss her-
ausgegeben und eingeleitet von Dr.  Hedwig Hintze, Berlin, 1925),
pp. 400-1; Alfred Vierkandt, Der Geistig-sittliche Gehalt des neueren
Naturrechts (Wien, 1927), p. 17.
	353	 Hans Kelsen, Die philosophischen Grundlagen der Naturrechtslehre
und des Rechtspositivismus (Charlottenburg, 1928), pp. 39-40.
	354	 Hermann Heller, ‘Political Science,’ in Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences,
ed. by Seligman and Johnson, vol. 12 (New York, 1934) p. 218.
	355	 Roscoe Pound, in Interpretation of Legal History (New  York, 1923,
p. 19), has shown that the Historical School of Law was based upon
an irrational conception of Natural Law. Cf. Rexius, ‘Studien zur
Staatslehre der historischen Schule,’ H. Z. Band 107, pp. 513-15.
	356	 Carl Larenz, ‘Volksgeist und Recht, zur Revision der Rechtsanschauung
der historischen Schule,’ Ztschr. f. dtsch. Kult. Philos. Band I, p. 40,
especially p. 52.
	357	 Hegel, ‘Die Verfassung Deutschlands.’ Sämtliche Werke (herausgege-
ben von Lasson), Band VII (Leipzig, 1913) pp. 3-149.
	358	 Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (herausgegeben von
Lasson) 3rd ed. (Leipzig, 1930), §182, Zusatz, p. 334, English transla-
tion by S. W. Deyde, Philosophy of Right (London, 1896), p. 186.
	359	 Ib. §324, Zusatz, p. 369. English translation, p. 332.
	360	 Hegel,
‘Über
die
wissenschaftlichen
Behandlungsarten
des
Naturrechts.’ Sämtliche Werke (herausgegeben von Lasson), Band VII
(Leipzig, 1913), pp. 329-416, especially p. 371.
	361	 Friedrich Meinecke, Die Idee der Staatsraison (München, 1924), p. 435.
	362	 Hans Frank, ‘Die Aufgaben des Rechts,’ Akademie Ztschr. 1938, p. 4.
	363	 Alfred Rosenberg, Der Mythos des 20. Jahrhunderts (München, 1934),
p. 525.
	364	 Otto Koellreutter, Grundfragen des völkischen und staatlichen
Lebens im deutschen Volksstaat (Berlin-Charlottenburg, 1935),
p.  14, and Koellreutter, Volk und Staat in der Weltanschauung des
Nationalsozialismus (Berlin, 1935), pp. 12 ff.
	365	 Carl Larenz, ‘Die Rechts— und Staatsphilosophie des deutschen
Idealismus und ihre Gegenwartsbedeutung’ in Handbuch der
Philosophie, (herausgegeben von A.  Baeumler und M. Schröter),
Abteilung IV, (München and Berlin, 1934), pp. 153, 187-8.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
Notes
231
 
231
	366	 Julius Loewenstein, Hegels Staatsidee; ihr Doppelgesicht und ihr
Einfluss im 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 1927), note 45.
	367	 Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (herausgegeben von
Lasson), 3rd ed. (Leipzig, 1930), §270, p. 212; English translation by
S. W. Deyde, Philosophy of Right (London, 1896), p. 263.
	368	 Verhandlungen des Ersten Deutschen Soziologentages (Tübingen,
1911), p. 187.
	369	 Ernst Troeltsch, ‘Das stoisch-christliche Naturrecht und das moderne
profane Naturrecht’ in Gesammelte Werke, Band IV (Tübingen, 1921-
25), pp. 166-91, especially p. 186.
	370	 Ernst Troeltsch, ‘Das christliche Naturrecht (Überblick), in
Gesammelte Werke, Band IV (op. cit.), pp. 156-66, especially
p. 165.
	371	 Max Weber in Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen 1921 pp. 499-
501) saw that beginnings of a proletarian Natural Law had been
checked by the Marxian hostility to Natural Law.
	372	 Friedrich Engels, The Housing Question, (Moscow  — Leningrad
1935), p. 88.
	373	 Critique of the Gotha Programme, edited by C. P. Dutt (New York,
1937), p. 17.
	374	 Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I (translated by Samuel Moore and Edward
Aveling, Chicago, 1912), pp. 258-9.
	375	 Ib., vol. III (translated by Ernest Untermann, Chicago, 1909), p. 399.
	376	 Hellmuth Plessner, Grenzen der Gemeinschaft (Eine Kritik des sozi-
alen Radikalismus) (Bonn, 1924), p. 36.
	377	 Karl Marx, op. cit. vol. III. p. 954.
	378	 Marx and Engels, Gesamtausgabe, vol. I, p. 325.
	379	 Michael Freund, George Sorel (Der revolutionäre Konservativismus)
(Frankfurt a. M. 1932).
	380	 Quoted in Waldemar Gurian, Der integrale Nationalismus in
Frankreich (Charles Maurras und die Action française) (Frankfurt
a. M., 1931) p. 84.
	381	 Ernst Jünger, Der Kampf als inneres Erlebnis (5th ed., Berlin,
1933) p. 78 and Ernst Jünger, ‘Die totale Mobilmachung’ in Krieg und
Krieger (ed. by Ernst Jünger, Berlin, 1930).
	382	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Nationalsozialistisches Rechtsdenken’ Dtsch. Recht,
1934, p. 225.
	383	 Even more characteristic than Carl Schmitt’s well-known essay on the
nature of political activity is a book by Richard Behrendt: Politischer
Aktivismus (Berlin, 1932).
	384	 Alfred Meusel, ‘Der klassische Sozialismus,’ Arch. f.  Rechts. u.  Soz.
Phil. Band XXIV, 1930-1, pp. 125-168, especially 148.

--- Sayfa 314 ---
232
Notes
232
Chapter III
	385	 Carl L. Becker, The Declaration of Independence (New York, 1922) pp.
57, 60, 265, 274, 278. In the National-Socialist literature the problem is
discussed by Max Mikorey: ‘Naturgesetz und Staatsgesetz,’ Akademie
Ztschr. 1936, p. 932 especially p. 942). Cf. Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond
Good and Evil, Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future (1st ed. London,
1901), p. 32.
	386	 The materialistic interpretation of history endeavors to derive the
changing problem of natural science from the change in productive
relations. Cf. Otto Bauer, ‘Das Weltbild des Kapitalismus,’ in Der leb-
endige Marxismus, Festgabe zum 70. Geburtstag von Karl Kautsky (ed.
by Otto Jennssen, Jena 1924). Yet the sociology of the natural sciences
is still an almost entirely unexplored territory.
	387	 Otto von Gierke, Das deutsche Genossenschaftsrecht, Band IV (Berlin
1913), p. 391, note 47.
	388	 Ib, p. 392, note 49; p. 491.
	389	 Leibniz, Deutsche Schriften (Berlin, 1838) Band I, p. 414.
	390	 George Gurvitch, article ‘Natural Law’ in Encyclopaedia of the Social
Sciences, ed. by Johnson and Seligman (New York, 1933), vol. XI, pp.
284-90.
	391	 The above references to the history of communal Natural Law are
necessitated by the fact that National-Socialist propagandists of this
theory—Professor Wolgast of Würzburg and his disciple Dietze–omit
reference to it. Since National-Socialism is supposed to be the origi-
nal creation of Adolf Hitler, such historical references are unfavorably
viewed in the Third Reich. Dietze’s ‘Naturrecht aus Blut und Boden’
(Akademie Ztschr. 1936, p. 818) represents the best summary of the
National-Socialist theory of communal Natural Law.
	392	 252 US 416, 433.
	393	 Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf (42nd ed., München, 1933) p. 433.
	394	 Th. Buddeberg, ‘Descartes und der politische Absolutismus,’ Arch.
f. Rechts. u. Soz. Phil. Band XXX, 1937, p. 544.
	395	 Andreas Pfenning, ‘Gemeinschaft und Staatswissenschaft (Versuch
einer systematischen Bestimmung des Gemeinschaftsbegriffes),’
Ztschr. f. d. ges. Staatsw., Band 96, pp. 312 ff.
	396	 Konrad Heiden, History of National-Socialism (translated from the
German, London, 1934), has emphasized the influence of the Russian
emigration upon the development of National-Socialism. In the early
stages of the National-Socialist movement, Munich was the ‘Coblenz’
of the White Russian émigrés. It was from these circles that National-
Socialists also borrowed this particular form of anti-Semitism.
	397	 Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen, 1921), p. 631.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
Notes
233
 
233
	398	 Hellmuth Dietze, Naturrecht der Gegenwart (Bonn, 1936)
	399	 The work of Professor Wolgast of the University of Würzburg
(‘Völkerrecht’ in Das gesamte Deutsche Recht in systematischer
Darstellung, Teil XIII, pp. 698-993, Berlin 1934) is of importance in this
connection. Wolgast acknowledges his indebtedness to Adolf Hitler,
the Leader, and to Toennies, the Seer of the Third Reich.
	400	 Norbert Gürke, Grundzüge des Völkerrechts (Berlin, 1936).
	401	 Ferdinand Toennies, Einführung in die Soziologie (Stuttgart, 1931).
	402	 Henry Maine, Ancient Law (London and Toronto, 1917), pp. 67-
100, especially p.  100. Cf. Ferdinand Toennies, Gemeinschaft und
Gesellschaft (6th ed., Berlin, 1926), Buch III, §7, p. 182, and Toennies,
Soziologische Studien und Kritiken (Jena, 1925), Band I, p. 54.
	403	 Karl Landauer, ‘Zum Niedergang des Fascismus,’ Gesellschaft, 1925,
p. 168.
	404	 Hans Freyer, Soziologie als Wirklichkeitswissenschaft (Leipzig, 1930),
p. 240.
	405	 Cf. Ernest Barker, Introduction to Otto Gierke, Natural Law and the
Theory of Society 1500-1800 (Cambridge, 1934), p. 17.
	406	 In the light of this claim it is of interest to note that during the post-
war period the concept of Gemeinschaft was also used for a time in the
Marxist labor movement in Germany. Though this appropriation of
the Gemeinschaft concept never got very far in the socialist movement,
it was not an isolated phenomenon. A somewhat similar Gemeinschaft
theory is to be found in Friedrich Engels’ Origin of the Family. The
primitive conditions ‘which preceded alienation,’ as sketched by
Engels, had many communal Natural Law traits.
Plessner’s contention that the Marxian theory is intelligible to the
proletariat only as a theory of liberation from the machine is correct.
But when he continues to say that ‘Socialism abolishes society for
the sake of community’ he is generalizing tendencies which existed
in the German socialist youth movement at the time the book was
written. These tendencies never became important in the policies of
the German working class parties. ( Hellmuth Plessner, Grenzen der
Gemeinschaft; eine Kritik des sozialen Radikalismus. Bonn 1924, p. 36.)
	407	 Johannes Heckel, ‘Der Einbruch des jüdischen Geistes in das deutsche
Staats— und Kirchenrecht durch F. J. Stahl,’ H. Z. 155, 529.
	408	 The present author, in spite of his complete skepticism regarding the
proposition that there is a close association between an author’s race
and his political theory, thinks it is not without interest to present at
least one example of a genuine ‘Aryan’ who has dealt with political the-
ory and who has not arrived at the theory of the Gemeinschaft. Justus
Möser, concerning whose Germanism National-Socialist authors have
never raised any questions, wrote:  ‘Any civil society is like a stock

--- Sayfa 316 ---
234
Notes
234
company. Every citizen is a stockholder. A serf is a member of the state
who has no shares and hence is without assets and liabilities. This is
no more contrary to religion than it is to be an employee of the East
India Company without possessing shares in it. At bottom there is an
explicit or tacit social contract among all landowners who turned in
their farms against shares.’ (Justus Möser, Patriotische Phantasien, III,
3rd. ed., Berlin, 1804, No. 62).
	409	 Carl Dernedde, ‘Werdendes Staatsrecht,’ Ztschr f. d. ges. Staatsw. 1935,
Band 95, p. 349.
	410	 Hans Gerber, ‘Volk und Staat (Grundlinien einer deutschen
Staatsphilosophie),’ Ztschr. f. dtsch. Kult. Philos., Band III, 1936, p. 47.
	411	 Heinrich Herrfahrdt, ‘Politische Verfassungslehre,’ Arch. f.  Rechts.
u. Soz. Phil. Band XXX, 1936, p. 109.
	412	 Carl Schmitt, Über die drei Arten des rechtswissenschaftlichen Denkens,
(Schriften der Akademie für Deutsches Recht; Hamburg, 1934), p. 13.
	413	 Theodor
Maunz,
in
Frank
Deutsches
Verwaltungsrecht
(München, 1937).
	414	 Carl Schmitt, Über die drei Arten des rechtswissenschaftlichen Denkens
(Hamburg, 1934), p. 52.
	415	 Hegel, Philosophie der Weltgeschichte. Sämtliche Werke (herausgege-
ben von Lasson), Band VIII (Leipzig, 1923), p. 925; English transla-
tion by J. Sibree, Lectures on the Philosophy of History (London, 1890),
pp. 470-1.
	416	 Carl Schmitt, Legalität und Legitimität (München, 1932), p. 13.
	417	 Georg Dahm, ‘Die drei Arten des rechtswissenschaftlichen Denkens,’
Ztschr. f. d. ges. Staatsw., Band 95, p. 181.
	418	 Friedrich Völtzer, ‘Vom Werden des deutschen Sozialismus,’ Ztschr.
f. d. ges. Staatsw., Band 96, p. 1.
	419	 Friedrich Kühn, ‘Der vorläufige Aufbau der gewerblichen Wirtschaft,’
Arch. f. öff. Recht, Band 27, p. 334.
	420	 Ib., p. 360.
	421	 Friedrich Völtzer, op. cit., p. 9.
	422	 Georg Havestädt, ‘Grundverhältnisse des Eigentums,’ Verwaltung­
sarchiv, Band 42, pp. 337-68.
	423	 Ib., p. 365.
	424	 Ernst Huber, ‘Die Rechtsstellung des Volksgenossen (erläutert am
Beispiel der Eigentumsordnung),’ Ztschr. f. d. ges. Staatsw. 1935, p. 449.
	425	 Hans Peter Ipsen, Politik und Justiz (Das Problem der justizlosen
Hoheitsakte), (Hamburg, 1937).
	426	 Ib., p. 276.
	427	 He says that they refer ‘not to heteronomous but to homogeneous
spheres of a state in which justice rules.’ (Ib, p. 239.)
	428	 Ib., p. 12.
	429	 Ib., p. 12.

--- Sayfa 317 ---
Notes
235
 
235
	430	 Max Weber, ‘Der Sinn der Wertfreiheit der soziologischen und ökono-
mischen Wissenschaften,’ (Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wissen­schaftslehre).
(Tübingen, 1922), p. 458.
	431	 Hans Frank, ‘Der Nationalsozialismus und die Wissenschaft der
Wirtschaftslehre,’ Schmoller’s Jahrbuch, Band 58, pp. 641-50, espe-
cially p. 643.
	432	 Cf. Heinrich Rickert, Kant als Philosoph der modernen Kultur (ein
geschichtsphilosophischer Versuch) (Tübingen, 1924), pp. 50, 125.
PART III
Chapter I
	433	 See: Ferdinand Toennies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (6th and 7th
eds., Berlin, 1926), p. 227, and Werner Sombart, Das Wirtschaftsleben
im Zeitalter des Hochkapitalismus (München and Leipzig 1927)
Band I, p. 48.
	434	 Otto Hintze, ‘Preussens Entwicklung zum Rechtsstaat,’ Forschungen
zur Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Geschichte, Band 32, p. 394.
	435	 Ib., Staatsverfassung und Heeresverfassung (Dresden, 1906), p. 43.
	436	 Michael Freund, ‘Zur Deutung der Utopia des Thomas Morus (Ein Beitrag
zur Geschichte der Staatsraison in England),’ H. Z. Band 142, p. 255.
	437	 Quoted in John Rushworth, Historical Collections (London, 1721), vol.
II, p. 323.
	438	 The Autobiography and Correspondence of Sir Simonds D’Ewes (edited
by James Orchard Halliwell), (London, 1845), vol. II, p. 130.
	439	 4 Wallace 2 (121, 127).
	440	 F. Morstein-Marx, ‘Roosevelt’s New Deal und das Dilemma ameri-
kanischer Staatsführung,’ Verwaltungsarchiv, Band 40, 1935, pp.
155-213.
	441	 Reinhard Hoehn, ‘Parlamentarische Demokratie und das neue
deutsche Verfassungsrecht,’ Dtsch. Rw. 1938, pp. 24-54.
	442	 A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution,
8th ed. (London, 1926), pp. 198-9.
	443	 Cf. William Ebenstein, ‘Rule of Law im Lichte der reinen Rechtslehre,’
Revue internationale de la théorie du droit, 1938, p. 316.
	444	 The document is reprinted in Altmann, Ausgewählte Urkunden zur
Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Verfassungs— und Verwaltungsge­
schichte, 2nd ed. (Berlin, 1914).
	445	 Carl Brinkmann, in Landeskunde der Provinz Brandenburg (Berlin,
1910), Band II, p. 398, ‘Wirtschaftsgeschichte.’
	446	 Bernhard Erdmannsdörfer, Deutsche Geschichte im Zeitalter des
Absolutismus (Berlin, 1892-3), Band I, p. 423.
	447	 On the occasion of the 500th anniversary of the Hohenzollern
Dynasty in 1915, Otto Hintze had to admit that the Prussian nobility

--- Sayfa 318 ---
236
Notes
236
had indeed known how to exploit the situation. (Die Hohenzollern und
ihr Werk [Berlin, 1916], p. 206.)
	448	 Otto Hintze, ‘Preussens Entwicklung zum Rechtsstaat,’ Forschungen
zur Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Geschichte, Band 32, p. 429.
	449	 Dr.  Spatz in Landeskunde der Provinz Brandenburg (Berlin, 1910),
Band II, p. 275, ‘Zur Verwaltungsgeschichte der Städte und Dörfer,
Marken und Kreise.’
	450	 Edgar Loening, Gerichte und Verwaltungsbehörden in Brandenburg-
Preussen (Halle, 1914), p. 332.
	451	 Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen, 1922), p. 703.
	452	 Otto Hintze, ‘Preussens Entwicklung zum Rechtsstaat,’ Forschungen
zur Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Geschichte, Band 32, p. 379.
	453	 Hugo Preuss, Verfassungspolitische Entwicklungen in Deutschland
und Westeuropa (Historische Grundlagen zu einem Staatsrecht der
Deutschen Republik), (Berlin, 1925), p. 401.
	454	 Friedrich II., König von Preussen: Gesammelte Werke, Band 9, p. 205.
	455	 Otto Hintze, ‘Zur Agrarpolitik Friedrichs des Grossen,’ Forschungen
zur Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Geschichte, Band 10, p. 287.
	456	 Cf. Karl Brinkmann, op. cit. Band II, p. 298.
	457	 The delimitation of this procedure was related to the concept of status
oeconomicus, which came more and more to refer to questions con-
nected with the royal domains.
	458	 Cf. A. Wagner, Der Kampf der Justiz gegen die Verwaltung in Preussen
(dargelegt an der rechtsgeschichtlichen Entwicklung des Konfliktgesetzes
von 1844), (Hamburg, 1936).
	459	 G. F. Knapp, Die Bauernbefreiung und der Ursprung der Landarbeiter
in den älteren Teilen Preussens (2d ed., München, 1927). The decree
provided for the cession of land by the liberated peasants as compen-
sation to the Junkers for their losses. Hereditary copyholders had to
give up one third of their land, non-hereditary ones one half and peas-
ants without horses were entirely excluded from the soil.
	460	 Otto Hintze, Die Hohenzollern und ihr Werk, (Berlin, 1916), p. 495.
	461	 Gustav Schmoller made the following tabulation of the distribution of
the rural population under the absolute monarchy in Brandenburg (Zur
Verfassungs-, Verwaltungs- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Leipzig 1898, p. 623):
1618
1746
1774
1804
18558
16646
18842
18097
peasants
13644
12709
17063
21045
cotters
2659
18456
28925
33228
attached to large estates.
(Cotters (Kossäten) tilled land but without regular holding in the village
fields and without cattle.)

--- Sayfa 319 ---
Notes
237
 
237
	462	 Marie Dumler, ‘Die Bestrebungen zur Befreiung der Privatbauern in
Preussen,’ Forschungen zur Brandenburgisch-Preussischen Geschichte,
Band 33, p. 187.
	463	 Rudolf Hilferding, Das Finanzkapital. (Marx-Studien, Band II),
(Wien, 1923), p. 432.
	464	 Friese, quoted in Edgar Loening, Gerichte und Verwaltungsbehörden
in Brandenburg-Preussen, (Halle, 1914), p. 133. Walter Hamel (Dtsch.
Recht 1936, p. 413) has described this important development of police
law. He proposes to substitute the Prussian Police Law of 1931 for
Friese’s decree of 1808.
	465	 Eckhart Kehr, ‘Zur Genesis der preussischen Bürokratie und des
Rechtsstaats (Ein Beitrag zum Diktaturproblem),’ Gesellschaft, 1932,
p. 109.
	466	 Rudolf Hilferding, op. cit., p. 432.
	467	 In contrast with the monarchy of Frederic the Great, in which the lead-
ership of the army and the upper hierarchy of the administration was
staffed exclusively by the nobility, while the state was directed politi-
cally by the king and his bourgeois councillors, in post-Napoleonic
Germany political leadership too fell into the hands of the aristocratic
higher bureaucracy. Prince von Hardenberg in Prussia, Prince von
Metternich in Austria were its most famous representatives.
	468	 Ludwig Waldecker, Von Brandenburg über Preussen zum Reich. (Berlin
1935), p. 114.
	469	 Franz Schnabel, Deutsche Geschichte im 19. Jahrhundert (Freiburg,
1929), Band II, p. 110.
	470	 Emil Lederer, ‘Zur Soziologie des Weltkrieges,’ Arch. f. Szw. Band 39, p. 359.
	471	 Ib., p. 373.
	472	 Konrad Heiden, History of National-Socialism (translated from the
German, London, 1934), p. 1.
Chapter II
	473	 Fritz Tarnow, Parteitag der Sozialdemokratischen Partei Deutschlands
zu Leipzig 1931 (Berlin, 1931), p. 45.
	474	 See Deutschlands wirtschaftliche Lage in der Jahresmitte 1939 (pub-
lished by the Reichskreditgesellschaft, Berlin, 1939).
	475	 Joseph Schumpeter, ‘Zur Soziologie der Imperialismen,’ (Arch. f. Szw.
Band 46, p. 309).
	476	 Fft. Ztg. May 22, 1935.
Chapter III
	477	 Ferdinand Toennies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (Berlin, 1926).
	478	 Cf. Hans Freyer, Soziologie als Wirklichkeitswissenschaft (Leipzig 1930).

--- Sayfa 320 ---
238
Notes
238
	479	 Alfred von Martin, ‘Zur Soziologie der Gegenwart,’ Zeitschrift für
Kulturgeschichte, Band 27, pp. 94-119, especially p. 97.
	480	 Werner Sombart, A New Social Philosophy (Princeton, 1937).
	481	 See ‘Germany’s Economic War Preparations’ in The Banker, vol. 41,
1937, p. 138.
	482	 Heinz Marr, Die Massenwelt im Kampf um ihre Form (Zur Soziologie
der deutschen Gegenwart) (Hamburg, 1934), pp. 549, 564.
	483	 Ib., p. 550.
	484	 Reinhard Hoehn, review of Koellreutter, Grundriss der Allgemeinen
Staatslehre (J.W. 1936, p. 1653).
	485	 Andreas Pfenning, ‘Gemeinschaft und Staatswissenschaft (Versuch
einer systematischen Bestimmung des Gemeinschaftsbegriffs),’ Ztschr.
f. d. ges. Staatsw. Band 96, p. 314.
	486	 Reinhard
Hoehn,
Rechtsgemeinschaft
und
Volksgemeinschaft
(Hamburg, 1935), p. 81.
	487	 Hermann Schmalenbach, ‘Die soziologische Kategorie des Bundes,’
Die Dioskuren, Band 1, p. 35-105.
	488	 Werner Mansfeld, ‘Der Führer des Betriebes,’ J. W. 1934, p.  1005.
Till 1933 Mansfeld was counsel for the mining industry. ‘Whenever
the legislature attempts to regulate the differences between masters
and workmen, its counsellors are always the masters.’ (Adam Smith,
Wealth of Nations, Chap. X.)
	489	 Heinz Marr, op. cit. pp. 466, 7, 8.
	490	 Ib.
	491	 D. A. Z., April 28, 1938.
	492	 Ib.
	493	 Ib.
	494	 Ib.
	495	 Ib.
	496	 Werner Mansfeld, ‘Vom Arbeitsvertrag,’ Dtsch. Arb. R. 1936, p. 124.
	497	 Karl Marx, Capital, vol. I, (translated by Samuel Moore and Edward
Aveling, Chicago, 1912) p. 692.
	498	 Andreas Pfenning, ‘Gemeinschaft und Staatswissenschaft,’ Ztschr. f. d.
ges. Staatsw. Band 96, p. 302.
	499	 Gottfried
Neese,
‘Die
verfassungsrechtliche
Gestaltung
der
“Einpartei,”’ Ztschr. f d. ges. Staatsw. Band 98, p. 680.
	500	 See note 498.
	501	 Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, (Tübingen, 1922) p. 198.
	502	 Hellmuth Plessner, Grenzen der Gemeinschaft, (Eine Kritik des sozi-
alen Radikalismus), (Bonn, 1924) p. 54.
	503	 Hence, it is interesting to recall that more than 130 years ago the
Federalists realized the same point when they were fighting
Jeffersonian democracy. One of their leaders, Fisher Ames, wrote

--- Sayfa 321 ---
Notes
239
 
239
in 1802 to Rufus King: ‘We need, as all nations do, the compres-
sion on the outside of our circle of a formidable neighbour, whose
presence shall at all times excite stronger fears than demagogues
can inspire the people with towards their government.’ (Quoted in
Raymond Gettell, History of American Political Thought (New York,
1928), p. 185.) This letter of Fisher Ames draws its meaning from the
dread of Jacobinism which swept the western world after the French
Revolution.
	504	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Totaler Feind, totaler Krieg, totaler Staat,’ Völkerrecht
und Völkerbund, Band IV, 1937, pp. 139-145.
	505	 Quoted in Rasse und Recht, 1935, p. 29.
	506	 Article ‘Rechtsstaat’ in ‘Handwörterbuch der Rechtswissenschaft,’
Band VIII, pp. 572-3.
	507	 Carl Schmitt (Geistesgeschichtliche Lage des Parlamentarismus, 2nd
ed., München, 1926, p. 87) once pointed out quite aptly that the his-
tory of the stereotype of the bourgeoisie is as important as the history
of the bourgeoisie itself. However, Schmitt accused Marxism unjustly
of having given an almost supernatural aura to this stereotype. ‘A
synthesis of all that is hateful with which one does not discuss — but
which one annihilates.’ The racial problem has a bogey function in
National-Socialist theory of the community. [On the ‘bogey’ cf. Paul
Szende, ‘Eine soziologische Theorie der Abstraktion,’ Arch.f. Szw.
Band 50, p. 469].
	508	 Reinhard
Hoehn,
Rechtsgemeinschaft
und
Volksgemeinschaft
(Hamburg, 1935) p. 83. (‘Vom Standpunkt der Volksgemeinschaft ist
jede Wertgemeinschaft eine Zersetzungsgemeinschaft.’)
	509	 Fritz Kern, ‘Über die mittelalterliche Anschauung von Staat, Recht
und Verfassung,’ H. Z. Band 120, pp. 63-4.
	510	 Ludo Moritz Hartmann, ‘Der Begriff des Politischen,’ (Festgabe für
Lujo Brentano zu dessen 70. Geburtstag, München 1916, p. 220.)
	511	 Carl Schmitt, ‘Der Begriff des Politischen’ Arch. f. Szw Band 58, p. 1.
	512	 Rudolf Smend, Die politische Gewalt im Verfassungsstaat und das
Problem der Staatsform, (Festgabe für Wilhelm Kahl), (Tübingen,
1923), p. 17.
	513	 Joseph Schumpeter, ‘Zur Soziologie der Imperialismen,’ Arch. f. Szw.
Band 46, pp. 1-39, 275-310.
	514	 Hubert R. Knickerbocker, The German Crisis (New York, 1932).
	515	 On September 20, 1922, Mussolini said in a speech at Udine: ‘Our pro-
gram is very simple — we want to rule Italy!’
	516	 Walther Rathenau, Gesammelte Schriften, Band V, p. 272.
	517	 Hans Kelsen, ‘The Party Dictatorship,’ Politica, vol. II, p. 31.
	518	 Heinrich Herrfahrdt, ‘Politische Verfassungslehre,’ Arch. f.  Rechts-
u. Soz. Phil.,’ Band XXX p. 107.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
240
Notes
240
	519	 The Earl of Balfour, introduction to Walter Bagehot, The English
Constitution (Oxford, 1928), p. xxiv.
	520	 ‘First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801,’ in A Compilation of the
Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. I, (New York, 1897), p. 310.
	521	 Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (herausgegeben von
Lasson), 3rd ed. (Leipzig, 1930), §270, p. 212; English translation by
S. W. Deyde, Philosophy of Right (London, 1896), p. 263.
	522	 Fft. Ztg., January 22, 1937.
	523	 Alfred von Martin, ‘Zur Soziologie der Gegenwart,’ Zeitschrift für
Kulturgeschichte, Band 27, pp. 94-117.
	524	 Arnold Koettgen, ‘Die Gesetzmassigkeit der Verwaltung im
Führerstaat,’ R. Verw. Bl. 1936, pp. 457-62.
	525	 See Karl Mannheim, Mensch und Gesellschaft im Zeitalter des Umbaus
(Leyden, 1935), p.  27 and ib., ‘Rational and Irrational Elements in
Contemporary Society,’ L. T. Hobhouse Memorial Trust Lectures No.
4, delivered on 7 March 1934 (London, 1934), p. 14.
	526	 Carl Schmitt, Römischer Katholizismus und politische Form (Hellerau,
1923), p.  31. This book was later withdrawn from circulation by
Schmitt himself.
	527	 Ib., p. 30
	528	 Rainer Heyne, ‘George Sorel und der autoritäre Staat des 20.
Jahrhunderts,’ Arch. d. öff. Rechts, N. F., Band 29, p. 129.
	529	 Ib.
	530	 Er nennt’s Vernunft und braucht’s allein,
Nur tierischer als jedes Tier zu sein.
(Goethe, Faust.)

--- Sayfa 323 ---
241
APPENDIX TO THE 1941 EDITION
REICHSGESETZBLATT
(Official Statute Book)
Teil I
1933
Issued at Berlin, February 28, 1933
No. 17
Contents: Decree of the President of the Reich for the Protection of the
People and the State. February 28, 1933, p. 83.
DECREE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REICH FOR
THE PROTECTION OF THE PEOPLE AND THE
STATE … OF FEBRUARY 28, 1933.
On account of the Article 48, paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Reich,
the following decree is issued for the defence against Communistic, state-
endangering acts of violence:
§ 1.
The Articles 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 124, and 153 of the Constitution of the
German Reich are put out of force until further notice. Restrictions of per-
sonal freedom, the right of free expression of opinion, including the right
of the press, the right of associations and meetings, interference with the
secrets of letters, of the post, the telegraph and the telephone, the issue of
search warrants, as well as of orders for confiscation or restriction of prop-
erty — all these restrictions are therefore also admissable beyond the oth-
erwise legally fixed limitations.
§ 2.
If the necessary measures for the re-establishment of public security and
order are not taken the Government of the Reich may then temporarily
exercise the authority of the supreme Government of the land.
§ 3.
The authorities of the lands and municipalities (Municipal Associations)
have to comply with the orders of the Government of the Reich issued on
account of 2 within the framework of their competence.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
242
APPENDIX I TO THE 1974 GERMAN EDITION1
Proceeding before the Reichsarbeitsgericht
(Reich Labor Court)
The dual nature of the Hitler regime dawned on me when I represented
several former employees of the Deutscher Freidenker-Verband (German
Freethinkers Union). The association had been forcibly coordinated
(gleichgeschaltet) and my clients were claiming compensation for their dis-
missal. They based their claim on an in-house wage agreement (Haustarif)
from 1932, the legality of which the association disputed. The Deutscher
Freidenker-Verband, the defendant in this civil proceeding, carried in its
name the subtitle “Verband für Freidenkertum und Feuerbestattung e.V.”
(Union for Free Thought and Burial by Cremation). The objective of the
various police measures aimed at the union’s forcible co-ordination was to
interdict its ideological-political (weltanschaulich-politisch) activity without
interfering with its economic activity in the burial business. In the words of
the Reichsarbeitsgericht (Reich labor court), the union’s ideological-political
activity was “incompatible in its orientation (Zielrichtung) with the nature
(Wesen) of the National Socialist state and the Christian foundations upon
which it rests.”
The courts of first and second instance dismissed my clients’ claims with
the argument that they had failed to prove that a collective wage agree-
ment (Tarifvertrag) existed in written form. The burden of proof in this case
was even greater because the plaintiffs, unlike the defendant, did not have
access to the files of those unions that had been parties to the collective
wage agreement, all of which were now under National Socialist control.
The attempt to prove the existence of a written Tarifvertrag by taking depo-
sitions from the unemployed union functionaries who had participated
in the negotiations of the agreement in 1932 failed due to memory loss
(Gedächtnisschwund) on their part. A query lodged with the Tarifregister
(tariff register) was unsuccessful.
Even before the judgment of the Landesarbeitsgericht (regional labor
court) [in Berlin], which had dismissed my clients’ claims, had become
legally binding (rechtskräftig), I  was contacted by an employee of the
Deutsche Arbeitsfront (German Labor Front), who claimed that before
1  Source: “Anhang I,” in Ernst Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat, translated by Manuela
Schöps (Frankfurt: Europäische Verlagsanstalt, 1974), 243–5.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
Appendix I to the 1974 German Edition
243
 
243
the upheaval (Umbruch) he had worked as an assessor (Beisitzer) at the
regional labor court. He told that he knew me as well as my counterpart
in the legal proceeding, Dr. Meissinger, from our previous appearances at
the court. He was willing to provide both of us access to a formal, written,
and signed copy of the collective wage agreement. Explaining the reason-
ing for his step, which even at that time (at the end of 1933) was unusual,
he remarked that even though he had for decades been a functionary of the
Deutschnationaler Handlungsgehilfen-Verband (German National Union of
Commercial Employees), the decidedly “national” orientation of his asso-
ciation had not prevented his suffering the same fate as the functionaries
of other associations. The first victims of forcible coordination, he claimed,
had been the communists, after that the “Marxists” were targeted, then the
Social Democrats; later the free trade unions and Christian trade unions
followed. Now it was his association’s turn. Before his dismissal took effect,
he wanted to outwit [the Nazis] (“denen da noch ein Schnippchen schlagen”).
The proof of the Tarifvertrag’s existence created a new situation.
Although the Reich labor court in a judgment of November 7, 1934 rejected
the Revision (appeal) that I had preemptively filed (RAG 14,266), it expressly
emphasized that the plaintiffs could sue for a retrial (Restitutionsklage) in
order to affect the “legal assertion (Geltendmachung) of the belatedly found
collective wage agreement” (p. 269).
In the subsequent appeal proceeding before the regional labor court, the
plaintiffs were granted a favorable judgment, which the defendant appealed.
As a matter of routine, I added to the legal aid application on behalf of my
clients the request to be recognized as their legal representative during the
appeal procedure. Even before my request had been decided, I read in the
papers about a decree (Verfügung) by Reichsjustizminiser (Reich minis-
ter for justice) [Franz] Gürtner which stipulated that Jewish lawyers were
no longer eligible to serve as Armenanwälte, or public defenders. When
I raised the matter with the President of the Reich labor court, Dr. Oegg,
he explained that he, as judge (as I should well know), was bound exclu-
sively (ausschließlich) by legislation proclaimed in a procedurally correct
manner, not by newspaper announcements. An order that was publicized
merely in a newspaper did not bind him. President Dr. Oegg then issued
me with a previously signed certificate of appointment as a public defender
(Armenanwalt).
In the oral proceeding on July 25, 1936 the defendant [the Deutscher
Freidenker-Verband] was no longer just represented—as had been the
case up until that point—by Dr. Meissinger, the lawyer for the Deutscher
Arbeitgeberverband (German Employers’ Association), who had also
recently become a victim of Gleichschaltung, but also by a second attorney,
who did not think it necessary to introduce himself. Dr. Meissinger, with
whom I had crossed swords in numerous labor law proceedings, managed

--- Sayfa 326 ---
244
Appendix I to the 1974 German Edition
244
to quickly whisper: “Careful, Gestapo.” And the attorney was indeed con-
tent to delineate the Gestapo view, and how it manifested itself in the vari-
ous measures undertaken in pursuit of forcible coordination. These orders
and decrees (Verfügungen) were so contradictory and unclear that the oral
proceeding was for the most part taken up by disputes between the legal
representatives over the interpretation of these orders and decrees.
It is unnecessary to report in detail the arguments that were heard in the
oral proceeding of July 25, 1936, all of which can be found in the judgment
(RAG 17,161). The Reich labor court reduced the essence of the matter to the
question of whether an association, despite a change in name, purpose, and
legal form (Rechtsform), retained its legal personality (Rechtspersönlichkeit).
The plaintiffs argued in the affirmative, the defendant vehemently rejected
this argumentation. According to the plaintiffs, the defendant, after its
ideological, political orientation was jettisoned, continued to function
as a “Bestattungskasse” (“Burial bank”) (the name it had also since been
given). Because the defendant was thus operating in keeping with its core
economic essence (wirtschaftlichen Kerngehalt), its legal personality never
ceased to exist. According to the defendant, the Gestapo had dissolved the
old association and founded a new one.
The proceeding was conducted in a somewhat more relaxed manner
and reached its climax in a dialogue between the attorneys. In response to
the claim by the plaintiffs’ legal representative that the German civil code
did not provide for the creation of an association out of nothing (aus dem
Nichts) by governmental fiat (durch staatlichen Hoheitsakt), the defendant’s
attorney argued that any action the Gestapo required or deemed necessary
was lawful (rechtswirksam). “Even dissolve a marriage?,” asked the plain-
tiffs’ attorney. “Without a doubt,” responded the defendant’s representa-
tive. At that moment, the presiding President of the court intervened and
declared the proceeding close because all legal questions had been suffi-
ciently debated.
The judgment was handed down on the same day. The appeal that the
other side had lodged was dismissed with costs. We had won. The Reich
labor court expressly held that “the replacement of one association by
another can only be undertaken validly (wirksam) by following the proce-
dures of the civil code” (RAG, 17,166).
A few days after the judgment, I received the copy of a Gestapo order.
I was notified that the compensation that the Reich labor court had awarded
my clients in its judgment had been confiscated and seized to benefit the
Prussian state.
Translated by Jens Meierhenrich

--- Sayfa 327 ---
245
APPENDIX II TO THE 1974 GERMAN EDITION1
Proceeding before the Amtsgericht
(District Court) Berlin
It must have been as late as 1938 when I received a request from prison to
visit a detainee in pre-trial detention. The person in question was a Jew for
whom an arrest warrant had been issued for a violation of the Decree of
the Reich President for the Defense against Malicious Attacks against the
Government of the National Uprising of March 21, 1933 (Verordnung des
Reichspräsidenten zur Abwehr heimtückischer Angriffe gegen die Regierung
der nationalen Erhebung).2 The detention occurred when the accused, while
perusing the latest issue of the weekly Der Stürmer in a public display case
at a bus stop, muttered to himself, “This is an old hat” (“Das ist ja alles
alter Käse”). At this very moment, the accused told me, a member of the
SA (Schutzabteilung), whom he had not previously noticed, arrested him,
claiming that he had insulted the Führer. When I asked my client what had
prompted his utterance, he replied that he remembered very clearly that
he had seen the photograph [on view in the display case] some time ago in
the magazine Die Woche. In both weeklies, he claimed, the photograph was
published as evidence of the catastrophic conditions in the Soviet Union.
After reviewing the court documents, which included the image from
Der Stürmer, and inspecting Die Woche, which I did in the Staatsbibliothek
[a famous library in Berlin, at the time the largest in the German-speaking
world], I was indeed able to determine that the images were identical. Once
I had procured a copy of Die Woche, I explained to my client that the judge,
if presented with the image in Die Woche, would—by comparing it to the
image in Der Stürmer available in the files—have to conclude that the
accused’s utterance had been truthful. I explained that it was very likely
that the relevant district court judge would lift the arrest warrant and sus-
pend the investigation.
We were not just dealing with a judicial arrest warrant, however. The
Gestapo had also issued an arrest warrant for my client. I was unable to
negotiate about it being lifted as well. For at the entrance to the Gestapo
1  Source: “Anhang II,” in Ernst Fraenkel, Der Doppelstaat, translated by Manuela
Schöps (Frankfurt: Europäische Verlagsanstalt, 1974), 246–7.
2  Translator’s note: In the 1974 edition, the decree was listed with the wrong date. It
has been corrected in this edition.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
246
Appendix II to the 1974 German Edition
246
headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Straße, there stood a sign that declared Jews
were barred from entering the building. I told my client that the Gestapo
would be less inclined to end its investigation if the court suspended the
investigation than it would be in the event of his punishment (Bestrafung).
A highly intelligent man, the accused wondered whether it would not be
“smarter” not to make use of the image in Die Woche, which I had in the
meantime procured. I told him that that was my thought precisely.
In the main hearing (Hauptverhandlung) at the district court it was evi-
dent that the accused was able to hold his own. He implored the judge to
appreciate that he was very nervous because the times were difficult for
Jews, in his case even more so because his wife had fallen seriously ill. He
pleaded guilty. Asked by the judge whether he was still insistent that Der
Stürmer had published an antiquated image, he replied that he had no idea
why he had made such a ridiculous claim.
Once the eager SA member who had made the arrest testified to how
deeply the words of the accused had hurt him, a soldier of the Führer, the
prosecutor called for a relatively short prison sentence. My closing state-
ment (Verteidigungsrede) focused solely on the question of sentencing.
The court sided with the prosecution, but it refused to count the pre-trial
detention toward the prison sentence, something I had not requested. In its
judgment, the court accepted the prosecution’s reasoning (which I had not
challenged) that it was just as much a case of fraud when old wine is being
sold as young wine as when a magazine publishes an outdated image as a
new one. Proof of the accused’s libelous intent (verleumderische Absicht)
was his use of the words “an old hat” (“alter Käse”).
After serving a relatively short prison sentence, the accused was set free.
He was spared being sent to a concentration camp.
Translated by Jens Meierhenrich

--- Sayfa 329 ---
247
Table of Cases
Reichsgericht
6.
Strafsenat
23.
1. 34
J. W. 34, p. 767.
”
1.
Zivilsenat
10.
3. 34
RGZ. 144, p. 106.
”
7.
”
6.
7. 34
RGZ. 144, p. 306.
”
4.
”
12.
7. 34
RGZ. 145, p. 1.
”
2.
”
22. 10. 34
RGZ. 145, p. 367.
”
1.
Strafsenat
24.
9. 35
J. W. 35, p. 3377.
”
2.
Zivilsenat
25.
2. 36
RGZ. 150, p. 299.
”
6.
”
28.
2. 36
Höchst. R. Rspr. 36, p. 900.
”
1.
Strafsenat
28.
4. 36
D. Jstz. 36, p. 1131.
”
5.
Zivilsenat
6.
5. 36
J. W. 36, p. 2982.
”
1.
”
27.
6. 36
Seuffert’s Archiv 91, p. 65.
”
1.
Strafsenat
6.
8. 36
Dtsch. Str. 36, p. 429.
”
4.
Zivilsenat
2. 11. 36
J. W. 37, p. 98.
”
1.
”
14. 11. 36
D. Jstz. 36, p. 1941.
”
1.
”
2. 12. 36
RGZ. 153, p. 71.
”
5.
”
3.
3. 37
J. W. 37, p. 1723.
”
3.
”
16.
3. 37
J. W. 37, p. 2304.
”
3.
”
7.
9. 37
RGZ. 155, p. 296.
”
Grosser
”
16. 11. 37
RGZ. 156, p. 305.
”
4.
”
21. 11. 37
RGZ. 152, p. 390.
”
5.
Strafsenat
17.
2. 38
J. W. 38, p. 1018.
”
Grosser
”
23.
2. 38
Akademie Ztschr. 38, p. 349.
”
2.
Zivilsenat
30.
3. 38
J. W. 38, p. 1825.
”
4.
Strafsenat
8.
9. 38
J. W. 38, p. 2899.
”
2.
”
22.
9. 38
J. W. 38, p. 2955.
”
2.
”
27. 10. 38
J. W. 39, p. 29.
”
4.
”
3.
1. 39
J. W. 39, p. 629.
”
2.
Zivilsenat
4.
2. 39
J. W. 39, p. 437.
”
4.
”
17.
2. 39
R. Verw. Bl. 39, p. 727.
Reichsarbeitsgericht
17. 10. 34
J. W. 35, p. 378.
”
25.
4. 36
J. W. 36, p. 2945.
”
2.
6. 37
Arbeitsr. Entsch. vol. 30, 153.
”
10.
2. 37
RAG. 18, p. 170.
”
20.
3. 37
J. W. 37, p. 2310.
”
14.
4. 37
J. W. 37, p. 2310.
Reichsehrengerichtshof
30.
9. 35
Arb. R. S. vol. 25, p. 89.
Volksgerichtshof
6.
5. 38
D. Jstz. 38, p. 1193.
Kammergericht
      ”   (Oberlandesgericht Berlin)
3.
5. 35
D. Jstz. 35, p. 1831.
”
”
31.
5. 35
Dtsch. R. Z. 35, p. 624.

--- Sayfa 330 ---
248
Table of Cases
248
Kammergericht
(Oberlandesgericht Berlin)
25.
6. 37
Recht des Reichsnährstandes
38, No. 63.
”
”
12.
7. 35
R. Verw. Bl. 36, p. 61.
”
”
12.
5. 38
Jgdr. u. Jgdwohlf. 38, p. 272.
Oberlandesgericht
Braunschweig
29.
5. 35
Höchst. R. Rspr. 36, p. 98.
”
Dresden
31.
1. 35
D. J. Z. 35, p. 439.
”
Düsseldorf
10.
7. 35
D. J. Z. 35, p. 1123.
”
Hamburg
31.
3. 36
D. J. Z. 36, p. 771.
”
”
15.
4. 37
Funk Archiv 37, p. 257.
”
”
4.
5. 37
Hans. R. u. Ger. Ztg. 37,
B. 216.
”
”
12.
5. 37
D. Jstz. 37, p. 1712.
”
Karlsruhe
25.
6. 36
J. W. 36, p. 3268.
”
Kiel
25. 11. 35
Höchst. R. Rspr. 36, p. 592.
”
Köln
1.
2. 35
J. W. 35, p. 1106.
”
München
10.
8. 36
Reger 37, p. 571.
”
”
27.
1. 37
Jahrb. f. Entsch. der freiw.
Gbk. 15, p. 58.
”
”
4. 11. 37
Entsch. des KG. u. OLG.
München 17, p. 273.
”
”
8. 12. 37
D. Jstz. 38, p. 724.
”
Naumburg
20.
4. 37
Akademie Ztschr. 37, p. 587.
”
Stettin
25.
3. 36
J. W. 37, p. 241.
”
”
14.
4. 37
J. W. 37, p. 2212.
”
Zweibrücken
24. 12. 34
D. J. Z. 35, p. 442.
Landgericht
Berlin
1. 11. 33
D. Jstz. 34, p. 64.
”
”
7. 11. 38
J. W. 38, p. 3242.
”
Breslau
18. 11. 34
D. Jstz. 35, p. 413.
”
Dresden
18.
3. 35
J. W. 35, p. 1949.
”
Hamburg
6.
5. 36
Jgndr. u. Jgndwohlf. 36,
p. 281.
”
”
Dtsch. R. Z. 35, No. 631.
”
Tübingen
25.
1. 34
J. W. 34, p. 627.
”
Zwickau
14.
3. 37
J. W. 38, p. 2145.
Landesarbeitsgericht    Berlin
17. 11. 34
D. Jstz. 35. p. 73.
”
Gleiwitz
Dtsch. Rpfl. 36, p. 59.
”
München
31.
7. 37
D. Jstz. 37, p. 1159.
Sondergericht
Breslau
Dtsch. R. Z. 35, No. 554.
”
Darmstadt
26.
3. 34
J. W. 34, p. 1747.
Sondergericht
Hamburg
15.
3. 35
J. W. 35, p. 2988.
”
Hamburg
5.
6. 35
J. W. 35, p. 2988.
Amtsgericht
Berlin
12.
8. 36
Jgndr. u. Jgndwohlf. 36, p. 283.
”
Berlin-Lichterfelde
15.
4. 35
Das Recht, 35, No. 8015.
”
Berlin-Charlottenburg
3.
9. 38
J. W. 38, p. 3172.
”
Berlin-Schöneberg
16.
9. 38
J. W. 38, p. 3045.
”
Frankfurt-Höchst
4.
5. 37
Dtsch. Recht 37, p. 466.
”
Hamburg
15.
4. 35
Das Recht, 35, No. 8016.
”
Wilsen
26.
2. 38
J. W. 38, p. 1264.
Arbeitsgericht
Saalfeld
13.
7. 37
J. W. 37. p. 2850.

--- Sayfa 331 ---
Table of Cases
249
 
249
Administrative Courts
Reichsdienststrafhof
11.
2. 35
Ztschr. f. Beamtenr. 36, p. 104.
”
15.
6. 37
Ztschr. f. Beamtenr. 37, p. 104.
”
30.
8. 38
Dtsch. Verw. 39, p. 281.
Badischer
Verwaltungsgerichtshof
11.
1. 38
Bad. Verw. Ztschr. 38, p. 87.
Bayrischer
Verwaltungsgerichtshof
8.
5. 36
Reger 37, p. 533.
”                 ”
”
5.
6. 36
R. Verw. Bl. 38, p. 17.
Hamburger
Oberverwaltungsgericht
7. 10. 34
R. Verw. Bl. 35, p. 1045.
Preussisches
Oberverwaltungsgericht
24. 10. 34
OVG. 94, p. 138.
”
”
”
”
25. 10. 34
R. Verw. Bl. 35, p. 458.
”
”
”
”
10.
1. 35
R. Verw. Bl. 35, p. 923.
”
”
”
”
2.
5. 35
R. Verw. Bl. 35, p. 577.
”
”
”
”
23.
5. 35
J. W. 35, p. 2670.
”
”
”
”
21. 11. 35
R. Verw. Bl. 1936, p. 553.
”
”
”
”
5. 12. 35
OVG. 97, p. 117.
”
”
”
”
19.
3. 36
J. W. 36, p. 2189.
”
”
”
”
27.
5. 36
J. W. 36, p. 2277.
”
”
”
”
2.
7. 36
J. W. 36, p. 3415.
”
”
”
”
8. 10. 36
J. W. 37, p. 1031.
”
”
”
”
28.
1. 37
Verkehrsr. Abh. 37, p. 319.
”
”
”
”
29.
6. 37
R. Verw. Bl. 37, p. 762.
”
”
”
”
10. 11. 38
J. W. 39, p. 382.
”
”
”
”
15. 12. 38
R. Verw. Bl. 39, p. 544.
Sächsisches Oberverwaltungsgericht
4. 12. 36
J. W. 37, p. 1368.
”
”
”
”
25. 11. 38
R. Verw. Bl. 39, p. 105.
Württembergischer
Verwaltungsgerichtshof
9.
9. 36
Dtsch. Verw. 36, p. 385.
Preussischer    Kompetenzgerichtshof
27.
6. 36
R. Verw. Bl. 36, p. 860.

--- Sayfa 332 ---
250

--- Sayfa 333 ---
251
Index
Absolutism:
and arbitrariness, 113
of bureaucracy, 165, 170
dictatorial, 170
monarchical, 157ff, 170
Agnostic state, 48, 218
Arbitrary and discretionary power, 62,
69f, 222
Autarcy, 177f
Becker, Carl L., 112, 133
Best, Werner, 25, 33, 39f, 61f
Building permit, 58
Burke, Edmund, 123
Capitalism:
competitive and monopoly, 70, 172
183ff, 205
Dual State, 171f
National-Socialist Party, 61, 183
National-Socialist theory, 153
Natural Law, 131
Normative State, 71ff
and rationality, xii, 73, 205ff
Third Reich, 196, 203ff
Cartels, 97, 172, 175
Catholicism:
National-Socialism, 17f, 56, 77, 118
Natural Law, 116
Charity organizations, 21, 47f
Church struggle, 17ff, 22f, 42, 117, 119
Civil Servant, 29f, 47, 78f, 216
Class structure, 63, 86, 102, 186, 197
Class-struggle, 102, 144, 186
Communism:
Communist Party, 3f, 12, 16f, 49f
55f, 239
in a broader sense, 19
indirect communistic activities, 18f
sympathizers, 23
Concentration camp, 12, 39ff
Concrete theory of order, 99, 142
145, 196
Confessional Church:
National-Socialism, 18f
Natural Law, 117f
Constitution:
Third Reich, 3ff, 83, 96, 187
USA, 136, 219f
Weimar, 13ff, 32, 61, 168ff
Contracts, 76f, 85
Control of business, 70, 173f, 179ff
Coup d’état, 4f, 13
Courts of Social Honor, 40, 81
Decisionism, 142, 145
Dicey, A. V., 156, 222
Enabling Law, 4f, 8, 113
Enemy of the state, 43, 45
Engels, Friedrich, 127, 231
Estate system:
history, 157
National-Socialist theory, 144
Normative State, 97ff
Shop Troops, 195
Excès de pouvoir, 72
Family relations, 55f, 87f
Frank, Hans, 125, 149
Freedom:
of association, 15, 59
of conscience, 32, 116, 118f
National-Socialist concept of, 47f
of press, 100, 225
of worship, 15, 32, 54f
Freissler, Roland, 50, 59, 72, 199
Frick, Wilhelm, 38
Gestapo:
economic policy, 72
functions, 21f, 216
jurisdiction, 43ff
and legal order, 26ff
organization, 9, 211
Gierke, Otto von, 112, 122, 134, 226
Goering, Hermann, 74
Government and administration,
66ff, 201
Hegel, Georg Fr. W., 60, 124ff, 143, 204
High treason, 49ff

--- Sayfa 334 ---
252
Index
252
Hindenburg, Paul von, 4
Historical School of Law, 123f
Hobbes, Thomas, 139, 227
Imperialism, 131, 176, 184, 202
Industrial revolution, 190
Inflation, 180
International law, 65f, 76, 135, 138, 203
Jefferson, Thomas, 67, 204
Jehovah’s Witnesses:
Natural Law, 117
Prerogative State, 15, 17, 53ff
Jews:
martial law, 96
National-Socialist Party, 7, 35f, 83, 96
National-Socialist theory, 87, 140
148, 199f
Normative State, 73, 87ff
Prerogative State, 62, 90ff, 215
Junker, 157f, 162ff, 234
Justice:
formal and material 46, 86
restricted to Germans, 108f
restricted to National-Socialists, 147
Kant, Immanuel, 122, 226
Labor Front:
agent of Gestapo, 7
anti-Jewish activities, 92
class-struggle, 144
estate system, 101
Normative State, 80f
Shop Troops, 194ff
Landlord and tenant, 93ff
Leader principle, 112, 192ff, 204
Lederer, Emil, 168
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 134
Liberal principles, 17, 95, 108
Locke, John, 66f
Luther, Martin, 118ff
Machiavelli, Nicolo, 111, 120f
Mannheim, Karl, 206ff, 221
Martial law:
American law, 24f, 156
English law, 24, 52f
German law:
history, 11f, 212
National-Socialist theory, 25, 200
Third Reich, 3ff, 52, 57, 96, 156
Weimar Constitution, 5ff
World War, 168
Marx, Karl, 13, 127ff, 196f
Marxian Socialism, 114, 126ff, 229, 231
Master and servant, 33f, 80f, 92
Mcllvain, Charles, 113
Middle classes, 173, 189f
Miles perpetuus, 158, 164, 170
Military conscription, 164, 170
Montesquieu, Charles de, 67
Morality and law, 110f, 226
Mortgage, 85
Möser, Justus, 232
National-Socialist Party:
and competing
organizations, 22, 28
and courts, 34ff, 216
and members, 34, 146f
and outsiders, 35f, 147, 148
and state, xiii, 7f, 22, 34
National-Socialist Party program:
anti-Semitism, 36, 83, 87, 96
anti-capitalistic tendencies, 85, 175
positive Christianity, 32, 119f
private law, 61, 83, 85
racial idea, 87
Ne bis in idem, 51
Niemöller, 39
Normativism, 140ff
Nulla poena sine lege, 109
Pacifism:
National-Socialism, 53, 197
Social-Democracy, 131
Peasant law:
history, 157, 160ff, 165
Third Reich, 77f, 189
Penal law:
and formal justice, 47
procedure, 50ff
political crimes, 33, 49ff
People’s Tribunal, 50ff
Police law:
history, 161, 163ff, 166
Third Reich:
and estate system, 98ff
and Gestapo, 27
and judicial review, 25ff
positive and negative
functions 20ff
Press law, 8, 100, 225

--- Sayfa 335 ---
Index
253
 
253
Property:
economic aspect, 172f
National-Socialist theory, 61
and Normative State, 72ff, 185ff
and Prerogative State, 14
Protective custody, 12, 30, 40
Protective tariff, 165, 172, 177ff
Protestantism:
and Natural Law, 116
and Third Reich:
clergy, 18
missionary work, 19, 21
women’s organization, 22
Punishment:
administrative and
criminal, 41, 166
Racial doctrine:
and Natural Law, 133f
Third Reich, 87ff, 113
Raison d’état:
and National-Socialism, 108
and Natural Law, 125, 160
and the police state, 167
Rathenau, Walter, 202f
Rearmament, 138, 173, 177, 179ff, 189f,
205, 208
Re-employment, 182
Religion:
and National-Socialism, 119ff
Reservation of politics:
external and internal, 74
and international law, 65
and inviolability of law, 52, 107
and religion, 119
and science, 148f
Robespierre, Maximilien de, 219
Roman law:
Natural Law, 116
National-Socialist attitude
towards, 112
Rosenberg, Alfred, 54, 109, 125,
137, 220
Rule of Law:
America, 156
England, 154ff
Germany:
history:
enlightened despotism, 159
Revolution of 1848, 167
imperial Germany, 167f
Weimar Republic, 169f
Third Reich:
economic aspect, 185
international law, 221
National-Socialist theory, 199
Normative State, 71
Prerogative State, 9ff
Savigny, Friedrich Karl von, 123f 165f
Schmalenbach, Hermann, 192f
Schmitt, Carl, 5, 11, 13, 19, 25, 35 52, 57,
60f, 65f, 68, 76, 110, 118 130f,
142, 198, 201f, 217f, 226f 237
Schumpeter, Josef, 183, 201f
Sectarian movements:
Natural Law, 116
Third Reich, 23
Self-defense of state, 17
Smend, Rudolf, 68, 110, 201f, 226
Social-Democracy, 127, 130, 132, 203
Social insurance, 102f
Social reform, 181
Sohm, Rudolf, 46
Sombart, Werner, 154, 188
Sorel, George, 130, 207
Spinoza, Baruch, 227
Storm Troopers, 5, 7, 34, 190ff, 196
Stuart absolutism, 11, 38, 48, 54f, 155
Syndicalism, 130
Tawney, Richard, 48
Taxes, 78f, 180
Toennies, Ferdinand, 139, 154, 188, 231
Totalitarian state:
estate system, 97ff
National-Socialist theory, 60ff
Total mobilization, 60, 170
Total war, 198
Trade unions, 7, 144, 175, 179ff, 186f
Traditional law:
absolute monarchy, 158
National-Socialism, 123, 201
Traffic regulation, 43f
Troeltsch, Ernst, 115, 126, 139
Unfair competition, 35, 79, 89
Vaterlandspartei, 168ff
Weber, Max, 4, 12, 46, 48, 137f, 148f,
159, 192, 198, 206, 212, 214
Youth movement, 139