--- Sayfa 1 ---
THE ESSENTIALS OF THE
ISLAMIC FAITH

--- Sayfa 3 ---
New Jersey
2005

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Copyright © 2005 by The Light, Inc. & Iþýk Yayýnlarý
First edition in English published 2000
Originally published in Turkish as
Ýnancýn Gölgesinde by Nil Yayýnlarý 1991
08 07 06 05   2 3 4 5
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording
or by any information storage and retrieval system without permission in writing
from the Publisher.
Published by The Light, Inc.
26 Worlds Fair Dr. Suite C
Somerset, New Jersey, 08873, USA
www.thelightpublishing.com
Translated from Turkish by Ali Ünal
For other titles by Gülen http://en.fgulen.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data for the previous edition
Gülen, M. Fethullah,
[Ýnancýn Gölgesinde. English.]
Essentials of the Islamic Faith / M. Fethullah Gülen.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 9757388327
1. Islam--Doctrines. 2. Islam--Essence, genius, nature
3. Islam--Appreciation
I. Title.
BP165.5 G8513 2000
297.2--dc21
00-010841
Printed by
Çaðlayan A.Þ., Izmir - Turkey
January 2005

--- Sayfa 5 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
About the Author......................................................................................vii
Chapter 1: The Existence and Unity of God ..............................1
Traditional arguments for God’s existence ..............................................4
Arguments for Divine Unity ..................................................................9
False arguments about the origin of existence ......................................16
Chapter 2: The Invisible Realm of Existence ............................35
Arguments for the existence of invisible beings ....................................38
The spirit and its identity ....................................................................41
Death and the spirit after death............................................................50
The spirit in the intermediate world ....................................................52
Supernormal phenomena......................................................................56
Dreams ................................................................................................61
Angels and Their Functions..................................................................64
Jinn and their functions........................................................................69
Angels and jinn in this world................................................................70
Jinn and human beings ........................................................................72
Satan and humanity..............................................................................74
Spells and sorcery ................................................................................80
Chapter 3: Divine Decree and Destiny,
and Human Free Will........................................................................89
Introduction ........................................................................................91
The Manifest Record and the Manifest Book........................................93
Divine Decree and Destiny ..................................................................95
Destiny and human free will ..............................................................102
Divine Destiny and Decree, and Divine Grace....................................109
The Divine Wisdom in creating people differently..............................111
Questions on Destiny and human free will ........................................116

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Chapter 4: The Resurrection and the Afterlife ........................129
The benefits of belief in the Resurrection ..........................................131
Qur’anic arguments ..........................................................................137
General arguments ............................................................................142
The Resurrection in Revealed Scriptures ............................................158
Chapter 5: Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood....163
Prophet Muhammad in the Bible ......................................................166
His life ..............................................................................................170
His character and high morality ........................................................175
His achievements ..............................................................................179
His knowledge of the past ................................................................186
His predictions ..................................................................................187
His miracles ......................................................................................193
Miracles cannot be denied ..................................................................206
His marriages ....................................................................................209
Chapter 6: The Holy Qur’an ........................................................219
Arguments for the Divine authorship of the Qur’an ..........................222
Science and religion ..........................................................................228
The concept of science and technology ..............................................233
Does the Qur’an allude to scientific developments? ............................236
Why we refer to science and scientific facts ........................................246
Notes ................................................................................................255
Index ................................................................................................263
Table of Contents
vi

--- Sayfa 7 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
B
orn in Erzurum, in eastern Turkey, in 1941, M.
Fethullah Gülen is an Islamic scholar and thinker, and a
prolific writer and poet. He was trained in the religious
sciences by several celebrated Muslim scholars and spiritual mas-
ters. Gülen also studied the principles and theories of modern
social and physical sciences. Based on his exceptional skills in
learning and focused self-study, he soon surpassed his peers. In
1959, after attaining excellent examination results, he was
awarded a state preacher’s license (in Edirne), and was promot-
ed to a post in Izmir, Turkey’s third largest province, in 1966. It
was here that Gülen started to crystallize his theme and expand
his audience base. In his sermons and speeches he emphasized
the pressing social issues of the times: his particular aim was to
urge the younger generation to harmonize intellectual enlight-
enment with wise spirituality and a caring, humane activism.
Gülen did not restrict himself to teaching in the inner cities.
He traveled around the provinces in Anatolia and lectured not
only in mosques, but also at town meetings and corner coffee
houses. This enabled him to reach a more representative cross-
section of the population and to attract the attention of the aca-
demic community, especially the student body. The subject mat-
ter of his speeches, whether formal or informal, was not restrict-
ed explicitly to religious questions; he also talked about educa-
tion, science, Darwinism, about the economy and social justice.
It was the depth and quality of his speeches on such a wide
range of topics that most impressed the academic community,
and won their attention and respect.
Gülen retired from formal teaching duties in 1981, having
inspired a whole generation of young students. His efforts, dat-

--- Sayfa 8 ---
ing from the 1960s, especially in educational reform, have made
him one of the best-known and respected figures in Turkey. From
1988 to 1991, he gave a series of sermons as preacher emeritus
in some of the most famous mosques in major population cen-
ters, while continuing to deliver his message in the form of pop-
ular conferences, not only in Turkey, but also in Western Europe.
MAIN IDEAS
In his speeches and writings Gülen envisions a twenty-first cen-
tury in which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual dynamic
that will revitalize long-dormant moral values; an age of toler-
ance, understanding, and international cooperation that will
ultimately lead, through intercultural dialogue and a sharing of
values, to a single, inclusive civilization. In the field of educa-
tion, he has spearheaded the establishment of many charitable
organizations to work for the welfare of the community, both
within and without Turkey. He has inspired the use of mass
media, notably television, to inform the public, of matters of
pressing concern to them, individually and collectively.
Gülen believes the road to justice for all is dependent on the
provision of an adequate and appropriate universal education.
Only then will there be sufficient understanding and tolerance
to secure respect for the rights of others. To this end, he has,
over the years, encouraged the social elite and community lead-
ers, powerful industrialists as well as small businessmen, to sup-
port quality education. With donations from these sources, edu-
cational trusts have been able to establish many schools, both in
Turkey and abroad.
Gülen has stated that in the modern world the only way to
get others to accept your ideas is by persuasion. He describes
those who resort to force as being intellectually bankrupt; peo-
ple will always demand freedom of choice in the way they run
their affairs and in their expression of their spiritual and religious
values. Democracy, Gülen argues, in spite of its many shortcom-
ings, is now the only viable political system, and people should
strive to modernize and consolidate democratic institutions in
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
viii

--- Sayfa 9 ---
order to build a society where individual rights and freedoms are
respected and protected, where equal opportunity for all is more
than a dream.
INTERFAITH AND INTERCULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Since his retirement, Gülen has concentrated his efforts on estab-
lishing a dialogue among the factions representing different ide-
ologies, cultures, religions and nations. In 1999, his paper “The
Necessity of Interfaith Dialogue” was presented to the Parliament
of World’s Religions in Cape Town, December 1-8. He maintains
that “dialogue is a must” and that people, regardless of nation or
political borders, have far more in common than they realize.
Given all of this, Gülen considers it both worthwhile and
necessary for a sincere dialogue to be established in order to
increase mutual understanding. To this end, he has helped to
establish the Journalists and Writers Foundation (1994), whose
activities to promote dialogue and tolerance among all strata of
the society have been warmly welcomed by people from almost
all walks of life. Again to this end, Gülen visits and receives lead-
ing figures, not only from among the Turkish population, but
from all over the world. Pope John Paul II at the Vatican, the late
John O’Connor, Archbishop of New York, Leon Levy, former
president of The Anti-Defamation League are among many lead-
ing representatives of world religions with whom Gülen has met
to discuss dialogue and take initiatives in this respect. In Turkey,
the Vatican’s Ambassador to Turkey, the Patriarch of the Turkish
Orthodox Church, the Patriarch of the Turkish Armenian com-
munity, the Chief Rabbi of the Turkish Jewish community and
many other leading figures in Turkey have frequently met with
him, portraying an example of how sincere dialogue can be
established between people of faith.
In his meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican (1998),
Gülen presented a proposal to take firm steps to stop the con-
flict in the Middle East via collaborative work on this soil, a place
where all three religions originated. In his proposal, he also under-
lined the fact that science and religion are in fact two different
About the Author
ix

--- Sayfa 10 ---
aspects that emanate from the same truth: “Humankind from time
to time has denied religion in the name of science and denied sci-
ence in the name of religion, arguing that the two present conflict-
ing views. All knowledge belongs to God and religion is from
God. How then can the two be in conflict? To this end, our joint
efforts directed at inter-religious dialogue can do much to improve
understanding and tolerance among people.”
Gülen released a press declaration renouncing the September
11th terrorist attacks on the USA, which he regarded as a great
blow to world peace that unfairly tarnished the credit of believ-
ers: “. . . terror can never be used in the name of Islam or for the
sake of any Islamic ends. A terrorist cannot be a Muslim and a
Muslim cannot be a terrorist. A Muslim can only be the repre-
sentative and symbol of peace, welfare, and prosperity.”
Gülen’s efforts for worldwide peace have been echoed at con-
ferences and symposiums. “The Peaceful Heroes Symposium”
(April 11-13, 2003) at the University of Texas, Austin, produced
a list of peacemakers over 5,000 years of human history. Gülen
was mentioned among contemporary heroes of peace, in a list
which includes names such as Jesus, Buddha, Mohandas Gandhi,
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa.
Gülen contributes to a number of journals and magazines.
He writes the editorial page for several magazines. He writes
the lead article for The Fountain, Yeni Ümit, Sýzýntý, and Yaðmur,
leading popular and spiritual thought magazines in Turkey. He
has written more than forty books, hundreds of articles, and
recorded thousands of audio and videocassettes. He has deliv-
ered innumerable speeches on many social and religious issues.
Some of his books—many of which have been best-sellers in
Turkey—have been made available in English translations, such
as, The Messenger of God: Muhammad - An Analysis of the Prophet’s
Life, Questions and Answers about Faith, Pearls of Wisdom, Prophet
Muhammad as Commander, The Essentials of the Islamic Faith,
Towards the Lost Paradise, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism. A
number have also been translated into German, Russian, Albanian,
Japanese, Indonesian, and Spanish.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
x

--- Sayfa 11 ---
The educational trusts inspired by Gülen have established
countless non-profit voluntary organizations—foundations and
associations—in Turkey and abroad which support many schol-
arships.
Though a well-known public figure, Gülen has always shied
away from involvement in formal politics. Gülen’s admirers
include leading journalists, academics, TV personalities, politi-
cians, and Turkish and foreign state authorities. They see in him
a true innovator and unique social reformer who practices what
he preaches. They see him as a peace activist, an intellectual, a
religious scholar, a mentor, author and poet, a great thinker and
spiritual guide who has devoted his life to seeking the solutions
for society’s ills and spiritual needs. They see the movement he
helped to nurture as a movement dedicated to education, but an
education of the heart and soul as well as of the mind, aimed at
reviving and invigorating the whole being to achieve compe-
tence and providing goods and services useful to others.
About the Author
xi

--- Sayfa 13 ---
CHAPTER 1
The Existence and Unity of God

--- Sayfa 15 ---
THE EXISTENCE AND UNITY OF GOD
T
he existence of God is too evident to need any argu-
ments. Some saintly scholars have even stated that God
is the most manifest being, but that those lacking insight
cannot see Him. Others have said that His Self-manifestation’s
intensity conceals Him from direct perception.
However, the massive influence of positivism and material-
ism on science and on all people of recent centuries makes it
necessary to discuss such arguments. As this now-prevalent “sci-
entific” worldview reduces existence to what can be perceived
directly, it blinds itself to the far vaster invisible dimensions of
existence. To remove the resulting veil, we will review briefly
several traditional demonstrations of God’s necessary existence.
Before doing so, let us reflect on one simple historical fact:
Since the beginning of human life, the overwhelming majority
of humanity has believed that God exists. This belief alone is
enough to establish God’s existence. Unbelievers cannot claim
to be smarter than believers. Some of the most innovative scien-
tists, scholars, researchers have been—and are—believers, as are
the field’s experts: all Prophets and saints.
In addition, people usually confuse the non-acceptance of
something’s existence with the acceptance of its non-existence.
While the former is only a negation or a rejection, the latter is a
judgment that requires proof. No one has ever proven God’s
non-existence, for to do so is impossible, whereas countless argu-
ments prove His existence. This point may be clarified through
the following comparison.
Imagine a palace with 1,000 entrances, 999 of which are open
and one of which appears to be closed. Given this, it would be
unreasonable to claim that the palace is inaccessible. Unbelievers

--- Sayfa 16 ---
confine their (and others’) attention only to the door that is seem-
ingly closed.
The doors to God’s existence are open to everybody, provid-
ed they sincerely intend to enter through them. Some of those
doors—demonstrations for God’s existence—are as follows:
TRADITIONAL ARGUMENTS FOR GOD’S EXISTENCE
•
Everything is contingent, for it is equally possible that they will
exist or not exist. Anything can exist any time and anywhere,
in any form, and with any character. Nothing or no one has
a role in determining the way, time, and place of its coming
into existence, or its character and features. So, there must
be a power that chooses between a thing’s existence and non-
existence, giving it unique characteristics. This power must
be infinite, have absolute will and all-comprehensive knowl-
edge. Necessarily, it is God.
•
Everything changes. Therefore it is contained in time and space,
meaning that it begins and ends. That which has a beginning
needs one with no beginning to bring it into existence, for it
cannot originate itself, as this would require an infinite regres-
sion of originators. As reason cannot accept such a situation,
an originator who is infinitely self-existent, self-subsistent, and
unchanging is needed. This original originator is God.
•
Life is a riddle (scientists cannot explain it with material caus-
es or discover its origin) and transparent (it displays a cre-
ative power). Given this, life declares: “God created me.”*
•
Everything that exists, and the universe as a whole, display a mag-
nificent harmony and order in themselves and in their interrela-
tionships. The existence of one part necessitates the existence
of the whole, and the whole requires the existence of all parts
for its own existence. For example, a deformed cell may destroy
an entire body. Similarly, a pomegranate requires the collabo-
rative and cooperative existence of air, water, soil, and the
sun, as well as their mutual and well-balanced cooperation, for
its existence. This harmony and cooperation point to a cre-
ator of order, who knows the relationships and characteristics
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
4

--- Sayfa 17 ---
of everything, and who can order everything. The creator of
order is God.
•
All of creation exhibits an overwhelming artistry of dazzling worth.
Yet it is brought into being, as we see it, with great ease and
speed. Furthermore, creation is divided into countless families,
genera, species, and even smaller groups, each of which exists
in great abundance. Despite this, we see nothing but order, art,
and ease in creation. This shows the existence of one with an
absolute power and knowledge, who is God.
•
Whatever has been created has a purpose. Take the example of
ecology. Everything, no matter how apparently insignificant,
has a significant role and purpose. The chain of creation up
to humanity, its last link, is clearly directed to a final purpose.
A fruit-bearing tree’s purpose is to yield fruit, and its whole
life is directed toward that goal. Similarly, the “tree of cre-
ation” yields humanity as its final and most comprehensive
fruit. Nothing is in vain; rather, every item, activity, and event
has many purposes. This requires a wise one who pursues
certain purposes in creation. Since only humanity can under-
stand those purposes, the wisdom and purposiveness in cre-
ation necessarily point to God.
•
All living and non-living beings cannot meet almost any of their
own needs on their own. For example, the universe can operate
and maintain itself only by such universal laws as growth and
reproduction, gravitation and repulsion. But these so-called
“natural laws” have no actual external, visible, or material exis-
tence; they are nominal. How can something nominal, com-
pletely devoid of knowledge and consciousness, be responsi-
ble for such a miraculous creation that requires absolute power
and absolute knowledge, wisdom, choice, and preference? So,
one who has all of these attributes has established these “natural
laws” and uses them as veils to cover His operations for a cer-
tain purpose.
•
Plants need air and water, as well as heat and light, to survive.
Can they fulfill their own needs? Humanity’s needs are infi-
nite. Fortunately, all of our essential needs, from our begin-
The Existence and Unity of God
5

--- Sayfa 18 ---
ning in the womb to death, are met by someone who is able
to meet them and chooses to do so. When we enter this world,
we find everything prepared to meet all the needs of our sens-
es and intellectual and spiritual faculties. This clearly shows
that one who is infinitely merciful and knowledgeable pro-
vides for all created beings in the most extraordinary way, and
causes all things to collaborate to that end.
•
All things in the universe, regardless of distance, help each other.
This mutual helping is so comprehensive that, for example,
almost all things, among them air and water, fire and soil, the
sun and the sky, help us in an extraordinarily prearranged
manner. Our bodily cells, members, and systems work togeth-
er to keep us alive. Soil and air, water and heat, and bacteria
cooperate with each other to benefit plants. Such activities,
which display knowledge and conscious purpose, by uncon-
scious beings show the existence of a miraculous arranger.
That one is God.
•
Before humanity began to overpollute the air, water and soil, the
natural world was cleansed and purified continually. Even now,
it still preserves its original purity in many regions, mostly
where modern life has not yet taken hold. Have you ever
wondered why nature is so clean? Why are forests so clean,
even though many animals die in them every day? If all flies
born during the summer survived, the Earth would be cov-
ered completely with layers of dead flies. Nothing is wasted
in nature, for each death is the beginning of a new birth. For
example, a dead body decomposes and is integrated into the
soil. Elements die and are revived in plants; plants die in the
stomachs of animals and people and are promoted to a high-
er rank of life. This cycle of death and revival is one factor
that keeps the universe clean and pure. Bacteria and insects,
wind and rain, black holes and oxygen in organic bodies all
sustain the universe’s purity. This purity points to the All-
Holy One, whose attributes include cleanliness and purity.
•
Innumerable human beings have lived since Adam and Eve were
created. Despite their common origin—a sperm and ovum,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
6

--- Sayfa 19 ---
formed from the same foods consumed by parents—and their
being composed of the same structures or elements or organ-
isms, every person has a unique countenance. Science can-
not explain this. It cannot be explained by DNA or chromo-
somes, since this difference dates back to the first differen-
tiation of individuals in the world. Moreover, this difference
is not only in countenances; all human beings are unique in
character, desire, ambition, and ability, and so on. While mem-
bers of animal species are almost the same and display no
difference in behavior, each human individual is like a dif-
ferent species that has his or her own world within the larg-
er world of humanity. This obviously shows one with an
absolutely free choice and all-encompassing knowledge: God.
•
We need about 15 years to direct our lives and to understand
what is good and bad. But many animals have such knowledge
very soon after they are born. For example, ducklings can swim
as soon as they hatch, and ants start digging nests in the ground
when they leave their cocoons. Bees and spiders quickly learn
how to make their honeycombs and webs, respectively, which
are marvels of handiwork that we cannot reproduce. Who
teaches young eels born in the waters of Europe to find their
way to their ancestral home in the Pacific? The migration of
birds remains a mystery?** How can you explain such astound-
ing facts other than by attributing them to the teaching or
directing of one who knows everything, and has arranged the
universe and its inhabitants in a way that every creature can
direct its life?
•
Despite enormous scientific advances, we still cannot explain life.
Life is the gift of the Ever-Living One, Who “breathes” a spirit
into each embryo. We know little about the spirit’s nature and
relation with the body, but our ignorance does not mean that
the spirit does not exist. The spirit is sent here to be perfected
and to acquire a state appropriate for the other life.
•
Our conscience is the center of our inclinations toward right and
wrong. Everybody feels this conscience occasionally, and most
people are inclined to turn to God on certain occasions. For
The Existence and Unity of God
7

--- Sayfa 20 ---
us, this inclination and belief in Him are intrinsic. Even if we
consciously deny God, our unconscious belief in Him occa-
sionally shows itself. The Qur’an mentions this in several
verses:
It is He Who enables you to travel on the land and the sea;
and when you are in the ship, and the ships run with a favor-
able wind and they rejoice in it, there comes upon them a
strong wind, and waves come on them from every side and
they think that they are encompassed. Then they cry unto
God, making their faith pure for Him only, (saying): “If you
deliver us from this, we truly will be thankful.” (10:22)
Then [Abraham] broke them [the idols] into pieces, all except
the large one, so that they might turn to Him. [When they
returned and saw this] they said: “Who has done this to our
gods? Surely it must be some evildoer.” They said: “We have
heard a youth talk of them; he is called Abraham.” They said:
“Then [at once] bring him before the eyes of the people, so
that they may testify.” [When Abraham was there] they said:
“Is it you who has done this to our gods, O Abraham?” He
said: “Nay, their chief has done it, so ask them, if they can
speak.” At once they turned to themselves and said: “You, you
are the wrongdoers.” Then they were utterly confounded, and
said: “O Abraham! You know that these do not speak.”
Abraham said: “Do you then worship, besides God, those
things that cannot profit in anything at all, nor harm you? Woe
unto you, and all that you worship instead of God! Do you not
use your intelligence?” They said: “Burn him (immediately)
and protect your gods, if you are doing anything.” (21:58-68)
So, the human spirit and conscience are a strong argument
for the existence of One God.
•
Human beings are innately disposed to good and beauty, virtue
and moral values, and are adverse to evil and ugliness. Therefore,
unless corrupted by external factors and conditions, we nat-
urally seek universal good and moral values. These turn out
to be the same virtues and morality promulgated by all Divine
revealed religions. As history witnesses, humanity always has
had some kind of religion. Just as no other system has super-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
8

--- Sayfa 21 ---
seded religion in human life, the Prophets and religious peo-
ple always influenced us the most and have left indelible marks
on us. This is another irrefutable proof for the existence of
One God.
•
We feel many intuitions and emotions that are messages from
immaterial realms. Among them, the intuition of eternity arous-
es in us a desire for eternity, which we strive to realize in var-
ious ways. However, this desire can be realized only through
belief in and worship of the Eternal One Who inspired it.
True human happiness lies in satisfying this desire for eternity.
•
If a few liars come to us several times and tell us the same things,
we may, in the absence of reliable information, believe them. But
when tens of thousands of Prophets who never lied, hundreds
of thousands of saints, and millions of believers, all of whom
have adopted truthfulness as a most essential pillar of belief,
and then agree on God’s existence, is it reasonable to reject
their testimony and accept the individual reports of a few liars?
•
The proofs for the Qur’an’s Divine origin are also proofs for God’s
existence.1 The Qur’an teaches with great emphasis and focus,
as indeed do the Bible’s Old and New Testaments, the exis-
tence of One God. In addition, tens of thousands of Prophets
have been sent to guide humanity to truth. All were justly
renowned for their truthfulness and other praiseworthy virtues,
and all gave priority to preaching the existence and Oneness of
God.
ARGUMENTS FOR DIVINE UNITY 2
•
Everything that exists displays God’s Unity. For example, of the
innumerable arguments for His existence and Unity, con-
sider life: He makes everything out of one thing and makes
one thing out of many things. He makes an animal’s count-
less bodily members and systems out of a fertilizing sperm-
bearing fluid and water. One who can do this must be an
Absolutely All-Powerful One. One Who transforms with per-
fect orderliness all substances contained in innumerable types
of vegetable or animal foods into particular bodies and bod-
The Existence and Unity of God
9

--- Sayfa 22 ---
ily parts, weaving from them a unique skin for each, is sure-
ly an All-Powerful and Absolutely All-Knowing One.
•
Air displays His Unity. A marvelous conductor, it conducts
innumerable sounds, voices, images, and many other things
simultaneously, without confusion, and without one hinder-
ing the other. This shows that there is One, without partner,
Who created, controls, and administers all things according
to His Wisdom.
•
The universe resembles a tree that has grown from a seed con-
taining a comprehensive program for its life cycle. Everything is
closely interrelated. For example, a particle in the eye’s pupil
has relationships with and duties toward the eye, as well as
with the head; the powers of reproduction, attraction, and
repulsion; veins and arteries; motor and sensory nerves that
circulate the blood and operate the body; and with the rest
of the body. This clearly shows that the whole body, includ-
ing every particle, is the work of an Eternal, All-Powerful
One, and operates under His command.
An air molecule may visit any flower or fruit and work
within it. If this wandering molecule were not subjugated and
obedient to the Absolutely All-Powerful One’s command, it
would have to know all the systems and structures of all flow-
ers and fruits, and how they are formed, right down to their
peripheral lines. Thus, this air molecule displays Divine Unity
like a sun, as do its counterparts in light, soil, and water. And,
as we know, science says that the building blocks of everything
are hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen.
The seeds of all flowering and fruit-bearing plants are
composed of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. They
only differ due to the program deposited in them by Divine
Destiny. If we put several kinds of seeds in a flowerpot filled
with soil, which has its own particular elements, each plant
will assume its unique wonderful form and shape. If their par-
ticles were not subjugated to and directed by One Who knows
each thing’s features, structures, life cycles, and conditions of
its life; One Who endows everything with what is suitable
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
10

--- Sayfa 23 ---
and necessary for it; and to Whose Power everything is sub-
jected without resistance, there would be quite a problem.
Put simply, without God’s activity, each soil particle
would have to contain “immaterial factories” determining all
plants’ future lives. It also would need to have as many work-
shops as there are flowering and fruit-bearing plants, so that
each could bring each unique item into being. Or, each plant
would have an all-encompassing knowledge and power so
that it could create itself. Thus, in the absence of One God,
there would have to be as many deities as there are soil parti-
cles. Such a belief is untenable.
Each particle contains two further true witnesses to the
Maker’s necessary existence and Unity. First, a particle can
perform many significant activities, although it is absolute-
ly powerlessness. Second, by acting in conformity with the
universal order, each particle displays a universal conscious-
ness although it has no life. Each particle testifies through its
own impotence to the necessary existence of the Absolutely
All-Powerful One, and by acting in conformity with the uni-
versal order to His Unity.
•
Each person is a miniature universe, a fruit of the tree of creation
or the universe, and a seed of this world, for each of us contains
samples of most living species. It is as if each person were a drop
distilled from the universe, having the most subtle and sen-
sitive balance. To create such a living being and to be its
Lord requires having total control of the universe.
Given this, we understand that the following things rep-
resent stamps unique to the Creator of all things, the All-
Majestic Lord of the universe: making a honeybee a small
index of most things; inscribing most of the universe’s fea-
tures in humans; including the program for a fig tree’s life
cycle in a tiny fig seed; exhibiting the works of all Divine
Names manifested throughout the universe in the human
heart; and recording in our memory, located in a lentil-sized
place, enough information to fill a library, as well as a detailed
index of all events in the universe.
The Existence and Unity of God
11

--- Sayfa 24 ---
•
All life is a symphony of mutual helping. Just like a living body’s
members and organs, systems and cells, all parts of the uni-
verse support and help each other. For example, air and water,
soil and the sun, work together so that a single apple can
come into existence. Like a factory’s components or a palace’s
building blocks, creatures support and aid each other, and
cooperate to meet each other’s needs in perfect orderliness.
Joining efforts, they serve living beings. Elements in the soil
aid plants by helping them come into existence and survive.
Most animals live on plants, and people live on plants and
animals. Thus, elements form the basic foundation of a liv-
ing being’s physical constitution.
By obeying Acting this rule of mutual assistance, which
is in force throughout the universe—from the sun and moon,
night and day, winter and summer, to plants helping needy
and hungry animals, animals helping humanity, nutritious
substances helping infants, and fruits and food particles help-
ing the body’s cells—they demonstrate that they are acting
through the power of a single, Most Munificent Upbringer,
and at the command of a single, Most Wise Administrator.
•
The universal providence and favor of this universal wisdom are
clearly apparent in everything’s purposeful creation. This, along
with providence’s comprehensive mercy and the universal sus-
tenance required by that mercy to provide all living beings
with food, form a seal of Divine Unity so brilliant that anyone
can see and understand it.
All beings, especially those that are alive, must satisfy
their demands and needs to remain alive. This is true whether
the being in question is universal or particular, an individual
or a species. But they cannot fulfill even their smallest need.
Rather, all their requirements are met in an unexpected way
and from an unexpected place, with perfect order and timing,
in a suitable fashion, and with perfect wisdom. All of this
shows the existence of an All-Wise Nurturer of Majesty, an
All-Compassionate Provider of Grace.
•
Consider the sun. From planets to drops of water, glass frag-
ments, and sparkling snowflakes, a radiant effect particular
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
12

--- Sayfa 25 ---
to the sun is apparent. If you do not agree that the tiny suns
seen in these innumerable things are only reflections, you
must accept the existence of a sun in each drop of water,
glass fragment and transparent object facing the sunlight. Is
this not absurd?
If such images or reflections are not attributed to the sun,
you must accept the existence of innumerable suns in place of
the one sun. Is this logical? Similarly, if everything is not attrib-
uted to One God, the Absolutely All-Powerful One, you must
accept that there are as many deities as there are particles in the
universe. How can you believe such a thing?
•
During spring and summer, God raises to life countless plant and
animal species, each member of which is unique. The process is
so ordered that there is no confusion despite infinite inter-
mingling. He “inscribes” on the Earth’s face individual mem-
bers of countless species without fault or forgetfulness, mis-
take or deficiency. Everything is done in a most well-balanced
well-proportioned, well-ordered, and perfect fashion. This
points to One of Majesty, an All-Powerful One of Perfection,
an All-Wise One of Grace and Beauty, One who has infinite
Power, all-encompassing Knowledge, and a Will able to gov-
ern the universe.
Consider what happens during spring and summer. The
amount of Divine activity during those seasons is absolutely
miraculous in terms of extent, speed, and liberality, as well as
in terms of generosity and order, beauty and creation. Only
One with an infinite knowledge and boundless power could
own such a “seal.” That seal certainly belongs to One Who is
everywhere although He is nowhere, all-present and all-see-
ing. Nothing is hidden or difficult for Him, and particles and
stars are equal to His Power.
•
Seeds sown in a field show that both the field and the seeds belong
to their owner. Likewise, the fundamental elements of life (e.g.,
air, water, and soil) are universal and present everywhere despite
their simplicity and same nature. Plants and animals are found
everywhere, despite their essentially similar nature vis-à-vis
the diverse conditions of life.
The Existence and Unity of God
13

--- Sayfa 26 ---
All of these are controlled by a single miracle-displaying
Maker. Every flower, fruit, and animal is a stamp, a seal, or a
signature of that Maker. Wherever they are found, each pro-
claims in the tongue of its being: “The One Whose stamp I
bear made this location. The One Whose seal I carry owns this
place. The One Whose signature I indicate wove this land.” In
other words, only the one who holds all elements in His
Power can own and sustain the least of creatures. Anyone can
see that only One Who exercises Lordship over all plants and
animals can own, sustain, and govern the simplest of them.
Truly, in the tongue of similarity to other individuals,
each individual being says: “Only one who owns my species
can own me.” In the tongue of spreading over the planet with
other species, each species says: “Only one who owns the
planet can own us.” In the tongue of being bound to the sun
and of its mutual relationships with the heavens, the Earth and
the other planets say: “Only one who owns all these can own
me.” If apples were conscious and someone said to one of
them: “You are my work of art,” that apple would retort: “Be
quiet! If you can form all apples, rather if you can dispose
freely of all fruit-bearing trees on this planet and all gifts of the
All-Merciful One coming from the treasury of Mercy in
shiploads, only then can you claim to own me.”
Since each fruit depends on one law of growth from one
center, it is equally easy and cheap to produce one or many
fruits. In other words, for multiple centers to produce one
fruit would be as hard and expensive as equipping the tree,
and to produce the equipment necessary for one soldier would
require all the factories needed to supply an army. The point
is clear: When a single result related to numerous individu-
als depends on multiple centers, there are as many difficulties
as there are individuals involved. Thus, the extraordinary ease
seen in all species arises from unity.
The correspondence and similarity in basic features and
forms seen in all members of a species, and within all divisions
of a genus, proves that they are the work of a single Maker, for
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
14

--- Sayfa 27 ---
they are “inscribed” with the same Pen and bear the same seal.
The absolute ease observed in their coming into existence nec-
essarily and inevitably requires that they be the work of One
Maker. Otherwise, it would be so hard to bring them into exis-
tence that genus and species in question would not exist.
To conclude: When attributed to Almighty God, all things
become as easy as one thing; when attributed to causes, one
thing becomes as difficult as all things. As a result, the extraor-
dinary cheapness and ease observed in the universe, as well
as the endless abundance, display the stamp of Unity. If these
abundant and cheap fruits were not owned by the One of
Unity, we could not purchase them even if we gave the whole
world. How could we pay for the purposeful and conscious
cooperation of soil and air, water and sunlight, the sun’s heat
and the seed, and many other things that make a pomegran-
ate’s existence possible? All of these factors are unconscious
and controlled by a Single Maker, Who is Almighty God. The
cost of a single pomegranate or any other fruit is the whole
universe.
•
Life, which manifests Divine Grace, is an argument and proof
for Divine Unity, as well as a sort of manifestation of It. Death,
which manifests Divine Majesty, is an argument and proof
for Divine Oneness.
For example, bubbles on a river’s surface show the sun’s
image, light, and reflection, as do all transparent objects. These
facts testify to the sun’s existence. Despite the bubbles’ occa-
sional disappearance (e.g., when they pass under a bridge),
the splendid continuation of the sun’s manifestations and its
light’s uninterrupted display on successive bubbles proves
that the sun’s images (which appear, disappear, and are then
renewed) come from one enduring, perpetual sun manifest-
ing itself from on high. Therefore, the appearance of these
sparkling bubbles demonstrate the sun’s existence, and their
disappearance displays its continuation and unity.
In the same way, beings in continuous flux testify through
their existence and life to the necessary existence and Oneness
The Existence and Unity of God
15

--- Sayfa 28 ---
of the Necessarily Existent Being. They testify to His Unity,
eternity, and permanence through their decay and death.
Beautiful, delicate creatures that are renewed and recruited,
along with the alternation of day and night, as well as sea-
sons, and the passage of time show the existence, Unity, and
permanence of an elevated, everlasting One with a continu-
ous display of beauty. Their decay and death, together with
the apparent causes for their lives, demonstrate that the (mate-
rial or natural) causes are only veils. This decisively proves that
these arts, inscriptions, and manifestations are the constantly
renewed arts, changing inscriptions, and moving mirrors of
an All-Beautiful One of Majesty.
•
Obviously, the perfect design and adornment of a perfect palace
indicate a master builder’s perfect acts. This starts the follow-
ing series of relationships: Perfect acts show the builder’s
perfect titles (which specify his or her rank), which shows
the builder’s perfect attributes (the origin of his or her art),
which show master’s perfect abilities and essential capacity,
which show the perfection of the master’s essential nature.
In the same way, the faultless works and art in all well-
ordered beings point to the perfect acts of an Effective,
Powerful Agent. This fact starts another chain: Such perfect
acts point to that Majestic Agent’s perfect Names, which point
and testify to the perfect Attributes of the Majestic One known
with the Names, which points and testifies to the perfection
of the essential capacity and qualities of the Perfect One
qualified by those attributes, which points to the perfection
of the One having such capacity and qualities that all the types
of perfection in the universe are signs of His Perfection, hints
of His Majesty, and allusions to His Beauty. They are
pale, weak shadows in comparison with His Perfect Reality.
FALSE ARGUMENTS ABOUT THE ORIGIN OF EXISTENCE
Mediaeval European conceptions about the universe’s nature and
existence were underpinned by the Catholic Church’s authority.
The Church, relying upon a Divine Revelation (the Bible) that
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
16

--- Sayfa 29 ---
had been altered over time, considered modern science a threat
to its authority and so viewed it with great hostility. The result-
ing science–religion rift deepened steadily until the two became
irreconcilable. Eventually, religion was relegated to a domain of
blind belief and consolatory rituals considered alien to science.
Thus, science no longer had to defer to the Divine Revelation’s
authority. The Darwinian account of evolution sealed and popu-
larized the idea that existence was self-originated and self-sus-
tained, a process that had unfolded by itself according to laws
that one day would be understood fully (and therefore to some
degree could be manipulated) by humanity.
Not all scientists maintain that natural causes or so-called laws
of nature can explain all phenomena. Before discussing this issue,
we should point out that all the Prophets, regardless of place or time,
agree on how existence originated and is sustained, and on all oth-
er essential issues pertaining to life and existence. While a consid-
erable number of scientists agree with the Prophets, scientists and
philosophers who favor naturalism and materialism differ greatly
in their explanations. Some attribute creativity and eternity, as well
as life and consciousness, to matter. Others argue that nature is
eternally self-existent and that everything can be explained by nat-
ural causes and laws. Still others, unable to explain the origin of
life, fall back on such notions as chance and necessity.
The next section discusses the impossibility of explaining exis-
tence without affirming God’s Existence and Unity.
Nature, Natural Laws, and Causes
•
Natural laws have nominal, not real, existence. They are propo-
sitions tendered as explanations of particular events or phe-
nomenon, and allude to imaginary forces inferred from the
motions or relationships of events or phenomena. The laws
of gravity, reproduction and growth in living organisms,
magnetic attraction and repulsion, and others are not enti-
ties whose existence can be verified by our external senses
or scientific instruments. For example, whatever truth the
law of gravity may have, can we claim that the real universe
The Existence and Unity of God
17

--- Sayfa 30 ---
(the one in which this law operates) has (or must) come
about because of it? Is it reasonable to ascribe anything’s
existence, let alone intelligent and conscious living beings,
to propositions?
•
Natural laws and causes are inferred from the motions or relation-
ships of events or phenomena observed in the universe. Therefore,
as they depend upon external factors, they are either self-depend-
ent nor self-existent.
•
The existence of the universe, as well of all its events or phenomena,
is contingent. So nothing in it must exist, for it is equally pos-
sible for each thing to exist or not to exist. There is an almost
limitless number of cells in an embryo that a food particle can
visit. Anything whose existence is contingent cannot be eter-
nal, for someone has to prefer its existence over its non-exis-
tence or merely potential existence.
•
As all contingent entities are contained in time and space, they
have a beginning. Anything that begins must certainly end,
and so cannot be eternal.
•
Natural causes need each other to bring about an effect. For
example, an apple needs an apple blossom to exist, a blossom
needs a branch, a branch needs a tree, and so on, just as a
seed needs soil, air, and moisture to germinate and grow. Each
cause is also an effect and, unless we accept as many deities
as the number of causes, we must look to a single cause out-
side the chain of cause and effect.
•
For a single effect to come into existence, an infinite number of
causes must collaborate in such a coordinated and reliable way
that they become “natural laws.” Consider this: In order to
exist, an apple requires the cooperation of air and soil, sun-
light and water, the 23º inclination of the Earth’s axis, and
the complex rules of germination and growth for seeds and
plants. Could so many deaf and blind, ignorant and uncon-
scious causes and laws come together by themselves to form
a living organism? Do you really think that they could form
human beings, all of whom are alive and conscious, intelli-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
18

--- Sayfa 31 ---
gent and responsible, and able to answer questions about their
intentions and actions?
•
A tiny seed contains a huge tree. A human being, the most com-
plex creature, grows from an ovum fertilized by a microscopic
sperm. Is there an appropriate relation or acceptable propor-
tionality between cause and effect here? Can extremely weak
and simple, ignorant and lifeless causes result in very powerful
and complex, intelligent and vigorously living effects?
•
All natural phenomena and processes have opposites: north and
south, positive and negative, hot and cold, beautiful and ugly,
day and night, attraction and repulsion, freezing and melting,
vaporization and condensation, and so on. Something that
has an opposite, that needs its opposite to exist and to be
known, cannot be a creator or originator.
•
Although all causes necessary for an effect are present, that effect
does not always come into existence. Conversely, something hap-
pens or comes into existence without any causes that we can
recognize or understand as such. Also, the same causes do not
always engender the same effects. This is why some scientists
reject causality as a way of explaining things and events.
•
Among causes, humanity is the most capable and eminent, for
we are distinguished with intellect, consciousness, willpower,
and many other faculties and inner and outer senses and feel-
ings. Yet we are so weak and helpless that even a microbe can
cause us great pain. If even we have no part in our own com-
ing into existence, and no control over our body’s working,
how can other causes have creativity?
•
Materialists take the conjunction of events for causality. If two
events coexist, they imagine that one causes the other. Seeking
to deny the Creator they make claims like: “Water causes plants
to grow.” They never ask how water knows what to do, how it
does it, and what qualities it has that enable plants to grow?
Does water possess the knowledge and power to grow
plants? Does it know the laws or properties of plant forma-
tion? If we attribute a plant’s growth to the laws or nature,
do they know how to form plants? Some sort or amount of
The Existence and Unity of God
19

--- Sayfa 32 ---
knowledge, will, and power are absolutely necessary to make
the least thing. Therefore, should not an all-encompassing
knowledge, and an absolute will and power, be necessary to
make this complex, amazing, and miraculous universe about
which we still know so little?
Consider a flower. Where does its beauty come from,
and who designed the relationship between it and our sens-
es of smell and seeing and faculty of appreciation? Can a
seed, soil or sunlight, all of which are unconscious, ignorant,
and deaf, do such things? Do they have the knowledge, pow-
er, or will to make even a flower, let alone to make it beauti-
ful? Can we, this planet’s only conscious and knowledgeable
beings, make a single flower? A flower can exist only if the whole
universe exists first. To produce a flower, therefore, one must
be able to produce the universe. In other words, its creator
must have absolute power, knowledge, and will. All of these
are attributes of God alone.
Matter and Chance
Our argument against natural laws and causes being somehow
self-existent, self-sustaining, and even in some sense eternal, holds
true for those views attributing creativity to chance and matter.
Whether defined according to the principles of classical
physics or new physics, matter is obviously changeable and sus-
ceptible to external interventions. Thus it cannot be eternal or
capable of origination. Also, as matter is deaf and blind, lifeless
and ignorant, powerless and unconscious, how can it be the ori-
gin of life and knowledge, power and consciousness? Something
cannot impart to others what it does not possess itself.
There is such abundant evidence of purposive arrangement,
organization, and harmony in the universe that it is irrational to
speak of chance or coincidence as its cause. For example, a human
body contains trillions of cells, and a single cell contains about 1
million proteins. The possibility of a protein occurring by chance
is infinitesimally small. Without One to prefer its existence and
to create it; who has an absolute and all-comprehensive knowl-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
20

--- Sayfa 33 ---
edge to prearrange its relations with other proteins, the cell, and
all bodily parts; and then to place it just where it must be, a sin-
gle protein could not exist. Science will find its true path only
when its practitioners admit that this One—God—is the Creator
of all things.
The following simple scientific experiment helps us under-
stand this significant argument:
Overbeck and his co-workers at the Baylor College of Medicine
in Houston were trying to practice some gene therapy tech-
niques by seeing if they could convert albino mice into colored
ones. The researcher injected a gene essential to the production
of the pigment melanin into the single-cell embryo of an albino
mouse. Later they bread that mouse’s offspring, half of which
carried the gene on one chromosome of a chromosome pair.
Classic Mendelian genetics told them that roughly a quarter of
the grandchildren should carry the gene on both chromo-
somes—should be “homozygous,” in the language of genetics—
and should therefore be colored.
But the mice never got a chance to acquire color. “The first
thing we noticed,” says Overbeck, “was that we were losing
about 25% of the grandchildren within a week after they were
born.” The explanation:
The melanin-related gene that his group injected into the
albino mouse embryo had inserted itself into a completely unre-
lated gene. An unfamiliar stretch of DNA in the middle of a
gene wrecks that gene’s ability to get its message read. So in the
mice, it seems whatever protein the gene coded for went unpro-
duced, whatever function the protein had went undone, and the
stomach, heart, liver, and spleen all wound up in the wrong
place. Somehow, too, the kidneys and pancreas were damaged,
and that damage is apparently what killed the mice.
Overbeck and his colleagues have already located the gene on
a particular mouse chromosome and are now trying to pin down
its structure. That will tell them something about the structure of
the protein the gene encodes, how the protein works, and when
and where it is produced as the gene gets “expressed,” or turned
on, “Is the gene expressed everywhere, or just on the left side of
the embryo or just on the right side?” Overbeck wonders, “And
when does it get expressed?”
The Existence and Unity of God
21

--- Sayfa 34 ---
These questions will take Overbeck far from the gene-trans-
fer experiment. “We think there are at least 100,000 genes,” he
points out, “so the chances of this happening were literally one
in 100,000.” 3
It will take thousands of tests, and therefore thousands of
mice, for such an experiment to succeed. However, there is no tri-
al and error in nature. Any tree seed placed in the soil germinates
and becomes a tree, unless something prevents it from doing so.
Likewise, an embryo in the womb grows into a living, conscious
being equipped with intellectual and spiritual faculties.
The human body is a miracle of symmetry and asymmetry.
Scientists know how it develops in the womb. What they can-
not figure out is how the building-block particles reaching the
embryo distinguish between right and left, determine the specif-
ic organ’s location, insert themselves in their proper places, and
understand the extremely complicated relations and requirements
among cells and organs. This process is so complicated that if a
single particle required by the right eye’s pupil ended up in the
ear instead, the embryo could be damaged or even die.
In addition, all animate beings are made from the same ele-
ments coming from soil, air, and water. They also are similar to each
other with respect to their bodily members and organs. And yet they
are almost completely unique with respect to bodily features and vis-
age, character, desire, and ambition. This uniqueness is so reliable
that you can be identified positively just by your fingerprints.
How can we explain this? There are the two alternatives:
Either each particle possesses almost infinite knowledge, will, and
power; or One who has such knowledge, will, and power creates
and administers each particle. However far back we go in an
attempt to ascribe this to cause and effect and heredity, these two
alternatives remain valid.
Even if the universe’s existence is attributed to that which is
not God (e.g., evolution, causality, nature, matter, or coincidences
and necessity), we cannot deny one fact: Everything displays,
though its coming into existence and subsistence and death, both
an all-comprehensive knowledge as well as an absolute power and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
22

--- Sayfa 35 ---
determination. As we saw in Overbeck’s experiment, one misplaced
or misdirected gene may ruin or terminate life. The interconnect-
edness of everything, from galaxies to atoms, is a reality into which
every new entity enters and wherein it must know its unique place
and function.
Is there a better demonstration of the existence and free oper-
ation of an all-comprehensive knowledge, an absolute power and
will, that particles of the same biochemical constituents should
produce, through the subtlest adjustments in their mutual rela-
tionships, unique entities and organisms? Is it satisfactory to explain
this as heredity or coincidence, seeing that all such explanations rest
on the same all-encompassing knowledge, absolute power, and will?
We must not be misled by the apparent fact that everything
happens according to a certain program, plan, or process of causes.
Such things are veils spread over the flux of the universe, the ever-
moving stream of events. Laws of nature may be inferred from this
process of causes, but they have no real existence. Unless we attrib-
ute to nature (or to matter or coincidence and necessity) what we
normally would attribute to its Creator, we must accept that it is, in
essence and reality, a printing mechanism and not a printer, a design
and not a designer, a passive recipient and not an agent, an order
and not an orderer, a collection of nominal laws and not a power.4
To understand better why these cannot have any part in exis-
tence, let’s analyze the purpose, harmony, and interrelatedness in
creation by observing some plain facts. Again, Morrison draws
our attentions to some of these:
The bulk of the Earth is now reduced to very permanent
dimensions and its mass has been determined. Its speed in its
orbit around the sun is extremely constant. Its rotation on its
axis is determined so accurately that a variation of a second in
a century would upset astronomical calculations. Had the bulk
of the Earth been greater or less, or had its speed been differ-
ent, it would have been farther from or nearer to the sun, and
this different condition would have profoundly affected life of
all kinds, including man.
The earth rotates on its axis in twenty-four hours or at the
rate of about one thousand miles an hour. Suppose it turned at
The Existence and Unity of God
23

--- Sayfa 36 ---
the rate of a hundred miles an hour. Why not? Our days and
nights would then be ten times as long as now. The hot sun of
summer would then burn up our vegetation each long day and
every sprout would freeze in such a night. The sun, the source of
all life, has a surface temperature of 12,000 degrees Fahrenheit,
and our Earth is just far enough away so that this “eternal fire”
warms us just enough and not too much. If the temperature on
Earth had changed so much as fifty degrees on the average for a
single year, all vegetation would be dead and man with it, roast-
ed or frozen. The Earth travels around the sun at the rate of
eighteen miles each second. If the rate of revolution had been,
say, six miles or forty miles each second, we would be too far
from or too close to the sun for our form of life to exist.
The Earth is tilted at an angle of 23º. This gives us our sea-
sons. If it had not been tilted, the poles would be in eternal twi-
light. The water vapor from the ocean would move north and
south, piling up continents of ice and leaving possibly a desert
between the equator and the ice.
The moon is 240,000 miles away, and the tides twice a day
are usually a gentle reminder of its presence. Tides of the ocean
run as high as fifty feet in some places, and even the crust of the
Earth is twice a day bent outward several inches by the moon’s
attraction. If our moon was, say, fifty thousand miles away
instead of its present respectable distance, our tides would be
so enormous that twice a day all the lowland of all the conti-
nents would be submerged by a rush of water so enormous that
even the mountains would soon be eroded away, and probably
no continent could have risen from the depths fast enough to
exist today. The Earth would crack with the turmoil and the
tides in the air would create daily hurricanes.
Had the crust of the Earth been ten feet thicker, there would
be no oxygen, without which animal life is impossible; and had
the ocean been a few feet deeper, carbon dioxide and oxygen
would have been absorbed and vegetable life on the surface of the
land could not exist. If the atmosphere had been much thinner,
some of the meteors which are now burned in the outer atmos-
phere by the millions every day would strike all parts of the Earth.
Oxygen is commonly placed at 21 per cent [in the atmos-
phere]. The atmosphere as a whole presses upon the Earth at
approximately fifteen pounds on each square inch of surface at
sea level. The oxygen which exists in the atmosphere is a part of
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
24

--- Sayfa 37 ---
this pressure, being about three pounds per square inch. All the
rest of the oxygen is locked up in the form of compounds in the
crust of the Earth and makes up 8/10 of all the waters in the
world. Oxygen is the breath of life for all land animals and is for
this purpose utterly unobtainable except from the atmosphere.
The question arises how this extremely active chemical element
escaped combination and was left in the atmosphere in the almost
exact proportion necessary for practically all living things. If, for
instance, instead of 21 per cent oxygen were 50 per cent or more
of the atmosphere, all combustible substances in the world would
become inflammable to such an extent that the first stroke of light-
ning to hit a tree would ignite the forest, which would almost
explode... If free oxygen, this one part in many millions of the
Earth’s substance, should be absorbed, all animal life would cease.
When a man breathes, he draws in oxygen, which is taken up
by the blood and distributed through his body. This oxygen
burns the food in every cell very slowly at a comparatively low
temperature, but the result is carbon dioxide and water vapor, so
when a man is said to sigh like a furnace, there is a touch of real-
ity about it. The carbon dioxide escapes into his lungs and is not
breathable except in small quantities. It sets his lungs in action
and he takes his next breath throwing into the atmosphere car-
bon dioxide. All animal life is thus absorbing oxygen and throw-
ing off carbon dioxide. Oxygen is further essential to life because
of its action upon other elements in the blood as well as else-
where in the body, without which life processes would cease.
On the other hand, as is well known, all plant life is dependent
upon the almost infinitesimal quantity of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere which, so to speak, it breathes. To express this compli-
cated photosynthetic chemical reaction in the simplest possible
way, the leaves of the trees are lungs and they have the power when
in the sunlight to separate this obstinate carbon dioxide into carbon
and oxygen. In other words, the oxygen is given off and the carbon
retained and combined with the hydrogen of the water brought up
by the plant from its roots. By magical chemistry, out of these ele-
ments “nature” makes sugar, cellulose and numerous other chemi-
cals, fruits and flowers [all in different smell, taste, color and shape
according to the kind of plant or tree. Can this infinite difference or
variation be attributed to tiny seeds, blind, ignorant and uncon-
scious?]. The plant feeds itself and produces enough more to feed
every animal on Earth. At the same time, the plant releases the oxy-
The Existence and Unity of God
25

--- Sayfa 38 ---
gen we breathe and without which life would end in five minutes.
So all the plants, the forests, the grasses, every bit of moss, and all
else of vegetable life, build their structure principally out of carbon
and water. Animals give off carbon dioxide and plants give off oxy-
gen. If this interchange did not take place, either the animal or veg-
etable life would ultimately use up practically all of the oxygen or all
of the carbon dioxide, and the balance being completely upset, one
would wilt or die and the other would quickly follow.
Hydrogen must be included, although we do not breathe it.
Without hydrogen water would not exist, and the water content
of animal and vegetable matter is surprisingly great and absolute-
ly essential. Oxygen, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and carbon, singly
and in their various relations to each other, are the principal bio-
logical elements. They are the very basis on which life rests.
We pour an infinite variety of substances into this chemical
laboratory—the digestive system, which is the greatest laborato-
ry of the world—with almost total disregard of what we take in,
depending on what we consider the automatic process to keep us
alive. When these foods have been broken down and are again
prepared, they are delivered constantly to each of our billions of
cells, a greater number than all the human beings on Earth. The
delivery to each individual cell must be constant, and only those
substances which the particular cell needs to transform them into
bones, nails, flesh, hair, eyes, and teeth are taken up by the prop-
er cell. Here is a chemical laboratory producing more substances
than any laboratory which human ingenuity has devised. Here is
a delivery system greater than any method of transportation or
distribution the world has ever known, all being conducted in
perfect order. From childhood until, say, a man is fifty years of
age, this laboratory makes no serious mistakes, though the very
substances with which it deals could literally form over a million
different kinds of molecules—many of them deadly. When the
channels of distribution become somewhat sluggish from long
use we find weakened ability and ultimate old age.
When the proper food is absorbed by each cell, it is still
only the proper food. The process in each cell now becomes a
form of combustion, which accounts for the heat of the whole
body. You cannot have combustion without ignition. Fire must
be lighted, and so [you are provided with] a little chemical com-
bination which ignites a controlled fire for the oxygen, hydro-
gen, and the carbon in the food in each cell, thus producing the
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
26

--- Sayfa 39 ---
necessary warmth and, as from any fire, the result is water vapor
and carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide is carried away by the
blood to the lungs, and there it is the one thing that makes you
draw in your breath of life. A person produces about two pounds
of carbon dioxide in a day, but by wonderful processes gets rid
of it. Every animal digests food, and each must have the special
chemicals it individually needs. Even in minute detail the chem-
ical constituents of the blood, for instance, differ in each species.
There is, therefore, a special formative process for each.
In case of infection by hostile germs, the system also contin-
uously maintains a standing army to meet, and usually overcome,
invaders and save the entire structure of the man from premature
death. No such combination of marvels does or can take place
under any circumstances in the absence of life. And all this is
done in perfect order, and order is absolutely contrary to chance.5
Does all this require and point to One Who knows us thor-
oughly—all our needs, environment, and bodily mechanisms—
One Who is All-Knowing and does as He wishes? In Morrison’s
words: “Purpose seems fundamental in all things, from the laws
that govern the universe to the combinations of atoms which
sustain our lives. Atoms and molecules in living creatures do mar-
velous things and build wonderful mechanisms, but such machines
are useless unless intelligence sets them in objective motion. There
is the directive Intelligence which science does not explain, nor
does science dare say it is material.”6
Why God Created Natural Laws and Causes
In the next world, the realm of Power, God will execute His Will
directly. As there will be no “causes,” everything will happen instan-
taneously. But here, in the realm of Wisdom, the Divine Name the
All-Wise requires the Divine Power to operate behind the veil of
causes and laws for several reasons, among them the following.
•
Opposites are mingled in this world: truth with falsehood,
light with darkness, good with evil, and so on. Since our human
nature inclines toward both good and evil, we are tested to see
whether or not we will use our free will and other faculties in
the way of truth and good. Divine Wisdom requires that caus-
The Existence and Unity of God
27

--- Sayfa 40 ---
es and laws should conceal the operations of Divine Power. If
God had willed, He could train the planets with His “hands”
in a way that we could see, or He could have them adminis-
tered by visible angels. If this were the case, we would not need
to speak of the laws or causes involved. To communicate His
Commandments, He could speak to each individual directly,
without sending Prophets. To make us believe in His existence
and Oneness, He could write His Name with stars in the sky.
But then our earthly existence would not be an arena of trial.
As a result of this trial, since the time of Adam and Eve good
and evil flow through this world into the next to fill its two
mighty pools of Paradise and Hell.
•
Like a mirror’s two sides, existence has two aspects or dimen-
sions: one visible and material, the realm of opposites and
(in most cases) imperfections; and a spiritual realm that is
transparent, pure, and perfect. There can be—and actually are—
events and phenomena in the material dimension that we
do not like. Those who cannot perceive the Divine Wisdom
behind all things may criticize the Almighty for such events
and phenomena. To prevent that, God made natural laws and
causes veil His acts. For example, so that we should not crit-
icize either God or His Angel of Death for our own or oth-
ers’ deaths, God placed disease and natural disasters (among
other agents or causes) between Himself and death.
Due to this world’s essential imperfection, we experience
many deficiencies and shortcomings. In absolute terms, every
event and phenomenon is good and beautiful in itself and in
its consequences. Whatever God does or decrees is good,
beautiful, and just. Injustice, ugliness, and evil are only appar-
ent or superficial, and arise from human error and abuse. For
example, a court may rule against us unjustly, but we should
know that Destiny permitted it because of a concealed crime
belonging to us. Whatever befalls us usually is due to self-
wronging or an evil we have done. However, those who can-
not understand the Divine Wisdom behind events and phe-
nomena may impute the resulting apparent ugliness or evil,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
28

--- Sayfa 41 ---
imperfection and shortcoming, directly to God, although He
has no defect or imperfection.
To prevent such a mistake, His Glory and Grandeur
require that natural causes and laws conceal His acts, while
belief in His Unity demands that those causes and laws not
be ascribed to any creative power.
•
If God Almighty acted here directly, we could not have
developed science, known happiness, or be free of fear and
anxiety. Thanks to God’s acting behind natural causes and
laws, we can observe and study patterns in phenomena.
Otherwise, each event would be a miracle. The regular flux
and mutability of events and phenomena makes them com-
prehensible to us, and so awakens our desire to wonder and
reflect, which is a principal factor in science. For the same
reason, to some degree we can plan and arrange our affairs.
What would our lives be like if we were not sure that the
sun would rise tomorrow?
•
Whoever has such attributes as beauty and perfection desires
to know them and make them known. God owns absolute
beauty and perfection and, being independent of all things,
needs nothing. He also owns a holy and transcendent love,
and has a sacred desire to manifest His Beauty and Perfection.
If He manifested His Names and Attributes directly, we
could not endure them. He therefore manifests them behind
causes and laws, and by degrees within the confines of time
and space, so that we can build a connection with them, and
reflect on and perceive them. The gradual manifestation of
Divine Names and Attributes is also a reason for our curios-
ity and wonder about them.
These four points constitute only some of the reasons why
God acts through natural laws and causes.
ENDNOTE: God, the All-Knowing, All-Determining, and All-Powerful
In his book Man Does Not Stand Alone A.C. Morrison draws
our attention to the many beauties and complicated phenomena in
the nature:
The Existence and Unity of God
29

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Life is a sculptor and shapes all living things; an artist that designs
every leaf of every tree, that colors the flowers, the apple, the for-
est, and the plumage of the bird of paradise. Life is a musician and
has taught each bird to sing its love songs, the insects to call each
other in the music of their multitudinous sounds.
Life has given to man alone mastery over combined sound
vibrations and has furnished the material for their production.
Life is an engineer, for it has designed the legs of the grasshop-
per and the flea, the coordinated muscles, levers and joints, the tire-
less beating heart, the system of electric nerves of every animal, and
the complete system of circulation of every living thing.
Life is a chemist that gives taste to our fruits and spices and
perfume to the rose. Life synthesizes new substances which
Nature has not yet provided to balance its processes and to
destroy invading life... Life’s chemistry is sublime, for not only
does it set the rays of the sun to work to change water and car-
bonic acid into wood and sugar, but, in doing so, releases oxy-
gen that animals may have the breath of life.
Life is a historian, for it has written its history page by
page, through the ages, leaving its record in the rocks, an auto-
biography which only awaits correct interpretation.
Life protects its creations by the abundance of food in the
egg and prepares many of its infants for active life after birth, or
by conscious motherhood stores food in preparation for her
young. Life produces life-giving milk to meet immediate needs,
foreseeing this necessity and preparing for events to come.
Matter has never done more than its laws decree. The atoms
and molecules obey the dictates of chemical affinity, the force of
gravity, the influences of temperature and electric impulses. Matter
has no initiative, but life brings into being marvelous new designs
and structures.
What life is no man has yet fathomed; it has no weight or
dimensions... Nature did not create life; fire-blistered rocks and a
saltless sea did not meet the necessary requirements. Gravity is a
property of matter; electricity we now believe to be matter itself;
the rays of the sun and stars can be deflected by gravity and seem
to be akin to it. Man is learning the dimensions of the atom and is
measuring its locked-up power, but life is illusive, like space. Why?
Life is fundamental and is the only means by which matter
can attain understanding. Life is the only source of consciousness
and it alone makes possible knowledge of the works of God which
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
30

--- Sayfa 43 ---
we, still half blind, yet know to be good. [A. C. Morrison, Man
Does Not Stand Alone (New York: 1945), 31-6.]
Morrison writes further:
The robin that nested at your door goes south in the fall, but
comes back to his old nest the next spring. In September, flocks
of most of our birds fly south, often over a thousand miles of
open ocean, but they do not lose their way. The homing pigeon
confused by new sounds on a long journey in a closed box, cir-
cles for a moment and then heads almost unerringly for home.
The bee finds its hive while the wind waving the grasses and trees
blot out every visible guide to its whereabouts. This homing
sense is slightly developed in man, but he supplements his mea-
ger equipment with instruments of navigation. The tiny insects
must have microscopic eyes, how perfect we do not know, and
the hawks, the eagle and the condor must have telescopic vision.
Here again man surpasses them with his mechanical instruments.
If you let old Dobbin alone he will keep to the road in the
blackest night. The owl can see the nice warm mouse as he runs
in the cooler grass in the blackest night.
The ordinary scallop whose muscle we eat has several dozen
beautiful eyes very like ours, which sparkle because each eye has
unnumbered little reflectors which are said to enable it to see
things right side up. These reflectors are not found in the human
eye. Were these reflectors developed because of the absence of
superior brain power in the scallop? As the number of eyes in
animals ranges from two to thousands, and all are different,
Nature would have had a big job in developing the science of
optics unless [God, the All-Knowing, All-Determining, and All-
Powerful had predestined and predetermined everything].
The honeybee is not attracted by the gaudy flowers as we see
them, but sees by the ultra-violet light, which may make them
even more beautiful to bees. From the rays of slower vibrations
to the photographic plate and beyond are realms of beauty, joy
and inspiration. The honeybee workers make chambers of differ-
ent sizes in the comb used for breeding. Small chambers are con-
structed for the workers, larger ones for the drones, and special
chambers for the prospective queens. The queen bee lays unfer-
tilized eggs in the cells designed for males, but lays fertilized eggs
in the proper chambers for the male workers and the possible
queens. The workers, who are the modified females, having long
The Existence and Unity of God
31

--- Sayfa 44 ---
since anticipated the coming of the new generation, are also pre-
pared to furnish food for the young bees by chewing and predi-
gesting honey and pollen. They discontinue the process of chew-
ing, including the predigesting, at a certain stage of development
of the males and females, and feed only honey and pollen. The
females so treated become the workers.
The dog with an inquiring nose can sense the animal that
has passed. No instrument of human invention has added to
our inferior sense of smell, and we hardly know where to begin
to investigate its extension.
All animals hear sounds, many of which are outside our range
of vibration, with an acuteness that far surpasses our limited sense
of hearing.
The young salmon spends years at sea, then comes back to its
own river, and, what is more, it travels up the side of the river
into which flows the tributary in which it was born. If a salmon
going up a river is transferred to another tributary it will fight its
way down to the main stream and then turn up against the cur-
rent to finish its destiny. There is, however, a much more difficult
problem in the exact reverse to solve in the case of the eel. These
amazing creatures migrate at maturity from all the ponds and
rivers everywhere—those from Europe across thousands of miles
of ocean—all go to the abysmal deeps south of Bermuda. There
they breed and die. The little ones, with no apparent means of
knowing anything except that they are in a wilderness of water,
start back and find their way to the shore from which their par-
ents came and thence to every river, lake and little pond, so that
each body of water is always populated with eels.
Animals seem to have telepathy. Who has not watched with
admiration the sandpiper flying and wheeling till every white
breast shows in the sunlight at the same instant? A female moth
placed in your attic by the open window will send out some
subtle signal. Over an unbelievable area, the male moths of the
same species will watch the message and respond in spite of
your attempts to produce laboratory odors to disconcert them.
Vegetation makes subtle use of involuntary agents to carry
on its existence—insects to carry pollen from flower to flower
and the winds and everything that flies or walks to distribute
seed. At last, vegetation has trapped masterful man. He has
improved nature and she generously rewards him. But he has
multiplied so prodigiously that he is now chained to the plow.
He must sow, reap, and store; breed and cross-breed; prune
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
32

--- Sayfa 45 ---
and graft. Should he neglect these chores starvation would be
his lot, civilization would crumble, and Earth return to her pris-
tine state. [A.C. Morrison, Man Does Not Stand Alone (New York:
1945), 49-57]
Are all these habits or distinctive “instinctive” acts, which must
have their origin deep at the beginning of life on Earth, the result
of chance or of an intelligent provision? Should we reflect on why
certain animals are more developed than human beings in having
certain faculties? Among all living creatures that have roamed the
Earth none has a record of reasoning power which may compare
with that of humanity. What we call nature is utterly blind and
senseless, unconscious and ignorant. Men and women, who are the
only intelligent beings on Earth, can do nothing other than to
try to explain all these miraculous phenomena; they cannot even
control their own bodies. Does all this not display a supreme deter-
mination, all-encompassing knowledge, and an absolute power and
thereby One Who has these?
The Existence and Unity of God
33

--- Sayfa 47 ---
CHAPTER 2
The Invisible Realm of Existence

--- Sayfa 49 ---
THE INVISIBLE REALM OF EXISTENCE
S
ince our sensory powers are limited, it is not wise to deny
the existence of realms beyond our senses. Also, what we
know about existence is far less than what we do not know
about existence. Our sciences are still in their “childhood,” and the
future will witness dazzling scientific discoveries and developments.
Sciences are supported by theories and develop through tri-
al-and-error investigation of those theories. Numerous “facts”
that were once considered true, are now known to be incorrect.
We accept unquestionably, and with no scientific basis, the exis-
tence of many things. Since the beginning of time, most people
have believed in the existence of spirits and angels, jinn and
Satan. So, it seems more scientific to allow their existence in the-
ory and then investigate it. Denying their existence is unscien-
tific, insofar as such a judgment or conclusion must be based on
concrete proof. But no one can prove and therefore scientifical-
ly claim that invisible realms do not exist.
Many physical qualities (e.g., heat and cold) and abstract
qualities (e.g., beauty and charm, and feelings of joy, sorrow, and
love) can be experienced directly and measured to some degree.
Materialists attribute these to biochemical processes in the brain,
and some scientists (like psychologists and psychiatrists) still try
to explain them by natural or physical laws. However, our non-
physical side (namely, each person’s feelings, beliefs, potentialities,
desires, and so on) is too profound to be explained by physics,
chemistry, or biology. Believers can (and do) observe that the
stronger their belief, the deeper and more regular their worship;
and the higher their morality, the more radiant and lovable their
faces appear to be. Can such things be explained in merely physi-
cal terms?

--- Sayfa 50 ---
ARGUMENTS FOR THE EXISTENCE OF INVISIBLE BEINGS
Let’s consider some positive arguments for the existence of spir-
it beings.
•
Matter serves life, not the other way around. Science cannot
explain life or how organic matter acquires life. Although
matter appears to be the basis for or serves as a receiver of life,
it is clearly not its originator. So, life is sent from the imma-
terial dimensions of existence. God infuses it into matter or
inorganic substances via something immaterial and invisible.
We call this spirit. The particular features of each spirit makes
each individual unique, although they are formed of the same
physical elements.
•
Life does not depend on matter. On the contrary, life makes a
tiny body greater than a huge one. For example, life makes a fly
or a bird greater than a mountain. Life enables a honeybee to
claim the Earth as its garden, establish relations with all flow-
ers, and enter into transactions with them. Again, the more
refined matter is, the more developed and active life becomes.
Life’s development and activity has nothing to do with phys-
ical size. A fly or a flea is more active and has sharper senses
than a camel or rhinoceros.
•
This world is the arena in which God manifests His Will through
natural causes. Life is the result of the direct manifestation of
His Name the Ever-Living. Thus, as long as science insists on
its positivistic, even materialistic, viewpoint, it will never pen-
etrate the mystery of life.*
•
Angels are pure spiritual beings that represent the purely good
aspect in existence, while Satan and his minions represent the
purely evil aspect. God is One and Infinite, without opposite.
All other beings and existents have an opposite. Therefore,
angels represent our good aspect while Satan represents our
evil aspect. Angels invite us to our purely spiritual or “angel-
ic” aspect, while Satan tempts toward evil. The resulting strug-
gle, both in us and in the universe as a whole, has been ongo-
ing since the beginning of existence. Everyone feels a stim-
ulus toward good and evil at the same time. The former comes
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
38

--- Sayfa 51 ---
from the angels or our unpolluted spirit; the latter comes from
Satan collaborating with our carnal self, which represents
our animal aspect.
•
This spirit–body relation is similar to the relation between elec-
trical power and a factory run by electricity. If there is no elec-
tricity, the factory is reduced to heap of junk. Likewise, when
the spirit leaves the body because of some rupture or dis-
connection (e.g., illness or death), we become no more than
a mass of tissue and bone that decomposes in soil. This shows
that our real existence and uniqueness depend on this spirit.
•
We accept the existence of natural laws and forces unquestionably,
and even go so far as to attribute all phenomena to them. We
ascribe a tiny seed’s growth into a huge, elaborate tree to the
law of germination and growth in that seed, and the uni-
verse’s incredible balance to the laws of gravitation and repul-
sion. But we ignore the absolute will, knowledge, power, and
wisdom necessary for the universe’s very existence, operation,
and balance. The One Who has absolute Will, Knowledge,
Power, and absolute Wisdom uses such powerful invisible
beings (angels) as winds or gales, and others much more pow-
erful than natural forces or laws, behind natural forces and
laws to make them operative.
•
In addition to religious scholars, almost all Muslim philosophers and
even all Oriental philosophers agree that angels and spirit beings
exist. They just have different names for them. The Peripatetic
(Mashshaiyyun) school of philosophy, although quite inclined
toward rationalism and even materialism, admitted the existence
of angels on the grounds that each species has a spiritual, incor-
poreal essence. The Illuminists (Ishraqiyyun) also accepted the
existence of angels, calling them (wrongly) the “Ten Intellects
and Masters of Species.” On the other hand, followers of all
Divine religions, guided by Divine Revelation, believe that
there is an angel in charge of each type of existence, and name
them accordingly: the Angel of the mountains, the Angel of the
seas, the Angel of rain, and so on. Even naturalists and mate-
rialists, who restrict themselves to what they see, admit the
existence of angels, which they call pervasive forces.1
The Invisible Realm of Existence
39

--- Sayfa 52 ---
•
All Prophets, numbering 124,000 in reliable religious sources,
report the existence of angels, spirit beings, jinn, and Satan. All
saints and religious scholars agree on this invisible realm’s exis-
tence. We hardly need to say that two experts of a field are
preferable to thousands of non-specialists. In addition, it is an
established fact that once a matter is confirmed by two people,
its denial by thousands of others has no weight. Furthermore,
all people of religion and followers of almost all religions accept
the existence of such beings.
All Divine Scriptures record the existence of spirit beings
and the human spirit, as well as the story of Satan and how
he tempts us. Above all, can one doubt the report of the Qur’an
and the testimony and experiences of Prophet Muhammad?2
The proofs of the Qur’an’s Divine authorship, the mission
of Prophethood, and the Prophethood of Muhammad and all
other Prophets, also prove the invisible realm’s existence and
thus the existence of spirit, angels, jinn, and Satan.
The best and most rational way of establishing the exis-
tence of such beings is expounded by Islam, described by the
Qur’an, and was seen by the Prophet during his Ascension
through the heavens. The Qur’an explains the meaning of
angelic existence so reasonably that anyone can understand
it. In brief, it says that humanity is a community responsible
for carrying out the Divine Commandments issuing from the
Divine Attribute of Speech, and that angels are a communi-
ty whose “working class” carry out the Divine Laws of nature
issuing from the Attribute of Will. They are God’s honored
servants who do whatever He commands. The existence of
angels and other spirit beings can be established by proving
the existence of one angel. As denying one amounts to deny-
ing the entire species, accepting one requires accepting the
entire species.
•
A consensus has formed, especially among followers of religions,
that there have always been people who can see and converse with
angels, jinn, Satan, and other spirit beings. Had angels not exist-
ed, had one angel never been seen or their existence estab-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
40

--- Sayfa 53 ---
lished through observation, how could such a widespread
belief continue? If this belief were not based on strong evi-
dence, could it have come down to us despite changing ideas
and beliefs and the passage of time? Therefore, we can con-
clude that religious belief in the existence of such beings is
based on the experiences of the Prophets and saints. Such
accounts have been narrated by reliable sources.
THE SPIRIT AND ITS IDENTITY
The Spirit is From the World of Divine Commands
There are many other worlds than those we commonly think of,
such as those of plants, animals, human beings, and of the world
of jinn. Our visible, material world addresses itself to our senses.
From tiny particles to galaxies, this world is the realm where God
Almighty gives life, fashions, renews, changes, and causes things
to die. Science concerns itself with these phenomena.
Above this visible, material world is the immaterial world of
Divine Laws or Commands. To learn something about this world,
consider how a book, a tree, or a human being comes into exis-
tence. The main part of a book’s existence is its meaning. Regardless
of how excellent the printing machine is or how much paper we
have, a book cannot exist without meaning. In the case of a tree,
the essence of life and the law of germination and growth (with
which it is endowed) stimulates its seed to germinate underground
and grow into a tree. We can observe the entire growth process
with our own eyes. If this invisible essence and these unobserv-
able laws did not exist, there would be no plants.
Similarly, menstruation prepares a womb every month for
insemination. This process is dictated by a (biological) law. Out of
the millions of sperms heading for the womb, only one reaches and
fertilizes the ovum. After this, another (biological) law takes over:
menstruation stops until birth. An embryo’s multistage develop-
ment into a new individual is the third process governed by other
(biological or embryological) laws. This process is mentioned in
the Qur’an quite explicitly:
The Invisible Realm of Existence
41

--- Sayfa 54 ---
We created man from a quintessence of clay. We then placed
him as a drop in a place of rest firmly fixed. Then We made the
drop into a leech-like structure suspended on the wall of the
womb, and then of that leech-like structure We made a chewed-
like substance. Then We made out of that chewed-like sub-
stance bones (skeletal system). Then We clothed the bones with
flesh (muscles). Then We developed out of it another creation.
So blessed be God the best to create. (23:12-15)
The Qur’an says that this process takes place within three
veils of darkness: He created you in the wombs of your mothers, in
stages, one after another, in three veils of darkness (39:6). These three
veils of darkness are the belly, the womb, and the caul or mem-
brane; the constituents of the fetal membranes; or the decidua’s
three regions: decidua basalis, decidua capsularis, and the decidua
parietalis. Or rather, the verse includes all of these meanings.
We derive the existence of such laws from the almost never-
changing repetition of these processes. Likewise, by observing
the (natural) phenomena around us, we derive the existence of
many other laws, such as gravitation and repulsion, and the freez-
ing and vaporization of water.
Like these laws, the spirit is also a law issuing from the world of
Divine Laws or Commands. This is stated in the Qur’an: Say: “The
spirit is of my Lord’s Command” (17:85) But it is unique in one way:
It is a living, conscious law. If the spirit were stripped of life and
consciousness, it would be “regular” law; if “regular” laws were
given life and consciousness, each one would become a spirit.
Science cannot define or perceive the spirit. While matter or
anything in the material world is composed of atoms, and atoms
are made up of more minute particles, the spirit is a simple, non-
compound entity. We cannot see it, but we can know it through
its manifestations in this world. Although we accept its exis-
tence and observe its manifestations, we cannot know its nature.
Such ignorance, however, does not mean that it does not exist.
We see with our eyes, as they are our instruments of sight.
The main center of sight is located in the brain. But the brain
does not see. You do not say: “My brain sees”; rather, you say:
“I see.” It is the individual who sees or hears or senses. But what
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
42

--- Sayfa 55 ---
is this “I”? Is it something composed of a brain, a heart, and other
organs and limbs? Why can we not move when we die, although
all our organs and limbs are there? Does a factory operate by itself,
or does something else (i.e., electrical energy) cause it to work? Any
defect or error in a factory that causes a disconnect between it and
its electrical energy can reduce a once highly productive and invalu-
able factory to a heap of junk. Is such a relation at all comparable to
that between the spirit and the body?
When the body’s connection with the spirit is cut by death,
the body is reduced to something that must be disposed of
quickly, before it begins to rot and decompose.
The spirit is not an electrical power, but rather a conscious,
powerful thing that learns, thinks, senses and reasons. It devel-
ops continually, usually in parallel with the body’s physical devel-
opment, as well as mentally and spiritually through learning and
reflection, belief and worship. The spirit determines each individ-
ual’s character, nature, or identity. As a result, although all human
begins are substantially made of the same elements, each individ-
ual is unique.
The Spirit Commands Our Inner Faculties
According to the Qur’an, God has given a particular nature to
each creature: All that is in the heavens and Earth submits to Him,
willingly or unwillingly, and they will be returned to Him (3:83);
and Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High, Who has creat-
ed (all things) and well proportioned (them); Who has assigned for
each a particular form and a particular way to follow and ordained
their destinies, and guided (them) (87:1-3).
Whatever exists in the universe, including the human body,
acts according to the primordial nature God Almighty assigned to
it. This is why we observe a strict determinism in how the uni-
verse operates. What we call natural laws are no more than names
we give to a thing’s or a creature’s God-given primordial nature.
The primordial nature of things does not deceive. For exam-
ple, since God orders the Earth to revolve around its own axis as
well as the sun, it always does so. A seed says in the tongue of its
being or primordial nature: “I will germinate underground in prop-
The Invisible Realm of Existence
43

--- Sayfa 56 ---
er conditions and grow into a plant,” and it does what it says. Water
declares that it freezes at 0ºC and vaporizes at 100ºC, and does
what it declares.
Similarly, the human conscience, as long as it remains sound,
does not lie. If it is not deluded by the carnal self or harmful desires,
it deeply feels the existence of God and finds peace through believ-
ing in and worshipping Him. Thus, the spirit directs or commands
our conscience and other faculties. It seeks the world from which it
came, and yearns for its Creator. Unless it is stunted and spoiled by
sin, it will find the Creator and attain true happiness in Him.
The Spirit Has Deep Relations With the Past and the Future
Animals have no conception of time, for their God-given pri-
mordial nature causes them to live only for the present, without
feeling any pain for the past or anxiety for the future. On the oth-
er hand, we are deeply influenced by such pain and anxiety, for
our spirit is a conscious, sentient entity. The spirit is never satisfied
with this mortal, fleeting world, and our accomplishments or
possessions (e.g., money, status, satisfied desires) cannot make it
content. Rather, especially when considered for their own sakes
or for that of the carnal self alone, such things only increase its
dissatisfaction and unhappiness, for the spirit finds rest only through
belief, worship, and remembrance of God.
Every person feels a strong desire for eternity. This desire can-
not come from the physical dimension of our existence, for our
mortality precludes any feeling of and desire for eternity. This desire
of eternity originates in the eternal dimension of our existence,
which is inhabited by our spirit. Our spirit causes us to lament: “I
am mortal but do not desire what is mortal. I am impotent but do
not desire what is impotent. What I desire is an eternal beloved
(who will never desert me), and I yearn for an eternal world.”
The Spirit Needs Our Body in This World
The spirit, a non-compound entity issuing from the world of
Divine Commands, must use material means to be manifested and
function in this world. As the body cannot contact the world of
symbols or immaterial forms, the spirit cannot contact this world
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
44

--- Sayfa 57 ---
if there is no human heart, brain, or other bodily organs and limbs
to mediate. The spirit functions through the body’s nerves, cells,
and other elements. Therefore, if one or more bodily systems or
organs goes awry, the spirit’s relation with them is disconnected
and can no longer command it. If the failure or “illness” causing
this disconnection severs the spirit’s relation with the entire body,
what we call death occurs.
Although some coarse, meaningless hand or finger move-
ments can be produced by stimulating certain areas of the brain,
these movements are like confused, meaningless sounds produced
by pressing piano keys at random. They are automatic bodily
responses to stimulation, and are produced by the body’s automat-
ic functioning. Therefore, the body needs the spirit, which is con-
scious and has free will, to produce meaningful movements.
Although such psychoanalysists as Freud offered various expla-
nations for dreams, dreams cannot only be the subconscious mind’s
jumbled activities. Almost everyone has had dreams that have come
true. Many scientific or technological discoveries have been made
because of true dreams. So, as we will discuss later, dreams point to
the existence of something within us that can see in a different way
while we are sleeping. This something is the spirit.
Although the spirit sees with our eyes, smells with our nose,
hears with our ears and so on, there are many examples of peo-
ple who somehow manage to see with their fingers or the tips of
their nose, and smell with their heels.
The Spirit Manifests Itself Mostly on a Person’s Face
Truly, our face is a window opened on our inner world, for its fea-
tures disclose our character. Psychologists assert that almost all of
our movements, even coughing, reveal our character. The face’s
ability to reveal one’s character, abilities, and personality resulted in
physiognomy, the art of judging character from facial features. The
spirit determines these features.
Our body’s cells are renewed continuously. Every day, millions
of cells die and are replaced. Biologists say that all bodily cells are
renewed every 6 months. Despite this continuous renewal, the
The Invisible Realm of Existence
45

--- Sayfa 58 ---
face’s main features remain unchanged. We recognize individuals
from their unchanging facial features and fingerprints. The cells of
a finger change, due to such renewal or injury and bruise, but their
prints never change. Each individual’s unique spirit makes these
distinguishing features stable.
Our Spirit Makes us Unique
Our body experiences ceaseless change throughout its existence.
This change is directed toward physical growth and development
until a certain period, gradually becoming stronger and more per-
fect. When this growth stops at a certain point, decay begins.
Unlike our body, we can grow continuously in learning and devel-
opment, decay spiritually and intellectually, or stop and change
direction while developing or decaying. Our moral, spiritual, and
intellectual education does not depend on our bodily changes.
Furthermore, our moral, spiritual, and intellectual differ-
ences have nothing to do with our physical structure. Although
we are composed of the same substantial, physical or material
elements, we are morally and intellectually unique. Which part of
us receives this moral and intellectual education, and which part
is trained physically? Does physical training have any relation to
learning or moral and intellectual education? Are physically well-
developed people smarter and more moral than others?
If physical training or development does not affect our sci-
entific, moral, and intellectual level, why should we not accept the
spirit’s existence? How can we attribute learning and moral and
intellectual education to some biochemical processes in the brain?
Are those processes quicker in some people? Are some smarter
because they have quicker processes, or are the processes quick-
er because some study and thus become smarter? What relation
do these processes have with our spiritual and moral education
and development? How can we explain the differences regular
worship makes to one’s face? Why are believers’ faces more radi-
ant than those of unbelievers?
Our physical changes engender no parallel changes in our
character, morality, or thinking. How can we explain this, other
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
46

--- Sayfa 59 ---
than by admitting that the spirit exists and is the center of think-
ing and feeling, choosing and deciding, learning and forming
opinions and preferences, and is the cause of unique characters?
Our Spirit Feels and Believes or Denies
All people have innumerable, complex feelings: love and hate,
happiness and sadness, hope and despair, ambition and the abil-
ity to imagine, relief and boredom, and so on. We like and dis-
like, appreciate and disregard, experience fear and timidity as
well as courage and enthusiasm. We repent, become excited, and
long for various things. If we look through a dictionary, we find
hundreds of words that express human feelings. Moreover, we
do not all “feel” the same way. We may reflect on what is going
on around us, the beauty of creation, develop ourselves through
learning, compare and reason, and thus believe in the Creator of
all things. Worshipping and following His Commandments caus-
es us to develop morally and spiritually, until finally we are perfect-
ed. How can we explain such phenomena other than by admit-
ting that each human being has a conscious spirit? Can we attrib-
ute them to chemical processes in the brain?
Are We Only Physical Bodies?
If we are only a physical entity of blood and bones, flesh and tis-
sues, and attribute all our movements to biochemical processes in
the brain, why should we obey any laws? We have established that
our physical body is renewed every 6 months. If we were tried for
a murder we committed a year ago, would not the following con-
versation be entirely logical, given the above understanding?
Judge: When did you commit the crime?
Defendant: One year ago.
The judge announces the verdict: Since the murder was com-
mitted a year ago and the defendant’s cells, including those of
his trigger finger, have been completely replaced, and since it is
therefore impossible to punish the actual murderer, the jury has
voted for acquittal.
How can anyone be merely a physical entity? Can their move-
ments, feelings, thoughts, beliefs, and decisions be the results of
The Invisible Realm of Existence
47

--- Sayfa 60 ---
the brain’s biochemical processes? Such assertions are untenable.
The main part of our being is our living and conscious spirit. This
part of our body feels, thinks, believes, wills, decides, and uses the
body to enact its decisions.
The Spirit is the Basis of Human Life
God acts in this world through causes. However, there are many
other worlds or realms: the world of ideas, symbols or immate-
rial forms, the inner dimensions of things, and spirits, where
God acts directly and where matter and causes do not exist. The
spirit is breathed into the embryo directly, making it a direct
manifestation of the Divine Name the All-Living, and therefore
the basis of human life. Like natural laws, which issue from the
same realm as the spirit, the spirit is invisible and known through
its manifestations.
In this world, matter is refined in favor of life. A lifeless body,
regardless of size, such as a mountain, is lonely, passive, and stat-
ic. But life enables a bee to interact with almost the entire world
so that it can say: “This world is my garden, and flowers are my
business partners.” The smaller a living body is, the more active,
astonishing, and powerful life becomes. Compare a bee, a fly, or
even a micro-organism with an elephant. The more refined mat-
ter is, the more active and powerful the body becomes. For exam-
ple, wood produces flame and carbon when it burns, and water
vaporizes when heated. We come across electrical energy in the
atomic and subatomic worlds. We cannot see it, but we are aware
of its presence and power though its manifestations.
This means that existence is not limited only to this world;
rather, this world is only the apparent, mutable, and unstable
dimension of existence. Behind it lies the pure, invisible dimen-
sion that uses matter to be seen and known. As the spirit belongs
to that dimension, it is therefore pure and invisible.
The arguments for the spirit’s existence also affirm the Creator’s
existence. They are as follows:
•
Just as our body, which God creates from elements, needs the
spirit to govern it, the universe (and what it contains) needs
God to bring it into existence and to command and govern it.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
48

--- Sayfa 61 ---
•
Each body has one spirit that makes it alive and governs it. So,
there must be a single Lord, without partner, to create and gov-
ern the universe. Otherwise, disaster and confusion is inevitable.
•
The spirit is not located in any specific place or part of the
body. It may even leave the body and, as in the case of dreams,
continue its relation with the body by means of a specific
cord attached to the body. Likewise, God Almighty is not
contained by time or space. He is always present everywhere
and nowhere, whereas the spirit is in the body and is con-
tained by time and space.
•
There is only one sun, and the world is very far from it.
However, the sun is present everywhere through its heat and
light, and via reflection it can appear in every transparent thing.
Therefore, we can say that the sun is nearer to things than
things are to themselves. The spirit has the same relation with
the body, as well as with all of its separate cells. This analogy
may help us to understand God’s relation with existence. He
controls and directs all things at the same time like a single thing,
and although we are infinitely distant from Him, He is near-
er to us than we are to ourselves.
•
The spirit is invisible, and its nature is unknown. In the same
way, we cannot think of or imagine God as He really is, for
His Essence cannot be known. Like the spirit, God Almighty
is known via the manifestations of His Names, Attributes,
and Essence.
Our Spirit Has Its Own Cover
When the spirit leaves the body at death, it retains this cover,
which is like a body’s “negative.” It is called by many names: the
envelope of light, the person’s ethereal figure, energetic form,
second body, astral body, double (of that person), and phantom.
DEATH AND THE SPIRIT AFTER DEATH
All human beings have an intrinsic feeling of eternity, and so feel
imprisoned in the narrow confines of the material world and
yearn for eternity. Whoever can hear our conscious nature will
The Invisible Realm of Existence
49

--- Sayfa 62 ---
hear it pronouncing eternity over and over again. If we were
given the whole universe, we would still hunger for the eternal
life for which we were created. This natural inclination toward
eternal happiness comes from an objective reality: the existence
of eternal life and our desire for it.
Death and Angels of Death
The spirit uses the body as an instrument, and thus governs and
controls it in a comprehensive manner. When the appointed hour
of death comes, any illness or failure in the body’s functions is an
invitation to the Angel of Death (the Archangel Azra’il). In real-
ity, God causes people to die. However, He employs Azra’il to
take the souls, so that people should not complain about Him,
as death might seem disagreeable to many. He also uses illness or
other calamities as another veil between Azra’il and death so that
people should not curse the Archangel.
Since all angels are created from light, Azra’il can be present
and assume any form in innumerable places at once and do many
things simultaneously and perfectly. Like the sun giving heat and
light to all things in the world at the same time, and being pres-
ent through its images in innumerable transparent objects, Azra’il
can take millions of souls at the same moment with great ease.
Archangels like Gabriel, Michael, and Azra’il have subordi-
nates that resemble them and are supervised by them. When good,
righteous people die, certain angels come to them with smiles and
radiant faces. They are followed by Azra’il and his subordinates
charged with taking the souls of the good. The Qur’anic verses:
By those who pluck out violently; by those who draw out gently (79:1-
2), indicate that those angels who take the souls of the righteous
differ from those who take the souls of the wicked. The latter are
plucked out violently, and have sour, frightened faces at death.
Those who believe and live righteous lives are greeted with
scenes from the places reserved for them in Paradise. Prophet
Muhammad stated that the souls of such people are drawn out
as gently as the flowing of water from a pitcher. Better than that,
martyrs do not feel death’s agony and do not know that they are
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
50

--- Sayfa 63 ---
dead. Instead, they consider themselves to have been transferred
to a better world and enjoy perfect happiness. Prophet Muhammad
told Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amr, who was martyred at the
Battle of Uhud:
Do you know how God welcomed your father? He welcomed
him in such an indescribable manner that neither eyes have seen
it nor ears heard it, nor minds conceived of it. Your father said:
“O God, let me return to the world so that I can explain to those
left behind how pleasant martyrdom is.” God replied: “There is
no return. Life is lived only once. However, I will inform them
of your circumstances,” and He revealed: Never think of those
slain in the way of God to be dead; rather they are alive and are pro-
vided in the Presence of their Lord. (3:169)
Prophet Muhammad, the most advanced in worshipping God,
advised prescribed prayers while he was dying. So did ‘Umar,
the second Caliph. Khalid ibn Walid was one of the few invin-
cible generals in world history. Just before his death, he asked
those beside him to bring his sword and horse. People like ‘Uthman
(the third Caliph), ‘Ali (the fourth Caliph), Hamza, and Mus‘ab
ibn ‘Umayr dedicated themselves to the cause of Islam and died
as martyrs. Those who lead lives of dissipation die while fre-
quenting drinking or gambling tables, brothels, and other unsa-
vory places.
Should We Fear Death?
Believers and those who do righteous deeds do not need to fear
death. Although death seems to bring decomposition, extinguish
life, and destroy pleasure, in fact it represents a Divine discharge
from the heavy duties of worldly life. It is a change of residence,
a transferal of the body, an invitation to and the beginning of
everlasting life.
Just as the world is continually enlivened through acts of
creation and predetermination, so is it continually stripped of life
through other cycles of creation, determination, and wisdom.
The dying of plants, the simplest level of life, is a work of Divine
artistry, just like their living, but one that is more perfect and
The Invisible Realm of Existence
51

--- Sayfa 64 ---
better designed.3 When a fruit’s seed dies in the soil, it seems to
decompose and rot away. But in reality, it undergoes a perfect
chemical process, passes through predetermined states of refor-
mation, and ultimately grows again into an elaborate, new tree.
So a seed’s death is really the beginning of a new tree, a new, more
perfect and elaborate life.
Since the death of fruits, vegetables, and meat in our stom-
achs causes them to rise to the degree of human life, in this sense
their death can be regarded as more noble than their lives. Since
the dying of plants is so perfect and serves so great a purpose, our
deaths, given that we are the highest form of life, must be much
more perfect and serve a still greater purpose. After we have been
buried, we certainly will be brought into eternal life.
Death releases us from the hardships of worldly life—a turbu-
lent, suffocating, narrow dungeon of space that gradually becomes
more unbearable through old age and affliction—and admits us to
the infinitely wide circle of the Eternal, Beloved One’s mercy.
There, we may enjoy the everlasting company of our beloved ones
and the consolation of a happy, eternal life.
THE SPIRIT IN THE INTERMEDIATE WORLD
Following death, the spirit is taken to the Presence of God. If it
led a good, virtuous life and refined itself, the angels charged with
taking it there wrap it in a piece of satin and bear it, through the
heavens and all inner dimensions of existence, to His Presence.
During this journey, angels welcome it in every mansion or sta-
tion it passes and ask: “Whose spirit is this? How beautiful it is!”
The angels conveying it introduce it with the most beautiful titles
it had while in the world, and answer: “This is the spirit of the
one who, for example, prayed, fasted, gave alms, and bore all kinds
of hardship for God’s sake.” Finally, God Almighty welcomes it
and tells the angels: “Take it back to the grave where its body is
buried, so that it can answer the questions of Munkar and Nakir,
the interrogating angels.”
Whatever misfortune we experience is usually the result of our
own sins. If believers are sincere but cannot always refrain from
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
52

--- Sayfa 65 ---
sin, God, out of His Mercy, allows misfortune to strike so that they
may be purified. God may subject them to great agony during
death, either to forgive their still unpardoned sins or to promote
them to higher (spiritual) ranks, but then take their spirit very gen-
tly. If, despite all misfortune and death agonies there are still some
unforgiven sins, these people are punished in the grave and so will
not be punished in Hell. As the grave is the first station on the
journey toward eternal life, it features a preliminary interrogation
by two angels about what kind of life the deceased lead. Almost
everyone, except Prophets, is subjected to some suffering.
It is recorded in reliable books that ‘Abbas, the uncle of the
Prophet, desired very much to see ‘Umar in his dream after the
latter had died. When he saw him 6 months later, he asked him:
“Where were you until now?” ‘Umar replied: “Don’t ask me that!
I have just finished accounting (for my life).”
Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh was among the greatest Companions. When
he died, Archangel Gabriel told God’s Messenger: “The Divine
Throne trembled when Sa‘d died.” Innumerable angels took part in
his funeral. After Sa‘d, may God be pleased with him, was buried,
the Messenger said in amazement: “Glory to God! What (will hap-
pen to others) if the grave squeezes (even such people like) Sa‘d?”
In the grave, everyone is questioned by the angels Munkar and
Nakir. They ask: “Who is your Lord? Who is your Prophet? What
is your religion?” and many other questions. If the deceased were
believers, they can answer these questions. Otherwise, they cannot.
The questions continue concerning their deeds in the world.
The spirit’s relationship with the body differs according to
which world it inhabits. In this world, the spirit is confined
within the prison of the body. If the evil-commanding self and
bodily desires dominate it, the spirit inevitably deteriorates and
spells the person’s final doom. Those who use their willpower in
the way taught by God, discipline their evil-commanding selves,
nourish their spirits (via belief, worship, and good conduct), and
are not enslaved by bodily desires will find their spirits refined,
purified, and furnished with laudable qualities. Such people will
find happiness in both worlds.
The Invisible Realm of Existence
53

--- Sayfa 66 ---
After burial, the spirit waits in the intermediate world between
this one and the Hereafter. Although the body decomposes, its
essential particles (called ajb al-dhanab, which literally means coc-
cyx, in a hadith) do not rot. We do not know whether ajb al-dhanab
is a person’s genes or something else. Regardless of this ambi-
guity, however, the spirit continues its relations with the body
through it. God will make this part, which is formed of the body’s
essential particles, atoms, or all its other particles already dispersed
in the soil, conducive to eternal life during the final destruction
and rebuilding of the universe. He also will use it to re-create us
on the Day of Judgment.
The intermediate world is the realm where the spirit feels the
“breath” of the bliss of Paradise or the punishment of Hell. If we
led a virtuous life in the world, our good deeds (e.g., prayers, recita-
tions, acts of charity) will appear as amiable fellows. Also, windows
onto heavenly scenes will be opened for us and, as stated in a hadith,
our grave will become like a garden of Paradise. However, if some
of our sins still remain unpardoned, regardless of how virtuous we
were, we may suffer some punishment in the intermediate world
until we become deserving of Paradise. Unbelievers who indulged
in sin will be met by their deeds, which will assume the forms of
bad fellows and vermin. They will see scenes of Hell, and their
graves will become like a pit of Hell.
When we are alive, our spirit suffers pain and feels joy and
happiness. Although it feels pain apparently through the nerv-
ous system and uses this extremely complicated system to com-
municate with all bodily parts, scientists still do not understand
how it interacts with the body, especially with the brain. Any
bodily failure that causes death can make the nervous system
disfunctional. However, it has been established scientifically that
certain brain cells survive for a while after death. Scientists try to
receive signals from such cells. If they succeed in doing so and can
decipher those signals, it will be useful, especially in criminology,
in solving unsolved crimes. For example, the Qur’an tell us how,
during the time of Prophet Moses, God revived a dead person,
who identified his killer:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
54

--- Sayfa 67 ---
When Moses said to his people: “God commands you to sacri-
fice a cow” ... they sacrificed her, a thing they had scarcely done.
And when you killed a living soul, and disputed thereon—God
disclosed what you were hiding—so We said: “Smite him with
part of it”; even so He brings to life the dead, and He shows you
His signs, that haply you may have understanding. (2:67, 71-73)
As the spirit suffers pain and feels happy, and as it continues
its relation with the body (via those essential bodily particles
that do not rot) in the intermediate world, it is meaningless to
discuss whether the spirit, the body, or both will enjoy Paradise
or suffer Hell.
Since the spirit lives the worldly life together with the body
and shares all its joys and sorrows, God will resurrect people
both bodily and spiritually. The Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama‘a4
agree that the spirit and the body will go either to Paradise or
Hell together. God will build bodies in forms unique to the
Hereafter, where everything will be alive: This life of the world is
but a pastime and a game. Lo! the home of the Hereafter, that is life
if they but knew (29:64).
Spirits in the intermediate world will see and hear us, pro-
vided God allows this. If He does, He may permit some saintly
people to see, and hear, and communicate with us.
Our account is not closed after we die. If we leave behind
good, virtuous children, books or institutions from which people
continue to benefit, or if we have raised or contributed to rais-
ing those who benefit others, our reward increases. If we leave
evil behind, our sins increase as long as our evil harms others.
Therefore, if we want to help our beloved ones who have died, we
should do good deeds. If we help the poor, take part in Islamic
services, lead a good and virtuous life, and especially spend to pro-
mote Islam and the good of Muslims and humanity at large, we
will cause their reward to increase.
SUPERNORMAL PHENOMENA
The spirit issues forth from the world of unconditioned existence,
where Divine commands are carried out instantly and directly.
The Invisible Realm of Existence
55

--- Sayfa 68 ---
However, like energy requiring cords or bulbs to function, the
spirit needs matter to function in this world, although matter
restricts its activity. So, to make the spirit more active and less con-
fined within time and space, we can follow one of three ways:
Supernormal Phenomena, the Prophets, and Saints
Every person can give the spirit more room in which to act. This
goal is accomplished by firm religious belief and spiritual develop-
ment through regular worship and asceticism. The more refined
matter is, the freer and more active the spirit. Eating less food, fast-
ing frequently, sleeping less, refraining from sin, and regular and
more frequent worship help you reach this goal. If you use your
innate ability to develop your spiritual faculties, you can transcend
the limits of this world, travel in the spirit in other dimensions of
existence, and, to some degree, establish contact with the past and
future.
Consider the following analogy: When you are in a room,
you see that which is confined by the four walls. When you go
outside, you can see all of your immediate surroundings. You
can see even more from the top of a hill. The higher you ascend,
the more you see. It is the same with time. The freer the spirit
is from the prison of matter and the body, the broader the realm
of its activity with respect to time and space.
This way is usually the way of the Prophets and saints. Either
through traveling in spirit in time and space or being taught by
God, the Knower of the Seen and Unseen, they penetrate into the
depths of time and space. Just as sunlight is in innumerable places
simultaneously, although it is a material body, so a Prophet’s or a
saint’s spirit, especially that of a “substitute” (abdal), can be present
in many places at the same time in his or her body’s immaterial or
energetic form. The Qur’an points to this: She (Mary, the mother
of Jesus) placed a screen to seclude herself from them. Then We sent to her
Our spirit, and he appeared before her as a man without fault (19:17).
Many interpreters of the Qur’an say this spirit was Archangel
Gabriel. Such accounts also are reported in many authentic nar-
rations.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
56

--- Sayfa 69 ---
A saint’s spirit, if it has acquired sufficient enlightenment or
luminosity, encounters symbols or signs of past or future events
while traveling in time. Saints interpret these visions and relate
certain past or future events. This is comparable to dream inter-
pretation. They may err in their interpretation.
However, Prophets do not err in their interpretations and
predictions, since they receive Revelation and are taught direct-
ly by God Almighty, the Knower of the Unseen. Whatever they
predicted always came true. For example, Prophet Muhammad
predicted numerous future events (e.g., the martyrdom of ‘Uthman
and ‘Ali, the Battle of Jamal (Camel) between ‘Ali and such lead-
ing Companions as Talha and Zubayr, and the Muslims’ conquest
of Damascus, Iran, and Istanbul). Most of his predictions have
already come true; others are waiting for their time to come true.5
Muhyi al-Din ibn al-‘Arabi (d. 1240 CE), a Muslim saint who
died about 50 years before the founding of the Ottoman State,
predicted many important events of Ottoman history. His Shajarat
al-Nu‘maniya, manuscripts of which are available in libraries in
Edirne and Istanbul, is like a symbolic history of the Ottoman
State. For example, he predicted that his grave would be discov-
ered when Selim entered Damascus (it was), that despite 9 months
of siege Hafiz Ahmad Pasha would not capture Baghdad (he did
not), that Sultan Murad would conquer it in 40 days (he did), and
that Sultan ‘Abd al-‘Aziz would be dethroned and killed (he was).
Similarly, Mushtaq Dada of Bitlis, who lived in the first half
of the eighteenth century, predicted that after a war someone
named Kemal would make Ankara the capital of Turkey (all of
which happened). His Diwan, a book of his poems that contains
this prediction, is still available.
Such beloved servants of God, whether Prophets or saints,
make predictions only if He allows them to do so through His
permission and power. The Messenger reports from God:
My servant can draw near unto Me in no safer and better way
than performing his obligatory religious duties. He becomes
nearer to me through supererogatory prayers. Once he becomes
near to Me, I become his eyes with which he sees, his ears with
which he hears, and his hands with which he holds.
The Invisible Realm of Existence
57

--- Sayfa 70 ---
Supernormal Phenomena and the Divine Names
The second way to travel in spirit in time and space, or to pene-
trate into further and deeper dimensions of time and space, is to
follow the guidance of the relevant Divine Name or Names. All
existence depends on the Divine Names’ manifestations. We can
see only because the manifestation of His Name the All-Seeing
enables us to see. We continue to exist because of the manifesta-
tion of His Names the Self-Subsistent and the One-Causing-to-
Subsist allows us to do so. If He no longer manifested His Name
the One-Causing-to-Subsist in connection with existence, the
universe would cease to exist instantly.
Similarly, this practice allows angels and jinn to assume ani-
mal and human forms, provided that God allows them to do so.
Especially jinn can enter an animal’s body and govern its actions.
They can also control people. So, by discovering the Divine Name
that allows one to penetrate such dimensions and then following
Its guidance in a particular affair, we can travel in time and space,
and see and hear certain things that others cannot.
Various supernormal phenomena
Such supernormal phenomena as telepathy and spiritualism are
widespread. Millions of people who seek peace and happiness to
counteract the domination of their worldview, mind, and spirit
by technology and materialism, attend séances for so-called tran-
scendental experiences. Some people are more inclined to and
can perform supernormal phenomena. For example, Madame
Gibson predicted the partition of India in 1947 and the murder
of John Kennedy. Likewise, Fenni Bey from Ordu, Turkey, who
fought at the front of Madina during the First World War, relates:
We were under siege in Madina. I was unable to communicate
with my family in Istanbul. One night in a dream I saw fire and
smoke in my house. In the morning I sent for a private of mine,
who was a medium. I told him to go into a trance and, travelling
to my house—I told him where it was situated—describe to me
what he saw. He did what I told him and began to describe: “I
have reached the house, I have knocked on the door and an old
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
58

--- Sayfa 71 ---
woman in a headscarf has come out with a child in her arms.” I
told the private to ask the woman if there was anything wrong in
the house? He related to me: “She says your wife died yesterday.”
Spiritualism is now widespread. Before further explanation,
I should point out that I discuss such things only to emphasize
that existence is not restricted to matter. Rather, as a book’s main
existence lies in its meaning, that which is metaphysical, spiritu-
al, or immaterial is the essential part of existence. Matter, on the
other hand, is accidental and a changing means for manifesting
what is immaterial. Great saints like Ibn al-‘Arabi communicat-
ed with the spirits of the dead and even of those who had not
yet been born.6 Contemporary spiritualists and mediums com-
municate with unbelieving jinn or devils who appear as the dead
person with whose soul they wish to communicate. Also, medi-
ums predicting future events usually make contact with jinn and
then report what they are told.
Jinn live longer than us, are active in broader dimensions
(realms) of time and space, are much quicker than us, and can see
things that we cannot. But they cannot see the future, and so we
should not believe their predictions, even though a very few of
them do come true. In the past, American and Soviet intelligence
services competed with each other in studying telepathy and
other supernormal ways of communication. As will be explained
later, in a not-too-distant future, world powers will use jinn to
communicate with each other, especially in intelligence matters.
However, it is dangerous to seek to contact and communicate
with jinn or devils, for such beings can easily assert their influ-
ence and control the seekers.
A psychiatrist friend relates the following account:
I was invited to a necromantic event in a house in Samsun (a
province in northern Turkey). The youngest daughter arranged
cups and letters on a table. One of the participants invited the
soul of his late grandfather. After several calls, a man appeared.
When we asked him insistently who he was, he answered:
“Satan.” We were greatly astonished. A while later, I asked him
why he had come although we had not called him. He wrote
The Invisible Realm of Existence
59

--- Sayfa 72 ---
on the table with the cups: “So I come!” I asked him whether
he believed in God. He wrote “No!” When I asked whether he
believed in the Prophet, again he wrote, “No!” I began reading
to him some passages from a book concerning the existence of
God. When I read: “A factory with such and such features
points to the engineer who planned and built it,” he wrote:
“True”; but when I read: “So too the universe with all the plan-
ets and particularly the world with all plants and animals in it
indicate God,” he wrote, “No!” This continued for some time,
and I began reciting to him from Jawshan al-Kabir (The Great
Armor), a collection of supplications to God. While I was recit-
ing, the cups were moving on the table. Meantime he wrote:
“Give up that nonsense!” When I continued to recite, he could
not endure listening and disappeared.
Like such supernormal experiences, observations of some
doctors at the time of death also prove the existence of the spir-
it and spirit beings. What Bedri Ruhselman reports in Ruh ve
Kainat (The Spirit and the Universe) from a doctor agrees ful-
ly with the observations of a group of doctors from Holland,
which were published in the newspapers. A doctor narrates:
My wife was ill. When she went into the pangs of death, two
things resembling two clouds descended into the room and
hovered above her head. Meanwhile a form appeared, which
was connected to my wife on the nape of the neck with a cord
and was fluttering. This continued for five hours. In the end,
the cord broke off and the form, the spirit, rose away. This was
the end of my wife’s life.
DREAMS
While you sleep with your eyes closed, your ears deaf, your tongue
mute, and your arms and legs motionless, how do you travel, meet
people, and do many things in a few minutes or even seconds?
When you get up in the morning, you feel deeply influenced by
that adventure of few seconds. Although Freud and his followers
attribute dreams to the subconscious self, to thoughts and desires,
impulses and past experiences, how can you explain dreams that
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
60

--- Sayfa 73 ---
inform you of a future event with which you have no contact or
have never thought about? How do we dream? With what part of
our body or being do we dream? Why do dreams last only a few
seconds? How (and why) do we remember what we dreamed? All
of these and many similar questions are like puzzles awaiting to be
solved by science.
Sometimes while we are asleep, our subconscious (namely, our
thoughts and desires, impulses and past experiences) are revealed
unconsciously. We may be sick or hungry, or be facing an unsolv-
able problem. The imagination gives form to the deviations of
a bad temper, or the mind remembers a past exciting event and
gives it a new, different form. All such dreams are jumbled; they
have some meaning, but are not worth interpreting. For example,
if we eat salty things before sleep, we may dream that we are lying
by a pool; if we go to bed angry, we may dream that we are fight-
ing with others.
If we do not know how to interpret dreams, true dreams may
be confused with or taken for such jumbled dreams. For example,
although the dream Pharaoh told to Prophet Joseph was true, his
men described it as jumbled.7
True Dreams
One type of dream has nothing to do with the subconscious self.
Such dreams carry important messages: either good tidings from
God, which encourage us to do good things and guide us, or warn-
ings concerning the evil we have done. Those dreams, which we
call true dreams, are very clear and unforgettable.
Some true dreams contain news of the future. To under-
stand their nature and mechanism, consider the following:
Just as a book’s essence—its meaning—exists before it assumes
a written, visible form, everything has an essential form of exis-
tence in God’s Knowledge before it appears in the world. Islamic
philosophers call these essential forms archetypes. When God
wills to send them to this world, through the manifestation of His
Wisdom and Power and the appropriate Divine Names, He clothes
them in material bodies. There is another world between the world
The Invisible Realm of Existence
61

--- Sayfa 74 ---
of archetypes (where God’s Knowledge has primary manifesta-
tion) and this world —the world of immaterial forms or symbols.
There, things exist in ideal forms or as symbols, and the concept
and measure of time are completely different from their counter-
parts here. Dreamers find or receive these symbols differently, based
on such factors as time and place, culture, and even national and
individual characteristics.
When we sleep, our spirit ascends to this world of ideal forms
without completely breaking its connection with the body.8 It
enters a different dimension of existence, where past, present, and
future are combined. As a result, we may experience a past event
or witness a future one. However, since things in that world exist
in ideal forms or symbols, the spirit usually receives symbols that
require interpretation.
For example, clear water there might correspond to knowl-
edge here. If you see your own waste matter, it may be interpret-
ed to mean that you will earn money in lawful ways. If the waste
matter belongs to others, it may mean that money will come to
you in unlawful ways. As mentioned in Sura Yusuf, a fat cow may
mean a year of abundant crops, while a lean one means a year of
severity. The metaphors, similes, and parables found in the Qur’an
and the Prophetic sayings, and sometimes among people, may pro-
vide significant keys to dream interpretation. Some true dreams are
so clear that no interpretation is needed.
As time is measured differently in these two worlds, and as
the spirit is far more active while we are dreaming, great saints
who free their spirits, to a certain degree, can travel long distances
in a much shorter time than normal people.
Many people have had true dreams. For example:
•
Abraham Lincoln’s dream the night before his assassination is
famous. He dreamed of White House servants running to and
fro, telling each other that Mr. Lincoln had been killed. He
woke up in great excitement and spent an uneasy day. Despite
warnings, he went to the theater that evening and was killed.
•
Eisenhower’s dream just before he landed on Normandy in
June 1944 changed the course of the Second World War. A
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
62

--- Sayfa 75 ---
few days before the date on which he had decided to land,
he dreamed that a big storm broke out and overturned the
landing crafts. This caused him to move up the date. History
records that his dream was accurate.
•
The mother of Anne Ostrovosky, a Russian writer, saw
many scenes of the German–Russian battles 5 years before
the Second World War broke out. Her dream was published
in several newspapers.
•
Several scientific or technological discoveries were first seen in
dreams. Elias Howe, while trying to figure out how to thread
a sewing machine, dreamed he was a prisoner of an African
tribe that wanted him to thread a sewing machine. In mortal
fear and puzzled, he suddenly saw holes at the ends of his cap-
tors’ spears. He woke up and made a little “spear” with a hole
at one end. Niels Bohr, who was studying atomic structures,
dreamed of planets connected to the sun with threads and
turning around it. When he woke up, he conceived of a resem-
blance between what he had dreamed and atomic structures.
Many other true dreams have predicted future events or
resulted in scientific or technological discoveries. But these exam-
ples are sufficient to show that dreams are the result of the sprit’s
journey in inner dimensions of existence (the world of immateri-
al forms or symbols) and of receiving signals therein.
Finally, dreams provide a strong proof for the existence of
immaterial worlds as well as for Divine Knowledge and Destiny.
If God Almighty had not predetermined and recorded all events
in “the Supreme Guarded Tablet,” how could we be informed of
future events? Also, dreams show that the measure of time dif-
fers according to each world’s features.
ANGELS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS
Angels are created from light. The Arabic word for angel is malak.
According to its root form, malak means messenger, deputy, envoy,
superintendent, and a powerful being. The root meaning also
implies descent from a high place. Angels build relations between
the macrocosmic world and the material one, convey God’s com-
The Invisible Realm of Existence
63

--- Sayfa 76 ---
mands of creation and operation of the universe, direct the acts
and lives of beings (with God’s permission), and represent their
worship in their own realms.
Having refined or subtle bodies of light, angels move very rap-
idly and can be found in all realms of existence. They place them-
selves in our eyelids or in the bodies of other beings to observe the
works of God. They also descend into the hearts of Prophets and
saints to bring them inspiration. Such inspirations are usually from
God, but sometimes they come from angels.
Some animals, like honeybees, act according to Divine inspi-
ration. Science asserts that all animals are directed by impulses, but
cannot explain what an impulse is and how it occurs. Scientists are
trying to discover how migrating birds find their way, how young
eels hatched in the waters of Europe find their way to their ances-
tral waters in the Pacific. Even if such information is encoded in
their DNA, this information is assuredly from God, Who knows
everything, controls the universe, and assigns angels to direct these
creatures’ lives. If science says we cannot question the existence of
such invisible forces as the law of growth in living creatures, it is
even more scientific to attribute such forces to angels, God’s spe-
cial servants.
Everything that exists, whether an individual or a species,
has a collective identity and performs a unique, universal func-
tion. Each flower displays a superlative design and symmetry
and recites, in the tongue of its being, the Names of the Creator
manifested on it. The entire Earth performs a universal glorifi-
cation as though it were a single flower. The vast “ocean” of the
heavens praises and glorifies the Majestic Maker of the universe
through its suns, moons, and stars. Even inert material bodies,
although outwardly inanimate and unconscious, perform a vital
function in praising God. Angels represent these immaterial bod-
ies in the world of the inner dimensions of things, and express their
praise. In return, these immaterial bodies are the angels’ representa-
tives, dwellings, and mosques in this world.
There are classes of angels. One class is engaged in constant
worship; another worships by working. These working angels have
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
64

--- Sayfa 77 ---
functions that resemble human occupations, like shepherds or
farmers. The face of the Earth resembles a farm, and an appoint-
ed angel oversees all animal species by the command of the All-
Majestic Creator, by His permission and power and strength, and
for His sake. Each animal species is overseen by a lesser angel
appointed to act as its shepherd.
The face of the Earth is also an arable field in which all plants
are sown. Another angel is appointed to oversee all of them in
the Name of Almighty God and by His power. Lower ranking
angels worship and glorify Almighty God by supervising partic-
ular plant species. Archangel Michael, one of the bearers of God’s
Throne of Sustenance,9 oversees the angels of the highest rank.
Angels who function as shepherds or farmers bear no resem-
blance to human shepherds or farmers, for their supervision is
purely for God’s sake, in His Name, and by His power and com-
mand. They observe the manifestations of God’s Lordship in the
species they are assigned to supervise, study the manifestations of
Divine Power and Mercy in it, communicate Divine commands
to it through inspiration, and arrange its voluntary actions.
Their supervision of plants, in particular, consists of repre-
senting in the angelic tongue the plants’ glorification in the tongue
of their being. In other words, these angels proclaim the praises
and exaltations that all plants offer to the Majestic Creator through
their lives. These angels also regulate and employ the plants’ fac-
ulties correctly and direct them toward certain ends. Angels per-
form such services through their partial willpower and a kind of
worship and adoration.10 They do not originate or create their acts,
for everything bears a stamp particular to the Creator of all things.
Only God creates. In short, whatever angels do is worship, and
it is therefore not like the ordinary acts of human beings.
Since there is one angel to represent every kind of creature and
present its service and worship to the Divine Court, the Prophet’s
description of angels is entirely reasonable and true. According to
him, there are angels with 40,000 heads, each with 40,000 mouths,
and 40,000 praises sung by 40,000 tongues in each mouth.
The Invisible Realm of Existence
65

--- Sayfa 78 ---
This Prophetic tradition means that angels serve universal pur-
poses, and that some natural creatures worship God with 40,000
heads in 40,000 ways. The firmament, for example, praises the
Majestic Creator through its suns and stars; the Earth, although a
single body, worships with many thousands of “heads,” each with
many thousands of “mouths,” and each with many thousands of
“tongues.” Thus this tradition is considered to refer to the angel
who represents the Earth in the world of the inner dimensions of
things (the world of immaterial bodies).
The Majestic Maker of this huge palace of creation employs
four classes of laborers: angels and other spirit beings; inani-
mate things and vegetable creations, which are quite important
servants working without wages; animals, which serve uncon-
sciously in return for a small wage of food and pleasure; and
humanity, which works in awareness of the Majestic Creator’s
purposes. Men and women learn from everything, and supervise
lower-ranking servants in return for wages (reward) here and in
the Hereafter.
The first class consists of angels. These beings are never pro-
moted for what they do, for each has a fixed, determined rank and
receives a particular pleasure from the work itself as well as a radi-
ance from worship. Their reward is found in their service. Just as
we are nourished by and derive pleasure from air and water, light
and food, angels are nourished by and receive pleasure from the
lights of remembrance and glorification, worship and knowledge,
and love of God. Since they are created of light, light sustains them.
Even fragrant scents, which are close to light, are enjoyable nour-
ishment for them. Indeed, pure spirits take pleasure in sweet scents.
Angels receive their own reward (elevated bliss) for carrying
out the commands of the One Whom they worship, working
for His sake, rendering service in His Name, and supervising
through His view. They gain honor through their connection with
Him, are refreshed by studying His Kingdom’s material and imma-
terial dimensions, and are satisfied by observing His Grace and
Majesty’s manifestations. The resulting bliss is so elevated that
we cannot even begin to comprehend it.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
66

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Angels do not sin or disobey, for they do not have an evil-com-
manding soul that must be resisted. They have fixed ranks, and so
are neither promoted nor abased. They have no experience with
such negative qualities as envy, rancor, enmity, and all the lusts and
animal appetites found in human beings and jinn. They have no
gender, do not eat or drink, and do not feel hunger, thirst, or tired-
ness. Although they receive no wages for their worship, they derive
special pleasure from carrying out God’s commands, delight in
being near to Him, and receive spiritual pleasure from their wor-
ship. Praise, worship, recitation of God’s Names, and glorification
of Him are their nourishment, as are light and sweet fragrances.
On the other hand, we struggle with our evil-commanding
soul and Satan. While angels invite us to true guidance, inspire us
with belief, good conduct and virtue, and call us to resist the temp-
tations of Satan and our evil-commanding selves, Satan and our
evil-commanding selves try to seduce us. A person’s life is the his-
tory of his or her continuous struggle between angelic inspiration
and satanic temptation. This is why we can be elevated to the high-
est rank or abased to the lowest rank. Also, this is why the elect of
humanity, the Prophets and great saints, are higher in rank than the
greatest angels, and why ordinary believers are higher than com-
mon angels. Also, although angels have more knowledge of God
and His Names and Attributes than we do, we are more compre-
hensive mirrors of God’s Names and Attributes due to our devel-
oped human senses, our ability to reflect, and our complex nature.
There are different kinds of angels. Besides those deputed
to represent and supervise various species and present their
worship to God, there are four Archangels and angels who car-
ry God’s Throne.11 Other groups of angels are known as Mala’-i
A‘la (the Highest Council), Nadiyy-i A‘la (the Highest Assembly),
and Rafiq-i A‘la (the Highest Company).
Specific angels have been appointed to Paradise and Hell.
Angels who record a person’s deeds are called Kiramun Katibun
(the Noble Recorders), and, as stated in a hadith, 360 of them are
responsible for each believer’s life. They guard their charges, espe-
cially during infancy and old age, pray for them, and ask God to
forgive them. Other angels help believers during times of war and
The Invisible Realm of Existence
67

--- Sayfa 80 ---
attend assemblies that praise and glorify God, as well as study
meetings held for God’s sake and to benefit people.
Angels, particularly angels of mercy, do not enter houses con-
taining statues or places where dogs are fed, and refrain from close
contact with ritually impure people and menstruating women.
They also avoid those with bad breath (derived from eating onions
or garlic or from smoking), and do not visit those who sever rela-
tions with their parents and relatives.
Although God is All-Powerful and can guard everyone by
Himself, He may appoint angels to guard His servants. To earn
such a guardianship, believers have to do willingly that which is
good and establish a close relation with God Almighty. They
must have strong belief in God and all other pillars of faith, nev-
er abandon regular worship and prayer, lead a disciplined life,
and refrain from forbidden things or sinful acts.
Angels helped the believers during the battles of Badr and
Uhud, and also during the conquest of Makka. They always help
believers who sincerely struggle in the way of God, regardless of
time and place.
Belief in angels has many benefits. For example, it gives us peace
and removes our loneliness. The inspiration breathed by angels
exhilarates us, enlightens us intellectually, and opens new hori-
zons of knowledge and thought. Awareness of their continuous
company also helps us abstain from sin and improper behavior.
We may cite some Qur’anic verses to comprehend angels:
By the loosed ones successively, storming tempestuously; by
the scatterers scattering, and the severally severing and those
hurling a reminder, excusing or warning. (77:1-6)
By those that pluck out violently; and those that draw out gen-
tly; by those that float serenely, and those that outstrip sudden-
ly; by those that direct an affair. (79:1-5)
... in (the Night of Power) the angels and the spirit descend, by
the leave of their Lord, upon every command. (97:4)
... a Fire whose fuel is men and stones, and over which are harsh,
terrible angels who disobey not God in what He commands
them and do what they are commanded. (66:6)
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
68

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Glory be to Him! Nay, but they are honored servants that outstrip
Him not in speech, and perform as He commands. (21:26-27)
JINN AND THEIR FUNCTIONS
Jinn literally means “something hidden or veiled from sight.”
Jinn are a species of invisible beings. A short Qur’anic chapter is
named for them. In that chapter we learn that some jinn listened
to Prophet Muhammad and became believers:
Say: “It has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn gave
ear, and they said: ‘We have heard a wonderful Qur’an, which
guides to righteousness, so we believe in it and we shall not join
(in belief and worship) any (gods) with our Lord. And (we
believe) that He—exalted be the glory of our Lord—has taken
neither wife nor son .... Among us there are righteous folk and
among us there are far from that. We are sects having different
rules.” (72:1-3, 11)
Given this, we can understand that jinn are conscious beings
charged with Divine obligations. Recent discoveries in biology
make it clear that God created beings particular to each realm.
Jinn might have been created while the Earth was still a body of
fire. They were created before Adam and Eve, and were respon-
sible for cultivating and improving the world. Although God lat-
er superseded them with us, He did not exempt them from reli-
gious obligations.
The Qur’an states that jinn are created from smokeless fire
(55:15). In another verse, it clarifies that this fire is of a scorching
wind (15:27) and penetrates as deep as the inner part of the body.12
Like angels, jinn move extremely fast and are not bound by
our time and space. However, since the spirit is more active and
faster than jinn, those who live at the level of the spirit’s life and
can transcend the limits of matter and the confines of time and
space, can be quicker and more active than them. For example,
the Qur’an relates that when Prophet Solomon asked who could
bring the throne of the Queen of Sheba (Yemen), one jinn answered
he could bring it before the meeting ended and Prophet Solomon
stood up. However, a man with a special knowledge from God
The Invisible Realm of Existence
69

--- Sayfa 82 ---
replied: “I can bring it to you quicker than the blink of an eye,” and
he did so (27:38-40).
As nothing is difficult for God Almighty, He has provided
human beings, jinn, and angels with the power and strength
appropriate for their functions or duties. As He uses angels to
supervise the movements of celestial bodies, He allows human-
ity to rule the Earth, dominate matter, build civilizations, and
produce technology.
Power and strength are not limited to the physical world,
nor are they proportional to bodily size. We see that immateri-
al things are far more powerful than huge physical entities. For
example, our memory is far more spacious and comprehensive
than a large room. Our hands can touch a near-by object, but
our eyes can travel long distances in an instant. Our imagina-
tion can transcend time and space all at once. Winds can uproot
trees and demolish large buildings. A young, thin plant shoot
can split rocks and reach the sunlight. The power of energy,
whose existence is known through its effect, is apparent to
everybody. All of this shows that something’s power is not pro-
portional to its physical size; rather the immaterial world dom-
inates the physical world, and immaterial entities are far more
powerful than material ones.
ANGELS AND JINN IN THIS WORLD
Angels and jinn can assume any form or shape and appear in this
world. Here, we observe movement from the visible to the
invisible: water evaporates and disappears into the atmosphere,
solid matter becomes a liquid or a gas (steam), and matter becomes
energy (nuclear fission). Likewise, we observe movement from the
invisible to the visible: gases become fluids, evaporated water
becomes rain (as well as snow or hail), and energy becomes mat-
ter. Similarly, intangible thoughts and meanings in our minds
can appear in the tangible form of letters and words in essays
and books.
In an analogous way, such invisible beings as angels, jinn,
and other spirit entities are clothed in some material substance,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
70

--- Sayfa 83 ---
such as air or ether, and then become visible. According to Imam
Shibli, God may allow them to assume a form when they utter
any of His Names, for this functions like a key or a visa enabling
them to assume a form and become visible in this world. If they
try to do so without God’s permission, by relying on their own
abilities, they are torn into pieces and perish.
We read in Qur’an the (19:17) that the spirit God sent to
Mary (the mother of Jesus), and whom Muslim scholars say is
Archangel Gabriel, appeared before her as a man. When Gabriel
came to Prophet Muhammad with Revelation or God’s Messages,
he usually came as a warrior, a traveler, or a Companion named
Dihya. For example, he came as a warrior on horseback following
the end of the Battle of the Trench and told the Prophet: “O
Messenger of God, you have taken off your armor but we, the
angels, have not yet done so. God orders you to march upon the
Banu Qurayza.” Once he came as a traveler dressed in white and,
in order to instruct the Companions in religion, asked the Prophet
such questions as: What is belief? What is Islam? What is ihsan
(excellence or perfection of virtue)? When is the Day of Judgment?
Like angels and jinn, Satan (who is a jinn) can appear in dif-
ferent forms. It is narrated that before the Battle of Badr, he
appeared to the Qurayshi leaders as an old man from Najd and
advised them. Likewise, a Companion guarding the spoils of war
caught Satan in disguise trying to steal some items.13 Satan
entreated the Companion to release him, which he did—twice.
On the third time, the Companion tried to take him to God’s
Messenger. But Satan appealed: “Release me, and I’ll tell you how
you can secure yourself against me.” The Companion asked what
that was, and Satan replied that it was the Verse of the Throne
(2:255). When informed of this, God’s Messenger commented:
“That wicked one is a liar, but on that occasion he told the truth.”
The Qur’an relates that a group of jinn listened to God’s
Messenger recite the Qur’an and, when they returned to their
people, said: “O people! Surely we listened to a Book that has been
revealed after Moses, affirms what precedes it, and guides to right
and the Straight Path” (46:30). The sura continues with what
they thought about what they had heard. Some Traditions tell us
The Invisible Realm of Existence
71

--- Sayfa 84 ---
that the Messenger recited parts of the Qur’an and preached his
Message to the jinn.
Jinn can also appear as snakes, scorpions, cattle, donkeys,
birds, and other animals. When our Prophet accepted the jinn’s
oath of allegiance in the valley of Batn al-Nakhla, he wanted
them to appear to his community either in their own form or in
other agreeable forms, not as such harmful animals as dogs and
scorpions. He warned his community: “When you see any ver-
min in your house, tell it three times: ‘For God’s sake, leave this
place,’ for it may be a friendly jinn. If it does not leave, it is not
a jinn. If it is harmful, you may kill it.”
The jinn who gave allegiance to God’s Messenger promised
him: “If your community recites the basmala (In the Name of
God, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate) just when they
begin to do something (good and lawful), and cover their dishes,
we will not touch their food or their drink.”14 Another Tradition
says: [When you have relieved yourselves] do not clean yourselves
with bones and dried pieces of dung, for they are among the
foods of your jinn brothers.
JINN AND HUMAN BEINGS
Some people can go into a trance and contact beings from the
invisible realms. However, we should remember that whether
these are angels or jinn, invisible beings have their own conditions
of life and are bound to certain limits and principles. For this rea-
son, one who communicates with jinn should be careful not to
fall under their influence and become their plaything.
Some assert that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1839-1908) of
Qadiyan (India),15 fell victim to such tricks. He attempted to serve
Islam by struggling against Hindu Yogism through Fakirism, but
evil spirits got control of him. First they whispered to him that he
was a reviver (of religion), then that he was the Mahdi (Messiah),
and when he was finally under their influence and control, told
him to proclaim that he was an incarnation of God.
Sins and uncleanliness invite the influence of evil spirits and
unbelieving jinn. People of a susceptible nature, those who tend
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
72

--- Sayfa 85 ---
to be easily melancholical and those who lead dissipated and
undisciplined lives, are their primary targets. Evil spirits usually
reside in places for dumping garbage or other dirty places, pub-
lic baths, and bathrooms.
Jinn can penetrate a body even deeper than X-rays. They can
reach into a being’s veins and the central points of the brain. They
seem to be like lasers, which are used in everything from comput-
ers to nuclear weaponry, from medicine to communication and
police investigations, and to removing obstructions in our veins
and arteries. So, when we consider that Satan and jinn are creat-
ed from smokeless fire that penetrates deep into the body, like
radiation or radioactive energy, we can understand the meaning of
the Prophetic Tradition: “Satan moves where blood moves.”
Jinn can harm the body and cause physical and psychologi-
cal illnesses. It might be a good idea for medical authorities to
consider whether jinn cause certain types of cancer, since cancer
is an unordered and diseased growth in the body that we can
describe as cellular anarchy. Maybe some jinn have settled in that
part of the body and are destroying its cellular structure.
Although science does not yet accept the existence of invisible
beings and restricts itself to the material world, we think it is worth
considering the possibility that evil spirits play some part in such
mental illnesses as schizophrenia. We constantly hear of cases that
those who suffer from mental illness, epilepsy, or even cancer recov-
er by reciting certain prayers. Such cases are serious and significant,
and should not be denied or dismissed by attributing them to sug-
gestion or auto-suggestion. When science finally accepts the exis-
tence of the metaphysical realm and the influence of metaphysical
forces, its practitioners will be able to remove many obstructions
and make far greater advances and fewer mistakes.
Today, the doors to the metaphysical worlds are only slightly
ajar. We are barely at the beginning of contact with jinn and dev-
ils. However, one day we will feel obliged to enter these worlds
to solve many of their problems pertaining to this world.
The Qur’an states that God bestowed upon the House of
Abraham the Scripture, Wisdom, and a mighty kingdom (4:54).
The Invisible Realm of Existence
73

--- Sayfa 86 ---
This mighty kingdom manifested itself most brilliantly through
Prophets David and Solomon. Prophet Solomon ruled not only
a part of humanity, but also jinn and devils, birds and winds: God
subdued unto him devils, some of whom dived for pearls and did other
work (21:82). Solomon had armies of jinn and birds, and he
employed jinn in many jobs: They made for him what he willed:
synagogues, fortresses, basins like wells and boilers built into the
ground (34:13); and Wind was also subdued to him; its morning
course was a month’s journey and the evening course also a month’s
journey (34:12). As pointed out earlier, a jinn offered to bring the
throne of the Queen of Sheba from Yemen to Jerusalem before
Solomon rose from his council (27:39).
The verses relating to Solomon’s kingdom point to the final
limit of humanity’s use of jinn and devils. They also suggest that
one day we will use them in many jobs, especially in communi-
cation. It is quite probable that they will also be employed in
security affairs, mining and metal-work, even in space studies
and historical research. Since jinn can live about 1,000 years,
they may be useful in establishing historical facts.
SATAN AND HUMANITY
The jinn we know as Satan was created from fire. Before his
obedience and sincerity were tested through Adam, he had been
in the company of angels, acting and worshipping as they did.
Unlike angels, however, who cannot rebel against God (66:6),
Satan (called Iblis prior to his test) was free to choose his own
path of conduct. When God tested him and the angels by com-
manding them to prostrate before Adam, the seeds of his self-
conceit and disobedience blossomed and swallowed him. He
replied in his vanity: “I am better than him. You created me from
fire, whilst him You did create of clay” (38:76).
Why Was Satan Created?
Satan was created for important purposes. If Satan, who contin-
ually tries to seduce us, did not exist, our creation would be
meaningless and futile. God has innumerable servants who can-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
74

--- Sayfa 87 ---
not rebel and thus do whatever they are told. In fact, the existence
of an absolute Divine Being Who has many beautiful Names and
Attributes requires, not because of some external necessity but
because of the essential nature of His Names, that His Names be
manifest. He manifests all of these Names through humanity.
Since God has free will, He also gave us free will. We feel a
constant battle taking place in our inner world to choose between
good and evil. In addition, God gave us great potentials. So, by
knowing good from evil and choosing good, or by using our free
will in the right way, we can spiritually evolve. Just as God sends
hawks upon sparrows so that the latter will develop their potential
to escape, He created Satan and allowed him to tempt us so that
our resistance to temptation will raise us spiritually and strengthen
our willpower. Just as hunger stimulates human beings and ani-
mals to further exertion and discovery of new ways to be satisfied,
and fear inspires new defenses, so Satan’s temptations cause us to
develop our potentials and guard against sin.
Angels do not rise to higher spiritual ranks because Satan can-
not tempt them and cause them to deviate. Animals have fixed sta-
tions, and so cannot attain a higher or a lower station. Only human
beings can change their station.
There is an infinitely long line of spiritual evolution between the
ranks of the greatest Prophets and saints down to people such as
Pharaoh and Nimrod. Therefore, it cannot be claimed that the cre-
ation of Satan is evil. Although Satan is evil and serves various
important purposes, God’s creation involves the whole universe and
should be understood in relation to the results, not only with respect
to the acts themselves. Whatever God does or creates is good and
beautiful in itself or in its effects. For example, rain and fire are very
useful but can cause great harm when abused. Therefore, one can-
not claim that the creation of water and fire is not totally good. It
is the same with the creation of Satan. His main purpose is to cause
us to develop our potential, strengthen our willpower by resisting
his temptations, and then rise to higher spiritual ranks.
To the argument made by some that Satan leads many peo-
ple to unbelief and subsequent punishment in Hell, I reply:
The Invisible Realm of Existence
75

--- Sayfa 88 ---
First, although Satan was created for many good, universal
purposes, many people may be deceived by him. But Satan only
whispers and suggests; he cannot force you to indulge in evil
and sin. If you are so weak that his false promises deceive you,
and you allow yourself to be dragged down, you earn the pun-
ishment of Hell by misusing an important God-given faculty
that enables you to develop your potential and raise to the high-
est rank. You must use your free will, which makes you human
and gives you the highest position in creation, properly to fur-
ther your intellectual and spiritual evolution. Otherwise, you
must complain about being honored with free will and therefore
about being human.
Second, as quality is much more important than quantity,
we should consider qualitative, as opposed to quantitative, val-
ues when making our judgment. For example, 100 date seeds
are worth only 100 cents if they are not planted. If only 20 out
of 100 seeds grow into trees due to the other 80 being destroyed
by too much water, can we argue that it is an evil to plant and
water seeds? I think all of us can agree that it is wholly good to
have 20 trees in exchange for 20 seeds, since 20 trees will pro-
duce 20,000 seeds.
Again, 100 peacock eggs may be worth a couple of dollars.
But if only 20 eggs hatch and the rest do not, who will say that it
is wrong to risk 80 eggs being spoiled in return for 20 peacocks?
On the contrary, it is wholly good to have 20 peacocks at the
expense of 80 eggs, for those 20 peacocks will lay even more eggs.
It is the same with humanity. By fighting Satan and their
evil-commanding selves, many “worthless” people have been
lost in exchange for hundreds of thousands of Prophets, millions
of saints, and billions of men and women of wisdom and knowl-
edge, sincerity and good morals. All of these people are the sun,
moon, and stars of the human world.
How Does Satan Try to Seduce Humanity?
We read in Qur’an 7:17 that when God cursed Satan because of
his haughty disobedience, Satan asked for a respite until the Day
of Judgment so he could seduce human beings. God allowed him
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
76

--- Sayfa 89 ---
to do so, as was discussed above, and Satan retorted: “Then I shall
come upon them from before and behind, from their right and their
left, and You will not find most of them grateful.”
The verse means that Satan does everything he can to seduce
us. We are very complex beings, for God has manifested all of His
Names on us. This world is an arena of testing, where we are
trained so that we can serve as a mirror to God and earn eternal
happiness. God has endowed us with innumerable feelings, facul-
ties, and potentials to be trained and developed. If certain feelings
and faculties (e.g., intellect, anger, greed, obstinacy, and lust) are
not trained and directed to lofty goals but rather are misused, and
if our natural desires and animal appetites are not restricted and
satisfied in lawful ways, they can cause us great harm here and in
the Hereafter.
Satan approaches us from the left and, working on our ani-
mal aspect, our feelings and faculties, tries to lead us into sin
and evil. When he approaches us from the front, he causes us
to despair about the future, whispers that the Day of Judgment
will never come, and that whatever religions say about the
Hereafter is mere fiction. He also suggests that religion is out-
dated and obsolete, and thus of no use for anyone living now
or in the future. When he comes upon us from behind, he tries
to make us deny Prophethood and other essentials of belief, like
God’s Existence and Unity, Divine Scriptures and angels. Through
his whispers and suggestions, Satan tries to sever our contact
with religion completely and lead us into sin.
Satan can only seduce devout, practicing believers by com-
ing upon them from their right and tempting them to ego and
pride. He whispers that they are wonderful believers, and grad-
ually causes them to fall through self-conceit and the desire to
be praised for their good deeds. For example, if believers per-
form supererogatory late-night prayer (tahajjud) and then pro-
claim it so that others will praise them, and if they attribute their
accomplishments and good deeds to themselves and criticize
others in secret, they have fallen under Satan’s influence. This is
a perilous temptation for believers, so they must be incessantly
alert to this tactic.
The Invisible Realm of Existence
77

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Another trick of Satan is to cause unimportant things to
appear important, and vice versa. If believers dispute in the mosque
over a secondary matter, such as whether one can use a rosary
when glorifying God after the daily prescribed prayers, while their
children are being dragged into unbelief and materialism or are
drowning in the swamp of immorality, Satan has seduced them.
Satan incessantly whispers new, original ideas to sinful unbe-
lievers, in the name of unbelief, and teaches them how to strug-
gle against true religion and its followers.
Involuntary thoughts and fancies. If Satan cannot seduce
devout believers, he whispers disagreeable thoughts and fancies
to them. For example, by associating some ideas with others, he
makes believers have some unpleasant conceptions of the Divine
Being, or conceive of unbelief or disobedience. If they dwell on
such ideas, Satan pesters them until they fall into doubt about
their belief or despair of ever leading a virtuous life.
Such involuntary evil thoughts, fancies, and ideas are usual-
ly the result of Satan’s whispering. Like a battery’s two poles, the
human heart (by “heart” we mean the seat or center of spiritual
intellect) has two central points or poles. One receives angelic
inspiration, and the other is vulnerable to Satan’s whispering.
When believers deepen their belief and devotion, and if
they are scrupulous and delicate in feeling, Satan attacks them
from different directions. He does not tempt those who follow
him voluntarily and indulge in all that is transitory, but usually
seeks out sincere, devout believers trying to rise to higher spir-
itual ranks.
Another trick is to cause good, devout believers to suspect
the correctness or validity of their religious acts. For example:
Did I perform my prayer correctly? Did I wash hands or face
completely while performing the ritual ablution? How many
times did I wash the parts of my body that must be washed?
Believers who are pestered with such involuntary thoughts,
fancies, and doubts should know that they are involuntary and
that their hearts have no part in them. Just as pirates attack
treasure ships, thieves rob rich people, and strong countries try
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
78

--- Sayfa 91 ---
to control rich countries, Satan uses his evil suggestions to harm
them. Believers’ hearts become troubled. This resembles a fever,
for when the body’s temperature rises, antibodies are formed in
the patient’s blood to inhibit or destroy harmful bacteria or
germs. Similarly, those with troubled hearts begin to fight.
This shows that such thoughts and suggestions do not come
from, and are not approved of or adopted by, the heart. So, just
as the reflection of something foul is not foul and does not make
you dirty, and just as a snake’s reflection does not bite, conceiv-
ing of unbelief is not the same as unbelief, and imagining your-
self in unbelief does not make you an unbeliever. It might even
be said that Satan’s evil suggestions are beneficial, for they keep
believers always on ready to resist temptation and to continue their
struggle against the carnal self and Satan. This causes them to make
spiritual progress.
How to Resist Satan
In fact, Qur’an 4:76 tells us that the guile of Satan is ever feeble. It
resembles a cobweb that appears while you are walking between
two walls. It does not cause you to stop, and you should not give
it any importance. He suggests or whispers and presents sinful acts
in a “falsely ornamented wrapper,” thus believers must never accept
his “gifts.” When he whispers evil thoughts, believers should know
that this is his last and weakest strategy and treat it accordingly. If
they pay attention to such whispering, they might be defeated. Like
a commander who, deceived by his own fear, dispatches his army
to the two wings and leaves the center exposed, believers exhaust
their powers of perseverance and resolve by fighting Satan and their
own carnal selves when they concentrate on such whispering. In the
end, they cannot withstand the real fight.
To free yourself from such evil suggestions, remove yourself
from the attractive fields of Satan and sin. Heedlessness and neglect
of worship are invitations to Satan’s “arrows.” The Qur’an declares:
Whose sight is dim to the remembrance of the All-Merciful, We assign
unto him a devil who becomes his comrade (43:36). Remembrance of
the All-Merciful, noble or sacred phenomena, and a devout reli-
gious life protect us from Satan’s attacks. Again, the Qur’an advis-
The Invisible Realm of Existence
79

--- Sayfa 92 ---
es: If a suggestion from Satan occurs to you, then seek refuge in God. He
is All-Healing, All-Knowing. Those who fear God and ward off (evil),
when a passing notion from Satan troubles them, they remember, and
behold, they see (7:200-1).
God’s Messenger advised: “When you are angry, sit; if you
are standing, sit down; lie down or stand up if you are sitting and
perform the ritual ablution.” On the way back from a military
expedition, the Prophet called a halt at a certain place. They were
so tired that they slept through the time for the dawn prayer.
When they woke up, the Prophet commanded: “Leave here at
once, for Satan rules this place.” The Prophet also says that Satan
flees the call to prayer.
Satan sometimes tries to tempt us through obscene scenes.
He causes us to obsess over illicit pleasures. On such occasions,
try to persuade yourself that any illicit pleasure will result in fits of
remorse and may endanger your afterlife or even your mortal life.
Know that the life of this world is but a passing plaything, a com-
forting illusion, and that the true life is that of the Hereafter.
When some of his men hesitated to join the expedition to Tabuk
because of the scorching summer heat, God warned them: The
heat of Hell is much more intense, if they would but understood (9:81).
SPELLS AND SORCERY
Those who deny spells and sorcery do so either because they do
not believe in anything related to metaphysics or what they sup-
pose to be connected with religion, or because they are unaware
of realities beyond the physical realm. A man in his fifties once
told me:
Until last year I did not believe in spells and sorcery. However,
last year one of my relatives went mad. When he had a fit, he
became rigid with his eyes fixed on a certain point. We sought
the help of every doctor, but in vain. Finally, we went to some-
one who could break spells. He recited incantations and did
some other things. On the way back, the patient asked in a nor-
mal tone: “Where am I? What happened to me?” He had
recovered. I now believe that sorcery is real.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
80

--- Sayfa 93 ---
Most of us have heard of or even seen such cases. As the
Prophet declared that the evil eye is an undeniable fact, sorcery is
also an undeniable reality. The Qur’an speaks about (and severe-
ly condemns) the sorcery practiced to cause a rift between spous-
es. According to the Qur’an and Islam, sorcery and casting spells
are as sinful as unbelief.
While breaking a spell is a good, meritorious deed, it must not
be adopted and practiced as a profession. Although our Prophet
met with jinn, preached Islam to them, and took their allegiance,
he never explained how to contact them or how to cast or break a
spell. However, he taught how jinn approach us and seek to con-
trol us, how to protect ourselves against their evil, and how to pro-
tect ourselves against the evil eye.
The safest way to protect ourselves against evil spirits is to
have a strong loyalty to God and His Messenger. This requires fol-
lowing the principles of Islam strictly. In addition, we should nev-
er give up praying, for prayer is a weapon against hostility, pro-
tects us from harm, and helps us to attain our goals.
Praying
Prayer does not mean to ignore and neglect material means in
attaining goals. Rather, prayer can be divided into four types. First
is that which reaches to the Court of God from the whole uni-
verse. For example, plants and animals pray through the tongue
of their potential to achieve a full form and to manifest certain
Divine Names. Second is that which is expressed in the tongue
of natural needs. All living beings pray to God, the Absolutely
Generous One, to satisfy their vital needs, for they cannot do so
themselves. Third is that which is done in the tongue of com-
plete helplessness. A living creature in straitened circumstances
takes refuge in its Unseen Protector with a genuine supplication,
and turns to its All-Merciful Lord. These three kinds of prayer
are always acceptable unless somehow impeded.
The fourth type of prayer is the one we do. This also falls
into two categories: active and by disposition, and verbal and
with the heart. For example, acting in accordance with causes is
active prayer. By complying with causes, we try to gain God’s
The Invisible Realm of Existence
81

--- Sayfa 94 ---
approval for our requests, for only God can produce the result.
For example, plowing the soil is an active prayer, for it involves
actually knocking at the door of the treasury of God’s Mercy.
Similarly, going to a doctor is an active prayer for recovery from
illness. For this reason, believers must seek medical help when
ill. Believing psychiatrists should be preferred in cases of mental
illnesses, for innumerable cases show that most mental illnesses
are not due to material causes and that (physical) therapy can-
not cure them. Most of them require spiritual therapy. This
active type of prayer is usually acceptable, for it is a direct appli-
cation to the Divine Name the All-Generous.
The second type of prayer, which is done with the tongue and
the heart, is the real one. It is to ask God from the heart for some-
thing that we cannot obtain on our own. Its most important
aspect and finest and sweetest fruit is that the supplicants know
that He hears them, is aware of whatever occurs to their hearts,
has power that extends everywhere, can satisfy all their desires,
and helps them because He is merciful to the weak and helpless.
Prayer is a form of worship rewarded primarily in the Hereafter.
For this reason, we must not say that our prayers are not answered
when we do not receive that for which we prayed. Just because
a prayer is “answered” does not mean that it is “accepted” in all
circumstances. There is an answer for every prayer, but its
acceptance and answer depend on God’s Wisdom. Suppose a
sick child asks a doctor for a certain kind of medicine. The doc-
tor either will give that medicine or something better, or will
give no medicine at all, especially if there is some reason to think
that it will harm the child.
Similarly, God Almighty, the All-Hearing and All-Seeing,
answers His servants’ prayers and changes the depression of
loneliness into the pleasure of His Company. But His answer
does not depend on our fancies; rather, it depends on Divine
Wisdom, according to which He either gives what is requested
or what is better, or He gives nothing at all. However He answers,
we must pray.
As we pray for ourselves, we also must request those who we
believe to be near to God to pray for us. The Companions frequent-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
82

--- Sayfa 95 ---
ly asked the Prophet to pray for them. As recorded by Ibn Hanbal,
Abu Dawud, al-Tabarani, and Umm Hani: An insane child was
brought to God’s Messenger, who touched him and said: “Come
out, O enemy of God.” Then, he washed the child’s face and prayed.
The child recovered. Many similar cases are narrated in the Bible.
The Prophet Jesus was famous for healing the insane by God’s
permission and power.
Avoiding Exorcists
Some people go to exorcists. Although a few people might know
how to drive out evil spirits, such activity is usually quite danger-
ous, for most exorcists deceive people. In addition, an exorcist
must be very careful about his or her religious obligations, refrain
from sin, and be an upright person who really knows what he or
she is doing. Patients usually rely on exorcists and attribute their
recovery to them, and also rely on the written charm or amulets
they are advised to carry. However, our Prophet declared that God
would admit into Paradise 70,000 people without calling them to
account for their deeds. These people would be those who do not
wear armlets or amulets, who do not consider things auspicious
or inauspicious, and who trust completely in God.
Consulting Believing Psychiatrists
Believers should not go to psychiatrists or doctors who restrict
themselves to a materialist view of existence. Such psychiatrists,
who do not believe in the spirit and spirit beings, may advise
patients suffering from spiritual dissatisfaction or being pos-
sessed to indulge themselves in pleasure and amusement. This is
like advising thirsty people to quench their thirst with salt water.
Reciting Specific Prayers
God’s Messenger mentioned that special prayers should be recit-
ed to protect oneself against the evils of Satan and other unbe-
lieving jinn. The Verse of Throne (2:255) is one of them. We also
read that: If a stimulus from Satan occurs to you, seek refuge in God
immediately (41:36) by saying: “I seek refuge in God from Satan,
the accursed.”
The Invisible Realm of Existence
83

--- Sayfa 96 ---
As reported by ‘A’isha, the Mother of Believers and one of
the Prophet’s wives, God’s Messenger recited Surat al-Falaq and
Surat al-Nas three times every morning and evening, and then
breathed into his joined palms and rubbed them against the parts
of his body he could reach. He also recited three times every
morning and evening: “In the Name of God, whom nothing on
the earth and in the heaven can give harm despite His Name, and
He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.” This recitation and the
following one are among the prayers advised for protection against
paralysis: “I seek refuge in all of God’s words from all devils and
vermin and from all evil eyes.”
Imam Ghazali advises us to protect ourselves against spells,
charms, and evil spirits by reciting: “In the Name of God, the All-
Merciful, the All-Compassionate” once, “God is the Greatest” ten
times, and: The magician will not be successful wherever he appears
(20:69), and from the evil of blowers upon knots (113:4). Another
imam advises us to recite these two verses 19 times after each sip
of any liquid. We should remind that these are to be recited in
their original, Arabic form.
ENDNOTE: Further views on the invisible realm of existence
Scientists restrict the concept of life to the conditions that obtain on
or beneath Earth’s outer surface. Therefore, when they look for
extraterrestrial life, they look for conditions that are the same as or
closely correspond to the conditions for life on Earth. If they had
retained a sufficient sense of the absolute wonder of life (an aspect
of life’s being a direct manifestation of the Ever-Living), they should
not have ruled out forms and conditions of life currently beyond
their understanding. In their view, the arguments put forward by
Said Nursi for the existence of angels and other spirit beings may
not be worthy of consideration. However, the latest discoveries in
deep-sea biology may persuade them to review his arguments.
Writing at the beginning of the 1930s, Said Nursi stated:
Reality and wisdom in the existence of the universe require that
the heavens should have conscious inhabitants of their own, as
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
84

--- Sayfa 97 ---
does the Earth. These inhabitants of many different kinds are
called angels and spirit beings in the language of religion.
It is true that reality requires the existence of angels and
other spirit beings because the Earth, although insignificant in
size compared with the heavens, is continually being filled with
and emptied of conscious beings. This clearly indicates that the
heavens are filled with living beings who are the perfect class of
living creatures. These beings are conscious and have percep-
tion, and they are light of existence; they are the angels, who,
like the jinn and mankind, are the observers of the universal
palace of creation and students of this book of the universe and
heralds of their Lord’s Kingdom.
The perfection of existence is through life. Moreover, life is
the real basis and the light of existence; consciousness, in turn,
is the light of life. Since life and consciousness are so important,
and a perfect harmony evidently prevails over the whole cre-
ation, and again since the universe displays a firm cohesion, and
as this small ever-rotating sphere of ours is full of countless liv-
ing and intelligent beings, so it is equally certain that those
heavenly [realms] should have conscious, living beings particu-
lar to themselves. Just as the fish live in water, so those spirit
beings may exist in the heat of the sun. Fire does not consume
light; rather, light becomes brighter because of fire. We observe
that the Eternal Power creates countless living beings from
inert, solid substances and transforms the densest matter into
subtle living compounds by life. Thus It radiates the light of life
everywhere in great abundance and furnishes most things with
the light of consciousness.
From this we can conclude that the All-Powerful, All-Wise
One would certainly not leave without life and consciousness
more refined, subtle forms of matter like light and ether, which
are close to and fitting for the spirit. Indeed He creates animate
and conscious beings in great numbers from light, darkness,
ether, air and even from meanings and words. As He creates
numerous species of animals, He also creates from such subtle
and higher forms of matter numerous different spirit creatures.
One kind ... are the angels, others are the varieties of spirit
beings and jinn. [Nursi, S., The Words, Twenty-ninth Word]
Half a century after Said Nursi wrote this, nearly 300 ani-
mal species, almost all of them previously unknown, were dis-
The Invisible Realm of Existence
85

--- Sayfa 98 ---
covered living around hydrothermal vents that form when sea-
water leaking through the ocean floor at spreading ridges is
heated by the underlying magma and rushes into the cold ocean.
V. Tunniclife writes:
All life requires energy, and nearly all life on Earth looks to the
sun as the source. But solar energy is not the only kind of ener-
gy available on the Earth. Consider the energy that drives the
movement and eruption of the planet’s crust. When you look
at an active volcano, you are witnessing the escape of heat that
has been produced by radioactive decay in the Earth’s interior
and is finally reaching the surface. Why should there not be
biological communities associated with the same nuclear ener-
gy that moves continents and makes mountains? And why
could not whole communities be fuelled by chemical, rather
than, solar energy?
… Most of us associate the escape of heat from the interior
of the Earth with violent events and unstable physical conditions,
with extremely high temperatures and the release of toxic
gasses—circumstances that are hardly conducive to life. The
notion that biologic communities might spring up in a geologi-
cally active environment once seemed fantastic. And until recent-
ly, few organisms were known to survive without a direct or indi-
rect way to tap the sun’s energy. But such communities do exist,
and they represent one of the most startling discoveries of 20th
century biology. They live in the deep ocean, under conditions
that are both severe and variable.
This startling discovery contains clues to other realities, which
science should consider. Prophet Muhammad states that angels
are created from light. We read in the Qur’an that God created
humanity from dried soil, wet clay, and an extract of clay, and then
made humanity His khalifa [one who comes after (to rule accord-
ing to God’s commandments)] for this planet. Many interpreters
of the Qur’an have concluded from this that jinn once ruled the
Earth and were succeeded by humanity.
Starting from the clues above, it should be possible to do for-
mal studies to determine the worth of such propositions as the
following:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
86

--- Sayfa 99 ---
God first created “pure light” (nur) and then light. The process
of creation followed a gradual, regular accumulation of identities
and/or an evolutionary sequence of abrupt leaps. Fire followed
light, and then came water and soil. God spread one existence
through another, compounding and interweaving, and created
living beings appropriate for each phase of creation. When the
universe was in a state of pure fire or some other high energy, He
created appropriate life forms. When the Earth became suitable
for life, He created plants, animals, and humanity. He adorned
every part and phase of the universe with creatures, including liv-
ing ones, appropriate for that part and phase.
Finally, just as He created innumerable beings from light,
ether, air, fire, water, and soil, so does He create Paradise or
Hell from each of our words and deeds. In other words, just as
He grows a tree from a tiny seed through particles of soil, air
and water, so will He build the other world, including Paradise
and Hell, from the material of this world by adapting it for the
other world during the convulsions of the Day of Judgment.
[The Fountain, Issue 13 (Jan.-Mar. 1996), pp. 36-37.]
The Invisible Realm of Existence
87

--- Sayfa 101 ---
CHAPTER 3
Divine Decree and Destiny,
and Human Free Will

--- Sayfa 103 ---
DIVINE DECREE AND DESTINY,
AND HUMAN FREE WILL
INTRODUCTION
T
he Arabic word translated as destiny is qadar. In its der-
ivations, this word also means determination, giving a
certain measure and shape, dividing, and judging. Muslim
scholars of Islam define it as Divine measure, determination, and
judgment in the creation of things.
Before discussing Divine Decree and Destiny further, con-
sider the following relevant verses:
With Him are the keys of the Unseen. None but He knows them.
He knows what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falls but He
knows it, not a grain amid the darkness of the soil, naught of wet
or dry but it is in a Manifest Book (Kitabun Mubin). (6:59)
There is nothing hidden in the heaven or the Earth but it is in
a Manifest Book. (27:75)
It is We Who bring the dead to life. We record what they send
(of their lives and conduct to the Hereafter) and what is left of
them. All things we have kept in a Manifest Record (Imamun
Mubin). (36:12)
They ask: “When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if you are
truthful?” Say: “The knowledge is with God only, and I am but
a plain warner.” (67:25-26)
Nay, but it is a glorious Qur’an. On a Preserved Tablet (Lawhun
Mahfuz). (85:21-22)
In one sense, Decree and Destiny mean the same thing. In
another sense, however, Destiny means to predetermine or pre-

--- Sayfa 104 ---
ordain, while Decree means to implement or put into effect. To
be more precise, Destiny means that everything that exists, from
subatomic particles to the universe as a whole, is known by God
Almighty. His Knowledge includes all space and time, while He
Himself is absolutely free from both. Everything exists in His
Knowledge, and He assigns certain shape, life span, function or
mission, and certain characteristics to each and every thing.
Consider the following analogy: Authors have full and
exact knowledge of the books they will write, and arrange its
contents before writing it. In this sense, Destiny is almost iden-
tical with Divine Knowledge, or is a title of Divine Knowledge.
Therefore it is also called the “Supreme Preserved or Guarded
Tablet” (or the “Manifest Record”). Destiny also means that God
makes everything according to a certain, particular measure and
in exact balance:
God knows what every female bears and what the wombs
absorb and what they grow. And everything with Him is meas-
ured. (13:8)
The sun and the moon are made punctual according to a calcu-
lation. The stars and the trees adore, in subservience to Him.
And the sky He has uplifted; and He has set the balance, that
you exceed not the balance, but observe the balance strictly, nor
fall short thereof. (55:5-9)
The exact measure and balance, order and harmony in the
universe clearly show that everything is determined and meas-
ured, created and governed by God Almighty. Therefore, Divine
Destiny exists. The acceptance of determinism by many people,
including even some Marxists, to explain this obvious universal
order, is a tacit acceptance of Destiny. But we have to clarify one
point here: According to Islam, absolute determinism cannot be
used in the context of human action.
All seeds, measured and proportioned forms, and the uni-
verse’s extraordinary order and harmony (which has continued
for billions of years without interruption or deviation) demon-
strate that everything occurs according to God Almighty’s absolute
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
92

--- Sayfa 105 ---
determination. Each seed or ovum is like a case formed by Divine
Power into which Divine Destiny inserts the future life-history of
a plant or a living being. Divine Power employs atoms or parti-
cles, according to the measure established by Divine Destiny, to
transform each seed into a specific plant, and each fertilized ovum
into a specific living being. This means that the future life-history
of these entities, as well as the principles governing their lives, are
prerecorded in the seed or the fertilized ovum as determining fac-
tors and processes.
Plants and living beings are formed from the same basic mate-
rials. However, there is an almost infinite variety between species
and individuals. Plants and living beings grow from the same con-
stituent basic elements, and display great harmony and proportion.
Yet, there is such abundant diversity that we are forced to conclude
that each entity receives a specific form and measure. This specific
form and measure is established by Divine Destiny.
THE MANIFEST RECORD AND THE MANIFEST BOOK
For example, a seed exhibits Destiny in two ways: demonstrat-
ing the Manifest Record (Imamun Mubin) and displaying the
Manifest Book (Kitabun Mubin).
The Manifest Record, another title for Divine Knowledge and
Command, includes all things and events in the universe. That is,
every thing and event has a pre-existence in Divine Knowledge.
When it is time for them to come into the world or when God
wills to bring them into the world, He clothes them in materi-
al existence.
The Manifest Record refers to this phenomenon. A seed
contains the future life of the plant that will grow from it. The
plant’s life also ends in seeds, each of which may be regarded as
the plant’s memory. The new plants that will grow from those
seeds will be almost identical with the original plant, because
none of them has a conscious spirit endowed with free will. Thus,
besides serving as an analogy for the Manifest Record and there-
fore Divine Destiny and Knowledge, a seed also indicates the
Supreme Preserved Tablet (Lawhun Mahfuz) and corresponds to
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
93

--- Sayfa 106 ---
human memory in the human kingdom. In addition, because a
seed indicates that the life-histories of creatures are recorded, it
also points to afterlife.
The Manifest Book is another title for Divine Will and God’s
creational and operational laws of the universe. If we refer to the
Manifest Record as Formal or Theoretical Destiny, the Manifest
Book can be referred to as Actual Destiny. The future full-grown
form of a plant or a living being, which displays all the content
of the seed or fertilized ovum, can be understood as its Actual
Destiny.
In short, like seeds or plants or fertilized ovums and living
beings, everything that exists clearly points to Divine Destiny,
determining and judging, as well as measuring, particularizing,
and individualizing. True dreams that inform us of certain future
events are another, undeniable indication of Destiny or Divine
predetermination.
Question: Why is belief in Destiny one of the essentials of
faith?
Answer: Our self-conceit and weak devotion leads us to
attribute our accomplishments and good deeds to ourselves and
to feel proud of ourselves. But the Qur’an explicitly states: God cre-
ates you and what you do (37:96), meaning that Divine Compassion
demands good deeds and the Power of the Lord creates them.
If we analyze our lives, eventually we realize and admit that God
directs us to good acts and usually prevents us from doing what
is wrong.
In addition, by endowing us with sufficient capacity, power,
and means to accomplish many things, He enables us to realize
many accomplishments and good deeds. As God guides us to
good deeds and causes us to will and then do them, the real cause
of our good deeds is Divine Will. We can “own” our good deeds
only through faith, sincere devotion, praying to be deserving of
them, consciously believing in the need to do them, and being
pleased with what God has ordained. Given this, there is no rea-
son for us to boast or be proud; rather, we should remain hum-
ble and thankful to God.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
94

--- Sayfa 107 ---
On the other hand, we like to deny responsibility for our sins
and misdeeds by ascribing them to Destiny. But since God nei-
ther likes nor approves of such acts, all of them belong to us and
are committed by acting upon our free will. God allows sins and
gives them external forms, for if He did not, our free will would
be pointless. Sins are the result of our decision, through our free
will, to sin. God calls and guides us to good deeds, even inspires
them within us, but free will enables us to disobey our Creator.
Therefore, we “own” our sins and misdeeds. To protect ourselves
against sin and the temptations of Satan and our carnal, evil-
commanding self, we must struggle to remove or discipline our
inclinations toward sin through repentance and asking forgive-
ness for them. In addition, we must direct and exhort ourselves
to do good deeds through prayer, devotion, and trust in God.
In short, because we have free will and are enjoined to fol-
low religious obligations and refrain from sin and wrong deeds,
we cannot ascribe our sins to God. Divine Destiny exists so that
believers do not take pride in their “own” good deeds but rather
thank God for them. We have free will so that the rebellious car-
nal self does not escape the consequences of its sins.
A second, important point is that we usually complain about
past events and misfortune. Even worse, we sometimes despair
and abandon ourselves to a dissolute lifestyle, and might even begin
to complain against God. However, we relate past events and
misfortunes to Destiny and feel relief, security, and consolation.
So, whatever happened in the past should be considered in
the light of Destiny; what is to come, as well as sins and ques-
tions of responsibility, should be referred to human free will. In
this way, the extremes of fatalism and denying Destiny’s role in
human actions (the view of the Mu‘tazila) is reconciled.
DIVINE DECREE AND DESTINY
In Relation to Divine Knowledge
God is completely beyond our abilities of comparison and con-
ception, and so we can acquire only some knowledge of His
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
95

--- Sayfa 108 ---
Attributes and Names, not of His Divine Essence, by meditating
on and studying His acts and creatures. To understand His acts,
sometimes we have to resort to comparisons, as allowed in the
Qur’anic verse: God’s is the highest comparison (30:27). We may get
a glimpse of the relationship between Divine Decree and Destiny
and Divine Knowledge by pondering the following comparisons:
Suppose an extremely skilful man, who is an engineer as well
as an architect and a builder, wants to build a magnificent house.
First, he must determine what type of house he wants (the house
exists in his mind). Then, he draws the blueprints (the house exists
as an actual design or plan). After this, he builds the house accord-
ing to the blueprints (the house acquires a material existence). As
people can see the house, its image is recorded in numerous mem-
ories. Even if it is completely destroyed, it lives on in these mem-
ories and in the builder’s mind and plan (the final form of the
house’s existence, which has acquired some kind of perpetuity).
Before writing a book, an author must have its full content or
knowledge of its full meaning in his/her mind (the book exists as
knowledge or meaning). To make this knowledge or meaning vis-
ible and known, he/she must express it in words. Before doing
this he/she must arrange it (a “blueprint”), and then write it down
(material existence). Even if the book is destroyed and vanishes,
it continues to live in the memories of those who read or heard of
it, and in the author’s own mind.
Such existence—existence in mind—is the thing’s essential
existence. Even if the thing in question is not put into words or
practice, its knowledge or meaning exists in the mind. Therefore,
although knowledge or meaning needs matter to be seen and
known in this world, they are the essence of existence, upon
which material existence depends.
Likewise, God has full and exact knowledge of the universe
and all its contents. This is stated in the Qur’an many times. For
example:
It may be that you dislike a thing although it is good for you,
and love a thing although it is bad for you. God knows, but
you know not. (2:216)
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
96

--- Sayfa 109 ---
Say: “Whether you hide what is in your breasts or reveal it,
God knows it. He knows all that the heavens and the Earth
contain; and He has power over all things.” (3:29)
With Him are the keys of the Unseen. None but He knows
them. And He knows what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf
falls but He knows it; not a grain amid the darkness of the soil,
nothing of wet or dry, but (it is) in a Manifest Book. (6:59)
Say: “If the ocean were ink for the words of my Lord, assured-
ly the ocean would be used up before the words of my Lord
were finished, even if We brought another (ocean) like it, for its
aid.” (18:109)
Even if He had not created the universe, it still would exist
in His Knowledge. Since God is beyond all time and space, both
of which are united in His Knowledge as a single point, and
since His eternal, all-encompassing Knowledge does not depend
on them, time is a unified whole. Given this, precedence or pos-
teriority, sequence or division of time, and all other time-related
concepts do not exist for Him. We should always remember that
our categories of past, present, and future time are only artificial
categories designed to make our lives more manageable. Time
and space are two dimensions of creation.
Everything eternally exists in God’s Knowledge, and He liter-
ally knows everything about everything. Divine Power clothes a
thing in material existence according to Divine Will, and this trans-
ference from Knowledge into our own world takes place within
the limits of time and space. Knowledge and Will are two essential
Attributes of Divine Being: God knows things, things exist in His
Knowledge, His Will determines all of their specific and general
characteristics, and His Power gives them material existence. The
overall relationship between Divine Knowledge and Destiny, is
best expressed as: There is not a thing but with us are the stores there-
of. We send it not down save in appointed measure (15:21).
In Relation to Registry and Duplication
Everything that exists in Divine Knowledge has an individual-
ized form and a certain measure, or, if we may say so, as a plan
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
97

--- Sayfa 110 ---
or project, is in a Record. This record is called, in one respect, the
Supreme Preserved Tablet (85:22) and, in another, the Manifest
Record (36:12). The Qur’an states that nothing befalls us save that
which God has decreed or preordained for us (9:51) and there is not
a moving creature on the earth, nor a flying creature flying on two
wings, but they are communities like humanity, and that God has
neglected nothing in the Record (6:38).
This Record (or original Register) is a title for Divine
Knowledge in relation to creation. During the “process” of cre-
ation, this Register is duplicated. Its first, most comprehensive
duplication—all of creation—is the Tablet of Effacement and
Confirmation (or the Manifest Book). While the Supreme
Preserved Tablet (or the Manifest Record) contains the originals
of everything in Divine Knowledge, as well as the principles and
laws of creation, the Tablet of Effacement and Confirmation is the
reality and, metaphorically, a page of the stream of time. Divine
Power transfers things from the Supreme Preserved Tablet onto
the Tablet of Effacement and Confirmation, arranges them on the
page of time and, in turn, attaches them to the string of time.
Nothing changes on the Supreme Preserved Tablet, for every-
thing there is fixed. But during the process of creation, God effaces
what He wills, and confirms and establishes what He wills (13:39).
After birth, everyone is registered in a Registry of Births.
Then, based on this information, everyone receives an identity
document. Similarly, everyone’s complete personal characteris-
tics, particularities, and future life-history are registered on the
Supreme Preserved Tablet, which then is copied by angels. They
record all the information related to one’s body, and encode it in
cells as information or laws. For this information to work and
come to life, however, the spirit must be breathed into the body.
The other part of this copy is fastened around our neck as
an invisible book (17:13). We enact whatever is in that book as
long as we are alive. This does not mean that Destiny or prede-
termination compels us to act in a certain way, for Destiny is no
more than a sort of knowledge. For example, you send someone
somewhere to do a job. Having procured the necessary supplies,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
98

--- Sayfa 111 ---
you brief the man and send him on his way. Since you know in
advance how he will behave, you record the journey’s details in
a notebook and hide it in a secret pocket in his jacket. Unaware
of the notebook, this fellow behaves as he wishes while travel-
ing. You also dispatch two of your most reliable men to follow
him in order to observe and videotape secretly whatever he says
and does. When he returns, you compare the videotapes with
the notebook and see that they are exactly the same. Afterwards,
you interview him to see if he followed your instructions, and
then either reward, punish, or forgive him accordingly.
As in the example above, God, Who is beyond all time and
space, and therefore has comprehensive knowledge, records our
life-history in the original Register. Angels copy this information
and fasten a personal register, which we call destiny or fate, around
each person’s neck. God’s apparent foreknowledge and recording
of our deeds and words do not compel us to perform them, for
whatever we say or do is the result of using our free will.1 Our
complete life is recorded by two angels, called Kiramun Katibun
(the Noble Recorders). On the Day of Judgment, our record will
be presented to us, and we will be told to read it:
Every man’s book of life-history (fate) have We fastened
around his neck, and We shall bring forth for him on the Day
of Resurrection a book which he will find wide open. (It will
be said unto him): “Read your book. Your own self suffices as
a reckoner against you this day.” (17:13-14)
In Relation to Divine Will
God registers everything in His Knowledge in a record contain-
ing each thing’s unique characteristics, life span, provision, time
and place of birth and death, and all of its words and actions. All
of this takes place by Divine Will, for it is through Divine Will
that every thing and event, whether in the realm of Divine
Knowledge or in this world, is known and given a certain course
or direction. Nothing exists beyond the scope of the Divine Will.
For example, an embryo faces innumerable alternatives:
whether it will be a live being, whether it will exist or not, when
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
99

--- Sayfa 112 ---
and where it will be born and die, and how long it will live, to
mention just a few. All beings are completely unique in com-
plexion and countenance, character, likes and dislikes, and so on,
although they are formed from the same basic elements. A par-
ticle of food entering a body, whether an embryo or fully devel-
oped, also faces countless alternatives as to its final destination.
If a single particle destined for the right eye’s pupil were to go
to the right ear, this would result in an anomaly.
Thus, the all-encompassing Divine Will orders everything
according to a miraculously calculated plan, and is responsible
for the universe’s miraculous order and harmony. No leaf falls
and no seed germinates unless God wills it to do so.
Our free will is included in Divine Will. However, our rela-
tion with Divine Will differs from that of other beings, for only
we (and the jinn) can choose as a consequence of having free
will. Based on His knowledge of how we will act and speak,
God Almighty has recorded all details of our life. As He is not
bound by the artificial division of time into past, present, and
future, what we consider predetermination exists in relation to
us, not to God Himself. For Him, predetermination means His
eternal knowledge of our acts.2
In sum: Divine Will dominates creation, and nothing can
exist or happen beyond Its scope. It is also responsible for the
universe’s miraculous order and harmony, and gives every thing
and event a specific direction and characteristics. The existence
of Divine Will does not negate human free will.
In Relation to Creation
There are two aspects of the relation between Divine Decree and
Destiny and creation. First, as a determining and compelling fac-
tor, Destiny is absolutely dominant everywhere, except where our
free will has a part. Everything occurs according to Its measure
and determination, judgment and direction. God is the absolute
owner of sovereignty, and thus does what He wills. No one can
call Him to account for His acts. Being absolutely Just and Wise,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
100

--- Sayfa 113 ---
and absolutely Merciful and Compassionate, He does only good
and never wrongs His creatures.
We cannot interfere with the universe’s operation. The sun
always sends heat and light independent of us, the Earth rotates
on its axis and around the sun, days and months pass, the seasons
and years come and go, and we have no control over nature.
There are innumerable instances of wisdom in all of God’s acts,
all of which benefit us. So, we must study and reflect on His acts
to discover their wisdom:
In the creation of the heavens and the Earth, and in the alter-
nation of night and day, there are signs for men of understand-
ing. Those that remember and mention God standing, sitting,
and lying down, and reflect upon the creation of the heavens
and the Earth. “Our Lord! You have not created this in vain.
Glory be to You! Protect us from the punishment of the Fire.”
(3:190-91)
We should reflect on what happens to us. God never wills
evil for His creatures, for whatever evil befalls you is from yourself
(4:79). In other words, our sins are the source of our misfor-
tunes. God allows misfortunes to strike us so that our sins will
be forgiven or so that we will be promoted to higher ranks. But
this does not mean that God, for a reason known only to Him,
sometimes overlooks our sins and does not punish us.
The second aspect of this relationship concerns the reli-
gious injunctions and prohibitions, which relate to human free
will. While Divine Destiny is absolutely dominant in those areas
in which our free will has no part (e.g., creating and controlling
all things and beings, as well as animate and inanimate bodies,
planetary movements, and all natural events or phenomena), It
takes our free will into consideration. God creates all things and
events, including all our deeds, because He has honored us with
free will and prepared an eternal abode for us. Although He desires
that we always do what is good and insistently invites us to it,
He does not refrain from giving eternal, physical existence to
our bad choices and evil acts, even though He is displeased with
them.
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
101

--- Sayfa 114 ---
DESTINY AND HUMAN FREE WILL
Human free will exists because:
•
We feel remorse when we do something wrong. We beg God’s
forgiveness for our sins. If we trouble or harm someone, we
ask that person to excuse us. These actions show that we choose
to act in a particular way. If we could not choose our actions
and were compelled to do them by a superior power, why
should we feel remorse and seek forgiveness for anything?
•
We choose to move our hands, speak, or stand up to go some-
where. We decide to read a book, watch television, or pray to
God. We are not forced to do anything, nor are we somehow
remotely controlled by an invisible, superior power.
•
We hesitate, reason, compare, assess, choose, and then decide
to do something. For example, if our friends invite us to go
somewhere or do something, we first go through a mental
process and then decide whether we will accompany them or
not. We repeat this very process maybe 100 times a day.
•
When we are wronged, we sometimes sue the one who
wronged us. The court does not ascribe the crime to a com-
pelling superior power like Destiny, and neither do we. The
accused does not excuse himself or herself by blaming that
power. Virtuous and wicked people, those who are promot-
ed to high social ranks and those who waste their time,
those who are rewarded for their good acts or success and
those who are punished for their crimes—all of this proves
that each of us has free will.
•
Only the insane are not held responsible for their acts. Human
reason and other mental faculties require us to decide and act
freely; the results seen in our lives prove the truth of this asser-
tion. Without free will, human reason and other faculties have
no meaning.
•
Animals have no will power, and so act under God’s guidance
(“instinct,” according to materialistic science). For example,
bees always build hexagonal hives. Since they have no will
power, they never even try to build triangular hives or a nest.
But we consider many alternatives before acting or speaking.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
102

--- Sayfa 115 ---
We also are free to change our minds, which we do when con-
fronted with emergencies or new, better proposals. This also
indicates our free will.
The Nature of Our Free Will
Our free will is not visible and has no material existence. However,
such factors do not render its existence impossible. Everyone has
two (physical) eyes, but we also can see with our third (spiritual)
eye. We use the former to see things in this world; we use the lat-
ter to see things beyond events and this world. Our free will is like
our third eye, which you may call insight. It is an inclination or
inner force by which we prefer and decide.
We will and God creates. A project or a building’s plan has
no value or use unless you start to construct the building accord-
ing to it, so that it becomes visible and serves many purposes.
Our free will resembles that plan, for we decide and act accord-
ing to it, and God creates our actions as a result of our decisions.
Creation and acting are different things. God’s creation means
that He gives actual existence to our choices and actions in this
world. Without God’s creation, we cannot act.
To illuminate a magnificent palace, we must install a lighting
system. However, the palace cannot be illuminated until we flick
the switch that turns on the lights. Until we do so, the palace will
remain dark. Similarly, each man and woman is a magnificent
palace of God. We are illuminated by belief in God, Who has sup-
plied us with the necessary lighting system: intellect, reason, sense,
and the abilities to learn, compare, and prefer.
Nature and events, as well as Divinely revealed religions, are
like the source of electricity that illuminates this Divine palace
of the human individual. If we do not use our free will to flick
the switch, however, we will remain in darkness. Turning on the
light means petitioning God to illuminate us with belief. In a
manner befitting a servant at the master’s door, we must peti-
tion the Lord of the Universe to illuminate us and so make us a
“king” or a “queen” in the universe. When we do this, the Lord
of the Universe treats us in a way befitting Himself, and promotes
us to the rank of kingship over other realms of creation.
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
103

--- Sayfa 116 ---
God takes our free will into account when dealing with us
and our acts, and then uses it to create our deeds. Thus we are
never victims of Destiny or wronged by Fate. However insignif-
icant our free will is when compared with God’s creative acts, it
is still the cause of our deeds. God makes large things out of
minute particles, and creates many important results from sim-
ple means. For example, He makes a huge pine tree from a tiny
seed, and uses our inclinations or free choice to prepare our eter-
nal happiness or punishment.
To better understand our part, and that of our willpower, in
our acts and accomplishments, consider the food we consume.
Without soil and water, air and the sun’s heat, none of which we
can produce or create despite our advanced technology, we
would have no food. We cannot produce even a corn seed. We
did not create our body, one single part of which cannot control,
or establish its relationship with food. For example, if we had to
wind our heart like a clock at a fixed time every morning, how
long would we survive?
Obviously, almost all parts of the whole complex and har-
monious universe, which is a most developed organism, work
together according to the most delicate measures to produce a
morsel of food. Thus, the price of that morsel is almost as much
as the price of the whole universe. How can we possibly pay
such a price, when our part in producing that morsel is utterly
negligible, consisting of no more than our own effort?
Can we ever thank God enough for even a morsel of food? If
only a picture of grapes were shown to us, could all of us work
together and produce it? No. God nourishes us with His bounty,
asking in return very little. If He told us to perform 1,000 rak‘as
(units) of prayer for a bushel of wheat, we would have to do so.
If He sent a raindrop in return for one rak‘a, we would have to
spend our whole lives praying. If you were left in the scorching
heat of a desert, would you not give anything for a single glass of
water?
How can we thank Him enough for each bodily limb?
When we see sick and crippled people in hospitals, or when we
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
104

--- Sayfa 117 ---
ourselves are ill, we understand how valuable good health is.
But can we ever thank Him enough for this blessing? The wor-
ship God Almighty orders us to perform is, in fact, for our per-
sonal benefit and spiritual refinement, as well as for a good per-
sonal and collective life. Furthermore, if we believe in and wor-
ship God, He rewards us with infinite happiness and bounties
in Paradise.
In sum: Almost everything we have is given to us for prac-
tically nothing, and our part in the bounty we enjoy here is there-
fore quite negligible. Similarly, our free will is equally negligible
when compared with what God Almighty creates from our use
of it. Despite our free will’s weakness and our own inability to
really understand its true nature, God creates our actions accord-
ing to the choices and decisions we make through it.
Divine Destiny is Compatible With Human Free Will
Throughout history, people have tried to distinguish or recon-
cile Divine Will and human free will. Some have denied free will,
while others have claimed that we create our own deeds and
thereby ignore Destiny. However, as Islam is the middle way in
everything, it proclaims that Divine Destiny dominates existence,
including the human realm, but that we can use our free will to
direct our lives.
The Qur’an expresses the true nature of this relation as fol-
lows: This [Qur’an] is a reminder unto the worlds, unto whoever
among you wills to walk straight. You do not will, unless God wills, the
Lord of the Worlds (81:27-29). These verses attribute absolute will
to God Almighty, but do not deny human free will. In another
verse, we read that God creates you and whatever you do (37:96).
Other verses speak of a covenant between us and God, and
openly declare that we direct history: Fulfill [your part of] the
covenant so that I fulfill [My part of] the covenant (2:40); If you
help God[’s religion], He will help you and will make your foothold
firm (47:7); and God changes not the condition of a people unless
they change what is in their hearts (13:11).
Except for humanity and jinn, both of whom have free will and
must account for their acts, Divine Destiny is the only absolute-
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
105

--- Sayfa 118 ---
ly dominant factor in existence. To reconcile Destiny and human
free will, consider the following:
•
Destiny is a title for Divine Knowledge. God’s Knowledge
comprehends everything within and beyond time and space.
If your knowledge allows you to know beforehand that a cer-
tain thing will happen at a certain future time, your “predic-
tion” will come true. But this does not mean that your fore-
knowledge caused it to happen. Since every thing and event
are comprehended in God’s Knowledge, He writes what will
happen at a given time and place, and it does so. What God
writes and what we do are exactly the same; not because God
writes it and then forces us to do it, but because we will it and
then do it.
For example: A train travels between Istanbul and Ankara.
Considering its speed and characteristics, the railway’s con-
dition, the distance between the two cities, as well the num-
ber of stations along the way and how much time must be
spent in each, a timetable can be prepared. Does this timetable
cause the train to travel?
The time and duration of solar and lunar eclipses are
known and written beforehand based on astronomical calcu-
lations. Does such foreknowledge and recording cause them?
Of course not. Since astronomers knew beforehand when the
eclipse would occur, they recorded it. The same relationship
exists between Destiny and human free will.
•
Our free will is included in Destiny. For example, someone
asks you whether the clock in the next room is working. You
hear it and answer in the affirmative. The questioner does not
need to ask whether its hands are moving, for if the clock is
working, its gears are working and its hands are moving. In
an analogous way, Destiny and human free will are not mutu-
ally exclusive. We are neither dried leaves blown by the wind
of Destiny nor completely independent of it. As Islam always
follows the middle way, it explains the true relationship between
Destiny and our free will: we will and do something, and God
creates it.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
106

--- Sayfa 119 ---
•
In the view of Destiny, cause and effect cannot be separated.
It is destined that this cause will produce that effect. But we
cannot argue that killing someone is alright because the vic-
tim was destined to die at that time or place, and would have
died anyway even if he or she had not been shot. Such an
argument is baseless, since the victim is actually destined to
die as a result of being shot. The argument that the victim would
have died even without being shot would mean that this death
was senseless. How would we explain such a death? Remember
that there are not two kinds of Destiny, one for the cause and
the other for the effect. Destiny is one.
•
People tend to imagine, excluding themselves from the pas-
sage of time, a limit for past time extending through a certain
chain of things. They call this azal (past eternity). But to rea-
son according to such an idea is unacceptable. To understand
this subtle point better, consider the following:
Imagine you are holding a mirror in your hand. Everything
reflected on the right represents the past, while everything
reflected on the left represents the future. The mirror can reflect
only one direction, since it cannot show both sides at once while
you are holding it. If you want to see both directions simulta-
neously, you would have to rise high above your original posi-
tion so that left and right unite into one direction and noth-
ing could be called first or last, beginning or end.
Divine Destiny, in some respects identical with Divine
Knowledge, is described in a Prophetic saying as containing
all time and events as a single point, where first and last,
beginning and end, what has happened and what will hap-
pen are all united into one. As we are not excluded from it,
our understanding of time and events could be like a mirror
to the past.2
•
We do not create our actions. If we actually did so, we also
would have to be their ultimate cause. If that were the case,
we could not have free will, for, according to logic, a thing
exists if its existence is absolutely necessary and all necessary
conditions are prepared for its existence. Thus whatever comes
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
107

--- Sayfa 120 ---
into existence has to have a real, complete cause. But a com-
plete cause would make the existence of something compul-
sory, meaning that there would be no room for choice.
•
Although our free will cannot cause something to happen,
Almighty God has made its operation a simple condition
for bringing His universal Will into effect. He uses our free
will to guide us in our chosen direction, and so we are respon-
sible for our actions. If you place your child on your shoul-
ders and, at her request, take her outside, she might catch a
cold. Could she blame you for her cold? Indeed, you might
even punish her for her request. In a similar manner, Almighty
God, the Most Just of Judges, never forces His servants to do
anything, and so has made His Will somewhat dependent on
human free will.
We may summarize the discussion so far in seven points:
1.
Divine Destiny, also called Divine determination and arrange-
ment, dominates the universe but does not cancel or negate
our free will.
2.
Since God is beyond time and space and everything is includ-
ed in His Knowledge, He encompasses the past, present, and
future as one undivided and united point. For example: If you
are in a room, your view is restricted to the room. If you look
from a higher point, you can see the whole city. As you rise
higher and higher, your vision continues to broaden. The Earth,
when seen from the moon, appears to be a small blue marble.
It is the same with time.
3.
Since all time and space are included in God’s Knowledge
as a single point, God recorded everything that will happen
until the Day of Judgment. Angels use this record to prepare
a smaller record for each individual.
4.
We do not do something because God recorded it; God
knew beforehand what we would do it and recorded it.
5.
There are not two destinies: one for the cause, the other for
the effect. Destiny is one and relates simultaneously to the
cause and the effect. Our free will, which causes our acts, is
included in Destiny.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
108

--- Sayfa 121 ---
6.
God guides us to good things and actions, and allows and advis-
es us to use our willpower for good. In return, He promises
us eternal happiness in Paradise.
7.
We have free will, although we contribute almost nothing to
our good acts. Our free will, if not used properly, can destroy
us. Therefore we should use it to benefit ourselves by pray-
ing to God. This will make it possible for us to enjoy the bless-
ings of Paradise, a fruit of the chain of good deeds, and attain
eternal happiness. Furthermore, we always should seek God’s
forgiveness so that we might refrain from evil and be saved
from the torments of Hell, a fruit of the accursed chain of evil
deeds. Prayer and trusting in God greatly strengthen our incli-
nation toward good, and repentance and seeking God’s for-
giveness greatly weaken, even destroy, our inclination toward
evil and transgression.
DIVINE DESTINY AND DECREE, AND DIVINE GRACE
Divine Decree means carrying out Destiny’s decisions or judg-
ments. It simultaneously includes our actions and God’s creation
of them, for God allows us to do what we will to do by bringing
it into existence. The Arabic word translated here as Divine
Grace is ‘ata’, which means “to give freely or liberality.”
God has two main records or registers: the Supreme Preserved
Tablet (corresponding to Destiny or Divine Knowledge) and the
Manifest Record (corresponding to the reality of time). The Supreme
Preserved Tablet never changes, since God also has absolutely
unrestricted Will and is therefore not restricted by the Destiny He
established for His creatures. However, He may change what He
records in the Manifest Book: God effaces whatever He wills and con-
firms whatever He wills, with Him is the Mother of the Book (13:39).
This subtle matter is difficult to understand. Although we
cannot fully understand the reality of this effacement and con-
firmation, we frequently witness it in our lives. For example, one
day we leave home with the intention of going to a place where
sins are freely committed. However, out of His mercy and favor,
God arranges for us to meet some good friends who persuade
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
109

--- Sayfa 122 ---
us to go to a good place. Likewise, we commit sins too freely and
therefore are subject to misfortune. But instead of dealing with
us by His Justice, God, out of His grace, treats us with utmost
grace and pardons us, thereby saving us from misfortune.
Divine Grace exists so that we will not despair of being for-
given, so that we may turn to Him despite our sins, and so that
we should not see ourselves as absolutely bound by the conse-
quences that Divine Destiny and Decree establishes for our deeds.
This is made explicit in the following verses:
Whatever misfortune befalls you, is for what your own hands have
earned, and for many (of them) He grants forgiveness. (42:30)
If God were to punish people for their wrongdoing, He would
not leave on the Earth a single living creature; but He reprieves
them to an appointed term. (16:61)
Relate (to them from Me): “O My slaves who have trans-
gressed against their selves! Do not despair of God’s mercy!
Surely God forgives all sins, for He is the All-Forgiving, the
Most Compassionate. (39:53)
Divine grace or liberality manifests itself more clearly in human
history. As we are responsible and accountable for our acts, we
direct our own history. Such historical philosophies as historicism
are quite mistaken, for there is no determination in history or his-
torical events.
Many historical peoples, such as those of the ‘Ad, the
Thamud, and Pharaoh, deserved to perish because of their dis-
solute lifestyles, injustice, and atrocities. So God eradicated them.
However, Prophet Jonah’s people turned to God with utmost
sincerity and deep repentance, and reformed themselves moral-
ly after they saw signs of impending destruction. As a result,
God spared them the penalty of disgrace in the life of this world, and
gave them comfort for a while (10:98). Emphasizing this point,
God’s Messenger said: “Fear does not prevent misfortunes, but
prayer and charity prevent them.”3
Therefore, believers should never cease praying and giving
charity. When they feel misfortune coming, they should imme-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
110

--- Sayfa 123 ---
diately turn to God in prayer, repent, give charity, or perform some
service for Islam.
THE DIVINE WISDOM IN CREATING PEOPLE DIFFERENTLY
Why did God create us with different levels of provision and
intelligence, lifestyle and physiology? Why does He allow hard-
ship and poverty amidst ease and luxury? Such questions, besides
relating to Destiny, also have some bearing on understanding the
Divine way of acting.
We Must Try to Know God
Before discussing this issue, we should point out that all such
questions arise from not knowing the Divine Being. If we had
as much desire to learn everything about God as we do about
a movie star or a sports figure, if we had access to the necessary
resources from which we could learn something about our
Master, if we studied the Book of the Universe according to the
criteria established by the Qur’an, and if we followed the prin-
ciples preached by the Prophet to establish a true life—if we did
all of this, we could discern the immaterial dimension of things
and events through the prism of our conscience. If we could
reach that level, we would not need to ask such questions. But
as long as science isolates itself from religion, and healthy med-
itation is replaced by mechanical life and mass information, we
will continue to ask such questions and find it hard to know
our Creator.
God Controls Everything and Does as He Wills
Consider our claims of ownership and control over what we
regard as our property. What share do we have in producing the
food we consume? Each morsel of food requires the existence
of the entire universe. Given this, and if we can claim owner-
ship and control over our private property in which we have so
little share, why should God, the Creator and unique Owner of
the universe and all of its contents, not have complete control
of His property?
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
111

--- Sayfa 124 ---
God Almighty’s Names Have Different Manifestations
The Name All-Providing supplies beings with what they need to
live, the Name All-Healing enables patients to recover, and the
Name All-Answering comes to the aid of the needy. He warns
the heedless with His Name All-Distressing, and relieves the
distressed with His Name All-Relieving. If we study the mani-
festations of God’s Names, we can see the beauty in the variety
they bring to the universe, and understand the wisdom under-
lying the differences in creation. God makes Himself known by
manifesting His Names. For example, flowers smile at us as the
result of the manifestation of His Names originating in His
Grace, while natural catastrophes remind us of His Wrath as the
manifestation of His Names originating in His Majesty.
Everything is God’s Blessing
We cannot question God Almighty for what He gives or does not
give. Remember that God did not create you as a lifeless element,
a plant or an animal, but as a human being. Also, just as there are
always people who are wealthier and healthier than you, there are
also people who are poorer and sicker than you. So, with respect
to wealth and health, consider those who are poorer and sicker
than you. With respect to honesty and morality, learning and altru-
ism, truthfulness and generosity, and so on, emulate those who are
better than you.
Suppose a rich person gives three destitute people an apart-
ment flat, a large house, and a palace, respectively. Does the one
who is given an apartment flat have the right to ask the rich per-
son why he was not given a house or a palace? Should he not,
rather, thank his benefactor for the apartment? Similarly, all that
we have is from God. Thus, whether we are rich or poor, sound
or disabled, healthy or sick, we are obliged to thank God.
We Plant Here and Harvest in the Hereafter
This world is an arena of trial, a place where we seek to acquire
the state appropriate for the other life. This is not easy. Like a
tailor designing the best possible suit for a client by cutting and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
112

--- Sayfa 125 ---
stitching the material and then having the client try it on, God
Almighty causes us to “turn about” in diverse conditions to “shape”
us for the afterlife.
We are like raw minerals that have to be refined. Just as there
are many types of minerals, our social life requires that we have
different levels of intelligence, physical strength, and sensitivity.
Depending upon the final product desired, whether gold or dia-
monds, coal or copper, different (and more exacting and demand-
ing) processes and methods must be applied to the raw miner-
al. Similarly, each of us may need a different test, trial, or train-
ing to be refined and reach our destined final level of attainment.
This means that God subjects each of us to different levels of
suffering and affliction to elevate us to a state appropriate for the
other world.
This world is also the realm of trouble. When God warned
Adam not to eat of the forbidden tree, He reminded him:
Adam, surely this [Satan] is an enemy to you and your wife. So
let him not expel you both from the Garden, so that you are
unprosperous. It is assuredly given to you neither to hunger
therein nor to go naked, neither to thirst therein, nor to suffer
the sun. (20:117-19)
That means that we will experience hunger, thirst, tiredness,
and encounter hardship in the world. This must be so, because
in this world we sow the seeds that will be harvested in the
Hereafter. Those seeking only to gratify their desires most prob-
ably are the ones God will address in the other world with the
following words:
You dissipated your good things in your worldly life, and you
took your enjoyment in them; therefore today you shall be rec-
ompensed with the chastisement of humiliation because you
waxed proud on the Earth without right, and for your ungod-
liness. (46:20)
On the other hand, those who endure hunger, thirst, and oth-
er hardship here for the sake of God will be admitted to Paradise
and addressed thusly by angels: Peace be upon you. Well you have
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
113

--- Sayfa 126 ---
fared; enter in, to dwell forever (39:73); and Eat and drink with whole-
some appetite for that you did long ago, in the days gone by (69:24).
More Blessings Mean More Responsibility
As God gives you more bounties and blessings, your responsibil-
ity grows. For example, almsgiving is compulsory for the wealthy,
while the disabled, blind, or sick do not have to bear arms in the
way of God. To express the utmost degree of piety, the Prophet
Jesus says:
You have heard that it was said: “Do not commit adultery.” But
I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has
already committed adultery with her in his heart. If your right
eye causes you to sin, gouge it out and throw it away. It is bet-
ter for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole
body to be thrown into Hell. And if your right hand causes you
to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to lose
one part of your body than for your whole body to go into
Hell. (Matthew 5:27-30)
So, we do not know if being rich or poor, or healthy or sick,
is better for us. And, the Qur’an tells us that: It may be that you
dislike a thing although it is good for you, and love a thing although
it is bad for you. God knows but you know not (2:216).
Furthermore, many rich people cannot enjoy food and drink
or the world’s beauty as much as poor people do, due to their lack
of appetite or bad health. Although poverty is not something to
be desired and indeed, as stated by Prophet Muhammad, can even
cause unbelief, it is difficult to claim that the rich are always hap-
pier than the poor. No one can assert that people in the Middle
Ages, when living standards were relatively low, were less happy
than today’s rich people. Happiness lies in spiritual satisfaction,
not in having the material facilities to gratify bodily desires.
Another point to emphasize is that no one should complain
about hardship. When compared with times of good health,
comfort, and happiness, times of illness or hardship often are not
worth mentioning. Also, we usually live unaware of the constant
bounties we receive. For example, the sun rises every day and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
114

--- Sayfa 127 ---
sends us its heat and light for free. We are never deprived of air,
without which we would die instantly, although we pay nothing
for it. All the natural events necessary for producing rain occur
without our help. What we should do is thank God for these and
all other bounties (none of which we can provide for ourselves),
for the greatest part of our life (spent in health and comfort), and
not to complain to God about illness, hardship, or the lack of
some additional blessing.
Equality in material resources, as well as in intellectual and
physical ability, should not be considered a desirable social objec-
tive, for it is incompatible with the requirements of social life.
These differences, as well as those in individual temperament, dis-
position, and preference, sustain the variety of human occupations,
a fundamental element of human social life. This variation causes
people to need one another and to establish mutual good relations.
However, these relations should be based on justice and mutu-
al love, respect, understanding, and care. They should not lead to
oppression, usurpation, and cheating, or to class-based social hos-
tility and contempt. According to Said Nursi (d. 1960), a Muslim
scholar, thinker, and activist who started a major Islamic revival in
Turkey in the first half of the twentieth century, two major reasons
for all the revolutions and upheavals of the last few centuries are
the attitudes: “I do not care if others die of hunger so long as I am
full,” and “You work so that I may eat.”
Islam tackles the first attitude with zakat, the obligatory alms-
tax on wealthy Muslims, principally for redistribution among the
poor and needy. Islam tackles the second attitude by prohibiting
all interest-based transactions. Further, Islam extols the virtue help-
ing the poor and needy and commends moderate, disciplined liv-
ing. The lives of the Prophet and his four immediate political suc-
cessors (known collectively as the Rightly Guided Caliphs) are good
examples for the Muslim élites to follow.
The Purpose of Misfortune
Before closing, we should point out that however undesirable and
even appalling in appearance, affliction and illness usually bear good
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
115

--- Sayfa 128 ---
results. Just as punishing our children to train them, amputating
a gangrenous limb, or deriving medicine from a snake’s venom,
most afflictions or illnesses usually produce good results.4
A sparrow-hawk’s swooping contributes to a sparrow’s agility
and develops its ability to escape. People may be hurt by rain or elec-
tricity or fire, but no one actually curses them. Fasting may be diffi-
cult, but it provides the body with energy, activity, and resistance. A
child’s immune system usually gains strength through illness.
Exercise is not easy, but it is almost essential for the body’s health and
strength. Our spirit is refined and acquires the state deserving
Paradise through worship and meditation, as well as through illness,
suffering, and hardship. God gives a large reward for a small sacri-
fice. Hardship and suffering promote us to higher spiritual degrees
and will be rewarded in the other world with a generosity that we
cannot even imagine. For this reason, Prophets suffer the most griev-
ous hardship and difficulty, and they are followed by saints and oth-
er believers, each according to their degree of belief.
Hardship, illness, and calamity cause believers’ sins to be for-
given and remind them to be alert to sin and the attempted seduc-
tions coming from Satan and their carnal selves. They also help
us appreciate God’s blessings, express our gratitude, and encour-
age the rich and healthy to help the poor and the sick. Those who
never experience hunger cannot fully appreciate the conditions
of the hungry. Nor can one who has never been sick be aware of
what sick people live through. So, hardship, illness, and calamity
may establish closer relations between different groups or class-
es of people.
Calamity and suffering increase our resistance to hardships of
life and train us to persevere and endure. They also separate the
strong and sincere supporters of a cause from those who are sup-
porters out of convenience or some other personal (and there-
fore inappropriate) reason.
QUESTIONS ON DESTINY AND HUMAN FREE WILL
Question: Are we victims of Destiny? Do we have any part in
the calamities befalling us?
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
116

--- Sayfa 129 ---
Answer: As this question has been discussed earlier, I will
present a summarized account.
No one is a victim of Destiny. God does not destine our
acts; rather, He creates whatever we will to do. Destiny’s decrees
or verdicts are based on its consideration of our free will.
We are directly responsible for whatever happens to us. If we
experience misfortune, it is either because we have misused our
free will or because, as with Prophets, God wills to promote us
to higher ranks. For example, the sun is absolutely necessary for
and indispensable to life. If we stay outside too long and die of
sunstroke, can we blame the sun? Of course not, for we could
have gone inside or taken sufficient precautions. In the same way,
our free will (not Destiny) is responsible for any misfortune that
comes our way. Blaming Destiny only causes the misfortune to
worsen.
To cite another example: God Almighty created and endowed
us with certain faculties or powers, one of which is lust. If we use
this power improperly and thus harm ourselves, it can only be our
fault. God gave us this power so that we may reproduce the species
in the proper manner and be promoted to higher spiritual ranks by
resisting our carnal self ’s illicit suggestions. It is the same with
anger. God Almighty gave it to us so that we can defend ourselves
and our religious and social values, not to hurt others. Therefore,
if an uncontrolled burst of anger causes us to kill someone, it is our
fault, not Destiny’s.
Destiny relates to both the cause and the effect simultane-
ously. If we judge only by considering the effect, usually we make
mistakes. For example, if we accuse a father of abusing his son
while he only is trying to discipline him because he loves his son
or so that the son may reform himself and learn how to behave
properly, we would be wronging the father. We should consider
all related information while judging any event. If we cannot see
any good in it, we should tell ourselves that whatever God does
is good either in itself or in its consequences, and never accuse
Destiny. This is what is meant by: It may be that you dislike a thing
although it is good for you, and love a thing although it is bad for you.
God knows but you know not (2:216).
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
117

--- Sayfa 130 ---
In such calamities as earthquakes or floods, God usually
does not choose between the good and the evil or the innocent
and the guilty. Such calamities fall on everyone, for they are part
of the tests and trials prepared for us and serve His purpose.
However, in return for undergoing such calamities, good and
innocent people will receive a great reward in the Hereafter.
Also, it should be pointed out that sometimes God uses calami-
ties to punish such people, because they do not try to enjoin
what is good and prevent what is evil.
Whatever God does is the best and most proper. So, we
should try to see His wisdom behind the good He bestows on
us and the suffering to which He subjects us.
Question: Why does so insignificant a thing as free will
cause one to deserve eternal Paradise or Hell?
Answer: When we compare God’s acts and creation with
our own function in existence, we see that the role of human
free will is really insignificant. As a result, some have denied it.
Followers of the middle path in this matter have concluded that
human free will is an inclination, or something like inclination,
or more of a preference for our internal inclinations, and then
acting upon that inclination. It is actually like flicking a switch
to light a house or a city.
Before asking why God Almighty may condemn us to eter-
nal Hellfire if we misuse our free will during our short lifespan,
we should think about whether we really can deserve eternal
Paradise by using our free will correctly. Should we not consid-
er whether we ever can thank God enough for the bounties He
pours upon us? If we worshipped Him during our entire life
unceasingly, we could not thank Him enough even for our eyes.
As pointed out earlier, a pomegranate or a cherry has the
same cost as the universe, for its growth or production requires
the cooperation of air, water, soil, and the sun, none of which we
could produce. Furthermore, God Almighty asks us to assign only
a small amount of time for worship. We seldom need more than
one hour to perform the five prescribed daily prayers. The amount
of wealth we are enjoined to give in charity is, in most cases, only
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
118

--- Sayfa 131 ---
one-fortieth of what we have. We have to go on pilgrimage (hajj)
only once, and only if we can afford it. The rest of our life and
wealth is for worldly things. Despite this, God, the All-Merciful,
promises us eternal Paradise, the blessings and beauties of which
are beyond imagination. So first of all, we should think about
God’s infinite mercy, which enfolds us and invites us to Paradise.
Now we will answer the question.
Intention
Our intention is critical. The Messenger says:
Actions are judged according to intentions. Whatever you
intend to do, you get the reward thereof. So, whoever emigrates
for God and His Messenger has emigrated for God and His
Messenger; whoever emigrates to acquire something worldly or
to marry a woman emigrates to what is intended.5
Intention is the spirit of our actions and determines how we
will be rewarded (or punished). If you do not eat or drink dur-
ing the day, but made no intention to fast, you are not counted
as having fasted. If you fast without intending to obtain God’s
good pleasure, you receive no reward. If you are killed fighting
to exalt or strengthen the Word of God, you die as a martyr and
go, by God’s will, to Paradise. If you are killed while fighting for
any other cause, such as fame or wealth, you are not considered
a martyr and most probably will not be admitted to Paradise.
So, you are rewarded (or punished) according to your intention.
If you have a firm belief in God and the pillars of faith, and
intend to believe in them [as if you were to live eternally], you
will be rewarded with eternal happiness in Paradise. If you have
removed your inborn tendency to believe, and thus intend not
to believe even if you were to live forever, you will cause your
own eternal punishment. In the case of people whose unbelief is
deeply ingrained and who have lost the capacity to believe, the
Qur’an says:
As for the unbelievers, it is the same whether you warn them
or warn them not. They will not believe. God has set a seal on
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
119

--- Sayfa 132 ---
their hearts and on their hearing, and on their eyes is a cover-
ing (2:6-7)
Punishment For Unbelief
A given punishment is determined by the nature and result of the
crime and the person’s intention, not by the duration of the act.
Murder, which takes only a couple of minutes or even sec-
onds to commit, is often punished by many years in jail or the
death sentence. Unbelief is infinitely more serious than murder.
If you accuse truthful and innocent people of lying and decep-
tion, they will be very angry with you. Unbelief also means the
following:
•
Denying the true testimony of innumerable creatures, from
atoms to huge galaxies, to their Creator’s existence and Unity,
and accusing them of lying or giving false testimony.
•
Denying God, the Unique Creator, Sustainer, and Administrator
of existence, and degrading His innumerable works of art.
•
Accusing more than 100,000 Prophets of the most abased
form of lying, deception, and trickery, and doing this despite
the fact that according to the testimony of history and the
people to whom they were sent, they are the most truthful of
all humanity.
•
Accusing believers of following the greatest liars of human his-
tory. Such a view also insults innumerable believers since the
time of Adam and accuses them of deception and deviation.
For these and other similar reasons, it is pure justice to con-
demn unbelievers to the eternal punishment of Hell.
However insignificant our free will appears, and however
slight a sin unbelief may seem to be at first sight, unbelief is a denial
and negation and therefore destructive. Remember that we likened
free will to flicking a switch to illuminate a room. Flicking a switch
off can throw a whole city into darkness. A match can destroy a
huge, magnificent palace in a couple of minutes, even though it
took hundreds of workers several years to build it. Remember
that a single bullet fired by a Serbian ignited the First World War
and led to massive death and destruction.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
120

--- Sayfa 133 ---
Also, suppose there is a garden containing all kinds of flow-
ers and trees in which birds sing and animals live. These plants
and animals need water, reaching them through the canals, in
order to survive. Someone is responsible for opening those canals
so that water can flow through them. If that person, for whatev-
er reason, did not allow water to flow and thus killed everything
in the garden, what would be an appropriate punishment? The act
of unbelief is equivalent to such an act, but on the scale of the cre-
ation as a whole.
Unbelief is an unforgivable ingratitude. How can you deny
Him Who brought you into existence from non-existence, gave you
so many faculties (e.g., reason, intellect, heart, memory, insight,
inner and outer senses), and nourishes you with numerous vari-
eties of food and drink? Such people prepare their own doom, and
their punishment must be equal to their action (of denial).
Even if we all worked together, we could not create even one
fruit, one leaf, or one blade of grass. Denying the existence of the
One Who can do all of this, and Who created this huge universe
and gave us dominion over it, is the worst sin that we can com-
mit, and so deserves the most lasting and severest punishment.
Satan tries to lead us astray by inviting us to unbelief and dis-
sipation. Our evil-commanding self was given to us so that we
could rise to higher ranks by refining it. Our conscience innately
feels the existence of God, the Creator and Sustainer of beings,
and feelings that long for eternity can be satisfied only with eter-
nity. Followers of Satan, unbelievers who are ruled by their desires
and their evil-commanding selves, close their conscience to innu-
merable signs of God in themselves and the universe, extinguish
their feelings related to eternity, and blind themselves to the
Creator’s most manifest signs: the Qur’an, Prophet Muhammad,
and all other Prophets, peace and blessings be upon them.
Punishment Varies
The punishment for violating a trust is proportional to its
significance and its true owner. A child who breaks a window
does not receive the same punishment as an aide-de-camp who
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
121

--- Sayfa 134 ---
loses or breaks the king’s crown. If a private and a commander
spend the money they received (based on their rank) on petty
things and so waste it, the commander certainly would receive a
much greater punishment than the private. If a scientist respon-
sible for carrying out scientific investigations spent the resources
entrusted to him on studying trifling things, certainly he would
be punished far more severely than a shepherd who spent the
resources assigned to him on meeting his own needs instead of
those of his animals.
Animals do not misuse or waste the capital of life assigned
to them. They do whatever they must: some carry loads, some
give milk and meat, and others produce honey or silk for our use.
Only we can spend our resources according to our own desires.
Given this fact, as well as the earlier-mentioned bounties that
God has given us due to our status as His vicegerents on Earth,
our misuse of these resources results in a very severe punishment.
If we allow ourselves to be dominated by our evil-commanding
self instead of our heart (which must overflow with knowledge
and love of the Creator), we are destined to become fuel for the
fire of Hell.
Question: The Prophet says that at the sixth week of an
embryo’s development, God sends an angel to write whether it
will be righteous and prosperous or wicked and condemned. What
does this mean, and how can we reconcile it with human free will?
Answer: In addition to what has been said above, we will
make the following comments.
Destiny is a title of Divine Knowledge. It does not cancel
our free will or force us to behave in a preordained way. Since
God knows beforehand what we will do and say (as He is not
constrained by our concept of time), He orders an angel to
write down our life-history. We behave according to the dictates
of our free will, not because God wrote down our future life.
Destiny is related both to the cause and the effect. There are
not two separate destinies, one for the cause, the other for the
effect. God knows beforehand how we will behave in a given cir-
cumstance, and His preknowledge does not negate our free will.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
122

--- Sayfa 135 ---
Only God knows whether we will go to Paradise or Hell.
Although unbelief deserves eternal punishment, we may not say
that unbelievers are going to Hell, for one day they might accept
belief and go to Paradise. Many atheists have become Muslims.
Islam came to guide unbelievers to faith and worship, and con-
sequently to eternal happiness in Paradise.
Question: What does fitra (primordial nature) mean?
Answer: In an authentic hadith, the Prophet says that all
infants are born with this fitra, and then their parents cause them
to adopt another faith (or no faith at all).
This hadith means that everyone has the innate potential to
become a Muslim. Islam is the natural religion of all creatures, as it
means “peace, salvation, and obedience.” Since everything obeys
God absolutely and functions according to His laws, all creatures
are muslim. Every being’s bodily structure, regardless of religion or
lack thereof, whether they are human or jinn, are muslim, for all
bodies operate according to the laws God Almighty determined for
them. If a new-born could lead a completely monastic life free of
environmental effects, he or she would remain a natural Muslim.
This hadith also means that a new-born’s mind is like a tape on
which anything can be recorded, a lump of dough that can be
shaped in any way, a blank paper on which anything can be writ-
ten. If you could protect your mind from any external source of cor-
ruption, you could receive anything related to Islam easily and
become a perfect Muslim. But if your mind becomes impure, or
you inject into it the tenets, beliefs, and conduct of another religion
(or of atheism), you either will adopt another faith or encounter
many problems on your way to becoming a good Muslim.
New-borns resemble seeds that can produce good Muslims,
for they are all seeds of future Muslims. Adverse conditions
cause these seeds to be deformed or spoiled, and these people
eventually adopt another faith or none at all. Therefore, to raise
good Muslims, we have to do our best to improve our familial
and surrounding social conditions. After children reach puberty,
sins are a primary cause of deformed seeds. As every sin has the
potential to lead people to unbelief, we must protect ourselves
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
123

--- Sayfa 136 ---
against sin. Family, education, and social environment are also
of great importance.
Question: What does guidance mean, and can we guide
someone else?
Answer: Guidance is a light that God kindles in you because
you use your own free will in the way of belief. Only God guides
one to the truth, as pointed out repeatedly in the Qur’an: If God
willed, he could have brought them all to the guidance (6:35); If it
had been your Lord’s will, all who are on Earth would have believed,
altogether (10:99); You do not guide whom you like, but God guides
whom He wills (28:56); and For verily You cannot make the dead
hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned
to flee. Nor can you guide the blind out of their deviation. You can
make none hear save those who believe in Our Revelation so that they
surrender and become Muslims (30:52-53).
Since God guides, we implore Him in every rak‘a of our
daily prescribed prayers, saying: Guide us to the Straight Path
(1:6). God’s Messenger says: “I have been sent to call people to
belief. Only God guides them and places belief in their hearts.”
The Qur’an also states that God’s Messenger calls and guides
people to the Straight Path, such as in: Surely you call them to the
Straight Path (23:73); and Thus We have revealed a Spirit to you
from Our Command. You did not know what was the Scripture, nor
what the Faith was, but We have made it a light whereby We guide
whom We will of Our servants. You are indeed guiding to a Straight
Path (42:52).
The verses do not contradict each other. God creates every-
one with the potential to accept belief, but both the family and
existing educational and social conditions have a certain role in
one’s guidance or misguidance. To call people to belief, God
sent Messengers, some of whom received Revealed Books, so
that people could reform themselves. Prophet Muhammad is
the last Messenger, and the Revealed Qur’an is the last and only
uncorrupted Divine Book.
The Qur’an contains the principles of guidance. The Messenger
provides guidance, whether through the Book or his personality,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
124

--- Sayfa 137 ---
conduct, and good example. He recites the Divine Revelations,
shows God’s signs to his people (or to humanity at large, in the
case of Prophet Muhammad), and points out their misconcep-
tions, superstitions, and sins.
Every thing, event, and phenomenon is a sign pointing to
God’s Existence and Unity. Therefore, if we believe sincerely and
without prejudice, struggle against carnal desire and the tempta-
tions of the evil-commanding self and Satan, and use our free
will to find the truth, God will guide us to a way leading to Him.
He declares in the Qur’an:
Fear God and seek the means [of approach to and knowledge
of] Him, and strive in His way in order that you may succeed
and be prosperous [in both worlds]. (5:35)
As for those who strive in Us [in Our way and for Our sake and
to reach Us], We guide them to Our paths; and God is with the
good. (29:69)
Those who fear God [and keep their duty to Him], He will
appoint a way out for them. (65:2)
In order to find or deserve guidance, we must sincerely strive
for it and search for the ways leading to it. Those whom God bless-
es with guidance should first show that they have received it by set-
ting a good example, and then call others to it through every law-
ful (Islamic) means. God repeatedly commands His Messenger to
do just that in these, and other, verses:
Warn your tribe of near kindred [of their end, the consequences
of their deeds, and the punishment of Hell]. (26:214)
Remind and give advice, for you are one to remind. (88:21)
Proclaim openly and insistently what you are commanded. (15: 94)
Call to the path of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation,
and reason with them in the most courteous manner. (16:125)
Surely in the Messenger of God you have a good example for
him who hopes for God and the Last Day, and remembers God
oft. (33:21)
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
125

--- Sayfa 138 ---
God’s Messenger conveyed God’s Revelations to people, called
them to belief in the best and most effective way, and endured
great difficulty and persecution for doing so. He refused the most
alluring bribes designed to make him stop calling people to belief
in One God, and continued his mission without expecting any
worldly reward. Seeking only God’s pleasure and the prosperity of
people in both worlds, when he conquered Makka (with God’s
help) and made God’s Word prevail, he forgave the Makkans who
had persecuted him ruthlessly for 21 years, saying: “No reproach,
this day, shall be on you. God will forgive you, (for) He is the
Most Merciful of the Merciful. Go! You are freed!”6
God’s Messenger once said to ‘Ali: “If someone finds guid-
ance at your hand, this is better for you than having red camels.”7
According to the rule of “the one who causes is like the doer,” one
who leads someone else to guidance receives whatever the latter
earns, without any decrease in his or her own reward. Similarly,
God’s Messenger says:
Whoever establishes a good path receives the same reward as
those who follow that path thereafter until the Last Day without
any decrease in their reward; whoever establishes an evil path is
burdened with the same sins as those who follow it thereafter
until the Last Day, without any decrease in their burden.8
If you lead other people to guidance, never remind them by
saying, for example: “You found guidance only because of me.”
This is a grave sin and ingratitude to God, for only God guides
and causes you to lead others to guidance. Similarly, those guid-
ed through you should never say, for example: “Without you, I
would never have been guided.”
If you lead others to guidance, you should think: “Praise be
to God, for He has used such a poor and needy one like me to
achieve this meritorious deed. God is so powerful, merciful, and
munificent to His servants that He creates clusters of grapes on
wood. As wood has no right to ascribe to itself the grapes grow-
ing on it, I cannot attribute another’s guidance to myself.” As
for those who find guidance, they should think: “God, my Master,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
126

--- Sayfa 139 ---
saw my need and helplessness and allowed His servant to lead
me to guidance. All praise be to Him.”
Nevertheless, those who are led to guidance can feel thank-
ful to the one whom God used to guide them. After all, since
God created us and our actions, He also creates the means that
enable guidance and misguidance. But this does not negate or
diminish the part of our own free will in our guidance or mis-
guidance.
ENDNOTE: Qur’anic point of view about human free will
Most Western Orientalists accuse Islam of being fatalistic, al-
though only one small Islamic sect (the Jabriya) has ever defend-
ed fatalism. On the contrary, almost all Western philosophies of
history and, to some extent, Christianity, are fatalistic and based
on the supposed irresistibility of historical laws. The outlines of
those philosophies of history may be summed up as follows:
•
Humanity is steadily progressing toward the final happy end.
•
This progress depends on the fatalistic, irresistible laws of histo-
ry, which are completely independent of humanity. Therefore,
we must obey these laws if we do not want to be eliminated.
•
We cannot criticize the stages (e.g., primitive, feudal, or
capitalistic) through which we must inevitably pass, because
we have nothing to do other than to pass through them.
Such views imply the following: Present socioeconomic and
even political conditions are inevitable, because they were dic-
tated by nature, which decrees that only the able and the pow-
erful can survive. If these laws favor the West, the communities
that choose to survive must concede to the West’s dominion.
What distinguishes the Qur’anic concept of history from oth-
er philosophies is the following:
•
While philosophers of history or sociologists build their con-
ceptions on the interpretation of past events and present sit-
uations, the Qur’an deals with the matter from the perspec-
tive of unchanging principles.
•
The Qur’an stresses individual and communal free choice
and moral conduct. Although Divine Will could be regard-
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
127

--- Sayfa 140 ---
ed as, in some respects, the counterpart of Geist in Hegelian
philosophy and of absolute, irresistible laws of history in
other philosophies, the Qur’an never denies human free will.
God tests humanity here so that it should sow the “field” of
the world to harvest in the next, eternal life. For this reason,
all that happens here are occasions that God causes to follow
one another so that good and evil people may be distin-
guished. Testing requires that the one being tested have free
will to choose. Thus, according to the Qur’an, we are the ones
who make history, not a compelling Divine Will. God simply
uses our choice to bring His universal will into effect. If this
point is understood, the Western philosophies of history and
their conception of some “inevitable end” are seen to be ground-
less. (Tr.)
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
128

--- Sayfa 141 ---
CHAPTER 4
The Resurrection and the Afterlife

--- Sayfa 143 ---
THE RESURRECTION AND THE AFTERLIFE
THE BENEFITS OF BELIEF IN THE RESURRECTION
A
fter belief in God, belief in the Resurrection has the pri-
mary place in securing a peaceful social order. Why should
those who do not believe that they will be called to
account strive to live an honest, upright life? But those of us who
are convinced of this final reckoning in the other world certainly
try to live a disciplined and upright life. The Qur’an declares:
In whatever affair you may be, and whichever part of the Qur’an
you recite, and whatever deed you do, We are witness over you
when you are deeply engrossed therein. Not an atom’s weight
in the Earth and in the heaven escapes your Lord, nor is there
anything smaller or greater, but it is in a Manifest Book. (10:61)
Certain angels are entrusted with recording everything that
we do. God also has full knowledge and awareness of all our
deeds, intentions, thoughts, and imaginings. Those who under-
stand this (and act accordingly) will find true peace and happi-
ness in both worlds. A family and community composed of such
individuals would feel that they were living in Paradise.
Belief in the Resurrection prevents young people from wast-
ing their lives in transitory and trivial things, and gives hope to
the elderly as they move closer to the grave. It also helps children
endure the death of loved ones. Children who believe that they
will be reunited with their deceased loved ones in a far better
world find true consolation in the Resurrection. Everyone, regard-
less of age, gender, and any other artificial human-devised differ-
ence, needs belief in the Resurrection as much as they need air,
water, and bread.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
As this belief leads people to a life of peace, intellectuals
who seek public peace and security should emphasize it. Those
who are convinced of what the Qur’an declares—Whoever does
an atom’s weight of good shall see it, and whoever does an atom’s
weight of evil shall see it (99:7-8)—live a responsible life, and a
community composed of such people finds true peace and hap-
piness. When this belief is inculcated in the hearts of young peo-
ple, they will no longer be a harmful social element, but rather
will seek to serve their nation and humanity.
Children are very sensitive and delicate. Extremely suscepti-
ble to misfortune, they also are easily affected by what happens
to them and their families. When they lose a family member or
become orphans, their world is darkened and they fall into deep
distress and despair. When one of my sisters died during my
childhood, I was devastated. I frequently went to her grave and
prayed from the bottom of my heart: “O God! Please bring her
back to life again and let me see her beautiful face once more, or
let me die so as to be reunited with her.” So, what else other
than belief in the Resurrection and reunion with deceased loved
ones can compensate for the loss of parents, brothers and sisters,
and friends? Children will find true consolation only when they
are convinced that their beloved ones have flown to Paradise,
and that they will be reunited with them.
How can you compensate the elderly for their past years,
their childhood and youth that have been left behind? How can
you console them for the loss of their loved ones who preceded
them in death? How can you remove the fear of death and the
grave from their hearts? How can you make them forget death,
which they feel so deeply? Will more and newer worldly pleasures
console them? Only convincing them that the grave, which seems
to them like an openmouthed dragon just waiting to devour
them, is really a door to another and much better world, or sim-
ply a lovely waiting room opening onto that world, can compen-
sate and console them for such losses.
In its inimitable style, the Qur’an voices such feelings through
Prophet Zechariah:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
132

--- Sayfa 145 ---
This is a mention of your Lord’s mercy unto His servant
Zechariah; when he invoked Him with a secret, sincere call,
saying: “My Lord, my very bones have become rotten and my
head is shining with gray hair. My Lord! I have never been dis-
appointed in my prayer to You.” (19:2-5)
Fearing that his kinsmen would not be sufficiently loyal to
his mission after his death, Prophet Zechariah appealed to his
Master for a male heir to his mission. This is the cry of all old
people. Belief in God and the Resurrection gives them the good
news: “Do not be afraid of death, for death is not eternal extinc-
tion. It is only a change of worlds, a discharge from your life’s
distressing duties, a passport to an eternal world where all kinds
of beauty and blessings wait for you. The Merciful One Who
sent you to the world, and has kept you alive therein for so long,
will not leave you in the grave’s darkness and dark corridors
opening onto the other world. He will take you to His Presence,
give you an eternal and ever-happy life, and bless you with all
the bounties of Paradise.” Only such good news as this can con-
sole the elderly and enable them to welcome death with a smile.
Our free will, which we use to direct our life, makes us unique
among all creatures. Free will is the manifestation of Divine Mercy
and, if used properly, will cause us to be rewarded with the fruits
of Mercy. Belief in the Resurrection is a most important and com-
pelling factor urging us to use our free will properly and not to
wrong or harm others.
Sahl ibn Sa‘d narrates that God’s Messenger was told of a
young man who stayed at home for days. The Messenger went
to visit him. When the young man saw him appear unexpected-
ly, he threw himself into the Messenger’s arms and died instant-
ly. The Messenger told those around him: “Lay out your friend’s
corpse. Fear of Hell frightened him deeply. I swear by Him in
Whose hand my life is that God will surely protect him from
Hell.”1 The Qur’an declares: Those who fear to stand before their
Lord and curb the desires of the carnal self, Paradise will be their
dwelling place (79:40-41).
In a hadith qudsi, God says: “I will not unite two securities,
nor two fears.”2 In other words, those who fear His punishment
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
133

--- Sayfa 146 ---
here will be protected from His punishment there, while those
who do not fear His punishment here will not be saved from it
there.
‘Umar said, upon seeing a young man bravely protesting
and resisting an injustice: “Any people deprived of the young are
doomed to extinction.” Young people have a transforming ener-
gy. If you let them waste it in triviality and indulgence, you
undermine your own nation’s future. Belief in the Resurrection
stops young people from committing atrocities and wasting
their energies on passing pleasures, and directs them to lead a
disciplined, useful, and virtuous life.
Belief in the Resurrection also consoles the sick. A believer
with an incurable illness thinks: “I am dying; no one can pro-
long my life. Everyone must die. Fortunately, I am going to a
place (Paradise) where I will recover my health and youth, and
enjoy them forever.” Secure in this knowledge, all beloved ser-
vants of God, Prophets and saints, welcome death with a smile.
The Last Prophet said during the final minutes of his life: “O
God, I desire the eternal company in the eternal world.” He had
informed his Companions the day before: “God let one of His
servants choose between enjoying the beauty of this world as
long as he wishes and what is with Him. The servant chose what
is with Him.”3 That servant was the Messenger himself. The
Companions understood whom he meant and burst into tears.
Similarly, when ‘Umar ruled over a vast area stretching from
the western frontiers of Egypt to the highlands of Central Asia, he
prostrated himself before God and sighed: “I can no longer fulfill
my responsibility. Let me die and be taken to Your Presence.” Such
a strong desire for the other world, the world of eternal beauty, and
being blessed with the vision of the Eternally Beautiful One caused
the Prophet, ‘Umar, and many others to prefer death to this world.
The world is a mixture of good and evil, right and wrong,
beauty and ugliness, and oppressors and oppressed. Many instances
of wrong (appear to) go unnoticed, and numerous wronged peo-
ple cannot recover their rights. Only belief in being resurrected
in another world of absolute justice consoles the wronged and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
134

--- Sayfa 147 ---
oppressed, and dissuades them from seeking vengeance. Similarly,
those stricken with affliction and misfortune find consolation in
the Resurrection, because they believe that whatever befalls them
purifies them, and that anything lost in a catastrophe will be
restored in the Hereafter as a blessing, just as if they had given
these items as alms.
Belief in the Resurrection changes a house into a garden of
Paradise. In a house where the young pursue their pleasures, chil-
dren have nothing to do with religious sentiment and practices,
parents are engrossed in procuring all fantasies of life, and grand-
parents live in an old-folks or nursing home and console them-
selves with pets, for there are no grandchildren around whom they
can love and who can show them the respect they desire—in such
a house, life is a burden difficult to bear. Belief in the Resurrection
reminds people of their familial responsibilities, and as they imple-
ment these duties, an atmosphere of mutual love, affection, and
respect begins to pervade the house.
This belief leads spouses to deepen their love and respect for
each other. Love based on physical beauty is temporary and of
little value, for it usually disappears shortly after marriage. But
if the spouses believe that their marriage will continue eternally
in the other world, where they will be forever young and beau-
tiful, their love for each other remains even though they gradu-
ally age and lose their physical beauty.
Such a belief-based family life makes its members feel that
they are already living in Paradise. Similarly, if a country orders
itself according to this same belief, its inhabitants would enjoy a
life far better than what Plato imagined in his Republic or al-
Farabi (Alpharabios) in his Al-Madinat al-Fadila (The Virtuous
City). It would be like Madina in the time of the Prophet or the
Muslim lands under ‘Umar’s rule.
To have a better understanding of how the Prophet built that
society, we provide several examples of his sayings concerning
the Resurrection and the afterlife:
O people! You will be resurrected barefoot, naked, and uncir-
cumcised. Listen to me with full attention: “The one who will
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
135

--- Sayfa 148 ---
be first clothed is Abraham, upon him be peace.” Heed what I
will say: “That day some from my Umma will be seized on the
left side and brought to me. ‘I will say: O Lord! These are my
Companions.’ I will be told: ‘You do not know what disagree-
able things they did after you.’ Then I will say as the righteous
servant [meaning Jesus] said: ‘I was a witness over them while
I continued to stay among them. When You took me You
became the watcher over them. You are Witness over all things.
If You punish them, they are Your slaves; if You forgive them,
surely You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.’”4
Since God created them, the children of Adam have not expe-
rienced an event more terrible than death. However, death is
easier than what will follow it. They will suffer such terror that
sweat will cover their bodies until it becomes like a bridle
around their chins, until it grows into something like a sea on
which, if desired, vessels could be sailed.5
People will be resurrected in three groups: those who com-
bined fear of God with expectation [fearing His punishment
but never despairing of His mercy and forgiveness], those who
[because they frequently “faltered”] will try to go to Paradise
“mounted on a mule” in twos, threes, fours ... or tens. The rest
will be resurrected into Fire; [since they constantly pursued sins
worthy of Hellfire], if they want to sleep in the forenoon, Hell
will go to sleep with them; when they reach night, Hell will
reach night with them; when they reach morning, Hell will
reach morning with them, and when they reach evening, Hell
will reach evening with them.6
God’s Messenger made sure that his Companions under-
stood exactly what Hell was, and roused in them a great desire
for Paradise by conveying its good tidings to them. As a result,
they lived in great consciousness of Divine reward and punish-
ment. They were so sensitive to religious obligations and the
rights of people that, for example, two of them once appealed
to the Messenger to solve a disagreement. After hearing them,
the Messenger said:
I am a human being like you, so I will judge according to what
you say. It is possible that one of you speaks more convincing-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
136

--- Sayfa 149 ---
ly and I may judge in his favor. However, God will judge right-
ly in the Hereafter according to the truth of the matter. The
wrongdoer will meet his due punishment, while the innocent
will meet his reward.7
This was enough for each Companion to concede his claimed
right. The Messenger advised them: “Divide the disputed goods
in half, and then draw lots. Each one should consent to his share
wholeheartedly and without regret.”
Sa‘d ibn Rabi‘ was severely wounded at the Battle of Uhud.
In his last breath, he whispered to Muhammad ibn Maslama, who
brought him greetings from the Messenger: “Take my greetings
to God’s Messenger. By God, I sense the fragrance of Paradise
behind Mount Uhud.”
QUR’ANIC ARGUMENTS
Although scientific findings like the second law of thermody-
namics show that existence is gradually disappearing, and even
a collision of two planets could destroy the universe. If existence
began with a big bang, why should it not end with another big
bang or collision? Existence is an extremely delicately calculated
organism, a system with parts subtly dependent upon each oth-
er. A human body is made up of about trillions of cells. Just as
a single deformed, cancerous cell can kill the entire body, any
serious deformation anywhere in the universe also could “kill”
it. Our death sometimes comes unexpectedly and without any
visible, diagnosed reason. Do we know whether or not the uni-
verse might “die” all of a sudden, unexpectedly, from a “disease”
or a “heart attack”? Maybe our old world has terminal cancer
because we abuse it.
God’s Universal Acts Point to the Resurrection
The Qur’an argues for the Resurrection. To impress upon our
hearts the wonder of what the Almighty will accomplish in the
Hereafter, and to prepare our minds to accept and understand it,
the Qur’an presents the wonder of what He accomplishes here.
It gives examples of God’s comprehensive acts in the macro-cos-
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
137

--- Sayfa 150 ---
mos and, at times, presents His overall disposal of the macro-,
normo-, and micro-cosmoses (the universe, humanity, and atoms,
respectively).
For example, the following Qur’anic verse stresses God’s Power
and, by mentioning specific instances of It, calls us to have con-
viction in our meeting with Him in the Hereafter:
God is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you
can see, then He established Himself upon the Throne (of
authority; having shaped the universe and made it dependent
upon certain laws, He exercises His absolute authority over it),
and subjected the sun and the moon (to His command); each
runs (its course) for an appointed term. He regulates all affair,
expounding the signs, that you may believe with certainty in
the meeting with your Lord. (13:2)
The First Origination of the Universe and Humanity Indicate
Their Second Origination
The Qur’an presents the phenomenon of the universe’s creation,
which it defines as the first origination (56:62), while describ-
ing the raising of the dead as the second origination (53:47), to
prove the Resurrection. It also directs our attention to our own
origin, arguing:
You see how you progressed—from a drop of sperm to a drop
of blood, to a blood clot suspended on the wall of the womb,
from a suspended blood clot to a formless lump of flesh, and
from a formless lump of flesh to human form—how, then, can
you deny your second creation? It is just the same as the first,
or even easier [for God to accomplish]. (22:5; 23:13-16)
The Qur’an makes analogies between the Resurrection and
His deeds in this world, and sometimes alludes to His deeds in
the future and in the Hereafter, in such a way that we can become
convinced of that which we cannot fully understand. It also shows
similar events here and compares them to the Resurrection. One
example is as follows:
Has not man seen that We have created him from a sperm-drop?
Then lo, he is a manifest adversary. And he has coined for Us a
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
138

--- Sayfa 151 ---
similitude, and has forgotten the fact of his creation, saying:
“Who will revive these bones when they have rotted away?”
Say: “He will revive them Who produced them at the first, for
He is Knower of all creation.”8 Who has made for you fire from
the green tree, and behold! You kindle from it. Is not He Who
created the heavens and the Earth able to create the like of them.
Aye, that He is! For He is the All-Wise Creator. (36:77-81)
The Qur’an likens the universe to a book unfolded. At the
end of time, its destruction will be as easy for God as rolling up
a scroll. As He unfolded it at the beginning, He will roll it up
and, manifesting His absolute Power without any material cause,
will re-create it in a much better and different form:
On that day We shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up
for books. As We originated the first creation, so We shall bring
it forth again. It is a promise (binding) upon Us. Truly We shall
fulfill it (as We promised it). (21:104)
Have they not seen that God, Who created the heavens and the
earth and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life
to the dead? Surely He has power over everything. (46:33)
The Qur’an likens the Resurrection to reviving soil in spring
following its death in winter, and mentions how God disposes of
atoms and molecules while creating us in stages. Dried-out
pieces of wood blossom and yield leaves and fruits similar, but
not identical, to those that existed in previous years. Innumerable
seeds that had fallen into soil now begin to germinate and grow
into different plants without confusion. God’s raising the dead
on the Day of Judgment will be like this:
Among His signs is that you see the soil dry and barren; and
when We send down rain on it, it stirs to life and swells. Surely
God Who gives the dead soil life will raise the dead also to life.
Indeed, He has power over all things. (41:39)
O humankind! If you are in doubt concerning the Resurrection,
(consider that) We created you of dust, then of semen, then of
a fertilized ovum suspended on the wall of the womb, then of
a lump of flesh shaped and unshaped, so that We demonstrate
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
139

--- Sayfa 152 ---
to you Our power. And We keep in the wombs what We please
to an appointed term, and afterwards We bring you forth as
infants, then We cause you to grow up, that you reach your
prime. Among you some die (young) and some are sent back
to the feeblest phase of age so that they know nothing after
they had knowledge. You sometimes see the soil dry and bar-
ren. But when We pour down rain on it, it trembles, and swells,
and grows of every pleasant pair. That is so because God is the
Truth, and He it is Who gives life to the dead, and He is pow-
erful over all things. (22:5-6)
Look at the prints of God’s Mercy: how He gives life to the soil
after its death. Lo! He verily is the Reviver of the dead (in the
same way), and He is able to do all things. (30:50)
God has brought you forth from the soil like a plant. And to
the soil He will restore you. Then He will bring you back fresh.
(71:17-18)
Especially in suras 81, 82, and 84, the All-Mighty alludes to
the Resurrection and its attendant vast revolutions and Lordly
deeds. Due to what we have seen here, such as seasonal changes,
we can formulate an analogy that will help us understand and
then, with awe in our hearts, accept what the intellect might
otherwise refuse.
As giving even the general meaning of these three suras would
take a great deal of time, let’s take one verse: When the pages are
spread out (81:10). This implies that during the Resurrection,
everyone’s deeds will be revealed on a written page.
At first, this strikes us as strange and incomprehensible. But
as the sura indicates, just as the renewal of spring parallels anoth-
er resurrection, “spreading out the pages” has a very clear paral-
lel. Every fruit-bearing tree and flowering plant has its own
properties, functions, and deeds. Its worship consists of glorify-
ing God and thereby manifesting His Names. Its deeds and life
record are inscribed in each seed that will emerge next spring.
With the tongue of shape and form, these new trees or flowers
offer an eloquent exposition of the original tree’s or flower’s life
and deeds, and through their branches, twigs, leaves, blossoms,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
140

--- Sayfa 153 ---
and fruits spread out the page of its deeds. He Who says: When
the pages are spread out is the same Being Who achieves these feats
in a very wise, prudent, efficient, and subtle way, as dictated by His
Names All-Wise, All-Preserving, All-Sustaining and Training, and
All-Subtle.
In many verses, the Qur’an warns us that we were created to
achieve specific goals, not to do whatever we want. As we are
responsible beings, whatever we do is recorded. Our creation from
a drop of fluid through several stages, the utmost care shown to
our creation and the importance attached to us, demonstrate that
we have great responsibilities. After death, we will be called to
account for our lives. In addition, our creation through stages is a
manifest evidence for God’s Power, Who raises the dead to life.
Does man think he will be left to himself uncontrolled (with-
out purpose)? Was he not a drop of fluid which gushed forth?
Then he became a clinging clot; then He shaped and fashioned,
and made of him a pair, the male and female. Is He then not
able to raise the dead to life? (75:36-40)
A close analysis of the universe’s functioning shows that two
opposed elements are prevalent and firmly rooted everywhere.
These elements result in good and evil, benefit and harm, perfec-
tion and defect, light and darkness, guidance and misguidance,
belief and unbelief, obedience and rebellion, and fear and love.
The resulting continual conflict causes enough alteration and
transformation to produce the elements of a new world. These
opposite elements eventually will lead to eternity and materialize
as Paradise and Hell. The eternal world will be made up of this
transitory world’s essential elements, which then will be given
permanence.
Paradise and Hell are the two opposite fruits growing on the
tree of creation’s two branches, the two results of the chain of cre-
ation, the two cisterns being filled by the two streams of things and
events, and the two poles to which beings flow in waves. They are
the places where Divine Grace and Divine Wrath manifest them-
selves, and will be full of inhabitants when Divine Power shakes up
the universe.
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
141

--- Sayfa 154 ---
In this world, oppressors depart without paying, and the
oppressed are still humiliated. Such wrongs will be brought before
the Supreme Tribunal, for God would be unjust and imperfect
if He allowed them to be ignored. Indeed, God sometimes pun-
ishes the guilty in this world. The suffering endured by previous
disobedient and rebellious peoples teaches us that everyone is sub-
ject to whatever correction God Almighty’s Splendor and Majesty
chooses to apply. So, as declared in the verse: Keep apart on this
day, O you criminals (36:59), God’s absolute Justice requires that
He separate the good from the wicked in the Hereafter and treat
each group accordingly.
GENERAL ARGUMENTS
Universal Wisdom Requires the Resurrection
God is absolutely free to do what He wills, and no one can call
Him to account. Being All-Wise, He acts with absolute purpo-
siveness and wisdom, and never does something that is in vain,
futile, or pointless.
When we analyze ourselves, as well as our nature, physical
and spiritual identity, structure and body, we realize that we were
created for certain important purposes. Nothing in our body is
superfluous. The same is true of the universe, a macro-human
being if you will, for each part of it manifests great purposes and
innumerable instances of wisdom.
We are unique, for we contain some aspect of all that exists in
the universe. Our mental and spiritual faculties represent angelic
and other spiritual worlds, such as the world of symbols or imma-
terial forms. But due to our inborn capacity to learn and to our
free will, we can excel even the angels. Our physical or biological
being represents plants and animals. Although contained in time
and space, our spiritual faculties and such other powers as imagi-
nation allow us to transcend them. Despite our unique and price-
less value when compared with other members of creation, some
of us die at birth and some others quite young.
In addition, we long for eternity and desire eternal life—some
of our senses or feelings cannot be satisfied with something less. If
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
142

--- Sayfa 155 ---
we could choose between eternal life with severe hardship during
this life and eternal nonexistence after a short luxurious life, prob-
ably we would choose the former, maybe even preferring eternal
existence in Hell to eternal nonexistence. The All-Merciful and All-
Wise did not condemn us to eternal nonexistence or implant with-
in us the desire for eternity so that we would suffer while trying to
fulfill an impossible, yet heart-felt, desire. So Divine Wisdom
requires the existence of an eternal world.
This World Cannot Judge Our Actual Worth
Although we have a small physical body, our mental and spiritu-
al faculties allow us to embrace the universe. Our acts are not
restricted only to this world, and therefore cannot be bound by
time and space. Our nature is so universal that even the first man’s
acts affects the last man’s life and character and all of existence.
Restricting us to a physical entity, a very short lifespan, and a lim-
ited part of space, as materialists do, shows a complete misunder-
standing and lack of appreciation of what each of us really is.
This world’s scales cannot weigh the intellectual and spiri-
tual value of the Prophets and their achievements, or the destruc-
tion caused by such monsters as Pharaoh, Nero, Hitler, and Stalin.
Nor can they weigh the true value of sincere belief and moral
qualities. What is the proper reward for a martyr who has sacri-
ficed everything for the sake of God, or for such universal human
values as justice and truthfulness; or for a believing scientist whose
dedicated research results in an invention that benefits all peo-
ple until the Last Day?
Only the other world’s delicate scales, which account for an
atom’s weight of good and evil, can weigh such deeds accurate-
ly: We set up a just balance for the Day of Resurrection. Thus, no soul
will be treated unjustly. Even though it be the weight of one mustard
seed, We shall bring it forth to be weighed; and Our reckoning will
suffice (21:47). Even if nothing required the Resurrection, the
necessity of weighing our deeds would require an infinitely just
and sensitive balance to be established.
All of God’s Acts have a purpose, and sometimes several pur-
poses. Based on this fact, His universal Wisdom requires the
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
143

--- Sayfa 156 ---
Resurrection. If It did not, we would have to deal with the fol-
lowing issues, among others. The Majestic Being manifests the
Sovereignty of His being Master via the universe’s inclusive and
perfect order and purposiveness, justice and balance. How could
He not reward believers who seek His protection as Master and
Sovereign, believe in His Wisdom and Justice, and obey them
through worship? Would He allow those who deny His Wisdom
and Justice, who rebel against or ignore Him, to remain unpun-
ished? As this impermanent world contains hardly any of His
Wisdom and Justice with respect to humanity, most unbelievers
depart unpunished and most believers unrewarded. Thus, God’s
Justice is necessarily deferred to a Supreme Tribunal, where each
individual will be rewarded or punished in full.
It is clear that the One administering this world does so in
accordance with infinite wisdom. Just look at how everything’s
use and benefit is manifested. Every bodily limb, bone, and vein,
as well as every brain cell and cellular particle, serves many wise
purposes. These facts show that everything is arranged according
to infinite wisdom. Look at the absolute orderliness in the fash-
ioning of everything, another proof.
In short, we were created for universal purposes. This is
even stated in the Qur’an: Did you reckon that We only created
you in vain, and that to Us you would not be returned? So, exalted is
God (from exerting Himself in what is vain), the Sovereign, the Truth.
There is no god but He; Lord of the Noble Throne (23:115-16). We
were not created for mere play or sport, and eternal nonexis-
tence in the grave is not our ultimate destiny. Rather, we were
created for an eternal life prepared for us by all of our actions, and
for an eternal world full of eternal beauty and blessing (Paradise)
or evil and wickedness (Hell).
Divine Mercy and Munificence Require the Resurrection
We notice that the more needy and helpless a creature is, the bet-
ter it is nourished. For example, during the first stages of human
life, we are nourished in the best way and without effort on our
part both before and immediately after birth. As we pass through
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
144

--- Sayfa 157 ---
childhood, youth, and adulthood, becoming ever more aware of
our personal strength and willpower, we try to meet our own needs
as well as those of our family members, often with great difficulty.
Similarly, foxes and other animals that rely on their power and
cunning are barely nourished despite much effort and toil, while
fruit-worms live on the best food and quite easily, and plants take
their food without effort. Such examples clearly show that One
absolutely Merciful and Munificent rules, sustains, and maintains
all creatures.
God’s Mercy and Munificence are Eternal
An Eternal One manifests Himself eternally and requires the
existence of eternal beings. His eternal Mercy and Munificence
demand eternal manifestation and thus eternal beings on whom
to confer eternal bounties. But our world is only temporary, and
millions of its living creatures die each day. What can such a fact
indicate, other than this world’s final and complete death?
This world cannot receive the comprehensive manifestation of
the Divine Names and Attributes. Nor can living beings, who expe-
rience great hardship and difficulty in maintaining themselves. For
example, we cannot satisfy all our desires and appetites. Our youth,
beauty, and strength, upon which we set our hearts, leave without
a word and cause us great sorrow. Also, we have to exert ourselves
even to obtain a cluster of grapes. If we were denied eternal nour-
ishment after having tasted it, would this not be an insult and a
mockery, a source of great pain? For a blessing to be real, it must be
constant. Without an eternal life in which we can satisfy our desires
eternally, all of God Almighty’s bounties bestowed upon us would
change into pain and sorrow. Therefore, after destroying this world,
God will transform it into an eternal one that can receive the com-
prehensive manifestations of His Mercy and Munificence without
obstruction, one in which we can satisfy all our desires eternally.
Divine Pity and Caring Require the Resurrection
These heal wounds and wounded hearts and feelings, cause a
patient to recover, end the pain of separation, and change pain
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
145

--- Sayfa 158 ---
and sorrow into joy and pleasure. They help human beings and
animals throughout their lives, especially before and right after
birth. Their mothers’ wombs are well-protected homes in which
they are nourished directly without any effort on their part. After
birth, Divine Pity and Caring provide them with breast-milk, the
best possible food, and their parents’ feelings of pity and caring.
All of these are a single manifestation of Divine Pity and Caring.
Although Divine Pity and Caring encompass the universe, here
we encounter wounds, hurt feelings, incurable illness, hunger,
thirst, and poverty. Why? As above, the answer is that this world
cannot receive the comprehensive manifestation of Divine Pity and
Caring. Our inability to do so, as well as our injustice to others and
abuse of our innate abilities, intervenes between beings and the
manifestations of Divine Pity and Caring. Above all, every living
thing dies. This arouses great sorrow in the heart, a sorrow that can
only be compensated for by belief in another, eternal world.
Once when God’s Messenger was sitting in the mosque, some
prisoners of war were brought to him. A woman looking for
something with great anxiety caught his attention. Whichever boy
the woman saw, she took him to her bosom and then left him.
When she finally found her son, she embraced him, pressed him to
her bosom, and caressed him with great affection. This caused the
Messenger to burst into tears and, pointing to the woman, he
asked his Companions:
“Do you see that woman? Does she throw that child in her
arms into Hell?” The Companions answered that she did not,
and the Messenger, upon him be peace and blessings, added:
“God is much more compassionate than that woman. He does
not throw His servants into Hell [unless the servants absolute-
ly deserve it].”9
Divine Pity and Caring will be manifested fully in the other
world, for that world allows no intervention, sorrow, and pain.
Divine Justice and Honor Require the Resurrection
God’s Names and Attributes are absolute and eternal. Therefore,
He is absolutely and eternally Merciful, Relenting, and Forgiving,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
146

--- Sayfa 159 ---
as well as absolutely and eternally Mighty, Just, and Dignified.
Although His Mercy embraces all things (7:156) and, as stated in
a hadith, “exceeds His Wrath,” some people’s sins are so serious
(e.g., unbelief and associating partners with God) that they deserve
eternal punishment. Besides, the verse: whoever kills a human
being unjustly, it is as if he (or she) has killed humanity (5:32) can-
not be ignored. This is especially true today, where might is
right, thousands of innocent people are killed daily, and many oth-
ers are wronged and deprived of their basic human rights. Even
worse, many of the most serious sins and injustices go unpunished.
Death does not discriminate between oppressed and oppressor,
innocent and guilty, sinless and sinful. This only can mean that
while minor sins may or may not be punished here, major sins
(e.g., unbelief, associating partners with God, murder, and oppres-
sion) are referred to the Hereafter’s Supreme Tribunal, where God
will dispense absolute Justice.
One day, those who thanked God will be welcomed with: Eat
and drink to your hearts content because of what you did in days gone
by (69:24) and Peace be upon you! You have done well. Enter here to
dwell forever (39:73). In this place, God has prepared for us things
we cannot even begin to imagine. Meanwhile, those who engaged
in bloodshed, sin, and other prohibited activities will be thrown
into Hell with the shout: Enter (through) the gates of Hell to dwell
therein forever: what an evil abode for the arrogant! (39:72).
Divine Grace and Generosity require the Resurrection. A saint
once asked Harun al-Rashid, an ‘Abbasid caliph, the following:
“If you desperately needed a glass of water, would you abandon
your kingdom in return for it?” The caliph answers that he
would. “If you could not discharge it from your body, would
you again give up kingdom in order to be able to discharge it?”
The caliph answers that he would. The saint concludes: “Then
all of your wealth and kingdom consist of a glass of water.”
We are provided with whatever we need for almost nothing.
The more necessary for life an item is, the more abundant and
cheaper it is in nature. Our most pressing need is air, which we
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
147

--- Sayfa 160 ---
receive free of charge. Then comes water, which is almost free.
God sends both of these from His infinite Mercy, and we make
absolutely no contribution. Then come heat and light, which we
receive from the sun for nothing. When we look at the rest of
His bounties, we see that they are extremely cheap. And yet we
still demand that He perform a miracle so that we might believe
in Him! Our effort to procure these blessings is minuscule when
compared to how they were produced. However, if these boun-
ties or blessings were only temporary and imperfect, our fear of
death would change them into poison.
Thanks to God’s being eternal, He will provide for us eter-
nal and ever-better forms of bounties, through His Names and
Attributes, free of charge. As these will be eternal, they will not
become a source of pain engendered by our fear of death. For
believers, death is a changing of worlds, a discharge from world-
ly duty, an invitation to the eternal abode He has prepared for
them, and a passport to that abode.
Divine Beauty Requires the Resurrection
Listen to a bird’s singing on a spring morning, the murmur of a
brook flowing through green fields or deep valleys. Look at the
beauty of spectacular green plains and trees in blossom. Watch
the sun rise or set, or the full moon on a cloudless, clear night.
All of these, and many more that God presents to our senses, are
but a single gleam of His absolute and eternal Beauty manifested
through many veils. By observing such manifestations, through
which He makes Himself known, we are enraptured.
Temporary blessings leave unbearable pain in our heart when
they disappear. If spring came only once, we would sigh over it
until we died. So, a true blessing must necessarily be eternal. In
this world, the Eternally Beautiful One shows us only shadows of
His Beauty in order to arouse our desire to see Its eternal and per-
fect manifestation. Moreover, He will allow us to see Him in
Paradise in a manner free of any qualitative and quantitative meas-
ure or dimension: On that day there will be shining faces, gazing
upon their Master (75:22-23).
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
148

--- Sayfa 161 ---
The Relation Between Things and Humanity
Indicates the Resurrection
There is a basic relation between humanity and this world. We are
born into an amiable environment and equipped with the required
senses. We have feelings like compassion and pity, as well as caring
and love, for there are many things here to which we can apply
them. We feel hunger and thirst, cold and heat. Fortunately, these
feelings can be satisfied with that which was prepared before or
with only a slight exertion on our part.
Consider an apple. Its color and beauty appeal to our eyes and
our sense of beauty. Its taste addresses our sense of taste, and its
vitamins nourish our bodies. Despite our need of its nutriments,
we might refuse to eat it if it were ugly and tasteless, and thereby
deprive ourselves of its nourishment. This, as well as many other
natural facts, shows that One with infinite Knowledge and Power
created us and prepared a suitable environment for us. He knows
all of our needs, capacities, and qualities, just as He knows nature
down to its smallest building blocks.
Another example is reproduction, which depends on mutual
love and attraction between a man and a woman. If our Creator
had not placed such things in us, if He had not allowed us to
enjoy the process of reproduction, and if He had not implanted a
great love and caring for our resulting children, we would never
have reproduced. The first and final members of our species would
have been Adam and Eve.
Death ends all pleasure and makes everything as if it had nev-
er been. Given this, if there were no Resurrection our life would
be a meaningless existence of suffering and pain. However, this
world is a shadowy miniature of the other, eternal one. The boun-
ties God bestows here are only examples of their eternal and much
better forms in the eternal world, and are displayed here to encour-
age us to act in order to deserve them:
Give glad tidings to those who believe and do good deeds. For
them there will be Gardens beneath which rivers flow. Every
time they are served with the fruits therein, they will say: “This
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
149

--- Sayfa 162 ---
is what was given to us aforetime.” They shall be given in per-
fect semblance. And there will be pure spouses for them, and
they will abide there forever. (2:25)
All joy and beauty, reward and happiness in this world point
to their perfect and eternal forms in Paradise; all pain and pun-
ishment, ugliness and unhappiness point to their likes in Hell.
God will use the debris from this world, after He destroys it, to
build the other world. Thus, the interrelations among things here
and between this world and the other point to the Resurrection.
Recording and Preservation Point to the Resurrection
Nothing disappears completely from this world. While our every
word and act is recorded and preserved, why should we not be
able to understand that God records all of humanity’s words and
deeds in a way unknown to us? Advances in science and technol-
ogy constantly provide new evidence for His Existence and
Unity and affirm, with the Divine origin of the Qur’an, the truth
of Islamic beliefs. The Qur’an declared centuries ago that: We
shall show them Our signs in the outer world and within themselves
until it will be manifest to them that (the Qur’an) is the truth. Does
not your Lord suffice, since He is witness over all things? (41:53).
If people sincerely search for the truth and are not blinded by
prejudice, ignorance, and worldly ambition and desire, every new
scientific advance displays the truth of the Qur’an. We see that God
enfolds everything in small things like seeds. For example, each
human being is enfolded in a sperm or in his or her 46 chromo-
somes. If we had 44 or 48 chromosomes, we would be something
completely different. Similarly, when we die and disappear into the
soil, our most essential part does not disappear, as discussed earli-
er, for God will use it rebuild us on the Day of Resurrection. God
preserves everything, and so nothing can disappear forever. For
example, a plant that dies in autumn or winter continues to live in
innumerable memories as well as in its seeds that will bring it back
in an almost identical form next spring.
Just as God preserves things in their seeds, He preserves
sounds and voices, as well as appearances and sights to display
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
150

--- Sayfa 163 ---
them in another world. Maybe one day these sounds and sights
will be discovered.
One time I heard of an experiment carried out by a scientist
trying to find a killer. The suspects were brought singly under
the tree where the crime was committed. The tree showed noth-
ing unusual until the guilty person was brought close to it, at
which time it began to react negatively. Somehow, the tree had
recorded the killer’s voice, manner, posture, or whatever he had
displayed during the crime. God preserves a human being in a
sperm, a plant in a seed, a hen in an egg, and shows us that He
records everything by enabling us to record and preserve sounds
and images. Given this, would He leave us, the noblest and per-
fect pattern of existence, to our own devices or allow our record
to disappear? Of course not; rather, He will resurrect us in a dif-
ferent, eternal world.
Divine Power Proves the Resurrection
Consider an atom. How it is formed and maintains its relation-
ships with other atoms are astounding miracles. Creating a solar
system or an atom, both of which have orbiting bodies, and then
regulating their movements and establishing their relationships
are equally easy for God. Similarly, a cell is like an autonomous
government. It has its own departments, each of which is inter-
related with others and ruled by a center, as well as a “ministry
of finance” that manages its income and expenditure. It is as if
each cell were as smart as the smartest person on the planet. In
addition, there are very close and substantial relations between
these cells, all of which are ruled by a center: the brain.
These are only a few examples of the Creator’s Power.
Everything is equally easy for Him. Creating and administering
the universe is as easy as creating and administering an atom. If
all people worked together, we could not create even one atom.
So, if the absolutely Powerful One says He will destroy the uni-
verse and rebuild it in a different form, He will do so. As God
does not lie and is without defect, His promises can be believed.
As stated in the Qur’an: The Day of Final Decision and Judgment is
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
151

--- Sayfa 164 ---
a fixed time, a day when the Trumpet is blown, and you come in mul-
titudes, and the heaven is opened and becomes as gates (78:17-19).
Death and Revival Indicate the Resurrection
An overall death and revival is repeated every year.10 In winter,
a white “shroud” covers the soil, whose yearly life cycle ends in
autumn. Nature has already turned pale and shows fewer traces
of life. The shell has fallen in and, ultimately, trees become like
lifeless, hard bones; grass has rotted away and flowers have
withered; migrating birds have left; and insects and reptiles have
disappeared.
Winter, which is only temporary, is followed by a general
revival. Warm weather causes trees to bud and, wearing their fin-
ery, present themselves to the Eternal Witness. The soil swells,
and grass and flowers start to bloom everywhere. Seeds that fell
into ground during the previous autumn have germinated and,
having annihilated themselves, are transformed into new forms
of life. Migrating birds return, and the planet hosts countless insects
and reptiles. In short, nature appears before us with all its splen-
dor and finery.
Consider the phenomenon of photosynthesis. A tree’s leaves
are lungs that, in the presence of sunlight, separate carbon diox-
ide into carbon and oxygen by giving off oxygen and retaining
carbon, which it combines with the hydrogen of the water
brought up through its roots. Out of such “magical” chemistry,
God makes sugar, cellulose, various other chemicals, and fruits
and flowers [all having a different smell, taste, color, and shape].
This same carbon dioxide and water help innumerable kinds of
fruit, each of which has a unique taste, to grow. However simple
a process this seems, the collective wisdom of humanity cannot
produce a single fruit.
This process of respiration causes a tree to spend a great deal
of energy, but also brings it much greater benefits. During the
night, this process is reversed: the tree takes in oxygen and gives
off carbon dioxide.
Consider what deliberate results these unconscious actions
produce. Then ask yourself if something so completely ignorant
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
152

--- Sayfa 165 ---
and unconscious of its own existence, and totally devoid of any
power of choice, could do such comprehensive things that obvi-
ously require an all-comprehensive knowledge, power, and
choice. So, the Power that gives a tree such significant purposes
and makes it bear many deliberate results certainly will not
abandon the fruit to its own devices. Humanity is the fruit of
the tree of creation. Would God abandon us and condemn us to
eternal annihilation? It would be illogical for God to create us
for many deliberate purposes and then let us remain eternally
mixed in the soil. He preserves a fruit in memories and through
its seeds, just as He returns the like of it next summer after pro-
moting it to a higher level of life in an animal or human body.
Given that, He will promote us to a higher level of life in anoth-
er world following the total destruction of this one.
God created the world and humanity when nothing of either
thing existed. He brought our body’s building blocks together
from soil, air, and water, and made them into a conscious, intel-
ligent being. Is there any doubt that the person who made a
machine can tear it apart and reassemble it, or that an army com-
mander can gather his dispersed soldiers through a trumpet-call?
Similarly, while reconstructing the world, God Almighty will
gather our atoms and grant them a higher, eternal form of life:
Say: “Travel in the land and see how He originated creation, then God
brings forth the later growth. Assuredly, God is able to do all things”
(29:20); and Look at the imprints of God’s mercy (in creation): how
He gives life to the earth after its death. He surely is the reviver of the
dead (in the same way), and He is able to do all things (30:50).
Many Other Phenomena Point to the Resurrection
Great care and many purposes are attached to even the most
insignificant seeming things. For example, cellulose is the struc-
tural tissue forming the chief part of all plants and trees. Its elas-
ticity allows plants to bend, and thus protects them from break-
ing. It is also important in making paper.
Cellulose is hard to digest; only enzymes secreted by cud-
chewing animals can dissolve it. However, cellulose aids excre-
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
153

--- Sayfa 166 ---
tion, for it accelerates the bowel workings and prevents constipa-
tion. Thus cud-chewing animals are like factories that change
substances with cellulose into useful matter. Their manure makes
an excellent fertilizer, for innumerable bacteria in the soil con-
sume it. This process increases the soil’s productivity and rids it
of foul-smelling things.
If such bacteria did not exist, living beings could not sur-
vive. For example, if all the flies born in spring did not disap-
pear into the soil, they would form a thick cover over the entire
planet. Through the manifestation of His Name All-Purifying,
God Almighty uses bacteria to clean the soil. Have you ever
considered why forests are so clean although many animals die
in them every day? They are so clean because carnivorous ani-
mals and bacteria consume animal corpses. Would God, Who
employs the most insignificant-seeming creatures for many
great purposes, allow us to rot in the ground and thereby reduce
our existence to utter futility?
Again, a healed wound shows the body’s vigor. A fruit
reminds us of the tree that bore it, footprints point to the one
who has passed by, and water leakage indicates a water source.
Similarly, our innate feeling of and desire for eternity are signs of
an eternal One and the eternal world. Moreover, this world and
its contents cannot satisfy us. We overflow with subtle, refined
feelings and aspire to lofty ideals that could not have originated
in matter and the material world. These are reflections of the infi-
nite, immaterial dimensions of existence.
Philosophers, especially Muslim ones, call the universe a
macrohuman and humanity a normo-cosmos or a micro-cosmos.
Like us, the universe is a whole entity consisting of innumerable
interrelated parts. Maybe an angel has been assigned to represent
it by serving as its spirit. Who knows? Like us, the universe also
can be injured and have, as Einstein puts it, new bodies formed
in its remote corners. It also has an appointed time of death, just
as we do.
We have so little knowledge about existence. As we increase
in such knowledge, we also increase, paradoxically, in our igno-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
154

--- Sayfa 167 ---
rance of it. Existence is in a process of continuous flux, and we are
little more than ignorant bystanders. Prophet Muhammad, God’s
Last Messenger used to pray: “O God, show me the reality of
things.”
Everything in the universe has a purpose. The universe’s eco-
logical system is so complex, and its parts are so interrelated, that
the lack or removal of one part would cause the entire universe to
be destroyed. To express this reality, God’s Messenger declared: If
dogs were not a community like you, I would order their killing.11 If a
tree’s bacteria were killed, we could not obtain fruit.
Every species and thing has an important and unique place
in the universe’s structure. Such a magnificent universe cannot
be purposeless. It functions according to a moving timeline: sec-
onds point to minutes, minutes to hours, and hours to the end
of today and the coming of tomorrow; days point to weeks, weeks
to months, months to years, and years to the end of our lifespan.
Existence has its own days in every sphere and dimension, and
its appointed lifespan one day will cause it to end.
Also, time goes in cycles. For example, a scientist has estab-
lished that corn is abundantly produced every 7 years, and that
fish are abundant every 14 years.12 The Qur’an points to this in
Sura Yusuf. The “life” of existence has certain terms or cycles:
the life of this world and of the grave, for example. The afterlife,
the last cycle, has many cycles or terms of its own. The Qur’an
refers to them as days, for a day is the shortest time-cycle unit.
It corresponds to the entire life of existence. Daytime reminds us
of this world’s divisions of dawn, morning, noon, afternoon, and
evening, which have their counterparts in our lives: birth and
infancy, childhood, youth, old age, and death, respectively. Night,
on the other hand, resembles the intermediate life of the grave
and the next morning: the Resurrection.
Almost all previous people believed in the Resurrection13
Even the self-proclaimed divine Pharaohs of ancient Egypt believed
in it, and so wanted to be buried with their most precious things
and slaves. We read in the inscriptions found in their tombs: “After
death, the sinful will take on ugly forms and remain under the
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
155

--- Sayfa 168 ---
ground forever until eternity, while pure souls will join angels and
live among exalted ones.”
On the sheets buried together with the dead, we also read
petitions like the following:
Greetings to You, O Divine Being Exalted! I have come to Your
presence in order to observe Your infinitely beautiful Face.
Please favor me with this observation. I wronged no one, nor
betrayed anyone. I caused no one to weep, nor killed anyone. I
oppressed no one, either. I am here in Your presence to present
my situation to You. I only desire to observe Your Face.
If we search through the tombs, epitaphs, documents, and
art of bygone peoples, we hear humanity’s sighs for eternity
echoing throughout time. Despite the alterations and distortions
that have crept in over time, we find clear evidence of a belief in
eternity in ancient India, China, and Greece, as well as in most
Western philosophies.
For example Shahristani, a Muslim historian and theolo-
gian, writes that Zarathustra said: “Humanity has a duty in the
world. Those who do their duties satisfactorily will gain purity
and join the dwellers of the higher abodes. However, those who
fail to do their duties will be condemned to stay under the
ground until eternity.”
India has always been home to many religions, although it
is highly probable that they are all distorted versions one true
religion. Despite this, however, almost all contain a belief in the
Resurrection and eternity. In many of them, belief in eternity
has led to belief in reincarnation. One exception is Buddhism.
Buddha did not believe in eternal cycles of reincarnation, but
rather that souls would ultimately return to the Absolute Being
and find eternal peace and contentment. Souls that enter other
bodies are evil ones, and do so in order to be purified. When
they are purified, they also return to the Absolute Being and
find peace and happiness.*
Homeros, an ancient Greek poet, writes about a soul’s shel-
ter. He believed that souls, which manifest themselves here in
bodies, have shelters in another place. Pythagoras, a Greek math-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
156

--- Sayfa 169 ---
ematician, believed in the Resurrection and argued that purified
souls would join the exalted dwellers of higher worlds, while evil
ones would remain imprisoned on the Earth, which would be
enveloped in fire. Plato attributes to Socrates many arguments for
the Resurrection and eternal life, some of which are as follows:
Man should be virtuous. To become virtuous requires resist-
ance against carnal desires. This means a deprivation on the
part of man. This deprivation will be compensated with an
eternal, happy life.
Opposites follow each other in the world. Light and darkness,
spring and winter, day and night follow each other. Death fol-
lows life, so another life will follow death. However, this sec-
ond life will be eternal.
Everyone sometimes feels as if he experienced something
before which is just happening to him now. This means that we
live this life in another world, the world of the spirits, before
we come here. So, this life is the result of a previous life and a
“rehearsal” of another life to come.
Although it is highly questionable whether this last argument
is correct, and although it suggests reincarnation, it is an undeni-
able fact that Socrates and his student Plato believed in an afterlife.
Aristotle diluted the idealism of his teacher, Plato, with some
elements of materialistic philosophy. However, he also believed
in the spirit’s existence and immortality, as he said: “Apart from
man’s material body, something immaterial exists in him, which
is immortal.”
Xenophanes and Heraclitus, both ancient Greek philosophers,
believed in an afterlife. The former held that, apart from our body,
we have a soul that continues to live after we die. Among the prin-
ciples of good morality he argued was: It is impossible for the One
Who has created the universe so beautifully and adorned it because
of His love for man, that He will not bring him back to life again
after he has made him die. Heraclitus argued: “During the Last
Day, stars will fall onto the earth and envelop it as a circle of fire.
Evil souls will remain in this fire as a punishment, while pure ones
will escape it and rise to higher abodes.”
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
157

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Except for materialists like Epicurus and Democritus, all
ancient philosophers in the East and West believed in the after-
life. Most Western rationalists who prepared the ground for the
Renaissance believed in the Resurrection and the afterlife. Among
them, Descartes argued convincingly for the soul’s immortality
and analyzed issues pertaining to the afterlife.
Leibniz and Spinoza also believed in another life. The former
resembled Plato in that, corresponding to Plato’s ideas, he spoke
of monads as the immaterial parts of beings that must develop infi-
nitely. As this cannot occur in this time-limited world, there must
be an eternal world in which they can realize their infinite devel-
opment. Spinoza, a pantheist, believed in an eternal, collective life
of beings. Pascal and Bergson also believed in an afterlife.
In the Muslim world, almost all philosophers believed in eter-
nal life. Even the irreligious Abu al-A‘la al-Ma‘arri tried to describe,
in his Risalat al-Ghufran, the Day of the Resurrection according to
Qur’anic verses. Dante appears to have adapted this scholar’s writ-
ings for his descriptions of Paradise, Hell, and Purgatory.
To sum up: Except for a few materialists, the long history
of Eastern and Western philosophy witnesses to belief in the
Resurrection and an afterlife.
THE RESURRECTION IN REVEALED SCRIPTURES
The Qur’an, the last heavenly Scriptures, has four main themes:
God’s Existence and Unity, the Resurrection and afterlife,
Prophethood, and worship and justice. It emphasizes the
Resurrection far more than all previous Scriptures.
Despite the distortion it has suffered, the Torah still has vers-
es concerning the Resurrection. The Gospel came to restore this
corruption and to affirm what had remained intact. However, it
also was distorted. Not long after Jesus’ departure from this
world, about 300 Gospels appeared and were circulated. Their
internal contradictions and those with other Gospels led to many
distortions that only grew over time. However, there are still
some Gospel passages about the Resurrection and the Hereafter,
such as the following:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
158

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heav-
en... Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God…Blessed are
those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven... Rejoice and be glad, because great is
your reward in heaven. (Matthew 5:3, 7-8, 10, 12)
Woe to the world because of the things that cause people to sin!
Such things must come, but woe to the man through whom
they come! If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it
off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life maimed
or crippled than to have two hands and two feet and be thrown
into eternal fire. And if your eye causes you to sin, gouge it out
and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life with one eye
than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of Hell.
(Matthew 18:7-9)
The dead will be raised physically and spiritually. According
to the context, the Qur’an mentions either spiritual or bodily
resurrection. For example: O soul at peace! Return unto your Lord
well-pleasing and well-pleased! Enter among My (righteous) ser-
vants. Enter My Paradise! (89:27-30).
These verses mention the soul’s return to its Lord. Many
other verses describe the Resurrection and the other world in
such material or physical terms that we must accept that it also
will be physical. The Qur’an discusses the truth of Paradise and
Hell, either in detail or in brief, in 120 places. While describing
these realms and explaining who deserves which one, it stresses
the combination of our soul and our body.
For example, the faces of the people of Paradise will shine
with happiness, and they will find prepared for them whatever
they desire. They will be together with their spouses and family
members who deserve Paradise. God will rebuild the women of
Paradise without defect and as virgins, and they will excel Paradise
girls in beauty. The people of Paradise will live in magnificent
palaces set in gardens full of splendid trees, beneath which will
flow rivers of honey, pure water, milk, and other beverages. On
the other hand, the people of Hell will suffer great remorse and
burn in fire. When their skins are scorched or burned completely,
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
159

--- Sayfa 172 ---
they will be exchanged for new ones. In addition, those bodily parts
with which they sinned will witness against them.
Hell, because of its terror, warns people to reject unbelief
and sin, and Paradise urges those with sublime feelings to strive
for perfection. And so the Qur’an mentions both Paradise and
Hell as a favor or grace:
This is Hell which the guilty deny. They go circling round
between it and fierce, boiling water. Which is it, of the favors
of your Lord, that you deny? But for him who fears the stand-
ing before his Lord there are two gardens. Which is it, of the
favors of your Lord, that you deny? (55:43-47)
ENDNOTE: Further explanation on Buddhism
Buddhism is regarded as a religion without a God or an escha-
tology. This must be largely due to its concentration on the indi-
vidual’s spiritual perfection and purification and a harmonious
social life. The Buddha stressed the supremacy of ethics, and his
outlook was definitely practical and empirical. In fact, he did
not tolerate any doctrines that appeared to divert the mind from
the central problem of suffering, the cause of suffering and its
removal, and the urgency of the moral task. Therefore it cannot
be said that Buddhism directly and absolutely rejects belief in a
Supreme Being.
The conclusion of Wendy Erickson, a Canadian writer who
became an agnostic while an atheist after her studies on God
and Revelation, drew on the “objective” nature of God is signif-
icant on this point:
In his book, Medusa’s Hair, Gananath Obeyesekeri has shown us
that even today Buddhist ascetics in India mystically experience
the divine as a painful (and simultaneously ecstatic) possession by
another being that completely takes over their bodies.
Experience has led people in all religious traditions to make
very different faith statements about the “objective” nature of
God or Ultimate Reality. Buddhists experience the Ultimate as
Oneness, Creativity, or Consciousness. Jews, Christians and
Muslims have sensed the Ultimate as transcendent Love, Power,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
160

--- Sayfa 173 ---
and, yes, Creativity too. Monistic Hindus perceive the Ultimate
as a hidden Self, or Atman, which is one with the Godhead,
Brahman. When Love is the predominant sense, transcendence
is often sought after through worship and compassion toward
others. Believers seek to get beyond themselves by recognizing
that the world does not revolve around them; there is an
Ultimate Reality that exists beyond their selves, is much bigger
than them and, in some sense, more real. Prayer can be seen as
one way for a believer to cultivate a sense of being in God’s pres-
ence. This Reality (God) also exists within each individual.
[http://atheism.about.com]
What Buddha said about his faith and mission demonstrates
that, rather than rejecting a faith or a transcendent reality, his real
aim was to found a society on moral values and the cessation of
pain in individuals:
Bear always in mind what it is that I have not elucidated, and
what it is that I have elucidated. And what have I not elucidat-
ed? I have not elucidated that the world is eternal; I have not
elucidated that the world is not eternal; ... I have not elucidat-
ed that the soul and the body are identical; I have not elucidat-
ed that the monk who has attained (the arahat) exists after
death; I have not elucidated that the arahat does not exist after
death; ... I have not elucidated that the arahat neither exists
nor does not exist after death. And why have I not elucidated
this? Because this profits not, nor has to do with the funda-
mentals of religion; therefore I have not elucidated this. And
what have I elucidated? Misery have I elucidated; the origin of
misery have I elucidated; the cessation of misery have I eluci-
dated; and the path leading to the cessation of misery have I
elucidated. And why have I elucidated this? Because this does
profit, has to do with the fundamentals of religion, and tends
to absence of passion, to knowledge, supreme wisdom, and
Nirvana. [Henry Clarke Warren, Buddhism in Translation (Harvard
University Press: 1922), 122; Majjhima Nikaya 63, in John B.
Noss, Man’s Religions (New York: Macmillan, 1956), 166. (Tr.)]
The Resurrection and the Afterlife
161

--- Sayfa 175 ---
CHAPTER 5
Prophethood and Muhammad’s
Prophethood

--- Sayfa 177 ---
PROPHETHOOD AND MUHAMMAD’S
PROPHETHOOD
G
od creates every community of beings with a purpose
and a guide or a leader. It is inconceivable that God
Almighty, Who gave bees a queen, ants a leader, and
birds and fish each a guide, would leave us without Prophets to
guide us to spiritual, intellectual, and material perfection.
Although we can find God by reflecting upon natural phe-
nomena, we need a Prophet to learn why we were created, where
we came from, where we are going, and how to worship our
Creator properly. God sent Prophets to teach their people the
meaning of creation and the truth of things, to unveil the mys-
teries behind historical and natural events, and to inform us of
our relationship, and that of Divine Scriptures, with the universe.
Without Prophets, we could not have made any scientific
progress. While those who adopt evolutionary approaches to
explain historical events tend to attribute everything to chance
and deterministic evolution, Prophets guided humanity in intel-
lectual—and thus scientific—illumination. Thus, farmers tradi-
tionally accept Prophet Adam as their first master, tailors accept
Prophet Enoch, shipmakers and sailors accept Prophet Noah,
and clock makers accept Prophet Joseph. Also, the Prophets’
miracles marked the final points in scientific and technological
advances, and urged people to accomplish them.
The Prophets guided people, through personal conduct and
the heavenly religions and Scriptures they conveyed, to develop
their inborn capacities and directed them toward the purpose of
their creation. Had it not been for them, humanity (the fruit of
the tree of creation) would have been left to decay. As humani-
ty needs social justice as much as it needs private inner peace,

--- Sayfa 178 ---
Prophets taught the laws of life and established the rules for a
perfect social life based on justice.
Whenever people fell into darkness after a Prophet, God sent
another one to enlighten them again. This continued until the
coming of the Last Prophet. The reason for sending Prophets
Moses and Jesus required that Prophet Muhammad should be
sent. As his message was for everyone, regardless of time or place,
Prophethood ended with him.
Due to certain sociological and historical facts, which
require a lengthy explanation, Prophet Muhammad was sent as
“a mercy for all worlds.” For this reason, Muslims believe in all
of the Prophets and make no distinction among them:
The Messenger believes in what has been sent onto him by his
Lord, and so do the believers. They all believe in God and his
angels, His Scriptures and His Messengers: “We make no dis-
tinction between any of His Messengers”—and they say: “We
hear and obey. Grant us Your forgiveness, our Lord; to You is
the journeying.” (2:285)
That is why Islam, revealed by God and conveyed to human-
ity by Prophet Muhammad is universal and eternal.
Describing Prophethood and narrating the stories of all
Prophets is beyond the scope of this book. By focusing on the
Prophethood of the Seal of the Prophets who told us about the
other Prophets and Divine Scriptures and made our Lord known
to us, we will make the other Prophets known and prove their
Prophethood.
Belief in God, the source of happiness, and following the
Last Prophet and Messenger of God are the keys to prosperity in
both worlds. If we want to be saved from despair and all nega-
tive aspects of life and attain intellectual, spiritual, and material
perfection, we must believe wholeheartedly that Muhammad is
the Messenger of God and follow his guidance.
PROPHET MUHAMMAD IN THE BIBLE
Almost all previous Prophets predicted Prophet Muhammad.
Despite the distortions suffered by the Torah, the Psalms, and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
166

--- Sayfa 179 ---
the Gospels, we find indications of his coming. For example, the
Torah promises this:
The Lord said to me [Moses]: “What they say is good. I will
raise up for them a Prophet like you among their brothers; I
will put My words in his mouth, and he will tell them every-
thing I command him. If anyone does not listen to My words
that the Prophet speaks in My Name, I will Myself call him to
account.” (Deuteronomy 18:17-19)
The phrase a Prophet like you among their brothers clearly refers
to a Prophet from the line of Ishmael, the brother of Isaac, who
is the forefather of Moses’ people (the Children of Israel). The
only Prophet who came from this line after Moses and resembled
him in many ways (e.g., bringing a new law and waging war on
his enemies), is Prophet Muhammad. Also, Deuteronomy 34:10
clearly states that no Prophet like Moses ever appeared among the
Israelites: “[With respect to his virtues and awesome deeds,] a Prophet
like Moses, whom the Lord knows face to face, no longer appeared
among Israel.”1 The Qur’an points to the same fact: We have sent
to you a Messenger as a witness over you, even as We sent to Pharaoh a
Messenger (73:15).
The sentence I will put My words in his mouth, and he will tell
them everything I command him, in the above Biblical verse, means
that the promised Prophet will be unlettered and speak whatever
is revealed to him. God states this in the Qur’an: He does not speak
out of [his own] desire. It is but a Revelation revealed (53:3-4).
The following verse: The Lord came from Sinai and dawned over
them from Seir; He shone forth from Mount Paran (Deuteronomy
33:2), refers to the Prophethood of Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad,
respectively. Moses spoke to God and received the Torah at Sinai;
Prophet received Divine Revelation at Seir, a place in Palestine;
and God manifested Himself to humanity for the last time through
His Revelation to Prophet Muhammad at Paran, a mountain range
near Makka. The Torah mentions (Genesis 21:21) Paran as the desert
area where Abraham left Hagar and Ishmael. The Zamzam well is
located there. As stated in the Qur’an (14:35-37), Abraham left
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
167

--- Sayfa 180 ---
them in the valley of Makka, at that time an uninhabited place
within Paran’s mountain ranges.
The verse in Deuteronomy, according to the Arabic version
published in London (1944) and the Ottoman Turkish version
(Istanbul: 1885), continues: He came with myriads of holy ones; in
his right hand appeared to them the fire of the Shari‘a. It is almost
the same in King James’ version: And he came with ten thou-
sands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery Law for them.
This verse refers to the promised Prophet, Muhammad, who would
have numerous Companions of the highest degree of sainthood.
The fire of the Shari‘a alludes to the fact that he would be allowed,
even ordered, to fight his enemies.
In the Gospel of Matthew, we come across an interesting
verse in which Jesus said:
Have you never read in the Scriptures: “The stone the builders
rejected has become the capstone; the Lord has done this, and
it is marvelous in our eyes? Therefore I tell you that the king-
dom of God will be taken away from you and given to a peo-
ple who will produce its fruit. He who falls on this stone will
be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed.”
(Matthew 21:42-44)
This capstone cannot be Prophet Jesus, for the verses refer
to crushing victories won by the “capstone’s” followers. No people
were ever crushed because they resisted Christianity. Christianity
spread in the Roman Empire only after it underwent some changes
and was reconciled with Roman religion(s). Western dominion of
the world came via scientific thought’s triumph over the Medieval
Church, and took the form of ruthless colonialism.
Islam, on the other hand, ruled almost half of the Old World
for centuries. Its original purity was never diluted, its enemies were
defeated many times, and it successfully defended itself against
Christianity. Currently, Islam is once again rising as a pure, authen-
tic religion, way of life, and hope for human salvation. Moreover,
Prophet Jesus himself alludes to this by stating that the kingdom
of God will be taken away from his followers and given to a peo-
ple who will produce its fruit, as seen above.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
168

--- Sayfa 181 ---
Moreover, in a telling detail recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari
and Muslim, Prophet Muhammad describes himself as the “cap-
stone,” thereby completing the building of Prophethood.
Another reference to the Prophet is found in the Gospel of
John: Who is “the Paraklit, the Spirit of Truth,” referred to by
Jesus in the following verse:
But I tell you the truth: It is for your good that I am going
away. Unless I go away, the Paraklit will not come to you; but
if I go, I will send him to you. When he comes, he will convict
the world of guilt in regard to sin and righteousness and judg-
ment. (John 16:7-8)
In these verses, Prophet Muhammad is referred to as Paraklit.
It derives from the Greek word Períklytos (the “Much-Praised”).
Its Aramiac counterpart is Mawhamana, meaning Ahmad. Ahmad
and Muhammad are derived from the some root word “ha-mi-
da” meaning to praise, and mean the praised one. However, Ahmad also
means one who praises. It is highly interesting that Bediuzzaman
Said Nursi records that Prophet Muhammad was mentioned in the
Torah also with the name Munhamanna, meaning Muhammad,
the praised one. The Qur’an also states that Jesus predicted Prophet
Muhammad with the name Ahmad, a synonym of Muhammad
(61:6).
Further, Jesus mentioned and predicted the Paraklit with
various other names, but always with the same function, as seen
in the following verses:
When the Paraklit comes—the Spirit of Truth—who comes
from the Father, he will testify about me. (John 15:26)
I have much more to say to you, more than you can now bear. But
when he, the Spirit of Truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth.
He will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears, and
he will tell you what is yet to come. He will bring glory to me by
taking what is mine and making it known to you. (John 16:12-14)
These are only a few of the Bible’s allusions to Prophet
Muhammad. The late Hussayn Jisri found 114 such allusions and
quoted them in his Risalat al-Hamidiya.
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
169

--- Sayfa 182 ---
HIS LIFE
Prophet Muhammad’s life proves his Messengership and fore-
tells his Prophethood. Consider the following facts:
•
The extraordinary events on the night of his birth, the dif-
ferent character he displayed even as a child, and the mean-
ingful signs people of insight observed on him all meant
that he would undertake a great mission.2
•
Prior to his Prophethood, he opposed injustice and joined
organizations like the Hilf al-Fudul, which defended the help-
less and restored usurped rights.
•
Although of honorable descent, he did not live in luxury;
rather, he grew up as an orphan under the protection of his
grandfather and then his uncle. Whatever money he may
have earned by trading before and after his marriage went
to support orphans, widows, and the poor. Thus, he was
never wealthy and had no powerful backers.
•
Despite his community’s moral corruption, he lived an
extraordinarily chaste, disciplined, and morally upright life.
During his childhood, he intended only twice to attend wed-
ding ceremonies, but was overpowered by sleep on both occa-
sions. (Thus, he did not see improper things and practices that
Islam would later outlaw.) When he was 25 years old, he mar-
ried Khadija, a respected 40-year old widow. He only married
again after her death 25 years later. Those who knew him said
he was as shy as a young girl when he was proposed marriage.
•
Muhammad’s childhood and youth were a prelude to his
Prophethood. Even his enemies called him “the Trustworthy,”
for no one could deny that he was completely truthful and
trustworthy. People said: “If you travel, you can entrust
your family and belongings to Muhammad without hesita-
tion.” Once while the Quraysh were repairing the Ka‘ba, a
question of individual and clan honor arose over who would
reinsert the sacred Black Stone. To prevent violence, they all
agreed to let Muhammad decide. He asked them to bring a
piece of cloth, which he then spread on the ground. Placing
the Black Stone on it, he told each chief to raise their cor-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
170

--- Sayfa 183 ---
ner. When the Black Stone was raised to the required height,
he set it in its place.
•
Muhammad was unlettered. During his whole life, no one
taught him and no written culture influenced him. Toward
his fortieth year, he began retreating to Hira cave. One day he
emerged with a new, wholly authentic message to heal human-
ity’s wounds, and challenged all literary geniuses to produce
something like it.
•
His enemies never accused him of lying or cheating. To pre-
vent Islam’s spread, they labeled him a poet, a sorcerer, a
magician, or a lunatic. Sometimes they attempted to justify
their rejection by such false pretexts as: “If only this Qur’an
had been sent down to one of the great men of the two
cities (Makka and Ta’if).”
•
How could a 40-year-old man, universally acclaimed by his
society as completely honest and trustworthy, one who had
no moral and intellectual imperfection, suddenly and unex-
pectedly begin to lie and deceive his people without ever being
caught? Even enemies who had known him for years never
accused him of this. They never caught him in a lie, could not
meet his challenge to produce a similar document, and could
not discredit him. After years of warfare driven by base motives,
even his bitterest enemies (e.g., Safwan ibn Umayya, Abu
Sufyan ibn Harb, ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, and Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl)
finally accepted the truth of his message.
When he was entrusted with the duty of Prophethood, his
life did not change at all. There are also several other points to
consider:
•
If Prophet Muhammad nursed selfish aims and intentions,
why did he wait until he was 40 to claim Prophethood?
•
Until he was 40, no one had ever heard Muhammad give an
eloquent speech, talk on religious and metaphysical issues,
formulate laws, or handle a sword. How could he have changed
so suddenly from a reserved, quiet, and completely apolitical
man into the greatest reformer history has ever known? He
explains intricate metaphysical and theological problems, why
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
171

--- Sayfa 184 ---
nations decline and fall, and ethical canons; gives laws related
to social culture, economic organization, group conduct, and
international relations; and becomes so brave that he never
retreats in battle. He reformed his people’s modes of thought,
worldviews, beliefs, habits, and morals.
•
Prophet Muhammad blended many roles and his own per-
sonal excellences into one personality. He is a man of wis-
dom and foresight, a living embodiment of his own teach-
ings; a great statesman and military genius; a legislator and
teacher of morals; a spiritual luminary and religious guide. He
sees life comprehensively, and all that he touches is improved
and adorned. His teachings regulate everything from inter-
national relations to eating, drinking, sleeping, and personal
hygiene. He used these teachings to establish a civilization
and a culture that produced such a fine, sensitive, and per-
fect equilibrium in all aspects of life that no trace of a flaw,
deficiency, or incompleteness has ever been found in it. What
alleged shortcomings and imperfections deny him his right-
ful status as Prophet and Messenger of God?
•
Prophet Muhammad lived as the poorest of his community.
All of his resources were used to spread Islam. Despite his
greatness, he presented himself as the humblest and most
ordinary person. He sought no material reward or profit, left
no property for his heirs, and ordered his followers not to set
something aside for himself or his descendants. In fact, he
forbade his family and progeny from receiving zakat (alms).
•
Prophet Muhammad was extremely merciful. In Makka, per-
sistent persecution eventually forced him to emigrate to
Madina. However, when he finally conquered Makka with-
out bloodshed after 5 years of warfare, he forgave all of his
enemies, including the Hypocrites and unbelievers. He knew
who the Hypocrites were, but concealed their identities so
they could enjoy the rights of full citizenship to which their
outward confession of faith and practice entitled them.
•
Prophet Muhammad was particularly fond of children.
Whenever he saw a child crying, he would sit beside him or
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
172

--- Sayfa 185 ---
her and share his or her feelings. He felt a mother’s pain for
her child more than the mother herself. Once he said: “I stand
in prayer and wish to prolong it. However, I hear a baby cry
and shorten the prayer for the sake of its mother, who is
praying in the congregation.” He took children in his arms
and hugged them, sometimes carrying them on his shoul-
ders. As for animals, he once said that a prostitute was guid-
ed to truth by God and ultimately went to Paradise for giv-
ing water to a dog dying of thirst, while another woman was
condemned to Hell for letting a cat starve to death.
•
Prophet Muhammad was extremely mild and never took any-
thing personally. When people slandered his wife ‘A’isha, he
did not punish them after she was cleared. Bedouins often came
to his presence and behaved impolitely; he did not even frown
at them.
•
He was the most generous of people, and liked to distribute
whatever he had. After Prophethood had been bestowed upon
him, he and his wealthy wife Khadija spent all they had in the
way of God. When Khadija died, they were so poor that he
had to borrow money to buy a shroud in which to bury the
first person to embrace Islam and his first supporter.
•
According to the Prophet, this world is like a tree whose shade
is enjoyed by people on a long journey. No one lives forever,
so people must prepare for the journey’s second part: Paradise
or Hell. His mission was to guide people to truth by all per-
missible means, which he did. Once ‘Umar saw him lying on
a rough mat and wept, saying:
O Messenger of God! While kings sleep in soft feather beds,
you lie on a rough mat. You are the Messenger of God and
therefore deserve an easy life more than any other person. The
Messenger answered him: Do you not agree that [the luxuries
of] the world be theirs but those of the Hereafter ours?
Islam does not approve of a monastic life. It came to secure
justice and humanity’s well-being, and warns people against
over-indulgence. For this reason, many Muslims chose an asce-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
173

--- Sayfa 186 ---
tic life. Although Muslims generally became rich after the death
of the Messenger, caliphs Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Ali preferred
austerity partly because of their own inclination and partly to
follow the Prophet’s example strictly. Many other Muslims
made this same choice.
•
Prophet Muhammad was the most modest person. As he
attained higher ranks, he increased in humility and servant-
hood to God. He preferred being a Prophet–slave to being
a Prophet–king. While building the mosque in Madina, he
carried two sun-dried bricks while everybody else carried
one. While digging the trench around Madina to defend it
during the Battle of the Trench, the Companions bound a stone
around their bellies because of hunger; the Messenger bound
two. When a man began to tremble because of his awe-inspir-
ing appearance, the Messenger calmed him, saying: “Don’t
be afraid, brother. I am a man, like you, whose mother used
to eat dry bread.” A mentally unbalanced woman once pulled
him by the hand and said: “Come with me and do my house-
work.” God’s Messenger did as she asked. ‘A’isha said the
Messenger patched his clothes, repaired his shoes, and helped
his wives with the housework.
‘Ali describes the Prophet as follows:
God’s Messenger was the most generous of people in giving
out and the mildest and foremost of them in patience and per-
severance. He was the most truthful of people in speech, the
most amiable and congenial in companionship and the noblest
of them in family. Whoever sees him first is stricken by awe of
him but whoever knows him closely is attracted to him deeply,
and whoever attempts to describe him says: “I have, either
before him or after him, never seen the like of him, upon him
be peace and blessings.”
Other than conveying God’s Message by performing the
mission of Divine Messengership, who led such an austere life as
Muhammad? What can he be other than a Prophet? What sub-
stantial argument can one put forward against his Prophethood?
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
174

--- Sayfa 187 ---
HIS CHARACTER AND HIGH MORALITY
•
If a man’s universally admired accomplishments, wealth,
and fame do not change him, and he remains as humble as
he was at the beginning of his career, this shows an impres-
sive strength of character, morality, and virtue. Despite his
unparalleled achievements, which force even non-Muslims
and atheists to consider him the greatest person of all times,
Prophet Muhammad was poorer and more humble when he
entered Makka victoriously than he was at the beginning of
his mission.
•
One’s face reveals one’s inner world and character. Those
who saw Prophet Muhammad could not help but admire his
appearance and, if unprejudiced, acknowledge his truthful-
ness. For example, ‘Abd Allah ibn Salam, the most renowned
Jewish scholar of the time, believed in him at first sight, say-
ing: “One with such a face cannot lie.”
•
If a firefly declares itself to be the sun, its lie lasts only until
sunrise. Turkish people say that a liar’s candle only burns till
bedtime, meaning that a lie is short-lived. So, a deceitful per-
son pretending to be a Prophet would soon be unmasked, and
no one would accept his or her claim.
•
Even an unimportant person in a small group cannot lie
shamelessly and openly without somehow being discovered.
Prophet Muhammad challenged everybody to come until the
Last Day. He gave many important speeches to a large com-
munity concerning a great cause, all with great ease and free-
dom, without hesitation or anxiety, with pure sincerity and
great solemnity, and in an intense and elevated manner that
provoked his enemies.
•
An unlettered person cannot speak on something requiring
expert knowledge, especially to specialists in that area. However,
Prophet Muhammad spoke on every issue from theology and
metaphysics to medicine and history, physics and biology, and
has never been contradicted. He challenged his people’s strengths
(literature, eloquence, and oratory), yet nothing they composed
could compare with the Qur’an.
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
175

--- Sayfa 188 ---
•
People do not risk their life, wealth, and reputation, and bear
hardship and persecution for a lie, unless they want even
more wealth and higher worldly position. Before claiming
Prophethood, Prophet Muhammad was well off and respect-
ed. After Prophethood, he confronted great hardship and
persecution, and spent all he had for his cause. His enemies
slandered, mocked, and beat him. Finally forcing him out of
his homeland, they took up arms against him. He bore all of
this without complaint and asked God Almighty to forgive
them, for all he wanted was to see everybody believing in and
worshipping the One God exclusively, thereby prospering in
both worlds and being saved from the torments of Hell.
•
History is full of people who, saying one thing and doing
another, never attained a large and devoted following. Their
ideas did not change people permanently, nor did their sys-
tems outlive them for any length of time. However, Prophet
Muhammad sincerely and honestly practiced what he taught,
and was the most obedient worshipper of the Creator and
follower of the religious law. This shows his full conviction in
his cause and that he is a Messenger of God sent to guide
humanity to the True Path.
•
People’s characters are usually well-established by the time they
are 30, and do not change significantly after that. To change
one’s character after 40 is practically impossible. If, God forbid,
there had been any imperfection and blemish in Prophet
Muhammad’s character, it certainly would have appeared before
his Prophethood. Is it logical that a person recognized by his
community as its most honest and upright member would sud-
denly, at age 40, assume the role of a great liar and fraud to his
own people?
•
Liars can neither acquire nor maintain a large group of dedi-
cated followers eager to sacrifice themselves. Even though
being Prophets who never lied, Moses and Jesus did not have
such devoted followers. The Jews betrayed their Prophet—
Moses—when he left them for 40 days to receive the Torah
on Mount Sinai, by worshipping a golden calf made by Samiri.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
176

--- Sayfa 189 ---
Even after so many years of intellectual and spiritual training
in the desert, only two God-fearing men obeyed when Moses
ordered them to fight the Amalekites. As for Jesus, one of his
most devoted twelve followers [Judas Iscariot] betrayed him
and delivered him to his enemies.
The Companions were so devoted that they willingly
sacrificed everything for him. Although brought up among
a primitive, ignorant people without any positive idea of
social life and administration or a Scripture, and immersed
in spiritual and intellectual darkness, Prophet Muhammad
soon transformed them into the masters, guides, and just
rulers of the region’s most civilized, socially, and politically
advanced peoples and states. Their subsequent rule has been
widely admired ever since—even by those who continue to
oppose Islam and Muslims.
Also, innumerable universally acclaimed profound schol-
ars, famous scientists, and pure, spiritual masters have been pro-
duced by the generations following the Companions. How
could they establish a civilization, the most magnificent and
advanced of all times, by following a liar? God forbid such
a thought!
•
Prophet Muhammad was the perfect exemplar of high moral
conduct and virtue. He appeared among a desert people pos-
sessing only the most rudimentary level of civilization and
devoted to immorality. Who brought him up as the most vir-
tuous and moral person? His father died before he was born;
his mother died when he was 6 years old. He was then raised
by his grandfather and uncle, but how could they give these
perfections to him when they did not embody them to such
a degree? His teacher was God, as he himself said: “My Lord
educated me and taught me good manners, and how well He
educated me and how beautifully He taught me good manners.”
•
History has seen many virtuous people. However, no one
has ever combined all virtues and good qualities as perfectly
as Prophet Muhammad. Many generous people cannot show
enough courage when and where necessary, and many coura-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
177

--- Sayfa 190 ---
geous people cannot be so lenient and generous. But Prophet
Muhammad combined in his person all virtues and laudable
qualities at the highest level.
Virtue and good morality require balance. Excessive gen-
erosity becomes extravagance, excessive thrift becomes miserli-
ness, courage is confused with rashness, and dialectics or dem-
agogy with intelligence. Virtue requires knowing how to act in
certain conditions. For instance, the self-respect of the weak for
the strong, when assumed by the latter, becomes self-conceit;
the humility shown by the strong to the weak, when assumed
by the latter, becomes self-abasement. A person’s voluntary for-
bearance and sacrifice (of one’s rights) is good and a virtue;
when done on behalf of others, however, it is treason. People
may bear their own conditions patiently, but they cannot do so
for the nation. Pride and indignation on behalf of the nation
are commendable, whereas they are not on behalf of oneself.
Prophet Muhammad was perfectly balanced in his virtues and
good moral qualities; perfectly courageous when necessary;
perfectly mild, forgiving, and humble among people; perfect-
ly dignified but gracious; and more generous than all others,
but also thrifty and opposed to extravagance. In short, he was
the most perfect balance of all virtues and good qualities.
•
According to Muslim theologians, there are six essentials of
Prophethood: truthfulness, trustworthiness, communication
of God’s commands, intelligence, infallibility, and freedom from
any mental and physical defect. History records that Prophet
Muhammad had these six essential attributes in the most per-
fect fashion.
•
People often have to make quick decisions that might cause
them problems in the future. Prophet Muhammad’s great
achievements, made during the relatively short time span of
23 years, are without parallel in human history. He never
faltered, and his decisions always proved to be correct. Moreover,
his actions and words were both for his own people and for
all future generations regardless of time and place. As none
of his statements have ever been contradicted, no one can
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
178

--- Sayfa 191 ---
criticize his actions, words, and decisions. Can one who is not
a Prophet taught by God, the All-Knowing, have such intel-
ligence, foresight, sagacity, insight, sound reasoning, and
prudence?
HIS ACHIEVEMENTS
•
People usually consider their own occupations as more impor-
tant, necessary, beneficial to social life, and more challenging
than others. However, although every occupation has some
degree of difficulty and social use, educating people is far more
difficult and more necessary for a healthy social life.
Raising really educated people requires true educators
who have clear goals. But if such people are to succeed, they
must embody what they teach and advise to their students;
intimately know their students’ character and potential, as well
as their desires and ambitions, shortcomings and strengths,
and level of learning and understanding; and know how to treat
them in all circumstances, approach their problems, and get
them to replace their bad qualities with good ones.
People may not live according to their asserted “strong”
beliefs, have only superficial good moral qualities, or have
weak spots (e.g., open to bribery, insensitivity, hoarding).
How should we view educators who transform their students
by completely replacing their bad qualities with good ones,
and then proceed to establish a community to serve as a mod-
el for future generations; who transform the base rock, cop-
per, iron, and coal in their hands into silver, gold, precious
stones, and diamonds? Would such an educator not be con-
sidered extraordinary? What Prophet Muhammad achieved
in his 23 years as the educator of his people is far more than
what such educators do.
•
Not using force is another important dimension of a good
education. Penal sanctions, coercion, and military and police
forces can only succeed in “guiding” people for a short while.
If a transformation is to be permanent, people must under-
take it willingly, meaning that they must be convinced of its
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
179

--- Sayfa 192 ---
truth. No one has ever known people so comprehensively as
Prophet Muhammad, or has managed to transform such a piti-
less, crude, war-mongering, ignorant, and unyielding peo-
ple into a community that provides a perfect and complete
life and moral example for all future generations.
•
No one can guide people in every field of life. It is very diffi-
cult for anyone, however able and clever, to be an able states-
man, commander, brilliant scientist, and successful educator
simultaneously. However, Prophet Muhammad was the most
perfect spiritual and intellectual master, the most able states-
man and commander, the most efficient educator, and the
greatest scholar history has ever seen.
•
Prophet Muhammad was the foremost practitioner of all forms
of Islamic worship, and the most God-conscious Muslim. He
perfectly observed all details of worship, even when in danger.
He never imitated anyone, and excellently combined the begin-
ning and end of spiritual perfection. He is unparalleled in prayer
and knowledge of God. In his supplications and prayers, he
describes his Lord with such a degree of Divine knowledge
that no Muslim has ever attained a similar degree of knowl-
edge and description of God.
•
His faith was so extraordinarily strong, certain, miraculous, ele-
vated, and enlightened that no contemporary prevalent (and
opposed) idea, belief, philosophy, or teaching ever caused him
to doubt or hesitate. Moreover, all saintly people of all times,
primarily his Companions, benefited from his faith, which they
admit to be of the highest degree. This fact proves that his faith
is matchless.
•
Just as the Prophets’ consensus is a very strong proof of God’s
Existence and Oneness, it also is a firm testimony of the truth-
fulness and Messengership of Muhammad. History confirms
that all sacred attributes, miracles, and functions indicating the
truthfulness and Messengership of Prophets, are found in
Muhammad to the highest degree. Prophets predicted his com-
ing by giving good tidings of him in the Torah, the Gospels,
the Psalms, and other Scriptures (known as “Pages” in the
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
180

--- Sayfa 193 ---
Qur’an). Through their missions and miracles, they affirmed
and “sealed” the mission of Muhammad, the foremost and most
perfect Prophet.
Thousands of saints attained truth and perfection, per-
formed miracles, gained insight into the reality of things, and
made spiritual discoveries by following the Prophet’s example.
All of them assert God’s Oneness and the Prophet’s truthfulness
and Messengership. Their testimony confirms his truthfulness,
for they affirm the truth he proclaimed through the light of faith
and certainty coming from knowledge, sight, or experience.
Thousands of exacting scholars of purity, meticulous
scholars of truthfulness, and believing sages have reached the
highest station of learning through the sacred truths brought
by this unlettered man. The number of those who attribute
their success to the truth brought by him prove and affirm the
Oneness of God, the foundation of his mission, and the truth-
fulness of the Prophet, the greatest teacher and supreme master.
His family and Companions, whose insight, wisdom, and
spiritual accomplishment make them the most renowned,
respected, celebrated, pious, and intelligent people after the
Prophets, declared that he was the most truthful, elevated,
and honest person. This was their conclusion after having exam-
ined and scrutinized all of his thoughts and states, whether hid-
den or open, with the utmost attention to detail.
•
He displayed such steadfastness, firmness, and courage while
preaching and calling people to the truth that no hostility
from the contemporary powers and great religions, or of his
own people, tribe, and uncle, ever caused him to hesitate or
feel anxiety or fear. He successfully challenged the world, and
made Islam triumphant over all other religions and systems.
•
Let us go to Arabia in the Era of Happiness. That unlettered
man, who had never set foot in a school for military or civil
affairs, or for the law or science, presented a religion and law
that, when followed, ensure happiness in both worlds. People
of all times listen to his words. He easily solves all social, polit-
ical, and economic problems, and establishes such perfect rules
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
181

--- Sayfa 194 ---
that they leave permanent imprints everywhere. A great part
of his life is spent on the battlefield, where he functions as
the most able commander of all times. His behavior shows him
as the best husband, the most eminent and yet most compas-
sionate father, and the most amiable and loyal friend. He does
all this in so short a time as 23 years.
•
A leader must know his people thoroughly to educate them
and lead them to realize a great cause. Alexis Carrel, a great
twentieth-century French scientist and philosopher, still
describes human beings as unknown, as the most complex
and intricate of creatures.3 However, Prophet Muhammad
had such a comprehensive knowledge of his people that he
could educate them in such a way that they transformed them-
selves willingly to realize his cause. Knowing how to act in
every situation, his decisions never had to be changed or his
appointments to office rescinded. He succeeded in bringing
the most refined, well-mannered, and civilized society out
of an extremely backward, uncivilized, and rough people.
•
Not only did he eradicate his people’s savage customs and
immoral qualities to which they were addicted, he also equipped
and adorned these same desperate, wild, and unyielding peo-
ples with all praiseworthy virtues and made them the teach-
ers and masters of the world, including civilized nations. His
domination was not outward; rather, he was the beloved of
hearts, the teacher of minds, the trainer of souls, and the ruler
of spirits.
Despite all the advanced techniques and methods, mod-
ern communities cannot remove permanently so small a vice
as smoking. However, Prophet Muhammad quickly removed
many ingrained bad habits with little effort, and replaced
them with good habits in such a way that they became inher-
ent in his people’s very being. If people do not believe this,
let them go there with hundreds of philosophers, sociologists,
psychologists, pedagogues, and educators and see if they can
achieve in 100 years even a small portion of what the Prophet
achieved in a year.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
182

--- Sayfa 195 ---
•
The Prophet met all of his detractors with a smile. When the
Qurayshi leaders told Abu Talib to make his nephew aban-
don his mission, the Prophet answered:
O uncle! Should they place the sun in my right hand and the
moon in my left, so as to make me renounce this mission, I
shall not do so. I will never give it up; either it will please
God to make it triumph or I shall perish in the attempt.
On another occasion, a deputation of the Qurayshi elite offered
him all the worldly glory they could imagine if he would aban-
don his mission:
If you want wealth, we will amass for you as much as you
wish; if you aspire to win honor and power, we are pre-
pared to swear allegiance to you as our overlord and king;
if you have a fancy for beauty, you shall have the hand of
the most beautiful maiden of your own choice.
The terms would be extremely tempting for anyone, but they
had no significance in the eyes of the Prophet. He responded:
I want neither wealth nor power. God has commissioned
me as a warner to humanity. I deliver His Message to you.
Should you accept it, you shall have felicity in this life and
eternal bliss in the life Hereafter. Should you reject the
Word of God, surely God will decide between you and me.
The faith, perseverance, and resolution with which he car-
ried his mission to ultimate success prove the supreme truth
of his cause. Had there been the slightest doubt or uncer-
tainty in his heart, he could not have withstood the opposi-
tion that continued for 21 long years.
•
Great leaders have changed the course of history through
their states, empires, or revolutions. However, almost none
of them engendered so strong a unity of belief, thought, and
ideal among their followers as Prophet Muhammad. After
40 years of a completely apolitical life, he suddenly appeared
on the world stage as such a great political reformer and states-
man that, without any media or mass communications, he unit-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
183

--- Sayfa 196 ---
ed the scattered inhabitants of Arabian deserts. From belliger-
ent, ignorant, unruly, and uncultured tribes, he raised a nation
under one banner, law, religion, culture, civilization, and form
of government.
•
A leader must know people very well in order to win them
over to his or her cause. Most leaders promise power, wealth,
position, or a bright future; Prophet Muhammad conquered
minds and hearts and promised his followers God’s pleasure
and Paradise. His followers sacrificed themselves willingly and
preferred poverty and God’s pleasure and Paradise. He set the
example in his own family, always preparing them and his
Companions for eternal peace and permanent bliss, and dis-
playing it in his own life.
His daughter Fatima, his most beloved family member,
once came to him wearing a necklace. The Prophet asked:
“Do you want people here and in the heavens to say that my
daughter wears a chain from Hell?” These words were enough
for her, for they were coming from the mouth of one whose
throne was established in people’s hearts and who had con-
quered their minds. She continues:
I immediately sold the necklace, bought a slave and eman-
cipated him, and then went to the Messenger of God.
When I told him what I had done, he rejoiced. He opened
his hands and thanked God, saying: “All thanks to God,
Who protected (my daughter) Fatima from Hell.”
•
Suppose you are a school teacher or director who wants to
raise your students and employees to your own ideal. You
also are prepared to undergo any hardship to realize this goal.
Now, what would you do if they spit in your face when you
pass by, place a tripe over your head while you pray, slap you
in the face, throw stones at you and scatter thorny plants
where you walk, ambush you with daggers, mock you in
front of others, slander your wife, kill your relatives and muti-
late their bodies, attack you many times and even injure you,
and expel you from your native land? Could you bear such
cruelty and continue on your way without hesitation? More
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
184

--- Sayfa 197 ---
than that, could you forgive and even pray for them, saying:
“O God forgive them and guide them to truth, for they do
not know.” If you were taken to a Paradise-like place and could
choose between living there or returning to resume your mis-
sion, would you choose to go back? The Prophet underwent
all of this and still chose to return to his people and transform
them into the best community known to history. Would you?
•
The Prophet sent envoys to the Adal and al-Qarah tribes to
teach them Islam. However, members of the Hudhayl tribe
attacked them on the way, killed some and gave the survivors
to the Quraysh. Zayd ibn Dasina was among the envoys.
Before the Qurayshi polytheists executed him, Abu Sufyan,
who had not yet embraced Islam, asked him:
“I adjure you by God, Zayd, don’t you wish that Muhammad
was with us now in your place so that we might cut off his
head, and that you were with your family?” “By God,” said
Zayd, “let alone wishing that Muhammad were here in my
place so that I were with my family, I do not wish that even
a thorn should hurt his feet in Madina.”
Abu Sufyan remarked: “I swear by God that I have never seen
a man who was so loved by his Companions as Muhammad.”
This remains true even now, for history has never produced
a person who was (and is) more loved by his or her followers
than Prophet Muhammad.
•
Prophet Muhammad answered innumerable questions from
the polytheists, Jews, and Christians of his time on such wide-
ly divergent issues as religion, history, metaphysics, astronomy,
medicine, and so on. He answered without faltering, and his
answers have never been proven wrong.
•
Prophet Muhammad brought a law, a religion, a way of life,
a code of worship, a way of prayer, a message, and a faith that
was (and remains) unique. The law this unlettered man brought
is matchless in that it has administered, both justly and pre-
cisely, one-fifth of humanity for fourteen centuries. The dai-
ly practices of Islam, which originated in the Qur’an and his
own sayings, precepts, and example, has served for centuries
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
185

--- Sayfa 198 ---
as a peerless guide and authority for billions of people. It has
trained and refined their minds and souls, illumined and puri-
fied their hearts, and perfected their spirits.
After the Companions, who led humanity in all scientific,
political, social, administrative, economic and other fields of life,
many other worthy people appeared. I list only a few of count-
less such people: such saints and purified, meticulous scholars as
Abu Hanifa, Shafi‘i, Bayazid al-Bistami, ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani,
Imam Ghazali, Imam Rabbani, and Bediuzzaman Said Nursi;
such scientists as al-Biruni, al-Zahrawi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna),
and Ibn Haytham; and hundreds of thousands of literary
geniuses, commanders, statesmen, and other stars of humanity.
All of them followed in the Prophet’s footsteps.
In addition, such Western intellectuals and statesmen as
Lamartine, William Muir, Edward Gibbon, John Davenport,
L. A. Sedillot, Goethe, P. Bayle, Stanley Lane-Poole, A. J.
Arberry, Thomas Carlyle, Rosenthal, Elisee Reclus, Andrew
Miller, Bismarck, Leopold Weis, Marmaduke Pickthall, Martin
Lings, and Roger Garaudy have admitted that he is the great-
est person ever to have lived. Some of them even embraced
Islam. This is another proof of his Prophethood.
HIS KNOWLEDGE OF THE PAST
•
History is an important branch of knowledge. Unlike most
sciences, it mostly depends on historical documents or arti-
facts. Although we can acquire some knowledge of the past,
it is often very difficult to know the underlying facts, inten-
tions, and motives, for accurate knowledge depends on reli-
able documents. But reliable documents are rare, for person-
al inclinations, interests, prejudices, and other motives dis-
tort what actually happened. For example, if the Qur’an had
not been revealed, we would not have true knowledge of the
Israelite Prophets, especially Prophet Jesus, and the original
beliefs of Christianity and Judaism. We have only the trans-
lations of the Old and New Testaments, in which so many
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
186

--- Sayfa 199 ---
changes have been made that we can derive hardly any his-
torical truth from them.
•
Prophet Muhammad related many facts about past peoples
and events. Much of this information is in the Qur’an, which
informs us of past civilizations (e.g., ‘Ad, Thamud, Iram,
Sodom and Gomorra, and ancient Egypt) and peoples (e.g.,
those of Noah, Abraham, and Shu‘ayb). It also provides a gen-
eral historical outline of the Jewish people from the beginning
to the time of Jesus, particularly in the times of Prophets Moses,
David, and Solomon. Much of this information was revealed
while the Prophet was in Makka and had no contact with either
Christians or Jews. When he emigrated to Madina, Jewish and
Christian scholars questioned him on many topics and could
not refute his answers.
•
Some of this historical information is found in Sahih al-
Bukhari, Sahih al-Muslim, Sunan al-Tirmidhi, and other books
of Traditions. The Qur’an and the books have retained their
original, uncorrupted texts, and none of their information has
ever been contradicted; rather, much of it has been affirmed,
and we can expect further affirmations in the future. This is an
absolute, undeniable proof of Muhammad’s Prophethood.
•
Prophet Muhammad analyzed the causes and results of these
bygone civilizations and peoples. His historical accounts pre-
sented laws of history and broad psychological, social, and eco-
nomic principles concerning human individual and collec-
tive life. In addition, these masterpieces of literary style and
eloquence have never been equaled.
HIS PREDICTIONS
Normally, no one can know exactly what will take place at some
future date. Scientists are not even sure about natural events that
occur according to so-called deterministic laws, and state that
they cannot guarantee that the world will be in the same state
even a few seconds later as it is now. Sociologists and historians
speak of historical laws supposedly based on historical events or
the flow of history. History, however, has contradicted almost all
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
187

--- Sayfa 200 ---
of them, including such historians and supporters of various con-
cepts of a continual historical progress as Karl Marx, Max Weber,
Johann Fichte, Georg Hegel, and Johann Herder.
Only God Almighty knows the future. However, He may
favor whomever He pleases with some of this knowledge. Those
who are convinced about the news they give concerning the future
can only be Messengers of God.
Prophet Muhammad predicted many things, all of which
either have been confirmed by history or remain to be confirmed.
These are also found in the Qur’an and in books of Tradition.
Among them are the following:
•
The Byzantine and Persian empires were the superpowers
of that time. While the Makkans were persecuting the small
Muslim community, the Persians utterly defeated the Byzantines
and seized Aleppo, Antioch, and the chief Syrian provinces
(including Damascus). Jerusalem fell in 614-15; Christians
were massacred and their churches burnt. The Persian flood
of conquest spread over Egypt, reaching as far as Tripoli in
North Africa. Another Persian army ravaged Asia Minor right
up to the gates of Constantinople.
As a result, the Makkan pagans rejoiced greatly and redou-
bled their opposition to the Prophet whose Message was a
renewal of the Message of Jesus preached in Palestine. The fol-
lowing Qur’anic verses, revealed just at that time, gave certain
tidings of a very near victory of the Romans over the Persians:
Alif Lam Mim. The Romans have been defeated in a land close
by, but they, after their defeat, will be victorious, within nine
years. God’s is the command in the former case and in the lat-
ter, and on that day believers will rejoice, with the help of God.
He helps to victory whom He wills. He is the All-Mighty, the
All-Compassionate. (30:1-5)
No one at that time could have predicted such a reversal of
events. But the Prophet, conveyed these Divine Revelations
to his followers. Abu Bakr immediately bet the Makkan
polytheists that the Romans would be victorious in 9 years.
Heraclius, the Roman Emperor, attacked the Persians by sea
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
188

--- Sayfa 201 ---
in 622 (the year of the Hijra) and, after decisive battles and
three successive campaigns, routed them after a few years.
His victories happened at the same time as the believers defeat-
ed the Makkan polytheists at Badr. And so the predictions
in those two verses were proven true.
•
Six years after the Prophet emigrated to Madina, he left for
Makka to perform the minor pilgrimage. The Makkans met
him at Hudaybiya. After reaching a suitable compromise, the
Muslims returned to Madina. Some believers were not pleased
with this treaty. But the Qur’anic verses revealed after the treaty
proclaimed it a manifest victory and gave them a decisive glad
tiding:
In truth, God fulfilled the vision of His Messenger: You will
surely enter the Sacred Mosque, if God wills, in full securi-
ty; you will have your heads shaved, your hair shortened,
and you will have nothing to fear. He knew what you knew
not, and He granted, besides this, a near victory. He it is
Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the reli-
gion of truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all reli-
gion. God is enough for a witness. (48:27-28)
One year later the Muslims performed the minor pilgrimage,
and the year after they conquered Makka. Also, Islam pre-
vailed over all other religions for centuries and, if God wills,
will have global superiority in the near future.
•
Pharaoh enslaved the Children of Israel. God sent Prophet
Moses there to call Pharaoh to belief in One God and allow the
Israelites to leave Egypt with Moses. Pharaoh’s refusal opened
a long struggle. One night when Moses succeeded in marching
toward the frontier with his people, Pharaoh learned of his
attempt and set out after him. When Moses reached the Red
Sea, he touched it with his staff and a path opened. Pharaoh
followed him, but was engulfed with his legions.
While narrating this event, the Qur’an makes a very inter-
esting prediction: Today We shall preserve your body that you may
be a sign to those after you: although most men give no heed to Our
signs (10:92). Pharaoh’s corpse was later found floating on the
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
189

--- Sayfa 202 ---
Sinai’s western shore. Residents can still show you this land,
now known as Jabal Fir‘awn (Hill of Pharaoh). A few miles
away is a hot spring called Hammam Fir‘awn (the Bath of
Pharaoh).
•
A considerable part of the Qur’an concerns the Last Day. It
describes how the world will be destroyed and rebuilt, and how
the dead will be raised, assembled in the Place of Mustering,
judged and sent to Paradise or Hell. The Qur’an also gives
vivid descriptions of life in those two realms.
Among his predictions in the books of Tradition are the fol-
lowing:
•
‘Umar reports in a narration recorded in Sahih al-Muslim:
‘Before the Battle of Badr started, God’s Messenger, upon
him be peace and blessings, walked around the battlefield
and pointed to some locations, saying: “Abu Jahl will be
killed here, ‘Utba here, Shayba here, Walid here, and so
on.” By God, we found, after the battle, the dead bodies of
all those men in the exact places that God’s Messenger had
pointed out.4
•
Bukhari and Abu Dawud quote Habbab ibn Arat, who said:
Once, during the days of trouble and torture in Makka, I
went to God’s Messenger, who was sitting in the shade of
the Ka‘ba. I was still a slave of the Makkans. They tortured
me severely. Unable to endure those tortures any longer, I
asked God’s Messenger to pray to God for help and salva-
tion. But he turned toward me and said: “By God, previous
communities had to endure more pitiless tortures. Some
were made to lie in ditches and cut in two with saws, but
this did not make them forsake their faith. They were
skinned alive, but they never became weak against the
enemy. God will perfect this religion, but you display undue
haste. A day will come when a woman will travel by herself
from San‘a to Hadramawt fearing nothing but wild beasts.
However, you show impatience.”
Habbab concluded: “By God, what God’s Messenger predict-
ed that day, have all come true. I have personally witnessed it all.”5
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
190

--- Sayfa 203 ---
•
Bukhari, Muslim and Ahmad ibn Hanbal record:
While building the Prophet’s Mosque in Madina, the
Messenger told ‘Ammar: “What a pity O ‘Ammar, a rebel-
lious group will kill you.” ‘Ammar was killed in the Battle
of Siffin by the supporters of Mu‘awiya, who rebelled against
Caliph ‘Ali.6
•
Before his death, the Messenger called his daughter Fatima
to his bedside and informed her that she would be the first
family member to join him after his death.7 She died 6 months
later.
•
He predicted the Mongol invasion, saying: “The Hour will not
come before you fight against a people with red faces, small,
slanting eyes, and flat noses. They wear hairy leather boots.”8
•
As related by Hakim, Tirmidhi, Ibn Hanbal, and Ibn Maja,
by repeatedly declaring: “After my death, you should follow
the way of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar,”9 the Prophet meant that
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar would succeed him as caliphs. He also
predicted that Abu Bakr’s reign would be short, whereas ‘Umar
would remain longer and make many conquests.
•
According to authentic narrations, the Prophet, told his com-
munity that they would conquer Damascus, Jerusalem, Iraq,
Persia, Istanbul (Constantinople), and Cyprus, and that Islam
would reach as far as the easternmost and western-most parts
of the world.10
•
The Prophet declared: “This affair began with Prophethood
and as a mercy; then it will be mercy and Caliphate; afterwards
it will change into a cruel monarchy, and finally into an iniq-
uity and tyranny.” He also foretold: “Surely, the Caliphate
after me will last 30 years; afterwards it will be a monarchy.”11
Whatever the noble Prophet predicted came true.
•
According to an authentic narration, the Prophet declared:
“‘Uthman will be killed while reading the Qur’an. God will
dress him in a shirt, but they will want to remove it from
him.”12 In other words, ‘Uthman would become Caliph,
but his deposition would be sought and he would be mar-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
191

--- Sayfa 204 ---
tyred while reading the Qur’an. This happened exactly as
predicted.
•
As narrated in an authentic Tradition, the noble Prophet of
God said to Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas when the latter was gravely
ill: “It is hoped that you will be spared so that some people
may benefit through you and some others be harmed through
you.”13 By this, he suggested that Sa‘d would be a great com-
mander and make many conquests, and that while many would
benefit from him by converting to Islam, many others would
be harmed through him after their states collapsed. As predict-
ed, Sa‘d assumed command of the armies during the Caliphate
of ‘Umar and, by destroying the Persian Sassanid Empire,
brought many people within the fold of Islam.
•
Once the Prophet woke up in the house of Umm Haram,
the aunt of Anas ibn Malik (his servant for 10 years in
Madina), and said with a smile: “I dreamed that my com-
munity would fight in the sea sitting on thrones like kings.”
Umm Haram asked: “Pray that I may be with them.” He
said firmly: “You shall be.”14 All this came true 40 years lat-
er, when Umm Haram accompanied her husband ‘Ubada
ibn Samit on the conquest of Cyprus. She died there, and
her tomb remains a visited place.
•
According to an authentic narration, the Prophet declared: “A
liar who claims Prophethood, as well as a blood-thirsty tyrant,
will appear from the Thaqif tribe.”15 By this, he gave tidings
of the notorious Mukhtar, who claimed Prophethood, and the
criminal Hajjaj, who killed tens of thousands of people.
•
Again, according to an authentic narration, the Prophet declared:
“Surely, Constantinople (Istanbul) will be conquered (by my
community); how blessed the commander who will conquer
it, and how blessed his army.”16 He thus foretold the conquest
of Istanbul by the Muslims, indicated the high spiritual rank of
Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror, and the virtuousness of his
army. What he foretold took place centuries later.
•
God’s Messenger made about 300 predictions, the great
majority of which have already come true. Some of his pre-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
192

--- Sayfa 205 ---
dictions are, interestingly enough, about advances in science
and technology. For example, as recorded in Sahih al-Muslim
and Sunan al-Tirmidhi, he foretold that a pomegranate would
suffice for as many as 20 people, with its rind providing shade
for those who ate it, and that the wheat grown in a small house
balcony would be enough to feed a family for a year. By these
predictions, he must have indicated that humanity would
realize great advances in genetic engineering.
In his predictions, the Prophet never said “I think,” “I guess,”
“It may be,” or “It will probably happen,” all of which express
doubt. Instead, he spoke as if he were watching the past and
future on a television screen. This means that either he had a
very keen and far sight capable of penetrating the past and
future at the same time, which is impossible for any mortal,
or that he was a Prophet taught by the Knower of All Things,
the One for Whom all time and space is but a single point.
HIS MIRACLES
A miracle is an extraordinary event that God Almighty brings about
at the hands of a Prophet to prove his Prophethood, strengthen the
believers’ faith, and break the unbelievers’ obstinacy.
The universe operates according to God’s fixed laws. In the
absence of His laws and the uniform character of natural events,
everything would be in continual flux. In such an environment,
we would be unable to discover the Divine laws of nature or make
any scientific progress. Although recent discoveries in atomic
physics have shown that whatever exists is a wave in continuous
motion, on the surface everything occurs according to classical
or Newtonian principles. This has forced scientists to admit that
they cannot state that anything will exist in the same state as it
did even one second ago.
Normally, life has its own laws according to which we behave.
We need food and water to satisfy our hunger and thirst, and go to
a doctor when we are sick. We use animals for labor, but cannot talk
to them. Trees are fixed in their places, and neither they nor stones
and mountains greet us. We conform to the laws of gravitation and
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
193

--- Sayfa 206 ---
repulsion, and do not attempt to rise into the sky without first mak-
ing the relevant calculations.
All of these and other laws make human life possible.
However, since God has determined them, He is not bound by
them. Therefore, He may sometimes annul a law or change the
ordinary flow of events to allow a Prophet to perform what we
call a miracle or to show that He can do whatever He wills at
whatever time He desires. The original word in Islamic literature
translated as miracle is mu‘jiza (something that no one else can
do). If God allows a saint to perform such an event, it is called
karama (an extraordinary favor). These favors constitute anoth-
er proof of Muhammad’s Prophethood and the truth of Islam.
God created innumerable karama at the hands of Muslim
saints. One kind is foretelling the future. For example, Muhyi al-
Din ibn al-‘Arabi died almost 50 years before the establishment of
the Ottoman State, and yet wrote in his Shajarat al-Nu‘maniya
about the Ottomans, predicted their conquest of Damascus and
Egypt, that Sultan Murad IV would march on Baghdad and con-
quer it after a siege of 41 days, and that Sultan ‘Abd al-‘Aziz would
be killed by cutting his wrists. He also wrote that: “When ‘S’ enters
‘SH,’ the burial-place of Muhyi al-Din will be discovered.” Using
symbols in his predictions, “S” means “Selim” and “SH” means
“Sham” (Damascus). Like his other predictions, this one came true
when Sultan Selim I conquered Damascus, discovered Ibn al-
‘Arabi’s burial-place, and ordered a tomb built upon it.
Mushtaq Dada of Bitlis, an eastern province of Turkey, pre-
dicted 71 years in advance that after many wars and convulsions
Ankara would replace Istanbul as the capital city. Interestingly
enough, Mushtaq Dada gives the name of the man who would
do this: by combining the initial letters of his lines of verse, you
get the name Kemal.
God Almighty allowed His Prophets to perform miracles.
However, since all previous Prophets were sent to their own
people, and their Prophethood was thereby restricted, their mir-
acles were related to the widespread arts and crafts of their time.
For example, since at the time of Moses, sorcery enjoyed great
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
194

--- Sayfa 207 ---
prestige in Egypt, God Almighty caused his staff to change into
a snake and swallow those of the sorcerers. At the time of Jesus,
the healing arts enjoyed great prestige, and so most of his mir-
acles involved healing. As for Prophet Muhammad, since his
Prophethood is universal and he is the last Prophet, his miracles
are very diverse and connected with nearly all parts of creation.
When a glorified ruler’s aide-de-camp enters a city with var-
ious gifts from the ruler, a representative of each group of peo-
ple or from each professional group, society, or association wel-
comes him cheerfully. Similarly, when the Eternal Sovereign’s
supreme Messenger honored the universe as an envoy to the
Earth’s inhabitants, bringing from the Creator the light of truth
and spiritual gifts related to the truths of the universe, every
entity—from mineral elements and plants to animals and human
beings, and from the moon and sun to stars—welcomed him in
its own way and language, and became a means for one kind of
miracle.
Every word, act, and state of the noble Prophet testifies to
his Prophethood and his faithfulness. But not all of them need
to be miraculous. The Almighty sent him as human being so
that he could guide and lead men and women, in all their indi-
vidual and collective affairs, to happiness in both worlds, and so
they could view the wonders of His art and the works of His
Power. Each of these are in fact miracles, but they appear to us
as ordinary and familiar events.
If the Prophet had been extraordinary in all his acts, he could
not have guided and instructed us. God allowed him to perform
some extraordinary phenomena to prove his Prophethood to
unbelievers, and so he occasionally worked miracles. But these
were done in a way that did not compel belief, as this would
negate the purpose of our testing and exercise of free will. If mir-
acles forced people to believe, thereby depriving them of their
choice to believe or not, our whole existence and purpose would
be meaningless.
The majority of the Prophet’s approximately 1,000 miracles
were related first by Companions, then by numerous reliable nar-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
195

--- Sayfa 208 ---
rators and authorities, and subsequently recorded in authentic
books of Tradition. As for the rest, although related by only one
or two Companions, they also must be indisputable, as they lat-
er were judged true by all reliable authorities and narrated by
more than one chain of transmission. In addition, most occurred
in the presence of many people (e.g., a military campaign, wed-
ding ceremony, or feast), and one or more of those present relat-
ed it and the others confirmed it by keeping silent. Therefore, the
miracles recorded in authentic books of Tradition are indis-
putable and cannot be denied or rejected.
Examples of the Prophet’s Miracles
The Qur’an declares:
Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the
Sacred Mosque (Masjid al-Haram) to Masjid al-Aqsa, the neigh-
borhood of which We have blessed, that We might show him of
Our signs. Surely He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing. (17:1)
Then he drew nigh and came down, till he was two bows’ length
or even nearer, and He revealed unto His servant what He
revealed. The heart (of His servant) lied not (in seeing) what he
saw. (53:8-11)
The Ascension is one of the greatest miracles of the Prophet
Muhammad. Having been favored with spiritual perfection and
full refinement through belief and worship, God took him to
His holy Presence. Escaping the imprisonment of natural laws
and material causes and transcending bodily existence, the Prophet
crossed distances swiftly and rose above all dimensions of the
material world until he reached the holy Presence of God.
Atomic physics has changed many concepts in physics. It also
has established that this world is only one dimension or appear-
ance of existence among many, each of which has its own particu-
larities. Einstein posited that time is only one dimension of exis-
tence. Science has not yet drawn any final conclusions about exis-
tence, for new findings and developments continually change our
view of it. Therefore, how can one question the Ascension? People
have difficulty in understanding how one can penetrate all time at
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
196

--- Sayfa 209 ---
the same moment as a single point. To better understand this sub-
tle matter, consider the following analogy:
Imagine that you are holding a mirror. Everything reflected
on the right represents the past, while everything reflected on
the left represents the future. The mirror can reflect one direc-
tion only while you are holding it. If you want to see both sides,
you must rise so high above your original position that left and
right are united into one and nothing remains to be called first
or last, beginning or end.
In the Ascension, the Prophet must have moved with the
speed of the spirit, as he traveled through all time and space and
all dimensions of existence in a very short period. During that
heavenly journey, he met with previous Prophets, saw angels, and
beheld the beauties of Paradise and the terrors of Hell. He
observed the essential realities of all Qur’anic issues, as well as the
meanings and wisdom of all acts of worship. He also reached the
realms where even the greatest angel, Gabriel, cannot reach, and
was honored with a vision of God’s “Countenance,” free from
any qualitative and quantitative dimension and restriction. Then,
to bring humanity out of the darkness of material existence and
into the illumined realm of belief and worship, so that all men
and women can experience their own “spiritual” ascension, he
returned to the world.
Another miracle, that of splitting the moon was performed
before people who persisted in denying Muhammad’s Prophethood.
As related by ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud, one night while they were in
Mina’, the Prophet split the moon into two with a gesture of his
index finger. One half appeared behind the mountain, and the oth-
er in front of it. Then the Prophet turned to us and said: “Be wit-
nesses!”17 The Qur’an relates this miracle: The Hour has approached,
and the moon split. But whenever they see a sign, they turn away and
say: “This is evident magic.” (54:1-2).
We will now relate several other miracles, all of which are
thoroughly documented in Islamic literature.
•
Anas ibn Malik relates that Abu Talha, seeing that God’s
Messenger was hungry, invited him to a meal. The Messenger
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
197

--- Sayfa 210 ---
came with a crowd of people. Abu Talha had only one loaf of
rye bread at home. His wife Umm Sulaym spread some but-
ter on it. The Messenger prayed for abundance, and at least
70 to 80 people ate as much as they wanted before leaving.18
•
‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr relates that 130 Companions
were with God’s Messenger during an expedition. The
Messenger asked them whether they had something to eat.
Someone had one or two sacks of flour. Dough was prepared,
and a sheep was bought from a polytheist passing by with
his flock. After roasting the sheep’s liver, the Messenger gave
a piece to each one present, and put aside the shares of those
who were not present. They cooked the meat in two bowls,
and everyone ate of it. After they finished eating, there was
just as much meat as there had been before they had started
eating.19
Many similar miracles were transmitted through various
(sometimes as many as 16) channels. Most of them took place
in the presence of large assemblies and were narrated by many
persons of truth and good reputation.
The One Who created the universe and made it dependent
on certain laws obviously can change those laws for His special,
beloved servant and envoy. Especially in our day, when scientists
have abandoned mechanistic ideas in favor of relativity, it is nei-
ther rational nor scientific to deny miracles on the basis of
absolute determinism or causality.
Furthermore, miracles are never completely free of material
causes, however slight and insignificant they may be. Given that
God Almighty causes the smallest things to produce very great
entities, how can we deny miracles? Human beings, weak enough
to be defeated by germs, nevertheless are intelligent enough to
make computers that can hold knowledge that would fill many
libraries. Is this a lesser miracle than enabling His servant to give
some food or drink a blessed increase? Indeed, is not every occur-
rence in the universe, every act of God, really a miracle, the like of
which we are unable to make?
There are many examples of the Prophet’s miracles concern-
ing water. They were related by numerous Companions and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
198

--- Sayfa 211 ---
transmitted through various reliable channels. We mention two
of them here.
•
Once when they were in Zarwa, the Companions could not
find enough water for wudu’ (ritual ablution). God’s Messenger
asked them to bring a bowl of water. He dipped his hands
into it, and water began to run from his fingers like a foun-
tain. Anas ibn Malik says that on that day they were 300
people, and thus relates this incident on behalf of 300 peo-
ple. If he were lying, is it logical to assume that not even
one person would contradict him?20
•
During the campaign of Hudaybiya, the Companions com-
plained to God’s Messenger about the lack of water. He took
an arrow out of his arrow-bag and told them to put it in the
well called Semed. When they did so, water began to gush
forth. During the campaign, all Companions drank from it
and performed wudu’ with it.21
Authentic books of Tradition, including primarily Sahih al-
Bukhari and Sahih al-Muslim, report many miracles of healing
sick and wounded people, among them the following:
•
During the Battle of Khaybar, God’s Messenger asked where
‘Ali was. Informed that ‘Ali’s eyes were hurting him,” he sent
for him and, after he arrived, applied his healing saliva to ‘Ali’s
eyes. At the same moment the pain ceased, and ‘Ali’s eyes
became better than before.22
•
‘Uthman ibn Hunayf relates:
A blind man came to God’s Messenger and requested him
to pray to God to recover his sight. The Messenger said: “If
you desire, I’ll not pray—being blind may be better for
your after-life—or I’ll pray.” The man chose to be relieved
of blindness and the Messenger told him: “Go and do an
ablution. Then pray two rak’as and say: ‘O God, surely my
appeal is to You and I turn toward You through the Prophet
Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy. O Muhammad, surely I
turn toward God through you, that He uncover my sight.
O God, make him my intercessor.’”
The man did as he was told, and his sight was restored.23
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
199

--- Sayfa 212 ---
The animal kingdom recognized God’s Messenger, upon him
be peace and blessings, and became the means for him to work mir-
acles. Although there are many examples, we will mention here only
a few that are well-known and agreed on by exacting authorities.
•
During the Hijra, when God’s Messenger took shelter from
the unbelievers in Thawr cave, two pigeons guarded the
entrance (like two sentries) and a spider (like a doorkeeper)
covered its entrance with a thick web. While Ubayy ibn Khalaf,
a Qurayshi chief, was examining the cave, his friends sug-
gested that they should enter. He answered: “There is a web
here, which seems to have been spun before the birth of
Muhammad.” The others added: “Would those pigeons, stand-
ing there, still be there if someone were in the cave?”24
•
Jabir relates:
I was with God’s Messenger during a military campaign.
When my camel became exhausted and left behind, God’s
Messenger prodded it slightly. This made the camel so fast
that I had to pull on the reins to make it go slower so that
I could listen to the Messenger, but I was unable to [slow
it down].25
•
Anas ibn Malik reports:
After the conquest of Khaybar, a Jewish woman offered God’s
Messenger a roasted sheep. God’s Messenger, upon him be
peace and blessings, ate a piece but, according to the narration
of Abu Dawud, stopped eating and said: “This sheep says it
has been poisoned.” He turned to the woman and asked her
why she offered him poisoned meat. When the woman
replied that she wanted to kill him, the Messenger responded:
“God will not let you attack and annoy me.”26
•
‘A’isha reports:
We had a pigeon in our house. When God’s Messenger, upon
him be peace and blessings, was at home, it would stay quiet.
As soon as he left, it would continually pace to and fro.27
•
Anas ibn Malik relates:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
200

--- Sayfa 213 ---
God’s Messenger, upon him be peace and blessings, was the
most generous and courageous person. One night the peo-
ple of Madina heard some voices and set out in fear to
investigate. On their way, they saw a man coming toward
them, who appeared to be God’s Messenger, upon him be
peace and blessings. He said to them: “There is nothing to
be distressed about.” He had mounted Abu Talha’s horse
and investigated the matter before anybody else. He turned
to Abu Talha and said: “I found your horse fast and com-
fortable,” whereas it had been very slow before that event.
After that night, no other horse could race against it.28
According to many accounts in the books of Traditions, he
used inanimate objects while performing his miracles.
•
Jabir ibn Samura reports: God’s Messenger, upon him be
peace and blessings, once said: “Prior to my Prophethood,
a rock in Makka used to greet me. I still recognize it.”29 ‘Abd
Allah ibn Mas‘ud reports: We could hear food glorifying
God while we were eating with God’s Messenger, upon him
be peace and blessings.30
•
Traditionists unanimously report from Anas, Abu Hurayra,
‘Uthman, and Sa‘id ibn Zayd, who said:
God’s Messenger, upon him be peace and blessings, climbed
up Mount Uhud, with Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman. The
mountain, either in awe or because of its joy, trembled. He
said: “Be still, O Uhud, for on you is a Prophet, a truthful
one, and two martyrs.”31
Thus did the Messenger predict the martyrdom of ‘Umar and
‘Uthman.
•
It is established through authentic narrations from ‘Ali, Jabir,
and ‘A’isha that rocks and mountains would greet God’s
Messenger, saying: “Peace be upon you, O Messenger of God.”
‘Ali says: “Whenever we walked in the suburbs of Makka in
the early times of his Prophethood, trees and rocks would say:
‘Peace be upon you, O Messenger of God.’”32 The Prophet’s
protection was itself a miracle.
•
As related through various channels:
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
201

--- Sayfa 214 ---
During the military campaigns of Ghatfan and Anmar, a
courageous chief named Ghowras unexpectedly appeared at
the side of God’s Messenger, who was lying under a tree.
Unsheathing his sword, he asked God’s Messenger: “Who
will save you from me now?” “God will,” the Messenger
replied. Then he prayed: “O God, protect me from him as
You will.” At that moment, Ghowras was knocked down,
and his sword slipped from his hand. God’s Messenger,
upon him be peace and blessings, took the sword and asked
him: “Now, who will save you from me?” Ghowras began
to tremble and entreated God’s Messenger to spare his life.
“You are a noble, forgiving one; only forgiveness is expect-
ed of you,” he pleaded. God’s Messenger forgave him, and
when Ghowras returned to his tribe, he said to them: “I
have just come from the best of humanity.”33
•
Abu Hurayra relates:
Abu Jahl once asked those near him: “Does Muhammad still
rub his face against earth [i.e. make prostration]?” “Yes, he
does,” they answered. Abu Jahl added: “By Lat and ‘Uzza,
if I see him doing that again, I will tread on his neck or bury
his face with soil.”
A short while later God’s Messenger came and began to pray.
While he was prostrating, Abu Jahl approached him but sudden-
ly turned back in fear and amazement, trying to protect himself
with his hands. When asked why he had done so, he answered:
“Truly, between him and me is a trench filled with fire, and some-
thing horrible and some wings.”
God’s Messenger commented on the event: “If he had
approached me, the angels would have torn him to pieces.”34
God promised to guard him against people:
O Messenger! Make known whatever is revealed unto you from
your Lord, for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His
Message. God will protect you from people. Surely, God guides
not the unbelievers. (5:67)
The acceptance of his prayers is also a miracle, as can be seen
in the following accounts:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
202

--- Sayfa 215 ---
•
The authorities of Tradition, including Imam al-Bukhari and
Imam Muslim, all report that the Messenger’s prayer for rain
always was accepted immediately. Sometimes it would begin
before he lowered his hands while on the pulpit. Rain clouds
would appear when his army ran out of water. Even in his
childhood, his grandfather ‘Abd al-Muttalib would go out
with him to pray for rain, and rain would come out of God’s
love for him. ‘Abd al-Muttalib immortalized this in a poem.
After the Prophet’s death, ‘Umar once invoked the name of
‘Abbas while praying for rain, saying: “O God, this is the uncle
of Your beloved Prophet. Give us rain for his sake.” Thereafter
it rained.35
•
Anas ibn Malik reported that one Friday when God’s Messenger
was giving a sermon, a man came into the mosque and said: “O
Messenger of God, there is drought. Please ask God to send
rain.” The Messenger prayed, and it rained until the next Friday.
On that day, while God’s Messenger was on the pulpit again giv-
ing a sermon, a man stood up and said: “O Messenger of God,
please pray to God to turn the rain from us.” The Messenger
prayed: “O God, send the rain onto the places around us, not
onto us.” Anas, who reported the event, says: “By God, I saw
the clouds scatter and rain fall onto other places, and it stopped
raining on the people of Madina.”36
•
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar relates: When there were about 40
Companions, God’s Messenger, upon him be peace and bless-
ings, prayed: “O God, strengthen Islam with which of those
two, namely, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab and ‘Amr ibn al-Hisham,
is more pleasing to You.” The next morning, ‘Umar came to
the Messenger and accepted Islam.37
•
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas reports: Once when God’s Messenger
went to relieve himself, I carried water to him for wudu’.
When he came out, he asked who had put the water there.
“I did,” I answered. Whereupon he prayed: “O God, make
him profoundly knowledgeable in religion and teach him
the meaning of the Qur’an.”38 Based on this prayer, he would
be called “Profound Scholar of the Umma” and “Interpreter
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
203

--- Sayfa 216 ---
of the Qur’an.” When he was still young, ‘Umar put him on
his consultative assembly of high-ranking scholars and eld-
ers of the Companions.
•
Anas ibn Malik relates: My mother took me to God’s Messenger
and said: “O Messenger of God, this is my son Anas. Let
him serve you. Please pray for him.”39 The Messenger prayed:
“O God, give him abundant wealth and offspring.” Anas
remarked in his old age, swearing by God: “You see the abun-
dance of my wealth, and my children and grandchildren num-
ber about one hundred.”
•
Abu Hurayra once complained to God’s Messenger about
forgetfulness. The Messenger told him to spread a piece of
cloth on the ground. Then he seemed to fill his hands with
invisible things and empty them on the cloth. After repeat-
ing this three or four times, he told Abu Hurayra to pick it
up. Abu Hurayra, as he himself later swore by God, never
forgot anything again. This is also among the well-known
events related to the Companions.40
•
In addition, the Prophet met with and spoke to angels and
jinn. ‘Umar reports:
We were sitting with God’s Messenger, upon him be peace
and blessings, when a man appeared beside us. He had dark
black hair and was wearing a white robe. There were no signs
of traveling upon him. He sat before the Messenger and,
touching his knees to the Messenger’s, asked him about faith,
Islam, perfection of virtue (ihsan), and the Last Day. After the
interview, the man left and disappeared. God’s Messenger,
upon him be peace and blessings, turned to me and asked
who that man was. “God and His Messenger know better,” I
answered. The Messenger concluded: “He was Gabriel. He
came to teach you your religion.”41
•
Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas relates:
At the Battle of Uhud, I saw two men (the archangels
Gabriel and Michael) dressed in white on either side of
God’s Messenger, fighting for his sake. I had never seen
them before, nor have I seen them since.42
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
204

--- Sayfa 217 ---
•
Rifa‘a ibn Rafi‘ reports:
Gabriel asked God’s Messenger his opinion of the Companions
who participated in the Battle of Badr. The Messenger
answered like this: “We consider them among the most virtu-
ous of Muslims.” Gabriel responded: “So do we. We consider
the angels who were present there among the most virtuous of
angels.”43
•
In his Musnad, Ahmad ibn Hanbal reports from ‘Abd Allah
ibn Mas‘ud that God’s Messenger invited jinn to accept
Islam and taught them about the Qur’an.44
The Prophet, also performed miracles related to the appear-
ance of invisible objects and realms.
•
‘A’isha reports:
One day the sun was eclipsed. God’s Messenger, upon him be
peace and blessings, performed the prayer of eclipse and then
explained: “The sun and the moon are two of God’s signs.
When you witness an eclipse, pray until it ends. By God, in this
place where I have performed the prayer I saw everything
promised to me. When you saw me move forward during the
prayer, I did that to take a cluster of grapes that appeared to me
from Paradise. Again, by God, when you saw me move back-
ward, I did so because I saw Hell roaring with its parts piling
one upon another.”45
•
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas relates: God’s Messenger, upon him
be peace and blessings, passed by two graves and said:
Heed what I will tell you: Those lying in those graves are suf-
fering torments because of two grave sins. One of them used
to backbite and slander others everywhere; the other was not
careful [about guarding himself] against urine stains.46
Even such inanimate objects as trees and sticks testified to
his Prophethood.
•
Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah reports:
We were walking with God’s Messenger, upon him be peace
and blessings. We went down into a wide valley, and the
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
205

--- Sayfa 218 ---
Messenger searched for a place to relieve himself. When he
could not find one, he went to the two trees he had seen by
the valley. He pulled one of them by a branch next to the
other tree. The tree was like an obedient camel being pulled
by its reins. He addressed them: “Join together over me, by
God’s permission.” The trees did so and formed a screen.47
•
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar reports:
God’s Messenger, upon him be peace and blessings, used to
lean against a pole called the “date-palm trunk” when deliv-
ering a sermon. When a pulpit was built and the Prophet
started giving his sermons from it, the pole moaned
because of its separation. The Messenger climbed down
and stroked it, after which it stopped moaning.48
•
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri relates:
God’s Messenger gave Qatada ibn Nu’man a stick on a dark
night, saying: “This stick will light up your surroundings as
far as 7 meters. When you get home, you will see a black
shadow. Without allowing it to tell you anything, strike it
with this stick.”49
Qatada did as he was instructed.
MIRACLES CANNOT BE DENIED
•
The noble Prophet declared that he was a Prophet and, to
prove his Prophethood, presented the glorious Qur’an and
nearly 1,000 miracles. Their occurrence cannot be denied,
for even the most obstinate unbelievers only charged him
with sorcery. Unable to deny the miracles, they took them
to be sorcery to justify their unbelief and continued to mis-
guide their followers.
His miracles have been confirmed and reported unani-
mously by the Hadith authorities. A miracle is the Creator’s
confirmation of his Prophethood, as it says, in effect: “You
have spoken the truth.” If a person claims in the ruler’s pres-
ence that the ruler appointed him or her to such and such a
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
206

--- Sayfa 219 ---
position, the word “Yes” uttered by the ruler proves this claim.
Further, if the ruler changes his usual practice and attitude at
that person’s request, it only further confirms such a claim. In
the same way, the noble Messenger claimed that he was the
envoy of the Creator of the universe, Who, in turn, changed
His unbroken order when necessary so that His envoy could
perform a miracle to prove his claim.
•
Denying miracles amounts to denying God’s existence,
Muhammad’s Prophethood, as well as the Qur’an’s Divine
authorship. Such a denial is absurd and meaningless, for while
one piece of evidence proves a claim, its denial requires an
overall investigation throughout time and space. For example,
if you claim that there are black swans, all you have to do is
produce one. But if you claim that this is impossible, you must
show all swans from the beginning to the end of time. So, the
nonexistence of something is almost impossible to prove.
Those who deny miracles, which billions of believers, as well
as hundreds of thousands of saints, scholars and scientists,
have confirmed since the Prophet’s claim of Prophethood, are
like those who say that since one door of a magnificent palace
with 1,000 doors is closed, the palace cannot be entered.
•
Almost all Prophets worked miracles. For centuries, mil-
lions of Jews and billions of Christians have confirmed the
miracles of Moses and Jesus, respectively. When compared
to other Prophets, what shortcoming do they find in
Prophet Muhammad that causes them to deny his miracles?
•
The creation of Adam, Eve, and Jesus are miracles, for they
were not born according to God’s law. Although currently
entangled in materialistic notions, science one day will have
to attribute the origin of life to a Divine miracle. Besides, it
is highly questionable whether it is scientific to label as myth
the beliefs, concepts, or events that science cannot explain.
Science is based on theories and develops through trial-
and-error investigations of those theories. Many now-estab-
lished facts were once considered false, and many once-estab-
lished facts are now known to be fallacies. Moreover, we unques-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
207

--- Sayfa 220 ---
tionably accept the existence of many things that we cannot
prove scientifically. Denying miracles is unscientific, insofar as
such a judgment or conclusion must be based on concrete
proof. No one can deny, whether based on science or not, the
miracles of Prophet Muhammad.
•
Some regard miracles as being against reason and logic.
However, our reason and intellect cannot grasp everything
in existence. Also, no two people have the exact same intel-
lectual capacity. So, in order to decide something reasonable
or not, whose intellect will judge? The Qur’an declares:
Whomsoever We will, we raise in degrees. Over every man of knowl-
edge is one who knows better (12:76).
The magnificent order, harmony, and purposiveness in
existence decisively point to One with absolute knowledge,
will, and power. That One, God the Creator, does what He
wishes, for He is not bound by the laws He established for
the universe. Therefore, He can change them or even act
and create without any laws if He so wishes. Given this, we
should try to discover those laws, as God gave us an intel-
lect to do just that, not to judge His acts. Human intellect
is limited, and we all know that what is limited cannot
judge that which is not limited.
•
Time varies or changes according to the dimensions of exis-
tence and place. For example, time measurements differ from
planet to planet. The finer or more refined matter is, the
quicker its time and movement, as indicated that our spirit
travels much faster than our physical body. Also, our imagi-
nation can travel through all spheres within a few seconds.
Just as each person is unique in regard to power, there is a
great difference between each species’ capacity. We are far more
powerful than ants or bees, but they can do things that we can-
not. Also, invisible things or beings like angels and jinn, and even
storms and gales, may be far more powerful than human
beings. So all physical and intellectual powers and capacities are
included in a single, absolute Power. If that Power can do what-
ever It wishes, why should we not believe in miracles?
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
208

--- Sayfa 221 ---
•
We witness and even experience certain events that we regard
as miraculous, for the law of causality cannot explain every-
thing. Furthermore, modern physics asserts that whatever
exists is a wave in continuous motion, meaning that we can-
not say that what exists now will exist in the same manner
even one second from now. Therefore, the law of causality
is only a veil covering the Divine operations so that people
do not directly attribute certain disagreeable things and events
to God. And so it is the affirmation, not denial, of miracles that
is really reasonable and scientific.
HIS MARRIAGES
Some critics of Islam, either because they are unaware of the facts
or are biased, revile the Prophet as a self-indulgent libertine. They
accuse him of character failings that are hardly compatible with
a person of average virtue, let alone with the Prophet, God’s last
Messenger, and the best model for humanity to emulate. A sim-
ple account of these marriages, which are openly discussed in many
biographies and well-authenticated accounts of his sayings and
actions, shows that they were part of a most strictly disciplined
life, and another burden that he bore as God’s Last Messenger.
The Prophet entered into these marriages due to his role as the
Muslims’ leader and guide toward Islamic norms and values. In the
following pages, we will explain some of the reasons behind his
marriages and demonstrate that the charges are baseless and false.
The Prophet married his first wife, Khadija, when he was 25
and had not yet been called to his future mission. Given the sur-
rounding cultural environment, not to mention the climate, his
youth, and other considerations, it is remarkable that he enjoyed
a reputation for perfect chastity, integrity, and trustworthiness. As
soon as he was called to Prophethood, he acquired enemies who
slandered him. However, none dared to invent something unbe-
lievable. It is important to realize that his life was founded upon
chastity and self-discipline from the outset, and remained so.
Muhammad married Khadija, a woman 15 years his senior,
when he was in his prime. This marriage was very lofty and excep-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
209

--- Sayfa 222 ---
tional in the eyes of the Prophet and God. For 23 years, the cou-
ple lived a life of uninterrupted contentment in perfect fidelity.
In the eighth year of Prophethood, however, Khadija died and
the Prophet had to raise his children by himself. Even his ene-
mies had to admit that during all these years they could find no
flaw in his moral character.
The Prophet took no other wife while Khadija was alive,
although polygamy was socially acceptable and widely practiced.
He remarried only after he was 55, an age by which very little
real interest and desire for marriage remains. The allegation that
these marriages were due to licentiousness or self-indulgence is
thus groundless and without merit.
People often ask how a Prophet can be polygamous. There are
three points to be made here. But first, let’s recognize that those
who continually raise such questions are atheists, Christians, or
Jews who do not have accurate knowledge of either Islam and reli-
gion in general, and so, either deliberately or mistakenly, confuse
right with wrong to deceive others and spread doubt.
Those who do not believe in or practice any religion have
no right to reproach those who do. Their lifestyles, especially
their multiple extramarital liaisons, are examples of unrestrained
self-indulgence unhindered by such considerations as the happi-
ness and well-being of young people in general, and of their
own children in particular. Those who advertise themselves as
free and liberated condone such practices as incest, homosexual-
ity, and polyandry. One can only wonder how such relationships
affect the children of such unions. Such critics have only one
motive: to drag Muslims into the moral confusion and vicious-
ness in which they themselves are trapped.
Jews and Christians who attack Prophet Muhammad for his
marriages can be motivated only by fear, jealousy, and hatred of
Islam. They forget that the great patriarchs of the Hebrew race,
named as Prophets in the Bible and the Qur’an and revered by
followers of all three faiths as exemplars of moral excellence, all
practiced polygamy—and on a far greater scale than Prophet
Muhammad.50
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
210

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Here we remember the words of Isaac Taylor, who spoke at
the Church Congress of England, on how Islam changes the peo-
ple who accept it:
The virtues which Islam inculcates are temperance, cleanliness,
chastity, justice, fortitude, courage, benevolence, hospitality,
veracity and resignation.... Islam preaches a practical brother-
hood, the social equality of all Muslims. Slavery is not part of
the creed of Islam. Polygamy is a more difficult question.
Moses did not prohibit it. It was practiced by David and it is
not directly forbidden in the New Testament. Muhammad lim-
ited the unbounded license of polygamy. It is the exception
rather than the rule...
Polygamy did not originate with the Muslims. In the Prophet’s
case, from the viewpoint of its function within the mission of
Prophethood, polygamy (or, more strictly, polygyny) had far more
significance than people generally realize.
In a sense, polygamy was a necessity for the Prophet, for
through it he established the statutes and norms of Muslim fam-
ily law. Religion cannot be excluded from private spousal rela-
tions or from matters known only by one’s spouse. Therefore,
there must be women who can give clear instruction and advice,
rather than hints and innuendoes, so that everything is under-
stood. These chaste and virtuous women conveyed and explained
the norms and rules governing Muslim private life.
•
Since these women were of all ages, the Islamic requirements
and norms could be portrayed in relation to their different
life stages and experiences. These provisions were learned and
applied within the Prophet’s household first, and then passed
on to other Muslims by his wives.
•
Each wife was from a different clan or tribe. This allowed the
Prophet to establish bonds of kinship and affinity through-
out the community. As a result, a profound attachment to him
spread among many diverse people, thereby creating and secur-
ing equality, brotherhood, and sisterhood in a most practi-
cal way and on the basis of religion.
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
211

--- Sayfa 224 ---
•
Each wife, both during the Prophet’s life and after his death,
was of great benefit and service to Islam. Each one conveyed
and interpreted his message to her clan: all of the outer and
inner experiences, qualities, manners, and faith of the man
whose life, in all its public and intimate details, embodied
the Qur’an. In this way, all clan members learned about the
Qur’an, hadith, tafsir (interpretation and commentary on the
Qur’an), and fiqh (understanding of the Islamic law), and so
became fully aware of Islam’s essence and spirit.
•
Polygamy also allowed Prophet Muhammad to establish
ties of kinship throughout Arabia. As a result, he was free
to move and be accepted as a member in each family, for
their members regarded him as one of their own. Given
such a relationship, they were not shy to ask him directly
about the affairs of this life and the Hereafter. The tribes
also benefited collectively from this proximity, considered
themselves fortunate, and took pride in that relationship.
Some of these tribes were the Umayyads (through Umm
Habiba), the Hashimites (through Zaynab bint Jahsh),
and the Banu Makhzum (through Umm Salama).
What we have said so far is general and could, in some
respects, be true of all Prophets. Now we will discuss the lives
of Ummahat al-Mu’minin (the mothers of the believers) not in
the order of the marriages but in a different perspective.
Khadija was the Prophet’s first wife. When they married,
she was 40 and he was 25. She bore all of his children, except
his son Ibrahim, who did not live very long. As well as being a
wife, Khadija was also her husband’s friend who shared his incli-
nations and ideals to a remarkable degree. Their 23-year mar-
riage was wonderfully blessed and passed in profound harmony.
Through every insult and persecution, Khadija stood by him
and helped him. He loved her very deeply, and did not marry
another woman during her lifetime.
This marriage is the ideal marriage of intimacy, friendship,
mutual respect, support, and consolation. Though faithful and
loyal to all his wives, he never forgot Khadija and often men-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
212

--- Sayfa 225 ---
tioned her virtues and merits. After her death, the Prophet took
care of his children for 4 or 5 years, performing the duties of
mother and father. To allege that such a man was a sensualist or
lustful is not even worthy of consideration. If even 1 percent of
it were true, could he have lived such a life during and after his
wife’s death?
‘A’isha was his second wife, though not in the order of mar-
riage. Her father was Abu Bakr, the Prophet’s closest friend,
devoted follower, and one of the earliest converts. He had long
hoped to cement the deep attachment between himself and the
Prophet through marriage. By marrying ‘A’isha, the Prophet
accorded the highest honor and courtesy to a man who shared
all the good and bad times with him throughout his mission.
‘A’isha, a remarkably intelligent and wise woman, had the
nature and temperament to carry forward the work of Prophetic
mission. Her marriage prepared her to be a spiritual guide and
teacher to all women. She became a major student and disciple
of her husband and through him. Like so many Muslims of that
blessed time, she matured and perfected her skills and talents and
thus joined him in the abode of bliss both as wife and student.
Her life and service to Islam after her marriage prove that
she was an exceptional person fully worthy of such an exalted
position. She is one of the greatest Hadith authorities, an excel-
lent commentator on the Qur’an, and a most distinguished and
knowledgeable expert in Islamic law. She truly represented the
inner and outer qualities and experiences of Prophet Muhammad
through her unique understanding.
Umm Salama was from the Banu Makhzum clan. Along
with her husband, she had embraced Islam at the very begin-
ning and emigrated to Abyssinia to avoid further persecution.
After their return, they migrated with their four children to
Madina. Her husband, a veteran of many battles, was wounded
severely at the battle of Uhud and later died. Both Abu Bakr and
‘Umar proposed marriage, aware of her need and suffering as a
destitute widow with children. She refused because, according
to her judgment, no one could be better than her late husband.
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
213

--- Sayfa 226 ---
Some time later, the Prophet offered to marry her. This was
quite right and natural, for this great woman, who had never
shied from sacrifice and suffering for her faith, was now alone
after having lived for many years in the noblest clan of Arabia.
She could not be neglected and left as a beggar. Considering her
piety, sincerity, and all that she had suffered, she certainly deserved
to be helped. By taking her into his household, the Prophet was
doing what he had done since his youth—befriending those
without friends, supporting those without support, protecting
those without protection.
Umm Salama, who was an intelligent and fast learner, also
had the necessary qualifications to become a spiritual guide and
teacher. When the gracious and compassionate Prophet took her
under his protection, a new student to whom all women would
be grateful was accepted into the school of knowledge and guid-
ance. Let us recall that, at this time, he was approaching 60. For
him to marry a widow with many children, and to accept the
related expenses and responsibilities, can be understood only as
a reflection of his vast reserves of humanity and compassion.
Umm Habiba was the daughter of Abu Sufyan, a long-
time bitter enemy of the Prophet and the most determined sup-
porter of unbelief. Yet his daughter was one of the earliest con-
verts. She emigrated to Abyssinia, where her husband died and
left her alone as an exile in desperate circumstances.
The Companions were few in number and could barely sup-
port themselves, let alone others. Umm Habiba had few options:
she could become a Christian and seek their aid (unthinkable); she
could go to her father’s house, a headquarters of the war against
Islam (unthinkable); or live as a beggar, although she belonged to
one of the richest and noblest Arab families, and so bring shame
upon her family name.
God recompensed Umm Habiba for all that she lost or sac-
rificed in the way of Islam. She suffered a lonely exile in an
insecure environment among people of a different race and reli-
gion, and remained devastated by her husband’s death. The
Prophet, learning of her plight, sent an offer of marriage through
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
214

--- Sayfa 227 ---
the king (Negus). This noble and generous action was a prac-
tical proof of: We have not sent you save as a mercy for all creatures
(21:107).
Through this marriage, Abu Sufyan’s powerful family was
linked with the Prophet and his household. This development
led them to adopt a different attitude to Islam. This marriage
also was influential far beyond Abu Sufyan’s family: his clan, the
Umayyads, ruled the Muslim community for almost a hundred
years and produced some of Islam’s most renowned warriors,
administrators, and governors in the early period. This marriage
started the change, for the depth of generosity and magnanimi-
ty of the Prophet’s soul simply overwhelmed them.
Zaynab bint Jahsh was of noble birth and descent and a
close relative of the Prophet. She was very pious, fasted a great
deal, kept long vigils, and gave generously to the poor. When the
Prophet asked that Zaynab be married to Zayd (his adopted
African son), her family and Zaynab herself were at first unwill-
ing, for they had hoped to marry their daughter to the Prophet.
Naturally, when they realized that he wanted Zaynab to marry
Zayd, they consented out of deference to their love for the
Prophet and his authority. The two were married.
Zayd had been captured as a child during a tribal war and
sold as a slave. His master, Khadija, presented him to Muhammad
when they were married. He immediately freed Zayd and shortly
afterwards adopted him as his son. Through this marriage, the
Prophet wanted to establish and fortify equality, to make this ide-
al a reality by ending the ancient Arab prejudice against a slave or
even a freed-man marrying a free-born woman. The Prophet
therefore was starting this hard task with his own relatives.
The marriage was an unhappy one. The noble-born Zaynab
was a good Muslim of a most pious and exceptional quality. The
ex-slave Zayd was among the first to embrace Islam, and also was
a good Muslim. Both loved and obeyed the Prophet, but they
were mutually incompatible. Zayd sought permission to end this
marriage several times, but always was told to be patient and
remain married to Zaynab.
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
215

--- Sayfa 228 ---
Once when the Prophet was talking with someone, Gabriel
revealed to him that he should marry Zaynab.51 This new mar-
riage was announced as a bond already contracted: We have mar-
ried her to you (33:37). This command was one of the severest
trials for the Prophet up to that time. Yet he had to marry Zaynab,
and thereby violate a tribal taboo, because God had commanded
it. ‘A’isha later said: “Had the Messenger of God been inclined to
suppress anything of what was revealed to him, he would have
suppressed this verse.”52
Zaynab proved herself a most worthy wife. She was always
aware of her responsibilities as well as the courtesies expected of
her, and fulfilled them to universal admiration.
Before Islam, an adopted son was regarded as a natural son, and
his wife was therefore regarded as a natural son’s wife. According
to the Qur’an, those who have been wives of your sons proceeding
from your loins (4:23) fall within the prohibited marriages. But
this prohibition does not include adopted sons, with whom there
is no real consanguinity. This deep-rooted pagan taboo was end-
ed by God’s command that the Prophet marry Zaynab.
Juwayriya bint Harith, daughter of Harith, chief of the
defeated Banu Mustaliq clan, was captured and held alongside the
common people of her clan. When taken to the Prophet, she was
in considerable distress due to the fact that her kinsmen had lost
everything and because of her profound hatred and enmity toward
Muslims. The Prophet understood her wounded pride, dignity,
and suffering, as well as how to heal all of them. He agreed to pay
her ransom and set her free, and then offered to marry her. How
gladly Juwayriya accepted this offer can easily be imagined.
About 100 non-ransomed families were freed when the
Ansar (the Helpers) and the Muhajirun (the Emigrants) learned
that the Bani Mustaliq were related to the Prophet. A tribe so
honored could not be allowed to remain in slavery.53 In this way,
the hearts of Juwayriya and all her people were won.
Safiyya was the daughter of Huyayy, a chief of the Jewish
Khaybar tribe. This tribe earlier had persuaded the Banu Qurayza
tribe to break their treaty with the Prophet. Since she was small,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
216

--- Sayfa 229 ---
she had seen her family and relatives oppose the Prophet. Her
father, brother, and husband had fallen at the hands of Muslims,
and eventually she was captured by them.
The attitudes and actions of her family and relatives might
have nurtured in her a deep hatred of Muslims and a desire for
revenge. But 3 days before the Prophet arrived at Khaybar and
she was captured, she dreamed of a brilliant moon coming from
Madina, moving toward Khaybar, and falling into her lap. She
later said: “When I was captured, I began to hope my dream would
come true.” When she was brought before him, the Prophet set
her free and offered her the choice between remaining a Jewess
and going home or accepting Islam and becoming his wife. “I
chose God and His Messenger,” she said. They were married
shortly after that.
Raised to the Prophet’s household, she became a “Mother
of the Believers.” The Companions honored and respected her
accordingly, and so she witnessed at first hand the Muslims’
refinement and true courtesy. Her attitude changed completely,
and she appreciated the great honor of her new status. This mar-
riage caused many Jews to change their attitudes as they came
to see and know the Prophet closely.
Sawda bint Zam‘a was Sakran’s widow. Both were among
the first to embrace Islam. After being forced to emigrate to
Abyssinia to escape persecution, Sakran died and left his wife
destitute. To help her, Prophet Muhammad, although quite hard-
pressed to meet his own daily needs, married her. This marriage
took place some time after Khadija’s death.
Hafsa was ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab’s daughter. She had lost
her husband, who had emigrated to Abyssinia and then to
Madina, where he died from wounds received during a battle.
She remained a widow for a while. ‘Umar also desired, like Abu
Bakr, the honor and blessing of being close to the Prophet in
this world and in the Hereafter. Thus, the Prophet wed Hafsa to
protect and help the daughter of his faithful disciple.
These are some of the reasons for the Prophet’s multiple mar-
riages. Instead of sensuality, he married to provide helpless or wid-
Prophethood and Muhammad’s Prophethood
217

--- Sayfa 230 ---
owed women with dignified subsistence; console and honor
enraged or estranged tribespeople; establish a degree of relation-
ship and harmony between former enemies; gain certain unique-
ly gifted individuals for the cause of Islam, in particular some
exceptionally talented women; establish new relationship norms
among widely differing communities within the unifying bonds
of faith in God; and honor with family bonds those men who
would become his first two political successors.
These marriages were completely devoid of self-indulgence,
personal desire, lust, and all other charges leveled by his detractors.
With the exception of ‘A’isha, all of these women had been wid-
owed, and all of his marriages (after Khadija’s death) were con-
tracted when he was already old. If he had married any woman for
pure pleasure, he would have chosen virgins. Far from being acts
of self-indulgence, they were acts of self-discipline and self-sacrifice.
The number of the wives he was allowed was a special dis-
pensation within the law of Islam and unique to his person. When
the Revelation restricting polygamy came, he had contracted his
marriages already. Thereafter, the Prophet also could not marry
again.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
218

--- Sayfa 231 ---
CHAPTER 6
The Holy Qur’an

--- Sayfa 233 ---
THE HOLY QUR’AN
If We had sent down this Qur’an on a mountain, surely you
would have seen it humbled, rent asunder by fear of God. Such
comparisons do We coin for people that perhaps they may
reflect. (59:21)
T
he Qur’an is the Divine Word or Speech sent down to
humanity, the best pattern of creation that is uniquely
qualified to receive it. Despite the Qur’an’s weight and
gravity, most people cannot feel and appreciate its significance,
for they have closed their senses and faculties to it. Those who
alienate themselves and their inner life from the Qur’an receive
nothing from it.
For one who is a good “diver”
The Qur’an is an ocean replete with jewels;
While one indifferent to it
Has nothing to receive from it.
The Qur’an, revealed by God to meet all our needs, diffus-
es blessing and is peerless in its sublimity and holiness. Those
who obey it live a blessed life and acquire (spiritual) superiority
over others. The Qur’an changes their world into a kind of
Paradise, in which its blessings bloom like flowers. To benefit
from its blessing, we must obey its commands, reflect continu-
ally on its verses, and use it to answer our questions and solve
our problems. The Qur’an is the very essence of life; the more
you dedicate your life to it, the more blessed and fruitful your
life becomes. The opposite is just as true.
God’s Messenger declares: The best among you is one who
learns the Qur’an (with all the truths it contains) and then teach-
es it to others.1

--- Sayfa 234 ---
If we are to be included among the best, we should go through
the Qur’anic truths and teach them to others. The Qur’an is a
Divine letter to us. Its contents contain all the principles accord-
ing to which we must design our lives.
Our Creator has honored us with His Word. The more respect-
ful and obedient we are to this Word, the more honored and respect-
ed we are.
God’s Messenger, upon him be peace and blessings, also
declares: “One who proclaims (the truths) of the Qur’an open-
ly and recites it to announce it all people is like one who gives
alms openly. Another who recites it secretly is like one who gives
alms secretly.”2
Some people give alms openly to encourage others to do so.
By reciting the Qur’an publicly, one exhorts others by example.
Those who recite in secret should look for themselves in it, and
consider it addressed to them personally. Like ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz, Muhammad ibn Ka‘b al-Qurazi, and others, we should
consider that all Qur’anic commands and prohibitions, promis-
es and warnings are directed at us. If we do this, we will under-
stand the Qur’an better and regulate our life according to it.
If we recite the Qur’an sincerely and in full consciousness of
its being God’s Revealed Word, we will feel revived. If possible,
we should recite the Qur’an or hear its recitation as if God’s
Messenger were reciting it; or better yet, as if Gabriel were recit-
ing it to God’s Messenger; or even better still, as if we were
hearing it from God Almighty Himself.
ARGUMENTS FOR THE DIVINE AUTHORSHIP OF THE QUR’AN
•
When we study the Qur’an’s words, styles, and meanings
even superficially, we notice immediately that it is unique.
So, in rank and worth it is either below—even Satan cannot
claim this, nor does he conceive of it—or above all other
books. Since it is above, it must be the Word of God.
•
The Qur’an declares: You (O Muhammad) were not a reader
of any Scripture before it, nor did you write (such a Scripture)
with your right hand, for then those who follow falsehood might
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
222

--- Sayfa 235 ---
(have a right) to doubt it (29:48). Moreover, it is undeniable
that Prophet Muhammad was unlettered and that the Qur’an
has presented an open-ended and eternal challenge to human-
ity: If you are in doubt concerning that which We have sent down
onto Our servant (Muhammad), produce a chapter of the like
thereof, and call your witnesses, supporters, who are apart from
God, if you are truthful (2:23). No one has ever met this chal-
lenge successfully.
•
The Revelation spanned 23 years. How is it that such a
book, which deals with Divine truth, metaphysics, religious
beliefs and worship, prayer, law and morality, the afterlife,
psychology, sociology, epistemology, history, scientific facts,
and the principles of a happy life, never contradicts itself? In
fact, it openly declares that it contains no contradictions and
is therefore a Divine Book: Will they not then ponder on the
Qur’an? If it had been from other than God they would have
found therein much contradiction and incongruity (4:82).
•
The Qur’an is a literary masterpiece that cannot be duplicat-
ed. Its styles and eloquence, even its actual sentences, words,
and letters, form a miraculous harmony. With respect to rhythm,
music, and even geometric proportions, mathematical meas-
ures, and repetition, each is in its exact place and perfectly inter-
woven and interrelated with others.
•
Eloquence, poetry, and oratory enjoyed great prestige in pre-
Islamic Arabia. Poetry competitions were held regularly, and
winning poems were written in gold and hung on the Ka’ba’s
walls. The unlettered Prophet had never been heard to say
even a couple lines of poetry. However, the Qur’an he brought
eventually forced all known experts to surrender.
Even the unbelievers were captivated by it. Nevertheless,
to stop Islam from spreading, they said it was magical and
should not be listened to. But when poets such as Hansa and
Lebid converted and then abandoned poetry out of respect
for and awe of the Qur’an’s styles and eloquence, the unbe-
lievers had to confess: “If we call it a piece of poetry, it is not.
If we designate it a piece of rhymed prose, it is not. If we
The Holy Qur’an
223

--- Sayfa 236 ---
describe it as the word of a soothsayer, it is not.” At times,
they could not help listening to the Prophet’s recitation secret-
ly at night, but they could not overcome their arrogance long
enough to believe in its Divine origin.
•
Despite the high level of poetry, Arabic’s vocabulary was too
primitive to express metaphysical ideas or scientific, religious,
and philosophical concepts adequately. Islam, using the words
and expressions of a simple desert people, made Arabic so rich
and complex that it became the language of the most magnif-
icent civilization, one that made many entirely original con-
tributions to scientific, religious, metaphysical, literary, econom-
ic, juridical, social, and political areas. How could an unlet-
tered person launch a philological revolution that has no par-
allel in human history?
•
Despite its apparent simplicity, the Qur’an has many levels of
meaning. It illuminates the way for poets, musicians, and ora-
tors, as well as for sociologists, psychologists, scientists, econ-
omists, and jurists. Founders of true spiritual orders and schools
of law and conduct found in it all the principles needed to
guide their adherents. The Qur’an shows everyone how to solve
their problems and fulfill their spiritual quests. Can any other
book accomplish this?
•
However beautiful and interesting a book is, we read it at
most two or three times and then put it aside forever. Billions
of Muslims, on the other hand, have recited portions of the
Qur’an during their five daily prayers for the last fourteen cen-
turies. Many have recited it completely once a year, and some-
times even once or twice a month. The more we recite it, the
more we benefit from it and the more desire we feel to recite
it. People never get tired of its wording, meaning, and con-
tent, and it never loses any of its originality and freshness. As
time passes, it breathes new truths and meanings into minds
and souls, thereby increasing their activity and liveliness.
•
The Qur’an describes all our physical and spiritual aspects,
and contains principles to solve all social, economic, juridi-
cal, political, and administrative problems regardless of time
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
224

--- Sayfa 237 ---
or place. Furthermore, it satisfies the mind and spirit simul-
taneously, and guarantees happiness in both worlds.
No one, no matter how intelligent, can establish rules to
solve all potential problems. Even the best system must be
revised at least every 50 years. More importantly, no system
can promise eternal happiness, for their principles are restrict-
ed to this transient human life, which is infinitely short when
compared to the afterlife.
In contrast, no Qur’anic principle has become obsolete or
needs revision. For example, it states that wealth should not
circulate only among the rich (59:7); that government offices
should be entrusted to competent, qualified persons, and that
absolute justice should rule in public administration and all dis-
putes (4:58); that people can only have what they strive for
(53:39); and that whoever kills a person unjustly is the same as
one who would kill all humanity (5:32). These and many oth-
er principles (e.g., prohibiting usury, gambling, alcohol, and
extramarital sexual relations; enjoining prayer, fasting, alms-
giving, and good conduct), are strengthened through love and
awareness of God, the promise of an eternal happy life, and the
fear of punishment in Hell.
The Qur’an also unveils the mystery of humanity, cre-
ation, and the universe. The Qur’an, humanity, and the uni-
verse are the three “books” that make the Creator known to
us, and are three expressions of the same truth. Therefore, the
One Who created humanity and the universe also revealed
the Qur’an.
•
You cannot find people who do exactly what they ask oth-
ers to do, or whose deeds reflect them exactly. However, the
Qur’an is identical with Prophet Muhammad, and is the
embodiment of him in words, just as he is the embodiment
of the Qur’an in belief and conduct. They are two expres-
sions of the same truth. When asked about her husband’s
conduct, ‘A’isha replied: “Don’t you read the Qur’an? His
conduct was the Qur’an.” This clearly shows that the Qur’an
and Muhammad are the works of God Almighty.
The Holy Qur’an
225

--- Sayfa 238 ---
•
Authors are usually so influenced by their surroundings that
it is almost impossible for them to become detached. By
contrast, even though revealed in parts on certain occasions,
the Qur’an is as equally universal and objective when deal-
ing with particular issues as it is exact and precise when
dealing with universal matters. It uses precise expressions
even while describing the beginning of creation and the end
of time, and humanity’s creation and life in the other world.
Just as it sometimes draws universal conclusions from par-
ticular events, it sometimes goes from universal principles
to particular events. This typical Qur’anic style cannot be
found in any human work and is, therefore, another sign of
its Divine origin.
•
No author has ever written a book in his or her field that is
as accurate as the Qur’an is in such varied fields as religion
and law, sociology and psychology, eschatology and morali-
ty, history and literature, and so on. The Qur’an also con-
tains the principles of all branches of knowledge, either in
summary or in detail, and not even one piece of this knowl-
edge has ever been contradicted. What more is needed to
prove its Divine origin?
•
Can any author claim that his or her work is absolutely cor-
rect and will remain so forever? Scientific conclusions change
constantly. The Torah and Gospels undergo continuous alter-
ation. Even a superficial study of Bibles published in different
times and languages shows these alterations. Yet the Qur’an’s
truths retain their freshness or, in the words of Said Nursi, “as
time grows older, the Qur’an grows ever younger.” No mis-
take or contradiction has ever been found in it, and ever since
the beginning of its revelation it has remained unchanged and
displayed its uniqueness. It continues, even now, to conquer
new hearts and reveal its hidden unlimited treasures, to bloom
like a heavenly rose with countless petals.
•
Based on your knowledge and reputation for honesty, can
you speak on behalf of the president, the prime minister,
and all other ministers; of associations for writers, lawyers,
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
226

--- Sayfa 239 ---
and workers; and of the board of university lecturers and
scientists? Can you claim to represent them as perfectly as
each would want you to? Can you legislate for all the affairs
of the country? This is just what the Prophet achieved through
the Qur’an. How can you claim that an unlettered person,
who was totally apolitical until he was 40, could achieve such
results without Divine inspiration and support?
•
The Prophet is admonished in the Qur’an. If he were its author,
would he give such a noticeable place to the grave slander
against his wife? Would he not hide the revelation ordering
him to marry Zaynab (discussed above), rather than publi-
cize it, if it did not come from God? ‘A’isha said later that if
the Prophet could have concealed any part of the Qur’an, he
would have concealed this.
His uncle Abu Talib, who raised him since he was 8
and protected him for 10 years after his declaration of
Prophethood, never embraced Islam. The Prophet loved
his uncle deeply and desired his conversion, but was told
that: You guide not whom you love, but God guides whom He
wills. He is best aware of those who are guided (28:56). If he
were the Qur’an’s author, he could have claimed that Abu
Talib had embraced Islam.
•
Many verses begin with “They ask you” and continue with
“Say (in answer).” These were revealed to answer questions
asked by Muslims and non-Muslims, especially the Jews of
Madina, about allowed or prohibited matters, the distribu-
tion of war gainings, (astrological) mansions of the moon,
Judgment Day, Dhul-Qarnayn (an ancient believing king who
made great conquests in Asia and Africa), the spirit, and so
on. One without an all-encompassing knowledge cannot
answer such questions. But his answers satisfied everybody.
This shows that he was taught by God, the All-Knowing.
•
The Prophet was very austere and shunned worldly gain, fame,
rulership, wealth, and pleasure. Also, he endured great hardship
and persecution. To claim that he invented the Qur’an means
that Muhammad the Trustworthy, as he was commonly known,
The Holy Qur’an
227

--- Sayfa 240 ---
was the greatest liar and cheat history has ever known. Why
would he falsely claim Prophethood and expose himself and
his family to severe deprivation and persecution? Such an
accusation, as well as that of saying that he wrote the Qur’an,
are totally groundless and lack evidence.
•
The Jews and Christians were very strong opponents. Eventually,
he had to fight the Jews of Madina several times and expel them.
Despite this, the Qur’an mentions Prophet Moses about 50
times and Jesus many times; it mentions Muhammad’s name
only four times. Why should a person who falsely claims
Prophethood mention the Prophets of his opponents? Can
there be any reason other than jealousy, prejudice, selfish-
ness, and other negative emotions for denying Muhammad’s
Prophethood?
•
The Qur’an also refers to certain facts of creation only recent-
ly established by modern scientific methods. How, except for
Divine authorship, could the Qur’an be correct on matters
which the people listening to it had no idea? For example, if
the Qur’an were a regular book, could it have contained: Do
not the unbelievers realize that the heavens and the earth were one
unit of creation before we split them asunder? (21:30).
Whether the Qur’an refers explicitly or implicitly to scientific
facts, and the exact relationship between the Qur’an and modern
science, are matters of considerable controversy among Muslim
intellectuals. Therefore, we will discuss this subject at some length.
SCIENCE AND RELIGION
Science considers any fact, established through empirical meth-
ods, to be scientific. Therefore, assertions not established through
observation and experiment are only theories or hypotheses.
As science cannot be sure about the future, it does not make
definite predictions. Doubt is the basis of scientific investigation.
However Prophet Muhammad, who was taught by the All-
Knowing, made many decisive predictions. Most have come true
already; the rest are waiting for their time to come true. Many
Qur’anic verses point to recently discovered and established sci-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
228

--- Sayfa 241 ---
entific facts. As pointed out earlier, the Qur’an mentions many
important issues of creation and natural phenomena that even
the most intelligent person living fourteen centuries ago could
not have known. Furthermore, it uses the Prophets’ miracles to
allude to the farthest reaches of science, which originated in the
Knowledge of the All-Knowing One.
Does the Qur’an contain everything? The Qur’an describes
humanity and the universe. It declares:
With Him are the keys of the Unseen. None but He knows
them. And He knows what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf
falls but with His Knowledge, not a grain amid the darkness of
the earth, nothing of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a Manifest
Book. (6:59)
Ibn Mas‘ud says that the Qur’an provides information on
everything, but that we may not be able to see everything in it.
Ibn ‘Abbas, the “Interpreter of the Qur’an” and “Scholar of the
Umma,” asserts that if he loses his camel’s rein, he can find it by
means of the Qur’an. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, a major scholar who
lived in Egypt in the 15th century, explains that all sciences or
branches of knowledge can be found in the Qur’an.
How can a medium-sized book, which also contains a great
deal of repetition, contain everything we need to know about
life, science, social conduct, creation, past and future, and so on?
Before explaining this important matter, we should point
out that to benefit from the Qur’an, which transcends time and
location and is not bound by its audience’s intellectual level, we
have to prepare ourselves to do so. We should have firm belief
in it and do our best to implement its principles to our daily life.
We must refrain from sin as much as possible. As the Qur’an
declares we only get what we strive for (53:39), we should, like
a deep-sea explorer, dive into its “ocean” and, without becom-
ing tired or bored, continue studying it until we die.
Moreover, we need a good command of Arabic and sufficient
knowledge of all branches of the natural and religious sciences.
A good interpretation necessitates cooperation among scientists
from all natural and social sciences, and religious scholars who are
The Holy Qur’an
229

--- Sayfa 242 ---
experts on Qur’anic commentary, hadith, fiqh (Islamic jurispru-
dence), theology, and spiritual sciences. While reciting and study-
ing the Qur’an, we should regard it as being its first addressee,
consciously aware that each verse addresses us directly. If we con-
sider, for example, its historical accounts of the Prophets and their
peoples as unrelated to us, we will derive no benefit.
According to its nature and significance, worth and place in exis-
tence, everything has its own place in the Qur’an. The Qur’an con-
tains everything, but not to the same degree. It pursues four pur-
poses: to prove the existence and Unity of God, Prophethood,
bodily resurrection, and worship of God and justice.
To realize its purposes, the Qur’an draws our attention to
God’s acts in the universe, His matchless art displayed through
creation, the manifestations of His Names and Attributes, and
the perfect order and harmony seen in existence. It mentions cer-
tain historical events, and establishes the rules of personal and
social good conduct and morality, as well as the principles of a
happy, harmonious social life. In addition, it explains how to
worship and please our Creator, gives us some information about
the next life, and tells us how to gain eternal happiness and be
saved from eternal punishment.
Everything is contained in the Qur’an, but at different lev-
els. Therefore, not everything is readily apparent. The Qur’an’s
main duty is to teach about God’s perfection, essential qualities,
and acts, as well as our duties, status, and how to serve Him.
Thus, it contains them as seeds or nuclei, summaries, principles,
or signs that are explicit or implicit, allusive or vague, or sugges-
tive. Each occasion has its own form, and is presented in the
best way for making each Qur’anic purpose known according to
the existing requirements and context. For example:
Human progress in science and industry has brought about
such scientific and technological wonders as airplanes, electrici-
ty, motorized transport, and radio and telecommunication, all of
which have become basic and essential for our modern, materi-
alistic civilization. The Qur’an has not ignored them and points
to them in two ways:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
230

--- Sayfa 243 ---
•
The first is, as will be explained below, by way of the Prophets’
miracles.
•
The second concerns certain historical events. In other words,
the wonders of human civilization only merit a passing refer-
ence, an implicit reference, or an allusion in the Qur’an.
For example, if an aircraft told the Qur’an: “Give me the right
to speak and a place in your verses,” the aircrafts of the sphere of
Divine Lordship (the planets, the Earth, the moon) would reply
on the Qur’an’s behalf: “You may take a place here in proportion
to your size.” If a submarine asked for a place, the submarines
belonging to that sphere, the heavenly bodies “swimming” in the
atmosphere’s vast “ocean” would say: “Compared to us, you are
invisible.” If shining, star-like electric lights demanded the right to
be included, the electric lights of that sphere (lightning, shooting
stars, and stars adorning the sky’s face) would reply: “Your right to
be mentioned and spoken about is proportional to your light.”
If the wonders of human civilization demanded a place
based on the fineness of their art, a fly would reply: “O be qui-
et! Even my wing has more right than you. If all of humanity’s
fine arts and delicate instruments were banded together, the del-
icate members of my tiny body would still be more wonderful
and exquisite. The verse: Those upon whom you call, apart from
God, shall never create (even) a fly, though they banded together to
do it (22:73), will silence you.”
The Qur’an’s viewpoint of life and the world is completely
different from the modern one. It sees the world as a guesthouse,
and people as temporary guests preparing themselves for eternal
life by undertaking their most urgent and important duties. As
that which is designed and used mostly for worldly purposes only
has a tiny share in servanthood to and worship of God, which is
founded upon love of truth and otherworldliness, it therefore has
a place in the Qur’an according to its merit.
The Qur’an does not explicitly mention everything neces-
sary for our happiness in this world and the next for another rea-
son: Religion is a divine test to distinguish elevated and base
spirits from each other. Just as raw materials are refined to sep-
The Holy Qur’an
231

--- Sayfa 244 ---
arate diamonds from coal and gold from soil, religion tests con-
scious beings to separate precious “ore” in the “mine” of human
potential from dross.
Since the Qur’an was sent to perfect us, it only alludes to those
future events pertaining to the world, which everyone will see at
the appropriate time, and only opens the door to reason to the
degree necessary to prove its argument. If everything was explicit,
the test would be meaningless, for the truth of the Divine obliga-
tions would be readily apparent. Given that we would then be
unable to deny or ignore them, the competition behind our test-
ing and trials would be unnecessary, for we would have to confirm
their truth. “Coal” spirits would remain with and appear to be no
different from “diamond” spirits.
As the great majority of people are always “average,” the
Qur’an uses a style and language that everyone can understand. An
ordinary person and a great scientist can benefit from the Qur’an,
regardless of his or her specialization. A most suitable way to do
this is through symbols, metaphors and allegories, comparisons
and parables. Those well-versed in knowledge (3:7) know how to
approach and benefit from the Qur’an, and conclude that it is the
Word of God.
Earlier civilizations would neither have benefited from nor
understood Qur’anic accounts of modern scientific and techno-
logical discoveries, so why mention them? Also, scientific “truths”
change constantly and therefore are not eternal.
God Almighty gave us intelligence, and the Qur’an urges us
to use it to study ourselves, nature, and surrounding events. If it
mentioned modern scientific and technological discoveries or
everything pertaining to life, nature, history, and humanity, cre-
ating us in our present form would have been pointless. God cre-
ated us as the best pattern of creation, and gave us many intellec-
tual faculties. But if everything were clear, we would not need
these, for we would already know everything.
Finally, if the Qur’an contained explicit references to every-
thing we want to know, it would be so large that its complete
recitation would be impossible. We would be unable to benefit
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
232

--- Sayfa 245 ---
from its spiritual enlightenment, and would become really bored
while reciting it. Such results contradict the reasons for the Qur’an’s
revelation and its purposes.
THE CONCEPT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Despite the disasters caused by science and technology, their mis-
taken approach to the truth, and their failure to bring happiness,
we cannot condemn them outright and become pure idealists.
Science and technology do not bear the full responsibility for
humanity being devalued, human feelings being diminished, and
certain human virtues, along with health and the ability to think,
being seriously weakened. Rather, the fault lies with scientists
who avoid their responsibilities, who cause science to develop in
a materialistic and almost purely scientific atmosphere, and then
let it be exploited by an irresponsible minority. Many worrying
conditions probably would not exist if scientists had remained
aware of their social responsibility, and if the Church had not
forced it to develop in opposition to religion.
Flowing to the future like a rapid flood full of energy and
vitality, and sometimes resembling a dazzling garden, the natu-
ral world is like a book to study, an exhibition to behold, and a
trust from which we can benefit. We are responsible for study-
ing the meaning and content of this trust so that we and future
generations may benefit from it. If we wish, we can call this rela-
tionship “science.”
Science can also be described as comprehending what things
and events tell us, what the Divine laws reveal to us, and striving
to understand the Creator’s purpose. Created to rule creation, we
need to observe and read, to discern and learn about our surround-
ings so that we can find the best way to exert our influence and
control. When we reach this level, by the decree of the Exalted
Creator, everything will submit to us and we will submit to God.
There is no reason to fear science. The danger does not lie
with science and the founding of the new world it will usher in,
but rather with ignorance and irresponsible scientists and others
who exploit it for their own selfish interests.
The Holy Qur’an
233

--- Sayfa 246 ---
If true science directs human intelligence toward eternity
without expecting any material gain, undertakes a tireless and
detailed study of existence to discover absolute truth, and fol-
lows the methods required to reach this aim, what can we say
about modern science other than it cannot fulfill our expecta-
tions. Although usually presented as a conflict between Christianity
and science, the conflicts during the Renaissance were mainly
between scientists (not science per se) and the Catholic Church.
Copernicus, Galileo, and Bacon were not anti-religious; in fact,
we could say that their religious commitment drove them toward
scientific truth.
The religious thought springing from eternality, and the
resulting love and zeal accompanied by feelings of poverty and
impotence before the Eternal, All-Powerful and All-Knowing
Creator, enabled the Muslim world’s great five-century scientif-
ic advance until the close of the twelfth century. The driving
concept of science as based on Divine Revelation was represent-
ed almost perfectly by illustrious figures who, imbued with eter-
nality, tirelessly studied existence to attain eternity. Their com-
mitment to Divine Revelation caused It to diffuse a light that
engendered a new concept of science in human souls.
If Islamic civilization had not been so badly damaged by the
horrific Mongol and numerous destructive Crusader invasions,
the world would be very different today. If the Islamic concept
of science as being approved and appropriated by the commu-
nity, as if it were part of the Divine Message and pursued as an
act of worship, had continued to flourish, our world would be
more enlightened, its intellectual life richer, its technology more
wholesome, and its sciences more promising. All Islamic science
sought, based on eternality, was to benefit humanity by helping
us to aspire for the other world and to handle things responsi-
bly for the sake and pleasure of God Almighty.*
Only the love of truth, defined as approaching existence not
for material advantage or worldly gain but to observe and rec-
ognize it as it really is, gives true direction to scientific studies.
Those with such love will achieve their goal; those who do not
have such love, who are led by worldly ambitions, material aspi-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
234

--- Sayfa 247 ---
ration, ideological prejudice and fanaticism, either will fail or
turn science into a deadly weapon to be used against humanity.
Intellectuals, educational institutions, and mass media must
strive to deliver modern science from the current lethal atmosphere
of materialism and ideological fanaticism. To redirect science
toward human values, scientists’ minds must be freed of ideologi-
cal superstition and fanaticism, and their souls purified of desire for
worldly gain and advantage. This will enable them to secure true
freedom of thought and engage in pure science. Their centuries-
long battle against the clergy and corrupt concepts formed in the
name of religion, and their subsequent denunciation of religious
people as backward, narrow-minded, and fanatic, should serve as
a warning to scientists not to fall into the same trap.
Intellectual and scientific despotism arise from a group’s own
self-interest and power-seeking, ideology and fanaticism. Such
groups can be found among both scientists and clerics. Despotism
is despotism, whether it arises from restricting reason to corrupt
and distorted religious conceptions and clerical domination or
its scientific counterpart. Islam continually urges humanity to study
nature, the exhibition of Divine works, to reflect on creation and
what has been created, and to approach it responsibly in order to
benefit humanity.
When studied without prejudice and preconception, the
Qur’an shows that it promotes love of science and humanity, justice
and order. The Qur’an is full of verses urging us to study nature,
which it sees as a place of exhibition of Divine works. It also urges
us to reflect upon creation and the created, to approach it responsi-
bly, and to use it to everybody’s benefit. According to Islam, the
whole point of seeking knowledge is to discover the meaning of
existence so that we can reach the Creator and benefit humanity and
all creation. We are to combine that knowledge with belief, love and
altruism. Humanity has seen such an ideal in practice: the exempla-
ry life of Prophet Muhammad and the conduct of many of its rep-
resentatives who perfected their thoughts and deeds.
So what is there to fear from science? Planned acts based on
knowledge sometimes cause bad results, but certainly ignorance
The Holy Qur’an
235

--- Sayfa 248 ---
and disorganization always cause bad results. Instead of oppos-
ing the products of science and technology, we must use them
to bring happiness to humanity. Herein lies the essence of our
greatest problem, for we cannot take measures against the Space
Age or erase atomic or hydrogen bomb-making knowledge.
Although science might be a deadly weapon in the hands of
an irresponsible minority, we should not hesitate to adopt both
it and its products and then use them to establish a civilization
in which we can secure our happiness in this world and the next.
It is pointless to curse machines and factories, because machines
will continue to run and factories to operate. Science and its
products will begin to benefit us only when people of truth and
belief begin to direct our affairs.
We have never suffered harm from a weapon in the hands
of angels. Whatever we have suffered has come from those who
still believe that only might is right. This situation will continue
until we build a world on faith and science.
DOES THE QUR’AN ALLUDE TO
SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENTS?
Before answering this question, we should point out one impor-
tant fact: Considering science as opposed to religion and scien-
tific study as separate from and independent of the Qur’an is
just as mistaken as trying to reduce the Qur’an to a science text-
book by showing that every new scientific theory or fact can be
found in it.
For example, some have claimed, especially in Turkey, that
dabbet al-ard (a little moving creature) mentioned in Qur’an
27:82 is the virus that causes AIDS. However, this is a hasty
conclusion for several reasons: the Qur’an is silent about this
particle’s nature; if we accept this assertion, we also must accept
other venereal disease-causing bacteria or viruses; and, we can-
not know whether new and more lethal viral diseases will appear
in the future.
The context in which dabbet al-ard appears suggests that it
will emerge toward the end of this world, when almost no one
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
236

--- Sayfa 249 ---
believes in God. So, we must not show haste in trying to find
some type of correspondence between a Qur’anic verse and
every new development in science and technology.
Scientific theories are usually like clothes, for both are dis-
carded after a while. Trying to show that every new scientific fact
or theory can be found in the Qur’an displays an inferiority com-
plex and makes science more important than the Qur’an. Each
Qur’anic verse and expression has a universal content. Therefore,
any time-specific interpretation can address only one aspect of
that universal content.
Every interpreter, scientist, and saint prefers a particular
aspect as a result of his or her spiritual discovery or intuition, per-
sonal evidence, or natural disposition. Besides, we accept both
Newton’s physics and Einstein’s physics as science and therefore
true. Although in absolute terms both may be false, there certain-
ly must be some truth in both.
Causality is a veil spread by God Almighty over the rapid
flux of existence so that we can plan our lives to some degree.
This means that Newton’s physics and Einstein’s physics are
only relatively true. In short, while pondering the Qur’anic vers-
es, we should consider the relative truths found in existence and
our lives, which are much more numerous than the unchanging
absolute truths.
Qur’anic expressions have multiple meanings. For example,
consider the verses: He let forth the two seas that meet together,
between them a barrier, they do not overpass (55:19-20). These verses
indicate all the pairs of “seas” or realms, spiritual and material, fig-
urative and actual, from the realms of Lordship and servanthood
to the spheres of necessity and contingency, from this world to the
Hereafter (including this visible, corporeal world and all unseen
worlds), the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, the Mediterranean and
Red seas, salt water and sweet water in the seas and underground,
and such large rivers as the Euphrates and Tigris that carry sweet
water and salty seas to which they flow. All of these, together with
many others I do not need to mention here, are included in these
verses, either literally or figuratively.
The Holy Qur’an
237

--- Sayfa 250 ---
So even if a Qur’anic verse or expression appears to point
exactly to an established scientific fact, we should not restrict its
meaning to that fact. Rather, we should consider all other pos-
sible meanings and interpretations as well.
On the other hand, sometimes the Qur’an does point or
allude to specific scientific developments and facts. Being the
Divine Revelation that includes everything wet or dry (6:59), it
cannot exclude them. Indeed, it refers to them directly or indi-
rectly, but not in the manner of science and materialistic or nat-
uralistic philosophy.
The Qur’an is not a science textbook that has to expound
upon cosmological or scientific matters; rather, it is the eternal
interpretation of the Book of the Universe and the interpreter of
all natural and other sciences. It comments upon the visible and
invisible worlds, and discloses the spiritual treasures of the Divine
Beautiful Names in the heavens and the Earth. The Qur’an is the
key leading to an understanding of the hidden realities behind
events taking place in nature and human life, and is the tongue of
the hidden worlds in the manifest world.
The Qur’an is like the sun shining in the spiritual and intellec-
tual sky of Islam. It is the sacred map of the next world; the
expounder of the Divine Attributes, Names, and acts; and the edu-
cator of humanity that guides us to truth and virtue. It is a book
of law and wisdom, worship and prayer, Divine commands and
prohibitions. Fully satisfying our spiritual and intellectual needs, it
leaves no theological, social, economic, political, or even scientific
issue undiscussed, whether in brief or in detail, directly or through
allusion or symbols.
The Qur’an considers creation only for the sake of knowing
its Creator; science considers creation only for its own sake. The
Qur’an addresses humanity; science addresses only those who
specialize in it. Since the Qur’an uses creation as evidence and
proof to guide us, its evidence must be easily understandable to
all of us non-specialists. Guidance requires that relatively unim-
portant things should be touched on briefly, while subtle points
should be discussed as completely as possible through parables
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
238

--- Sayfa 251 ---
and comparisons. Guidance should not change what is obvious,
so that people are not confused. If it did, how could we derive
any benefit?
Like everything else, science has its source in one of God
Almighty’s Beautiful Names. The Name All-Healing shines on
medicine; geometry and engineering depend on the Names All-
Just, All-Shaping, and All-Harmonizing; and philosophy reflects
the Name All-Wise. As pointed out above, the Creator refers in
the Qur’an to everything that He has allowed us to learn and use
for our material and spiritual progress.
The Qur’an’s primary aims are to make God Almighty known,
to open the way to faith and worship, and to organize our individ-
ual and social life so that we may attain perfect happiness in both
worlds. To achieve this aim, it refers to things and events, as well as
scientific facts, in proportion to their importance. Thus the Qur’an
provides detailed explanations of the pillars of faith, the fundamen-
tals of religion, the foundations of human life, and essentials of wor-
ship, but only hints at other relatively less significant things. The
meaning of a verse may be compared to a rosebud: it is hidden by
successive layers of petals. A new meaning is perceived as each petal
unfolds, and people discover one of those meanings according to
their capacity and are satisfied with it.
Examples
One way the Qur’an hints of technological advances and marks
their final development is by mentioning the miracles of the
Prophets.
•
It encourages us to fly in the air and alludes implicitly to the
fact that one day we will make spaceships and aircraft: And
to Solomon (We subjugated) the wind; its morning course was a
month’s journey, and its evening course was a month’s journey
(34:12).
•
It invites us to learn how to cure every illness: (Jesus said):
I also heal the blind and the leper, and bring to life the dead, by
the leave of God (3:49), and hints that one day we will be so
successful that people will find it hard to believe that they
will actually die.
The Holy Qur’an
239

--- Sayfa 252 ---
•
The verse: Said he who possessed knowledge of the Book: “I will
bring it (the throne of the Queen of Sheba) to you (Solomon in
Jerusalem) before ever your glance returns to you” (27:40), fore-
tells that one day images or even physical items will be trans-
mitted instantly through knowledge of the Divine Book of
the Universe, just as those with knowledge of the Book of
Divine Revelation can bring things from a long distance in
the blink of an eye.
•
The Qur’an symbolically informs us that it might be possible
to identify a murderer by some cells taken from his body at the
time of death: A murderer was revealed in the time of Moses,
by smiting the slain man with part of a cow that God Almighty
ordered the Children of Israel to slaughter (2:67-73).
Below are further examples to illustrate the Qur’an’s allu-
sions to scientific facts and developments.
•
The Creator, Who is not bound by the human concept of
time, informs us that, in a general sense, the future will be
the age of knowledge and information, as well as an age of
faith and belief: Soon We shall show them Our signs in the out-
er world and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to
them that this is truth. Is it not enough that your Lord witness-
es all things? (41:53).
From the very early days of Islam, Sufis have interpret-
ed this verse as a sign and assurance of the spiritual wisdom
for which they strive. But if the verse is read in the context
of scientific progress, a progress significantly initiated and
advanced by Muslims, the mere fact of the verse will be seen
to be a miracle.
Everything within the fold of human thinking and
research affirms the Creator’s Oneness, as the true nature and
interrelationship of microcosm and macrocosm come to be
further disclosed and better understood. When we see hun-
dreds of books on this point, we understand that what was
Divinely revealed is near at hand. Even now we feel that we
shall soon hear and even understand testimonies and praises
to God through thousands of nature’s tongues:
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
240

--- Sayfa 253 ---
The seven heavens and the Earth, and all things therein,
declare His Glory. There is not a thing but celebrates His
praise. And yet you do not understand how they declare His
Glory. Truly He is Oft-Forbearing, Most Forgiving. (17:44)
We already understand something of this verse’s import.
The smallest atoms as well as the largest nebulae speak to
us, in the language of their being, of their submission to the
One God and so glorify Him. However, those who can lis-
ten to and understand this universal praise are very few.
•
What the Qur’an reveals about the embryo’s formation and
developmental phases in the uterus is striking. Consider the
following:
O mankind! If you have a doubt about the Resurrection,
(consider) that We created you out of dust, then out of
sperm, then out of a leech-like cloth, then out of a lump of
flesh, partly formed and partly unformed, in order that We
may manifest (what We will) to you. (22:5)
In another verse, this development is explained in greater
detail, and the distinct phases are emphasized more clearly:
Man We created from a quintessence (of clay). Then We
placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly
fixed. Then we made the sperm into a clot of congealed
blood. Then of that clot We made a lump (embryo); then
we made out of that lump bones and clothed the bones
with flesh. Then We developed out of it a new (distinct,
individual) creature. (23:12-14)
•
What the Qur’an says about milk and its production is as
brilliant as the drink itself, and our understanding of it has
brought us great benefits: And verily in cattle (too) will you
find an instructive sign. From what is from their bodies, between
excretions and blood, We produce, for your drink, milk, pure and
agreeable to those who drink it (16:66).
The Qur’an narrates the process in remarkable detail:
part-digestion and absorption of what is ingested as food,
and then a second process and refinement in the glands. Milk
The Holy Qur’an
241

--- Sayfa 254 ---
is a wholesome and agreeable source of human nourishment,
and yet its owner rejects it as useless.
•
The Qur’an reveals that all things are created in pairs: Glory be
to God, who created in pairs all things, of what the earth produces,
of themselves, and of which they have no knowledge (36:36).
Everything that exists has a counterpart, whether oppo-
site or complementary. The complementarity of human, ani-
mal, and certain plant genders has long been known. But what
about the pairs of things of which we have no knowledge?
This may refer to a whole range of entities, inanimate as well
as animate. In the subtle forces and principles of nature with-
in (and among) animate or inanimate entities, there are many
kinds of pairs. All things, as our modern instruments confirm,
occur in twos.
•
The Qur’an recounts, in its own unique idiom, the first cre-
ation of the world and its living inhabitants: Do not the unbe-
lievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined together (as a
single mass), before We clove them asunder? We made from water
every living thing. Will they not then believe? (21:30).
This meaning of the verse is clear, and should not be
obscured with hypotheses as to whether the primary materi-
al in creation is an ether or a large cloud, a huge nebula or a
mass of hot gas, or something else. The Qur’an states that
every living thing was created of water. Whether the water
itself was caused by gases and vapors rising from the ground,
condensing, and then returning as rain to form seas and pre-
pare a suitable environment for life, or by some other process,
is relatively unimportant.
The verse explicitly presents the universe as a single mir-
acle of creation. Each thing in it is an integral part of that
miracle, and contains signs that prove its claim. Everything
is interconnected, just like the leaves of a massive tree. They
are all different, but resemble each other and are linked to a
common root. The verse also emphasizes water’s vitality and
significance, for it constitutes three-fourths of the body mass
of most living creatures.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
242

--- Sayfa 255 ---
•
The sun has a special and significant place. The Qur’an reveals
its most important aspects in four words, whose full meaning
cannot be rendered easily: And the sun runs its course (mus-
taqarr) determined for it. That is His decree, the Exalted in Might,
the All-Knowing (36:38).
Given the context, mustaqarr may mean a determined
orbit, a fixed place of rest or dwelling, or a determined route
in time. We are told that the sun follows a predetermined
course toward a particular point. Our solar system is head-
ing toward the constellation Lyra at an almost inconceivable
speed: Every second we come ten miles closer (almost a mil-
lion miles a day). Our attention also is drawn to the fact that
when the sun finishes its appointed task, it will abide by a
command and come to rest.**
Such is the richness of the Qur’an, which explains many
truths in so few words. Here, in only four words, many
vague things were clarified at a time when people generally
believed that the sun made a daily circuit around the Earth.
•
Another inspiring and eloquent Qur’anic verse concerns the
universe’s expansion, mentioned in only four words: And
the firmament: We constructed it with power and skill, and
We are spreading it (51:47-48).
The verse reveals that the distance between celestial bod-
ies is increasing, which means that the universe is expanding.
In 1922, the astronomer Hubble claimed that all galaxies,
except the five closest to Earth, are moving further away into
space at a speed directly proportional to their distance from
the Earth. According to him, a galaxy one million light years
distant is moving away at a speed of 168 km/year, a galaxy
two million light years distant at twice that speed, and so on.
Le Maître, a Belgian mathematician and priest, later proposed
and developed the theory that the universe is expanding. No
matter how we try to express this reality, whether through
Hubble’s coefficient or a future theory, the Revelation is unmis-
takably clear on the reality itself.
•
The Qur’an provides some indication of the invisible oper-
ation of various laws as attraction and repulsion, rotation
The Holy Qur’an
243

--- Sayfa 256 ---
and revolution: God is He Who raised the heavens without any
pillars that you can see (13:2).
All celestial bodies move in order, balance, and harmo-
ny. They are held and supported by invisible pillars, some of
which are repulsion or centrifugal forces: He holds back the
sky from falling on earth, except by His leave (22:65).
At any moment, the heavens could fall upon the Earth.
That the All-Mighty does not allow this to happen is yet anoth-
er instance of the universal obedience to His Word. Modern
science explains this as a balance of centripetal and centrifugal
forces. What is of far greater importance, however, is that we
turn our minds to that obedience and to the Divine Mercy that
holds the universe in its reliable motion, rather than deciding
to follow Newton’s or Einstein’s theories about the mechanical
and mathematical terms of that obedience.
•
Previously, some Qur’anic commentators thought travel to
the moon, once considered a very remote possibility, could
be found in: By the moon’s fullness! You shall surely travel from
stage to stage (84:18-19).
Earlier commentators took this as a figurative reference
to our spiritual life, an ascent from one stage to the next, and
from one heaven to another. Others interpreted it as referring
to change in general, from one state to another. Later inter-
preters gave ambiguous meanings, because the literal mean-
ing did not agree with their beliefs about travelling such dis-
tances. But in fact, the more appropriate sense of the words
following the oath By the moon! given the verse’s immediate
context, is that of really travelling to the moon, whether lit-
erally or figuratively.
•
The Qur’anic description of the Earth’s geographical shape
and change in that shape are particularly interesting: Do they
not see how We gradually shrink the land from its outlying bor-
ders? Is it then they who will be victors? (21:44).
The reference to shrinking from its borders could relate
to the now-known fact that the Earth is compressed at the
poles, rather than to the erosion of mountains by wind and
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
244

--- Sayfa 257 ---
rain, of coastal areas by the sea, or of the gradual desertifica-
tion of agricultural land.
At a time when people generally believed that the Earth
was flat and stationary, the Qur’an explicitly and implicitly
revealed that it is round. More unexpectedly still, it also says
that its precise shape is more like an ostrich egg than a sphere:
After that He shaped the Earth like an egg, whence He caused to
spring forth the water thereof, and the pasture thereof (79:30-31).
The verb daha’ means “to shape like an egg,” and its
derived noun da’hia is still used to mean “an egg.” As this
scientific fact may have appeared incorrect to scientists liv-
ing before the advent of modern science, some interpreters
misunderstood the word’s meaning. They understood it as
“stretched out,” perhaps fearing that its literal meaning
might be difficult to understand and thus mislead people.
Modern scientific instruments recently established that the
Earth is shaped more like an egg than a perfect sphere, and
that there is a slight flattening around the poles as well as a
slight curving around the equator.
•
As a last example, consider what the Qur’an says about the
sun and the moon: We have made the night and the day as two
signs; the sign of the night We have obscured, while the sign of
the day We have made to enlighten you (17:12).
According to Ibn ‘Abbas, the sign of the night refers to the
moon, and the sign of the day to the sun. Therefore, from the sign
of the night We have obscured, we understand that the moon
once emitted light just as the sun does, and that for some rea-
son God took away its light, causing it to darken or become
obscured. While the verse accurately recounts the moon’s past,
it also points to the future destiny of other heavenly bodies.
Many other verses are related to what we now call scientif-
ic facts. Their existence indicates that our quest for knowledge
is a portion of Divine Mercy graciously bestowed by our Creator.
Indeed, Divine Mercy is one of the Qur’an’s names. All the truth
and knowledge that it contains is beyond our ability to recount
or even to hold in our mind.
The Holy Qur’an
245

--- Sayfa 258 ---
We must remember, however, that while the Qur’an alludes
to many scientific truths, it is not a textbook of science or scien-
tific explanations. Rather it is, and has always been understood by
believers to be, the book of guidance that teaches us the way to
right belief and right action so that we may be worthy of Divine
Mercy and Forgiveness. It is our responsibility to ensure that the
pursuit of scientific and other kinds of knowledge is conducted in
the light of the Qur’an, which so encourages and supports it.
Such an approach results in knowledge that will not engender
arrogance and self-pride, for such feelings lead to mental desola-
tion and human degradation, not to mention the degradation of
the Earth, our temporary home and Divinely given trust.
WHY WE REFER TO SCIENCE AND SCIENTIFIC FACTS
We refer to science and scientific facts when explaining Islam
because some people only accept scientific facts. Materialists and
both non- and anti-religious people have sought to exploit sci-
ence to defy religion and give their ideas more prestige than they
deserve. Through this approach, they have misled and corrupt-
ed the minds of many people. Therefore, we must learn how to
talk with them in their own terminology to prove that science
and technology do not contradict Islam. We have to turn their
arguments against them by evaluating them and then using
them to guide people to the right way.
Such an approach is entirely permissible, for how can we dis-
pute what such people say if we are not well-versed in their facts
and ideas? The Qur’an urges us to reflect and study, to observe the
stars and galaxies. They impress upon us the Magnificence of the
Creator, exhort us to wander among people, and direct our atten-
tion to the miraculous nature of our organs and physical creation.
From atoms to the largest beings, from the first human being’s
appearance on Earth until our final departure, the Qur’an places all
creation before our eyes. Touching upon a multitude of facts, it tells
us that those who truly fear God, among His servants, are those who have
knowledge (35:28), and so encourages us to seek knowledge, to
reflect and research. However, we must never forget that all such
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
246

--- Sayfa 259 ---
activities must comply with the spirit of the Qur’an. Otherwise,
even though we claim to be following its advice and command,
actually we will be moving away from it.
Science and its facts can and should be used to explain Islamic
facts. But if we use them to show off our knowledge, whatever we
say cannot influence our hearers in the right way, if at all. Bright
and persuasive words and arguments lose their effectiveness if we
have the wrong intention: they get as far as the listeners’ ear-
drums and no further. Similarly, if our arguments seek to silence
others instead of persuade them, we actually will be blocking their
way to a correct understanding. And so our efforts will fail, and
our goals remain unachieved.
However, if we try to persuade with a full and proper sin-
cerity, even those who need such arguments to believe will
receive their portion and benefit. Sometimes a sincere argument
may be far more beneficial than one in which you spoke rather
more freely and eloquently. Our primary aim when introducing
science and scientific facts, in accordance with our audience’s
level of understanding, must be to win the pleasure of God.
Science cannot be regarded as superior to religion, and sub-
stantial Islamic issues cannot use science or modern scientific facts
to justify or reinforce religion’s credibility. If we adopt such tech-
niques, we are proclaiming that we have doubts about the truths
of Islam and need science to support them. In addition, we cannot
accept science or scientific facts as absolute. Making science the
decisive criteria for the Qur’an’s authenticity or Divine origin,
thereby placing science over the Qur’an, is absurd, abhorrent, and
completely impermissible. Such arguments and allusions to science
have, at best, a secondary and supportive use. Their only possible
value is that they might open a door onto a way that certain peo-
ple simply would not know exists.
Science is to be used to awaken or stir some minds that oth-
erwise might remain asleep or unmoved. It is like a feather
duster used to brush the dust off the truth and the desire for
truth, which lie hidden in unstirred consciences. If we begin by
saying that science is absolute, we shall end up seeking to fit the
The Holy Qur’an
247

--- Sayfa 260 ---
Qur’an and Hadith to it. The result of such an undertaking can
only be doubt and confusion, especially when we cannot recon-
cile the Qur’an and Hadith with some present scientific asser-
tions that may be proven false in the future.
Our position must be clear: The Qur’an and hadith are true
and absolute. Science and scientific facts are true (or false) only
to the degree that they agree (or disagree) with these sources.
Even definitely established scientific facts cannot be pillars to
uphold the truths of faith; rather, they can be accepted only as
instruments giving us ideas or triggering our reflection on God,
Who establishes the truths of faith in our conscience. To expect
that this does or even could take place through science is a grave
error: faith comes only by Divine guidance.
Anyone who fails to grasp this has fallen into an error from
which it is hard to recover. Such people look for and gather evi-
dence from the universe and, trying to make it speak eloquently
in the Name of God, remain unconscious servants to nature and
nature worshippers. They study and speak of flowers, of the ver-
dancy and spring of nature, but not the least greenness or bud of
faith sprouts in their conscience. They may never even feel the
existence of God within their conscience. In appearance they do
not worship nature, but in reality that is what they are doing.
A man or a woman is a believer (mu’min) owing to the faith
(iman) in his or her heart, not to the great amount of knowledge
in his or her head. After we have understood as much as we can
about the objective and subjective evidence we have gathered, we
must break our dependence on the outer circumstances, qualities,
and conditions of such evidence. Only by doing this will we be able
to make any spiritual progress. When we abandon this depend-
ence and follow our heart and conscience within the Qur’an’s
light and guidance, then, if God wills, we will find the enlighten-
ment for which we are looking. As the German philosopher
Immanuel Kant once said: “I felt the need to leave behind all the
books I have read in order to believe in God.”
Undoubtedly, the grand Book of the Universe and the book
of humanity’s true nature, as well as their commentaries, have
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
248

--- Sayfa 261 ---
their proper place and significance. But after we use them, we
should put them aside and live with our faith, as it were, face to
face. This might sound rather abstract to those who have not gone
deep into the experience of faith and conscience. But for those
whose nights are bright with devotion, and who acquire wings
through their longing to aspire to their Lord, the meaning is clear.
ENDNOTE: Qur’anic perspective of the universe
According to Islam, the universe resembles a book written by
God, a palace built by Him to make Himself known to conscious
beings—primarily us. The universe essentially exists in God’s
Knowledge in meaning. Creation means that through His Will,
He specifies or gives a distinct character and form to that mean-
ing as species, races, families, or individuals. Then, through His
Power, He clothes each in matter so that it can exist in this time-
and-space constrained material realm. After a thing ceases to exist,
it continues to live in God’s Knowledge and in the memories of
those who saw it and through its offspring (if any). For example,
a dead flower continues to exist in God’s Knowledge, in the mem-
ories of those who saw it, and in its seeds.
Everything has five stages or degrees of existence. First, and
essentially, it exists in the Creator’s Knowledge as meaning. Even if
God Almighty did not create it (in the material realm), it would
exist in His Knowledge as meaning, for meaning constitutes the
essential existence of everything. Then, it exists in the Divine Will
as a form or a plan; as a material object in the material realm; as a
memory and through its offspring (if any); and, finally, its eternal
existence in the other world. God Almighty will use the debris of
this world to construct the other one. There, animals will continue
their existence, each species through a representative of its own
species, while each human being will find the eternal life designed
for him or her according to how he or she lived while in this world.
I hope now that the relationship between science and Islam
is clear.
The universe, which science studies, manifests God’s Names
and therefore has some sort of sanctity. Everything in it is a let-
The Holy Qur’an
249

--- Sayfa 262 ---
ter from God Almighty inviting us to study it and acquire knowl-
edge of Him. Thus, the universe is the collection of those letters
or, as Muslim sages call it, the Divine Book of Creation issuing
primarily from the Divine Attributes of Will and Power. The
Qur’an, which issues from the Divine Will of Speech, is the uni-
verse’s counterpart in written form. Just as there can be no con-
flict between a palace and the paper describing it, there can be
no conflict between the universe and the Qur’an, for they are
two different expressions of the same truth.
Similarly, humanity is a Divine book corresponding to the
Qur’an and the universe. This is why the term used to signify a
Qur’anic verse also means events occurring within human souls
and phenomena occurring in nature.
The Meaning of the First Command “Read!”
It is interesting that the first revelation of the Qur’an was: Read,
in and with the name of your Lord Who created. He created man of
an embryo suspended. Read, and your Lord is the Most Munificent,
Who taught by the Pen, taught man what he knew not (96:1-3).
The Qur’an ordered people to read when the local civilization
to which it was revealed had almost nothing to read. What does
this apparent contradiction tell us? Nothing less than that we are
to read, in the sense of studying, the universe as the Book of
Creation and its written counterpart, the Qur’an. We are to
observe the universe, perceive its meaning and content, and use
the resulting knowledge to deepen our appreciation of the beau-
ty and splendor of the Creator’s system and the infinitude of His
Might. And so we are obliged to penetrate the universe’s mani-
fold meanings, discover the Divine laws of nature, and establish a
world in which science and faith complement each other so that
we can be God’s vicegerent and attain true bliss in both worlds.
God Almighty has two kinds of laws. One is the Shari‘a, which
comprises His laws issuing from His Attribute of Speech, governs
humanity’s religious life, and serves as the basis for reward or pun-
ishment, which are usually given in the afterlife. The second is the
Divine laws governing creation and life as a whole, which issue
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
250

--- Sayfa 263 ---
from His Attribute of Will and are generally (but mistakenly) called
“the laws of nature and life.” The reward or punishment for them
is usually given in this world. For example, patience and persever-
ance are rewarded with success, while indolence brings privation.
Industry brings wealth, and steadfastness victory.
The Qur’an insistently draws our attention to natural phe-
nomena, which are the subject matter of science, and urges their
study. During the first 5 centuries of Islam, Muslims united sci-
ence and religion, intellect and heart, material and spiritual. Later
on, however, it was the West that pursued scientific knowledge
and therefore showed an (unconscious) obedience to the Divine
laws of nature. The West dominated the Muslim world because
the latter no longer understood or practiced Islam correctly in
their daily lives, and because they neglected scientific investiga-
tion and the study of nature. All of this amounted to disobeying
the Divine laws of nature. (Tr.)
The sun moves (in its course) to a resting-place for it. (36:38)
Before elucidating other meanings and connotations, remember
that earlier peoples’ sense-derived information led them to believe
that the sun moved around a motionless Earth. Science and obser-
vation later showed that the Earth spins on its own axis and orbits
the sun, which is relatively motionless. First, since people see the sun
moving, the Qur’an mentions it as moving. Second, the Qur’an
mentions the sun here to illustrate the magnificent order prevailing
throughout the universe as a sign of God’s Might and Knowledge:
A sign for them is the night. We strip it of the day, and behold!
they are in darkness. And the sun moves (in its course) to a
resting-place for it. That is the measuring and ordaining of the
All-Mighty, the All-Knowing. And for the moon We have
appointed mansions till it returns like an old shriveled palm-
leaf. It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the
night outstrip the day. They float, each in an orbit. (36:37-40)
We understand from this context that the sun’s function is
vital. The word mustaqarr (stability) applies to is course and the
place in which stability is secured. So, the statement can mean
The Holy Qur’an
251

--- Sayfa 264 ---
that the sun has a central position in the universe’s order. Second,
the preposition used here, li, has three meanings: for, to, and in.
Therefore, the exact meaning of this statement is: The sun moves
following a route or course to a fixed place determined for it for
the purpose of its (system’s) stability.
Recently, solar astronomers have observed that the sun is not
motionless; rather it quivers, shakes, and continually rings like a
well-hit gong [M. Bartusiac, “Sounds of the Sun,” American
Scientist (January-February 1994): 61-68]. The resulting vibra-
tions reveal vital information about its deep interior and hidden
layers, information that affects calculations of the universe’s age.
Also, knowing exactly how the sun spins internally is important
in testing Einstein’s theory of general relativity. Like so many oth-
er significant findings in astronomy, this one was totally unexpect-
ed. Some astronomers have commented that it is as if the sun
were a symphony orchestra, with all its instruments being played
simultaneously. At times, all the vibrations combine to produce a
net oscillation on the solar surface that is thousands of times
stronger than any individual vibration.
Commenting on the Qur’anic verse: The sun moves to a rest-
ing-place for it, several decades before this totally unexpected dis-
covery, Said Nursi wrote:
As the word “moves” points to a style, the phrase “in its course”
demonstrates a reality. The sun, like a vessel built of gold, trav-
els and floats in the ocean of the heavens comprising ether and
defined as a stretched and tightened wave. Although it quivers
and shakes in its course or orbit, since people see it running, the
Qur’an uses the word “travel” or “float.” However, since the ori-
gin of the force of gravity is movement, the sun moves and quiv-
ers in its orbit. Through this vibration, which is the wheel of its
figurative movement, its satellites are attracted to it and pre-
served from falling and scattering. When a tree quivers, its fruits
fall. But when the sun quivers and shakes, its fruits—its satel-
lites—do not fall.
Again, wisdom requires that the sun should move and travel
on its mobile throne (its course or orbit) accompanied by its sol-
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
252

--- Sayfa 265 ---
diers (its satellites). For the Divine Power has made everything
moving, and condemns nothing to absolute rest or motionlessness.
Divine Mercy allows nothing to be condemned to inertia, which is
the cousin of death. So the sun is free; it can travel, provided it
obeys the laws of God and does not disturb others’ freedom. So it
may actually be travelling, as its travelling may also be figurative.
However, what is important according to the Qur’an is the univer-
sal order, the wheel of which is the sun and its movement. Through
the sun, the system’s stability and orderliness are ensured. (Tr.)
The Holy Qur’an
253

--- Sayfa 267 ---
NOTES

--- Sayfa 269 ---
CHAPTER 1
THE EXISTENCE AND UNITY OF GOD
1
On the Qur’an’s Divine authorship, consult M. Fethullah Gülen, Questions This
Modern Age Puts to Islam 1 (London: Truestar, 1993), 53-97.
2
Adapted from the Second Station of Said Nursi, The Words, “The Twenty-second
Word” (Izmir, Turkey: Kaynak, 1997).
3
Reported in Discover, 20 August 1993.
4
Suppose you take ten pennies and mark them from 1 to 10. Put them in your pock-
et and give them a good shake. Now try to draw them out in sequence from 1 to 10,
putting each coin back in your pocket after each draw. Your chance of drawing No.
1 is 1 in 10. Your chance of drawing 1 and 2 in succession would be 1 in 100. Your
chance of drawing 1, 2, and 3 in succession would be 1 in 1,000. Your chance of
drawing 1, 2, 3, and 4 in succession would be 1 in 10,000 and so on, until your
chance of drawing from no. 1 to no. 10 in succession would reach the unbelievable
figure of one chance in 10 billion.
The object in dealing with so simple a problem is to show how enormously figures
multiply against chance.
So many essential conditions are necessary for life on our Earth that it is mathemati-
cally impossible that all of them could exist in proper relationship by chance on any
one Earth at one time. Therefore, there must be in nature some form of intelligent
direction. If this be true, then there must be a purpose. Morrison, Man Does Not
Stand Alone, 13.
5
Ibid., 14, 16-19, 22, 24-27, 76-77.
6
Ibid., 65.
CHAPTER 2
THE INVISIBLE REALM OF EXISTENCE
1
Said Nursi, The Words, “The 29th Word,” 2 (Izmir, Turkey: Kaynak AS, 1997), 196-97.
2
In traditional Islamic literature, every mention of the Prophet is followed by a phrase
of blessing, usually “peace and blessings be upon him.” In the case of the Companions
and other pious Muslims, the phrase “may God be pleased with him (or her)” is
used. Both of these are religious obligations. We have not followed this practice in
this book, as it is foreign to American literary style. This is not meant as a sign of
disrespect, for they are assumed to be there.
3
This does not imply that God creates something imperfect. Rather, everything in the
world has imperfection because its substance cannot receive God’s manifestations in
perfect form. Since death leads to a more perfect life than the previous one, death
may be more perfect than life itself.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
4
The Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama‘a, meaning the People of Sunna and Community, are
the great majority of Muslims who follow the way of the Prophet and Companions.
Other groups of Muslims, which can be called fractions, differ from them with
respect to either matters of belief (e.g., the Mu‘tazila and Jabriya) or viewing the
Companions’ role in religion (e.g., the Kharijites and Shi‘a) because of political incli-
nations and influences from ancient philosophies. (Tr.)
5
For many of his predictions, see, Said Nursi, The Letters (London, UK: Truestar,
1994), 1:111-30; Gülen, The Messenger of God: Muhammad - An Analysis of the Prophet’s
Life (The Light Inc., New Jersey, 2005).
6
Some maintain that the Qur’an, in 7:172 and 23:14, alludes to the fact that our spir-
its were created long before Adam and Eve came to the world. According to a hadith,
each person's spirit is breathed into him or her when he or she is about a 6-week old
embryo in the mother’s womb.
7
The king said: “[In my dream] I saw seven fat cows devoured by seven lean ones,
and seven green ears of corn and (seven) dry (ears of corn). O my courtiers, tell me
the interpretation of my dream, if you understand the meanings of dreams.” They
replied: “A jumble of dreams. We are not skilled in interpreting jumbled dreams.” …
(Joseph) said: “You shall sow, as usual, for seven years. Leave in the ear the corn you
reap, except a little which you may eat. After that will come seven years of severity,
which will consume all but a little of what you have stored for them. After that will
come a year in which the people will have abundant water and in which they will
press (juice, oil, etc.).” (12:43-44, 47-49.)
8
During dreams, the spirit continues this connection through a cord.
9
This is an official of the highest rank, whom God employs to veil His provisioning
of all creation. (Tr.)
10
Said Nursi says that they have partial will-power, as shown by their response to
God’s proclaiming to them that He would choose a vicegerent on the Earth. This
partial willpower, however, does not cause or enable them to disobey God’s orders.
As such, their willpower is weaker than our willpower.
11
We do not know what the Qur’an means by God’s Throne or how it is carried. (Tr.)
12
We are not certain whether the Qur’an means energy or something like X-rays when
it talks of such a smokeless, penetrating, and scorching fire. (Tr.)
13
The Companion did not know that the man was Satan. (Tr.)
14
We do not know how they eat our foods or drink our beverages. (Tr.)
15
Founder of the Qadiyani (also known as Ahmadiyya) sect, which most Muslims say
is either heretical or non-Islamic.
CHAPTER 3
DIVINE DECREE AND DESTINY, AND HUMAN FREE WILL
1 Such foreknowledge and prerecording are apparent, because past and future time are
relevant only to humanity. They cannot, and do not, apply to God. As He “sees”
everything simultaneously, there is no such thing as “fore-” or “pre-” when speaking
of Him.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
258

--- Sayfa 271 ---
2
Islam does not accept the deistic concept of God, namely, that He created the uni-
verse and left it to run itself. We are contained by time and space, and therefore are
limited in the following ways: we cannot draw exactly true conclusions about the
relation between the Creator and the creation, we cannot perceive eternity, and we
have little true information about this world. God is beyond all time and space, infi-
nite and eternal. He holds the universe in His “hand” and controls and manages it
as He wills. However, so that we might glimpse His actions and acquire some
knowledge of Him and His Attributes, He allows those of His manifestations relat-
ed to creation to be limited by time and space. If He did not, life could not exist and
we could acquire no knowledge of Him and the universe. Therefore, what we have
said about His Will and Destiny should be considered in light of the fact that we can
talk about these matters only from within the bounds of this life (limited by time,
space, and matter) and of our very existence.
3
We are included in the same mirror, but we are conscious of both the mirror and of
what is reflected in it.
4
Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, Hadith No. 3123; Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh al-
Dimashq, 5:168.
5
Such events are meant to benefit both believers and unbelievers. For the latter, there
is the added benefit of warning. We must endure such trials patiently, for they are
usually followed by good and bring perfection in this life and much reward for the
next life.
6
Sahih al-Bukhari, “Bad’u l-Wahy,” 1; Sahih al-Muslim, “‘Imara,” 155.
7
Ibn Sa‘d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra’, 2.142; Ibn Ishaq, Al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya, 2:402.
8
Bukhari, Jihad, 102; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 35. “Red camels” is a metaphor used
by medieval Arabs for the most precious thing one can have. (Tr.)
9
Muslim, Zakat, 69; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 203.
CHAPTER 4
THE RESURRECTION AND THE AFTERLIFE
1
Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 3:539 (quoting from Ibn ‘Asakir’s Tarikh al-Dimashq).
2
Kanz al-‘Ummal, 3.141, Hadith No. 5878.
3
Ibn Ishaq, Al-Sirat al-Nabawiyya (Beirut: 1955), 2:642; Ibn Sa‘d, Al-Tabaqat al-
Kubra’ (Beirut), 2:204.
4
Bukhari, Anbiya’, 8:48; Muslim, Janna, 56; Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 3.
5
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3:154. (Related by Anas.)
6
Bukhari, Riqaq, 45; Muslim, Janna, 59; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 118. (Related by Abu
Hurayra. Bukhari and Muslim.)
7
Bukhari, Shahada, 27; Muslim, ‘Aqdiya, 4; Abu Dawud, Adab, 87.
8
You see that trees come to life again and grow green. Your bones resemble dry
branches, yet you refuse to recognize that your bones can be similarly reanimated
and regard it as utterly improbable.
9
Bukhari, Adab, 18; Muslim, Tawba, 22.
Notes
259

--- Sayfa 272 ---
10
Obviously, this example does not apply to those regions of the world that do not
experience winter.
11
Sunan Abu Dawud, “Adahi,” 22; Sunan al-Tirmidhi, “Sayd,” 16-17.
12
For many other examples, see: Safvet Senih, Ilim Acisindan Kader (Destiny from the
Perspective of Science) (Izmir, Turkey: Caglayan AS, 1985), 16-17.
13
For the sources of the information given in this section, as well as information on
the universality of belief in the Resurrection, see Chapter 5.
CHAPTER 5
PROPHETHOOD AND MUHAMMAD’S PROPHETHOOD
1
Taken from the Turkish translation of the Bible, published in Istanbul in 1885.
2
For example, most of the idols at the Ka‘ba toppled over; the Sassanid Emperor’s
palace shook and cracked, and its fourteen pinnacles collapsed; the small Persian lake
of Sawa sank into the ground; and the fire worshipped by Istakhrabad’s Magians was
extinguished (it had been lit continually for 1,000 years. (Tr.)
3
See his Man, This Unknown, published during the 1930s.
4
Sahih al-Muslim, “Janna,” 76, 77.
5
Sahih al-Bukhari, “Manaqib,” 22; Sunan Abu Dawud, “Jihad,” 97.
6
Bukhari, “Salat,” 63; Muslim, “Fitan,” 70, 72; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 12:161, 164.
7
The hadith is in this strain: “You will be the first of my family to join me after my death.”
Sunan Ibn Maja, “Jana’iz,” 65; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 15; Ibn Hanbal, 3.197.
8
Bukhari, “Jihad,” 95, 96; Abu Dawud, “Malahim,” 10; Ibn Maja, “Fitan,” 36.
9
Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:75. Also related by Tirmidhi, Ibn Hanbal and, Ibn Maja.
10
Hakim, 4:445; Ibn Hanbal, 4:303; also related by Muslim, Tirmidhi, and Ibn Maja.
11
Abu Dawud, “Sunna,” 8; Sunan al-Tirmidhi, “Fitan,” 48; Ibn Hanbal, 4:273.
12
Hakim, 3:100; Ibn Hanbal, 6:114; Ibn Maja, 5:188; Tirmidhi.
13
Abu Nu‘aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, 1:94; Bukhari and Muslim.
14
Suyuti, Jami‘ al-Saghir, 6:24; Bukhari, Muslim, and Tirmidhi.
15
Hakim, 3:453; also related in Muslim, Sunan by Ibn Hanbal and Tirmidhi.
16
Hakim, 4:422; Bukhari, Tarikh al-Saghir, 139; Ibn Hanbal, 4:335.
17
Bukhari, “Manaqib,” 27; Muslim, “Kitab Sifat al-Munafiqin wa Ahkamihim,” 44.
18
Bukhari, “Ayman,” 22; Muslim, “Ashriba,” 142.
19
Bukhari, “At‘ima,” 6; Muslim, “Ashriba,” 175.
20
Sunan al-Nasa’i, 1:60; Bukhari, 4:233; Muslim, Hadith No. 2279.
21
Bukhari, “Shurut,” 15.
22
Bukhari, “Fada’il al-Sahaba,” 9; Muslim, “Fada’il al-Sahaba,” 34.
23
Tirmidhi, “Da‘awat,” 119; Ibn Hanbal, 4:138; Ibn Maja, “Iqama,” 189.
24
Musnad Ibn Hanbal, 1:348.
25
Bukhari, “Nikah,” 10:22.
26
Muslim, “Salam,” 45; Abu Dawud, “Diyat,” 6.
27
Musnad Ibn Hanbal, 4:112.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith
260

--- Sayfa 273 ---
28
Bukhari, “Adab,” 39; Muslim, “Fada’il,” 48; Ibn Hanbal, 3:147.
29
Muslim, “Fada’il,” 2; Sunan al-Darimi, “Muqaddima,” 4.
30
Bukhari, “Manaqib,” 25; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1:460.
31
Muslim, “Fada’il,” 50.
32
Tirmidhi, Hadith No. 3630; Hakim, 2:607.
33
Bukhari, “Maghazi,” 31, 33; Muslim, “Fada’il,” 13.
34
Muslim, “Sifat al-Munafiqin,” 38.
35
Bukhari, 2:35; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 6:147.
36
Bukhari, “Istisqa‘,” 7; Muslim, “Istisqa‘,” 1.
37
Tirmidhi, “Manaqib,” 18; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:95.
38
Bukhari, “‘Ilm,” 17; Muslim, “Fada’il,” 137.
39
Muslim, “Fada’il,” 143.
40
Ibid., 159.
41
Bukhari, “Iman,” 37.
42
Bukhari, “Maghazi,” 18; Muslim, “Fada’il,” 46-47.
43
Bukhari, “Maghazi,” 11.
44
Musnad, 1:455.
45
Bukhari, “Abwab ‘Amal fi al-Salat,” 2; Muslim, “Kusuf,” 3.
46
Bukhari, “Adab,” 46; Muslim, “Tahara,” 3.
47
Muslim, “Zuhd,” 74.
48
Bukhari, “Manaqib,” 25; Tirmidhi, “Manaqib,” 6; Nasa’i, “Jumu‘ah,” 17.
49
Musnad Ibn Hanbal, 3:65.
50
For example, Prophet Solomon had 700 wives, princesses, and 300 concubines (I Kings
11:1-3).
51
Bukhari, “Tawhid,” 22.
52
Bukhari and Muslim.
53
Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:277.
CHAPTER 6
THE HOLY QUR’AN
1
Sahih al-Bukhari, “Fada’il al-Qur’an,” 21; Sunan Abu Dawud, “Witr,” 14.
2
Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4.201.
Notes
261

--- Sayfa 275 ---
A
‘A’isha, 84, 173, 174, 200, 201, 205,
213, 216, 218, 225, 227
‘Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet, 53
‘Abd al-‘Aziz, the Sultan, 57, 194
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas, 203, 205
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar, 203, 206
‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud, 197, 201, 205
‘Abd Allah ibn Salam, 175
‘Abd al-Muttalib, 203
‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, 186
‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr, 198
‘Ad, 110, 187
‘Ali, 51, 57, 126, 174, 191, 199, 201
‘Amr ibn al-‘As, 171
‘Amr ibn al-Hisham, 203
Abraham, House of, 73
Absolute Being, 156
Abu al-A‘la al-Ma‘arri, 158
Abu Bakr, 174, 188, 191, 201, 213,
217
Abu Hanifa, 186
Abu Hurayra, 201, 202, 204
Abu Jahl, 190, 202
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, 206
Abu Sufyan, 171, 185, 214, 215
Abu Talha, 197, 198, 201
Abu Talib, 183, 227
Abyssinia, 213, 214, 217
Adal, 185
Adam and Eve, 6, 28, 69, 149, 258
Afterlife, 80, 94, 113, 129, 131, 135,
155, 157, 158, 223, 225, 250
Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama‘a, 258
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, 191, 205, 259
AIDS, 153, 236
ajb al-dhanab, 54
Aleppo, 188
Amalekites, 177
Anas ibn Malik, 192, 197, 199, 200,
203, 204
Arabia, 181, 212, 214, 223
arahat, 161
Arberry, A. J., 186
Aristotle, 157
Ascension, 40, 196, 197
Asia Minor, 188
atheism, 123, 161
Atman, 161
azal (past eternity), 107
Azra’il (Angel of Death), 50
B
Bacon, 234
Badr, Battle of, 68
Baghdad, 57, 194
Banu Makhzum, 212, 213
Banu Qurayza, 71, 216
Batn al-Nakhla, 72
Bayazid al-Bistami, 186
Baylor College of Medicine, 21
Bergson, 158
INDEX

--- Sayfa 276 ---
Bermuda, 32
Bible, 9, 16, 83, 166, 169, 210
al-Biruni, 186
Bismarck, 186
Bitlis, 57, 194
Black Stone, 170, 171
Brahman, 161
Buddha, x, 156, 160, 161
Buddhism, 156, 160, 161
C
Carlyle, Thomas, 186
carnal self, 39, 44, 79, 95, 117, 133
Carrel, Alexis, 182
Catholic Church, 16, 234
causality, 19, 22, 198, 209, 237
chance, 17, 20, 21, 27, 33, 165
charity, 54, 110, 111, 118
Christianity, 127, 168, 186, 234
Christians, 160, 185, 187, 188, 207,
210, 228
coincidence, 20, 23
Constantinople, 188, 191, 192
Copernicus, 234
Crusader, 234
Cyprus, 191, 192
D
da’hia, 245
dabbet al-ard, 236
daha’, 245
Damascus, 57, 188, 191, 194
Dante, 158
Davenport, John, 186
David, the Prophet, 74
Day of Judgment, 54, 71, 76, 77, 87,
99, 108, 139
decidua basalis, 42
decidua capsularis, 42
decidua parietalis, 42
decidua, 42
Democritus, 158
Descartes, 158
determinism, 43, 92, 198
Deuteronomy, 167
Dhul-Qarnayn, 227
Dihya, 71
Diwan, 57
DNA, 7, 21, 64
dreams, 45, 49, 60, 61, 62, 63, 94
E
Egypt, 134, 155, 187, 188, 189, 194,
195, 229
Einstein, 154, 196, 237, 244, 252
Eisenhower, 62
Emigrants, 216
Enoch, the Prophet, 165
Epicurus, 158
Erickson, Wendy, 160
Europe, viii, 7, 32, 64
evil-commanding self, 53, 67, 76, 95,
121, 122, 125
evolution, 17, 22, 75, 76, 165
exorcists, 83
extraterrestrial life, 84
F
Fakirism, 72
al-Farabi, (Alpharabios), 135
Fatima, 184, 191
Fenni Bey, 58
Fichte, Johann, 188
fiqh, 212, 230
Index
264

--- Sayfa 277 ---
fitra (primordial nature), 123
Freud, 45, 60
G
Gabriel, 50, 53, 56, 71, 197, 204, 205,
216, 222
Galileo, 234
Garaudy, Roger, 186
Geist, 128
Ghatfan, 202
Ghowras, 202
Ghulam Ahmad, 72
Gibbon, Edward, 186
Gibson, (Madame), 58
Goethe, 186
Gospel of John, 169
Gospel, 158, 168, 169
Gülen, M. Fethullah, vii, viii, ix, x, xi,
257, 258
H
Habbab ibn Arat, 190
hadith qudsi, 133
Hadramawt, 190
Hafiz Ahmad Pasha, 57
Hafsa, 217
Hagar, 167
Hajjaj, 192
Hakim, 191, 260, 261
Hammam Fir‘awn (the Bath of
Pharaoh), 190
Hamza, 51
Hansa, 223
Harun al-Rashid, 147
Hashimites, 212
Hegel, Georg, 188
Hegelian philosophy, 128
Heraclitus, 157
Heraclius, 188
Herder, Johann, 188
Hijra, 189, 200
Hilf al-Fudul, 170
Hindu Yogism, 72
Hindus, 161
Hitler, 143
Homeros, 156
Howe, Elias, 63
Hubble, 243
Hudaybiya, 189, 199
Hudhayl tribe, 185
Hussayn Jisri, 169
Huyayy, 216
Hypocrites, 172
I
Iblis, 74
Ibn ‘Abbas, 203, 205, 229, 245
Ibn al-‘Arabi, 57, 59, 194
Ibn Hanbal, 83, 191, 205, 259, 260,
261
Ibn Haytham, 186
Ibn Maja, 191, 259, 260
Ibn Mas‘ud, 197, 201, 205, 229
Ibn Sina (Avicenna), 186
Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl, 171
Illuminists (Ishraqiyyun), 39
Imam Ghazali, 84, 186
Imam Rabbani, 186
Imam Shibli, 71
India, 58, 72, 156, 160
Iraq, 191
Isaac, 167
Ishmael, 167
Israel, Children of, 167, 189, 240
Index
265

--- Sayfa 278 ---
Israelites, 167, 189
Istanbul, 57, 58, 106, 168, 191, 192,
194, 260
ihsan, 71, 204
J
Jabal Fir‘awn (Hill of Pharaoh), 190
Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amr, 51
Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah, 51, 205
Jabir ibn Samura, 201
Jabriya, 127
Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, 229
Jamal, Battle of, 57
Jawshan al-Kabir (The Great Armor),
60
Jerusalem, 74, 188, 191, 240
Jesus, x, 56, 71, 83, 114, 136, 158,
166, 167, 168, 169, 176, 177,
186, 187, 188, 195, 207, 228,
239
Jews, 160, 176, 185, 187, 207, 210,
217, 227, 228
jinn, v, 37, 40, 41, 58, 59, 67, 69, 70,
71, 72, 73, 74, 81, 83, 85, 86,
100, 105, 123, 204, 205, 208
Jonah, the Prophet, 110
Joseph, the Prophet, 61, 165
Judaism, 186
Judas Iscariot, 177
Juwayriya bint Harith, 216
K
Ka‘ba, 170, 190, 223, 260
Kant, Immanuel, 248
karama, 194
Kemal, 57, 194
Kennedy, John, 58
Khadija, 170, 173, 209, 210, 212,
215, 217, 218
Khalid ibn Walid, 51
khalifa, 86
Khaybar, 199, 200, 216, 217
Khaybar, Battle of, 199
Kiramun Katibun (the Noble Re-
corders), 67, 99
L
Lamartine, 186
Lane-Poole, Stanley, 186
Lat, 202
Lebid, 223
Leibniz, 158
Lincoln, Abraham, 62
Lings, Martin, 186
Lyra, the constellation, 243
M
Madina, 58, 135, 172, 174, 185,
187, 189, 191, 192, 201, 203,
213, 217, 227, 228
Mahdi, 72
Majjhima Nikaya, 161
Makka, 68, 126, 167, 168, 171, 172,
175, 187, 189, 190, 201
Mala’-i A‘la (the Highest Council), 67
malak, 63
Manifest Book (Kitabun Mubin), 91
Manifest Record (Imamun Mubin), 93
Marx, Karl, 188
Mary, 56, 71
Masjid al-Aqsa, 196
Masjid al-Haram, 196
materialism, 3, 17, 39, 58, 78, 235
materialists, 19, 37, 39, 143, 158, 246
Index
266

--- Sayfa 279 ---
Matthew, 114, 159, 168
meditation, 111, 116
Medusa’s Hair, 160
Mehmed the Conqueror, the Sultan,
192
Mendelian genetics, 21
Michael, 50, 65, 204
micro-cosmos, 154
Miller, Andrew, 186
Mina’, 197
monads, 158
Mongol invasion, 191
Mongol, 191, 234
Morrison, 23, 27, 31, 257
Moses, 54, 55, 71, 166, 167, 176,
177, 187, 189, 194, 207, 211,
228, 240
Moses, the Prophet, 54, 189, 228
Mount Paran, 167
Mu‘awiya, 191
mu‘jiza, 194
Mu‘tazila, 95, 258
mu’min, 248
Muhajirun, 216
Muhammad ibn Ka‘b al-Qurazi, 222
Muhammad, the Prophet, vi, 40, 50,
51, 57, 69, 71, 86, 114, 121,
124, 125, 155, 166, 167, 169,
170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175,
176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182,
183, 184, 185, 187, 188, 195,
196, 199, 207, 208, 210, 212,
213, 217, 223, 225, 228, 235
Muhyi al-Din ibn al-‘Arabi, 57, 194
Muir, William, 186
Mukhtar, 192
Munkar and Nakir, 52, 53
Murad IV, the Sultan, 194
Murad, the Sultan, 57, 194
Mus‘ab ibn ‘Umayr, 51
Mushtaq Dada, 57, 194
mustaqarr (stability), 243, 251
N
Nadiyy-i A‘la (the Highest Assembly),
67
Negus, 215
Nero, 143
Newton, 237, 244
Niels Bohr, 63
Nimrod, 75
Nirvana, 161
Noah, the Prophet, 165
Noble Throne, 144
Normandy, 62
North Africa, 188
Noss, J. B., 161
Nursi, Said (Bediuzzaman), 169, 186
O
Obeyesekeri, Gananath, 160
Orientalists, 127
Ostrovosky, Anne, 63
Ottoman, 57, 168, 194
Overbeck, 21, 22, 23
P
P. Bayle, 186
Palestine, 167, 188
Paraklit, 169
Paraklit, 169
Pascal, 158
Peripatetic (Mashshaiyyun), 39
Persia, 191
Index
267

--- Sayfa 280 ---
Persian, 188, 192, 260
Pharaoh, 61, 75, 110, 143, 167, 189,
190
philosophy, 39, 128, 157, 158, 180,
238, 239
physiognomy, 45
Pickthall, Marmaduke, 186
pilgrimage (hajj), 119
Place of Mustering, 190
Plato, 135, 157, 158
polygamy, 210, 211, 212, 218
polytheists, 185, 188, 189
predetermination, 51, 94, 98, 100
Preserved Tablet  (Lawhun Mahfuz), 91
pride, 77, 95, 178, 212, 216, 246
Prophetic tradition, 66, 73
Psalms, 166, 180
Psalms, 166, 180
Pythagoras, 156
Q
al-Qarah, 185
Qatada ibn Nu’man, 206
Queen of Sheba, 69, 74, 240
Quraysh, 170, 185
R
Rafiq-i A‘la (the Highest Company), 67
rationalism, 39
rebellion, 141
Reclus, Elisee, 186
Red Sea, 189
reincarnation, 156, 157
Renaissance, 158, 234
repentance, 95, 109, 110
Republic, 135
Revelation, 16, 17, 39, 57, 71, 124,
160, 167, 218, 223, 226, 227,
233, 234, 238, 240, 243, 250
Rifa‘a ibn Rafi‘, 205
Risalat al-Ghufran, 158
Risalat al-Hamidiya, 169
Roman (Empire), 168, 188
Rosenthal, 186
Ruh ve Kainat (The Spirit and the
Universe), 60
Ruhselman, Bedri, 60
S
Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas, 192, 204
Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh, 53
Sa‘d ibn Rabi‘, 137
Sa‘id ibn Zayd, 201
Safiyya, 216
Safwan ibn Umayya, 171
Sahl ibn Sa‘d, 133
Said Nursi, 84, 85, 115, 169, 186,
226, 252
Sakran, 217
Samiri, 176
Samsun, 59
San‘a, 190
Sassanid Empire, 192
Sawda bint Zam‘a, 217
Sedillot, L. A., 186
Seir, 167
Selim I, the Sultan, 57, 194
Semed, 199
Shafi‘i, 186
Shahristani, 156
Shajarat al-Nu‘maniya, 57, 194
Sham, 194
Index
268

--- Sayfa 281 ---
Shari‘a, 168, 250
Shu‘ayb, 187
Siffin, Battle of, 191
Sinai, 167, 176, 190
Socrates, 157
Solomon, 69, 74, 187, 239, 240
Solomon, the Prophet, 69, 74, 261
sorcery, v, 80, 81, 194, 206
Spinoza, 158
Spirit of Truth, 169
Stalin, 143
Straight Path, 71, 124
substitute (abdal), 56
Supreme Guarded Tablet, 63
Supreme Tribunal, 142, 144, 147
T
Ta’if, 171
al-Tabarani, 83
Tablet of Effacement and Confirmation,
98
Tabuk, expedition to, 80
tafsir, 212, 259
tahajjud, 77
Talha, 57, 197, 198, 201
Taylor, Isaac, 211
Testaments, 9, 186
Thamud, 110, 187
Thaqif tribe, 192
Thawr, 200
Time of Happiness, 181
Torah, 158, 166, 167, 169, 176, 180,
226
Trench, Battle of the, 71, 174
Tripoli, 188
Tunniclife, V., 86
U
‘Ubada ibn Samit, 192
Ubayy ibn Khalaf, 200
Uhud, 51, 68, 137, 201, 204, 213
Uhud, Battle of, 51, 137, 204, 213
‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 222
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, 203, 217
‘Umar, 51, 53, 134, 135, 173, 174,
190, 191, 192, 201, 203, 204,
206, 213, 217, 222
Umayyads, 212, 215
Umm Habiba, 212, 214
Umm Hani, 83
Umm Haram, 192
Umm Salama, 212, 213, 214
Umm Sulaym, 198
Umma, 136, 203, 229
Ummahat al-Mu’minin (the mothers
of the believers), 212
‘Uthman ibn Hunayf, 199
‘Uthman, 51, 57, 191, 199, 201
‘Uzza, 202
V
Verse of Throne, 83
W
Warren, H. C., 161
Weber, Max, 188
Weis, Leopold, 186
White House, 62
World War I, 58, 120
World War II, 62, 63
wudu’, 199
X
Xenophanes, 157
Index
269

--- Sayfa 282 ---
Y
Yemen, 69, 74
Z
al-Zahrawi, 186
zakat (alms), 172
Zamzam, 167
Zarathustra, 156
Zarwa, 199
Zayd ibn Dasina, 185
Zayd, 201, 215
Zaynab bint Jahsh, 212, 215
Zechariah, 132, 133
Zechariah, the Prophet, 132, 133
Zubayr, 57
Index
270