--- Sayfa 2 ---
Copyright © 1988 by Tom C. McKenney
A ll rights reserved N o part o f this book may be reproduced without permis­
sion from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in
a review; nor may any part o f this book be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or copied by mechanical, photocopying, recording o r other means,
without permission from the publisher.
Huntington House, Inc.
P. O. Box 53788, Lafayette, Louisiana 70505
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 88-081728
ISBN Number 0-910311-52-8
Printed in the United States of America

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Table of
Contents
Foreword..............................................................................
7
Chapter 1 On My Own ...................................................
9
Chapter 2 In Search of a Future.............................
13
Chapter 3 Brought to the Light...............................
19
Chapter 4 “ I’m Going to F lo rid a .......................... 31
Chapter 5 Master Mason................................................. 43
Chapter 6 Going Higher ................................................. 55
Chapter 7 Branching Out ............................................... 65
Chapter 8 A Religion at Last........................................... 77
Chapter 9 The Gathering Storm..................................... 87
Chapter 10 Into the Light ................................................. 99
Chapter 11 Walking in the Light ...............................I l l
E p ilogu e............................................................................... 123
Appendices:
A Masonic Doctrine Versus Christian Doctrine. . . . 126
B Masonic Symbolism ...............................................142
C Masonic Morality ...................................................147
D The Legend o f Hiram A b iff.....................................150
E The Lecture o f the 32nd Degree ............................ 155
A Prayer fo r F reed om ........................................................... 158
In d e x ......................................................................................159

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Foreword
Freemasonry, sincerely entered into, is a search for light. Any
knowledgeable Mason can tell you this. Yet, beneath the surface
o f this search for light, there is much more. This truth is seldom
realized by the Masonic candidate. As a matter o f fact, the vast
majority o f Masonic seekers are never aware that there is anything
more available to them in Masonry, beyond what they see and hear
in their Blue Lodge experience. Quite naturally, they settle for that.
Yet the very richness o f meaning in the word “ light” should tell
us that in the light they seek there should be truth — answers to
deep questions. There should come revelations o f the meaning o f
life, death and eternal things.
Very few Masons realize this and press on through the degrees
and offices o f Masonry and the writings o f the Masonic philoso­
phers in an unending search for enlightenment — for intellectual
and spiritual fulfillment.
Only a small number make that extra commitment that goes far
beyond social and business motivations. They continue to work,
study, seek and learn, climbing the mountain o f Masonic knowl­
edge, searching for that light in all its fullness.
Jim Shaw was such a man. He was not satisfied with social
fulfillment or surface knowledge; he sensed the deeper, true
meaning o f that promised light and he sought it with all his heart,
mind and strength. His ardent quest carried him through all the
chairs o f leadership in the Blue Lodge and the Scottish Rite, all the
way to the House o f the Temple in Washington, D. C. to the
“ Thirty-Third and Last Degree” and the position o f Sovereign
Grand Inspector General, Knight Commander o f the House o f the
Temple o f Solomon. There, at the top o f the Masonic mountain, he
broke through the clouds at last and found the full revelation, the
true meaning o f light and life. This is his story. Come and make that
pilgrimage to Truth with him.
Tom C. McKenney
Mahon, Kentucky

--- Sayfa 5 ---
1 On my own
My mother married for the second time when I was two years old.
I was, o f course, too young to understand that my father had
deserted us when I was only a few months old. I have never seen
him.
As time passed, my stepfather developed a growing dislike for
me that I accepted as normal, having no knowledge or experience
against which to judge life. He really loved my mother, I think, in
his own imperfect way. But his resentment o f me created problems
for her almost from the start.
My Christian grandmother was a beloved and powerful influ­
ence in my life. She loved me. Our mutual love and her obvious
dislike o f my stepfather contributed to his ever-increasing hatred
and rejection o f me.
However my origin, my grandmother and our love for one
another impacted on my problems at home, these took a giant
leap for the worse with the birth o f my little half-sister. It was only
natural that my stepfather would favor her, which he definitely and
obviously did. If there was anything remaining o f our father-son
relationship, it vanished with her coming.
After my little sister, three boys were bom. With the coming of
each one, my stepfather’s life was increasingly fulfilled with his
own babies. Simultaneously, I grew older, losing any “ little boy”
advantage with which I may have begun our relationship. I just
became, obviously and completely, an unwanted, adolescent ugly
duckling, an entirely unwelcome complication in his home.
9

--- Sayfa 6 ---
10
W
o
r k
 b
e
g
i n
s
 e
a
r l y
Unpleasant as all this was for me, I accepted it. I had never known
anything else. And I was busy. M y stepfather had decreed I must
work and support myself. So I did, beginning with my first news­
paper route at age five. Soon I was buying all my own clothes,
books and school supplies.
During elementary school I had a newspaper route which I deli­
vered early in the morning before going to school and a second job
working in the neighborhood drugstore after school. In the eve­
nings I walked, doing my paper route collections, and selling extra
papers up and down the streets. I kept up with my school work,
worked at my jobs and stayed out o f trouble — except at home.
L
i v
i n
g
 w
i t h
 p
h
y
s
i c a
l a
b
u s e
Things really didn’t seem so bad. I just did what I had to do and
thought my life was fairly normal— except for one thing. The
beatings I took from my stepfather didn’t seem normal to me. They
were frequent, whenever he could find the slightest excuse— and
they were nothing like the loving chastening a godly father should
give his child. They were beatings. But I took them, not seeing any
alternative, and made the best o f things. I could cling to the belief
that my mother and grandmother loved me. This was my life
through the age o f 12.
T
h
e
 b
e
a
t i n
g
s
 c
o
m
e
 t o
 a
n
 e
n
d
I was 13 the day I saw my stepfather hit my mother with his fist.
I didn't take time to think. I just reacted in a reflex built way down
deep inside my very nature. I jumped him, pulled him away from
her, and a wild fight followed. Although he was much larger than
I, and I was only a boy, I fought with the fury o f a son rescuing his
beloved mother, and with the pent-up anger o f a lifetime o f
physical and emotional abuse. I fought him to the floor. He got up
and left the house. Although I didn’t realize it, this part o f my life
had come to an end.
" Y
o u
 m
u
s t g
o "
The next afternoon, when I came home from working at the
drugstore, my mother was waiting for me in the front yard. She was

--- Sayfa 7 ---
11
crying. She stopped me short o f the house and said, “ Jimmie, Joe
says you must pack up and leave. He says he can’t stand having you
around here anymore, and you must go. ”
She was choking on the words. And as the reality o f what I was
hearing came into focus in my mind, weeping rose up within me
and spilled over. W e wept there, standing in the front yard, but this
was something we both had to face. She now had four younger
children besides me and a life she had to live.
T
h
e
 s
e
e
d
 i s
 p
l a
n
t e
d
As I shouldered my school books and what little clothing I had,
my mother went on to say, “ Now, Jimmie, I want you to get a room
near your work; and since you have been supporting yourself
anyway, maybe it won’t be too difficult for you. Jimmie, I want you
to try to be a man. Try to be like your Uncle Irvin (her brother); he
is a good man and a Mason. He goes to church and is good to his
family and if you get to know him better maybe you can grow up
to be a good man and a Mason like he is. ”
My mother knew nothing o f what Freemasonry is but she knew
her brother as a hard-working, church-going, good man.
My stepfather had forbidden that anyone in our family attend
church services, saying that all the people in the churches were
hypocrites. I believe that the fact that Uncle Irvin was an active
member of the Methodist Church was the main reason my mother
looked up to him. She wanted me to be like him. The seed that
would later germinate, spring up, and grow to full fruit in ardent
commitment to Freemasonry, taking me to its high levels o f service
and leadership, was planted.
Although I didn’t realize it then, the course o f much o f my life
already was set. But I wouldn’t just become a good Mason like my
Uncle Irvin; I would go far beyond him in the Craft, far, far beyond
him, for it would become the center o f knowledge, wisdom and
religious fulfillment in my life.
My life would come to be built around my search for light and the
fellowship I found in the Masonic Order and its various bodies.
As we stood there in the front yard that pivotal, painful day she
went on to advise me. “ Stay out o f pool rooms, ” she said, and I
always have. “ Don’t smoke cigarettes, ” she said, and I never have.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
12
Or* (T )y Own
She added, “ If you must smoke, smoke cigars like your Uncle
Irvin; ” and for many years o f my life, I did.
As she spoke, I began to realize the enormity o f what was
happening. With this realization growing within me and blinded
with tears, I reached out to her, hugged her, turned and walked
away. As I took each step up the street and away from mother, the
weight o f the world and o f an unknown future settled down on my
13-year-old shoulders.
I was on my own.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
2 In search
of a
fu tu re
The first thing I had to do after leaving home and my mother —
now on my own for the first time in my life — was to find a place
to live. Mother had suggested that I find a room near my work and
I did, at a rooming house just down the street from the drugstore.
The owner o f the drugstore gave me longer hours to work so that
I could give up the paper route. I began to adjust to my new life.
Working in the drugstore, going to school and studying filled my
days and nights. But I was able to keep up with my school work and
in this way finished elementary school and high school, including
four years o f R O TC 1.
During those first years on my own, my grandmother was even
more important in my life. She was a real rock o f stability and
support and we became very close.
She tried to get Uncle Irvin to take me places and spend time with
me because she knew I had never known a father. She wanted him
to help fill that void in this growing boy’s relatively empty life and
I very much wanted that. But he was too busy — always too busy
— with his Masonic Lodge activities, his work at the post office
and his own family.
13

--- Sayfa 10 ---
14
Mother had set him up as my father figure and role model, and
I really wanted to know him; but he was too busy.
A
l o
n
e
 a
g
a
i n
After high school graduation, with the encouragement and finan­
cial support o f my grandmother, I began the study o f law. In those
days it was possible to enter the study o f law directly out o f high
school, earn the L L B 2 degree from the state university and take the
bar examination. But after only one year my grandmother died and
I was forced to drop out o f law school. M y world suddenly became
much more empty. M y one real friend and supporter on earth was
gone. I was alone again.
B
o
n
n
i e
 e
n
t e
r s
 m
y
 l i f e
But my work kept me busy, and I got an additional job that
summer, hoping that maybe I could earn enough money for another
year o f law school. By this time I was definitely interested in girls
and, although there was precious little time for them, I began to
meet some and get to know them. That summer I met Bonnie and
almost everything in my life changed! It was another turning point.
But, as usual, I didn’t realize it at the time.
Bonnie was wonderful. She seemed to return this sentiment and
her family liked and approved o f me. Things developed quickly,
we decided to marry and soon did. Since my second job (in hopes
o f another year o f law school) was in a restaurant and I was learning
a good deal about the restaurant business, Bonnie’s family sug­
gested that we go into that business. They lent us the money to buy
a place that was for sale. We cleaned, painted and decorated it
nicely and were soon doing a good business. W e were enjoying the
work, prospering and were quite happy with it all, and with each
other. Life was good.
Law school was disappearing on the road behind me now. The
path o f my life had taken a permanent turn in another direction.
M
y
 f i r
s
t e
x
p
e
r
i e
n
c
e

o
f f r a
t e
r n
a
l o
r d
e
r s
One day a man who was eating in our restaurant asked to see me.
I went over to the side table where he was seated and asked him

--- Sayfa 11 ---
15
what he wanted. He said he was a representative o f the Loyal Order
o f the Moose and that I had been selected to be a member. He also
said that it would provide important social and business contacts
and would be good for my restaurant business.
It sounded good to me and before long I was a member. At the
same time, Bonnie joined the Women o f the Moose. It was the
beginning o f our active involvement in fraternal orders and I had
not the slightest idea o f where it would eventually take me.
The Moose Lodge was quite different from the Masonic orders
I would later know so well. For one thing, the Moose meetings
were quite short. Our lodge met upstairs over a lunchroom and bar.
When the relatively short meetings were over, nearly everyone
went downstairs to the bar where things continued for a much
longer time (sometimes it almost seemed that this was the real
reason for meeting).
Still, I didn’t attend the Moose meetings very often until I was
approached about being an officer. Now, for the boy who had never
felt accepted and had never been an officer in anything, this was
pretty heady stuff; I immediately accepted, necessarily becoming
much more active.
The lunchroom under the Lodge Hall belonged to the Lodge. The
man who operated the business had to pay no rent, nor did he have
any utility costs, which made his brisk business even more profit­
able. He was a member o f the Lodge and I envied his advantage in
business, compared with my own situation.
M
o
t h
e
r s
 l a
s
t g
o
o
d
b
y
e
In all the time that Bonnie and I had operated the restaurant,
Uncle Irvin had never been there, so I was surprised one day to see
him coming in. He said that my grandfather was outside in the car
but didn’t feel well enough to come inside. I went out to the car to
see him and could see at a glance that grandfather was very, very
sick and weak. W e visited briefly and then Uncle Irvin drove away.
It was the last time I saw grandfather alive; he died the following
week.
At his funeral, I noticed that mother did not look well at all. She
appeared pale and weak, struggling, it seemed, just to sit up. I had

--- Sayfa 12 ---
16
never seen her look so ill, but I thought it was just the pain and stress
o f losing her father. I didn’t feel free to stay very close to her, since
my stepfather was there. But I comforted her as best I could and,
as we parted, she told me goodbye. How could I have suspected
that it was her last goodbye? The following week she died, and the
following Saturday, exactly one week after grandfather’s funeral,
we buried mother.
I have never been able to find out what caused her death. Even to
this day, there is something mysterious about it as if something is
being concealed; but it seems to have been a heart attack.
After the funeral service was completed, my stepfather came
over to where Bonnie and I were standing and said, “ Jim, I feel that
I need to tell you something. I believe that your mother would still
be alive had it not been for the way I treated you. ”
Then he said, emotionally, “ I will never marry again! ” Six
months later he was remarried. But I do believe there was truth in
what he told me about mother’s death. He was never again any part
o f my life.
W
a
r c o
m
e
s
Not long after mother’s death, the Great War came and ended the
Great Depression. The Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor and Amer­
ica entered the conflict. We were in it at last and the operator o f the
lunchroom at the Moose Lodge was drafted. This opened up that
position and the governing board asked me to take it over. Bonnie
and I talked it over and decided I would probably also be drafted
soon, so we sold our restaurant (in order to be ready) and were soon
working full time at the Moose Lodge. Our lives were even more
closely tied to fraternal orders now. Still we had no idea where it
would lead.
More than a year went by. I tried to join the Navy but was turned
down. We stayed busy with the lunchroom and lodge activities. I
had really forgotten about the draft when the notice came. I had
been drafted.
T
h
e
 m
a
s
o
n
i c c o
n
n
e
c t i o
n
I had been out of high school more than six years and married for
five years when I entered the Army during World War II. Yet from

--- Sayfa 13 ---
17
the very first I began to remember what my mother had said to me,
that awful day at age 13 when I had been forced to leave home.
Maybe it was because, once again, I was alone and entering into
an unknown way o f life. I remembered about my Uncle Irvin and
his active involvement in the Masonic Lodge. As I went through
basic training I noticed that many o f the officers there wore Ma­
sonic rings.
Toward the end of basic training, two men from my unit were to
be selected for Officer Candidate School to be trained as officers
and commissioned second lieutenants. I was not selected and the
two who were selected were both Masons. I thought about my four
years o f ROTC, my age, my experience and wondered why I had
not been selected. I didn't realize then that these men had been
selected by Masons because they were Masons. In later years I
would understand very w e ll. But at the time I could only wonder.
C
l i m
b
i n
g
 S
h
a
w
 h
i l l
I was much older than the other men in my company. As a matter
o f fact, I was older than my company commander. In spite o f my
“ advanced age, ” I had been assigned to the infantry, and was
baseplate man in the mortar platoon o f a rifle company. W e
traveled on foot and I had the heaviest load to carry. The others
called me “ Pop, https: //www. amazon. com/Mirrors-Orion-Knowledge-Ancient-World-ebook-dp-B00OGW1VNI/dp/B00OGW1VNI/
 but I didn’t mind. I carried my baseplate, plus my
own weapon and all my individual gear, and usually outdid the
younger men.
As a matter o f fact, during a training march from Camp Butner
to Raleigh, North Carolina, I was the only man in the company able
to carry another man to the top o f a certain hill along the way.
My platoon commander congratulated me, named it “ Shaw
Hill, ” and that little honor meant a lot more to me than anyone else
there could have known. I still think at times of that hill, about
halfway between Camp Butner and Raleigh, and what Lieutenant
Ram said that day about this abandoned little kid from the big city.
The war came and went and, with that behind me, I was even
more sure that I could make it in life. With Bonnie at my side, I
knew that I could succeed. Mother would be pleased if she knew.
I really could be a successful, good man like my Uncle Irvin.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
18
F o o t n o t e s
1 Reserve Officer Training Corps, a training program that prepares young men
to be officers in the Army. High School ROTC prepares the men fo r college ROTC.
and that leads to a commission as second lieutenant.
2 Bachelor o f Laws and Letters, the traditional law school degree.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
3 Brought to the light
The war was over and I was home again with Bonnie. We were
supremely happy — and together we were about to enter into the
Masonic fellowship that would become our world.
I soon told Bonnie that I would really like to join the Masonic
Lodge. I remembered the Masonic officers in basic training and I
had a need to belong, a need for acceptance in a group, for friends,
for a family.
Immediately I received a surprising revelation from Bonnie: she
had been a member o f the Order o f the Eastern Star since age 18,
and her father was a Mason! I was amazed; I had no idea o f any of
this. She had never attended a meeting or even mentioned it to me
since I had known her. But she was happy that I wanted to be a
Mason.
I was happy that we already had this little foundation laid, and
now I earnestly pursued the idea.
W
h
y
 a
l l t h
e
s
e
 p
e
n
n
i e
s
I was still a member in good standing in the Moose Lodge.
During the war, while I had been away, my dues had been sus­
pended (it was the patriotic thing to do). W e had many good friends
19

--- Sayfa 16 ---
20
in the Moose Lodge, I was made welcome there and it was as if I
had never been away — except that we no longer operated the
lunchroom.
I told a few friends in the Moose that I was thinking o f joining the
Masonic Lodge and discovered that there was no conflict at all.
Three o f my Moose brothers were also Masons. They were pleased
that I wanted to be one too.
Each one o f them gave me a penny and told me to “ keep it handy, ”
as I would be needing it.
They were a bit mysterious about it and didn’t explain, so I
wondered what all this penny business was about but didn’t ask. I
wondered even more as days passed, because every Mason I
mentioned this to did the same thing! I soon had quite a few pennies
and was certain that it was important to “ keep it handy, ” but hadn’t
the slightest idea why. Then, the mysterious nature o f Masonry
was one o f the things about it that attracted me. I began to look
forward to entering in with increased anticipation.
As the Christmas season approached in late 1945 I found a
temporary job at the post o ffic e . Uncle Irvin was assistant post­
master and could have helped me to get the job, but he didn’t. I got
the job without his help, was working the second shift, and we were
getting along fine.
F
i r s
t s
t e
p
s
 t o
w
a
r d
 t h
e
 l i g
h
t
Bonnie and I had two close friends, Mac and Merle, whom we
had known before the war. Merle had worked for us at the restau­
rant and had later married Mac. One evening they invited us over
to their home and, after dinner, when the ladies were in the kitchen,
I asked Mac (who was a Mason) how I could get into the Masonic
Lodge.
He was delighted, and replied, “ All you have to do is ask. I will
get a friend o f mine at the Fire Department to recommend you, and
with my recommend1 that will get the ball rolling. ”
About two weeks passed and I had a phone call from a man who
said he was on the Masonic Lodge committee that would be talking
with me and asked if they might come over that evening.
I told him I would be glad for them to come and after dinner that

--- Sayfa 17 ---
21
evening, three men2 came. W e visited and they asked me questions
about myself, including my reasons for wanting to join. They were
pleasant, and Mac had already told me what to expect so I was at
ease throughout the interview. They left in agreement that I would
be taken into the Lodge.
P
r e
p
a
r a
t i o
n
 f o
r i n
i t i a
t i o
n
A few days later I received a letter telling me to be at the Lodge
Hall at 7 p. m. Tuesday evening. I arrived promptly and found that
two others were to be initiated along with me.
We were met by the Lodge secretary who told us what the cost
o f the initiation would be and explained that these dues (fees that
must be paid) would have to be paid for all three degrees before we
could proceed with the first degree initiation.
I paid my dues and, when the others had settled their business, we
were taken to a room which I later knew very well as the ‘‘Prepa­
ration Room. ” But at the time I had no idea where I was or why I
was there. In the Preparation Room we were told to remove all
clothing, and were then given a two-piece garment made o f thin,
white material that looked like pajamas; and we were given one
sandal each. W e were told to put the sandal on the right foot,
leaving the left foot bare. W e were now prepared to receive the
Entered Apprentice Degree, or the First Degree in Freemasonry.
A man called “ The Senior Deacon” then entered and asked
questions o f us such as “ Why do you wish to become Freemasons;
do you join because you believe it will help you in your business,
or help you to gain influence in your community? ”
Now, to such questions the candidate is supposed to answer as if
he had no such selfish motivation. But it has been my experience
that the vast majority o f Masons enter for these very self-serving
reasons. As a matter o f fact, although the theory is that Masons do
not recruit, or advise prospects that there are business and profes­
sional advantages in being a Mason, both are commonly done.
Again, Mac had prepared me by warning me about such questions
and I gave satisfactory answers. But I was able to do so honestly,
for I really did have an earnest desire to join and to belong — just
to belong. Then the Senior Deacon left.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
22
After the departure o f the Senior Deacon, I was blindfolded. The
blindfold is called a “ hoodwink, ” and the candidate so prepared is
said to be “ hoodwinked, ” unable to see or know the truth o f his
surroundings or situation.
After the hoodwink was placed over my eyes, a heavy cloth was
further placed under it and over my eyes to insure that I would not
be able to see anything, not even a crack o f light.
Then the light cloth shirt was arranged so that my left arm was out
o f it, and the left side of the shirt folded back and tucked under,
leaving the left arm and left side o f the torso bare. The left leg o f
the “pajama bottoms” was rolled up high, leaving the left foot and
leg bare. A blue rope (called a “ cabletow” ) was tied around my
neck. I was ready.
Although I very much wanted to be taken into the Masonic
Lodge, I began to experience real fear. I couldn’t see, didn’ t know
where I was, was half-naked among an unknown number o f strang­
ers, being held by a rope around my neck, and I certainly didn’t
know what would happen next. There was a sense o f unreality and
helplessness and a rising groundswell o f disorientation, insecurity
and fear. Mac had told me (although he was under a terrible oath
not to do so) a little o f what to expect. I knew I would be blindfolded
but expected to be able to see a little bit anyway. However, I could
see nothing at all.
This being in total darkness produced a deep-down feeling o f
helplessness, and gave rise to thoughts o f terrible things that might
be done. The thing that kept me from being overwhelmed with fear
was the knowledge that Mac, Uncle Irvin and my Masonic friends
in the Moose Lodge were all alive and well. Since they all had
somehow survived this, I believed that I would survive it too. But
I was extremely uncomfortable.
I n
t o
 t h
e
 h
o
l y
 p
l a
c
e
The Steward led me to the Lodge Hall door and instructed me to
give three raps. Nothing happened at first and then there were three
answering raps from inside and a voice asked, “ Who comes here? ”
The Steward, answering forme, replied, “ A poor blind candidate

--- Sayfa 19 ---
23
who desires to be brought from darkness into light, and receiving
a part o f the rights, lights and benefits o f this Worshipful Lodge
dedicated to the Holy Saints John, as many a brother and fellow
have done before him. ”
I was asked, “ Is this an act o f your own free will and accord? ”
Prompted by the Steward, I replied, “ It is. ”
It was already becoming apparent to me that, although I really
wanted to be a Mason, this was not to be an honest exchange
between me and these unseen persons; there were prearranged
“ right” answers to all their prearranged questions, and I would be
told how to reply. The voice on the other side of the door asked if
I were properly prepared and worthy and well-qualified. To both
questions the Steward replied in the affirmative.
Then the other voice asked, “ By what further right or benefit does
he expect to gain admission? ”
The Steward replied, for me, “ By being a man, free bom, o f
lawful age and well-recommended. ”1
The voice on the other side then said, “ Let him wait with patience
until the Worshipful Master is informed and his answer returned. ”
After another period o f waiting in the black silence the door was
opened before me and the voice said that I was to be allowed to
enter and be received “ in due and ancient form. ” I was led through
the door. Although I didn’t know where I was, I had passed through
the protected portals and into the holy and secret place. I was inside
a Lodge Hall for the first time in my life.
B
r o
u
g
h
t t o
 t h
e
 l i g
h
t
That same voice I heard from inside the door (it turned out to be
the Senior Deacon) then said, from directly in front o f me, “ You are
received into this Lodge o f Entered Apprentices upon the point o f
a sharp instrument piercing your naked left breast, which is to teach
you as this is an instrument o f torture to the flesh, so the re­
membrance o f it be to your mind and conscience, should you ever
presume to reveal any o f the secrets o f Freemasonry unlawfully. ”
The “ sharp instrument” was actually a large compass with the
two sharp points brought together as one, and “ sharp” it most

--- Sayfa 20 ---
24
certainly was. I really did feel pain as it was pressed into my flesh.
When he said “ presume,” he emphasized the word by jabbing me
again. This thing was becoming more and more serious and I was
even more afraid. Yet, under the circumstances, I stood silently and
made no reply.
I was then caused to walk again, led by the same man who was
holding me by the rope around my neck and by my left arm. We
stopped. Another voice (it was the Worshipful Master) ordered me
taken to a place in the center o f the room for prayer. I was led there,
made to kneel, and the Master prayed a formal, generalized prayer,
never mentioning Jesus, and ending with, “ So mote it be. ”
After the prayer he came to where I was kneeling, placed his hand
on my head and asked, “ In whom do you place your trust? ”
Except for the few times as a child with my grandmother I had not
been taken to church or taught about God and I really didn't know
how to reply. I was awkwardly silent for what seemed a long time.
Finally the Senior Deacon leaned over and whispered in my ear
that I should say “ In God, ”4 and I did. The Master then said that
since my trust was in God my faith was well-founded and I w as to
follow my “ conductor” (the Senior Deacon, who was leading me
around by the rope around my neck) and not be afraid. That helped
a little but I was still far from being at ease.
I was then led to another place in the room where another man
(the Junior Warden) asked the same questions as before my being
allowed to enter the room. He then directed me to be led to still
another place where the Senior Warden asked the very same
questions and received the same replies. At each stop someone
rapped once with a gavel.
It was all very strange and formal and the questions and answers
were beginning to sound familiar. From there I was led to the
position o f “ the Worshipful Master in the East” where he asked the
very same questions and received the very same replies. It was
really beginning to be repetitious. Then, at the direction o f the
Worshipful Master, I was instructed in the proper manner of
“ approaching the East. ”' The Senior Deacon, my principal escort,
turned me around saying, “ You will face the East. Take one step
with your left foot, and bring the heel o f your right foot to the

--- Sayfa 21 ---
25
hollow (instep) o f your left foot, feet forming the angle o f the
oblong square. ”
He helped me do this because I could not see. He held on to me
or I might have lost my balance. It was an unnatural way to stand
and being blindfolded made it even more difficult. Then, suddenly,
he shouted, “ STAN D ERECT! ”6
I was startled and wondered what that was all about (I was
already standing up. although my feet were somewhat twisted
around). But I was beginning to expect such unexpected things
and, although I certainly didn’t know it, an even more startling
surprise was just ahead.
The voice o f the Worshipful Master, somewhere in front o f me,
said, “ Friend, for the first time in your life you have advanced to
the altar o f Masonry; you stand before us a candidate seeking ad­
mission to our Order. But before going farther be warned o f the
solemnity and importance of the step you are about to take. If you
are unwilling to proceed, withdraw while there is yet time. ”
There had been moments o f fear when I wanted to leave, but felt
trapped in what was taking place. And now, as I awkwardly stood
there, blindfolded and disoriented, not knowing what (or how
many) men may be looking at me, I began to feel a strange kind o f
numbness. I felt somewhat like a victim still, but really didn’t want
to leave. I was beginning to feel as if I were being carried along,
propelled by a force I neither knew nor understood. The Master
went on with remarks about the nature o f the Order and o f the high
moral character required to belong.
Then I was placed in a kneeling position before the altar, “ in due
form. ” This was to kneel on the naked left knee, right leg extended
to form the Tau Cross (“ angle of a square” ), left hand under the
Bible on the altar (on top o f which were the square and compass),
right hand resting thereon and body erect. I was now ready to take
the oath, although I certainly didn’t know it, and I knew nothing o f
what would be in that oath.
K
i s s i n
g J e s u
s g o o d
b y e
The Master then assured me that the oath w hich I was about to
take would in no way “ conflict with religious, political or private

--- Sayfa 22 ---
26
pursuits be they what they may, ”7 and, asked me if I were willing
to continue. I really didn’t know what he was talking about but it
sounded reassuring so I said, “ I am. ”
I was then led to swear, repeating after the Worshipful Master,
the oath o f an Entered Apprentice Mason. He would speak a few
words and I would repeat them, having no idea to what I was
swearing until each small group o f words was spoken for me to
repeat.
As it progressed I realized that I was swearing to protect the
secrets o f the Lodge. Then I heard myself saying that I was
“ binding myself under no less penalty than that o f having my throat
cut from ear to ear, my tongue tom out by its roots, and buried in
the sands o f the sea a cable’s length from shore, where the tide ebbs
and flows twice in twenty-four hours, should I ever willingly,
knowingly, or unlawfully violate this, my Entered Apprentice
Oath, so help me God and keep me steadfast. ”
The awfulness o f the oath dawned within me as I was speaking
it and it was both frightening and repulsive to me. But, having
begun, having “ come this far, ” I just continued to the end. 8 The
Master then told me that, in order to seal this oath, I was to kiss the
open Bible before me. I had my hands on it so I knew where it was
and I leaned forward and kissed it. I had no idea that I was actually
kissing Jesus goodbye at a pagan altar. I didn’t know that through­
out my lifetime in Masonry I would not be allowed to pray in His
name, or even to hear or speak His name in the Lodge, even in
Scripture readings. 9 But I didn’t know Him then, so would have
had no sense o f loss even had I known this.
I w
a
n
t e
d
 a
 g
l a
s
s
 o
f w
a
t e
r
The Worshipful master then directed that since I was now bound
to the Lodge “ by an oath which cannot be broken, ” I was to have
the rope (cabletow) removed from my neck.
The Senior Deacon removed it.
Then the Master said to me, “ M y brother, in your present blind
condition, what do you most desire? ”
Well, I had been through a lot o f stress by that time and was very
thirsty. I assumed from his question that whatever I asked for, I

--- Sayfa 23 ---
27
would probably be given. So I thought it over briefly and was just
about to say, “ a cold glass o f water, ” when the Senior Deacon
leaned over and whispered in my ear, “ Light. ”
So. a little disappointed, I said. “ Light. ”
The big surprise was just about ready. The Master called the
lodge members to the altar and they gathered in two rows, one on
either side o f me, aligned east-to-west.
He then quoted from Genesis where God said, “ Let there be
light” and said, “ In solemn imitation o f Him I, in like manner,
Masonically declare, ‘ let there be LIG H T ! ’”
When he shouted “ L IG H T ’ all the other men present around me
clapped their hands and stamped their feet simultaneously, star­
tling me half to death and, at the same moment, the Senior Deacon
ripped o ff the hoodwink and I was blinded with brilliant light.
The Worshipful Master then said, “ And there is light. ”
I was stunned and dazzled momentarily. Then the Master went
on talking, explaining the objects I was beginning to be able to
focus my eyes on and see before me. He told me about the Bible, 10
square, and compass, their meaning, and called them the “ three
great lights o f Masonry. ” Then he referred to the three candles
around the altar and said they represented the “ three lesser lights”
of Masonry, which in reality are the sun, the moon, and the
Worshipful Master o f the Lodge. None o f this meant much to me
at that time, except that I already had a vague idea that the Bible was
supposed to be a sacred book.
Then the Worshipful Master showed me how to perform the due-
guard (by holding my hands in the position in which they had been
at the altar, left one palm-up and the right one over it, palm-down),
and the sign. The sign was performed by drawing the open hand
from the left ear, across the throat to the right ear, as if cutting the
throat across. I was still kneeling at the altar. The Master then
demonstrated the secret grip (pressing the knuckle o f the right
index finger) and gave me the secret word, (“ Boaz” ).
He helped me to stand and instructed me to go and salute the
Junior and Senior Wardens with the due-guard and sign. Led by the
Senior Deacon. I did.
Returning then to the west side o f the altar, I waited while the

--- Sayfa 24 ---
28
Master approached the altar and presented me with a lambskin
apron. He explained that it was an emblem o f innocence and the
mark o f a Mason. He further spoke o f its importance and then told
me to take it to the Senior Warden in the West who would instruct
me in the way to wear it. I did it, thinking that there is a very great
deal o f moving around in these ceremonies.
The Senior Warden explained its use by ancient stonemasons
and by members o f the Lodge, or “ speculative” Masons, including
the way I should wear it (with the bib turned up). Then he put the
apron on me, led me back to my place at the altar, we both saluted
the Worshipful Master and he reported, “ Your orders have been
obeyed, Worshipful Master. ”
T
h
e
 p
e
n
n
i e
s
 e
x
p
l a
i n
e
d
At this point the Master asked me to deposit something o f value
o f a metallic kind and directed me to search my person for such an
object.
“The pennies, ” I thought, “ this is what the pennies were about. ”
Well, I knew there was no use looking in those pajamas for a coin
for they had no pockets. The Master then explained that all this was
to remind me o f my “ poor and penniless condition, ” should I ever
meet a friend, particularly a brother Mason, who is destitute. I was
to give to him, as able to do so “ without inconvenience. ”
Then I was sent to the preparation room to dress again and then
return for further instruction.
I went, thinking, “ This explains all that mysterious stuff about the
pennies, and yet it doesn’t. They said I would be needing them and
I really don’t. ”
It was a partial truth — but not the clear, plain truth. I had actually
been misled. I wondered if somehow this was an indication of
deceptions to come. I had believed them completely and it had
really not been true.
Upon my return, I saluted the Worshipful Master and was seated
as a member o f the Lodge. I watched, with growing understanding,
as the other two candidates were initiated after me.
I was a Mason at last — without any help from Uncle Irvin.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
29
F o o t n o t e s
1 A recommendation fo r acceptance is called a ” recommend” in the Lodge, as
is the case with Mormons seeking admission to the secret rituals o f the M orm on
Temple. Joseph Smith. founder o f Mormonism and writer o f the temple ritual, was
a Mason. Much o f the M orm on Temple ritual is the same as in Masonic ritual,
having apparently been “borrowed” from it by Smith. Two such "recommends”
are required before admission to the Masonic Lodge can be pursued.
2These three men constituted the “Investigation Committee” ; there are always
three men. and they are elected each year to this position.
3 Although essentially the same, the rituals fo r the first three ( “Blue” ) degrees
vary in small ways from state to state in the USA. In most states the wording here
includes “ w h i t e , " f o r Negroes and women are entirely excluded from the Masonic
brotherhood. There is a Negro Masonic system, called the Prince H all Lodge, but
it is not associated in any way with “white” Freemasonry. It is referred to as
“clandestine” Masonry, and is considered by the rest o f Masonry to be a spurious,
illegitimate imitation.
4 Some really funny things do happen in these ceremonies. Once, later on. when
I was Worshipful Master. I placed my hand on a candidate’s head and asked him.
“In whom do you place your trust? ” Without hesitation the man replied. "M y
wife. ”
5 “The east” is the location within the Lodge H all where the Worshipful Master
sits upon his throne! chair o f authority In the ancient mystery religions, from
which Freemasonry springs, the Sun was worshipped, and the most sacred
direction was east, where the sun arose each morning to renew life on earth.
6This position o f the feet is no coincidence when facing the Worshipful Master
“ in the East. ” This position o f the feet form s the “Tau Cross. ” a phallic symbol
from antiquity associated with phallic worship and Sun worship in which the Sun
was viewed as the source o f life (m ale), rising each day in the east to impregnate
the Earth (fem ale) with new life. Such worship was always done facing East. Here
in the ritual, the command “STAND E R E C T ’ is also not a coincidence, and is o f
obvious symbolic meaning. See Appendix B. ” Masonic Symbolism”
7This is. at best, logically absurd. He could have no way o f knowing this, fo r he
had no knowledge o f what such values, beliefs and standards I may have held, then
o r in the future. One clear exception to this false assurance, fo r example, is that
all Christians are forbidden by Scripture from taking such oaths, particularly
blood oaths o f mayhem and murder.
8There have been cases reported o f men who stopped at the point o f the terrible
oath and refused to continue, but such cases are rare By the time most men are
at this point, nearly finished with the oath, they will, because o f fear, their
humbling position, the rope around the neck, and the hypnotic effect o f the
ceremony, proceed with the oath, although they may feel revulsion at it.
9 In a “ well-ordered Lodge” the name o f Jesus is not allowed to be spoken.
Praying in His name is a serious offense and can even bring about the closing o f

--- Sayfa 26 ---
30
a lodge. When New Testament Scriptures are read in the rituals, portions
including the name o f Jesus are simply omitted.
10 In this part o f the ritual the Worshipful Master tells the initiate, ” the Holy
Bible is to be your rule and guide to your faith and practice. ” Years later, when
I was a Worshipful M aster, a friend who was an officer in the Lodge asked me, after
an initiation. "Jim. if it is true that the Bible is to be our rule and guide, why don't
we follow its teachings? ” He had an excellent question, one fo r which / had no
answer, and he soon left Masonry.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
4 I'm going
to florida
After the three of us had been initiated into the Entered Appren­
tice Degree we were immediately assigned an instructor from
among the experienced brothers in the Lodge. He was to meet with
us at least once weekly at the Lodge Hall for several weeks' to
instruct and coach us in the necessary memory work until we were
ready to recite before the Lodge and actually have the degree
conferred.
This memory work consisted o f portions o f the initiation ritual
(in which we had been prompted during initiation, or had simply
had them shown us or spoken for us), such as the secret word, due-
guard, sign, grip, and the oath (obligation). Then, when we were
ready, we would be examined orally before the Lodge, the ques­
tions being put to us by our instructor.
Our final examination for the Entered Apprentice Degree would
be given on the same night that we would be initiated into the
Fellowcraft Degree, making for a very long meeting on that night.
The instructor set a regular night for the three o f us to meet with
him and I was looking forward to it. I was definitely motivated, an
eager beaver, ready to “ get on with it. ” I wanted to take the oral
exam for Entered Apprentice and be initiated into the Fellowcraft
Degree as soon as possible.
Meanwhile, Roy, a friend with whom I had been in the Army,
31

--- Sayfa 28 ---
32
called me. He was living in South Florida in one side o f a duplex
house. The other side was empty. He urged Bonnie and me to leave
the North, with its long, cold winters and come to Florida with him
and his family. He painted a most appealing picture and said he was
sure we could both Find jobs there.
W e really didn't want to leave, for the city was “ home" to us.
Both o f us had grown up there and what families we had were there.
So I just went ahead with my job at the post office and looked
forward to the training sessions with our instructor at the Lodge
Hall. I believed that I would soon be ready, with the other two men.
to take the examination. I kept thinking about Roy and what he had
suggested, but it was just too big a change to make so lightly.
O
n
e
 c o
l d
 n
i g
h
t
Christmas had come and gone, then New Year’s Day, and the post
office still kept me on. I was working second shift, from 3 t o 11 p. m.,
on the south side o f town where packages were handled. The
weather was extremely cold.
One bitterly cold night, when my shift was over, I walked out to
the parking lot to get into my car and drive home as I always did
When I tried to start the car it wouldn't do a thing; it was frozen.
A lot o f the gasoline being sold at the time had water in it and I was
the victim o f a tank full. The fuel line and the carburetor were
frozen and it simply wouldn't start. I was stranded in the middle of
a very cold winter night.
There was no one left in the lot to give me a ride, so there was noth­
ing to do but walk to town where I could catch a streetcar home.
I locked the car, wrapped my coat around me and set out for town,
walking into a cold north wind. As I walked along on painfully cold
feet I began thinking o f Roy and his proposal. The more I thought
o f it, the more attractive the thoughts o f that warm climate became.
Soon, with each step I was saying to myself. “ I'm going to
Florida. I’ m going to Florida. I’m going to Florida. " keeping
cadence with my steps crunching on the frozen ground. With each
step I was more determined to do it and by the time I reached town,
and the first streetcar stop, the decision was made. W e were going
to Florida, and the sooner the better!

--- Sayfa 29 ---
33
When I presented the idea to Bonnie she was willing and imme­
diately we began to make preparations. Thoughts o f how this
would affect my progress as a Mason didn’t have much impact;
that could be worked out somehow. The cold weather and contrast­
ing thoughts of palm trees, warm breezes and orange groves
prevailed. We were going to Florida at least until the awful winter
was over.
Within a few weeks we were on our way south. W e drove through
Kentucky, Tennessee and Georgia. The farther south we drove the
warmer it was and the happier I became. It felt so “ right. ”
A
 t e
m
p
o
r a
r y
 s
t a
n
d
s
t i l l
In Florida we moved right into the other side o f the duplex Roy
and his family were in and settled down. I was in contact with the
Lodge back home and they thought I would soon be back. So did
I but I felt no compulsion to be in a hurry about it. M y degree
instructor finally wrote and told me that the other two men who had
been initiated as Entered Apprentices with me were already Master
Masons (had completed the first three degrees); he wanted to know
when I would be coming back and was concerned that I would not
be able to remember the material after so long a time. Actually, I
did remember it — very well — for I frequently went over all o f it
in my mind. I remembered it though I had not been able to attend
even the first training session with the instructor before leaving for
Florida.
It was suggested that I might be able to go on with the degree
work right there in Florida so I inquired about it. I learned that, with
a letter from the Lodge back home, I could continue in Florida as
a “ courtesy candidate” and finish all three degrees right there.
Since I had already paid for all three o f the Blue Degrees, 2, it
wouldn’t cost me anything to take the degrees in Florida. I was de­
lighted, made the necessary arrangements, and immediately com­
menced the memory work with an instructor from the local lodge.
S o
 w
h
y
 l e
a
v e ?
Meanwhile, I applied for a job with the City Port Authority and
was accepted. Bonnie had a good job, already, and we were doing
fine. Spring had come and cold weather was over back home but

--- Sayfa 30 ---
34
thoughts o f returning to the North were rapidly losing their appeal.
W e talked it over, discussed it with Roy and his wife and consid­
ered the facts that we both had good jobs where we were, had no
jobs back home, and liked Florida better each day. So, we rea­
soned. why leave? W e decided to stay right where we were, at least
for the foreseeable future.
B
a
c
k
 i n
t o
 t h
e
 c
r a
f t
It may seem that my ardent seeking into Freemasonry had been
interrupted, that it had been displaced in my life’s goals and values,
but it hadn’t been — not at all. I had been preoccupied with the
move to Florida and the search for a good job there, but actually all
this had only involved a few months. I had continued to rehearse
the secret degree work in my mind all the while and I had kept in
touch with the Lodge in Indianapolis. There had been a little “ time
out. *’ but no real change in my heart.
With my acceptance by the Florida Lodge as a courtesy candi­
date for the rest o f the Blue Degrees, I stepped right back into my
active pursuit o f the Masonic mountaintop.
I was soon ready for the oral examination for the Entered
Apprentice Degree and initiation into the Fellowcraft Degree. I
had never ceased to remember and to prepare, and was anxious to
proceed with it.
A
 f e
l l o
w
 c
r a
f t m
a
s
o
n
Although I was now in another Grand Lodge (each state is a
separate “ Grand Lodge” and, in many ways, independent o f the
others) and in the Southern Jurisdiction3, things were essentially
the same in Florida and I felt a basic familiarity with what was
happening as I was being prepared for the Fellowcraft initiation.
When I arrived at the Lodge Hall and was led into the Preparation
Room I was much more relaxed than I had been that first time a few
months earlier in Indianapolis. There were three other men to be
examined with me, including one who had previously taken the
examination and failed it. W e waited in our street clothes while the
Worshipful Master opened the Lodge in the Master Mason’s

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Degree (the Lodge is always opened in the Master Mason’ s degree
when candidates are to be examined for the Blue Degrees). Then
the Lodge was “ called o f f ’ to the Entered Apprentice Degree for
the examination and the Senior Deacon escorted us into the Lodge
Hall, placing us near the altar.
Our instructor had now changed roles and become our examiner,
as we had known he would do. He took his place at the west side
o f the altar, facing us, and began to ask us the questions for which
we had been prepared. No one o f us was asked all the questions;
but, of course, it was necessary for each o f us to know all the
answers for we couldn’t know which ones we would be asked.
We answered his questions in order, without a flaw, and were
then escorted back to the Preparation Room to wait while the
Lodge members voted on whether to award the degree to us4
After a rather short time, the Junior Deacon came into the
Preparation Room and told us that we had all been accepted and
awarded the Entered Apprentice Degree. We were all pleased, but
not too surprised, and were immediately told to remove our clothes
to prepare for initiation into the Fellowcraft (Second) Degree. We
undressed and were given pajama tops and bottoms, very similar
to those I remembered from the Entered Apprentice initiation, and,
again, one slipper. This time, however, we were told to put the one
slipper on the left foot, leaving the right one bare. The right leg o f
the trousers was rolled up above the knee and the right arm left out
of the top leaving the right side o f the torso naked.
We were ready, but this time I was not to be first; the man who
had failed and been forced to retake his examination was taken into
the Lodge Room for initiation first.
When the first man had completed the initiation, put his street
clothes back on and been seated in the Lodge Hall to watch the rest
o f us, it was my turn.
I was hoodwinked, just like before. But when the cabletow was
tied onto me it was not put around my neck; instead, it was wound
twice around my right arm. The Steward led me to the inner door
and told me to give three raps. After a brief delay, there were three
answering raps on the other side o f the door. The Steward opened
the door just enough to allow discussion and the question was

--- Sayfa 32 ---
36
asked (it was the Senior Deacon, as in the first degree), “ Who
comes here? ”
The Steward, who was holding onto me, replied, “ A brother who
has been regularly initiated an Entered Apprentice and now desires
to receive additional light in Masonry by being passed to the degree
o f Fellowcraft. ”
I was then asked by the Senior Deacon, “ Is this an act o f your own
free will and accord? ” and I replied, “ It is. ”
This time things were not so strange and new; in fact, I could
anticipate some o f it before it took place. I was much more relaxed.
The Senior Deacon asked the Steward if I were duly and truly
prepared and if I were well qualified.
To both, the Steward replied that I was.
The Senior Deacon asked the Steward if I had made suitable
proficiency in the preceding degree, and was told that I had. The
Senior Deacon then asked “ by what further right or benefit” I
expected to gain admission. The Steward replied, “ By benefit of
the Pass. ”
The Steward was then asked if I had the pass and replied that I did
not, but that he had it for me.
The door was opened just enough for the Steward to whisper the
password to the Senior Deacon who then said, “ Let him wait until
the Worshipful Master is informed o f his request and his answer
returned. ”
The door was closed. After a short delay the door was opened and
the Senior Deacon said from right in front o f me that it was the will
o f the Worshipful Master that I enter the Lodge o f Fellow crafts and
that I be received “ in due and ancient form. ” That part sounded very
familiar.
The Senior Deacon then said to me, “ My brother, it is the will of
the Worshipful Master that you be received into this Lodge upon
the angle o f a square at your naked right breast, which is to teach
you that the square o f virtue should be a rule and guide to your
conduct in all your future action with mankind and more especially
with a brother Mason. ”
As he was saying this, he pressed the point o f the square into my
bare chest; it was uncomfortable, but nothing like as painful as the

--- Sayfa 33 ---
37
compass points pressed into me in the first initiation. He then took
me firmly by my bare right arm and began to lead me around the
room. It is awkward to walk in a strange place blindfolded, even
when being led along; there is always the thought that you are about
to run into something.
In this way I made my way around the Lodge Hall and, as we
passed certain places, I heard tapping sounds, two each time. W e
seemed to be going around again, and this time stopped (at the
station of the Junior Warden) and there were three taps. The same
questions and answers that were exchanged at the door were
repeated.
Then the Junior Warden asked, “ Has he the password? ”
The Senior Deacon replied, “ He has it not; I have it for him. ”
Upon being told to advance and give the password, the Senior
Deacon did so, saying “ SHIBBOLETH. ” The Junior Warden
replied, “ Right. Pass on. ”
We began moving again and stopped as before (this time it was
at the station o f the Senior Warden). The same questions and
answers were exchanged and the Senior Warden directed that I be
conducted to the Worshipful Master in the East for final instruc­
tion. W e began moving again and stopped at the Master’s station.
Here the very same questions were asked and the very same replies
given. (The similarity with the Entered Apprentice initiation ritual
was apparent to me, even at the time. ) The Worshipful Master then
directed that I be returned to the Senior Warden in the West who
would instruct me in the proper manner in which to approach the
East. So back to the Senior Warden’s station we went and he said
that the Senior Deacon should so instruct me.
The thought that this was a wasted trip flickered across my mind
when the Senior Deacon turned me around (facing the East) and
told me to step o ff with my left foot as an Entered Apprentice, then
take a step with my right foot, bringing the heel o f my left foot up
to the hollow (instep) o f the right one, forming the angle o f an
oblong square (the Tau Cross).
This was just the way I had done it in the first initiation, except
that the extra step resulted in reversing the Tau Cross made with my
feet. Then, as before, the Senior Deacon suddenly and loudly said

--- Sayfa 34 ---
38
§! %•
in my ear, “ STA N D ERECT! ” This time I rather expected it, so
wasn’t startled as I was the first time, but it still had a strange effect
on me that I didn’t understand.
Then the Worshipful Master began to speak from directly in front
of me. He said that our knowledge as Masons is progressive and our
obligation is similarly progressive and binding. But he gave me the
same assurance as had been given in the Entered Apprentice
initiation that nothing in my oath or obligation would conflict with
my duty to my God, my country, my neighbor or myself, but said
it would merely bind me more closely to the brothers o f the Lodge.
He then asked me whether, with that assurance, I were willing to
proceed, and I said, “ I am. ” He then told the Senior Deacon to place
me “ in due form” at the altar to be made a Fellowcraft.
The Senior Deacon said to me, “ Advance! Kneel on your naked
right knee, your left forming a square, your body erect, your right
hand resting on the Holy Bible, square and compass, your left
elbow forming a right angle, supported by the square. ” He helped
me to get into this position, and then said to the Master, “ The candi­
date is in due form, Worshipful Master. ” There were three raps o f
a gavel, some shuffling noises, and the Master said, “ You will re­
peat your name and repeat after me: “ I, James D. Shaw, o f my own
free will and accord, in the presence o f Almighty God and this
Worshipful Lodge, do hereby and hereon solemnly and sincerely
promise and swear. ” I reaffirmed the oath that I had taken as an En­
tered Apprentice and swore not to reveal any o f the secrets o f a Fel­
lowcraft Mason to any Entered Apprentice or to any “ profane per­
son. ”5 I promised to abide by the laws, rules and regulations o f a
Fellowcraft Lodge and that I would respond to degree. Then I
swore not to cheat or defraud, knowingly, a Fellowcraft Lodge or
a brother o f that degree. 6 To all this I swore, “ binding myself under
no less a penalty than that o f having my left breast tom open, my
heart plucked out and given to the beasts o f the field and fowls o f
the air as a prey” should I ever knowingly or willingly violate the
oath.
The Worshipful Master then said, “ In token o f your sincerity,
kiss the Holy Bible open before you. ” As I had done in the first

--- Sayfa 35 ---
39
initiation, I leaned forward and kissed the Bible. It gave me a
strange sensation.
The Master then told the Senior Deacon that, since I was bound
to the Lodge by an oath which cannot be broken (a bond much
stronger than any rope) that he was to remove the cabletow from
my arm. As soon as it was removed, the Master asked me what I
most desired. Prompted by the Senior Deacon, I replied, “ Further
light” (by this time, I knew better than to ask for cold water).
The Master then said, “ Further light being your desire, you shall
receive it. ” As in the f irst degree, the brothers came down and lined
up on either side o f me and, as they and the Master clapped their
hands, the hoodwink was removed from my eyes. Then the Master
called my attention to the fact that this time one point o f the
compass was hidden beneath the square, which was to teach me
that there were still more secrets hidden from my view. He then
approached the altar and demonstrated the due-guard and sign o f
a Fellowcraft Mason. The due-guard consisted o f the right arm
extended, just below the chest, palm-down, and the left arm raised
to form a right angle, just as mine had been while taking the oath.
The sign was given by raising the right hand to the left breast and
drawing it swiftly across the chest as if tearing it open with claws
and then dropping the hand to the side, all in one motion.
The Master then extended his right hand to me “ in token o f
brotherly love and confidence” and demonstrated the pass grip by
shaking hands and pressing his thumb between the first and second
fingers where they join the hand. He gave me the word, the name
o f the pass grip, “ SHIBBOLETH. ”
Next came the "real grip, ” made by putting the thumb on the first
knuckle o f the second finger so that each can stick the nail o f his
thumb into the knuckle o f the other. The name was given to me as
“JACHIN, ” spoken in the following manner.
While giving the grip, you say, “ What is this? ”; the answer is “ A
grip. ” Then, “ A grip o f what? ”; the reply is “ The grip o f a
Fellowcraft Mason. ” Question: “ Has it a name? ”; reply: “ It has. ”
Next you say, “ Give it me. ” Reply: “ I will letter it or halve it. ” Then
you say, “ Halve it and begin. ” Answer: “ Nay, you begin. ” Again
you say, “ You begin. ”The reply: “Ja. ” M y response: “Chin. ”Then
he replies: “ Jachin; right brother, I greet you. ” It was all so
complicated but I could only accept it.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
40
Then the Master got an apron and put it on me with appropriate
remarks about its importance. The Senior Warden tucked the
lower left corner under the top. I was then escorted by the Senior
Deacon to the station o f the Worshipful Master in the East who
presented and explained the significance o f “ the tools o f a Fel
lowcraft Mason, ” the plumb, square, and level, applying them to
principles o f virtue and morality.
He then said, “ I further present you with three precious jewels;
their names are Faith, Hope and Charity. They teach us to have
faith in the Grand Architect o f the Universe, hope in immortality
and charity to all mankind, more especially a brother Mason. ”
Then he directed the Senior Deacon to conduct me “ out o f the
Lodge Room” and to “ reinvest him with that o f which he has been
divested” (in ordinary language, to take me back to the Preparation
Room and let me put my clothes back on).
My Fellowcraft initiation was almost completed, and I was
feeling pretty good about it.
When I had re-dressed I was readmitted to the Lodge Hall and
seated. I was told that our forefathers, the ancient Masonic breth­
ren, worked at the building o f King Solomon’s Temple and many
other edifices, Masonic buildings, cathedrals and the like.
The Senior Deacon described the two columns (or pillars) o f the
Temple, said the name o f the left one is Boaz, and that o f the right
one Jachin. He also went into considerable detail in describing the
symbolic significance of the decorations on them.
Then the Master said that I had been admitted to the “ Middle
Chamber” o f King Solomon’s Temple for the explanation o f the
letter “ G. ” He said that it denotes “ Deity” before whom we ought
all to bow in reverence to worship and adore. He said that it also
denotes “ Geometry” by means o f which “ we may track Nature
through her various windings to her most concealed recesses. ” He
said that by means o f geometry we may better comprehend the
perfection o f Nature and the “ goodness o f the Great Artificer of the
Universe. ”
With this brief lecture on the letter “ G ” my initiation ended and
I watched as the remaining candidate was initiated. As was the case

--- Sayfa 37 ---
41
when I was initiated into the Entered Apprentice Degree, my
watching the other man not only helped me to understand it all
better, but helped me to be o ff to a good start in memorizing it all
for my coming examination in the degree. I was back on the
Masonic pathway and picking up speed.
Fotnotes
1The exact amount o f time required fo r this varies depending on how quickly the
candidate can memorize the material required, hut is usually completed in 4-6
weeks.
2Basic Freemasonry consists o f the first three degrees: Entered Apprentice,
Fellowcraft, and Master Mason. These constitute the foundation o f all Masonry
and are conferred and conducted in the local, hometown lodge. The lodge is
referred to as " Blue Lodge, " and the first three degrees as the " Blue Degrees, "
because o f the importance o f the blue sky and its heavenly host o f stars and
planets. Astrology is extremely important to Masonry, and it is also important
that ancient pagans worshiped on high places (h ill tops) "under the starry
canopy o f heaven. "
’American Freemasony (Blue Lodge and Scottish Rite) is divided into two
jurisdictions. The Northern Jurisdiction includes 15 northern and northeastern
states: the much-larger Southern Jurisdiction includes the other 35 states, plus
all U. S. territories and trusts.
4This voting is done with white and black balls, dropped into a box. A white
ball is a “yes" vote, and a black ball is a “n o" vote. I f there is even one black ball
in the box. the candidate is not accepted fo r the degree. A ll such voting is done
while the Lodge is in session in the Master Mason (3rd) degree, and only 3rd
Degree (M aster) Masons can take part.
5A ll non-Masons are, according to Masonic law and tradition,
“profane”
persons. This includes the Mason’s wife, children and parents, unless they, too,
are Masons. The English word “profane" is derived from the Latin word
“profanis, " meaning "before, or outside, the temple. " hence not holy, not clean,
debased and unworthy, a thing to be avoided fo r it would contaminate the holy
and clean ones. I f you are not a Mason, this is what you are to the Masonic world.
See, in this regard, 1 Timothy 1: 9-11 fo r the Bible meaning o f "profane. "
6Note that there is no promise not to cheat or defraud the "profane. ” That seems
to be accepted in Masonic morality. See Appendix C, "M asonic Morality. ”

--- Sayfa 38 ---
5 Master
Mason
For the next two weeks the three o f us attended training sessions
at the Lodge three nights a week. Once again, it seemed easy and
natural for me to learn the secret degree work. I was glad to have
the first two degrees behind me and was eager to get on with the
work and become a Master Mason. I really liked the growing sense
o f acceptance my commitment to the Lodge gave me; those men
were devoting time and energy to me and my progress in the Craft
and the feeling o f belonging did something good for me —
something I had wanted for a very long time and not known.
At the end o f two weeks (which passed very quickly) we met at
the Lodge for our examination in the Fellowcraft Degree and
initiation into the Master Mason Degree. Once again, we waited in
the Preparation Room in our street clothes while the Worshipful
Master opened the lodge in the Master Mason’s Degree and then
“ called it o f f ’ to the Fellowcraft Degree for examination.
The Senior Deacon escorted us into the Lodge Hall and placed us,
as before, facing the altar and the Worshipful Master. Our instruc­
tor, who was now our examiner, stood (as before) facing us with
his back to the altar. I felt a strange mixture o f apprehension and
eager confidence — like a well-trained athlete at the start o f a race.
I was ready.
The examiner questioned us in turn and we all gave the correct
answers; although no one o f us was asked all o f the questions, I
43

--- Sayfa 39 ---
44
could have answered them all. W e were then escorted back into the
Preparation Room to await the voting by the membership.
They didn't take much time in the voting and the Junior Deacon
came into the room to announce that we had all been accepted.
There had been no black balls in the ballot box; “ the ballot was
clear. ” We were Fellowcraft Masons!
Immediately I was told to remove my clothes and prepare for
initiation into the Master Mason degree. The others would be
initiated in the following weeks; I was to be initiated alone. I put
on the same pajama-like bottoms as before, but this time both legs
were rolled up above the knees: and both feet were left bare. I was
not given the shirt to put on and was left naked above the waist. The
cabletow was wound about my body three times at the waist and
then I was hoodwinked. I could see nothing at all — not even any
light.
The same questions as before were asked and answered at the
door and I was led through the door and into the Lodge Room. The
Senior Deacon said, ‘‘Brother James, you are received into this
Lodge o f Master Masons upon the points of the compass extend­
ing from your right to left breast, which is to teach you that, as the
most vital parts o f the man are contained between the breasts, so are
the most valuable tenets o f Masonry contained between the two
extreme points o f the compass, which are virtue, morality and
brotherly love. ” The compass points were sharp and I felt them as
he made his teaching points.
After being received at the door, I was led to the Worshipful
Master who asked for the password. The Senior Deacon, in a
whisper, communicated it to him, for me, “Tubal-Cain. ” Then I
was led by the Senior Deacon around the room as before, stopping
at the station o f the Junior Warden, who sent me to the Senior
Warden, who then directed that I be placed at the altar in due form
to receive the obligation. I was led to the altar and stood waiting.
From directly in front o f me the Master spoke, giving again the
assurance that there was nothing in the oath that would conflict
with my other duties and commitments; and, once again, I had no
way o f knowing that what he was saying could not possibly be true.
Asked, as before, if I were willing to proceed with the oath, I

--- Sayfa 40 ---
45
replied “ I am, ” and he directed the Senior Deacon to place me “ in
due form” at the altar to be made a Master Mason.
T
a
k
i n
g
 t h
e
 m
a
s
t e
r m
a
s
o
n
 o
a
t h
The Senior Deacon placed me in position, kneeling this time on
both bare knees, body erect, legs forming a square, both hands
resting on the square and compass upon the Bible.
Told that I was “ in due form” to receive the obligation, the
Worshipful Master had me repeat after him. a few words at a time,
the oath o f obligation: “ I, James D. Shaw, o f my own free will and
accord in the Presence o f Almighty God and this Worshipful
Lodge, do hereby and hereon solemnly promise and swear, that I
will always hail, ever conceal and never reveal, any o f the secret
arts, parts or points o f the Master Mason’s degree to any person or
persons whomsoever except it be to a true and lawful brother o f this
degree and not unto him or them until after due trial and strict
examination I have found him or them justly entitled to receive the
same. I furthermore promise and swear that I will conform and
abide by all the laws, rules and regulations o f the Master Mason’s
degree, and o f the Lodge o f which I shall hereafter become a
member, and that I will ever maintain and support the constitution,
laws and edicts o f the Grand Lodge under whom the same shall
work, so far as they shall come to my knowledge. Furthermore, that
I will keep the secrets o f a worthy Master Mason as inviolable as
my own, when communicated to and received by me as such.
Furthermore, I will aid and assist all worthy distressed brother
Master Masons, their widows and orphans, I knowing them to be
such, so far as their necessities may require and my ability will
permit without material injury to myself. Furthermore, that I will
not assist in, nor be present at, the initiating, passing or raising o f
a woman, an old man in his dotage, a young man in his non-age, a
madman or a fool, I knowing them to be such. I furthermore
promise and swear I will not visit a clandestine lodge o f Freema­
sons, nor converse Masonically with a clandestine Mason, or with
one who has been expelled or suspended, while under that sen­
tence, knowing them to be such.
“ I furthermore promise and swear that I will not cheat, wrong or

--- Sayfa 41 ---
46
defraud a lodge o f Master Masons or a brother o f this degree,
knowing them to be such, but will give them due and timely notice
that they may ward o ff all approaching danger. I furthermore
promise and swear that I will not violate the chastity of a Master
Mason’s wife, his mother, sister, or daughter, knowing them to be
such. ' I furthermore promise and swear that I will not give the
Grand Masonic Word in any other manner than that in which I shall
receive it, which shall be on the five points o f fellowship and at low
breath. I furthermore promise and swear that I will not give the
Grand Hailing Sign o f Distress except it be in case o f most
imminent danger, my life in peril, or within a lawfully constituted
lodge o f Masons. When I hear the words spoken and see the sign
given, I will hasten to the aid o f the one giving it if there be a greater
possibility o f saving his life than that o f losing my own.
“ To all o f the which, I do most sincerely promise and swear with
a firm and steadfast resolution to keep and perform the same,
without the least equivocation, mental reservation or self-evasion
whatever, binding myself under no less a penalty than that of
having my body severed in twain, my bowels taken out and burned
to ashes, the ashes scattered to the four winds o f heaven that there
should be no more remembrance among men and Masons forever
o f so vile a wretch as I should be, should I ever knowingly or
wittingly violate or transgress this my solemn and binding Master
Mason’s obligation. So help me God and keep me steadfast. ’’
As had been the case with the oaths o f obligation o f the first two
degrees, I had no idea o f what I would be swearing to do until I was
actually hearing and repeating each line. Had I been able to hear or
read the oath in advance, I might not have been able to say it. Even
while taking it as I did, one might expect that the nature o f parts o f
it would have made me hesitate; but I really wasn't thinking o f the
nature o f the oath. I was thinking o f Uncle Irvin and how I was now
going to be a good and successful man as I supposed him to be. If
mother were alive, she would be pleased.
B
u
t t h
e
r e
 w
a
s
 m
o
r e
Upon completion o f the oath, the Master came down to the altar.
He directed the Senior Deacon to remove the cabletow from

--- Sayfa 42 ---
47
around my waist since I was now bound by my obligation to the
Lodge. He then asked me what I most desired; prompted, I replied
“ More light. ” He replied that, since that was my desire, that was
what I should receive. As the hoodwink was suddenly removed,
the brothers (assembled as before) clapped their hands in unison
and my eyes were again dazzled by the sudden bright light. Even
though this had happened to me twice before, it was still somewhat
startling and disorienting. It was as if a susceptibility or fear had
been planted in me the first time and it remained.
The Master then instructed me in making the sign which was
made by dropping the left hand to my side, bringing the right hand
to the left o f my waist, palm- down, and then bringing it quickly
across my waist as if severing my body in twain with my thumb,
then dropping my right hand to the side.
I was shown to make the due-guard by extending the hands,
palm-down, as they had been placed on the square and compass
while taking the oath. The pass grip was shown me by grasping the
hand in the normal (handshake) way, but pressing the thumb
between the second and third joints o f the fingers where they join
the other’s hand. The name o f the pass was then given me: “Tubal-
Cain. ”
Thinking I was just about finished with the Master Mason
initiation, feeling I was “ down to the short rows, ” I was both
listening to the Worshipful Master and feeling a growing sense o f
pleasant release. I had it made, I thought, and it had been so easy!
I was given an apron and the Senior Warden helped me to put it
on as a Master Mason with the “ bib” hanging down in front. I was
then returned to the preparation room and told to take o ff the
initiation drawers I was in and put my street clothes back on, with
the apron.
A plumb emblem, the Junior Warden’s “ Jewel.” was put around
my neck; I was now dressed as a Master Mason. I looked myself
over as best I could, and was thinking, “ W o w ! I am a Master Mason
at last! ”
It was a heady moment and I was exhilarated. But my newfound
sense o f having arrived didn’t last long. I was told that I must be
returned to the Lodge Room for further instruction.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
48
A
n
 u
n
e
x
p
e
c t e
d
 d
i s
a
p
p
o
i n
t m
e
n
t
Back inside the Lodge Room, still feeling very pleased and proud
to be a Master Mason, feeling the exciting newness o f wearing the
Master Mason’s apron and with the plumb emblem around my
neck, I was taken to a position before the Worshipful Master.
He said to me, “ You have been taught to wear your apron as a Ma­
ster Mason and you are doing so at the moment. This would imply
you are a Master Mason and qualified to travel and work as such.
Nay, more, I observe that you have upon your person the badge of
office, the Jewel o f the Junior Warden, one o f the principal officers
o f the Lodge. This mark o f distinction must be highly pleasing to
you and doubtless you now consider yourself a Master Mason. Is
that not so? ”
Suddenly the exhilaration left me and fear took its place. Some­
thing was going on that I hadn’t expected. I was afraid to say “ yes, ”
so I said nothing at all. The Senior Deacon then answered for me,
saying, “ He is o f that opinion, Worshipful Master. ” The Master
then said to me, “ It is my duty to tell you that you are not yet a
Master Mason, nor do I know that you will ever be. The road you
must travel in order to prove yourself is a long, hard and rough one,
upon which lives have been lost, and you may lose yours. ”
Well, that ended any doubts I had about whether my initiation
was over; now I knew I was not yet finished. I was not yet a Master
Mason and what he said about losing my life sounded ominous.
With that strange fear still stirring within me, I was led to the altar
and told to kneel and pray for myself, either silently or out loud. I
had no idea how to pray, so I just knelt silently with my head bowed
and waited.
L i v i n
g
 o
u
t t h
e
 l e
g
e
n
d
After kneeling and waiting silently, appearing to pray, I was told
to remove all articles from my pockets, take o ff my watch, and to
lay them all on the altar. The hoodwink was once again put over my
eyes and I couldn’t see a thing.
The Senior Deacon then said to me, “ M y brother, heretofore you
have represented a candidate in search o f M ORE LIG H T; now you

--- Sayfa 44 ---
49
will represent another character, no less a personage than our
Grand Master Hiram A biff2, Grand Master and architect at the
building o f King Solomon’s Temple. It was the custom o f this great
and good man, at high twelve, when the craft were called from
labor to refreshment, to enter the Holy o f Holies, to offer up his
adorations to Deity and draw his designs upon his trestle board. ”
All the time he was telling me this, he was leading me around the
room. Trying to listen and understand while stumbling along
blindfolded was difficult and awkward for me.
He continued, “ He then passed out by way o f the South Gate to
talk to the workmen, as you will do now. ”
After being led a few more steps, I was accosted by a brother
representing the character Jubela, (it was actually the Junior
Warden). He spoke to me as if I were actually Hiram Abiff, and
grabbed me by the lapels. He said that I had promised to reveal the
secret word o f a Master Mason when the Temple was completed,
that it was nearly completed, and demanded that I give him the
secret word then and there. A ll the while, as he spoke roughly to
me, he was jerking me around and really roughing me up.
The Senior Deacon, speaking for me, said, ‘‘Craftsman, this is
neither the time nor the place. Wait until the Temple is finished and
then you shall have the secrets o f a Master Mason. ”
Jubela then got even more violent, demanding the secret word,
right then! Again speaking for me, the Senior Deacon said, “ Crafts­
man, I cannot and will not give them, ” upon which Jubela struck
a blow across my throat with the 24-inch gauge. It hurt and startled
me and I was immediately hurried a few steps farther where I was
stopped and grabbed by a second “ ruffian, ” called Jubelo. This one
really jerked me around, and said, “Grand Master Hiram Abiff, the
craft are waiting and many are exceedingly anxious to receive the
secrets o f a Master Mason, and we see no good reason why we are
put off so long. W e have determined that we will wait no longer.
I therefore demand o f you the secrets o f a Master Mason! ”
Again speaking for me, the Senior Deacon said, “ Craftsman,
why all this violence? When the Temple is finished, you shall
receive this secret word; I cannot, nor will not, give them to you at
this time. ”

--- Sayfa 45 ---
50
Jubelo then became even more furious and again demanded the
word, upon which the Senior Deacon answered for me, “ I cannot
give them nor can they be given except in the presence o f three:
Solomon, King o f Israel; Hiram, King o f Tyre; and myself. ”
Jubelo, becoming still more violent, reminded me that there was
no one there to help me and threatened to kill me if I didn’t give him
the word.
For me, the Senior Deacon replied, ‘‘M y life you may take, but
my integrity, never! ”
Jubelo then struck a heavy blow across my chest with the square.
It hurt, but I was immediately jerked away and led a few more steps
when I was grabbed a third time and shaken. This was all very real,
even though it was obvious that parts were being acted out. I was
being jerked about, shoved, shouted at and hit by people I couldn’t
see. I had great difficulty in keeping my balance (if the “ ruffians”
hadn’t been holding onto my coat I would have fallen many times),
and the violence was even more shocking because I couldn’t see
it coming.
The third “ ruffian, ” Jubelum, said as he was shaking me that he
had heard me speaking to Jubela and Jubelo and saw that I had
escaped, but said I would not escape from him ever. He said that
what he said, he would do, and that he held in his hand “ an
instrument o f death. ” He said that if I didn’t give him the secrets o f
a Master Mason immediately he would kill me.
Speaking for me again, the Senior Deacon replied as he had
already replied to Jubela and Jubelo. Jubelum then shouted at me,
“ For the last time, Grand Master Hiram, give me the secret word
or I will take your life! ”
I, of course, didn’t realize it, but as Jubelum readied himself to
deliver the death blow, several o f the brothers moved into position
behind me, holding a large canvas, stretched out so as to catch me
when I fell.
With that, Jubelum shouted, “ If you will not give me the secret
word o f a Master Mason, then... D IE! ”
As he shouted the word, “ DIE, ” he hit me right in the middle o f
my forehead with a setting maul! I saw stars. They were brilliant
and in colors, and I fell backward onto the canvas, unconscious. 3

--- Sayfa 46 ---
51
I wasn’t out very long and I came to, head still ringing and aching,
with the three “ ruffians” standing around me, talking over the
situation, and discussing how to dispose o f the body. They decided
to conceal the body “ in the rubbish o f the Temple” until “ low
twelve” (midnight), when they would meet and decide what to do.
So they carried me, on the canvas, a little distance and covered me
with “ rubbish, ” consisting o f chairs and other objects in the Lodge
Hall. There was silence, then I heard a bell strike 12 times and the
“ ruffians” returned. Jubela said, “ This is the hour. ”
Jubelo said, “ This is the place. ” Jubelum then said, “ And there is
the body. Assist me to carry it in a due west course from the temple
to the brow o f a hill where I have dug a grave, six feet due east and
west, and six feet perpendicular, in which we shall bury it. ”
They removed the chairs and other “ Temple rubbish” from me,
picked me up on the canvas, carried me to the west side o f the
Lodge Room and laid me down between the stations o f the Master
and the Senior Warden, my feet to the east. They lowered me to the
floor a little at a time, pausing three times, to simulate lowering me
into a grave.
After I was “ buried, ” Jubelum said, “ I will set this sprig o f Acacia
at the head o f the grave, that the place may be known should the
occasion require it. And now let us make our escape out o f the
country by the way o f Joppa. W e should be able to get a ship to take
us to a foreign port. ”
The “ ruffians” then acted out a scene in which they talked with
a sea captain and asked for passage on his ship which was to sail
the next day. Learning they could not sail without a pass from King
Solomon, they decided to flee into the mountains and hide.
Meanwhile, the Worshipful Master, acting the part o f King
Solomon, heard a lot of commotion made by other brothers acting
as workmen in the Temple. Solomon asked what the noise was all
about and was told that Grand Master Hiram A b iff was missing and
could not be found.
King Solomon ordered that a search be made and the brothers
then did a lot o f talking back and forth while I lay there, saying such
things as, “ Have you seen him? ” “ Not since high twelve yester­
day, ” and, “ Where is our Grand Master? ”

--- Sayfa 47 ---
52
Then King Solomon ordered that a search be made with one party
going west, one east, one north, and one south. At this point there
were three loud raps on the door and when the “ alarm was at­
tended” there were found to be 12 “ fellowcrafts” who confessed to
the King that they and three others had conspired to force Hiram
to reveal the secret word. They said that they (the 12) had not been
able to go through with their evil plan, having “ reflected with
horror on the atrocity o f the crime, ” but reported that the other three
had gone through with it.
The King then sent out those 12, three in each direction, to search
for Jubela, Jubelo and Jubelum. One group o f three spoke with the
sea captain and, following the direction he gave them, followed the
murderers’ path and found the new grave, marked with the Acacia
sprig. Digging down, they “ discovered” my body.
Reporting to Solomon, they were sent back to identify the body
and, if Hiram, to raise it with the grip o f an Entered Apprentice.
As the drama continued, they returned to the “ grave” and saw that
I was indeed Hiram4; but they could not “ raise” me, as the body was
decomposing, so the “ flesh left the bone. ” They reported the
problem to Solomon, who sent them back to raise the body with the
grip o f a Fellowcraft. When “ the skin (slipped) away” they re­
ported this failure to Solomon.
Then the Master, playing King Solomon, came over to me and
took my hand with the grip o f a Master Mason, “ the strong grip o f
the lion’s paw”5 and, with the other hand behind my back, assisted
me to a standing position. I was fully recovered by this time, but
still stiff and a little wobbly from the strain and from lying still for
so long while the latter part o f the drama was acted out.
The Master explained that while the secret word o f the Master
Mason had been lost when Hiram was killed, the First word he
spoke when raised from the dead was the substitute for the “ lost
word. ” He then placed his right foot alongside mine, instep to
instep, his knee against mine, his chest against mine and his mouth
next to my right ear. With my hand placed on his back, we were “ on
the five points o f fellowship: foot to foot, knee to knee, chest to
chest, hand to back and mouth to ear. ” He whispered into my ear
the Grand Masonic Word, “ Mah-Hah-Bone, ” and instructed me

--- Sayfa 48 ---
53
that it must never be given to any but another Master Mason, only
“ on the five points o f fellowship” as he had given it to me and never
above a whisper, under penalty o f death.
I was then instructed by the Worshipful Master in giving the
“Grand Hailing Sign o f Distress. ” The Grand Hailing Sign o f
Distress is given by raising the hands above the head and looking
up, then lowering the hands in supplication, then dropping them to
the side. The words accompanying the sign are, “ Oh, Lord my God,
is there no help for the widow’s son? ”
He explained to me that I was never to give this sign unless in the
most extreme distress and that it is the most important Masonic
secret. I was reminded o f the part o f my obligation relating to my
responsibility should another Master Mason ever give this sign to
me and, with this, my initiation as a Master Mason was really
finished at last.
With the instruction finished I was seated and there followed a
rather long and involved lecture on the meaning o f the symbols o f
a Master Mason and the lengthy charge o f a Master Mason. When
the Master closed the Lodge, the brothers crowded around me with
congratulations and then went home.
Bonnie was waiting up for me and we shared the sense o f
accomplishment together. She was pleased and proud o f me. It was
a really wonderful moment o f fulfillment. If only mother could
know; I had a good job, a wonderful wife, and I had finally caught
up with Uncle Irvin. I was a Master Mason.
F o o t n o t e s
1It is noteworthy when considering Masonic morality that the Master Mason
swears that he will not have sexual intercourse with the wife, mother, daughter,
o r sister o f another Master Mason, “knowing her to he such" ; apparently this is
alright with anyone else's wife, mother, daughter, o r sister and is even a ll right
with those o f a Master Mason if unaware o f the Masonic relationship. See
Appendix C. “Masonic M orality. "
2 F o r the purpose and significance o f this dramatization o f the legend o f Hiram
Ahiff. see Appendix D , “ The Legend o f Hiram Ahiff. "
3The man portraying Juhelum isn't supposed to hit the candidate that hard, hut
I was really knocked unconscious. The man who hit me was an undertaker, and
we had many laughs later about his trying to drum up business in the Lodge while
acting the part o f Jubelum.
4In the drama, the Junior Warden’s jew el ( which was still around my neck) plays

--- Sayfa 49 ---
54
a significant role in the candidate’s being recognized as Hiram by the searchers.
5The Master's G rip, o r the” Strong G rip o f the L ion ’s P a w ” was not explained
to me; but I had felt it and. in watching subsequent initiations, I learned it. I later
had occasions to use it as a Master Mason's pass grip, an alternate means o f
recognition to the primary grip explained by the Master that night This grip is
given by grasping the other’s hand in the normal way. except that the thumb and
small finger are wrapped around the edges o f the hand, just below the rhumb, with
the middle three fingertips dug into the inside o f the other’s wrist. As Worshipful
Master myself, later on. I, o f course, used it in “raising the candidate

--- Sayfa 50 ---
6 Going higher
Before I was even through with the Master Mason degree, I had
noticed and decided something: two things that would influence
the rest o f my life. I noticed that a great many Masons were not only
content to stop at the Third Degree, but often came to Lodge and,
after about 45 minutes, went to sleep and slept through the meet­
ings. This offended me. What I decided was that I did not want to
be that kind o f Mason — not ever!
I was determined to learn and to grow, to keep moving on up in
the fraternity, to climb the “ Masonic mountain. ” At that early point
in my Masonic career I really didn’t know what there was to be
accomplished. I didn’ t know what higher ground there was to be
reached; but I knew that I didn’t want to come to Lodge and sleep
like those men did. Whatever there was to achieve, I wanted it. I
was going higher!
F
r o
m
 c
a
n
d
i d
a
t e
 t o
 i n
s
t r u
c
t o
r
Within a month after I was raised to the Third Degree there was
a new class o f candidates to be brought through the Blue Degrees.
I was still a “ courtesy candidate” (Bonnie and I were still expect­
ing to go back to Indianapolis before long), and grateful to that
Lodge for bringing me through the Second and Third Degrees.
I w as never bashful about such things, so I said to the Worshipful
Master, “ Sir, I am grateful to this Lodge and to you, and feel that
I owe you something for what you have done for me. If you will
appoint me, I will be glad to be the Instructor for this new class o f
candidates. ”
55

--- Sayfa 51 ---
56
He thought a moment, looking at me intently, and then said that
I had the job. I could hardly believe it. I had just been raised, a
member o f the most recent class, and now I was the Instructor! I
thanked the Master and promised to do my very best. I could hardly
wait to get started.
The next week we took the class through the Entered Apprentice
initiation and they took their first obligation. The following week
I arranged to meet with them for instruction and a month later they
were ready to take their examination. They all passed, were then
“ passed” into the Fellowcraft Degree, and the week after that I
began to instruct them in the memory work o f that degree. At the
end of that month they were ready for examination in the Fel­
lowcraft Degree and again they all passed easily.
They were motivated and I had taught them well. Then, one each
week, they were raised to the Master Mason degree and I had the
satisfaction o f knowing that I had brought the entire class through
all three Blue Degrees. I was not only a Master Mason now, I was
a maker o f Master Masons. It really felt good.
W
h
y
 l e
a
v
e
 a
t a
l l ?
By this time I had gone to work for the city and had an excellent
job. Bonnie was well established in her job and was enjoying it. I
was accepted in the Lodge and had a real sense o f belonging. The
more we thought and talked about it, the less reason we saw in
leaving to go back to Indianapolis. There had been no hurry about
leaving Florida and what we had found there through the winter
and spring; and now, as we considered the situation, we asked
ourselves. “ Why shouldn’t we just stay here? Why leave at all? ”
So we decided: we would just settle in and stay right there.
Florida would be our home. I would no longer be just a “ courtesy
candidate” or a visitor in the Lodge; it would be my Lodge. I would
really belong there. With the decision made, we began to settle in
and “get permanent. ”
Roy and his family moved to the west coast o f Florida and we
missed them, but that didn’t matter so much now. W e were making
new friends in the Lodge.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
57
M
o
v
i n
g
 u
p
 t h
r o
u
g
h
 t h
e
 c h
a
i r s
Not long after, elections were held in our Lodge and a new
Worshipful Master was elected. I had already found out that there
was a normal progression through the offices in the Lodge, begin­
ning with the lowest office (Junior Steward) and proceeding up to
the top (Worshipful Master). Since each office has a position (or
“ chair” ) in the Lodge Hall, this progression upward through the
offices in the Blue Lodge is often called “ moving up through the
chairs. ” The positions o f Junior and Senior Steward and Junior and
Senior Deacon are appointed positions and men are selected for
them by the Worshipful Master. The three top offices. Junior and
Senior Warden and Worshipful Master, are elected positions. But
the normal situation is that, once elected Junior Warden, that man
will “ move up. ” He can expect to move up to Senior Warden the
following year and to the chair o f Worshipful Master the year after
that. Barring something unusual, these elections are virtually
automatic.
As soon as I had the opportunity, I went to see the newly elected
Worshipful Master and told him that I didn’t want to be an
“ ordinary Mason. ” I said that I never wanted to be like those
brothers who slept through the meetings and asked him to consider
appointing me to a chair (an office) in the Lodge. I must have made
a positive impression on him for he appointed me Senior Deacon,
the highest appointed office in the Lodge. I had bypassed the three
lowest offices and was o ff to a big head start in moving up through
the chairs.
B
e
y
o
n
d
 t h
e
 b
l u
e
 l o
d
g
e
Blue Lodge Masonry is the heart o f Masonry and the Third
Degree is the heart o f the Blue Lodge. If one is not a Master Mason
in good standing in the Blue Lodge, he cannot “ g o on” into the York
Rite or the Scottish Rite and thence to “ the top o f the Masonic
mountain. ” And, once advanced in the York Rite or the Scottish
Rite, he cannot remain in those bodies (or the Shrine) if he doesn’t
continue in good standing in the Blue Lodge. This is the general
structure and the Blue Lodge is its foundation.
I had been in the Blue Lodge about four months, had taken a class

--- Sayfa 53 ---
58
o f candidates through all three degrees, and was Senior Deacon,
learning, growing and feeling good about it when one day I was
talking with a brother who owned a lumber yard.
He said, “ I thought you joined the Masonic Lodge. ”
I said that I had and that I was very active.
He said something about the Scottish Rite and wondered why he
hadn’t seen me there.
I didn’t know what he was talking about, but sensed that it was
something I would want to do.
He said, “ Jim, you’ve just got to get into the Scottish Rite,
because you really don't know what Masonry is all about until you
do. The Scottish Rite and its 29 degrees will really open your eyes. ”
He said that if I wanted him to, he would get me a petition and get
things rolling.
I said that it sounded good to me and asked him to go ahead.
Although I was eager to begin, I found out that I couldn’t enter the
Scottish Rite until I had been a Master Mason for six months. But
he went ahead with the petition while I waited. I went right on with
my work in the Blue Lodge, the most eager and zealous man they
had.
2
 p
a
t h
s
 f r o
m
 w
h
i c
h
 t o
 c
h
o
o
s
e
As I have already said, the Blue Lodge, with its three degrees, is
the heart and foundation o f Freemasonry. This is where the vast
majority o f Masons stop and go no farther, their local lodge being
all they ever know o f Masonry. However, for those who are not
willing to stay at that level, there are two options for “ going on
higher, ” two paths to follow: they are the Scottish Rite and the York
Rite.
The Scottish Rite includes 29 degrees beyond the Blue Lodge,
culminating in the 32nd. The York Rite has the equivalent o f the
29 degrees o f the Scottish Rite and advancement along this path
culminates in the degree “ Knight Templar. ” In addition, the Shrine
(“ Ancient Arabic Order, Nobles o f the Mystic Shrine” ) is available
to 32nd Degree Masons and Knights Templar who wish to partici­
pate.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
59
Devoted to community service and fun, the Shriners are looked
upon as the “ party boys” o f Freemasonry and are best known for
their hospitals for crippled children, for light-hearted participation
in parades, and for their riotous, drunken parties and conventions.
Although at the time I was not fully aware o f these options and
how it all goes together, my path was determined. I was going into
the Scottish Rite.
I n
t o
 t h
e
 s
c
o
t t i s
h
 r i t e
The more my friend talked to me about the Scottish Rite, the more
eager I was to get started in it. In the Scottish Rite, initiations are
conducted and degrees conferred during meetings called “ Reun­
ions” which are normally held twice a year, fall and spring.
In addition to the initiations into the degrees, there is also
recognition o f those brothers who have died since the previous
Reunion. They are, in this sense, memorials to the departed broth­
ers. I could hardly wait for the Fall Reunion to come. As the time
approached, I was told to report to the Secretary o f the Scottish Rite
for a briefing. I was there early, waiting for my turn to be called into
his office.
The Secretary greeted me and explained the nature and structure
o f the Scottish Rite. He explained that the 29 degrees are divided
into four groups called the “ Four Bodies” o f the Rite and that each
o f these bodies is somewhat like a separate lodge within the
system. He also explained to me that the Reunion would last for
four Sundays and that it would be possible for me to take all 29
degrees in the one Reunion, or just go to the 14th Degree at this
Reunion and then continue to the 32nd Degree in the spring. He
said that some men could not afford to take all o f the degrees at one
Reunion because o f the cost. 1 He told me that the first o f the four
“ bodies” o f the Scottish Rite is called “ Lodge o f Perfection” and
is the one in which business meetings are held on meeting nights.
The second body, he said, is the “ Chapter o f Rose Croix, ” the third
is the “ Council o f Kodosh” and the fourth is “The Consistory. ”
It all sounded wonderful to me and I asked the Secretary if I could
just pay for all 29 o f the degrees right then! He gave me the figure.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
60
I wrote the check, and he told me to report on the next Sunday (the
first day o f the Fall Reunion). He told me that we would meet from
9 a. m. to 6 p. m. each Sunday for the next four Sundays to receive
instruction, and that on the fourth Sunday I would be made a 32nd
Degree Mason.
I asked him if I would have to memorize all the passwords, signs
and grips and then pass examinations as we had to do in the Blue
Lodge, and he roared with laughter!
He said, “ Are you kidding? It would take you a whole year of
Sundays to do that! You just be here Sunday and you will find out. ”
On the morning o f the first Sunday o f the Fall Reunion I arrived
promptly and, as soon as all the rest arrived, we were ushered into
a large classroom. There were about 250 o f us and our class was
given the name “ George Washington Bicentennial Class” (each
class is given a name, or title, which it retains as long as there are
any of its members left alive).
Our instructor was an attorney, a man in his sixties. His age and
knowledge made him seem a little “ larger than life” to me, very
impressive, and I listened carefully to all that he said. He also had
a sense o f humor, which made him even more effective. I was
totally receptive.
We had to have an “ opening ceremony” which gave our class
official identity and status and then we had a class picture taken.
W e also had to elect class officers, but I didn’t try for any o f those
offices as I was only interested in the degree work (the lessons in
religion and morality). I wanted to learn.
T
h
r o
u
g
h
 t h
e
 d
e
g
r e
e
s
With all the preliminaries completed, we were taken into the
auditorium. It was like a large and very nice theater, with fully
equipped stage, sophisticated lighting and theater seats. W e were
told to be seated and the presentation o f the Fourth Degree began.
The Fourth Degree was put on just like a play, with one candidate
chosen from the class to represent us all as he participated. The
presentation went on until time to take the oath at the end. At this
time we were told to stand, put our hands over our hearts and repeat

--- Sayfa 56 ---
61
the oath 2 o f obligation with the representative candidate on the
stage. After we finished the oath we were given the sign o f that
degree, 3 and the Fourth Degree was completed. When a degree is
given in this way it is said to be “ exemplified. ”
When a degree is not put on as a drama, but merely explained, it
is said to be “ communicated. ” Such was the case with the Fifth
Degree. Back in the classroom the Degree Master explained the
content and meaning o f the degree, administered the oath, and gave
us the sign.
Now we were Fifth Degree Masons, and ready for the Sixth
Degree. And so we progressed, through the degrees. The relatively
unimportant degrees, about one third o f the total o f 29, were
“ communicated” in this way. It is also true that some degrees
which are merely “ communicated” in one Reunion will be “ exem­
plified” at the following Reunion. The degrees o f the Four Bodies
(the four degrees whose names identify the Four Bodies), how­
ever, are always put on in full and not merely “ communicated. ”
That Sunday we completed the Fourth through the Ninth Degrees
and I went home feeling good about it all.
I was so interested in the degree work that I could hardly wait
from one Sunday until the next. The “ old religions” (the mystery
religions o f Egypt, Greece, Persia, etc. ) were taught. And, as I had
never had a religion, but had only heard passing references to the
major ones, I was fascinated.
There was also a great deal said about the ancient philosophers
and occultists and I felt that I was really growing in knowledge.
Each week I would tell my brother Masons in the Blue Lodge how
great it was and how much they were missing by not being in the
Scottish Rite. But this was not always well-received: some were
really offended and a few hurt, because they could not afford to go
into the Rite. So, although my zeal didn’t diminish any, I tried to
be more careful about such enthusiastic talk.
On the second Sunday we completed the 14th degree, the Degree
o f Perfect Elu, generally considered the halfway mark in the
Scottish Rite. With this attainment comes the 14th Degree ring.
This flat gold band with the Hebrew letter “ YO D ” on it is the
official Masonic ring.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
62
Many kinds o f rings with Masonic symbols may be purchased
and worn; but, except for the Thirty-Third Degree ring, this ring is
the only official one. It is the patent and property o f the Supreme
Council o f the Thirty-Third Degree, and is only obtained when
presented with the 14th degree. In our case the rings had not arrived
so we had to wait to get them the final Sunday.
A
n
o
i
n
t
e
d

a

priest and a prophet
Finally, the last Sunday o f Reunion arrived and we progressed to
the 32nd Degree. Upon completion o f the degree work, climaxing
with the 32nd Degree lecture, we stood and were brought forward.
One by one, we were anointed with oil. As the man placed his hand
on my head and applied the oil, he said to me, “ I anoint thee a Priest
and a Prophet, and a Sublime Prince o f the Royal Secret. ”
This part was definitely a new experience for me and I certainly
didn’t understand the part about being a priest and a prophet, but
it was impressive and I liked the sound and solemnity o f it. For me,
it was rather awesome and a little unreal.
Each o f us was presented, along with the Scottish Rite ring, a
copy o f Albert Pike’s book, “ Morals and Dogma. ” 4 W e were told
that it was the source book for Freemasonry and its meaning. W e
were also told that it must never leave our possession, and that
arrangements must be made so that upon our deaths it would be
returned to the Scottish Rite. It was clear that this book was not only
a terribly important source but was, it seemed, almost sacred.
It had all been so very interesting to me and, in a way, the time
had passed much too quickly. I felt that I had learned so much, yet
felt that I had so much more to learn.
“ Perhaps in the future I will get to work in these degrees, ” I
thought. ” Then I can really learn about religions. ”
It was only about 5 p. m. when we finished and, after a lot of
exchanging congratulations, I hurried home to tell Bonnie all about
it (at least the parts I was free to tell her). As I headed home I was
thinking, “ If only mother had lived to see this day — she would
really be proud. ”

--- Sayfa 58 ---
63
F o o t n o t e s
'There is a price to he paid, in dollars, fo r all "earned" Masonic degrees, from
Entered Apprentice to the 32nd Degree. D ollar values change with time and fees
vary some from place to place, but the total cost o f going all the way to the 32nd
Degree can be very substantial, well into the thousands o f dollars today.
1There was a blood-oath o f obligation fo r each degree, as in the Blue Lodge.
Unlike the Blue Lodge, however, since there was no memorizing, and since they
were not written down, the candidates normally remember nothing o f these oaths
once they are spoken.
3In all my years o f Masonry that follow ed, I was never once asked to give this
sign.
4 Albert Pike (1809-1891) is easily the preeminent figure in American Freem a­
sonry. His many titles included Sovereign Grand Commander o f the Supreme
Council o f the Thirty-Third Degree (M other Council o f the W orld) and Supreme
Pontiff o f Universal Freemasony. Scholar, student o f ancient languages and
occult philosopher, he completely rewrote the degrees o f the Scottish Rite into
their present form . This work is explained in his book Morals and Dogma o f the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite o f Freemasonry. His position in Masonry
was, and is today, unparalleled, not only in the United States, but throughout the
world.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
7 Branching
out
The Monday after my initiation into the 32nd Degree, I was
congratulated by a number o f my superiors at work whom I had not
even realized had been there. The extent o f Masonry and its
influence was far greater than I had suspected. Realizing that there
were so many men such as these, seemingly everywhere, who were
part of the Masonic brotherhood, and that they knew who I was and
what I was doing, was both comforting and vaguely disturbing. But
it was mostly comforting. I was seeing that this Masonic family o f
which I had become a committed part reached much farther into
every part o f life than I had suspected.
S
u
d
d
e
n
l y
 a
 p
r o
m
o
t i o
n
A short while after, the director o f my department called me in
and asked me to take an examination for a higher position which
was opening up. I felt that I was completely unqualified for this
position and told him so. But he smiled reassuringly, said that he
thought I was qualified and urged me not to fail to take the test. I
was so convinced that I wasn't qualified for the job that I almost
decided not to show up; but, because o f his urging, I went.
Expecting a room full of men competing for so important a job,
65

--- Sayfa 60 ---
66
I was surprised when I arrived to find that only two others were
taking the test with me. I was given the examination paper and told
to turn it face down on my desk until time for the examination to
begin. When we were told to begin and I looked over the test, I was
amazed at the simplicity o f the questions. I thought, “ Is this all there
is to it? I'm sure glad the boss insisted that I come! ”
I finished my paper quickly and easily. The other two men
continued to struggle with theirs and were still working when the
examiner told them to stop. W e were told to turn our papers face
down on the desks and leave, for time had expired. He said we
would be notified later as to how we had done. I left thinking about
how easy the test had been and wondering why the other two had
seemed to have such a difficult time with it.
I went directly to the office and the director was waiting for me.
He met me at the door, stuck out his hand and said, “ Congratula­
tions, Jim, you got the promotion! You were the only one who
knew all the answers. You will soon be called to take an ‘on-the-
job’ training course, and then you can start on your new job. ”
He shook my hand again and went back to his office. I was
pleased but a little bewildered. I still could not understand how it
had been so easy and how could he know so soon that I was
selected? Why, the ink was barely dry on my paper!
With questions about this still whispering in my mind, but mostly
just excited and happy, I hurried home at the end o f the day to tell
Bonnie. She was, o f course, delighted too. In light o f her good job,
plus my promotion, we decided to move out o f the duplex apart­
ment and buy our own home. W e were making progress!
B
u
t u
n
c l e
 I r v
i n
 w
a
s
n
't p
l e
a
s
e
d
I called Uncle Irvin to tell him the good news about my being in
the Scottish Rite. I thought he would be pleased and proud. But he
didn’t seem pleased or proud o f me at all. He appeared to resent it,
envious o f my being a 32nd Degree Mason.
He said that he had never been allowed to enter the Rite, and went
on to explain, “ Even though I was Past Master o f my Lodge, I
couldn't go in because there was a man in the Scottish Rite who

--- Sayfa 61 ---
67
didn't like me. He said that if I ever tried to enter he would
‘ blackball’ me. ”
I was amazed, and asked, “ Whatever became o f ‘ Masonic broth­
erhood’? ”
Uncle Irvin wouldn’t answer my question, so I didn’t tell him he
had been lied to by that brother Mason. As long as a man is a Master
Mason in good standing in his Blue Lodge, he cannot be black­
balled and kept out o f the Scottish Rite.
T
h
e

r
a
i
s
i
n
g

o f M ik e a n d th e h a n d s -o ff p o lic y
Working with me on the same shift was a man named Mike. He
was a Scotsman with a wonderful accent, a warm heart and a
somewhat quick temper. He was not very tall, but very solidly built
and strong as a bull. He had been badly injured as a fireman in New
York City and, after a long time in the hospital, had retired from the
Fire Department. He had come to Florida, found work with the
civil service o f our large city, was assigned to my department, and
we had become friends. Mike knew that I was a Mason (I had
spoken to him about it from time to time), and one day he told me
that he would like to be a Mason too. I, o f course, was pleased, and
asked him if he would like to belong to my Lodge. He said that was
exactly what he wanted, so I got a petition and had another man
(who worked with us) to sign it with me. Mike was duly investi­
gated, approved, and was soon ready to take the degrees.
As I was now Senior Deacon, I was the one to conduct candidates
through the initiations. I was pleased that I was going to get to lead
my friend through. It happened that Mike was the only man going
through at that time so things moved along smoothly and quickly.
I had a pretty easy time of it. Until the latter part o f the Third
Degree.
Before we began that final night of Mike’ s Blue Lodge initiation,
I spoke with the three men who were to portray the “ three ruffians”
Jubela. Jubelo, and Jubelum. I asked them to take it easy on Mike
and explained why. They said they understood and would be gentle
with him.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
68
Everything went smoothly until we came to the part where I was
leading Mike, as Hiram Abiff, to the “ South Gate” where he was
met by Jubela, the first “ ruffian. ” As is always done, Jubela
grabbed him and jerked him around a bit. It was gentle compared
with what the candidate usually goes through, but it was too much
for Mike, much too much, and he e r u p te d ! I le pushed Jubela away,
ripped o ff the hoodwink, roared like a mad bull and picked Jubela
up! In one mighty motion, Mike threw him across the Lodge Hall.
Jubela hit the black and white tiles and went sliding across the floor
on his back, spinning slowly around and slid right up against the
altar, which stopped him. He wasn't hurt badly, but lay there
against the altar, not moving.
Mike had assumed a wrestler’s stance, feet widespread, power­
ful arms at the ready, and bellowed out, “ No man puts his hands on
me! ” At first there was not a sound in the Lodge Hall, except for
Mike. He stood there, looking slowly around the room, glaring at
the brothers assembled, and continued to roar, “ No man puts his
hands on me! ”
Suddenly the Lodge was in an uproar. Some o f the brothers
convulsed with laughter, some were shouting excitedly at one
another and some sat still in stunned silence. Mike was still
standing there, challenging them all, and continuing to roar, “ No
man puts his hands on me! ” This scene in the sacred Hall was
unprecedented, unheard of, unthinkable!
Many o f the brothers were looking at the Worshipful Master,
expecting him to “ do something” ; but he wasn’t any more ready to
“ do something” about Mike than was Jubela the ruffian, who was
still lying quietly against the altar. The Master just sat there, still
as a statue in his black top hat. looking straight ahead.
I tried to calm Mike down but had no effect at all on him. I then
went over to consult with the Worshipful Master. I tried to explain
and told him that if I could take Mike out to the Preparation Room
I thought I could calm him down and we would be able to proceed.
He nodded his head and continued to sit there as if stunned, not
moving.
I went back to Mike, who was still turning slowly from side to
side in the center o f this sudden storm, and spoke again with him.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
69
He agreed to go out with me. We closed the Lodge Hall door behind
us. In the Preparation Room Mike began to relax some and I told
him I was really sorry about what had happened and would try to
work it out so that we could proceed with his initiation. He just said,
“ All right Jim — but no man puts his hands on me. "
I left Mike in the Preparation Room and went back out to consult
again with the Worshipful Master. I told him I thought it would be
best to leave out Jubelo and Jubelum and just have Mike lie down
on the canvas and let them bury him. The Master looked at me
strangely and then asked, “ Forever? ”
Since that was all the Master said, I took it that my compromise
solution was acceptable, so I returned to the Preparation Room. I
explained to Mike the whole scene and what was going to happen.
I told him that if he would just let us do the rest o f it, gently, it would
soon be over and he would be a Master Mason. He agreed, but
Firmly repeated the admonition, “ No man puts his hands on me. ”
So we went back into the Lodge Hall, let him lie down on the
canvas and completed his initiation, albeit considerably modified.
Mike never lived down that night and for many years jokes were
made about Mike and the “ Hands-Off Policy. "
I b
e
c o
m
e
 a
 d
e
g
r e
e
 m
a
s
t e
r
The Master of the 25th Degree in the Scottish Rite moved to
California. I was appointed to replace him. I got from him the
degree book and, although it was not required o f me, memorized
the entire degree (the ritual and lesson to be taught or performed in
that degree). It was to be exemplified (put on in full, as a dramati­
zation) at the next Reunion. I was determined to do it better than it
had ever been done.
Mike and I continued to be friends, becoming closer. With my
encouragement he soon came into the Scottish Rite with me; since
it is the “ Scottish” Rite it seemed to me that we should have at least
one Scotsman. Since by that time I was Master o f the 25th Degree,
I appointed Mike Orator. With his heavy Scottish accent, he
seemed the perfect choice. I gave him his part and had him
memorize it. When I told him he would have to wear a pasted-on
artificial beard he decided just to grow his own, and he did.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
70
When Reunion came around we were ready. It all went perfectly.
The Secretary was so pleased with the way we exemplified the
degree that he thanked and congratulated us all, making all the hard
work and rehearsing worth it. We had not just “ gotten by, ” we had
done it better than anyone could remember its ever having been
done before.
F
i l l i n
g
 t h
e
 v
o
i d
As I had said to the incoming Worshipful Master when asking
him to consider me for “ a chair” in the Blue Lodge, I had no
intention o f just settling down and getting comfortable. Looking
back on it all. I'm really not sure why I was so eager to get to the
higher offices and to do it so soon. I am sure it was not just prideful
ambition, or a desire for recognition. It was something much more
valid and substantial, some need down deep inside o f me.
Having grown up with no religious training, no church affiliation
o f any kind, and no spiritual identity, I really had no concept o f the
meaning o f life. I had no philosophy nor any basic view o f life,
death and eternity. And, without realizing it at first, this emptiness
in my life was being filled with what I was learning and doing in
Masonry.
From the very beginning I had been troubled by the fact that so
many o f the men just came to Lodge and sat there. When the Master
rapped, they stood up; when he rapped again, they sat down. When
he said anything that called fora vote, they said “ So mote it be, ” and
when the meeting came to an end they got up and went home. Some
had to be awakened and told it was time to leave. Many were
members for many years, and always sat in the same seat. I was
determined not to be such a “ seat warmer” ; I wanted to function,
to leam all that there was to learn. I wanted to grow, and that was
exactly what I was doing — at last.
A
 c
h
a
p
l a
i n
 l e
a
r n
s
 t o
 p
r a
y
In the Scottish Rite I became acquainted with the undertaker who
had knocked me out with the setting maul when I was initiated into

--- Sayfa 65 ---
71
the Third Degree. He was to be the new Venerable Master o f the
Lodge o f Perfection (one o f the Four Bodies and the one in which
all business meetings are held).
I hadn’t seen him for a while and told him o f my appointment as
Senior Deacon in the Blue Lodge. I then told him that I would like
to be an officer in the Lodge o f Perfection, if he had room for me,
and he said he would keep me in mind.
I realize that this may sound a little pushy, but actually it wasn't;
it is not at all easy for incoming Masters to get men to volunteer for
offices and they usually appreciate such willingness.
As is the case in all walks o f life, most want the “ honor” o f
belonging, but do not want to do the work. I didn’t know what to
expect from him, but when he assumed office he appointed me
Chaplain.
At last I was finding a place for myself; I was an officer in both
the Blue Lodge and the Scottish Rite. But there was a problem —
a big one; as Chaplain I was going to have to pray and I didn't know
how. I had not been in church since the last time my grandmother
had taken me and knew nothing o f prayer. I had heard the prayers
from the ritual in the Lodge, but couldn’t remember any o f them.
I asked the new Venerable Master about praying and he eased my
mind some. He said that he would give me two cards with the
opening and closing prayers printed on them and that I could
simply read them out loud. But he also said that I would be expected
to “ give prayers” at banquets and at the assembling of the Scottish
Rite Guard. So I would have to get an idea o f how to pray and what
prayers to use. There was no way around it. I was going to have to
learn to pray.
We had a new man in the incoming class at the Blue Lodge who
was pastor o f the Methodist Church next door to the Lodge Hall.
I called on him and told him I was the new Chaplain in the Lodge
o f Perfection and that I needed to know something about prayer. He
said he would help me and the next day when I looked in my mail
box I found a book called “The Prayers o f John Wesley. ”
I studied the book and then wrote out several o f the prayers, just
as they were in the book, just as Wesley wrote them. I thought they
were really good and felt that I was at last prepared for my new

--- Sayfa 66 ---
72
office. Whenever I was called upon to pray, I could just read one
o f those prayers out loud. I was ready — or so I thought.
At the next assembling o f the Scottish Rite Guard (for the
opening o f the initiation o f a new class at Reunion) I gave the
prayer while the Guard o f 25 men stood. It was one o f the prayers
o f John Wesley I had taken from the book.
I thought the prayer was First rate and felt good about it; but when
the opening ceremony was finished the Commander o f the Guard
called me aside and rebuked me sharply. He said, “ You kept my
men standing at attention for five whole minutes! ” He also called
me a “ religious fanatic” and said that it was bad enough I kept the
men standing five minutes, but then I had ended the prayer “ in
Christ’s holy name. ” For that, he said, I would be reported! I was
stung by his rebuke, especially since I had worked so hard to get
it right and had no idea I was doing anything wrong.
I said since he was so rude to me I didn’t care what he thought,
that I didn't know anything about his 30-second prayers, and that
from that time on he could say them himself!
As I walked away, I thought, “ Some brother he is, to speak to me
like that! At least he could have left out that part about ‘ religious
fanatic’ since I don’t even know what prayers are except for the
ones on the cards and in the book. ”
Very soon after, I was called in to see the Secretary of the Scottish
Rite about my unsatisfactory performance. He was nice about it,
but told me that I was never to end a prayer “ in Jesus’ name” or “ in
Christ’s name. ” He said, “ Make your prayers universal. ”
I wondered about all this fuss over a prayer, especially one that
came out o f a book a preacher had lent me; but I just thanked him
and left.
I was to learn the meaning and significance o f this fuss over a
prayer later on, ’ but for the time being I just accepted it. At least
the Secretary was nice about it. Many years later, when he died, I
learned that he was a Christian Scientist.
I n t o t h e e a s t e r n s t a r
Bonnie had supported and encouraged me in Lodge work from
the start. As already stated, she had been an inactive member o f the

--- Sayfa 67 ---
73
Order o f the Eastern Star when we were married, although I had not
known it at the time. After my promotion, and as I became more
and more active in Blue Lodge and the Scottish Rite, Bonnie told
me one night that she intended to begin attending the Eastern Star
and thought it would be good for me to join.
I agreed, submitted my application, and was soon approved and
initiated. Many people believe that “ The Star” is only for women,
but it isn’t.
The Order o f the Eastern Star was conceived by a man, men
organized it, men wrote the rituals, and no meeting can be held
without at least three male officers present. Men, one might fairly
say, control The Order o f the Eastern Star, but only from the
background.
The social life was pleasant, and now there was one meeting each
week that Bonnie and I could attend together.
Although I could have been an officer in the Eastern Star, I had
no desire to be. I had plenty to do already in the Blue Lodge and
Scottish Rite and I was content just to enjoy going with Bonnie to
the meetings and the social functions that went with them.
T h e K o r a n fe z a n d fu n b e c o m in g a s h r in e r
The Shrine (Ancient Arabic Order, Nobles o f the Mystic Shrine)
is easily the most conspicuous o f all forms o f Freemasonry and the
most far-removed from basic Masonic principles and traditions.
Many who know nothing o f Masonry in general who perhaps don’t
even recognize the word “ Mason” except for thinking it means
some kind o f bricklayer, have at least a vague awareness o f “The
Shriners. ”
At the mention o f the word “ Shriner” most will think o f men in
red hats with tassels, perhaps in colorful costumes, parading,
clowning and doing some kind o f public service.
If they are a little more aware than that, they will think o f them
as men who have big conventions and drink a lot. Most o f the
general public will go through life with no knowledge o f the
existence of the Scottish Rite or the York Rite; the degrees o f these

--- Sayfa 68 ---
74
Bodies and such titles as Prince Adept, Master o f the Royal Secret
or Knight Templar will have no meaning at all for them.
They may never even have heard o f the Blue Lodge and the
degree o f Master Mason. But they will probably have heard o f the
Shriners and will have some knowledge o f what they do. The
Shrine, the “Show Army o f Masonry, ” maintains a very high
profile.
I had been aware o f the Shrine for a long time when I had only the
most vague knowledge o f the rest of Freemasonry. From the time
o f my very first entrance into the Lodge, I had the thought o f
someday being a Shriner. It seems to me that this is true o f most
Masons who go on beyond the Blue Degrees.
For this reason, one o f their practices always puzzled me: after
each Reunion in the Scottish Rite, the Shriners would come
around, recruiting the new 32nd Degree Masons for the Shrine and
it seemed unnecessary. Such was the case with me. Shortly after
receiving the 32nd Degree they began approaching me about
joining. In my case they were wasting their time, for I had decided
a long time before to join them.
It is necessary to be a 32nd Degree Mason for six months before
being eligible to join the Shrine. Unlike myself in a way, I didn’t
rush in as soon as the six months passed. I was fully involved in the
Blue Lodge and already was an officer in the Scottish Rite;
perhaps, also, I sensed that work in the Shrine wasn’t as serious as
in Blue Lodge and the Rite. I wanted to learn— about religions and
the meaning o f life — and I had plenty to learn where I was. So I
didn’t enter the Shrine after the Spring Reunion when I became
eligible.
I was Chaplain in the Scottish Rite and a Degree Master. In the
Blue Lodge I was Senior Deacon and preparing to be the Junior
Warden, only two chairs away from the office o f Worshipful
Master. I was very busy with all this responsibility.
The following fall however, after Reunion, I decided it was time
to enter the Shrine. Mike had come into the Scottish Rite at Spring
Reunion and was now eligible also. W e went into the Shrine
together. I knew that the Shrine initiations got really rambunctious
and wondered what might happen when they laid hands roughly on

--- Sayfa 69 ---
75
Mike. The initiation was performed in the Coliseum before a very
large crowd o f Shriners who came to see the fun. One o f the first
things done was to identify the men with health problems that
might make the initiation a risk.
There were physicians there to question and examine the candi­
dates; those considered risky were separated out, had a white tape
put around the left wrist, and they simply sat while the other
candidates went through the rowdy part o f it all. In this way,
because o f his previous back injury, Mike was spared the hazing
and the Shrine was thus spared a demonstration o f the “ Hands-Off
Policy. ”
We began the initiation about noon that Saturday. After the medi­
cal screening came the hazing, which was very childish. Some o f
it was not only childish, but downright vulgar. At one point we
were placed in a large, mesh cage, and one o f the Shriners climbed
up on top o f it. He exposed a very convincing rubber penis which
was connected to a water bag concealed in his clothing and hosed
down all o f us in the cage to the delighted howls o f the spectators.
After the hazing it was time for the serious part, the ritual, and
then time to take the oath. W e took the obligation, again with
terrible bloody consequences if we revealed any o f the “ secrets”
(one form o f mayhem we promised to accept was to have our
“ eyeballs pierced to the center with a sharp, three-edged blade” ).
And, with the Koran on the altar, we sealed our solemn oath in the
name o f “ Allah, the God o f Arab, Moslem and Mohammedan, the
God o f our fathers. ” 2
I had taken so many bloody oaths already (one for each degree)
that I paid little attention to this one, except to notice that it, like the
rest of the ritual, featured desert settings, Arabs and Allah, the M o­
hammedan god. I was disappointed and a little offended at the
childish and vulgar nature o f the initiation but not really surprised.
This, after all, was the Shrine; and “ fun” was the Shriners’ trade­
mark.
The initiation was completed by 4 p. m., so we could all be ready
for the big celebration banquet that night. With still another
initiation behind me, I headed home to share the moment with
Bonnie and to get ready for the celebration. It was to be a BYOB

--- Sayfa 70 ---
76
(“ bring your own bottle” ) affair, Mike was going with us, and we
were looking forward to wearing our brand-new fezes. We enjoyed
the party, which lasted until 2 a.m.; we were Shriners at last and it
felt good.
There was no “ degree work” in the Shrine for there is no actual
degree, so it didn’t look like I would be learning a great deal there.
However, I looked forward to being a part o f all their benevolent
community services. I was proud o f my new red fez with its gold
trim and tassel.
I didn’t see how my life could be much more full — except for
one thing. I still had a spiritual emptiness; I was still in search o f
a religion.
F o o t n o t e s
1In a well-ordered lodge, Jesus is never mentioned except in vague, philosophi­
cal terms. Prayers are never prayed in His name, and when scriptures are quoted
in the ritual, all references to Him are simply omitted. F or example, II Thessalo-
nians 3: 6 is used in the ritual, but not the way it is in your Bible; the words "in the
name o f our Lord Jesus Christ” are entirely omitted. Likewise, the ritual includes
I Peter 2: 5, but with the words "by Jesus Christ” omitted. Albert Mackey, after
Al bert Pike the highest Masonic authority, calls this changing o f the scriptures "a
slight but necessary modification" ( Masonic Ritualist, pg. 272)
2 Every Shriner, kneeling before the Koran, takes this oath in the name o f Allah,
and acknowledges this pagan god o f vengeance as his own ("th e C od o f our
fathers” ). And, in the ritual, he acknowledges Islam, the declared blood-enemy o f
Christianity, as the one true path. ( “Whoso seeketh Islam earnestly seeks true
direction. " ) How it must break the heart o f God to hear these words from the lips
o f His own children, particularly the leaders o f His church.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
8 A religion at last
As I continued my progression “ through the chairs, ” from office
to higher office in the Blue Lodge, I also continued to work in more
and more of the Scottish Rite degrees. As I continued to study in
the degree rituals and lectures, I developed more and more o f a
clear understanding o f religious beliefs and moved ever closer to
a personal religious belief o f my own.
" T
h
e
 l o
d
g
e
 i s a
 g
o
o
d
 e n
o u
g h

R
e l i g
i o
n
"
Through the years I must have heard hundreds o f men say, “ I
don’t need to go to church — the Lodge is a good enough religion
for me. ” So very many such men never attend a church except with
the Lodge once a year to hear Masonry exalted. They trust Lodge
membership and their own “ virtuous life” to assure them accep­
tance in the “Celestial Lodge above. ”
In a sense I agreed with such men, in that I believed that the
churches and synagogues knew and taught only imperfect remnants
and perversions of the “ old religions, ” the ancient mystery relig­
ions o f the East. But I was not in agreement with them in another
sense: I was not going to be satisfied with basing my life on
77

--- Sayfa 72 ---
78
anything so vague. I was going to continue the search until I had
a specific, foundational religious belief. And I wasn't there yet.
T
h
e
 t e
n
 c o
m
m
a
n
d
m
e
n
t s
Still motivated in my search for religious understanding, I was
happy when asked to become Master o f the 18th Degree. In this
degree, the Degree o f the Rose Croix, I read that “ The ceremonies
o f this degree are interpreted by each individual according to his
own faith, for in no other way can Masonry retain its universal
character. ”
The degree book went on to say that the symbolism for this
degree comes from the “ ankh, ” the Egyptian symbol for life, which
comes from Deity (God), meaning that the Egyptian gods were at
least the equal o f the Christian God. It also said that “ In all religions
there is a basis o f truth; in all there is pure morality. ”
As I read these words I thought they sounded wonderful. I didn’ t
stop to realize that this endorsement o f “ all religions” included all
cruel forms o f paganism with mutilation and human sacrifices,
voodoo, witchcraft (which often refers to itself as “ The Old
Religion” ) and all forms of Satanism. The degree book tied all this
together by saying that Masonry has the mission o f bringing
together “ all men o f all religions” under the Masonic banner and
around the Masonic altar.
The degree also features the Ten Commandments, which I
thought particularly nice, and in performing this part o f the ritual
one day a very important insight came to me.
A
 d
i s
t u
r b
i n
g
 t h
o
u
g
h
t
At the next Reunion this Degree o f Rose Croix was exemplified.
I had my team well prepared for the performance. I was feeling
good about it — not only the “ truth” I thought I was expressing, but
also the effective way we were performing the ritual. One o f the
candidates in the class o f initiates was the mayor o f our large city,
a very important man and, in a way, my boss. As usual, one o f the
men in the class was selected to actually participate, representing
the rest; we chose, of course, His Honor, the mayor.
At the end o f the oath I had him kneeling at the altar, I had the
Book o f the Law in my hand, and he was vowing to keep the Ten

--- Sayfa 73 ---
79
Commandments. As I read each one from the book, he repeated it
after me and promised to keep it. About half way through the
Commandments the thought occurred to me, “ You cannot possi­
bly do what you are promising to do. I know you, and know
something o f your life, and you cannot keep these Command­
ments. As a matter o f fact, I don’t think I know anyone who could. ”
Nevertheless, the mayor promised with a terrible oath, “ So mote
it be. ” This interesting contradiction stayed with me, returning to
my thoughts from time to time. The vast majority o f men admini­
stering and taking the oath, however, seem only to say it, get it over,
and promptly forget it.
I b
e
c o
m
e
 w
o
r s
h
i p
f u
l m
a
s
t e
r
When my time came to be elected Worshipful Master of the Blue
Lodge I had to stop taking on extra responsibilities in the Scottish
Rite. I was already working in four degrees, plus my participation
in the Eastern Star and Shrine. Serving as Worshipful Master takes
most o f the “ spare time” one has, for the duties are demanding. O f
course, I had the full cooperation o f my superiors at my job, for they
were Masons and were pleased with what I was doing. They gave
me plenty o f time o ff for Masonic funerals and other extra activi­
ties, and this was never a problem.
A
n
 i n
t e
r e
s
t i n
g
 t e
s
t i m
o
n
y
On the evening after my installation as Master we had a special
dinner party for the outgoing Master. It was very nice, with a
private party room in a large hotel, complete with its own bar.
During the party we asked the outgoing Master to share with us the
story o f how he had entered Masonry and his progression in it. He
had already had quite a bit to drink and was very frank in the telling
o f his “ testimony” as a Mason.
We laughed as he told us that when he applied for membership
he was amazed that the Investigating Committee approved him for
membership. He said, “ I could hardly believe that they were telling
me I was approved, for I was so drunk when they arrived that I
couldn’t get up. M y wife had to let them in, for even if I had been
able to get up on my feet I could not have taken the chance of
walking across the room and falling down. ”

--- Sayfa 74 ---
80
I laughed with everyone else at first. Then I was troubled by the
obvious contradiction there. One o f the basic tenets o f Masonry is
sobriety. Yet this Past Master was accepted for membership when
so drunk he couldn’t stand up and walk. This troubling thought,
like the one about the Ten Commandments, stayed with me.
A

s
t
r
a
n
g
e

a
n
d

interesting theory
We had regular luncheons at the Acacia Club, for Masons only.
We would usually have a drink at the bar, then go into the club room
and have lunch. After lunch we always had a speaker.
One such speaker was a Methodist preacher, a dedicated Mason
and a student o f the Ancient Mysteries. He had a strange and
interesting theory to the effect that Masonry was actually founded
by Nimrod at the building o f the Tower o f Babel. O f course I knew
nothing o f the Bible, so accepted everything he said as truth.
Now that I have made a study o f the Scriptures I know that they
teach no such thing. However, having also learned much o f the
dark and shadowy origins o f Masonry, I realize that the strange
preacher may not have been so far from the truth.
I w
a
n
t e
d
 t o
 u
n
d
e
r s
t a
n
d
My year as Worshipful Master o f the Blue Lodge was a pleasant
experience. I enjoyed the work in the weekly meetings and bring­
ing classes through the first three degrees. It was also nice being
treated with such respect and being called “ Worshipful” and
“ Master. ”
Because the office required so much o f my time and energy, my
thoughts were once more really focused on the Blue Lodge (rather
than on the Scottish rite degrees and the Shrine work). I had
questioned things almost from my beginnings in Masonry, not that
I was skeptical, but because I wanted so much to learn and to
understand. I wasn’t satisfied just to sit through it, say it and get it
over with; I wanted to learn. Masonry was giving meaning to my
life, and I wanted to grasp it all.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
81
W hat is a cowan?
I remembered a question that occurred to me during one of the
very first lectures I heard. It was about Masonic origins and the
lecturer said that the name “ Blue Lodge” came from “our ancient
brethren who met on the high hills and low vales at night, meeting
under the starry canopy o f Heaven, ” the blue sky. The lecture went
on to say that the ancient brethren set guards “ to keep o ff cowans
and eavesdroppers. ”
My mind grabbed onto the word “ cowan,” as I had never heard
it before. After the meeting I asked the Tiler (the officer in the
Lodge responsible for guarding the door and keeping cowans and
other “ profane” persons out o f the hall) what a cowan is. Since it
w as his duty to keep them out, I assumed that he would know what
they were.
He looked puzzled, and finally said, “ I think it is a no-good bum. ”
So I asked about a dozen other men (including all the officers) the
same question that night and no one could tell me what a cowan is.
Many years later I finally learned that it is an old term for an
untrained builder o f walls who hadn’t the knowledge o f stone
masonry and who in the middle ages could be found eavesdropping
on meetings of builders’ guilds, trying to learn their secrets.
This questioning became a pattern in my life as a Mason. It
sometimes got me in trouble but it also made me a much better-
informed Mason than most. Had anyone asked me, when I was
Worshipful Master, what a “ cowan” was, I could have answered
the question. But no one ever asked.
T
h
e
 j u
n
i o
r
 w
a
r
d
e
n

leaves the lodge
While I was Worshipful Master the man who was Junior Warden
asked me one day about the Bible. He pointed out that in the ritual
we say that the Bible is a “ rule and guide for faith and practice” and
that it teaches that the Christian God is the only true one and that
Jesus is the only means o f salvation.
Yet, he reminded me, we teach in the Lodge that all religions are
valid. He pointed out to me that there is a contradiction there and

--- Sayfa 76 ---
82
asked me to explain it to him. When I couldn’t do it he left the
Lodge and renounced Masonry. I thought he was a bit extreme but
never forgot the question. This man had been a dedicated Mason
and a hard worker in the Lodge, only two chairs away from being
Worshipful Master. He left it all for Jesus and the Bible.
M
o
r
e
 q
u
e
s
t
i o
n
s

w ith o u t a n s w e rs
With the closing o f my year as Worshipful Master I returned to
the work in the Scottish Rite with all my might. I studied more o f
the degrees, studied the references in “ Morals and Dogma” and
other sources and continued to ask questions. As before, my
questions continued to be met with annoyed silence or advice to
“ Stop asking questions that have no answer and just follow the
Ritual. ” I asked so many questions the Secretary finally had a
special meeting o f the officers to deal with the “ problem” I was
creating.
When they told me that my questions had no answers and that I
should be satisfied just to follow the books, I said my piece. I told
that body o f officers that I believed the answers were there but that
no one cared enough to find them.
For example, I wanted to know why we were called “ Scottish”
Rite, when the degrees and the system originated in France. “ Why
not call it the French Rite? ” I asked. Again there was no answer,
and the conference concluded with, “ Just stick to the Ritual and
stop trying to write your own opinions into the system. It is
Scottish, no matter what anyone else may say. ”
In spite o f the special meeting’s conclusions, several o f the
officers approached me later and asked how I had learned these
things that were so disturbing. I gladly shared with them my
irrefutable Masonic sources and they seemed to be taking it all in.
But it didn’t change anything. Their interest was only mild and
temporary. They had no real desire to know the truth.
I began to realize that there are two classes o f Masons: one that
just sits through the meetings; and the other that does the work, but
just keeps to the Ritual and memorizes or reads it without under­
standing.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
83
[ really didn’t fit into either category but was still blind to the
Bible and its truth. So I kept on asking. I continued searching for
answers in the degrees and other writings of the Masonic authori­
ties.
A

k
n
i
g
h
t

com m a n d er of th e cou rt of h on or
In spite of the fact that I was “ making waves” with all my
questioning and seeking for understanding, I continued to make
real progress in the Rite and to accumulate honors and recognition.
There is a special honor, beyond the 32nd Degree, called “ Knight
Commander o f the Court o f Honor “ (K . C. C. H. ). With the lifetime
title goes a special red cap with the K. C. C. H. emblem. lt was a
happy day when I was notified that I had been selected (by the 33rd
Degree representatives) to receive this high honor.
In order to receive the K. C. C. H. it was necessary for me to travel
to a distant city. Since Bonnie was working she was not able to go
along, so Mike said he would go with me. We were given time off
from our jobs to make the trip (our superiors were pleased about it
all) even though it wasn't necessary for Mike to go. We took the
train to the Conclave, and it was a pleasant trip. I was excited and
Mike was happy for me.
There was a great deal o f drinking at the Conclave and it bothered
me. “ Why must we always do so much drinking? ” I asked myself,
but had no answer. I enjoyed a little drinking and did it regularly.
But it bothered me that there was always so much o f it and that it
played such a major role in the Masonic life. I received the Honor
and we enjoyed a banquet after the ceremony. The next morning
there was a meeting in the Lodge Hall and a lecture was given by
the Grand Master o f the Grand Lodge o f Florida, a very prominent
Mason. I felt honored by all o f it.
That afternoon Mike and I took the train back home. As we
reflected on it all, he said that he hoped he could become a
K. C. C. H. someday and I said that was my hope also. Bonnie was
glad to see me, was proud o f the honor I had received, and thought
I looked distinguished in my snappy new red cap.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
84
A
 r e
l i g
i o
u
s
 b
e
l i e
f a
t l a
s
t
It was time again to be getting ready for Reunion and there was
much to be prepared as I was now working in four degrees at once.
As I studied more and more, I saw with increasing clarity that
Masonry teaches that whatever a man sincerely and conscien­
tiously believes is truth, and that all religions are o f equal worth and
validity. Thus, Jesus Christ is reduced to the level o f the other
“exemplars” such as Buddha, Mohammed, Confucius, Pythagoras
and Emmanuel Swedenborg.
Albert Mackey wrote (in The Masonic Ritualist), “ Thus the
trestleboard (blueprint for life) o f the Jew is the Old Testament, of
the Mohammedan the Koran; the Veda Scriptures o f Hinduism and
the writings o f Baha-ullah are just as good as the Word o f the
Christians’ God, for the fact is that all religions are never as good
as the pure teachings o f Freemasonry. ”
Albert Mackey, that eminent Masonic leader and philosopher
who believed that all the religions o f man are o f equal validity, but
are inferior to the “ pure teachings o f Masonry, ” also believed in
reincarnation. As a matter o f fact, Mackey believed that in one of
his previous lives on earth he had been Jacques DeMolay, the
medieval soldier crusader who was burned at the stake in France
for betraying the faith and victimizing pilgrims in the Holy Land. 1
A
 s
e
r i o
u
s
 c o
n
t r a
d
i c t i o
n
Of course, there are immediate problems here because many of
these religious systems that are “ all correct” or o f “ equal validity”
claim to be the only valid and correct one. So it becomes obvious
that they cannot all be “ right” or of equal validity. But my mind was
not prepared to see this serious contradiction. I accepted this idea
that it doesn’t really matter what you believe as long as you are
sincere. To undergird and hold together this unsubstantial assort­
ment of contradictory beliefs, there was the theory o f reincarna­
tion.
As Mike and I finished up the degree work in still another
Reunion, we discussed the lecture he gave in the 25th Degree and
the one I gave in the 32nd Degree. Neither o f us had ever studied
the Bible. No one had ever witnessed to us plainly about Jesus as

--- Sayfa 79 ---
85
the Redeemer, and so we decided that we would find the truth about
religion in the degrees. Mike had been a Catholic in Scotland, but
had left all that behind when he came to America. He said, “ I don't
want any more to do with Christianity. ”
W
e
 e
m
b
r a
c e
 r e
i n
c a
r n
a
t i o
n
With the degree work and other Masonic writings as our source,
we finally decided that the truth lay in reincarnation and that if we
would try to live a good life now, be good to our brother Masons,
help the sick and attend to good deeds in general, when we died we
would enter the next life on a higher plane — just like going
through a door. However, if we did not try to live right and do well
in this life, then we could expect to go through that door into a lower
form o f life, perhaps as a barbarian in the Dark Ages, or a poor
wretch living in ignorance and poverty in the Far East.
We remembered, for example, the exemplification o f the 31st
degree. In this degree the candidate, as a typical man who has just
died, is defending his life before the gods and goddesses o f Egypt.
The candidate tells o f his good works in his just-ended life and o f
his hope for a better incarnation in the next. As the candidate tells
o f each work he has done, one o f the Egyptian deities drops a stone
into the pan o f a scale. As the last stone is dropped into the pan by
the god Anubis (a man with a ram’s head), the scale tips and Osiris
and Isis, who are presiding, say, “ Weighed in the balance and
found wanting. ” The candidate listens then as the Soul o f Cheres,
symbol of immortality, is brought before the Chamber o f the Dead
and he learns that he must improve in his next life in order to
advance in the cycle o f reincarnation.
A
 d
u
a
l c o
m
m
i t m
e
n
t
So we decided to accept the doctrine of reincarnation and made
a dual commitment. We made a commitment to the concept as a
religious belief. We also made a commitment to one another to do
the best we could in this life so as to be together on a higher plane
in the next. We examined all the evidence at our disposal, made a
decision, and then a sincere commitment to try to live up to it.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
86
Mike and I thought that somehow, by accepting reincarnation
and doing the best we could, we would someday find ourselves
together in that “ Grand Lodge on High. ”
Bonnie really didn’t agree with us concerning reincarnation but
didn’t say much about it. She seemed to know something, way
down deep, that we didn’t know. But she didn’t object to our
decision and commitment and we pressed on.
At last, I had a religion of my own! I had the religion o f Masonry
(the Egyptian Mystery Religion o f Isis and Osiris) with its under-
girding doctrine o f reincarnation and the Lodge really was “ a good
enough religion for me. ”
F o o t n o t e
1The Order o f Demolay, Masonic organization fo r boys too young to enter the
Lodge, is named fo r Jaques DeMolay. regarded in Masonic tradition as a hero.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
9 The gathering
storm
With a religion o f my own, at last, I entered into a period o f four
satisfying years. It was a time of steady, single-minded work and
accomplishment, a stable period of progress. In my work in the
Scottish Rite, especially, they were years o f fulfillment. But with
the satisfaction o f the work and the learning, there were some
disappointments and a measure o f disillusionment.
D
i s
a
p
p
o
i n
t m
e
n
t i n
 t h
e
 s
h
r i n
e
Soon after becoming a K. C. C. H., I spoke to the Illustrious
Potentate o f the Shrine about the possibility o f my “ moving up” to
the office o f Illustrious Potentate. I was working in the Shrine as
much as my responsibilities in the Scottish Rite and Blue Lodge
would allow. As a matter o f fact, I was one o f the hardest workers
in our Shrine Lodge. I had become one of that committed few upon
whom the Potentate depended to keep things going. Every organi­
zation, it seems, has such people who do most o f the work.
Y
o
u
 d
o
n
't q
u
a
l i f y
When I told him I was interested in becoming “ Illustrious
Potentate" someday (this office, like that of Worshipful Master in
87

--- Sayfa 82 ---
88
the Blue Lodge, is held for only one year), I thought he would be
pleased — that he would encourage me to seek it.
Instead, he looked at me a moment and then said, “ Jim, you can
never expect to be Illustrious Potentate in the Shrine. The office
requires someone with more money and a nicer house than you
have. This office requires entertaining visiting Potentates and
other important people and you would not be able to do that
properly. You may as well forget it. ”
This really took me by surprise and it hurt my feelings. Once
again, I saw a sharp contrast between the seriousness and depth of
the Blue Lodge and Scottish Rite and the shallow, social and public
relations emphases o f the Shrine.
T
h
e
 a
l l - s
t a
r f o
o
t b
a
l l g
a
m
e
Another disappointment came as I continued to work hard in the
Shrine. I was appointed to a demanding and responsible job in
connection with the All-Star Football Game we sponsored in order
to raise money to build and operate our burn centers and hospitals
for children. I was responsible for all arrangements for lodging,
feeding and entertaining the coaches, players and others involved
in putting on the game itself.
I was saddened and disillusioned by the vast amount of money
that was spent on accommodations and entertainment for all these
people, rather than going into the hospitals themselves. It really
troubled me. But I soon learned that there was nothing I could do
about it. So I just did my job and took comfort in the money that did
go into the building and operation o f the hospitals. But I couldn’t
forget it and it continued to trouble me.
M
a s t e r o f f a l l S c o t t i s h
rite bodies
I went on working diligently in the Scottish Rite degrees, learn­
ing more and more about the “ Old Religion” that had become my
own, and believing that I was growing spiritually. During the next
four years I continued to work in still more degrees, to make
occasional waves by asking questions (which still went largely
unanswered) and to gather recognition and honors.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
89
By the end of this time I had become, in succession. Master o f all
four of the Scottish Rite Bodies and served as such with success
and satisfaction. I had become, without seeking to be, the man
generally looked upon as the outstanding leader in the Rite — the
one most likely to “ really amount to something. ”
Except for ail my questioning and seeking for knowledge and
understanding, I maintained harmonious and friendly relation­
ships with all in the system. I was a little “ hard-nosed” in my
insistence on getting the job done, maintained a no-nonsense
attitude about the work and demanded excellence o f those work­
ing with me. But it was all positive, except for a few lazy ones I
wouldn’t tolerate, and the results were consistently good.
By becoming Master of all four Bodies I had accomplished
something seldom done. I felt good thinking of how much I had
learned in the process and had satisfaction, both in the sense of jobs
well done and of growing in my religion. I had my roots down deep
in the “ Ancient Mystery Religions, ” was depending upon reincar­
nation and my good works to eventually get me into that “ Celestial
Lodge on High” and I was growing rapidly in terms o f responsibil­
ity and accomplishment in the Lodge. I felt good about it all, and
wondered how it could be any better. I soon found out.
G
o o d
 n
e w
s a
n
d
 b
a
d
 n
e w
s
Fall Reunion was a hard but good one with a large class of
candidates coming through. At the end o f Reunion I was told that
I was being considered for the 33rd Degree.
The 33rd Degree! This was almost too good to be real! I was
K. C. C. H. and Past Master o f all Scottish Rite Bodies and that was
a lot of success and honor for one who had been an abandoned little
boy. The thought that I might also be given the 33rd Degree made
my head swim.
The 33rd Degree cannot be earned or bought. As a matter of fact,
it cannot even be sought, for to ask for or seek it means automatic
and permanent disqualification for the honor.
The Supreme Council of the 33rd Degree, seated in Washington,
D. C. at the House of the Temple, reaches down and selects those
it chooses. Except for a seat on the Supreme Council itself, this

--- Sayfa 84 ---
90
honor is the end o f the line — there is none higher. Not only that,
I had been a K. C. C. H. for only four years. A man cannot even be
considered for the 33rd Degree until he has been a K. C. C. H. four
years. I was being considered for the 33rd in the minimum time!
I was told that in about six months I would be notified as to
whether I would actually be granted the 33rd. I thought, even if I
were not selected, what an honor it was even to be considered!
Along with this almost unbelievably good news I began to notice
a problem in my work and increasing difficulty on the job. In my
work with the Port Authority I needed to be able to see names and
numbers o f ships and boats at a distance. Rather quickly, this
became a problem. No matter how hard I tried, I noticed I could not
read the names and numbers clearly from a distance as I had always
been able to do.
Thinking I only needed to get some glasses that would solve the
problem, I went to see an optician. He examined me and said he had
bad news for me. He couldn’t help me with the problem by
prescribing glasses for distant vision. As a matter o f fact, he said
that he couldn’t help me at all. He said that I had a progressive
cataract developing on my left eye and would need to see a
physician.
A
 d
o
c
t o
r
 w
i t h
 s
i m
p
l e

good n ew s
I went home and told Bonnie what had happened. She said she
knew o f an ophthalmologist she could recommend. This doctor
had helped a lady she knew and she felt that he was the one I should
see. This recommendation o f Bonnie’s was perhaps the most
important turning point in my life. O f course I had no way of
knowing it at the time. Simply doing what seemed the logical thing
at the time, and with not the slightest inkling of the importance of
what I was doing, I called his office and made an appointment.
A
 b
o l d
 d
i a
g
n
o s i s
When the day arrived I went to the doctor’s office. My time came
and I went into the examining room to wait for my pupils to dilate.
The doctor came in, spoke with me briefly and began to examine

--- Sayfa 85 ---
91
my eyes. In what seemed to be a very short time, he completed his
examination and then proceeded to give me a bold and startling
diagnosis.
This man looked as if he were looking right through me for a
moment and then said, “ Mr. Shaw, it is true. You do have a
developing cataract on your left eye, and there is one coming on
your right eye also; but while your physical vision is bad, that isn’t
your real problem.
Your real problem is with your spiritual
vision. ”
I sat there feeling a strange kind of emotional impact, wondering
what he meant.
Before I could ask, he spoke again with the same powerful
simplicity and asked, “ Mr. Shaw, are you saved? ”
This time I did reply, and I asked him, “ Saved from what? ”
He said, “ I mean, have you ever received the Lord Jesus Christ
as your Savior and made Him the Lord of your life? ”
By this time I was regaining my usual ability to carry on such
verbal exchanges and, with a religious haughtiness rising up within
me, I said to him, “ Sir, I know more about religion than you do —
as a matter of fact I know more about religion than most people will
ever know! ”
But he was neither impressed nor taken aback by my proud
declaration. Without taking his eyes from mine or changing his
expression he asked me, “ But what do you know about salvation? ”
Suddenly I had no more spirit for this exchange. I sensed that I
was up against something very powerful, and said quietly, “ I will
think it over and let you know” and left as quickly as I could.
" H
e
 i s
 a
 r e
l i g
i o
u
s
 f a
n
a
t i c "
I left the doctor’s office and went to my boss’s office. I knew that
I had a serious problem with my eyes and thought that I may have
another problem of a different kind — one that I definitely didn’t
understand.
I asked my boss if I could take a two-week leave. He said, “ Sure,
Jim” and I went home to call my half-brother in Indianapolis. He
was a Mason also, and I thought he might give me some advice. I

--- Sayfa 86 ---
92
told him what had happened, what the doctor had said, and he
quickly gave me his opinion.
“That man is a religious fanatic, ” he told me. “ You take the next
plane here and I will meet you at the airport. Then I ’ ll take you to
see my ophthalmologist. ” The next plane left at 9 o’clock the
following morning and I was on it.
" G
o

b a c k h o m e a n d d o w h a te v e r h e te lls y
o u
"
“ When I arrived in Indianapolis my half-brother was waiting. He
told me that I had an appointment with his doctor for the next day
and took me to his home to rest and wait. The following day the
doctor there examined me and then asked me where I lived. I told
him where I lived, and also what the other doctor had said about my
eyes (I didn’t mention what the other man had said about my
spiritual vision).
He replied, “ I will look the man up in our Register. ”
When he came back into the examining room he said to me, “ Mr.
Shaw, you have the very best medical facilities available to you in
Florida, and the doctor who examined you there is one of the very
best. My advice to you is to go straight home and do whatever he
says. ”
My brother wasn’t at all pleased. I was feeling a strange combi­
nation o f dread and excited anticipation. There seemed to be no
alternative except to do as he said. But what. I wondered, would
that strange and intense doctor in Florida tell me to do?
I n
c
r e
a
s
i n
g
 k
n
o
w
l e
d
g
e

a
n
d
 g r o w
i n
g d
i s c o m
f o r t
Back home, I made another appointment and went to see the
doctor. There was an unexpected complication: I had an infection
in my eyelids. He said that he would not be able to operate for at
least six weeks. So I returned to work and went each week for the
next six weeks to be treated for the infection. Each time when I
went to see the doctor for examination and treatment, he spoke to
me about God’s plan o f salvation and my need o f Jesus as my

--- Sayfa 87 ---
93
personal redeemer. He spoke to me about the Lord and quoted
verses of Scripture.
Searching the scriptures
His speaking to me this way no longer offended me. The verses
o f Scripture he quoted seemed to go way down inside of me. Some
o f them seemed to explode down there, stirring things I could
neither describe nor understand. I decided that I would look up the
verses he spoke of and read them for myself. The more I thought
o f it the more strongly I wanted to do it.
I had no Bible to read except for the big one on the coffee table.
Bonnie had bought it when we were married and said that it would
be our “ family Bible. ” But it had lain there all those years without
being read. At last it was opened and I began to look up the verses
the doctor quoted and read them in their context. They sounded
good as I read them. I would go back and read some of them again
and again.
As the weeks passed I would sometimes wake up in the night
thinking about one o f the verses, get up and go into the living room
to read it from that big Bible. The Scriptures definitely spoke to me
— to needs deep within me. I noticed that they continued to speak
to me, reverberating with meaning, no matter how many times I
had read them. Those Bible verses were different from anything I
had ever read before. They seemed alive.
There was a definite conflict going on within me as the Scriptures
collided in my understanding with the teachings o f the Masonic
authorities and philosophers. I could feel the clouds swirling in my
mind and was vaguely troubled, but didn't try to understand it. I
just continued to read the big Bible in the living room, listen to the
doctor as he witnessed to me, and do my Lodge work as well as I
possibly could.
T
h
e
 s
c r i p
t u
r e
s
 w
e
r e
 s
o
  s
i m
p
l e
I didn’t try to sort it all out or understand it. But I did notice
something that became clearer and clearer. In addition to the
strange “ life” I sensed in the Scriptures, I noticed how simple their
message was compared with the complexity of the Masonic writ­
ings.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
94
T
h
e c o n
f l i c t c o m
e s i n
t o f o c u
s
I had the surgery on my left eye and it was successful. With new
glasses I could see well with that eye and after two weeks I went
back to work. The operation on the right eye was scheduled to be
done in six months. As surely as my vision was coming into clearer
focus after the surgery, so was the conflict between the teachings
o f the Bible and the teachings o f Masonry. I was increasingly
aware of this in general terms, but it became clear in specifics when
I gave the 32nd Degree Lecture at the next Coronation.
O
n
e
 o
r t h
e
 o
t h
e
r w
a
s
 w
r o
n
g
I had been understudy for some time to the judge who gave the
Lecture o f the 32nd Degree before I began to give it myself. I had
heard it or given it many, many times and knew it well. Reunion
was coming up, and Mike and I were making preparations. I
studied all o f my work thoroughly — the 32nd Degree Lecture with
particular care. As I studied the lecture, and when I delivered it to
the new class o f 32nd Degree Masons, I saw that there was a
significant difference here. I saw for the first time how different
from the teachings o f the Bible was the lecture, this summing up
o f all the Masonic teachings the men had gone through in working
up to this climactic degree. There was a difference there— one that
could not be reconciled and I saw it clearly.
Either the “ Old Religions” and the teachings o f Masonry are
right and the Bible is wrong, or the Bible is right and the “ Old
Religions” and Masonic teachings are wrong. Both could not be
right. It was, I now saw clearly, that simple.
O
n
 a
 c
o
l l i s
i o
n
 c
o
u
r
s
e

w ith a ch oice
With this fundamental conflict now clearly in focus in my
understanding, I saw the long-range implications o f it all. Masonry
taught salvation by works, depending on one’s own “ virtuous life”
to redeem him. The Bible teaches salvation by grace, depending on
the perfect life o f Jesus and His atoning death for us. Masonry
teaches that Jesus is no greater than the other “ exemplars” of
history (such as Mohammed, Buddah, Aristotle or Joseph Smith),

--- Sayfa 89 ---
95
and was neither divine nor inspired. The Bible teaches that Jesus
is God the Son, that He has always existed, and that no man can be
reconciled to God the Father except through Him. 1 There is a
choice to be made here— I saw this clearly— and I was on a
collision course with that choice.
S
e
e
k
i n
g
 t h
e
 c
o
u
n
s
e
l o
f o
t h
e
r s
Seeing clearly the conflict and the choice it demanded, I began,
discreetly, to seek the counsel o f others. I spoke with Bonnie and
Mike about it, and with a few other close friends. I even went to see
the Methodist preacher who had lent me the book o f John Wesley’s
prayers when I was made Chaplain o f the Lodge of Perfection. He
really wasn’t much help. He was not a zealous Mason and seldom
attended Lodge meetings, but had no intention o f leaving the
Lodge altogether. He wasn’ t going to make that kind o f trouble for
himself! No one seemed to understand as clearly as I did. Bonnie
came close, but none o f them really saw the conflict and the choice
it demanded, probably because they had not been reading the
Scriptures as I had.
T
h
e
 l i g
h
t b
r e
a
k
s
 t h
r o
u
g
h
During one o f my regular visits to the doctor after the operation
on my left eye, I was sitting in one o f his examination rooms,
waiting for him to come to check me. I am very much inclined to
read whenever I must wait, no matter how brief the waiting period,
so I looked around to see what was in there that I might read until
he came. There was not a thing in that room to read, except a Bible.
I picked it up, opened it to John’s Gospel, and began to read again
some o f the verses I had read so many times in chapters one, three
and four. Then, turning over to chapter six, I began to read verses
I had not read before.
My eyes seemed to move quickly over the words o f Jesus: “ I am
the bread o f life; he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he
that believeth on me shall never thirst... him that cometh to me I will
in no wise cast out... and this is the will o f him that sent me, that
every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. ”

--- Sayfa 90 ---
96
" H
e
y
 d
o
c
 i s
 t h
i s
 r e
a
l l y
 t r u
e
"
Then my eyes beheld verse 47, “ Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that believeth on me hath everlasting life. ”
In spite o f all the verses and passages of Scripture I had already
read, and for reasons probably known only to God, this verse
reached down inside me and grabbed my heart. I was staggered
with the simplicity o f what it said and the power o f what it did to
me. Trumpet fanfares inside my head could not have more effec­
tively locked my attention on that simple verse, or more clearly
shown its importance to me. It was doing powerful things, both in
my heart and in my understanding.
“Could it really be true, ” I wondered, “ that it could all be so
simple? Could this really be true? ”
Without thinking about courtesy or propriety in a large doctor’s
office, I called out loudly, “ Hey, Doc! ”
When, after a few seconds, he looked into the room where I was
sitting, I pointed to that verse and asked, “ Is this really true? ”
He looked at the page, read the verse my finger was on and said,
“ Sure. Yes, Jim, o f course it’s true. ”
T
h
i s
 t i m
e
 i t w
a
s
 r e
a
l
When one has been exposed to Masonic religion and philosophy,
with all its confusion, doubt and doubletalk, for as long as I had
been, it is hard to believe the simple truth when finally confronted
with it — even the living truth o f the Bible.
After being really convinced of the truth o f the “ Old Religion”
and the doctrine o f reincarnation, after believing and teaching
others that Jesus was neither divine nor unique, it is not at all simple
or easy to accept the truth that He is divine and unique.
Even though the doctor had been quoting Scriptures to me for
nearly six months, and I had been studying them myself, there had
been much confusion within me about it all.
But the supernatural power o f the words o f God had been doing
their work within me and the simple truth o f this verse suddenly
broke through the clutter o f tangled concepts in my mind.
The light o f Truth suddenly broke through the fog o f confusion
and doubt.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
97
It was TRUE! It was really that simple and it was TRUE! I had
told Doc on occasion before that I believed the verses he spoke of,
but I really hadn't. Much o f that time I had been playing mind
games with him. Now I did — I really did! This time I wasn't
playing any mind games; this time it was real.
S
o
m
e
t h
i n
g
 i n
s
i d
e
 m
e
 c h
a
n
g
e
d
With the realization that the simple message of John 6: 47 is true,
a dark power within me was broken, a door in my heart opened and
light came flooding into me. I felt an overwhelming sense o f
gladness and sadness — a rush o f mixed emotions swirling within
me.
I didn't try to interpret what I was feeling, but it was definitely a
breakthrough o f truth. I really knew it was truth and I was never the
same again. Something inside me had changed, something that
opened my eyes to truth and error, and the change was permanent.
I would see things differently from that day on.
A
n

o
p
e
r
a
t
i o
n
,

a

prayer and a hurricane
The time came for me to have the second operation, the one to
remove the cataract on my right eye, and I went back into the
hospital confident that it would turn out as well as the first one. I
wasn’t worried at all. When the operation was over and I was back
in my room, someone came in and took me by the hand.
I couldn’t see, for both eyes were bandaged. When I asked him
who he was, he said that he was the doctor’s pastor.
He said, “ Mr. Shaw, I just came from the operating room. The
doctor always prays for his patients, and he and I prayed for you —
before and after the surgery. ”
His words penetrated clear to the center o f me and shook my
emotions loose. I had never before, to my knowledge, had anyone
really pray for me. never, and I choked on the significance o f it.
When I could speak again I said to him, “ Sir, as soon as I get out
o f the hospital and am able, I will be at your church. ”
He squeezed my hand and left me to think about it all. It was an
overwhelming experience but definitely a good one.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
98
Before my recuperation was complete a hurricane approached
and the hospital authorities were asking all patients who were able
to leave to do so. I was making much more rapid recovery than had
been expected, so I called Bonnie and asked her to come get me.
As she drove me home, I told her that although people from the
doctor's church had visited me and had prayed for me, not one
person from the Lodge had been there to see me. She told me that
she had announced to the Eastern Star members that I was having
the surgery. But not a one o f them had come. The contrast was clear
and unmistakable.
The physical hurricane that was approaching was paralleled, if
not exceeded, by the spiritual and emotional one building up inside
o f me.
Fotnote'1See Appendix A, “Masonic Doctrine Versus Christian Doctrine. ”

--- Sayfa 93 ---
10 Into the
ligh t
The hurricane came and went without any harm to us. But the one
within me continued to gather force. It seemed strange, from my
point o f view, for all the people around me seemed calm. Even the
doctor was no longer speaking much to me about the Lord, for I
wasn’t seeing him regularly. Bonnie was quietly supportive, but
we really didn’t say much about it. Mike and my other friends went
on with life. It was “ business as usual” around me, but definitely
not that way inside o f me.
T
h
e
 h
i g
h
e
s
t m
a
s
o
n
i c d
e
g
r e
e
Easter was approaching and one quiet morning I was at home
recuperating from the second operation when the doorbell rang. It
was a special delivery letter from the Supreme Council in
Washington, notifying me that I had been selected for the 33rd
Degree.
I could hardly believe it was true! This honor is one most Masons
never even think o f receiving. It was just too much, too far out o f
reach, beyond limits o f reality. It was unreal to think I had actually
been selected. It was an honor just to be considered for this ultimate
degree and I had actually been selected, chosen by that small and
powerful group, the Supreme Council o f the 33rd Degree.
I called Bonnie to share the good news with her. In talking with
her, I surprised myself by asking her if she thought I should accept
it.
99

--- Sayfa 94 ---
100
“ What a strange thing to ask her, " I thought. But before I could
contemplate it she said, “ Why. sure you should accept it. You have
worked so hard for so long to get there — by all means you should
accept it. ”
So I returned my acceptance immediately and began making
plans for the trip.
I m
a
d
e
 i t o
n
 m
y
 o
w
n
With plenty o f time to reflect, I thought about my long climb up
the mountain o f Masonry in search o f light. I thought about the
odds against anyone’s ever making it to the 33rd Degree. I realized
that in my case the odds had been even greater. I had made it by hard
work and dedication alone. Some men have an edge on selection
because o f their wealth, political power or prominence. I had none
o f these.
Like the day I had carried the man all the way to the top o f “ Shaw
Hill” between Camp Butner and Raleigh, I had made it to the top
o f the Masonic mountain because I was willing to make the effort
required and refused to quit. Thinking o f this, I felt particularly
good about it and wished my mother could know.
I had come a long way since leaving the front gate that terrible day
so many years ago. I had come the distance with no help from Uncle
Irvin. Who would have thought that the lonely walk, begun so
many years ago by that frightened little 13-year-old boy, would
have led to this point? I had reached the pinnacle — made it all the
way to the top.
Some o f the most prominent and influential men in the world
would undoubtedly be there to participate when I was given this
ultimate degree — for me — little Jimmy Shaw, who had gone to
work at age five and made it alone since age 13. They would be
there to give the 33rd Degree to me. It was really a bit difficult to
take it all in.
3
 d
a
y
s
 a
t t h
e
 m
o
u
n
t a
i n
 t o
p
In order to receive the 33rd Degree it was necessary to go to
Washington, D. C. The initiation and related functions were to last
three days.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
101
Since Bonnie could participate in practically none o f the things
I would be doing each day. she decided not to go along. W e were
both excited as I made preparations to leave. But I was not as
excited as I expected to be. The edge was taken o ff the excitement
because, in me, it was mixed with a considerable amount o f
conviction. Way down deep there was a growing restlessness, an
increasing conflict, produced by the things the doctor had been
sharing and by all the Scripture I had been reading. Preparing to
receive this “ ultimate honor” was not as thrilling as it might
otherwise have been.
A
r
r
i
v
i
n
g

a
t

t
h
e

house of the temple
I flew into Washington National Airport and took a taxi to the
House of the Temple on Northwest 16th Street. Upon arriving at
the Temple I was met by a receptionist who asked if I were there
to receive the 33rd Degree. I was surprised to find a woman in those
sacred Masonic precincts, but said that I was and showed her my
letter from the Supreme Council. She then told me that in order to
receive the degree, I would be expected to make a “ minimum
donation" o f a very large amount o f money (at least it was a “ very
large" amount for me). This took me completely by surprise for
there had not been a word about any such “ minimum donation” in
the letter sent me by the Supreme Council. I didn’t carry that much
money with me and had left my checkbook at home but was able
to borrow the money from one o f the other men and gave it to her.
W e candidates were all unhappy about this unpleasant surprise and
grumbled to one another about it, but were not unhappy enough to
forsake the degree over it. W e were too close to the “ top o f the
mountain” to turn back at that point.
T
h
e
 t e
m
p
l e
 i t s
e
l f
The House o f the Temple is quite impressive — a bit awesome,
really. Standing large, grey and silent on the cast side o f Northwest
16th Street, between “ R” and “ S” Streets, it looms very wide and
tall from the curb. There is a huge expanse o f granite pavement in
front o f it, including three levels o f narrowing steps as the entrance

--- Sayfa 96 ---
102
is approached. Flanking the entrance are two Sphinx-like granite
lions with women’s heads, the neck o f one entwined by a cobra and
decorated with the “ ankh” (the Egyptian symbol o f life and deity).
Adorning the neck and breast o f the other is an image o f a woman,
symbolic o f fertility and procreation. In the pavement, just in front
o f the tall bronze doors, are two Egyptian swords with curved, ser­
pentine blades and, between the two swords, brass letters, set into
stone, saying, “ The Temple o f the Supreme Council o f the Thirty-
Third and Last Degree o f the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. ”
Over the tall, bronze doors, cut into the stone, is the statement,
“ Freemasonry Builds Its Temples in the Hearts o f Men and Among
Nations. ” 1
High above the entrance, partially concealed by stone columns,
is an elaborate image o f the Egyptian sun god, backed with
radiating sun and flanked by six large, golden snakes.
Inside is elegance: polished marble, exotic wood, gold and statu­
ary. There are offices, a library, dining room, kitchen. Council
Room, “ Temple Room” and a large meeting room. This room is
like a luxurious theater, rather elegantly furnished and decorated.
The ceiling is dark blue, with lights set into it to give the
appearance o f stars. These lights can even be made to “ twinkle”
like stars in the sky. There is a stage, well-equipped, and it is all
very nicely done. But the thing that is most noticeable is the way
the walls arc decorated with serpents. There are all kinds; some
very long and large. Many o f the Scottish Rite degrees include the
representation o f serpents and I recognized them among those
decorating the walls.
It was all most impressive and gave me a strange mixture o f the
sensations o f being in a temple and in a tomb — something sacred
but threatening. I saw busts o f outstanding men o f the Rite includ­
ing two o f Albert Pike, who is buried there in the wall.
I n
t e
r v
i e
w
e
d
 b
y
 t h
e
 s
u
p
r e
m
e

c o
u
n
c i l
The first day was devoted to registration, briefings and inter­
views. W e were called into one o f the offices, one at a time, and
interviewed by three members o f the Supreme Council.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
103
When my turn came I was ushered into the office and seated. The
very first question I was asked was, “ O f what religion are you? ”
Not long before this I would have answered with something like,
“ I believe the Ancient Mysteries, the ‘Old Religion, ’ and I believe
in reincarnation. ” However, without thinking at all about how to
answer, I found myself saying, “ I am a Christian. ”
Then, to my surprise and theirs, I asked of them. “ Are you men
bom again? ” The man in charge quickly stopped me by saying,
“ W e're not here to talk about that — we are here to ask you
questions. ”
After they sent me back out I sat down and thought about it. When
the next man came out, I asked him, “ Did they ask you if you are
a Christian? ” He said. “ Yes, they did. ”
“ What did you tell them? ” I asked, and he replied, “ I told them
‘ Hell no, and I never intend to be! '”
Then he said a strange thing to me, “ They said I’m going higher, ”
and he left through a different door, looking pleased.
B
e
c
o
m
i n
g
 a
 s
o
v
e
r
e
i g
n

g r a n d i n s p e c t o r g e n e r a l
The second day was the day o f the actual initiation, held in the
theater-like meeting room. Those of us who were receiving the
degree were seated and the ceremony was “ exemplified” (acted
out in full costume) before us, in the same way that we had
performed the lesser degrees o f the Scottish Rite all those years.
The parts in the exemplification were played by men o f the 33rd
Degree.
The representative candidate was dressed in black trousers,
barefooted, bareheaded and draped in a long, black robe that
reminded me o f a very long, black raincoat. He had a black
cabletow around his neck but was not hoodwinked. During the
initiation he was led around the stage, conducted by two men with
swords, as the degree was performed for us.
Instructions and signs were given. Upon the altar were four “ holy
books” (the Bible, the Koran, the Book of the Law and the Hindu
Scriptures). At one point the “ candidate” was told to kiss the book

--- Sayfa 98 ---
104
“ o f your religion" and. representing us all, he leaned forward and
did so. I remembered the First Degree initiation, when I was told
to kiss the Bible, and at that moment something came full cycle. It
was the Final such kiss to be a part o f my life.
W
i n
e
 i n
 a
 h
u
m
a
n
 s
k
u
l l
When it was time for the final obligation we all stood and
repeated the oath with the representative candidate, administered
by the Sovereign Grand Inspector General. We then swore true
allegiance to the Supreme Council o f the 33rd Degree, above all
other allegiances, and swore never to recognize any other brother
as being a member o f the Scottish Rite o f Freemasonry unless he
also recognizes the supreme authority o f “ this Supreme Council. ”
One o f the Conductors then handed the “ candidate” a human
skull, upside down, with wine in it.
With all o f us candidates repeating after him, he scaled the oath,
“ May this wine I now drink become a deadly poison to me, as the
Hemlock juice drunk by Socrates, should I ever knowingly or
willfully violate the same" (the oath).
He then drank the wine. A skeleton (one o f the brothers dressed
like one — he looked very convincing) then stepped out o f the
shadows and threw his arms around the “ candidate.” Then he (and
we) continued the sealing o f the obligation by saying, “ And may
these cold arms forever encircle me should I ever knowingly or
willfully violate the same. ”
The Sovereign Grand Commander closed the meeting o f the
Supreme Council “ with the Mystic Number, " striking with his
sword Five, three, one and then two times. After the closing prayer,
we all said “ amen, amen, amen, ” and it was over.
P
r o
m
i n
e
n
t m
e
n
 t o
o
k
 p
a
r t
There were some extremely prominent men there that day,
including a Scandinavian King, two former presidents o f the
United States, an internationally prominent evangelist, two other
internationally prominent clergymen, and a very high official o f
the federal government, the one who actually presented me with

--- Sayfa 99 ---
105
the certificate o f the 33rd Degree. Some made only brief appear­
ances; others stayed much longer. However, they didn’t do much
mixing or socializing with us, except for those whom they already
knew. Even though these celebrities weren’t extremely “ broth­
erly, ” it was still quite an experience for me just to be associated
with them. It was easily the largest gathering o f such prominent and
influential men o f which I have ever been a part.
The third day there was a banquet to celebrate our becoming
“ Grand Inspectors General, 33rd Degree. ” The banquet was a little
anticlimactic, at least for me, and I was anxious to get it over with
so I could return home. It was good to be a 33rd at last. But it wasn’t
as exciting or fulfilling as I had thought it would be during all those
years in the Craft. I guess this was because o f the profound changes
going on down deep within me.
I returned home as soon as the 33rd Degree award and related
social functions were finished, for it was time for my next appoint­
ment with the doctor. After he had examined my eyes he said that
they were healing fine, that he felt good about the way they were
looking, and as usual he spoke with me about the Lord. I told him
that I planned to come to his church the next Sunday and that I had
been reading the Bible.
Obviously pleased, he said, “ Good. Keep studying, and your
sight will soon be much better. ” By this time I knew what he meant
— he was speaking o f my spiritual sight.
Maundy Thurs­ day
In the Scottish Rite the Thursday before Easter, “ Maundy Thurs­
day, ” is an important day. On this day we always performed a
special service o f Communion in the local Scottish Rite Temple.
At this time I was Wise Master in the Chapter o f Rose Croix and
it was my job to preside over the exemplification (dramatization)
o f the ceremony. I had done this many times and was known for my
knowledge o f the service and for “ doing a good job” o f putting it
on.
T
h
e
 w
o
r d
s
 h
a
d
 m
e
a
n
i n
g
 n
o
w
On Thursday evening we gathered at our home Temple and
dressed for the ceremony. It was always a most solemn occasion

--- Sayfa 100 ---
106
and seemed a little awesome, even to those of us who had done it
many times.
Dressed in long, black, hooded robes, we marched in, single file,
with only our faces partly showing, and took our seats.
There was something very tomb-like about the setting. The
silence was broken only by the organ, playing mournfully in the
background, and there was no light except for the little that came
through the windows. After the opening prayer (from which the
name o f Jesus Christ was conspicuously excluded), I stood and
opened the service.
As I had done so many times before, 1 said, “ We meet this day to
commemorate the death o f our ‘ Most Wise and Perfect Master, *
not as inspired or divine, for this is not for us to decide, but as at least
the greatest o f the apostles o f mankind. ”
As I spoke these words that I had spoken so many times before
1 had a strange and powerful experience. It was as if I were standing
apart, listening to myself as I spoke, and the words echoed deep
within me, shouting their significance. They were the same words
I had spoken so many times before, but had meaning for me now.
They made me sick, literally ill, and I stopped.
The realization o f what I had just said grew within me like the
rising o f a crescendo. I had just called Jesus an " apostle o f
mankind” who was neither inspired nor divine! There was a silent
pause that seemed to last a very long time as I struggled with a sick
smothering within.
When I was finally able, I continued with the service and we
gathered around a large table across the room in marching order.
The table was long, shaped like a cross, and covered with a red
cloth which was decorated down the center with roses.
A
 b
l a
c k
 c o
m
m
u
n
i o
n
Once we were assembled at the table, I elevated (lifted high) the
plate o f bread, took a piece, put my hand on the shoulder o f the man
in front o f me, gave him the plate and said, “ Take, eat, and give to
the hungry. ”
This continued until all had partaken o f the bread.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
107
Then I lifted up the goblet o f wine, took a sip, and said, “ Take,
drink, and give to the thirsty. ”
Again, this continued until all had partaken o f the wine.
Then I took the bread, walked over to the first row o f spectators
and served it to the man previously chosen for the honor o f
representing the rest o f the Lodge.
As I handed it to him I again said, “ Take, eat, and give to the
hungry. ”
In like manner I served the wine to him saying, “ Take, drink, and
give to the thirsty, ” and he sat down.
After this we took our places at the table shaped like a cross and
sat down. The setting was dark, our long, sweeping robes were
solid black, our faces nearly concealed in the hoods, and the mood
was one of heavy gloom. The Christ-less prayers and the hymns we
sang fit right in. The one word that would describe the entire event
would be “ black. ” It was, indeed, a Black Communion — a strange
Black Mass.
E
x
t i n
g
u
i s
h
i n
g
 t h
e
 c a
n
d
l e
There was a large M enorah (candlestick with seven candlehold
ers) in the center of the room, with seven candles now burning.
Standing again, I said, “ This is indeed a sad day. for we have lost
our Master. W e may never see him again. He is dead! Mourn, weep
and cry, for he is gone. ”
Then I asked the officers to extinguish the candles in the large
M enorah. One by one they rose, walked to the center o f the room,
extinguished a selected candle and left the room.
Finally, with only the center candle still burning, I arose, walked
sadly to the Menorah and extinguished the last candle— the candle
representing the life o f Jesus, our “ Most Wise and Perfect Master. ”
W e had dramatized and commemorated the snuffing out o f the life
o f Jesus, without once mentioning his name, and the scene ended
with the room in deep silent darkness. I walked out o f the room,
leaving only the darkness and the stillness o f death.
Once again, the single word best to describe it would be “ black. ”
All through the service I was shaking and sick. I have never felt
so sad. I had stumbled over the words but, somehow, I made it to

--- Sayfa 102 ---
108
the completion o f the ceremony and went back to the dressing
room. I still didn’t know much about praying but felt that I had been
sustained by the Lord through it all.
T h e fin a l p a r tin g
Back in the dressing room we hung up our black, hooded robes,
put our street clothes back on and prepared to leave. Less than two
hours had passed since I arrived. But what had happened in that
period o f time had changed my life forever.
Still sick in my heart, I changed clothes without a word to anyone.
The others asked me what was wrong. But I couldn’t reply.
They reminded me that I had acted as Wise Master so many times
before, that I was known for my smooth performance o f it, and they
asked what had gone wrong.
I was choking on the awful reality o f what we had said and done,
the way we had blasphemed the Lord, and the evil, black mockery
we had made o f His pure and selfless death. With weeping welling
up within me, I could only shake my head in silence and walk out.
Mike was waiting for me at the door, expecting to get a ride home,
and he asked, “ What’s the matter, Jim? Are you sick? ”
Finally able to speak, I quietly replied, “ No. Mike, I’m just sick
o f all this. "
" I t i s
n
' t r i g
h
t "
I started down the wide steps in front of the large Scottish Rite
Temple, realization and conviction growing within me, reached
the bottom step and stopped. Turning around, I looked back at the
huge, granite building and slowly studied the words, carved in the
stone across the top o f the entrance: “ A N C IE N T A N D A C ­
CEPTED SCOTTISH RITE OF FREEM ASO NRY. ”
Something came clearly into focus in my understanding and I
made a decision. This crisis point in my life, one which had
required so many years for me to reach, passed in seconds. The
truth was revealed and the choice was made — a choice that would
be the difference between darkness and light, death and life, one
that would last for eternity. Looking up at those words I had walked

--- Sayfa 103 ---
109
under so many times, words o f which I had been so proud, I spoke
to myself out loud. It was as if I were the only man in the world as
I heard myself say, slowly and deliberately, “ It isn’t ancient, it isn’t
Scottish, it isn't free, and it isn’t rig h t! ”
I turned away and walked into the parking lot, knowing that I
would never return. As I walked into the deepening darkness o f that
springtime night, I was walking into the growing light o f the living
God. As the natural darkness closed around me, the supernatural
light welled up within me. With every step I took, as the Temple
receded behind me, I was more free.
“ I will never return, ’' I thought with each step. “ I will never
return, I will never return... ”
The decision was made, the die was cast. From that night onward
I would serve the true and living God, not the Great Architect o f the
Universe. I would exalt and learn o f Him. not Osiris, Krishna or
Demeter. I would seek and follow Jesus, not the will-o’-the-wisp
o f “ hidden wisdom. ”
I was walking, after such a long time, out of the darkness and into
the light.
Footnote
1This statement is an interesting contradiction with the Temple it adorns, as
well as with the thousands o f other such Masonic temples built around the World
at a total cost o f many billions o f dollars.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
11 Walking
in the light
I tried to explain to Mike that Thursday night, and told him
quietly but forcefully that I was never going to return to the Lodge.
He looked at me for a few seconds, trying to understand, but unable
to do so.
Then he said, “ Alright, Jim, but what you need is a drink. Let’s
go get one. ”
“ Alright, Mike, ” I replied, “ but just one. ” As we started for the
bar near where he lived, I said, “ I don't think I'll have a drink, Mike.
I think I’ ll just have a soda with you. ”
A
 f r i e
n
d
 l o
v
e
t h
 a
t a
l l t i m
e
s
As we sat in the bar Mike continued to ask questions, trying to
understand what was happening. I answered him as well as I could.
He knew that I had dedicated my life to Masonry and how hard I
had worked in it. He had been there with me for many years,
working beside me when others were not willing to work. Since his
first moment as a Masonic candidate, we had been together. I had
urged him to join, had given him his petition, sponsored him and,
as Senior Deacon, I was escorting him through the Blue Degrees
when he threw Jubela across the Lodge Hall and established the
“ Hands-Off Policy. ”
We had worked together in the Scottish Rite Degrees so many
times, working harder than all the rest. He had even taken time o ff
111

--- Sayfa 105 ---
112
and gone with me when I received the K. C. C. H. If anyone on earth
knew how truly I had loved and served Masonry, and how hard I
had worked in and for it, it was Mike.
Now he was mystified, trying to understand why I was leaving
it, but unable to do so.
The supernatural battle that had been going on within me was one
o f which Mike had not been a part. The truth o f Scripture that had
been lodged inside me from the doctor’s witnessing and my Bible
study was something in which he had not participated. He could
not understand the things o f the Spirit o f God. At that point even
1 didn’t fully understand it all. I just knew it was real— I just knew
it was true.
But Mike was a friend — a real one — and even though he
couldn't understand this outrageous thing I was doing, he was still
sticking by me. Like the friend of Proverbs 17: 17, he was going to
love me “ at all times, ” and was going to stick with me through
adversity. Sadly, the others would not feel that way about it. Finally
Mike said, “ Jim, I don't understand why you are leaving the Lodge,
but I hope you won’t be angry with me if I don’t leave. ”
I assured him that I did understand his position and that neither
his staying nor anything else would ever cause me to stop being his
friend.
M
a
k
i n
g
 i t o
f f i c
i a
l
The next day I went to work. During my lunch period I wrote four
letters o f resignation: to the Blue Lodge, the Scottish Rite, the
Eastern Star and the Shrine. 1 sealed, stamped, and dropped them
into the mailbox in front o f the office. I have never forgotten the
“ clang” o f the mailbox lid when it fell shut. It seemed as though that
sharp and sudden sound had severed something and set me free; I
felt as if that “ clang” sent a new life surging through me. However,
that was not to be the end o f Freemasonry in my life — not by any
means. It was not going to be that easy.
M
y
 l a
s
t m
a
s
o
n
i c
 f u
n
e
r a
l
The next day was my day o ff from work and I was at home when
the phone rang. It was the Worshipful Master o f the Blue Lodge

--- Sayfa 106 ---
113
and he said, “ Jim, we are having the funeral for George (the Tiler1
o f the Lodge) this afternoon. Be at the Lodge Hall at I p. m. for the
Lodge of Sorrows (the Masonic funeral is always begun and ended
at the Lodge Hall).
Before 1 could reply, he hung up. I had only put my letters o f
resignation in the mailbox after noon the day before. Yet, some­
how, they already knew! “ How could they know already? " I
wondered. It was obvious that they were not going to let me go so
easily.
I had no intention o f going to that funeral and it never occurred
to me that they might come to get me. But that is exactly what they
did. About an hour after the phone call, they drove up to the front
o f my house and the Worshipful Master came to the door.
He said, “Jim, I thought you would be at the Lodge o f Sorrows;
are you ready to go? "
I just looked at him for a moment or two and then said, " I 'm not
going. ”
"Jim, you had better go"
“ W H A T DO YO U M EAN. YOU ARE N O T GOING? ” he burst
out angrily. “ OF COURSE YO U ARE G O IN G ! ” Then, more
quietly, he said, “Come on, let's go. ”
I didn’t move, and said, “ I have just put in for a dem it. " 2
He wasn't at all surprised, but said, “ Jim, you must be out o f your
mind! As long as you have served the Lodge, have served as
Worshipful Master, and all the honors you have received, how can
you do this? ”
The tension was very great, and at that point Bonnie spoke up and
said. “ Jim, you had better go. ”
By this time I was beginning to wonder if they were planning to
take me out and dispose o f me, or perhaps keep me a prisoner until
I “ regained my sanity. ” But I said no more, kissed Bonnie goodbye
and went out the door. At the car I stopped. I only had on trousers
and a shirt. It is necessary in a Masonic funeral that participants
wear a coat and tie. Without a word, the Master opened the trunk,
took out a coat and tie and handed them to me. He had anticipated
this also.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
114
"Here, ” he said. "I know you think you won’t have to take part
in the funeral because you are not properly dressed but I brought
these for you. Put them on. ”
I put them on, he ushered me into the car, and we drove away. At
the funeral home there was a brief service conducted by the dead
man’s church. Although we took no part in it, I noticed how very
similar it was to Masonic services. It could almost have been lifted
right out of Masonic rituals. There was no mention o f Jesus at all.
The man was a Christian Scientist.
M
y
 l a
s
t m
a
s
o
n
i c
 p
r a
y
e
r
We left the funeral home and followed the hearse to the cemetery.
In the graveside service I was "Great Lights Bearer; ” I had a
wooden tray, supported by a strap around my neck, and on the tray
were the Book o f the Law (Old Testament Scriptures), Square and
Compass, the "Great Lights” o f Masonry.
The Master, who was Priest, stood at the head o f the grave. I stood
at the foot and the others lined up on either side. The Master did all
the talking until time for the prayer. Then it was my turn. I had the
“ official” prayer card on the tray before me. I looked at that card,
decided not to follow it, and then prayed my own prayer which I
ended "in the name o f Jesus Christ our Savior. ”
I had come a long way from that day when I had been made
Chaplain in the Lodge o f Perfection and didn’t know how to pray;
something else had come full cycle. The prayer was greatly
offensive to the Master and the other Masons who were there, o f
course, but because o f the setting not a word could be said to me
about it.
" A
l a
s
, m
y
 b
r o
t h
e
r "
We all had a sprig o f Acacia which we dropped, in turn, into the
grave and said, “ Alas, my brother. ”
I dropped my sprig into the grave, said, “ Alas, my brother, ” and
it was as if I were looking down through the grave, into a dark
eternity.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
115
I said, “ George, I wish you could have known Jesus as your
personal Savior but, alas, my brother, it cannot be so. It is now too
late. ”
" I w
i l l b
e
 g
l a
d
 t o
 h
a
v
e
 y
o
u
 g
o
n
e
"
We got back into the car and drove to the Lodge Hall where we
completed the service by closing the Lodge o f Sorrows. I started
to leave when the Senior Warden came up to me and wanted to
know what had happened to me to make me think o f leaving the
Lodge.
I told him as plainly as I could that I had been saved, I now
belonged to the Lord Jesus Christ, and I could no longer belong to
the Masonic Lodge, or any other lodge which denied Him as Lord.
He immediately became very angry and shouted, “ I W IL L BE
G LAD TO H AVE YO U G O N E ! ”
I then insisted that I go to the office o f the Secretary and talk with
him and was allowed to do so.
O
n
c e a
 m
a
s o n
, a
l w
a
y
s a
 m
a
s o n
The Secretary had just received my letter.
“ Jim, ” he said, “ I can hardly believe you would leave the Lodge
after all these years and after the hard work you have done and the
honors you have received. I just can't believe it. ” I knew that he
could not understand, but tried to explain that I was now indwelt
by the Holy Spirit and that He would be grieved if I went back into
a Lodge Hall.
At least the Secretary was not hostile and. with that, I left. O f
course, in the eyes o f Masonry I would never leave — not really.
The obligations (oaths) are considered unbreakable.
As a matter o f fact, the “ demit, ” the Masonic form for withdraw­
ing from the Lodge, is looked upon by the Lodge only as a
document which keeps you in good standing for the day when you
will return. They do not look upon it as anything like a final
resignation. From the Masonic point o f view, the only way one can
actually stop being a Mason is to die (and that, because o f the
general belief in reincarnation and the Masonic concept o f Heaven,
is not even the end o f it in their eyes).
After I got back home I called Mike at work and told him all that

--- Sayfa 109 ---
116
W a lk in g tr» d ie
had happened. He said that he wished he could have been at the
service for the Tiler, for he had been a nice guy. Beyond that he
made no reply. Mike was doing a lot o f thinking.
B
e
g
i n
n
i n
g
 a
 n
e
w
 l i f e
Jesus was now in my heart and everything was changing. I was
seeing things in a different light, things I had never before seen at
all. The Spirit o f God was living in my human spirit at long last. A
truly new life had begun.
There was still so much to learn, so much clutter in my mind that
needed to be cleared out and thrown away. But I was on my way.
I was learning to walk in the light and the Light o f the World was
my constant companion and guide. It was wonderful.
Bonnie and I began attending the doctor’s church regularly.
After a lifetime outside o f church, a lifetime filled with pagan
religion and occult philosophy, it should have seemed strange to
begin suddenly to attend church regularly. It should have been a
cultural, emotional and spiritual shock for us — especially in that
church (where the Gospel was plainly declared and Jesus exalted).
But it seemed natural to be there. It was where we belonged.
D
r i n
k
i n
g
 i n
 a
 n
e
w
 l i f e
We also began to attend night classes at the Bible College
associated with the church. It was a totally positive experience.
From the very beginning everything we learned was a blessing —
so positive, so “ right” — that we wanted to leam more. What we
were learning was not just interesting. It was like drinking in new
life. We had, at last, found the real source o f truth. W e were taking
in all that we could get.
L
e
a
r
n
i n
g

t
o

l e
a
d

som eone to the Lord
After a few weeks o f classes in the Bible college I had learned
enough to realize that I really didn’t know very much. Most
importantly, I didn't know how to lead someone else to the Lord
— that is, to help someone have the personal relationship with Him
that I had found.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
117
Except for the doctor’s witnessing to me and the Scriptures he
had shared, my being saved had been a thing entirely between the
Lord and me. I wasn’t even certain as to just how or when it had
happened. I was learning that there are effective ways to witness,
to approach people with the Good News, and that it is important to
be able to show them the basis for it in the Bible.
But I also realized the importance o f knowing how actually to
lead someone to the Lord and I knew that I didn’t know how to do
it.
So I asked one o f the teachers at the college, a man who had been
a missionary to Cuba, to teach me.
He told me that there are many ways to approach it, taught me his
method, and then gave me some tracts he had written. He advised
me to memorize the verses o f Scripture (such as John 1: 12, John
3: 3, John 3: 16, Romans 3: 23, Romans 6: 23, Romans 5: 8 and
Romans 10: 9, 10, 13) and the basic outlines o f the tracts. I did just
that and soon I was ready.
T h e w
i n n i n g o f M
i k e
Vacation time was com ing soon and I asked Mike if he could get
his at the same time as mine. I told him that the house needed
painting and, since we had done it together in the past, I hoped he
could help me with the job again. He agreed, our vacations were
arranged for the same period o f time, and when the day arrived we
went to work. W e would work for about two hours, then stop for
a coffee break at the kitchen table.
I had made plans to witness to Mike during the painting project
and, at the first break, on the first day, I began.
“ Mike, do you ever worry about what would happen if you
should die? ”
He said, “ I worry about it sometimes but you and I decided to
believe in reincarnation. Also, as a Catholic I was taught to believe
in Purgatory, a place where I could spend time to pay for my sins. ”
I said, “ Mike, I was wrong about reincarnation. The Bible says
(in Hebrews 9: 27) that ‘ it is appointed unto men once to die, but
after this the judgment. ’ If reincarnation is true, the death o f Jesus
was for nothing because we would eventually save ourselves. And

--- Sayfa 111 ---
118
as for Purgatory, there is no Scripture for that idea, not even in
Catholic Bibles. ”
I could tell that Mike didn't want to hear any more just then, so
I let the subject drop: but I could also tell he was really thinking.
He was very quiet and ordinarily he would have been doing a lot
o f laughing and joking.
" I h
a
v
e
 l e
d
 a
 v
e
r y
 w
i c
k
e
d
 l i f e
"
At the next break I asked Mike if he would like to go to Heaven
when he died.
He said, ‘‘I have thought about it and, o f course, I would; but I
have led a very wicked life. I believe the Masonic Lodge has helped
me, because I have a purpose now and things are much more
regular. I don't know as much about the Bible as you do but if you
want to talk about it I will listen. ”
So I said to him, “ Mike, I am asking you the most important
question of your life — your joy and peace for all eternity depend
on your answer. Are you willing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ
as your personal Savior? '*
Without waiting for his answer, I went on. “ You say that you
have led a wicked life but if you are willing to confess your sins to
Him and receive Him as Savior and Lord, all your sins will be
forgiven and forgotten, washed away in His blood, and your life
will have a new beginning. There is no other way to have all this;
Jesus said, ‘ no man cometh to the Father but by me. ’ He also said,
‘ye must be born again. ’”
Mike just lowered his head and quietly said, “ I don't know how
to be born again. ”
I said, “ Mike, would you be willing to try if I show you how? ”
With his head still down as if already in prayer, he quietly said,
“ Yes. ”
I n
 m
o
m
e
n
t s
 i t w
a
s
 d
o
n
e
We got down on our knees, right there in the kitchen, and prayed.
First I prayed for him and then I led him in a simple prayer, asking
Jesus to forgive him, save him and to come into his heart to live. In
moments it was done — a thing that would last for eternity.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
119
Now Mike and I would no longer have to work and wonder,
trying to be good enough to make it into “ that Celestial Lodge
above. ” Now we would be together, in the presence o f our wonder­
ful Savior, for all eternity. Mike was a child of God.
I told him to get up. He looked up at me. his eyes full o f tears, and
tried to thank me. But I told him only to thank the One who had died
for him. Then I gave him some very simple instructions about
reading the Bible and praying.
I asked him, “ Mike, are you saved? ” and he replied, very
positively, “ Yes, I am! "
We went back to work, were nearly finished when Bonnie came
home, and we all had dinner together.
When I prayed over the food. Bonnie said, “ Amen” and then
Mike chimed in with a big “ A M E N ! ” He was learning fast.
Later he asked me, “ Jim do I now have t' give up smokin’ me
pipe? ”
I said, “ No, Mike — just let the Lord speak to you about it. But
as you leam to stay close to Him, don't be surprised if He changes
the way you feel about a lot o f things. ”
I didn't ask Mike to leave the Lodge. But he immediately gave
up all the degrees he was working in. He gave up the Shrine and
seldom attended the Blue Lodge.
Because so many o f the men kept asking him why he continued
to speak to me after I had left the Lodge, he soon left the Scottish
Rite altogether. For all practical purposes he was out o f it all,
although I had said nothing to him about it.
S
h
u
n
n
e
d
 b
y
 t h
e
 b
r o
t h
e
r s
The change in our social life after I resigned from the Lodge was
immediate and complete. Bonnie and I were cut off. For all those
years we had been so busy with social functions and most o f it was
pleasant. Suddenly we were shunned by our friends. It was as if we
had leprosy.
Not only had we been busy with parties, banquets and receptions
associated with the Lodges, we had enjoyed so many good times
in one anothers’ homes. Never did I enjoy being a Mason more than
at these informal parties in the homes. In our home we had

--- Sayfa 113 ---
120
entertained as many as 20 guests at a time— complete with music
—and there was never a guest who left unhappy. We met so many
friendly people at these parties that it was seldom we went any­
where in the city that we didn’t see someone we knew.
Now, not a one o f them would even speak to us when we chanced
to meet, with the single exception o f Mike. He stuck by us from the
start and it was the hostility with which the rest treated us that
hastened his decision about leaving the Lodge. I never had a better
friend, nor a more stubborn one, than Mike.
Now, however, we were making new friends in the church and
in the Bible College classes. The social functions that we were
beginning to enjoy with our new friends were a lot healthier than
the ones we had known before.
P
e
r
s
e
c
u
t
i o
n
 o
n
 t
h
e

job brings blessing
On my job, I was almost immediately changed to the night shift.
There was no attempt to conceal the fact that it was because o f my
leaving the Lodge.
At first I was stung by it. But the Lord quickly showed me that
it was a blessing. As was the case with Joseph o f old, what was
intended for evil, the Lord had used for good. Now I was able to
enroll in the daytime program in the Bible College. Because the
work wasn’t so demanding on the job at night, I could do my
studying at work and still do my job well.
U
n
c l e
 I r v
i n
s
 p
a
r t i n
g
 w
o
r d
s
My half-sister in Indianapolis called me one day to tell me that
Uncle Irvin was in failing health and that she thought that I should
see him. I returned to Indianapolis and the two o f us drove out to
his house.
Uncle Irvin did look ill, as if he might not live much longer.
I wanted to know that he would be with the Lord when he died,
but I didn’t get to speak with him about his salvation. He had
already found out about my leaving the Lodge and was not at all
open to hearing my reasons. He was already upset when I got there
and went immediately to the attack.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
121
Quickly becoming very angry, he shouted at me, “ Don’t you ever
TH INK? Don’t you realize that Masonry is the SAM E as JESUS
CHRIST? ”
I made no reply, for he expected none, nor would he listen to me.
So, with this ultimate deception o f the Masonic philosophy ex­
pressed in a few angry words ringing in our ears, we left. I never
saw Uncle Irvin again.
In a matter o f weeks he was dead.
T
h
e
 p
a
s
t i s
 p
r o
l o
g
u
e
I returned home, heavy in heart for Uncle Irvin, and went back
to work. I had my job to do and my studies at the Bible College to
pursue. There was so much to learn, and I was hungry to learn it all.
Like my days in the Army in World War II, I was much older than
the rest o f the students. It didn’t bother me at all. As a matter o f fact,
in some ways it was an advantage, for I had seen a lot o f life and
death that they hadn't seen.
There were many o f them, for example, who were timid about
speaking before a group. For me this was not a problem. My many
years as a leader in the Lodge had provided rich experience in
public speaking. When I went regularly to minister in one o f the
nursing homes, two or three o f them would often go with me. They
would help me with the music. I helped them to overcome the fear
o f public speaking. M y Masonic years definitely paid o ff in this
way.
S
o
 m
a
n
y
 m
e
n
 l i k
e
 m
e
There were many times when I would think about all those years
I walked in darkness and wondered what I might have been able to
do had I used all that time for the Lord. I felt that, somehow, it was
not all wasted. As He promised in Romans 8: 28, God could work
it all together for good. He could convert those “ wasted” years into
something useful. If nothing else, those years in Masonry had
equipped me to reach out to other Masons with the truth, the simple
truth that can set them free.
“ There are so many men like me out there, ” I thought, “ so many
Mikes, so many Uncle Irvins, deceived and being destroyed by a
deadly deception. Some o f them might listen to me. ”

--- Sayfa 115 ---
122
A
t t h
e
 e
n
d
 o
f a
 l o
n
g
 n
i g
h
t
Very early one morning, as a long night was giving way to the
growing light o f a bright new day, I stood on the pier, thinking. I
looked back over all those years that seemed to have been wasted
and tried to look into the years o f my life that still lay ahead. I
thought o f how far I had traveled, searching for truth, seeking light,
only to be led ever more deeply into the darkness by men who
meant to do right. I thought o f mother— looking so helpless as she
sent me up the street and out o f her life, with nothing to give me but
her pitiful legacy o f advice to try to be like Uncle Irvin.
I thought o f all the men to whom I had passed on that deadly
inheritance; and I thought o f the long suffering o f God as He had
pursued me through the years with His love.
“ Maybe, ” I thought, “just maybe all this was preparation for
serving Him. Maybe, with His Spirit to guide and strengthen me,
I can lead some o f those men out o f the deadly deception o f
Masonry and into the truth and light o f Jesus. ”
A ship was underway outbound, growing smaller as it followed
the channel lights toward the open sea. Seagulls wheeled and
circled overhead, squawking and seeking.
“ Maybe that could be His plan, ” I thought “ perhaps the Lord
could use me to help them find their way. Maybe I can lead some
o f those empty, victimized men out o f the pagan darkness o f the
Lodge and into the Light! ”
With hope rising in my heart, with answers beginning to take
shape in my understanding, and with a vision finding form in my
spirit, I turned back toward the office. There was work to do.
“ I am the Light o f the World: He that followeth me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light o f life. ”
Jesus of Nazareth John 8: 12
F o o t n o t e s
The Tiler is the officer in a Lodge responsible fo r keeping all “profane persons”
(non-Masons) from entering the Lodge Hall. He is usually armed with a sword and
guards the door during meetings.
A “dem it" is the Masonic form fo r withdrawal (becoming inactive) from the
Lodge.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
Epilogue:
In the years
that followed
Jim and Bonnie attended classes at the Bible college together and
Jim continued his work with the Port Authority. Not long after
leaving the Lodge, Jim suffered the first of two detached retinas.
Laser surgery to restore his vision did so, but left him with
sufficient visual handicap to eventually force his retirement after
a bad fall on the job did additional, permanent damage to one o f his
eyes.
Tw o years after being born again, Mike began to have increasing
pain and limitation in his back where he had been injured fighting
the fire in New York so many years before. He also began to suffer
a dramatic weight loss, and his once-powerful body became
steadily weaker.
He was found to have cancer o f the spine and died in the hospital
where Jim had had his eye surgeries. During his last hospitaliza­
tion, one o f his old girlfriends came to see him. She asked Jim
where the nearest Catholic church was, and said she would like to
go there to light a candle for Mike.
Jim said, “ He doesn't need a candle lit for him. Mike has Jesus
in his heart now and his sins are all washed away. ”
Wearily, but gladly, Mike said, “ Yes, that is true. "
123

--- Sayfa 117 ---
124
It was the last time Jim saw him alive. In less than two days Mike
was dead.
Two years after retiring from the Port Authority, Jim graduated
from Bible college. Since graduation he has preached, written
many tracts and pamphlets and recorded many teaching tapes. He
is dedicating the rest o f his life to reaching other Masons with the
simple good news o f Jesus. He sends his teaching tapes, tracts and
books all over the USA and to foreign countries. He carries on a
steady correspondence with all who contact him for information.
He and Bonnie still make their home in Florida, traveling with the
message o f truth and freedom as doors o f ministry open.
Jim may be reached by writing to: Rev. James D. Shaw, P. O. Box
884, Silver Springs. FL 32688
— Tom McKenney

--- Sayfa 118 ---
A personal
word from
Jim
As this true story is closed, I would be greatly remiss if I did not
make it clear that in my pre-Christian life I truly loved Freema­
sonry. I loved the men with whom I was associated in the Lodge
and the men with whom I worked so hard in the degrees and bodies
o f the Scottish Rite. Most o f all, I was so very sure that I was doing
what was right and pleasing in the sight o f the Great Architect of
the Universe.
Never in all my years o f dedicated service to Masonry did anyone
in the Lodge witness to me about the love and saving grace o f Jesus.
The Lodge attended a church once each year as a group. Each time
the pastor (who was himself a Mason) would introduce us to the
congregation and then exalt the Craft, telling them about all our
wonderful works. W e usually left the church thinking o f how
wonderful we were and feeling sorry for all those in the church who
were not Masons, participating in all our good deeds.
After having been witnessed to by my ophthalmologist for some
time I read those simple, wonderful words of Jesus, “ Verily, verily,
I say unto you, he that believeth on me hath everlasting life. ” These
words, so short and so sweet, went right through my heart. I looked
in the Bible for more and I found blessed assurance everywhere I
looked. Jesus the Christ, the Son o f God, really loved me. That truth
set me free. I received the One who loved me as a real Brother! He
will do the same for you.
— Jim Shaw
125

--- Sayfa 119 ---
APPENDIX A:
Masonic doctrine
versus
Christian doctrine
The following is a brief comparison of the doctrines and practices of Freemasonry
with the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith and its foundational source, the
Bible.
Masonic doctrines summarized here are. in every case, based upon the consensus
of the most revered and widely accepted Masonic philosophers, writers and source-
books. Any knowledgeable Mason will know at a glance that this is true. He has taken
oaths to lie if necessary in order to conceal such things, and so will probably deny
some things, and try to justify others. But the Masonic writers, and common practices
in the Lodge, will verify it all.
Although most Masons have never read some of the sourcebooks cited, and have
been deliberately deceived as to some of the facts in them, they could read them if they
would. All these Masonic sourcebooks are in the libraries of most local Lodges and
the libraries of all the Grand Lodges of the states. In addition, they can be purchased
from Masonic publishing companies or in bookstores. But most Masons have never
read them.
Many, many more similar references could be cited in addition to the ones included
here but these will suffice Capitalization and other means of emphasis are as the
Masonic originals; nothing has been added or changed
1.  JESUS CHRIST
a.  MASONIC DOCTRINE
Jesus was just a man He was one of the “exemplars." one of the great men of the
126

--- Sayfa 120 ---
127
past, but not divine and certainly not the only means of redemption of lost mankind.
He was on a level with other great men of the past like Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras and
Mohammed. His lifeand legend were no different from that of Krishna, the Hindu god.
He is “the son of Joseph, " not the Son of God.
(1) “Nor can he (the Christian Mason) object if others see (in Jesus) only the Logos of Plato,
and the Word or Uttered Thought or first Emanation of Light, or the Perfect Reason of the
Great. Silent Supreme. Uncreated Deity, believed in and adored by a ll. ' (Albert Pike,
“Morals and Dogma, " 26th Degree, p 524)
(2) “And the Divine Wise Intellect sent teachers unto men.. Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham,
and Moses the son of Imram, and the Prophets, and Pythagoras, and Plato, and Yesus
the son of Joseph, the Lord, the Messiah, and his Apostles, and after these Mohammed
the son of Abdulla, with his law. which is the law of Islam, and the disciples of truth
followed the law of Islam. " (Albert Pike, “Morals and Dogma, " 25th Degree, p. 34)
(3) “In his private petitions a man may petition God or Jehovah. Allah or Buddha.
Mohammed or Jesus; he may call upon the God of Israel or the First Great Cause. In the
Masonic Lodge he hears petition to the Great Architect of the Universe, finding his own
deity under that name. A hundred paths may wind upward around a mountain; at the top
they m eet" (Carl H Claudy, “Introduction to Freemasonry, ’ p 38
(4) “It has been found that every act in the drama of the life of Jesus, and every quality
assigned to Christ, is to be found in the life of Krishna" (Sun god of India) (J. D. Buck,
“M ystic Masonry, "p p 119, 138)
(5) “We meet this day to commemorate the death (of Jesus), not as inspired or divine, for
this is not tor us to decide, ' (Maundy Thursday Ritual, Chapter of Rose Croix)
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
Jesus Christ is divine, eternal and the second Person of the Godhead. When He was
living on earth as a man, the only begotten Son of the Father, He was God incarnate,
truly God and truly man. He was and is the only means of redemption of fallen
mankind. Anyone who denies or rejects Him or His preeminent position as sole
Redeemer also denies and separates himself from God the Father.
(1) “In the beginning was the Word (Jesus) and the Word was with God. and the Word was
God. The same was in the beginning with God. A ll things were made by Him; and without
Him was not anything made that was made. In Him was life; and the life was the ligh t of
men. " (John 1: 1-4)
(2) “Jesus said unto them. Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, la m ’. "(John
8: 58)
(3) “And now, 0 Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I (Jesus)
had with thee before the world w as" (John 175)
(4) “Jesus saith unto him, “I am the way. the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the
Father, but by m e'. " (John 14: 6)
(5) “Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name (but Jesus) under

--- Sayfa 121 ---
128
A p p en d ices
Heaven given among men. whereby ye must be saved" (Acts 412)
(6) "He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life. ’ (1 John
512)
(7 ) “Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth
the Father and the Son Whosoever denieth the Son. the same hath not the Father ’ (1 John
2 2 2 . 23)
(8) “For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. "
(I Tim 2: 5)
(9) “I and my Father are one. " (John 1030)
(1 0 ) "... he that hath seen me hath seen the Father. . " (John 149)
2.  THE BIBLE
a.  MASONIC DOCTRINE
The Bible of the Christian is merely one of the “holy books" of man, no better than
the Koran, the Hindu scriptures or the books of the Chinese and Greek philosophers
It is not to be taken literally, for its true meaning is esoteric (hidden from al I but a small
number of “enlightened, " elite leaders); the literal, obvious meaning is only for the
ignorant masses It is right to remove references to Jesus in passages used in the
ritual Masonry, contrary to popular belief, is NOT based upon the Bible. Masonry is
actually based on the Kabala (Cabala), a medieval book of magic and mysticism.
(1) “Masonically, the Book of the Law is that sacred book which is believed by the Mason
of any particular religion to contain the revealed w ill of God., thus to the Christian Mason
(it is) the Old and New Testament; to the Jew the Old Testament, to the Musselman (Mus­
lim), the Koran; to the Brahman the Vedas; and to the parsee the Zendavesta." ("Masonry
Defined, ” a compilation of the writings of Albert Pike and Albert Mackey, pp 78. 79)
(2) “Masonry makes no profession of Christianity but looks forward to the time when the
labor of our ancient brethren shall be symbolized by the erection of a spiritual temple.
in which there shall be but one altar and one worship; one common altar of Masonry on
which the Veda, Shastra, Sade, Zend-Avesta, Koran and Holy Bible shall lie and at
whose shrine the Hindoo, the Persian, the Assyrian, the Chaldean, the Egyptian, the
Chinese, the Mohammedan, the Jew and the Christian may kneel.. " ( “The Kentucky
Monitor. ’ Fellowcraft Degree, p 95)
(3) "What is Truth to the philosopher, would not be truth, nor have the effect of truth, to the
peasant. The religion of many must necessarily be more incorrect than that of the refined
and reflective few The truest religion would, in many points, not be comprehended by
the ignorant
The doctrines of the Bible are often not clothed in the language of strict
truth, but in that which was fittest to convey to a rude and ignorant people, the doctrine. ”
(Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, ' 14th Degree, p 224)
(4 ) “... the literal meaning (of the Bible) is for the vulgar only. "(Albert Pike, "Digest of Morals

--- Sayfa 122 ---
129
and Dogma, " p 166)
(5) "To a ll this (error of stupidity) the absurd reading of the established Church, taking
literally thefigurative. allegorical, and m ythical language of a collection of Oriental books
of different ages, directly and inevitably le d " (Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, ’ 30th
Degree, p 818)
(6) "The Jews, the Chinese, the Turks, each reject either the New Testament, or the Old, or
both, and yet we see no good reason why they should not be made Masons. In fact Blue
Lodge Masonry has nothing whatever to do with the Bible It is not founded on the Bible,
if it was it would not be Masonry; it would be something else. " ("Chase’s Digest of
Masonic Law. ’ pp 207-209)
(7) "Beautiful around stretches off every way the Universe, the Great Bible of God Material
nature is its Old Testament... and Human Nature is the New Testament from the Infinite
God, ’ (Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, ' 28th Degree, p. 715)
(8) "Masonry is a search after Light That search leads us back, as you see, to the Kabalah.
In that ancient and little understood (source-book) the Initiate w ill find the source of many
doctrines, and (he) may in time come to understand the Hermetic philosophers, the
Alchemists, a ll the Antipapal Thinkers of the Middle Ages, and Emanuel Swedenborg'
(Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, " 28th Degree, p 741)
(9) "All truly dogmatic religions have issued from the Kabalah and return to it; everything
scientific and grand in the religious dreams of the Illuminati, Jacob Boeheme, Sweden­
borg, Saint Martin, and others is borrowed from the Kabalah a ll Masonic associations
owe to it their secrets and their symbols. ’ (Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, ’ 28th
Degree, p. 744)
(10) The removal of the name of Jesus and references to Him in Bible verses used in the ritual
a re "slight but necessary m odifications. " (Albert M ackey, "Masonic Ritualist, "p 272)
b.  CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
The Bible is the only written revelation of, and from, the only true God. The Bible,
as contained in the Old and New Testaments, is the Word of God, inspired and pre­
served by Him, and is the only val id rule of faith and practice for His people, the church.
No part shall be added to, or taken from the Bible as delivered to us in the Old and New
Testaments.
(1) "If they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. *
(lsa. 8: 20)
(2) "All Scripture is given by inspiration of G od" (II Tim 3 16)
(3 ) "The Words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven
times Thou shalt keep them. 0 Lord, thou Shalt preserve them from this generation
forever "(Ps 126, 7)
(4 ) "... whose hope is in the Lord his God. which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and a ll
that therein is: which keepeth truth forever. " (Ps. 1465, 6)
(5) "Every word of God is pure. He is a shield unto them that put their trust in Him Add thou

--- Sayfa 123 ---
130
iC C S
not unto His words, lest He reprove thee, and thou be found a lia r " (Prov 3 0 5 , 6)
(6) ‘Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass aw ay" (Matt 24 35)
(7) 1Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God. which
liveth andabideth forever. But the word of the Lord endureth forever. And this is the word
which by the gospel is preached unto y o u " (I Pet 1 2 3. 25)
(8) "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we declared unto you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his
majesty:. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpre­
tation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the w ill of man but holy men of God spake
as they were moved by the Holy G host" (II Peter 116-21)
(9) "Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you. neither shall ye dim inish aught
from it.. "(D eut 4 2 )
(10) "... If any man shall add unto these things. God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book: And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy. God shall take away his part out of the book of life... ’ (Rev 2218. 19)
3.  GOD
a.  MASONIC DOCTRINE
God is, basically, whatever we perceive Him to be; our idea or concept of God
becomes our God Usually referred to with the vague and general term, ‘ Deity, ’ the
god of Masonry can be the one of our choosing, spoken of generically as ’The Great
Architect of the Universe. " However, those who pursue the higher studies in Masonry
learn that God is the force of nature, specifically the Sun with its life-giving powers
To the “advanced, enlightened ones, " the adepts at the top, this nature worship is
understood as the worship of the generative principles (i. e. the sex organs), particu­
larly the phallus. Human Nature is also worshipped by some as "Deity, " as are
Knowledge and Reason. Since Masonry is a revival of the ancient pagan mystery
religions, its god can also be said to be Nature, with its fertility (sex) gods and
godesses representing the Sun and Moon (in Egypt, Osiris and Isis)
(1) “ . Since every man's conception of God must be proportioned to his mental cultivation,
and intellectual powers, and moral excellence God is. as man conceives Him. the
reflected image of man him self ’ (Albert Pike, “Morals and Dogma. " 14th Degree, p 223)
(2) “... every religion and every conception of God is idolatrous, in so far as it is imperfect,
and as it substitutes a feeble and temporary idea of that Undiscoverable Being who can
be known only in part, and who can therefore be honored, even by the most enlightened
among His worshippers, only in proportion to their lim ited powers of understanding and
imagining to themselves ’ (Albert Pike. "Morals and Dogma, ’ 25th Degree, p. 516)
(3) "The only personal God Freemasonry accepts is humanity in toto Humanity therefore
is the only personal God that there is ' (J D Buck "Mystic Masonry, "p 216)

--- Sayfa 124 ---
131
(4) “Phallus a representation of the virile member (male sex organ) which was venerated
as a religious sym bol very universally by the ancients It was one of the modifications
of Sun-worship, and was a symbol of the fecundating (impregnating) power of the
luminaries The Masonic point within a circle (important Masonic symbol) is undoubt­
edly of phallic origin " (Albert Mackey. ‘Symbolism of Freemasonry. " p 352)
(5) “These two divinities (the Sun and the Moon. Osiris and Isis, etc) were commonly sym­
bolized by the generative parts of man and woman, to which in remote ages no idea of
indecency was attached; the Phallus (penis) and Cleis (vagina), emblems of generation
and production, and which, as such, appeared in the Mysteries (the ancient religions of
which Masonry is a revival) The Indian Lingam was the union of both, as were the boat
and mast and the point within the circle (important Masonic symbols). ’ (Albert Pike,
“Morals and Dogma, " 24th Degree, p 401)
(6) "Masonry, successor to the Mysteries (the pagan religions of Isis Osiris. Baal. Mythras.
Tammuz. etc), s till follows the ancient manner of teaching. " (Albert Pike, “Morals and
Dogma. ‘ Fellowcraft Degree, p 22)
(7) "Though Masonry is identical with the ancient Mysteries, it is so only in this qualified
sense that it presents but an imperfect image of their brilliancy, the ruins of their
grandeur.. ’ (Albert Pike. “Morals and Dogma. ' Fellowcraft Degree p 23)
(8 ) "The Absolute is Reason Reason IS. by means of Itself It IS because IT IS If God IS.
HE IS by Reason" (Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, " 28th Degree p. 737)
(9) “This is the immutable law of Nature. the Eternal W ill of the Justice which is God "(Albert
Pike, "Morals and Dogma. ' 32nd Degree, p 847)
b.  CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
God is a Spirit, eternal, self-existent, unchanging, almighty and sovereign There
is one God who created all things, existing in three Persons: Father, Son and Holy
Spirit. God the Father is revealed in His Son, Jesus Christ, and is perfect. He is holy,
and requires holiness of His people.
(1 ) ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth' (Gen 11)
(2) “God is a Spirit and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and truth. ’ (John
44 )
(3) “Hear, O Israel the Lord our God is one Lord ’ (Deut 6 4)
(4) “Before the mountains were brought forth, or even thou hadst formed the earth and the
world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art G od" (Ps 902)
(5) “For lam the Lord, I change not, " (M ai 36 )
(6) ‘ There is none other God but one.. the Father, of whom are a ll things. ’ (1 Cor 8 4 , 6)
(7) “But the Lord is the true God, he is the everlasting God, and an everlasting k in g " (Jer
10: 10)
(8) "Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever "(P s 456)
(9) “For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word (Jesus), and the Holy
Ghost: and these three are one. ’ (I John 5 7 )
(1 0 ) ".. Ye shall be holy for I the Lord your God am holy "(Lev 192)
(11) “God said unto Moses, 7 am that lam ... ” (Ex 3 14)

--- Sayfa 125 ---
132
\ p p c rx ilc c s
4.  REDEMPTION
a . MASONIC DOCTRINE
Redemption is a matter of self-improvement, morality, and good works, including
obedience to the Mason's obligation and all higher Masonic authorities.
Faith in the atonement of Jesus has nothing to do with it; it is rather a matter of
enlightenment, step by step, which comes with initiation into the Masonic degrees
and their mysteries.
(1) “By the lambskin the Mason is reminded of that purity of life and rectitude of conduct
which are so essentially necessary to his gaining admission into the Celestial Lodge
above, where the Supreme Architect of the Universe presides. ' (Albert Mackey, ‘Ency­
clopedia of Freemasonry. ' "Apron")
(2) "... and in Thy favor, may we be received into Thine everlasting kingdom, to enjoy, in
union with the souls of our departed friends, the just reward of a pious and virtuous life
Amen. So Mote it Be. ’ ( “Texas Monitor, ’ Masonic Burial Service, p 10)
(3) "In Egypt, Greece and am ong other ancient nations. Freemasonry was one of the earliest
agencies employed to effect improvement and enlightenment of man. and make them
comprehend the true principles of morality, which initiate men into a new order of life . "
(Daniel Sickles, "Ahimon Rezon or Freemason's Guide, " p 57)
(4) The rite of induction signifies the end of a profane and vicious life, the palingenesis (new
birth) of corrupt human nature, the death of vice and a ll bad passions and the introduc­
tions to the new life of purity and virtue. "(Daniel Sickles, "Ahimon Rezon or Freemason's
Guide, " p 54)
(5) These three degrees (1st. 2nd. 3rd) thus form a perfect and harmonious whole, nor can
it be conceived that anything can be suggested more, which the soul of man requires"
(Daniel Sickles, “Ahimon Rezon or Freemason's Guide, "p 196)
(6) "If we with sui table true devotion maintain our Masonic profession, our faith w ill become
a beam of light and bring us to those blessed mansions where we shall be eternally happy
with God. the Great Architect of the Universe. " (Daniel Sickles. "Ahimon Rezon or
Freemason's Guide, ’ p 79)
(7 ) "Acacian: a term signifying a Mason who by living in strict obedience to obligations and
precepts of the fraternity is free from sin. "(A Mackey, lexico n of Freemasonry, "p 16)
(6) “When you shall have become imbued with the morality of Masonry.. when you shall
have learned to practice a ll the virtues which it inculcates, when they become fam iliar to
you as your Household God; then w ill you be prepared to receive its lofty philosophical
instruction, and to scale the heights upon whose summit Light and Truth sit enthroned
Step by step men must advance towards Perfection; and each Masonic Degree is meant
to be one of those steps" (Albert Pike, "Morals and Dogma, " 8th Degree, p 136)
(9) "The dunces who led prim itive Christianity astray, by submitting faith for science have
succeeded inshrouding in darkness the ancient discoveries of the human mind; so that
now we grope in the dark to find again the key... "(Albert Pike, “Morals and Dogma, "26th
Degree, p. 732)

--- Sayfa 126 ---
133
p
(10) "... salvation by faith and the vicarious atonement were not taught as now interpreted,
by Jesus, nor are these doctrines taught in the esoteric scriptures. They are later and
ignorant perversions of the original doctrines "(J D Buck. "Mystic Masonry, " p 57)
b.  CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
All have sinned and fallen short of the perfection God requires; none is righteous
in his own virtue and our own righteousness is as filthy rags compared with the
righteousness of God. However, Jesus, God’s only begotten Son, lived a sinless life
for us, and laid down His life a perfect sacrifice to make atonement for our sins.
By faith in Him and His provisions for us we can be made the righteousness of God
and be born of the Spirit of God into everlasting life, becoming a part of the family of
God. There is no other way to be reconciled to God and live in His presence forever.
We cannot, by our own efforts, redeem or perfect ourselves.
(1) "As it is written, There is none righteous, no. not one: ’ (Rom. 3 : 10)
(2) "For a ll have sinned and come short of the glory of God: ’ (Rom. 3: 23)
(3) "But we are a ll as an unclean thing, and a ll our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; ' (Isa.
64: 6)
(4) "For He hath made Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we m ight be made the
righteousness of God in Him ' (II Cor. 5: 21)
(5) "For ye (Christians) are a ll the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus" (Gal 3: 26)
(6) “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. " (John 3 16)
(7) "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the g ift of God:
Not of works, lest any man should boast ’ (Eph. 2: 6, 9)
(8) "Neither is there salvation in any other (than Jesus) for there is none other name under
heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved. ' (Acts 4 : 12)
(9) "And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son
He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life . " (I John
5 : 11, 12)
5.  SATAN
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
Satan, as an enemy of God and his Kingdom, as an evil power seeking to tempt,
deceive and destroy, does not exist. Mankind has merely “supposed" this. The usual
Christian perception of Satan is merely a distortion of the truth about Lucifer, the
“Light Bearer, " who is actually good and the instrument of liberty, but generally mis­
understood and maligned.
(1) “The true name of Satan, the Kabalists say, is that of Yahveh reversed, for Satan is not
a black god For the initates this is not a Person, but a Force, created for good, bu t which

--- Sayfa 127 ---
134
may serve for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free W ill (Albert Pike. “Morals and
Dogma, " Master M ason/3rd Degree p 102)
(2) “Lucifer, the Light-Bearer! Strange and mysterious name to give to the Spirit of Darkness!
Lucifer, the Son of the M orning! Is it he who bears the Light, and with a ll its splendors
intolerable blinds feeble, sensual, or selfish Souls? Doubt it not! " (Albert Pike. "Morals
and Dogma. " 19th Degree, p 321)
(3) “The conviction of a ll men that God is good led to a belief in a d e vil. " (Albert Pike,
'Morals and Dogma. " 19th Degree, p 324)
(4) “A ll antiquity solved the enigma of the existence of evil by supposing the existence of
a Principle of Evil, of demons, fallen angels.. a Satan.. " ( “Kentucky M onitor, " “The Spirit
of M asonry" p xiv)
(5) "... there is no rebellious demon of Evil, or Principle of Darkness coexistent and in eternal
controversy with God, or the Principal of Light... " (Albert Pike. 1Morals and Dogma. "
32nd Degree, p. 859)
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
Satan is a proud, rebellious angel, created by God but fallen, the father of lies,
accuser of the brethren, deceiver, tempter and ruler of the Kingdom of Darkness. He
blinds the lost to the glorious light of the gospel, and seeks to be worshipped as he
also works to steal, kill and destroy. He is the enemy we are to resist and the one whose
works Jesus came to destroy.
(1 ) "How art thou fallen, O Lucifer, son of the m orning! How art thou cut down to the ground,
which did weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I w ill ascend into heaven.
I w ill exalt my throne above the stars of God: I w ill sit also upon the mount of the
congregation, in the sides of the north: I w ill ascend above the heights of the clouds: I
w ill be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to H e ll.. ’ (Isa 1 4 : 12-15)
(2)
Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth, and I have set thee so thou wast upon the
holy mountain of God, thou hast walked up and down in the m idst of the stones of
fire Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by
reason of thy brightness I w ill cast thee to the ground... " (Ezek. 28 . 13-19)
(3) “Ye are of your father, the devil he is a liar, and the father of i t " (John 844)
(4) "And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out
with him the accuser of our brethren is cast down. '(R ev 1 2 9 . 10)
(5) “And Jesus being fu ll of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit
into the wilderness, being forty days tempted of the de vil. "(Lk 4 : 1, 2)
(6) “And if Satan cast out Satan, how shall then his kingdom stand? " (M att 12: 26)
(7) “Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil For we wrestle against the rulers of the darkness. "(Eph 6 : 11, 12)
(8) “... the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light
of the glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them. " (II Cor 44 )
(9 ) "The thief (Satan) cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy. " (John 1 0 : 10)
(10) "Resist the devil, and he w ill flee from y o u " (James 4 7)

--- Sayfa 128 ---
135
(11) ‘For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he m ight destroy the works of
the d e v il' (I John 3 8)
(12) "... Your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may
devour: ’ ( I Pet 5 : 8)
6.  SPIRITUAL LIGHT AND DARKNESS
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
All "profane" people (non-Masons), including godly, genuine Christians, are
wretched, blind and lost in complete spiritual darkness Only initiation into the
degrees and mysteries of Masonry wiII bring them out of darkness and “into the light, "
cleansing them and imparting new life.
(1) ‘In Masonry, the darkness, which envelops the m ind of the uninitiated (non-Mason) is
removed by the effulgence of Masonic Light Masons are appropriately called the 'Sons
of Light” ("Lightfoot's Manual of the Lodge, "p 175)
(2) ‘Freemasons are emphatically called 'Sons of Light' while the profane or uninitiated
(non-Masons) who have not received this knowledge... are said to be in darkness. "
(‘Masonic Dictionary, ' ‘Light, ' Consolidated Book Pub. 1963)
(3) Blindfolded ( ‘hoodwinked’)and kneeling. half naked and bound by a rope("cabletow").
the candidate for initiation into the Blue Degrees is asked, by the W orshipful Master, ‘In
your present, blind condition, what do you most desire T His reply, according to the
ritual, must be "Light' (1st Degree). ‘Further Light’ (2nd Degree) and "More Light’ (3rd
Degree) (Verbal Masonic Ritual. 1st. 2nd. 3rd Degrees)
(4) "There he (the man to be initiated) stands, without our portals, on the threshold of his
new Masonic life, in darkness, helplessness and ignorance Having been wandering
amid the errors, and covered over with the pollutions of the outer and profane world, he
comes inquiringly to our doors, seeking the new birth, and asking a withdrawal of the
veil.. ’ (Albert Mackey, ‘Manual of the Lodge, ’ p 20)
(5) ‘Applied to Masonic symbolism, it (the darkness) is intended to remind the candidate
of his ignorance, which Masonry is to enlighten, of his evil nature, which Masonry is to
purify; of the world in whose obscurity he has been wandering and from which Masonry
is to rescue him ’ (Albert Mackey, “Manual of the Lodge, ’ p 39)
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
Jesus is the Light of the World; those who follow Him shalI not be in darkness. He,
and He alone, is the source of spiritual enlightenment. If we are “in Him’ we are not in
darkness, for in Him is no darkness at all. The life that He alone gives is the light of
men.
(1)
7 am the Light of the World He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life ’ (Jn 812)

--- Sayfa 129 ---
136
2) "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should show forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his
marvelous ligh t. ' (I Pet. 2: 9)
(3) "For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the L o rd " (Eph. 5 8 )
(4 ) m This then is the message which we have heard of him (Jesus), and declare unto you.
that god is light, and in him is no darkness at a ll' (I Jn 15)
(5) "In him (Jesus) was life; and the life was the light of m en" (Jn 1. 4)
7.  PRAYER
a.  MASONIC DOCTRINE
Prayers are to be offered to “Deity, " to "The Great Architect of the Universe"
(GAOTU), and are to be "universal" in nature, so as not to offend anyone and so as to
apply to everyone. Prayer is NEVER to be made “in Jesus' name, " or “in Christ's
name"; to do so would offend a Muslim, Hindu. Buddhist, etc If a Worshipful Master
allows prayers to be made in Jesus’ name, his lodge can be closed and its charter
revoked by the Grand Lodge of his state
(1) *A ll sectarian tenets must be carefully excluded from the (Masonic) system " (Morris.
"Webb's Monitor, "p. 285)
(2) "Prayer in Masonic lodges should be of a general character, containing nothing
offensive to any class of conscientious brethren (Ibid)
(3) “The religion then, of Masonry is pure Theism on which its different members engraft
their own peculiar opinions; but they are not permitted to introduce them into the lodge. ’
(Albert Mackey. "Lexicon of Freemasonry. " Religion)
(4) *Every important undertaking in Masonry is both begun and completed with prayer The
prayers given in the hand- books of the Blue Lodge are such as a ll Masons, whatever their
religious faith, may unite in. ’ (M orris's “Dictionary, ‘ Prayer)
MOTES:
(a) It is true that in some local lodges, in sm all communities where a ll churches are
Christian, prayers are made in Jesus'name However, if this were to be reported to the
Grand Lodge of that state they would be required to stop it immediately or have their
charters revoked Jack Harris. Worshipful Master of a Baltimore, Maryland lodge was
told just this (Harris, Jack Freemasonry The Invisible Cult in Our Midst, Daniels Pub
Co 1983, pp ix. x. 121. 122)
(b) Harmon Taylor, former Grand Chaplain of the Grand Lodge of New York, says. "The only
instruction I was given as New York State Grand Chaplain, and I was given it repeatedly,
was not to end a prayer in Jesus'name ("Attention Masons'", HRT Ministries. Box 12
Newtonville. NY 12128)
(c) It is a fact, known to every Mason who cares to know, that in a ll the prayers printed in
h is monitors, handbooks and other guides to rituals there is NOT ONE which closes in
Jesus' name.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
137
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
Prayer is to be made through the Father, in the name of (through) the Son, in the
power of, and inspired by, the Holy Spirit. Only through the mediatorial office of Jesus
can we approach the throne of God.
(1) “For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus'
(I Tim 2: 5)
(2) ". whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in my (Jesus) name, he may give it to you "
(Jn 1516)
(3 ) “Giving thanks always for a ll things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. '(Eph 520)
(4) “And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do a ll in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God and the Father by him . " (Col. 3 : 17)
8 .
T R U T H
F U L N E S S
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
It is right to lie, if necessary, to protect the “secrets" of the Lodge, or to protect
another Mason by concealing his wrongdoing. It can even be “right" to deliberately
deceive sincere Masons seeking to learn the lessons and "secrets" of Masonry.
(1) “The Blue Degrees are but the portico (porch) of the Temple. Part of the symbols are dis­
played there to the initiate, but he is intentionally m isled by false interpretations. It is not
intended that he shall understand them, but it is intended that he shall imagine that he
understands them... their true explication (explanation/understanding) is reserved tor
the Adepts, the Princes of Masonry ‘ (Albert Pike, ‘Morals and Dogma. " 30th Degree,
p 819)
(2) "Furthermore do I promise and swear that a Master Mason's secrets, given to me in
charge as such, and I knowing them to be such, shall remain as secure and inviolable
in my breast as in his own, when communicated to me, murder and treason excepted;
and they left to my own election. ’ (Master Mason's /3 rd Degree Oath of Obligation)
(3) “A companion Royal Arch Mason's secrets given to me in charge as such, and I knowing
them to be such, shall remain as secure and inviolable in my breast as in his own. without
exception. ’ (Royal Arch Mason's Oath of Obligation)
(4) “ You must conceal a ll the crimes of your brother Masons and should you be
summoned as a witness against a brother Mason be always sure to shield him It may
be perjury to do this, it is true, but you're keeping your obligations ‘ (Ronayne.
“Handbook of Masonry, "p 183)
(5) “If your wife, or child, or friend, should ask you anything about your initiation— as for
instance, if your clothes were taken off, if you were blindfolded, if you had a rope around
your neck, etc, you must conceal.. hence of course, you must deliberately lie about it.
It is part of your obligation.. " (Ibid, p 74)

--- Sayfa 131 ---
138
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
We must speak the truth at all times.
(1) "Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. ’ (Ex 2016)
(2) "Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely neither lie one to another. ’ (Lev 1911)
(3) "Lie not to one another' (Col. 3 9 )
(4 ) "... a ll liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. ’ (Rev 21. 6)
9. SECRECY
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
Secrecy is the essence of Masonry, necessary for its very existence, and protected
by blood oaths of mayhem and murder.
(1 ) "Secrecy is indispensable in a Mason of whatever degree. " (Albert Pike, ‘Morals and
Dogma. " 4th Degree, p 109)
(2) "The secrecy of this institution is another and most important landmark If divested of
its secret character, it would lose its identity, and would cease to be Freemasonry death
of the Order would follow its legalized exposure. Freemasonry, as a secret association,
has lived unchanged tor centuries, as an open society it would not last for as many years"
(Albert M ackey. "Textbook of Masonic Jurisprudence. * 23rd Landmark. "Secrecy")
(3) 7 .. do hereby and hereon most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear that I w ill
always hail, ever conceal and never reveal any of the arts, parts or points of the secret arts
and mysteries of ancient Freemasonry which I have received, am about to receive, or may
hereafter be instructed in ... " (Oath of Obligation. Entered Apprentice/1st Degree, and
included in a ll subsequent degrees, always on penalty of mayhem and violent death)
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
There are no secrets; the truth of God that sets men free is for all who will hear it,
and we are to tell it to the world!
(1) "I (Jesus) spake openly to the world. I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the
temple and in secret have I said nothing' (Jn 16 20)
(2) “What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear in the ear. that preach
ye upon the housetops' (Matt 10 27)
(3) "Go ye into a ll the world, and preach the gospel to every creature" (Mk. 16 15)
(4 ) "Provide things honest in the sight of a ll men ’ (Rom 1217)
10. BLOOD OATHS
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
Blood Oaths on penalty of mayhem and violent death are administered at the end
of initiation into all Masonic degrees, binding the initiate to protect the “secrets" of

--- Sayfa 132 ---
139
the degrees These oaths of obligation (usually called just “obligation”) are consid­
ered unbreakable, and are (collectively) the thing that makes a man a Mason. In this
way, these oaths are the cornerstone of Masonry
(1) Question: "What makes you a Mason? " Answer: "My obligation, ’ (question and answer
from the Entered Apprentice/First Degree)
(2) “.. binding myself under no less a penalty than that of having my throat cut from ear to
ear. my tongue torn out by its roots, and with my body buried in the rough sands of the
sea. a cable's length from the shore, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four
hours. ' (from the oath of obligation, entered Apprentice/First Degree)
(3) “... binding m yself under no less a penalty than that of having my left breast torn open,
my heart plucked out. and given to the beasts of the field and fowls of the air as a prey. ’
(from the oath of obligation. Fellowcraft/Second Degree)
(4 ) “ . binding myself under no less a penalty than that of having my body severed in twain,
my bowels taken out and burned to ashes, the ashes scattered to the four winds of
heaven.. " (from the oath of obligation, Master Mason/Third Degree)
(5) “... In w illful violation whereof may I incur the tearful penalty of having my eyeballs
pierced to the center with a three-edged blade, my feet flayed and I be forced to walk the
hot sands upon the sterile shores of the Red Sea until the flam ing Sun shall strike me with
a livid plague, and may Allah, the god of Arab. Moslem and Mohammedan, the god of
our fathers support me to the entire fulfillm ent of the same ’ (from the oath of obligation,
Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the M ystic Shrine of Shriners'))
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
A Christian is enjoined not to take oaths at all, especially oaths of mayhem and mur­
der It is particularly offensive to God for a Christian to take such an oath, swearing
on the pagan Koran, calling upon Allah to sustain and make possible his faithfulness
to the terrible oath, confessing Allah is “the god of our fathers. " A Christian (or Jew)
is not even to speak the name of a pagan god in a way that expresses respect or honor
(1 ) "Thou Shalt not k ill (do no murder) ’ (Ex 2013)
(2) ‘But I say unto you. swear not at a ll but let your communications be. Yea Yea. Nay. Nay;
tor whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil ’ (M att 534-37)
(3) "But above a ll things, my brethren, swear not. neither by heaven, neither by the earth,
neither by any other oath but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation' (Jas 512)
(4) “ . and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy
mouth ‘ (Ex 2313)
11.  SEEKING AND FINDING
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
Masonry is a never-ending search for “light, " always promised but never quite

--- Sayfa 133 ---
140
realized.
( 1) "It is one of the most beautiful, but at the same time one of the most abstruse doctrines
of the science of Masonic symbolism that the Mason is ever to be in search of truth, but
is never to find it ‘ (Albert Mackey. 'Manual of the Lodge, 'p 93; Daniel Sickles, "Ahimon
Rezon or Freemason's Guide, " p. 169)
(2) “You have reached the mountain peak of Masonic instruction, a peak covered with mist,
which YOU in search for further light can penetrate only by your own efforts. ' (Lecture
of the 32nd Degree, final earned degree. Scottish Rite)
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
If we sincerely seek truth (light) in Jesus, who declared Himself to be truth and light,
we are promised that we will find it. Jesus is the beginning and the ending of our
search. Coming unto Him we find life, meaning and understanding, for all that we need
and desire, He provides. We are guaranteed, by God who cannot I ie, that if we call upon
Him we will not be disappointed or ashamed.
(1) 'And I say unto you... seek and ye shall find; ’ (Lk. 11: 9)
(2) “... h e that seeketh findeth; " (Lk. 1 1 : 10)
(3 ) "... him that cometh to me (Jesus) I w ill in no wise cast out. ’ (Jn. 6: 37)
(4) "For Christ is the end (fulfillm ent) of the law for righteousness to everyone that
believeth ’ (Rom. 10: 4)
(5) “... whosoever believeth on Him (Jesus) shall not be ashamed (or disappointed): (Rom.
10: 11)
12.  EXCLUSIVENESS
a. MASONIC DOCTRINE
The “light" of Freemasonry, its “secrets" and its pathway to “perfection" are only
for the elite few initiated into its knowledge and wisdom Excluded are women, Ne­
gros, the poor (who haven’t the money with which to pay), the cripples, blind and deaf
who can’t perform the recognition signs (or see and hear them), and the feeble­
minded who can't receive the teachings or be trusted to protect them. Al I such people,
including the wives, the daughters and some of the sons of Masons, are considered
“profane" (unclean, unworthy) and can never be anything else. No references are
required here for it is common knowledge and all of the above confirms and
establishes it.
b. CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE
The life, knowledge, wisdom and freedom offered by God in Jesus are for
“whosoever w ill”; anyone can come to Him and receive these priceless blessings,
free, just by asking. Everyone who asks, sincerely, receives; none is turned away and

--- Sayfa 134 ---
141
none is disappointed or ashamed. God is not willing that anyone should perish, but
wants all to come to Him and receive the life that He alone can give.
(1 ) ’The Lord is. not w illing that any should perish but that a ll should come to repentence
(II Pet 3 9 )
(2) "Come unto me a ll ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I w ill give you rest Take my
yoke upon you and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart and ye shall find rest
unto your so u ls" (Matt. 1128. 29)
(3) "And let him that is athirst come And whosoever will, let him take the water of life fre e ly"
(Rev 2217)

--- Sayfa 135 ---
142
APPENDIX B:
Masonic
symbolism
1. THE ULTIMATE DECEPTION
Masonry is, according to its own philosophers, a system of pure religion expressed
in symbols, one which cannot be understood without a knowledge of the true meaning
of them. This makes a proper understanding of those symbols terribly important. For
the Christian Mason, accepting and guarding those symbols and their “secrets" with
his physical life at stake, he must understand them to know that he is doing right.
For the many zealous Masons, trusting their obedience to their obligations to gain
them entrance into that “Celestial Lodge Above, " those for whom “the Lodge is a good
enough religion, " the correct understanding of these symbols is the key (they believe)
to their eternal destiny. They are trusting in the teachings of the Lodge concerning
these symbols with their eternal redemption, or damnation, at stake.
Herein lies the most terrible manifestation of Masonic morality, that philosophy of
the elite, which makes whatever they do “right" because it is they (the elite) who do
it. Having established and taught the sincere but deceived masses of Masons (the
Blue Lodge Masons) that everything depends upon their proper understanding of the
symbols of Masonry, they have then deliberately deceived them as to the true meaning
of those symbols. Hear the arrogant words of Albert Pike, Supreme Pontiff of
Universal Freemasonry, that preeminent Masonic authority: “The Blue Degrees are
but the court or portico (porch) of the Temple. Part of the symbols are displayed there
to the initiate, but he is intentionally mis-led by false interpretations. It is not intended
that he shall understand them; but it is intended that he shall imagine that he
understands them... their true explication (explanation and understanding) is re­

--- Sayfa 136 ---
143
served for the Adepts, the Princes of Masonry (those of the 32nd and 33rd Degrees). "
(Morals and Dogma, page 819).
2. THE FOUNDATION OF MASONIC
SYMBOLISM: PHALLIC WORSHIP
Since the true meaning of Masonic symbols (and, thus, the true meaning of
Masonry itself) is to be known only by the Prince Adepts of Masonry, we must hear
what they say concerning them. They (Albert Pike, Albert Mackey, J. D Buck, Daniel
Sickles and others) teach us that Masonry is but a revival of the Ancient Mysteries (the
mystery religions of Babylon, Egypt, Persia, Rome and Greece).
These ancient religions had two meanings, or interpretations One was the
apparent (exoteric) meaning, known to the uninitiated, ignorant masses; the other
(esoteric) meaning was the true meaning, entirely different, known only to a small,
elite group, initiated into their secrets and secret rituals of worship. These mystery
religions were forms of nature-worship, more specifically and most commonly the
worship of the Sun as source and giver of life to the Earth Since ancient times, this
worship of the Sun (and of the Moon, stars and of nature in general) has been sexual
in its outworkings and rituals. Since the Sun’s rays, penetrating the Earth and bringing
about new life, have been central to such worship, the phallus, the male “generative
principle, " has been worshipped as representing the Sun's rays In this way, the
phallus has been worshipped and the rituals climaxed with sexual union in the
mystery religions of Isis and Osiris. Tammuz, Baal, etc. 11n summary, then, since the
Ancient Mysteries (especially those of Egypt) are in fact the “Old Religion" of which
Freemasonry is a revival, the symbols of Masonry should be expected to be phallic
in true meaning. This, in very fact, is the case. A thorough treatment of this unpleasant
reality is beyond the scope of this brief summary, however, some examples, with
references to the Masonic authorities, will suffice to illustrate this astonishing fact.
a. THE SQUARE AND COMPASS
Blue Lodge Masons are taught that the Square is to remind them that they must
be “square" in their dealings with all men, i. e. to be honest. The Compass, they are
taught, is to teach them to "circumscribe their passions, " i. e to control their desires
and to be temperate. The real meaning of these "great lights, " however, is sexual. The
Square represents the female (passive) generative principle, the earth, and the baser,
sensual nature; and the Compass represents the male (active) generative principle,
the sun/heavens, and the higher, spiritual nature The Compass, arranged above the

--- Sayfa 137 ---
144
ic e *
Square, symbolizes the (male) Sun, impregnating the passive (female) Earth with its
life-producing rays. The true meanings, then are two-fold: the earthly (human)
representations are of the man and his phallus, and the woman with her receptive eteis
(vagina). The cosmic meaning is that of the active Sun (deity, the Sun-god) from
above, imparting life into the passive Earth, (deity, the earth/fertility goddess) below
and producing new life. 2
b. THE LETTER “G”
The Blue Lodge Mason is taught that the “6 ” in the basic Masonic symbol
represents God. Later on, he is told that it also represents “deity." Later stiII, he is told
that it represents “geometry. " In reality, this letter represents the “generative prin­
ciple, ” the Sun-god and, thus, the worshipped phallus, the male “generative prin­
ciple... ' In its position (along with the Square and Compass) on the east wall over the
chair (throne) of the Worshipful Master, it is the representation of the Sun, thus of the
Sun-god, Osiris. Its earthly meaning, then, is of the sacred phallus; its cosmic
meaning is of the Sun, worshipped since antiquity by pagans while facing the East.
(See c, below).
C. THE “G” AND THE “YOD”
The English letter “G” in Masonic symbolism is inseparable from, and identical
with, the Hebrew letter “YOD. " This “YOD“ is the symbol on the Scottish Rite ring.
‘YOD’ represents deity in general (its cosmic meaning), and the worshipped phallus
in particular (its earthly meaning) Albert Pike wrote that the “G“ displayed in English
speaking lodges is merely a corruption of the “YOD" (with which it should be
replaced), and that “the mysterious YOD of the Kabalah" is the “image of the Kabalistic
Phallus."3 The “Kabalah" he refers to here is a medieval book of the occult, a highly
mystical and magical interpretation of the Bible, 4 and important sourcebook for
sorcerers and magicians. 5
d.  THE POINT WITHIN A CIRCLE
The Masons of the Blue Lodge are taught that the Point within a Circle represents
the individual Mason (the Point), contained and restricted by the boundary line of his
duty (the Circle). Its real meaning, however, is that of the phallus, positioned within
the female generative principle (sex organ) in sexual union, the climactic act of Sun-
god worship. 6
Dr Albert Mackey, already quoted herein, also writes in his classic work “Symbol­
ism of Freemasonry, " page 352, "Phallus, a representation of the virile member,
which was venerated as a religious symbol... It was one of the modifications of sun

--- Sayfa 138 ---
145
worship, and was a symbol of the fecundating power of that luminary. The Masonic
point within a circle is undoubtedly of phallic origin. "
The cosmic meaning of this symbol is that of the Sun, surrounded by the Universe;
on the following page (353) he writes, “Point within a circle It is derived from Sun-
worship, and is in reality of phallic origin In his “Manual of the Lodge. " page 156,
Mackey writes, “The point within a circle is an interesting and important symbol in
Freemasonry, but it has been debased in the interpretation of it in the modern lectures
and the sooner that interpretation is forgotten by the Masonic student, the better it will
be The symbol is really a beautiful but somewhat abstruse allusion to the old Sun-
worship, and introduces us for for the first time to that modification of it, known among
the ancients as the worship of the phallus"
e. THE VERTICAL LINES
The two vertical lines touching the sides of the circle are represented to the Blue
Lodge Mason as “the Holy Saints John. " By this is meant John the Baptist and John
the Apostle In reality, the two vertical lines represent the Summer and Winter
Solstices, the shortest and longest nights of the year, respectively These nights are,
and have been since antiquity, important periods for pagan worship.
Concerning these two lines, Albert Mackey has written (“Symbolism of Freema­
sonry, ' page 352), “The lines touching the circle in the symbol of the point within a
circle are said to represent St. John the Baptist and St John the Evangelist, but they
really refer to the solstitial points. Cancer and Capricorn, in the Zodiac. "
f. THE BIBLE
The Bible, only one of the "Three Great Lights" of Masonry (along with the Square
and Compass), is represented to Blue Lodge Masons as symbolizing truth. In reality,
the Bible may be replaced with the Koran, the Book of the Law, the Hindu scriptures
or any other “holy book, " depending on the preferences of the men in the Lodge. In
most American Lodges, the members are told that all the Masonic system and its
rituals are “based on the Bible. " Such, however, is not the case. In Chase’s "Digest
of Masonic Law, " pages 207-209, it is clearly written that “Masonry has nothing
whatever to do with the Bible, " and that "it is not founded upon the Bible, for if it were
it would not be Masonry, it would be something else. "
Albert Pike, in writing on the subject of Masonry’s source-book said, “Masonry is
a search after light. That search leads us directly back, as you see, to the Kabalah. ”
(Morals and Dogma, page 741) The Kabalah, then, seems to be the actual sourcebook
of Masonry and the Bible merely (as it is spoken of in the ritual) a piece of the
“furniture" of the Lodge

--- Sayfa 139 ---
146
A p p en d ices
NOTE: For more information concerning Masonic symbols and their true mean­
ings, see McQuaig. CF., “The Masonic Report, "Answer Books and Tapes, Norcross,
GA 1976; Storms, E. M., “Should a Christian Be a Mason?, ' New Puritan Library,
Fletcher, N C 1980; and Mackey, Albert G., “Symbolism of Freemasonry, " Charles T.
Powner Co, Chicago 1975.
Footnotes
' *Phallus: a representation of the virile member (male sex organ) which was venerated as
a religious symbol very universally. by the ancients It was one of the modifications of Sun-
worship. and was a symbol of the fecundating (impregnating) power of that luminary The
Masonic point within a circle is undoubtedly of phallic origin. ' (Mackey. Albert G., “Symbol­
ism of Freemasonry. ’ pg 352)
2Pike. Albert. “Morals and Dogma. "pgs 11. 639, 850. 851.
3Pike. Albert, “Morals and Dogma, 'pgs. 5. 757, 758. 771. 772
4 “Cabala (Kabalah) is a medieval and modern system of theosophy, mysticism, and
thaumatology (magic), “Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, "pg 53
5Baskin, Wade, “The Sorcerer’s Handbook. " New York. Philosophical Library, 1974
6 “These two divinities, were commonly symbolized by the generative parts of man and
woman, the Phallus and Cleis (vagina), emblems of generation and production, and which,
as such, appeared in the Mysteries. The Indian Lingam was the union of both, as were the Boat
and Mast, and the Point within the Circle... Pike. Albert, “Morals and Dogma, "pg 401

--- Sayfa 140 ---
APPENDIX C:
Masonic
m orality
1.  UNDERLYING ATTITUDES AND ASSUMPTIONS
There is, underlying all Masonic thinking and writing, an attitude and spirit of
elitism which says, “Masonry is not for everyone, just for the select few. " At the same
time Masonry teaches it is the only true religion and that all other religions are but
corrupted and perverted forms of Masonry. This is both elitist and contradictory, in that
it leaves no hope for the non-elite to find the "true religion. " Freemasonry proudly
proclaims it makes good men better; but this makes no provision for bad men to
become good.
a. NO ROOM IN THE LODGE FOR THE BUND, CRIPPLED, POOR,
ETC.
It is significant, I think, that those whom Masonry rejects and excludes are the very
ones Jesus sought out to accept and minister to.
The Lodge excludes and rejects the blind, for they cannot see to engage in the signs
and due-guards; it rejects the crippled and maimed, for they cannot assume the body
positions necessary for the signs and due-guards The deaf are excluded because they
cannot hear the “secret" words The poor are excluded, for they cannot pay the fees
and dues The feeble-minded are rejected because they cannot learn and function in
the Lodge The emotionally ill are rejected because they cannot be trusted with the
“secrets. " Negroes and women are excluded simply because they are considered
unsuitable.
Jesus, on the other hand, proclaims that His gift of redemption is for “whosoever
w ill, " and that all may "take the water of life freely” (Rev. 22; 17). He especially reached
out to the blind, the crippled, the feeble-minded and mentally ill. the poor and the
unwanted — the very ones Masonry excludes and rejects

--- Sayfa 141 ---
148
b. EVEN WITHIN THE LODGE THE ELITE SPIRIT RULES.
Even within Masonry the spirit of elitism, the principle of the superiority of the
‘chosen few, ” prevails Those Blue Lodge Masons who lack the money cannot pursue
the higher degrees and the Shrine. And, even for those who can afford the higher
degrees and the Shrine, there are offices and positions closed to some who haven’t
the wealth, nice home or social position required
c. IT CAN BE “RIGHT” IN MASONIC MORALITY TO DECEIVE
SINCERE MASONS.
The deadly danger of this elitist attitude ( in any organization or society) is that
whatever the elite leadership decides is “right" is then right, regardless of external
moral considerations A significant case in point is the fact that the “ordinary" Masons
of the Blue Lodge are deliberately deceived by the Masonic philosophers and writers
of doctrine into believing they understand the meaning of Masonic symbols and
rituals when they do not.
The masses of “ordinary" (Blue Lodge) Masons who pay the dues and work faith­
ful ly to make the entire system possible are deliberately deceived as to the true nature
of what they are saying and doing. But this deliberate deception becomes “right" in
Masonic morality, simply because the elite leadership decides that it is right. For
documentation of this profound deception, see Appendix B. "Masonic Symbolism. "
2.  SPECIFIC EXAMPLES OF MASONIC MORALITY
So much of the morality expressed in Masonic teachings, particularly the oaths of
obligation, sound good on the surface but do not stand up under casual scrutiny. Most
Masons really believe they are binding themselves to moral standards of behavior.
But this is because they have never really thought about what they have said. Their
basic assumption that it is all good" closes their eyes to the reality Although volumes
could be written concerning the flawed morality of Masonry, for the purposes of this
brief summary a few examples wiII suffice. The following are selected examples of the
moral standards of Masonry, compared with the teachings of the Bible
a. FORNICATION AND ADULTERY
The Master Mason swears not to “violate the chastity" of the mother, wife, sister
or daughter of another Master Mason, "knowing her to be such. " This may sound
good superficially, but it permits intercourse with anyone else’s mother, wife, sister
or daughter (even Masons of the First and Second Degrees), and permits intercourse
with those of a Master Mason as long as one isn’t aware of their Masonic relationship.
It could even permit such illicit intercourse with female relatives of a Master Mason,
knowingly, if they are not chaste and, therefore, have no chastity to be violated. The

--- Sayfa 142 ---
149
Bible, on the other hand, is very clear concerning the matter. We are told to flee forni­
cation, and are forbidden to commit adultery (Ex 2014; Acts 15: 20; I Cor 6: 18 et al).
b. CHEATING, WRONGING, DEFRAUDING
The Master Mason swears not to “cheat, wrong or defraud" another Master Mason
ora Lodge of Master Masons, “I knowing them to be such. ” This may seem like lofty
morals to the casual observer, but it will not bear scrutiny. This promise permits the
cheating, wronging or defrauding of anyone not a Master Mason, or an organization
other than a Lodge of Master Masons, and even they may be cheated, wronged or
defrauded if the Mason doing it doesn’t realize who or what they are.
The Bible is likewise very clear concerning this class of behavior, stating plainly
that we must not cheat, wrong or defraud anyone at any time (Ex 2015; Lev. 19: 13,
35, Prov. 11: 1, Eph. 4. 28; et al).
c. LYING AND PERJURING
The Mason swears to keep the secrets of another Mason, protecting him even if it
requires withholding evidence of a crime In some degrees treason and murder are ex
cepted; in other, higher degrees, there are no exceptions to this promise to cover up
the truth. The obligations, if the Masonic teachings are believed, may require a Mason
to give false testimony, perjure himself or (in the case of a judge) render a false verdict
in order to protect another Mason Again, the Bible is quite clear in teaching that we
must never lie or bear false witness, and states that liars will have their part in the Lake
of Fire (Ex 2016, Prov 1 9 5 , 9. Eph. 415; Rev. 21: 8, e t al).
d. HELPING OTHERS
The Master Mason swears to assist widows, orphans and others in need of help,
so long as it is not inconvenient or sacrificial for him to do so (“so far as my abilities
permit without material injury to myself”). He also swears to go to the aid of another
Master Mason who gives the “Grand Hailing Sign of Distress, " that most extreme call
for help, given only when life is threatened However, he agrees to help that distressed
brother Master Mason only if he can do it without unduly risking his own life (“only
if there is a greater probability of saving the other's life than of losing my own”). Given
the wrong circumstances here, the Master Mason would apparently allow the other
Master Mason to die, to say nothing of one in peril who is not a Master Mason. The
most casual student of the Bible and its teachings knows that it teaches us to give to
those in need, whether or not it is easy, and that we are to consider others’ needs,
comfort, lives, etc. more important than our own (Prov. 3: 27; Matt 25: 31-46; John
15: 12, 13; Jas 2: 15 , 16; e t al).
NOTE: Fora more thorough study of Masonic morality and its flaws, see McQuaig,
C. F., ‘The Masonic Report, ” Answer Books and Tapes, Norcross, GA, 1976

--- Sayfa 143 ---
150
APPENDIX D
The Legend of
Hiram Abiff
( T
h
e
 E
g
y
p
t i a
n
 c o
n
n
e
c t i o
n
)
The heart of Freemasonry is the Blue Lodge with its three degrees. The climactic
degree (and the final one for most Masons) in the Blue Lodge is the Third, or Master
Mason Degree. The heart of the Master Mason Degree, the thing that gives it both
meaning and substance, is without any doubt the reenactment of the Legend of Hiram
Abiff. It is this central figure in the legend, this Hiram “The Widow's Son, " the “Tyrian
Architect, " this “First Grand Master" who is impersonated by every man who is
initiated as a Master Mason It is Hiram who is at the very heart of the foundation of
all of Masonry His true identity and nature become, then, matters of extreme
significance. Just who — and what — was this man, Hiram Abiff?
1 . T H E M A S O N IC T R A D IT IO N
According to the Masonic legend. Hiram Abiff was a man of Tyre, the son of a
widow, and the chief architect of the Temple built by King Solomon. He was the central
character in the building of the Temple and one of three leading characters along with
King Solomon and Hiram, King of Tyre. Hiram Abiff, Masonry teaches, was the only
one on Earth who knew the "secrets of a Master Mason. " including the most important
secret of all, the "Grand Masonic Word, " the name of God (the "ineffable name").
Since, in occult lore, knowing the name of a spirit is a key to having its power, there
was very great power in knowing this word. Knowing the other "secrets of a Master
Mason" would enable the masons/workmen working on the Temple project to go out
on their own, working as Master Masons and earning “Master Mason's wages. "
This Hiram had promised to reveal the “secrets of a Master Mason, " including the
name of God (“Grand Masonic Word"), upon completion of the Temple, and to make
the workmen Master Masons, able then to go out on their own as masters (they were,
as yet, only f ellowcraft" Masons) One day Hiram went, as was his custom, into the

--- Sayfa 144 ---
151
unfinished Holy of Holies at noon ("High Twelve") to worship and to draw up the work
plans (on his "trestleboard") for the workmen to follow the next day. The workmen
were outside the Temple for their lunch break ("... the craft were called from labor to
refreshment... ").
As Hiram was leaving the Temple he was accosted by three "ruffians, " in succes­
sion, who demanded that they be given the secrets immediately (without waiting for
the Temple to be completed). He was handled roughly by the first ruffian (Jubela). but
escaped Accosted and handled roughly by the second ruffian (Jubelo), he again
refused to divulge the secrets and again escaped. The third ruffian (Jubelum) then
accosted him and, when Hiram again refused to divulge the secrets, killed him with
a blow to the forehead with a setting maul The body was hastily concealed under some
rubbish in the Temple until midnight ("low twelve") when it was taken out to the brow
of a hill and buried. The grave was marked by a branch of Acacia (an evergreen tree
common in the Middle East), and the three ruffians attempted to escape the country.
Denied passage on a ship out of the country, they retreated into the hills to hide.
Meanwhile, back at the Temple, it was noticed that Hiram was missing and King
Solomon was notified Solomon immediately ordered a search in and about the
Temple with no success. At this point 12 "fellowcrafts" reported to the King that they
and three others (the three "ruffians“) had conspired to extort the secrets of Hi ram Abiff
but they had repented and refused to go through with the murderous plan. They
reported that it was those other three who had murdered Grand Master Hiram and
King Solomon then sent them out in groups of three to search in all directions.
After questioning the sea captain who had refused the murderers passage, three of
the searchers then followed the murderers’ path and discovered the grave with its
Acacia at the head. Digging down and recognizing the body, they reported back to
Solomon. Solomon sent them back to locate the grave, positively identify the body as
Hiram and to attempt to raise it from the grave with the grip of an Entered Apprentice.
They relocated the grave but were unable to raise the body because decomposition
had caused the flesh to leave the bone.
Reporting back to Solomon, they were told to return to the grave and attempt to raise
the body with the grip of a Fellowcraft. When this failed because the skin slipped away,
they reported back to Solomon who, himself, went to the grave and raised the body
up with the grip of a Master Mason, the “Strong Grip of a Lions Paw. " Hiram was not
only brought up out of the grave, but restored to life. The first word he spoke was the
replacement for the "Grand Masonic Word' lost at his death and that word is the one
passed down to Master Masons to this day. 1 This, then, is the Masonic legend of
Hiram Abiff, and most Blue Lodge Masons believe that it is a factual, scriptural and

--- Sayfa 145 ---
152
\p perK ilcc5
historical account. It is generally believed, in spite of the fact that the Masonic
authorities and writers of doctrine agree that it is not only a myth, unsupported by
facts, but acknowledge that it is but a retelling of the legend of Isis and Osiris.
2 . T H E B IB L E R E C O R D
Does the Bible record such a person as Hiram Abiff? Definitely not, although part
of his identity is taken from the Bible. The Scriptures record two men named Hiram
concerning the building of the Temple by King Solomon; one is Hiram, King of Tyre,
who was supportive of Solomon and who provided materials and workmen for the
project. The other Hiram, called “a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali," was a worker
in brass, not the architect of the entire Temple. He made the brass pillars, the brass
sea with its 12 oxen to support it, 10 bases of brass with brass bowls, and all the brass
lavers, shovels and basins. The Scriptures record that this Hiram, the widow's son,
completed all the work that he had come to do on the Temple. Presumably, he then
returned to his home in Tyre, safe and sound (there is no indication in the Bible of
anything to the contrary). 2 Concerning the Masonic claim that Hiram, the widow’s
son, was chief architect of the Temple, the Bible is clear in establishing that he was
no such thing. The Bible reveals that God, Himself, was the designer and architect of
the Temple, that He gave the plans in minute detail to David and that David gave them
to Solomon, 3 along with most of the materials. To claim that anyone but God was the
Chief Architect of the Temple is unfounded and, I believe, blasphemous.
3 . T H E E G Y P T IA N C O N N E C T IO N
It is the consensus of opinion among Masonic authorities, philosophers and
writers of doctrine that the legend of Hiram Abiff is merely the Masonic version of a
much older legend, that of Isis and Osiris, basis of the Egyptian Mysteries. The
following is a brief summary of that legend, and a comparison with the Masonic
legend of Hiram Abiff. This comparison is supported, beyond doubt, by the conclu­
sions of the Masonic authorities.
a. THE LEGEND OF ISIS AND OSIRIS
Osiris, both King of the Egyptians and their god, went on a journey to bless
neighboring nations with his knowledge of arts and sciences. His jealous brother,
Typhon (god of Winter) conspired to murder him, steal his kingdom and did so. Isis,
sister and wife of Osiris and his queen (as well as Egypt’s Moon- goddess) set out on
a search for the body, making inquiries of all she met.
After certain adventures, she found the body with an Acacia tree at the head of the
coffin. Returning home, she secretly buried the body, intending to give it a proper

--- Sayfa 146 ---
153
burial as soon as arrangements were made Typhon, by treachery, stole the body, cut
it up into 14 pieces and hid them in as many places. Isis then made a second search
and located all the pieces but one; the one missing and lost part was the phallus.
She made a substitute phallus, consecrated it, and it became a sacred substitute,
an object of worship.
This, in extremely abbreviated form, is the Egyptian legend of Isis and Osiris. It is,
without doubt, the basis for the Masonic legend of Hiram Abiff. To support this "Egyp­
tian connection, ” let’s consider two things: a brief comparison of key elements in both
stories and the conclusions of the Masonic authorities in Masonic source-writings.
b. A BRIEF COMPARISON OF THE LEGENDS OF HIRAM ABIFF
AND OSIRIS
The fundamental similarity between the two stories may be seen in many respects;
the following are some of the most important:
(1) Both men went to foreign lands to share their knowledge of arts and sciences.
(2) In both legends there is a precious thing possessed: Hiram has the secret word; Osiris
has the kingdom.
(3) In both legends there is a wicked conspiracy by evil men to seize the precious thing.
(4) In both legends there is a struggle and a murder of the virtuous leader
(5) Both are murdered by their brothers (Osiris by Typhon, Hiram by Jubelum, his brother
Mason).
(6) Both bodies are buried hastily, with the intention of a later, deliberate burial.
(7) Locations of the bodies are both marked by Acacia at the head.
(8) In both legends there are two separate searches for the bodies.
(9) In both legends there is a loss of something precious: in Hiram is death the secret word
is lost; in Osiris’ death the phallus is lost.
(10) In both there is a substitution for the precious thing that has been lost, concerning
Hiram it is the substitute tor the secret word; concerning Osiris it is the substitute phallus,
made by Isis.
c. CONCLUSIONS OF THE MASONIC AUTHORITIES
A few statements from the most authoritative Masonic writers wiII suffice to express
the doctrinal consensus:
(1) “The legend and traditions of Hiram Abiff form the consummation of the connecting link
between Freemasonry and the Ancient Mysteries. " (Pierson, "Traditions of Freema­
sonry, "page 159)
(2) “We readily recognize in Hiram Abiff the Osiris of the Egyptians... ’’(Pierson, page 240)
(3) 1Osiris and the Tyrian Architect (Hiram Abiff) are one and the sam e' (Sickles. Daniel,
‘Freemason's Guide, "page 236)
(4) ‘ That part of the rite (Master Mason initiation) which is connected with the legend of the
Tyrian Artist (Hiram Abiff)... should be studied as a myth and not as a fact.. outside of

--- Sayfa 147 ---
154
A p p e n d ic e s
Masonic tradition there is no proof that an event such as is related in connection with the
“Temple Builder" ever transpired and. besides, the ceremony is older by more than a
thousand years than the age of Solom on... It is thoroughly Egyptian" (Sickles, Daniel,
“The Ahiman Rezon, 'page 195)
(5) It (the Legend of Hiram Abiff) is thoroughly Egyptian, and is closely allied to the Supreme
Rite (highest degree) of the Isianic Mysteries (Mystery religion of Isis and O siris)"
(Mackey, Albert, le xico n of Freemasonry. " page 195)
CONCLUSION
Thus, it seems clear, the Hiram Abiff of Freemasonry is not an historical character
and certainly not a biblical one. Rather, he actually represents Osiris, the Egyptian
Sun-god; and the reenactment of the Legend of Hiram Abiff is actually the reenactment
of the legend of Isis and Osiris.
Thus, each sincere man who is initiated into the Third (Master Mason)
Degree of Masonry impersonates Osiris, the Sun-god of Egypt, and enters into his life
of good deeds, his death, his burial and is “raised” in his resurrection from the dead
With this understood, it is then easy to understand the statement in the Kentucky
Monitor (handbook for all Blue Lodge Masonry in the Grand Lodge of Kentucky) that,
while the Christian’s Messiah is called Jesus, the Mason’s Messiah is called Hiram
(Kentucky Monitor, “The Spirit of Masonry, " xv).
Footnotes
11t puzzles me that no one has questioned the necessity for a "substitute* for the lost Grand
Masonic Word. If it was lost at the death of Hiram because only he knew it, then why, when Hiram
was raised back to life, didn't Solomon just ask him what the real, original one was? A ll Solomon
needed to do was to say something like. "Hiram ... praise the Lord that you are no longer dead!
Now, what was that word all this fuss has been about? '
2 1 Kings 7: 13-47
3 1 Chron 17: 1-15; 22: 11-29: 9 (especially 28: 19)

--- Sayfa 148 ---
Apendix EThe 32nd degree lecture
As the Masonic candidate comes into the Lodge tor the first time he is told that he
will be brought to the light. Then he is told that he has made a beginning toward the
light but has not yet arrived. In the Second Degree light is again sought but not quite
attained He receives “additional light" but, again, it is only partial fulfillment. Then,
in the Third (Master Mason) Degree, he is supposedly brought to final fulfillment.
Again, he only receives “more light. " Even in this climactic degree of the Master
Mason where he goes through the death, burial and resurrection of Osiris the Sun-
god, he is not fully enlightened He has been given more teaching about the mysteries
and their symbols, relating to the meaning of life, death and eternity. The "true light"
of understanding and intellectual rebirth is still beyond his grasp... it is still up there
somewhere, higher up the mountain and farther out ahead.
Then he is led to believe that the light — the real enlightenment — is to be found
i n the "higher degrees" In each one of these degrees beyond the Blue Lodge the seeker
expects to finally reach and obtain the light. However, like the carrot on the stick,
always out before the reluctant donkey to draw him onward, it remains, each time,
beyond his reach. “Next time you'll reach it, " the system infers each time, but the light
still remains out of reach. Each time, in every higher degree, the seeking candidate
doesn't quite get there. But there is always the next degree “Surely, " the candidate
reasons, "... surely I will reach the light in the next degree" But he is disappointed each
time.
Then comes the final degree, that terminal earned degree, the 32nd Degree This
is the top of the mountain, final fulfillment! From the very top of the Masonic Mountain
one can surely see all things clearly. At the top of the mountain there should be pure
air, full light and nothing hid! It has been a long and expensive climb, one that not
everyone makes. At least the light will be reached there 'After all, that is the ultimate
goal — the end of the line — and you can’t go any higher than the top'

--- Sayfa 149 ---
156
ices
Alas, It is not to be. The candidate receiving the 32nd Degree is told that he has still
not reached the light. He is told that he has, indeed, reached the top of the mountain,
but that the mountaintop is covered with clouds and mists. The light is still
obscured, still “out there somewhere" beyond him.
“Sorry, brother, " the candidate is told in effect, “you will just have to press on and
find the light for yourself. " Here at the pinnacle of the earned degrees of Freemasonry
the candidate is given his final teaching, the very last revelation in his quest for the
light. Here is that lecture, verbatim, exactly as it is given to the candidates, just as Jim
Shaw gave it so many times. Let’s allow it to speak for itself.
THE LECTURE OF THE 32ND DEGREE
“You are here to learn, if you can learn, and to remember what you have been taught.
In the Scottish Rite you will be taught that our ancient ancestors who knew all the
Mysteries left enough traces so that we today with diligent labor and teaching may
renew them and bring them to light for your enlightenment. We now come to the great
symbol of Pythagoras. Our symbols have descended to us from the Aryans, and many
were invented by Pythagoras, who studied in Egypt and Babylon. In order to preserve
the great truths learned from the profane, there were invented some of our symbols
that represent the profoundest of truths descended to us from our white ancestors.
Many have been lost, lost as was the true word at the death of our Grand Master Hiram
Abiff.
“The ancient Masters invented some of these symbol s to express the result of deity.
They did not attempt to name him, but rather tried to express their reverence by
describing him as Ahura-Mazda, spirit of light. They conceived the idea that Ahura
had seven potencies or emanations, four of these they thought of as Male and three
Female. The four male potencies of Ahura by which he governed the universe were:
the divine might, the divine wisdom; the divine word; and the divine sovereignty. The
three female potencies were: productiveness; health; and vitality.
"Look to the East, my brothers... and behold the seven-pointed star, the great
symbol of this degree, with the seven colors of the rainbow. The seven colors and
seven points represent the seven potencies of Ahura.
“Observe now the great Delta of Pythagoras consisting of 36 lights arranged in
eight rows to form an equilateral triangle. The light at the apex of the Delta represents
Ahura-Mazda, source of all light. This represents the seven remaining potencies of
Ahura.
“The right angle triangle of three lights around the altar represents the famous 47th
proposition of Euclid, or the Pythagorian theorum, which is used to conceal and reveal
philosophical truths. The real significance of the cross is that of Ahura and his four

--- Sayfa 150 ---
157
male emanations, emanating from him. The four animals of the prophet Ezekiel
represent these same four male emanations: Man, the divine word; the Eagle, divine
wisdom; the Bull, divine might; and the Lion, divine sovereignty.
“Every equilateral triangle is a symbol of trinity, as are all groups of three in the
Lodge, as the Sun, the Moon, and the Worshipful Master, in the sacred and mystic
symbol AUM of the Hindus, whose origin and meaning no one here knows, the great
trinity of the Aryans was symbolized by the Adepts. Among the Hindus it symbolized
the supreme god of gods. The Brahmins, because of its awful and sacred meaning,
hesitated to pronounce it aloud, and when doing so placed a hand in front of the mouth
to deaden the sound. This triliteral name for god is composed of three Sanscrit letters.
The first letter A stands for the creator (Brahma); the second letter U for (Vishnu) the
preserver; the third letter M for (Siva) the destroyer. AUM it is, ineffable, not because
it cannot be pronounced, but because it is pronounced A-A-A-U-U-U-M-M-M. All
these things which you can learn by study, concentration, and contemplation, have
come down to us from our ancient ancestors through Zaranthustra and Pythagoras.
“You have reached the mountain peak of Masonic instruction, a peak covered by
a mist, which YOU in search for further light can penetrate only by your own efforts.
Now we hope you will study diligently the lessons of all our degrees so that there will
be nurtured within you a consuming desire to pierce the pure white light of Masonic
wisdom. And before we let you go, let me give you a hint and that is all that the greatest
Mystics ever give. The hint is in the Royal Secret, it is there that you may learn to find
that light. Yes, brothers, the hint is in the Royal Secret. The true word-Man, born of
a double nature (of what we call Good and what we call Evil; spiritual and earthly;
mortal and immortal) finds the purpose of his being ONLY WHEN THESE TWO
NATURES ARE IN PERFECT HARMONY.
“Harmony, my bretheren, Harmony, is the true word and the Royal Secret which
makes possible the empire of true Masonic Brotherhood! "
AND THAT’S IT !
Well, there it is. This absurd, disarticulated mixture of silly contradiction, pagan
blasphemy and unfulfilled promise is all they get. They are now “Princes of the Royal
Secret, " and aren't even sure what the secret is! However, the most significant thing
about it is, I believe, that the mountaintop they have finally reached is “a peak covered
with mist" which they can penetrate only by their own efforts.
Here they are at the final destination, the 32nd Degree, and they find out that it isn't
the final destination! In fact, they learn that not only must they press on and reach the
final destination on their own, they don’t even know what that destination is! After

--- Sayfa 151 ---
158
\ p p c n d ic e s
spending all this money and effort to reach “the Light, " they are told they still are not
there, that they must search farther and find it on their own And they still don’t really
know what it is!
And these victimized men, “ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, " don’t even realize that they are victims. How very sad.
A PRAYER FOR FREEDOM
The effects of involvement in such things as Freemasonry (and its affiliates such
as Demolay, Rainbow Girls and Eastern Star) can cling to us — even to the sincere
Christian — hindering, limiting and blinding. The seeds of spiritual confusion,
having been sown, can put roots down deeply into our lives, bringing ongoing
trouble. The resulting problems may be obvious and dramatic; or they may be so
subtle as to be hardly noticed.
Whatever the situation, having once been exposed to this pagan poison with its
sugar coating of "goodness, " the remedy is the same “Whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be delivered” (Joel 2 32)
God will never override our wills and force us to be free He waits, more than willing,
to liberate us when we ask Him. It seems true that if we don’t ask, we will go on
indefinitely, carrying the doubts, fears and other problems that entered our lives
through the open door of Masonic involvement. God grieves, and we suffer; yet the
problems remain until we ask Him to free us.
So why not ask? Even if you’re not sure you need to, what is there to lose? Just tell
the Lord, out loud, that you renounce all involvement in Masonry, its branches and all
other pagan, occult things, and ask Him to deliver you from all its effects and make
you truly, fully and freely His child by faith in Christ Jesus. If you mean it, He will do
it— not because you deserve it, but because you need it. God is not legalistic; He is
infinitely gracious. You have only to ask, and mean it; He will do the rest.
If you would like a model prayer to follow, just pray this prayer;
Heavenly Father, I want truly to be your child, and I want to be completely free. I
confess that Jesus is Lord, I believe you raised Him from the dead and I confess my
need of the new birth and freedom He alone can give. I want this. I renounce
Freemasonry and a ll its affiliated groups, forms and activities, with a ll the paganism
they represent. I renounce a ll things occult and pagan that have touched m y life d i­
rectly or come into m y life through my family. I renounce it all, turn from it and ask
you to forgive me, free and deliver me from a ll its consequences. I ask you to fill me
completely with your Holy S pirit and lead me in the way I should go. I count this done,
and thank you for it, in the m ighty name o f Jesus Christ m y Lord. Amen.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
Index
Adultery 46 . 5 3 . 148 149
Allah, god of Mohammed 75 . 139
Angle of a Square". (See “Tau Cross")
Apron. Masonic, 28 , 40 4 7 48
Bible, the Masonic view of, 2 7 , 3 0 , 81 . 8 2 , 8 4 , 94,
128. 129, 145
Blackball/Whiteball (voting), 3 5 . 4 1 . 44. 6 6 . 67
"Cabletow". 2 2 . 26 . 35 . 46. 4 7 . 103
Cheating, Masonic view of 38 , 41 45, 4 6 , 149
Communion, service of, 104-107
Deception, 28. 45. 137, 138. 140 142. 143, 148,
149
Demit. 113. 115. 122
Due-Guard. 2 7 . 32. 3 9 . 47
Eastern Star, Order of. 19, 72, 7 3 . 159
Entered Apprentice Degree, initiation into. 21-28
Exclusiveness. 23. 29 , 4 5 , 149. 147, 148
Five Points of Fellowship. 46 . 5 2 . 53
Fellowcraft Degree, initiation into. 35-41
Funeral. Masonic, 112-115. 132
"G, " letter, the. 4 0 . 144
God. Masonic view of. 130, 131
Grand Hailing Sign of Distress. 4 6 . 5 3 , 149
Grand Lodge (of each state). 34
Grand Masonic Word, (See "Mah-Hah-Bone")
"Great Lights of Masonry (Three)'. 2 7 . 114
Grips, "secret". 27. 32. 39 . 4 0 , 47
Hiram Abiff. 48-53. 67-69. 150-154
Honesty. Masonic. (See "Truthfulness")
"Hoodwink". 22, 27. 3 9 . 4 7 . 103
Investigating Committee. 20 . 2 1 . 2 9 , 79. 80
Jesus Christ. Masonic view of. 26. 30. 72. 76. 84.
106, 107. 126. 127. 132. 133
Jesus, name of. excluded. 24 2 6 . 30. 72. 7 6 . 106.
136. 137
Jurisdictions. Northern and Southern. 3 4 , 41
Kabala (Cabala). 128. 129. 145 146
Kissing the Bible, 26 , 3 8 . 3 9 . 103, 104
'Lesser Lights of Masonry (Three)", 27
Light, spiritual. 26. 27. 39. 4 7 . 122. 135. 136. 155-
158
Lucifer in Masonry, (See "Satan")
Lying and Perjuring. (See "Deception")
Mah-Hah-Bone (Grand Masonic Word), 46. 52, 53.
150-152
Master Mason Degree, initiation into. 44-54
Messiah. Masonic. 154
Moose Loyal Order of. 14. 1 5 . 19 20
Morality, Masonic, general. 147-149
Mystery Religions ancient. 29. 6 1 . 77. 85 . 8 6 , 89.
94 . 9 6 . 103. 131. 143-146, 156. 157
Negroes, exclusion of. 2 9 . 140, 147
Oaths of Obligation ("Obligations"). 25. 26. 32. 38.
4 5 . 46. 60 . 61. 63. 75. 76. 139
Osiris and Isis. 8 5 . 86. 102. 130, 131. 143. 144,
152-154
Passwords. "Secret". 27. 3 2 . 37 . 3 9 . 4 4 . 47
Phallic Symbolism m Masonry. 25, 29. 37 38, 143-
146. 152 154
Prayer. Masonic. 24. 26 3 0 . 71. 72. 114. 136. 137
Prince Hall (Negro) Masonry. 29
‘ Profane" Persons (Non-Masons). 38. 41. 8 1 . 122,
135
‘ Recommend’ (recommendauons), 2 0 . 29
Redemption, Masonic view of. 133. 134
Secrecy, Masonic, 23 . 2 6 . 38, 45 . 46, 62, 75 . 138
Selflessness (Self-Sacrifice), Masonic view of. 28.
4 5 . 4 6 . 149
Shrine (Ancient Arabic Order. Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine). 57, 58, 59, 73-76, 87 . 8 8 . 148
Signs, penalty. 27 . 3 9 . 47 . 61. 63
Square and Compass, 23-25, 27, 36-40, 44, 47,
143. 144
"Strong Grip of the Lion s Paw". 52, 5 4 , 151
"Tau Cross". 24 . 25. 29 . 37
Truthfulness. Masonic view of. 45. 6 7 . 137. 138,
149
Yod. 61, 6 2 . 144
York Rite/Scottish Rite Pathways. 57. 58
159