--- Sayfa 2 ---
The Messenger of God - Muhammad - An Analysis of
the Prophet's Life
M. Fethullah Gulen
Published: 2009
Tag(s): Islam Iman Quran Muhammad "Prophet Muhammad" History
"Said Nursi" Gulen Sunnah Hadith Companions Sahabah "God's Mes-
senger" "Holy Books" Torah Bible Revelations Religion
1

--- Sayfa 3 ---
About the Author
Born in Erzurum, in eastern Turkey, in 1941, M. Fethullah Gülen is an
Islamic scholar and thinker, and a prolific writer and poet. He was
trained in the religious sciences by several celebrated Muslim scholars
and spiritual masters. Gülen also studied the principles and theories of
modern social and physical sciences. Based on his exceptional skills in
learning and focused self-study, he soon surpassed his peers. In 1959,
after attaining excellent examination results, he was awarded a state
preacher’s license (in Edirne), and was promoted to a post in Izmir, Tur-
key’s third largest province, in 1966. It was here that Gülen started to
crystallize his theme and expand his audience base. In his sermons and
speeches he emphasized the pressing social issues of the times: his par-
ticular aim was to urge the younger generation to harmonize intellectual
enlightenment with wise spirituality and a caring, humane activism.
Gülen did not restrict himself to teaching in the inner cities. He
traveled around the provinces in Anatolia and lectured not only in
mosques, but also at town meetings and corner coffee houses. This en-
abled him to reach a more representative cross-section of the population
and to attract the attention of the academic community, especially the
student body. The subject matter of his speeches, whether formal or in-
formal, was not restricted explicitly to religious questions; he also talked
about education, science, Darwinism, about the economy and social
justice. It was the depth and quality of his speeches on such a wide range
of topics that most impressed the academic community, and won their
attention and respect.
Gülen retired from formal teaching duties in 1981, having inspired a
whole generation of young students. His efforts, dating from the 1960s,
especially in educational reform, have made him one of the best-known
and respected figures in Turkey. From 1988 to 1991, he gave a series of
sermons as preacher emeritus in some of the most famous mosques in
major population centers, while continuing to deliver his message in the
form of popular conferences, not only in Turkey, but also in Western
Europe.
Main Ideas
In his speeches and writings Gülen envisions a twenty-first century in
which we shall witness the birth of a spiritual dynamic that will
revitalize
long-dormant
moral
values;
an
age
of
tolerance,
2

--- Sayfa 4 ---
understanding, and international cooperation that will ultimately lead,
through intercultural dialogue and a sharing of values, to a single, in-
clusive civilization. In the field of education, he has spearheaded the es-
tablishment of many charitable organizations to work for the welfare of
the community, both within and without Turkey. He has inspired the
use of mass media, notably television, to inform the public, of matters of
pressing concern to them, individually and collectively.
Gülen believes the road to justice for all is dependent on the provision
of an adequate and appropriate universal education. Only then will there
be sufficient understanding and tolerance to secure respect for the rights
of others. To this end, he has, over the years, encouraged the social elite
and community leaders, powerful industrialists as well as small busi-
nessmen, to support quality education. With donations from these
sources, educational trusts have been able to establish many schools,
both in Turkey and abroad.
Gülen has stated that in the modern world the only way to get others
to accept your ideas is by persuasion. He describes those who resort to
force as being intellectually bankrupt; people will always demand free-
dom of choice in the way they run their affairs and in their expression of
their spiritual and religious values. Democracy, Gülen argues, in spite of
its many shortcomings, is now the only viable political system, and
people should strive to modernize and consolidate democratic institu-
tions in order to build a society where individual rights and freedoms
are respected and protected, where equal opportunity for all is more
than a dream.
Interfaith and Intercultural Activities
Since his retirement, Gülen has concentrated his efforts on establishing
a dialogue among the factions representing different ideologies, cultures,
religions and nations. In 1999, his paper “The Necessity of Interfaith Dia-
logue” was presented to the Parliament of World’s Religions in Cape
Town, December 1-8. He maintains that “dialogue is a must” and that
people, regardless of nation or political borders, have far more in com-
mon than they realize.
Given all of this, Gülen considers it both worthwhile and necessary for
a sincere dialogue to be established in order to increase mutual under-
standing. To this end, he has helped to establish the Journalists and
Writers Foundation (1994), whose activities to promote dialogue and tol-
erance among all strata of the society have been warmly welcomed by
3

--- Sayfa 5 ---
people from almost all walks of life. Again to this end, Gülen visits and
receives leading figures, not only from among the Turkish population,
but from all over the world. Pope John Paul II at the Vatican, the late
John O’Connor, Archbishop of New York, Leon Levy, former president
of The Anti-Defamation League are among many leading representatives
of world religions with whom Gülen has met to discuss dialogue and
take initiatives in this respect. In Turkey, the Vatican’s Ambassador to
Turkey, the Patriarch of the Turkish Orthodox Church, the Patriarch of
the Turkish Armenian community, the Chief Rabbi of the Turkish Jewish
community and many other leading figures in Turkey have frequently
met with him, portraying an example of how sincere dialogue can be es-
tablished between people of faith.
In his meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican (1998), Gülen
presented a proposal to take firm steps to stop the conflict in the Middle
East via collaborative work on this soil, a place where all three religions
originated. In his proposal, he also underlined the fact that science and
religion are in fact two different aspects that emanate from the same
truth: “Humankind from time to time has denied religion in the name of
science and denied science in the name of religion, arguing that the two
present conflicting views. All knowledge belongs to God and religion is
from God. How then can the two be in conflict? To this end, our joint ef-
forts directed at inter-religious dialogue can do much to improve under-
standing and tolerance among people.”
Gülen released a press declaration renouncing the September 11th ter-
rorist attacks on the USA, which he regarded as a great blow to world
peace that unfairly tarnished the credit of believers: “… terror can never
be used in the name of Islam or for the sake of any Islamic ends. A ter-
rorist cannot be a Muslim and a Muslim cannot be a terrorist. A Muslim
can only be the representative and symbol of peace, welfare, and
prosperity.”
Gülen’s efforts for worldwide peace have been echoed at conferences
and symposiums. “The Peaceful Heroes Symposium” (April 11-13, 2003)
at the University of Texas, Austin, produced a list of peacemakers over
5,000 years of human history. Gülen was mentioned among contempor-
ary heroes of peace, in a list which includes names such as Jesus,
Buddha, Mohandas Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mother Teresa.
Gülen contributes to a number of journals and magazines. He writes
the editorial page for several magazines. He writes the lead article for
The Fountain, Yeni Ümit, Sızıntı, and Yağmur, leading popular and
4

--- Sayfa 6 ---
spiritual thought magazines in Turkey. He has written more than forty
books, hundreds of articles, and recorded thousands of audio and video-
cassettes. He has delivered innumerable speeches on many social and re-
ligious issues. Some of his books—many of which have been best-sellers
in Turkey—have been made available in English translations, such as,
The Messenger of God: Muhammad - An Analysis of the Prophet’s Life,
Questions and Answers about Faith, Pearls of Wisdom, Prophet
Muhammad as Commander, The Essentials of the Islamic Faith,
Towards the Lost Paradise, Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism. A
number have also been translated into German, Russian, Albanian,
Japanese, Indonesian, and Spanish.
The educational trusts inspired by Gulen have established countless
non-profit voluntary organizations-foundations and associations- in Tur-
key and abroad which support many scholarships.
Though a well-known public figure, Gülen has always shied away from
involvement in formal politics. Gülen’s admirers include leading journal-
ists, academics, TV personalities, politicians, and Turkish and foreign
state authorities. They see in him a true innovator and unique social re-
former who practices what he preaches. They see him as a peace activist,
an intellectual, a religious scholar, a mentor, author and poet, a great
thinker and spiritual guide who has devoted his life to seeking the solu-
tions for society’s ills and spiritual needs. They see the movement he
helped to nurture as a movement dedicated to education, but an educa-
tion of the heart and soul as well as of the mind, aimed at reviving and
invigorating the whole being to achieve competence and providing
goods and services useful to others.
5

--- Sayfa 7 ---
A General Introduction
I would like to introduce the reader to the exemplary life of the blessed
Prophet Muhammad1 and his distinguished, exalted personality. The
“water of life” for the salvation of humanity should be made known to
everyone.
Prophet Muhammad is the pride of humanity. For the past 14 centur-
ies, many thinkers, philosophers, scientists, and scholars, each a radiant
star in our intellectual world, have stood behind him in respect and ad-
miration, and taken pride in belonging to his community.
It is enough to appreciate and understand his greatness that even after
so many antagonism (toward religion), we still hear the words “I bear
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of God” from minarets five
times a day. We rejoice while his name is being proclaimed from min-
arets, as do the dead and other spiritual beings. Despite concerted efforts
to corrupt our young people and lead them astray, they continue to
hasten to him, although they cannot perceive the full reality of
Muhammad.
Time has not caused us to forget the truth about him. He is so fresh in
my mind that if I mention his holy name, it is as if I am about to meet
him. Once, while on pilgrimage to his radiant city, Madina, I felt that he
was about to appear and welcome us. As time progresses, some thoughts
become obsolete, but he remains as fresh as a rosebud in our hearts. And
so whenever we hear his name mentioned from the minaret, we immedi-
ately abandon our work and, accepting his invitation, hasten to mosque.
If we had been allowed to describe him as others have been described,
if we had used the social and educational institutions, then perhaps our
young people would be following his way. Despite our shortcomings,
many pick up their “glasses” and run to fill them from this “pure
spring.” In every part of the world, including the United States, England,
France, and Germany, an Islamic revival is occurring. Muslims are sow-
ing these lands with the seeds of a happy future. Islam is everywhere
1.In any publication dealing with the Prophet Muhammad, his name or title is fol-
lowed by the phrase “upon him be peace and blessings,” to show our respect for him
and because it is a religious requirement to do so. A similar phrase is used for his
Companions and other illustrious Muslims: “May God be pleased with him (or her).”
However, as this practice might be distracting to non-Muslim readers, these phrases
do not appear in this book, on the understanding that they are assumed and that no
disrespect is intended.
6

--- Sayfa 8 ---
healthy and flourishing as it did during the Era of Happiness—the time
of Muhammad.
The same is true of predominantly Muslim lands. Those Muslims
whose devotion to Islam was largely unconscious and devoid of deep
perception or research have given way to a new generation who are con-
sciously following Muhammad in the light of science and advances in
knowledge. Those who were previously exploiting schools and uni-
versities on behalf of unbelief are now running to him. Even such well-
known people as Maurice Bucaille and Roger Garaudy have seen the
falsehood of their systems and are hastening to him.2
Muhammad as the Most Beloved of the Hearts
I wonder whether we have fully recognized the most beloved of
hearts. Even I, who have been performing five daily prayers since the
age of 5 and striving to be a servant at his door, wonder if I can recognize
him. Have we been able to enthuse love into the hearts of our recent gen-
erations by describing the ultimate source of all love and enthusiasm?
If only humanity had known Muhammad, they would have fallen in
love with him as Majnun fell in love with Layla.3 Whenever his name is
mentioned, they would tremble with joy in anticipation of entering the
ethos that surrounds him and those following his way wholeheartedly.
We can love only those whom we know and only to the extent of our
knowledge. Our enemies have tried to make us forget him, to ensure that
his name is no longer mentioned. Since he is supported by God, all
obstacles have been torn down, and the younger generation submits to
him as joyfully as one dying of thirst does upon finding water. His
mighty tenderness and compassion will embrace every “thirsty” person
who comes to him.
You must have noticed that when you come to the Friday prayers, the
congregation consists mainly of young people. Have you ever asked
why, despite the prevalence of misguidance and rebellion, young people
come to mosques and sit despite cold and other difficulties? There is
2.Maurice Bucaille is a French physician and scientist who accepted Islam about 25
years ago. Roger Garaudy is one of the ideologues of communism of our age, and a
previous general secretary of the French Communist Party. He chose Islam about 20
years ago.
3.Majnun and Layla are two legendary figures in who loved each other very deeply.
(Tr.)
7

--- Sayfa 9 ---
only one attraction: Muhammad. Whether we can grasp it or not, souls
and hearts rush to him as moths to a candle. Even those “winter flies”
who have not been so fortunate will soon turn to him. Scientists and
great thinkers will study him. Those who are currently enemies will soon
be bosom friends, and will take refuge in his warm welcome. In his time,
even his enemies admired him.
He once related a dream: “They weighed me against ten people of my com-
munity, and I outweighed them. Then they weighed me against a hundred and
then a thousand, and I outweighed them all.”4 He also related: “I was weighed
against my whole community, and I outweighed it.”5 He outweighs all people
of intellect, piety and spirituality, and faith and knowledge, for all other
beings were created because of him. It is reported that God said to him:
“But for you, I would not have created the spheres.”6
Muhmmad Describes the Meaning of Creation
The universe is a book. If Muhammad had not been created, this book
would not have been understood. To create an incomprehensible book is
a waste of time and effort. As God is beyond such things, He created
Muhammad to describe the meaning of creation to humanity. God
would be his teacher, and the Earth and firmaments would be subjected
to him. He would answer all the eternal questions: “Who and where am I?”
“Why have I been created?” “What is my ultimate destination?” and “Who is
my guide during this journey?”
Muhammad provides creation with meaning and answers such ques-
tions. If he had been fully recognized, he would have been truly loved.
Although we only know him a little, we still love him.
Let
me
narrate
an
incident
that
occurred
during
a
visit
to
Muhammad’s holy city. The atmosphere was overpowering. Something
occurred to me: I pray to God every morning, saying seven times: “O my
God, save me from Hellfire and make me enter Paradise among the com-
pany of the godly people.” There can be no believer who does not wish
to enter Paradise. However, in this environment I asked myself: “If they
were to invite you to Paradise through any of its seven gates, which
would you prefer entering into the rawdah (the area in the mosque next
to the Prophet’s tomb) or entering Paradise?” Believe me, I swear by God
4.Qadi Iyad, Shifa’ al-Sharif, 1:173.
5.400Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:76.
6.Al-Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, 2:232.
8

--- Sayfa 10 ---
that I said to myself: “This place is more appealing to me. I have had the
chance to rub my face against the soil of my master, at whose door I
prefer to be a chained slave rather than anything else in the world. I do
not want to miss this chance.”
I believe this is the desire of every believer. When I was blessed with
this great opportunity, I was with a member of the Turkish Parliament,
Mr. Arif Hikmet. He told me he had promised himself that he would roll
in the soil like a donkey when he stepped across the border and entered
the land of Madina. This great man kept his promise. When I remember
this incident, I cannot prevent my eyes from watering.
Muhammad's Message Embraces Humanity and Jinn
Since Prophet Muhammad came with a sacred Law that will never be
abrogated, a Message that embraces humanity and jinn, and has hun-
dreds of miracles excelling those of all other Prophets, he is the head of
all Prophets. Therefore, he has the core of all their miracles and their un-
animous confirmation. In other words, all other Prophets’ agreement on
the same faith and the testimony of their miracles support Muhammad’s
honesty and truthfulness. He is, at the same time, the master and leader
of all saints and scholars of purity and profound knowledge who have
attained perfection through his teaching and guidance, and through the
light of his sacred Law.
In addition, he has the core of their wonders, their unanimous affirma-
tion, and the strength of their verified conclusions. Since the way they
have followed to reach the truth was the one opened and left open by
him, all of their wonders and conclusions established through meticu-
lous research and intuition, as well as their consensus on the same faith,
support his Prophethood and truthfulness. This is why his coming was
promised by all the Prophets before him. God made a covenant with
them that they would believe in him and support him.
God took a covenant with the Prophets: “I have given you of Book and Wis-
dom; then there shall come to you a Messenger confirming what is with
you—you shall believe in him and help him.” He said: “Will you affirm this,
and take My load on you in this matter?” They answered: “We affirm it.” He
said: “Bear witness, and I shall be with you among the witnesses.” (3:81)
All of the Prophets led their lives in perfect loyalty to their promise.
When Prophet Muhammad was about to make his mi‘raj (Ascension to
the Heavens), he led the prayers before the souls of all the other
9

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Prophets.7 All of them, including Abraham, Moses, Noah, and Jesus, dis-
played their desire to become his muezzin (the one who calls to prayer).
In the Bible, Jesus repeatedly gave his disciples the glad tidings of
Muhammad’s coming. According to John (see 14:16, 26, 30; 16:7), he said:
It is better for you that I go away, because if I do not go, the helper will not
come. I have much more to tell you, but for now it would be too much for you to
bear. When, however, the spirit of the Truth, the lord of the world, who reveals
the truth about God comes, he will lead you to the truth.
I wonder if we realize how unique he was as the head of family. Do
we know how he brought up his children or grandchildren, each of
whom would have been a great leader in any succeeding century? He
dealt with his wives so successfully that there was no serious disagree-
ment among them. He is beyond all comparison as father, husband, or
human being.
He had such sublime virtues in his blessed being, such exalted qualities
in his Messengership, and such precious merits in the religion and sacred
Law that he preached, that even his bitterest enemies could find no fault
with him. Since he combines function, religion, and the most praise-
worthy virtues in his personality, he is certainly the embodiment, mas-
ter, and representative of all perfections and high, laudable virtues found
in creation.
This perfect a commander challenged the world with only a few fol-
lowers. He repelled all who opposed his teachings and was never de-
feated, although he had no mortal teachers and never attended a military
academy. He was so informed about science that he told his followers
about almost all the major events that would occur until the Last Day. It
was as if he were watching television or reading from an unseen tablet.8
Some time ago, a friend brought me a video cassette in which Keith
Moore, a Canadian pediatrician who had realized how the Qur’an de-
scribes the development of the human embryo in the womb, declared his
conversion to Islam. On the same tape, a Japanese psychologist who had
discovered that Islam explains many problems that baffle modern scient-
ists, was trying to get his tongue around the Arabic words to make the
same declaration.
7.Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan ‘an Ta’wil Ay al-Qur’an; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya
wa al Nihaya, 3:139.
8.Sahih al-Muslim, “Fitan, 22-25”; Ibn Hanbal, 1:4.
10

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Who taught all these scientific facts to Muhammad? Certainly he did
not speak on his own. Whatever he spoke was a Revelation revealed to
him by his teacher, the One Who knows everything, Who is All-Knowing
and All-Aware. As science advances, humanity will come to discover a
new aspect of his personality and will regret not having known him
earlier.
His Companions knew him and loved him more than they loved
themselves. They were prepared to sacrifice their lives to protect him.
For example, he dispatched a group of teachers to the Hudayl tribe at
their request. The Hudayli unbelievers betrayed their teachers and killed
most of them. Zayd ibn Dasina and Hubayb were handed over to the
Quraysh, then enemies of the Muslims.
When they were about to be executed, someone asked Hubayb: “Don’t
you wish that Muhammad were in your place so that you could be with
your family in Madina?” Hubayb was startled, and replied: “I would
rather be cut into pieces than wish Muhammad were in my place. I don’t
want even a thorn to hurt his blessed foot in exchange for my being re-
turned to my family.” Hubayb prayed that God would convey his wish
of peace and greetings to His Messenger, and inform him that he had re-
mained loyal to him until he died. Meanwhile, the Prophet informed his
Companions of Hubayb’s martyrdom and returned his greetings.9
Sumayra, from the Dinar tribe, hurried to the battlefield when she
learned that the Muslims had experienced a reverse in Uhud. They
showed her her father’s corpse, and those of her husband and sons, but
she ignored all of them. She just kept asking what had happened to the
Prophet. When somebody guided her to him, she threw herself to the
ground at a short distance from his feet and exclaimed: “All misfortunes
mean next to nothing to me, provided that you are alive, O Messenger of
God!”10
He was so loved that his Companions would have given their lives if it
meant that he could live forever. But, of course, he was mortal like other
created beings. The appointed hour drew near, and he had to say
farewell to his friends of 23 years. Mu‘adh ibn Jabal had been shuttling
between Madina and Yemen carrying the Prophet’s Message. On the day
he was about to leave, the Messenger of God told him: “Mu‘adh, leave
now for Yemen. When you come back, you will probably visit my
9.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 4:76.
10.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 4:54; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, 6:115.
11

--- Sayfa 13 ---
mosque and my tomb.” These words were enough to bring Mu‘adh to
the point of emotional collapse.11
Following Prophet Muhammad
The problems of our time will be solved by following the way of
Muhammad. This has been acknowledged by unbiased Western and
Eastern intellectuals. As Bernard Shaw once admitted, humanity can
solve its accumulated problems by turning to Prophet Muhammad, who
solved the most complicated problems as easily as one drinks coffee.
Humanity is waiting for the return of the Muhammadan spirit, for the
Message of Muhammad. When they turn to him to solve their problems,
they will be saved from exploitation, freed from misery, and attain true
peace and happiness. This second revival has already begun, despite the
aversion of unbelievers:
They desire to extinguish the light of God with their mouths; but God will
perfect His light, even though unbelievers are averse. He has sent His Messen-
ger with the guidance and the religion of truth, that He may uplift it above every
religion, even though the polytheists are averse. (61:8-9)
God will uplift His religion, and people will run to Prophet
Muhammad. In him, they will find peace and happiness. Humanity fi-
nally will learn to live in security through him, and it will seem as if they
are already living in Paradise despite still being in this temporary world.
This will take place despite the presence in every country of unbelievers,
wrongdoers, hypocrites, and those who ignore him. The lord of the
Prophets, whose name we proclaim from our minarets five times a day,
sooner or later will enter the hearts of all human beings. And since
Prophet Muhammad was a man of peace, humanity will attain happi-
ness through the Message he brought: Islam.
11.Ibn Hanbal, 5:235.
12

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Chapter 1
The Prophet Sent as a Mercy
The Dark Period of Ignorance
Every period of human history characterized by associating partners
with God, whether by worshipping idols, deifying individuals, or attrib-
uting creativity to nature and material causes, is wholly dark. When be-
lief in God's Unity is removed from people's hearts, their minds and
souls darken, standards change, and things and the world are judged
from false points of view. The Qur'an defines this moral, spiritual, social,
and even economic and scientific state as jahiliyya (ignorance): Or like
darkness on a deep sea obscure, covered by a wave, above which is a
wave, above which is a cloud. Layers of darkness one upon the other.
When he holds out his hand, wellnigh he cannot see it. And he for whom
God has assigned no light, for him there is no light (24:40).
I do not like describing falsehood. Besides, it is wrong to do so where
truth may be described. In the words of God: What is there, after truth,
but misguidance? (10:32). However, to clarify the subject, I will say a few
words about the pre-Islamic era, known as the Age of Jahiliyya.
Prophet Muhammad appeared at a time when people had lost their
knowledge of the true religion and had reverted to worshipping idols of
stones, earth, bread, and even cheese. As stated in the Qur'an: They were
serving, apart from God, what hurts them not, neither profits them, and
they say: "These are our intercessors with God" (10:18).
They were so degraded in thought and morals that, as reported by
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, they would cut their idols into pieces and eat
them. The only excuse offered was that they were following in the steps
of their forefathers: When it is said to them: "Follow what God has sent
down" they say: "No. We follow that wherein we found our fathers" (2:170).
They also buried their daughters alive: When any of them is given the
good tidings of a girl, his face is darkened and he chokes inwardly, as he hides
himself from the people because of the evil of the good tidings that have been
13

--- Sayfa 15 ---
given to him, whether he shall preserve her in humiliation, or trample her into
the dust (16:58–59).
Women were despised, not only in pre-Islamic Arabia but also in the
Roman and Sassanid lands. The Qur'an openly declares that men will be
questioned concerning this: When the female (infant) buried alive is ques-
tioned—for what crime was she killed? (81:8-9).
After Muhammad had declared his Prophethood, a Companion told
him what he had done with his daughter:
O Messenger of God, I had a daughter. One day I told her mother to dress her,
for I was taking her to her uncle. My poor wife knew what this meant, but could
do nothing but obey and weep. She dressed the girl, who was very happy that
she was going to see her uncle. I took her near a well, and told her to look down
into it. While she was looking into the well, I kicked her into it. While she was
rolling down, she was shouting: "Daddy, Daddy!"
As he was recounting this, the Prophet sobbed as if he had lost one of
his nearest kinsfolk. 12
Hearts had become hard. Every day a pit was dug in the desert for an
innocent girl to be buried. Human beings were more brutal and cruel
than hyenas. The powerful crushed the weak. Brutality was taken for hu-
manity, cruelty received approval, the bloodthirsty were exalted, blood-
shed was considered a virtue, and adultery and fornication were more
common than legal marriage. The family structure had been destroyed.
This dark period was followed by Islam. In addition to eradicating all
other evils, God declared in the Qur'an: Do not slay your children because of
the fear of poverty: We provide for you and for them (6:151).
12.Darimi, Sunan,"Muqaddima" 7-8.
14

--- Sayfa 16 ---
The Prophet's Life Before His Prophethood
Prophet Muhammad was brought up in God's sight and care. His father
'Abd Allah died before he was born, which meant that he had to put all
his trust in God and submit completely to Him. He visited his father's
tomb in Madina years later, cried his heart out, and on his return said: "I
wept for my father and entreated God to forgive him."
With the death of his father, God deprived him of all human support
and directed him to the realization that there is no deity but God, Who
has no partners.
His grandfather and uncle protected him to some extent, but he came
to perceive that his real guardian was God. Behind every phenomenon
and every cause and effect, he could discern the hand of the Single Creat-
or of the universe and of causes. The Oneness of God would be manifes-
ted to him in the light of Divine Unity. That is, he would be tested in this
world of wisdom, where material causes and means have a part in every
attainment, and so would have to use necessary material causes and
means and take all necessary measures to attain anything. He would
have to depend wholly on his Lord and ask Him for any help, thereby
demonstrating that only God creates the result and gives success.
As a result of his father's death, he came to be called the "Matchless
Orphan Pearl." In reference to this, God addressed him years later: Your
Lord shall give you, and you shall be satisfied. Did He not find you an orphan
and shelter you?… Did He not find you needy and suffice you? As for the
orphan, do not oppress him, and as for the beggar, scold him not (93:5-6, 8-10).
The Matchless Orphan Pearl also lost his mother, Amina, at an early
age. When she died in Abwa at age 25 or 26 on her way back from visit-
ing her husband's tomb in Madina, Muhammad was only 6 years old.
Thus, he learned the pain of having no father or mother. Indeed, he
would learn and suffer everything, for he was sent to teach everything to
humanity and to be an example in every respect.
His grandfather 'Abd al-Muttalib, a respected Makkan elder, under-
took his protection. For this reason, God saved 'Abd al-Muttalib from
misfortune. He embraced his beloved grandson, and always offered him
the seat of honor in his house. He felt that Muhammad would grow up
to save humanity. Muhammad was so noble and well-mannered that his
grandfather anticipated his Prophethood. He was not the first of his
noble forefathers to do so, however; Ka'b ibn Luayy, who some consider
15

--- Sayfa 17 ---
a Prophet, predicted that the Last Messenger would be raised from his
own progeny. He mentioned him by name:
Suddenly Prophet Muhammad will appear;
He will give tidings, and is truthful in his tidings.
'Abd al-Muttalib, whom even the great army of Abraha could not
bring to tears, wept bitterly when he took to his deathbed. When his son,
Abu Talib, asked what was wrong, he replied: "I'm weeping because I'll no
longer be able to embrace Muhammad," and then added: "I'm afraid something
might happen to my Matchless Pearl. I entrust him to you for safekeeping."
Abu Talib assumed Muhammad's protection and, in return, his son
'Ali would be blessed with being the father of Muhammad's progeny.
After Prophethood, the Messenger of God said to 'Ali: "Every other
Prophet's progeny descended from himself, but my progeny will descend from
you." 'Ali would be the father and the greatest saint until the Last Day, as
the representative of the Prophet's sainthood. This is Abu Talib's reward
for helping Muhammad.
Abu Talib protected Muhammad with great care. Historians and bio-
graphers, such as Ibn Ishaq, relate that Abu Talib took his nephew to
Syria in a trade caravan when he was 10 or 12 years old. They stopped
somewhere near Damascus and left him, as he was the youngest, to
watch over the caravan. From his nearby monastery, the Christian monk
Bahira was observing the caravan. This monk was expecting the arrival
of the Last Prophet, and so always studied people. He noticed that a
cloud followed the caravan, stopping and starting when the caravan did
so, in order that one of its members would be shaded.13 He thought:
"This is a special characteristic of the Prophets. The expected Prophet must be in
that caravan."
When the caravan stopped near his monastery, Bahira invited its
members over for a meal. Noticing the cloud still hovering over the cara-
van, he asked Abu Talib if someone had been left behind. Abu Talib
answered that they had left a young boy to watch over their things. The
monk asked them to fetch him. When Muhammad came, Bahira took
Abu Talib to one side and asked him about his relationship with the boy.
"He is my son," Abu Talib answered, but Bahira disputed this, saying: "He
can't be your son. According to our books, his father must have died before his
birth." Then he added: "Let me give you this advice. Take this boy back
13.Busiri, in his famous Qasida al-Bur'a (Eulogy of Bur'a) mentions this incident, say-
ing: "A cloud hovers over his head and protects him from the sun."
16

--- Sayfa 18 ---
immediately. The Jews are envious. If they recognize him, they'll harm him."
Abu Talib made an excuse to the other caravan members and returned to
Makka with his nephew. 14
Prophet Muhammad made a second journey when he was 25 years
old, with the trade caravan of Khadija, a respected widow he would later
marry. On the journey, he encountered Bahira once more. The monk was
very pleased with this second meeting, and told him: "You will be a Proph-
et, the Last Prophet. I wish that God would allow me to live to see you raised as
a Prophet. I would follow you, carry your shoes and protect you against your
enemies!"
Another major event of Muhammads' early life was the fijar
(sacrilegious) war that occurred during his later teens. This was the
fourth war that violated the sanctity of the sacred months (Dhu al-
Qa'dah, Dhu al-Hijjah, Muharram, and Rajab) and the sacred territory of
Makka. Its immediate cause was two men's jealousy and animosity. One
belonged to the Banu Kinanah (a confederate of the Quraysh tribe) and
the other to the Qays-'Aylan (an important clan of the Hawazin tribe).
The future Prophet, who would end all injustice and lawlessness, helped
his uncle Zubayr ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, who represented Banu Hashim in
the war, gather the arrows shot by the enemy.
Another important event was his presence at the meeting that resulted
in the hilf al-hudul (the alliance of the virtuous). This league against in-
justice was sponsored mainly by the Banu Hashim and the Banu al-Mut-
talib tribes. It was formed to ensure that foreign merchants would no
longer be deprived of their rights, as happened when the Qurayshi 'As
ibn Wa'il usurped a Yemeni merchant's goods. The Yemeni appealed to
the Qurayshi leaders for help, but they ignored him. When the Banu
Hashim, Muhammad's clan, heard of this, they decided to form the hilf
al-fudul and force the return of the merchant's money. They also took an
oath that whenever they someone in Makka, whether citizen or stranger,
suffered an injustice, they would offer their support until justice was
done. Muhammad was so impressed with its noble objectives that he
would say long after: "I attended the conclusion of an agreement at 'Abd Al-
lah ibn Jud'an's house. I would not exchange it for the best material gain. If
someone appeals to it in Islam, I would respond."
Muhammad's childhood and youth were a prelude to his Prophet-
hood. Besides his other exalted and laudable characteristics, everyone
agreed upon his truthfulness and trustworthiness. He never lied,
14.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:191.
17

--- Sayfa 19 ---
cheated, broke his word, or participated in pagan rituals (jahiliyya). He
was called "the Truthful, Trustworthy Man" even by his bitterest enemies.
People would say of him: "If you have to travel and need someone to look
after your wife, entrust her to Muhammad without hesitation, for he will not
even glance at her face. If you want to entrust your wealth for safeguarding, en-
trust it to this trustworthy, honest man, for he will never touch it. If you look for
someone who never tells a lie and never breaks his word, go directly to
Muhammad, because whatever he says is true."
Those who knew him from his childhood immediately believed in him
when he declared his Prophethood. Among them were Abu Bakr,
'Uthman, Talha, Zubayr, Abu Dharr, and Yasir. When 'Ammar told Yasir
(his father) that he believed in Muhammad the latter responded: "If
Muhammad says that God is One, it is true. He never lies."
In the early days of his Prophethood, Prophet Muhammad once
summoned the Qurayshis to the foot of Abu Qubays hill. He asked them:
"Would you believe me if I told you an enemy host was waiting behind this hill
to attack you?" Everyone answered that they would, even his uncle Abu
Lahab, who would become his bitterest enemy.15
When humanity was in dire need of someone to destroy unbelief and
breathe new life into the world, God raised Muhammad to stop all forms
of wickedness. In the words of Ahmad Shawky:
The sun of guidance was born, and the entire universe was illumined.
A smile appeared on the lips of time, and his praises were sung.
When he appeared on the horizon of Madina years later, the pure, in-
nocent children of that illumined city would sing his praises as follows:
The "full moon" rose upon us from the hills of Wada',
So it is incumbent upon us to thank God so long as
Those who pray and entreat Him continue to do so. 16
15.Sahih al-Bukhari, Tafsir, 1:111; Sahih al-Muslim, Iman, 355.
16.Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 3:241.
18

--- Sayfa 20 ---
The awaited prophet
The Torah and the Psalms
A Companion once asked God's Messenger to talk about himself. The
Messenger remarked: "I am the one for whose coming Abraham prayed and of
whom Jesus gave glad tidings."17 This alludes to the following Qur'anic
verses:
(Abraham prayed): "Our Lord, raise up in their midst a Messenger
from among them who shall recite unto them Your signs, and teach them
the Book and Wisdom, and purify them. Verily you are the All-Mighty,
the All-Wise." (2:129)
When Jesus, son of Mary, said: "O children of Israel! I am indeed a Mes-
senger of God to you, confirming that which was [revealed] before me in the
Torah, and bringing good tidings of a Messenger who shall come after me,
whose name is Ahmad [the Praised One]." (61:6)
The Messenger of God was expected. All preceding Prophets spoke of
and predicted his coming. The Qur'an (3:81) specifically states that God
made a covenant with the Prophets that they would believe in and help the Mes-
senger who would come after them and confirm the Message that they
brought.18
Although subjected to distortion and alteration, the current versions of
the Torah, the Gospel, and the Psalms still contain verses alluding to
Prophet Muhammad. The late Husayn Jisri found 114 such allusions and
quoted them in his Risala al-Hamidiya. We cite a few examples here, be-
ginning with: The Lord came from Sinai and dawned over them from Seir; He
shone forth from Mount Paran (Deuteronomy 33:2).
This refers to the Prophethood of Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, re-
spectively. Sinai is where Prophet Moses spoke to God and received the
Torah. Seir, a place in Palestine, is where Prophet Jesus received Divine
Revelation. Paran is where God manifested Himself to humanity for the
last time through His Revelation to Prophet Muhammad.
17.Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 11:384.
18.Behold, Allah took the Covenant of the Prophets, saying: "I give you a Book and
Wisdom. Then a Messenger comes to you, confirming what is with you. Believe in
him and help him. Allah asked: "Do you agree, and take this Covenant as binding?"
They replied: "We agree." He said: "Then bear witness, and I am with you among the
witnesses."
19

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Paran is a mountain range in Makka. It is mentioned in the Torah
(Genesis 21:19–21) as the desert area where Hagar was left by her hus-
band Abraham to live with her son Ishmael. The Zamzam well also is
located there. As stated in the Qur'an (14:35–37), Abraham left Hagar and
Ishmael in the valley of Makka, which was then an uninhabited place between
the mountain ranges of Paran.
It is because of such explicit predictions in the Torah that the Jews
were expecting the Last Prophet and knew that he would appear in
Makka.
The verse of Deuteronomy, according to the Arabic version published
in London in 1944, continues: He came with myriads of holy ones; in his right
hand was an axe of fire with two edges. This verse refers to the promised Proph-
et, who would have numerous Companions of the highest degree of sainthood
and would be allowed—even ordered—to fight his enemies.
The following verses also promise his coming of:
The Lord said to me [Moses]: "What they say is good. I will raise up for them
a Prophet like you among their brothers; I will put My words in his mouth, and
he will tell them everything I command him. If anyone does not listen to My
words that the Prophet speaks in My name, I will Myself call him to account."
(Deuteronomy 18:17–19)
It is clear from these verses that a Prophet like you among their broth-
ers means a Prophet from Ishmael's line, for Ishmael is the brother of
Isaac, the forefather of the Children of Israel. The only Prophet who
came after Moses and resembled him in many ways (e.g., bringing a new
law and waging war against his enemies) is Prophet Muhammad. The
Qur'an points to the same fact: We have sent to you a Messenger as a witness
over you, even as we sent to Pharaoh a Messenger (73:15).
'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr, an ascetic warned by the Prophet not to neglect
sleeping with his wife and to fast only on alternate days, is reported to
have said: "It was common knowledge to the communities of previous religions
that God would send a Prophet to humanity as a bearer of good tidings and a
warner. I personally read in the Torah these verses about him:
We have sent you, O Prophet, to humanity as a bearer of good tidings and a
warner, and as a support and refuge for the common folk. You are My servant
and Messenger. I have called you Mutawakkil [the one who puts his trust in
God]. He is not one rude, repelling and angry, and shouting in the streets. He
does not repel evil with evil; instead, he excuses and forgives. God will not make
him die before He guides through him the deviating nation to the right path by
declaring there is no deity but God." 19
20

--- Sayfa 22 ---
This report was confirmed by 'Abd Allah ibn Salam and Ka'b al-Akh-
bar, the most learned scholars of the Jewish community at the time of the
Prophet. They later converted to Islam.
We also read about Muhammad in the Psalms of David:
He will rule from sea to sea and from the river to the ends of the Earth. The
desert tribes will bow before him, and his enemies will lick the dust. The kings of
Tarsish and of distant shores will bring tribute to him; the kings of Sheba and
Seba will present gifts to him. All kings will bow down to him and all nations
will serve him, for he will deliver the needy who cry out, the afflicted who have
no one to help. He will take pity on the weak and the needy, and save the needy
from death. He will rescue them from oppression and violence, for precious is
their blood in his sight. Long may he live! May gold from Sheba be given to him.
May people ever pray for him and bless him all day long. Let corn abound
throughout the land; on the tops of the hills may it sway. May his name endure
for ever; may it continue as long as the sun. All nations will be blessed through
him, and they will call him blessed. (Psalms 72:8–17)
19.Bukhari, Buyu', 50; Ibn Hanbal, 2:174.
21

--- Sayfa 23 ---
The Gospels
More emphatically and frequently than any other Prophet, Prophet Je-
sus gave good tidings of Muhammad. In the Gospel of John, Jesus prom-
ises his arrival using several names: But I tell you the truth: It is for your
good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Paraklit will not come to you;
but if I go, I will send him to you. When he comes, he will convict the world of
guilt in regard to sin and righteousness and judgment (John, 16:7-8).
In these verses, Prophet Muhammad is referred to as the Paraklit. This
Greek word means "the Distinguisher between Truth and Falsehood." Chris-
tian interpreters have given it various meanings, such as Counselor
(Gideons International), Helper (American Bible Society), or Comforter
(the Company of the Holy Bible), and claim that it refers to the Holy
Spirit. However, they have never been able to establish whether the Holy
Spirit came down after Jesus and did what Jesus said it would do.
If, according to Christians, the Holy Spirit is Archangel Gabriel, he
came many times to Prophet Muhammad to bring Divine Revelations.
Further, Jesus mentioned and predicted the Paraklit with other names
but the same function, as seen below:
When Paraklit comes—the Spirit of truth—who comes from the Father, he
will testify about me. (John 15:26)
I have much more to say to you, more than you can now bear. But when he,
the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all truth. He will not speak on
his own; he will speak only what he hears, and he will tell you what is yet to
come. He will bring glory to me by taking what is mine and making it known to
you. (John 16:12–14)
I will not speak with you much longer, for the Prince of this world is coming.
And I posses nothing of him. (John 14:30)
Who has come after Jesus other than Prophet Muhammad, as the
Comforter who has comforted human beings against their fear of death,
worries of the future, and spiritual ailments? As the Helper, who has
helped humanity attain real peace and happiness in both worlds? As the
Prince of the world, who has ruled almost half the world for fourteen
centuries and has become the beloved of billions? As the Spirit of truth,
who has testified to Jesus, brought glory to him by declaring his Prophet-
hood against the Jews' denial and the Christians' false deification, and
restoring his religion to its pristine purity through the Book revealed to
him?
22

--- Sayfa 24 ---
What shortcomings do Western Christians attribute to Prophet
Muhammad, in contrast to Jesus and other Prophets, that, while almost
all Middle Eastern Christians believed in him and became Muslim with-
in a few decades of his death, they persist in denying him?
Mawlana Jalal al-Din al-Rumi, a great Sufi saint, expresses in the fol-
lowing stanza the good tidings of Prophet Muhammad found in the
Gospel:
In the Gospel Mustafa is mentioned with his attributes. In him is the mystery
of all the Prophets; he is the bringer of happiness. The Gospel mentions him with
his external form and features, and also with his personal virtues and Prophetic
qualities.
The Old and New Testaments, despite the questionable authenticity of
their current versions, still contain references to Prophet Muhammad.
We have quoted some of these. If, one day, the original copies or the
least altered copies of the Torah and the Gospel are discovered, they will
contain explicit references to the last Messenger. This may be deduced
from the Traditions that say Christianity will be purified of its borrowed
elements.
23

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Many Others Awaited the Prophet
Owing to the numerous predictions of his coming, eve-ryone was
waiting for Prophet Muhammad. In that dark era of human history, hu-
manity was waiting for one who would destroy unbelief and breathe
new life into the world. Judaism and Christianity, being God-revealed
religions in origin, had no more to offer. Those who had studied the old
books without prejudice, especially the monk Bahira, were waiting for
him to come.
Many Makkans also were waiting, one of the foremost being Zayd ibn
'Amr, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab's uncle. He had rejected idolatry, led a pure
life, and used to address people as follows: "There's no good in the idols
you worship. I know of a religion that will soon be taught and spread. It will be
proclaimed no later than a few years from now, but I don't know whether I'll
live long enough to witness it."
According to 'Amr ibn Rabi'a, Zayd gave a detailed description of the
expected Prophet:
I am expecting a Prophet who is about to come. He will appear among
Ishmael's descendants and 'Abd al-Muttalib's grandsons. He is of middle
height, neither too tall nor too short. His hair is neither curly nor straight.
His name is Ahmad. His birthplace is Makka. His people will force him
to leave Makka, and he will emigrate to Yathrib (Madina), where his reli-
gion will spread. I have traveled from place to place searching for
Abraham's religion. However, all the Jewish and Christian scholars I
spoke to advised me to wait for him. He is the Last Prophet; no Prophet
will come after him. I may not live long enough to see him, but I have be-
lieved in him.
At the end of his introduction, Zayd told 'Amr ibn Rabi'a: "If you live
long enough to see him, greet him for me." Years passed before Prophet
Muhammad declared his Prophethood. 'Amr ibn Rabi'a, having declared his
faith to the Prophet, explained what Zayd had told him and conveyed his greet-
ings. Muhammad returned his greetings and added: "I saw Zayd in Paradise,
trailing his robes."20
Among those seeking the truth was Waraqa ibn Nawfal, a Christian
scholar and paternal cousin of Khadija, wife of Muhammad. When the
first Revelation came to Prophet Muhammad, Khadija told Waraqa what
had happened. Waraqa replied: "Muhammad is a truthful man. What he saw
20.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 2:223.
24

--- Sayfa 26 ---
is that which occurs at the beginning of Prophethood. The being who came to
him is Gabriel, who also came to Moses and Jesus. Muhammad will be a Proph-
et. If I live long enough to witness his declaration of Prophethood, I will believe
in him and support him." 21
One of those seeking the Last Prophet was the Jew 'Abd Allah ibn
Salam. The Jews had such confidence in him that they called him "the
lord, son of a lord." His greatness equaled that of even the greatest Com-
panions, such as Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and God would consider his testi-
mony to the Qur'an equal to the testimony of a people: Say: "Have you
considered? If it be from God, and you do not believe in it, and a witness from
among the Children of Israel bears witness to its like, and believes, and you wax
proud, God guides not the people of the evildoers." (46:10)
This great Companion describes how he found the Prophet:
When God's Messenger emigrated to Madina, I went to see him, as did
everyone else. He was sitting amidst a group of people when I went in,
and saying: "Give food to others and greet them." His speech was so sweet
and his face so charming that I said to myself: "I swear by God that one
with such a face cannot lie." Without delay I declared my belief in him.22
The Jews and Christians of that time recognized God's Messenger. As
stated in the Qur'an, They recognize him as they recognize their sons (2:146).
After his conversion, 'Umar asked 'Abd Allah ibn Salam if he had recog-
nized God's Messenger. "I recognized him," Ibn Salam answered, and ad-
ded: "I may doubt my children—my wife might have deceived me; but I have no
doubt about God's Messenger being the Last Prophet."23
Although the Jews and Christians recognized him, most envied him
and, because of their prejudice and envy, did not believe:
When there came to them a Book from God confirming what was with
them—and they aforetime prayed for victory over the unbelievers—when there
came to them what they recognized, they disbelieved in it; and the curse of God
is on the unbelievers. (2:89)
After his conversion, 'Abd Allah ibn Salam said to God's Messenger:
"O Messenger of God, hide me in a corner and then summon all the Jewish
scholars in Madina to ask about me and my father. Their assessment will cer-
tainly be positive. Then let me come out to declare my conversion." God's Mes-
senger accepted this suggestion. Ibn Salam hid in a corner and, when the
21.Bukhari, Bad'u al-Wahy, 3.
22.Ibn Hanbal, 5:451.
23.Mukhtasar Tafsir Ibn al-Kathir, 1:140.
25

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Jewish scholars gathered, God's Messenger asked them what they
thought of Ibn Salam and his father. All of them answered: "They are
among our noblest and most learned people." Upon this, God's Messenger
asked again: "How would you react if he affirms me?" They responded: "It is
impossible that he will affirm you!" Ibn Salam then came out and declared
his conversion, whereupon the Jewish scholars immediately changed
their attitude and retorted: "Ibn Salam is the most wicked among us, and the
son of the most wicked."24
Prophet Muhammad was one who had been sought for centuries.
Salman al-Farisi was one of those seekers. Originally a Magian (a fire
worshipper), he had left his native Persia due to his burning desire to
find the eternal truth. Before embracing Islam, he worked for several
Christian monks, the last of whom advised Salman on his deathbed:
Son, there is nobody left to whom I can commend you. But according
to what we read in our books, the Last Prophet is about to appear. He
will come with the pure creed of Abraham and will appear in the place
to which Abraham migrated. Nevertheless, he will emigrate to another
place and settle there. There are explicit signs of his Prophethood. For ex-
ample, he will not eat of charity but will accept gifts, and the seal of
Prophethood will be between his shoulders.
Now, let Salman narrate the rest of his story: I joined a caravan head-
ing for the place mentioned by the late monk. When we arrived at Wadi
al-Qura', they sold me to a Jew as a slave. When I saw gardens of date
palms, I thought the Prophet would emigrate to this place. While I was
working there, another Jew from the Banu Qurayza bought me and took
me to Madina. I began working in his datepalm garden. There was no
news yet of God's Messenger. However, one day I was harvesting dates
when a cousin of my Jewish owner came up hurriedly. He said in great
anger: "Damn itl! The people are flocking to Quba. A man from Makka, who
claims Prophethood, has come. They think he's a real Prophet."
I began to tremble with excitement. I climbed down from the tree and
asked: "What are you talking about?" My owner saw my excitement and
slapped my face with the back of his hand, saying: "It doesn't concern you,
mind your own business!"
On the same day, as the sun set, I went to him in Quba and gave him
as alms the food I had brought with me. God's Mes-senger did not touch
it, but said to those around him: "Help yourself to this." I told myself: "This
24.Bukhari, al-Anbiya', Bab Khalq Adam, 2.
26

--- Sayfa 28 ---
is the first sign." On another occasion I gave him something as a gift. He
accepted it and ate it with his Companions. "This is the second sign," I told
myself.
Once, I attended the funeral for a deceased Companion. I came close to
God's Messenger in the cemetery. After greeting him, I stood behind him
in the hope of seeing the Seal of Prophethood. His shoulders were bare,
and the seal was just as the monk had described it. I couldn't help kissing
it in tears, after which I told him my story. He was very pleased and
wanted his Companions to hear my story. 25
People who sincerely sought him found him. Whoever seeks him will
find him, whereas those who remain obstinant and ruled by their evil-
commanding selves will drown in unbelief and hypocrisy. Mughira ibn
Shu'ba narrates:
One day I was with Abu Jahl in Makka. God's Messenger came over
and invited us to accept Islam. Abu Jahl rebuked him, saying: "If you are
doing this so that we will testify be-fore God in the other world that you per-
formed your mission of Prophethood, we will do it. Leave us then, O man, to
ourselves!" When God's Messenger left us, I asked Abu Jahl if he admitted
Muhammad's Prophethood. He said that he did, and then added: "I know
he is truly a Prophet. Nevertheless, we compete with the Hashimites in
everything. They have been boasting of providing food and water to the pilgrims.
Now if they begin to boast of having a Prophet, I won't be able to en-dure it at
all."26
This is typical of the thoughts cherished by the Abu Jahls of the past
and the present. Intelligent people who are not prejudiced and whose
willpower is not paralyzed cannot help but believe in Islam and God's
Messenger. In this respect, God says to His holy Messenger: We know well
that their talk grieves you; in truth they deny not you, but it is the signs of God
that the evildoers condemn (6:33).
How could they accuse him of lying, for he was known by everybody
as al-Amin (the truthful one)? The testimony of one of his bitterest en-
emies, 'Utba ibn Abi Rabi'a, proves that even his enemies admitted his
truthfulness.
The Qurayshi leaders met to discuss how to prevent the spread of
Islam. They decided to send 'Utba to God's Messenger. 'Utba went with
the hope of persuading him to stop. He asked: "Who is better, O
25.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:228–34.
26.Kanz al-'Ummal, 14:39-40; Ibn Kathir, 3:83.
27

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Muhammad, you or your father?" God's Messenger did not answer, prob-
ably because silence is the best answer to such an absurd question. 'Utba
continued: "If your father was better than you, he cannot have been following
the religion you are now preaching. If, by contrast, you are better than your
father, then I am ready to listen to what you have to say."
God's Messenger inquired: "Is that all you intend to say?" 'Utba said that
it was, and fell silent. Then, God's Messenger knelt and began reciting
from Sura al-Fussilat. By the time he reached: But if they turn away, then
"I warn you of a thunderbolt [as fell in times past upon the tribes] of 'Ad and
Thamud" (41:13), 'Utba was trembling as if caught by fever. He had to put
his hand on the lips of God's Messenger and said: "Please stop, for the sake
of the God in whom you believe!" 'Utba returned home bewildered.
The Qurayshi leaders were waiting for him anxiously. Fearing that
'Utba might have accepted Islam, Abu Jahl knocked at his door and,
when admitted, angered 'Utba by saying: "I heard Muhammad treated you
very generously and feasted you, and in return you believed in him. This is what
the people are saying." Angrily, "Utba replied: "You know I don't need his
feating. I am richer than all of you. But his words shook me. They weren't po-
etry, nor did they resemble those of a soothsayer. I don't know how I should re-
spond. He's a truthful person. While I was listening to his recitation, I feared
that what happened to 'Ad and Thamud might happen to us." 27
They had been expecting a Prophet for a long time. Everybody knew
al-Amin's character, and no one had ever heard him lie. They were
charmed by his personality and the Qur'an's eloquence, but yet could not
overcome their pride and arrogance, or the envy and rivalry, and pro-
claim their belief. Nor could they bring their habits and lifestyle into ac-
cord with his Message. Is this not true of all those who, knowing the
truth, persist in unbelief?
27.Ibn Kathir, 3:80-81; Ibn Hisham, 1:313.
28

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Chapter 2
Why prophets are sent
To Illuminate Humanity's Way
Today, our greatest problem is that many people do not recognize
Prophet Muhammad, and that others neglect or refuse to follow his way.
God sent Muhammad, as He sent all previous Prophets, to illuminate
our way:
God was gracious to the believers when He raised up among them a Messen-
ger from themselves who recites to them the verses (of His Book) and shows
them His signs [in their selves and in the universe], purifies them [of their sins
and deviations], and instructs them in the Book and the Wisdom. They were
evidently in manifest misguidance before. (3:164)
God sent Messengers to guide people to the truth and so they could be
purified of sin. Those who were enlightened by the Messengers found
the way to the Divine Presence and attained the highest rank of human-
ity. In the words of Ibrahim Haqqi: "God declared that He could not be con-
tained by the Heavens and Earth. He can be known and reached only through
hearts." This is why Messengers led humanity to the knowledge of God.
Those who follow this guidance are touched by Him in their inner-
most selves, whether it is called heart, soul, or conscience, for only that
can grasp God in His entirety. Minds cannot comprehend Him, and
philosophy cannot reach Him. Therefore, the Prophets purified souls so
they could be mirrors in which God might manifest Himself. Prophet
Muhammad left us the Qur'an and Sunna to show us how to live in a
way that fulfills the purpose for which the Prophets were sent.
Here, it is necessary to emphasize three points. First, Prophets were
not ordinary men; rather, they were chosen men through whom God
manifested Himself. God chose them and paid great attention to their
upbringing so that they always would seek to gain His approval. Like
his predecessors, Prophet Muhammad always pursued God's good
29

--- Sayfa 31 ---
pleasure. His last words were: "To Rafiq al-A'la (the Highest Abode)." His
wife 'A'isha gives the following account of his last moments:
I was with him during his last moments. Whenever he became ill, he
would ask me to pray for him and, expecting my prayer to be accepted
through the blessing of his auspicious hand, I held his hand and prayed.
During his last illness, I wanted to do the same and pray, when he sud-
denly withdrew his hand and said: "To Rafiq al-A'la."28
Second, the world always contains successors who devote their lives to
disseminating truth. They should seek what the Prophets sought, preach
what the Prophets preached, and strictly follow the Prophets in enjoining
good and forbidding evil.
Third, death is not total annihilation, but rather a changing of worlds
without completely breaking away from this one. Prophets' deaths are
special. In the case of martyrs, whose spiritual degree is lower than a
Prophet's, the Qur'an says: Say not of those slain in God's way: "They are
dead," they are alive but you understand not (2:154). So we cannot say that
Prophets are dead. Thus Prophet Muhammad did not die as we under-
stand this word; he only changed places and passed into another dimen-
sion or degree of life.
Those who can penetrate other dimensions with their inner faculties
experience different dimensions of time and space, see different
creatures, and look into things and events from different viewpoints. We
consider things and events according to the stream in which we are.
Those who rise high enough to see all dimensions of this stream have the
scope of their sight enlarged as they ascend higher. Thus their capacity
and judgment when considering matters is more comprehensive. Such
people might be sitting with us and, at the same time, in the presence of
God's Messenger. While praying with us, some may be leading the same
prayer in the Hereafter before the angels. There is a particular class of
saints called abdal (substitutes). When one dies, he or she is replaced im-
mediately with a new one who can see the Prophet whenever they wish.
Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, a sixteenth-century scholar, once said: "I have seen
God's Messenger 28 times while awake."
28.Bukhari, Maghazi, 78; Muslim, Salam, 50,51; Abu Dawud, Tib, 19.
30

--- Sayfa 32 ---
To Guide People to the Service of God
God declared in the Qur'an: I have not created jinn and humanity except
to serve me (51:56).
We were not created only to eat, drink, and reproduce; these are natur-
al facts of our life and natural needs. Our main purpose is to recognize
and serve God. All Prophets were sent to show us how to do this: We
never sent a Messenger before you except that We revealed to him:
"There is no god but I, so serve Me" (21:25), and: We sent forth among every
nation a Messenger, saying: "Serve God, and eschew taghut [idols and tyrants,
Satan and his followers]." Then some of them God guided and some were justly
disposed to misguidance (16:36).
God sent Prophets to guide us to His service. Their missions were the
same. However, whereas the earlier Prophets were sent to their own
people and for a set period, Prophet Muhammad was sent as a mercy to
humanity and jinn, and for all time.
According to an authentic narration, Ibn Mas'ud reports the following
incident concerning the Prophet's preaching to the jinn:
Once God's Messenger and I went somewhere. He drew a circle around me
and told me not to leave it until he returned. He left, and after a while some tu-
mult broke out on the other side. I wondered whether something had happened to
him, but as he had told me to stay put until he returned, I did so. Some time
later, God's Messenger returned and I asked him about the uproar. He replied:
"The jinn have believed and taken the oath of allegiance to me. When some of
them insisted on unbelief, fighting broke out. The uproar you heard was the
fighting. This implies that my life is about to end."29
God's Messenger used this last sentence to indicate that he had been
sent to open the way to the guidance of humanity and jinn. Once this
had been accomplished, there would be no reason for him to live, for he
would have nothing more to accomplish. This also implies that believers
should never neglect their essential duties here, and should pray, as in-
structed by God's Messenger: "O God, make me die if death is good for me; or
else, make me live long as long as living is good for me!'30
29.Tabari, Jami' al-Bayan, 24:33; Ibn Hanbal, 1:499.
30.Bukhari, Marda, 19; Muslim, Dhikr, 10.
31

--- Sayfa 33 ---
To Teach People God's Laws
Another purpose for sending Prophets is to reveal Divine Command-
ments (i.e., the five daily prayers, fasting Ramadan, paying zakat, and
not indulging in any illicit sexual relations, alcohol, and gambling). This
function is called Messengership. According to the Qur'an: They deliver
the Messages of God and fear Him, and do not fear anyone except God (33:39).
In addition, God told Muhammad:
O Messenger, deliver that which has been sent down to you from your Lord;
for if you do not, you will have not performed His Messengership. God protects
you against people; verily God will not guide the people of unbelief. (5:67)
The Messenger was sent to enlighten humanity about every dimension
of human life. So, any neglect in delivering God's Message would
amount to leaving humanity in darkness. For this reason, he continually
sought unadulterated minds and hearts to which he could impart God's
Message.
God's Messenger might have talked to people like Abu Bakr and
'Umar only a few times before they embraced Islam. But when it came to
people like Abu Jahl, it was a different story. Each time he met them, he
would say: "Proclaim there is no god but God and be saved." He would visit
places where people gathered and make the same call. Occasional fairs
were held in Makka and such nearby places as 'Arafat, Mina, Muzdali-
fah, and 'Aqabah—he would go to them every year, looking for receptive
people.
When the Makkan polytheists' indifference was replaced with derision
and mocking, and then with increasingly unbearable persecution, tor-
ture, and boycott, God's Messenger took Zayd ibn Haritha with him and
went to Ta'if. But the people of this city also treated him harshly. The
children lined up on either side of the road and threw stones at him. As
he was wearing no armor, by the time he had left the town and found a
tree under which to rest, he was bleeding profusely. He held up his
hands and supplicated:
O God, unto You I complain of my frailty, lack of resources and signi-
ficance before those people. O Most Merciful of the merciful, You are the
Lord of the oppressed and are my Lord. To whom do You abandon me?
To that stranger who looks askance and grimaces at me? Or to that en-
emy to whom You have given mastery over me? If Your indignation is
not directed at me, I have no worry. But Your grace is much greater for
me to wish for. I seek refuge in the light of Your Countenance, which
32

--- Sayfa 34 ---
illumines all darkness and by which the affairs of this life and the Here-
after have been rightly ordered, lest Your wrath alight upon me, or Your
indignation descend upon me. I expect Your forgiveness until You are
pleased. There is no resource or power but in You.
After saying this, he noticed that a tray had been placed before him.
Addas, a Christian slave from Nineveh, had seen God's Messenger being
stoned and tormented from the vineyard in which he was working. Put-
ting some grapes on a tray, he had brought them to him. God's Messen-
ger said "In the name of God" and began to eat. This surprised Addas, for
it was the first time he had heard this phrase among the polytheists. So
he asked God's Messenger who he was and why he had come to Ta'if.
Upon hearing the answer, "I am Muhammad, from Makka, the Last Prophet,"
he said with tears in his eyes, Addas remarked: "God has made me find
you," and embraced Islam.31
Prophet Muhammad was entirely focused on his mission. As a result,
the circle of light broadened day by day, and the party of unbelief be-
came more and more frustrated: They desire to extinguish with their mouths
God's light; and God refuses but to perfect His light, though the unbelievers are
averse (9:32). When no more could be accomplished in Makka, he emig-
rated to Madina and continued his mission there. Here he faced a differ-
ent problem: established communities of hostile Jews and, eventually, a
fifth column of Hypocrites who would ally themselves with his enemies.
In the twentythird year of his mission, he began to feel that his life was
almost finished. He had performed the minor pilgrimage ('umrah) a few
times, but never the major pilgrimage (hajj). He was able to do this dur-
ing this final year. Ascending 'Arafat on the back of his camel, he
preached what has become known as the Farewell Sermon. In it, he
stressed that feuds and interest-based transactions were forbidden and
that women have certain rights, and talked about family ties as well as
tribal and national relationships.
A huge, tearful congregation listened to him. While speaking, he fre-
quently asked them if he had communicated God's Message. With each
positive reply, he raised his index finger toward Heaven and said: "O
God, be witness!" In deep consciousness of Divine service, he might have
thought: "God sent me to perform the duty of Messengership. Just as these
people bore witness that I fulfilled this duty, I hope I may be regarded as having
truly done it." He was prepared to meet God in perfect satisfaction.
31.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:60-63; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 3:166.
33

--- Sayfa 35 ---
To be Examples
Prophets were sent to serve as examples who must be followed con-
sciously. After mentioning the Prophets in Surat al-An'am, God told His
last Messenger: Those are they whom God has guided, so follow their guidance
(6:90). In particular, we are told to follow Muhammad's example: You
have a good example in God's Messenger for whoever hopes for God and the Last
Day, and remembers God oft (33:21).
God's Messenger is our leader. Just as we pray as he prayed, we must
exert ourselves to live as he lived. Those who followed him during the
first Islamic century were real representatives of the true Islamic life.
God's Messenger says of them:
Muslim armies will arrive, after me, at the gates of cities. They will be asked:
"Did any of you see the Prophet?" The answer will be affirmative, and the gates
will be opened for them. Those who succeed them also will perform jihad and be
asked: "Did any of you see those who saw the Prophet?" They will reply in the
affirmative, and the cities will be conquered by them. As for the third generation,
its members will be asked: "Did any of you see those who saw the followers of
the Prophet's Companions?" When this question is answered in the affirmative,
their conquest will be successful.32
In another narration by Bukhari and Muslim, God's Messenger says:
"The best of you are those who live in my period, then those who succeed them,
and then those who follow them." 33
Those three generations strictly followed the Prophet and, accordingly,
were granted great victories throughout the world. Jesus had predicted
them, saying: "The banners of the holy ones are in their hands."34 These holy
ones are the Companions of Muhammad and those who follow his way
in every century.
In a Tradition, although with a weak chain of transmission, God's Mes-
senger declares: "The pious scholars of my nation resemble the Prophets of the
Children of Israel."35 'Umar submitted himself to God so sincerely that, as
a servant of God, he was far more effective than had been expected. Dur-
ing his caliphate, Iran, Iraq, and Egypt were conquered. Muslim armies
marched throughout a vast area, led by such great commanders as Abu
32.Bukhari, Fada'il al-Ashab, 1; Muslim, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 208–9.
33.Bukhari, ibid., 1; Muslim, ibid., 212.
34.Ibrahim al-Halabi, Sira, 1:218.
35.Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa', 2:83.
34

--- Sayfa 36 ---
'Ubayda ibn al-Jarrah, Shurahbil ibn Hasana, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, 'Amr
ibn al-'As, and Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan.
Jerusalem was conquered during his caliphate. When the Muslims' su-
preme commander asked its priests to submit the keys of the city, they
answered: "We cannot see among you the man to whom we are to submit the
keys." They had read in their religious books a description of who was
qualified to receive the keys.
So the priests and Muslim commanders waited while 'Umar and his
servant were riding a camel, by turns, toward Jerusalem. Although
'Umar ruled over lands twenty times the size of Turkey, he did not own
a camel. He borrowed one from the state treasury and set out with his
servant. When they approached the river Jordan, his waiting command-
ers on the river's other side were excited, praying: "O God, let 'Umar be the
one riding when they reach the river, for these Romans are fond of pomp and
display. They may not esteem us if they see the caliph pulling a camel ridden by
a servant." But God had destined the latter scenario. When 'Umar ap-
proached, the priests noticed, among other things, several patches on his
robe. This was the man described in their books, and so they gave him
the keys of Jerusalem.
'Umar never deviated from the path of God's Messenger. While on his
deathbed, after being fatally stabbed by a Magian slave, he refused food
and water because he was too weak. However, he always prayed when it
was time to do so, even if it caused his wounds to bleed. He would say:
"Those who don't pray have nothing to do with Islam." An exemplary follow-
er of God's Messenger, his own example would be followed by succeed-
ing generations.
35

--- Sayfa 37 ---
To Establish Balance
At a time when some people lived in monasteries and others drowned in
luxury, Prophet Muhammad came with the Qur'anic instruction: Seek,
amidst that which God has given you, the Last Abode, and do not forget your
portion of the present world (28:77).
All Prophets, peace be upon them all, came to establish balance
between the material and spiritual life, reason and soul, this world and
the next, and indulgence and abstinence. While we should declare all
that God has bestowed on us to show our gratitude and due praise for
Him (And as for your Lord's blessing and bounty, declare it [93:11]), we must
not forget that we will have to account for every good we enjoy (Then you
shall be questioned that day concerning every good you enjoy [102:8]).
The Prophet inculcated this principle so deeply in his Companions'
hearts that it could be seen in every aspect of their lives. For example,
once when breaking fast during Ramadan, Abu Bakr, the first caliph,
was offered a glass of cold water. He had just taken a sip when he sud-
denly burst into tears and stopped drinking. When asked why, he
replied: "Once I was with God's Messenger. He acted as if he were pushing
something with his hand and saying to it: 'Keep away from me!' I asked him
what he was doing, and he replied: 'The world appeared to me in an ideal form,
with all its pomp and luxury. I pushed it away, saying: "Leave me. You can't
seduce me." It withdrew and said: "I can't conquer you, but I swear by God I'll
captivate those who come after you.'" After narrating this Tradition, Abu
Bakr concluded: "Just now, I thought that the world tempted me with a glass
of cold water, and I wept." 36
Abu Bakr and most Companions lived a balanced life, despite the fact
that they had every chance to live in comfort.
36.Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat al-Awliya' wa Tabaqat al-Asfiya', 1:30-31.
36

--- Sayfa 38 ---
To Be God's Witnesses
Prophets also were sent so that people cannot plead ignorance in the
Hereafter. Regarding this, the Qur'an says: Messengers bearing good tidings
and warning, so that humanity might have no argument against God (4:165).
Humanity, who has followed many so-called guides or leaders only to
be led astray, has received true guidance through the Prophets. These
servants of God were created for a special mission. Already Prophets in
their mothers' wombs, their births were extraordinary. Their lives re-
sembled a beautiful symphony, perfectly harmonious and balanced.
Their words were like sweet melodies that penetrated souls.
All of existence, animate or inanimate, hearkened to them. Trees and
rocks would greet Prophet Muhammad, and he would answer them. In
his well-known Qasidat al-Bur'a, Busiri says: "Trees answered his call, pros-
trating." When he called them, trees came to him. Both living beings and
inanimate objects acquired meaning through his advent, existence be-
came a "cosmos" out of "chaos," and each thing became a tongue glorifying
God with praise: There is not a thing that does not glorify Him with praise,
but you do not understand their glorification (17:44). The extraordinary har-
mony in the universe displays God's Existence and Unity. Nothing is cre-
ated in vain and without purpose: Does humanity think it will be left aim-
less? (75:36).
If the Prophets had not been sent, we might have had an argument
against being punished in the Hereafter. But, as the Qur'an states: We
never punish until We have sent a Messenger (17:15), God must send Proph-
ets so that people can distinguish good from evil. Thus, people cannot
plead ignorance when they must defend their actions on the Day of
Judgment.
37

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Chapter 3
Characteristics of Prophets
Total Dependence on Revelation and Submission To God
Although every Prophet was intelligent and endowed with a compre-
hensive understanding and a pure soul, these play no role in God's
choice of a Prophet. Most Prophets, including Muhammad, were un-
lettered and therefore were taught by God. Prophet Muhammad, despite
his illiteracy, had knowledge of the past and the future, and insight into
every branch of knowledge. He did not attend any school or have any
human teachers, yet even his enemies admitted (and still do) that he dis-
played perfect justice in family affairs, perfect competency in state ad-
ministration, and perfect command of armies.
Prophets were specially brought up by God. To cite an example, the
Last Prophet recalled: "I intended twice in my childhood to attend a wedding
ceremony. On both occasions, I was overpowered by sleep half-way [and thus
was protected against any sin I would later prohibit]37; and "While repairing
the Ka'ba, prior to my Prophethood, I was carrying stones. As everyone did, I
wrapped my garment's lower part over my shoulder to avoid injury. Part of my
thigh was left uncovered. All of a sudden, the angel I had seen several times in
my childhood appeared to me in all his majesty. I fell down and fainted. That
was the first and last time I uncovered any part of my body that God ordered to
be covered."38
Prophets were protected by God against all sins, for they were created
for a special purpose. They were protected from going astray, for even a
minor deviation could result in humanity's almost complete deviation.
Prophethood is distinguished by Divine Revelation: And thus have We
revealed to you a spirit of Our command. You did not know what the Scripture
was, nor what the faith. But We have made it a light whereby We guide whom
37.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 2:350.
38.Bukhari, Hajj, 42; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 2:350.
38

--- Sayfa 40 ---
We will of Our servants. And you, surely you guide unto a straight path
(42:52). As a result, Prophets never spoke on their own accord: Nor does he
speak of (his own) desire. It is naught but a Revelation revealed (53:3-4).
Prophet Muhammad, particularly when asked about the essentials of
belief, would wait for Revelation. Sometimes the polytheists asked him
to alter the Qur'an. But as it is a Divine Scripture whose wording and
meaning belong completely to God, he would reply, as instructed by
God: Say: "It is not for me to alter it of my own accord. I follow nothing, except
what is revealed to me" (10:15).
Prophets submitted themselves wholly to God, and fulfilled their mis-
sion solely because God commanded them to. They never compromised
or deviated from their way in order to achieve success. When confronted
with threats or seductive offers, they replied with words similar to those
of the Prophet: "If you were even to put the sun in my right hand, and the
moon in the left, I will never give up preaching my cause." He knew that the
Qur'an is the Word of God, and so bore all hardship and opposition.39
39.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:285.
39

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Trustworthy and Asked No Wage
Prophets were completely trustworthy and asked no wage for their ser-
vices. This very important characteristic is mentioned five times in Surat
al-Shu'ara'. All Prophets said the same thing: "I am for you a trustworthy
Messenger, so serve you God, and obey you me. I ask of you no wage for this; my
wage falls only upon the Lord of the Worlds" (26:107–9, 125–27, 143–45,
162–64, 178–80).
Among his own people, Prophet Muhammad was famous for his
trustworthiness even before his proclamation of Prophethood. He was
known as al-Amin (the Trustworthy). Like his predecessors, he asked no
wage for calling to God.
Prophets never thought of material gain, spiritual reward, or even
Paradise—they strove only for God's good pleasure and to see humanity
guided to the truth. Prophet Muhammad was the foremost in this re-
spect. As he devoted his life to humanity's welfare in this world, he will
do so in the Place of Gathering. While everybody else will care only
about themselves, he will prostrate before God, pray for the Muslims'
salvation, and intercede with God on behalf of others.40
Those who intend to spread the perennial values of Islam should fol-
low these practices. Any message based on an impure intention, regard-
less of eloquence, will have no effect on people. This point is frequently
emphasized in the Qur'an: Follow such as ask no wage of you, that are right-
guided (36:21).
Imam Busiri expresses the altruism, sincerity, and patience of God's
Messenger in vivid language: "Mountains desired to run on his either side in
heaps of gold, but he refused." The Messenger once said: "A day comes when I
am hungry so as to endure it with patience; on another day I am full to praise
my Lord, acquiring thus the reward of both patience and praising."
'A'isha reported that sometimes was no food was cooked for four suc-
cessive days in their house.41 Abu Hurayra also reports: "Once I went into
the Prophet's room. He was praying while seated and groaning. I asked him if he
was ill. He replied that he was too hungry to stand. I began to sob bitterly, but
he stopped me, saying: "Don't cry, for one who endures hunger here will be safe
from God's torment in the next."42
40.Bukhari, Tawhid, 36; Muslim, Iman, 326.
41.Bukhari, Riqaq, 17; Muslim, Zuhd, 28.
42.Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 7:199.
40

--- Sayfa 42 ---
One day, he told Gabriel: "It has been several days since someone has lit a
fire to cook food in the house of Muhammad's family". An angel appeared and
asked: "O Messenger of God, God greets you and asks if you would like to be a
Prophet-king or a Prophet-slave?" He turned to Gabriel, who recommended
humility. The Prophet raised his voice and replied: "I wish to be a Prophet-
slave, who entreats God in hunger one day and thanks Him in satisfaction the
next." 43
God's Messenger used to eat with slaves and servants. Once a woman
saw him eating and remarked: "He's eating as if he were a slave." God's
Messenger responded: "Could there be a better slave than me? I am a slave of
God."44
God's Messenger is, by virtue of being a slave of God, our master and
that of creation, as eloquently stated by Ghalib Dada:
An exalted king, the King of the Messengers, O my Master.
You are an endless source of help for the helpless, O my Master.
God honored you by swearing by your life in the Qur'an, O my
Master.
In the Divine Presence, you are the greatest, O my Master.
You are the beloved, lauded and praised one of God, O my Master.
Our "eternal" king you are, sent to us by God, O my Master.
43.Ibn Hanbal, 2:231; Al-Hindi, 7:191; Haythami, Majma' al-Zawa'id, 9:18–19.
44.Haythami, 9:21.
41

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Complete Sincerity
Another indispensable characteristic is sincerity, which in this context
means "purity of intention, to do everything solely for the sake of God." We are
told to worship God sincerely: They were commanded only to serve God,
making the religion His sincerely, men of pure faith, and to perform the prayer,
and pay the alms (98:5). God also mentions sincerity as the foremost attrib-
ute of the Prophets: And mention in the Book Moses; he was made sincere,
and he was a Messenger, a Prophet (19:51).
We worship God only because we are His servants and He has told us
to do so. Obeying Him allows us to secure His approval and be rewar-
ded in the Hereafter. Said Nursi, the great twentieth-century Turkish
thinker, said: "Do what you do only for God's sake, start for God's sake, work
for God's sake, and act within the sphere of God's good approval."45
God's Last Prophet worshipped God so sincerely that people could
say: "No one can remain as humble as he was at the beginning of his career or
quest after attaining its height. Muhammad was an exception to this." He is so
great and sublime that we still stand out of respect for him, although he
used to warn his Companions: "When I come upon you, don't stand up as
the Persians do (for their elders)."46 Although his Companions had com-
plete respect for him, he considered himself a poor slave of God. On the
day he conquered Makka, he was the same as when he humbly had be-
gun his mission. At the outset of his mission, he would sit and eat with
the poor and slaves. As he entered Makka in triumph, he rode a mule in
such deep submission and humility before God that his forehead
touched its packsaddle. He was prostrating before God and taking
refuge in Him from being a tyrannical, haughty conqueror.
God's Messenger had one intention: to please God and worship Him
sincerely. He worshipped Him at a level of perfect goodness and sincer-
ity, as he himself stated in a famous Tradition: "Perfect goodness or virtue
is to worship God as if you were seeing Him, and while you see Him not, yet
truly He sees you."47
45.Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, The Words, The First Word, 5.
46.Abu Dawud, Adab, 152; Ibn Hanbal, 5:253.
47.Bukhari, Iman, 47; Muslim, Iman, 5:7.
42

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Calling People Wisely and with Kindness
Another attribute of Prophets is calling people to the way of God with
wisdom and fair exhortation. They never resorted to demagogy and dia-
lectics, but acted and spoke with wisdom. God ordered His Last and
Greatest Messenger: Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair ex-
hortation, and reason with them in the best way (16:125).
People are more than just minds or hearts. We are complex beings
with many faculties, including the mind, intellect, heart, and soul. All of
our faculties, even the innermost ones, require satisfaction. The Prophets
addressed all of them.
Those taught by the Prophets acquired certainty, and their view of
things differed from those with limited external sight and devoid of in-
sight and spiritual vision. Their conviction of religious truths was un-
shakable, and they were continually fed with Divine Revelation. They
combined speech with action, knowledge with practice, and action with
contemplation. 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, among others, would say: "If the veil of
the Unseen were lifted up, my certainty would not increase."48 There was no
further degree of certainty left for them to attain.
The education given by the Prophets to their disciples, or the function
of the Prophets, is described precisely: We have sent among you, of
yourselves, a Messenger, to recite Our signs to you and to purify you, and to
teach you the Book and Wisdom, and to teach you what you know not (2:151).
48.'Ali al-Qari, al-Asrar al-Marfu'ah, 286.
43

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Calling Humanity to God's Unity
The cornerstone of the Prophetic mission was to preach Divine Unity. All
Prophets concentrated on this basic principle: O my people, serve God: You
have no god other than He (11:84).
God has sent at least one Prophet to every people. The fact that all of
them, regardless of time or place, agree on one basic principle shows that
they did not speak or act on their own; rather, they did no more than
teach the Message received from God. Philosophers and thinkers, no
matter how great they may be, disagree among themselves because they
depend on their own intellect and findings. Frequently, the same philo-
sophical or sociological school contains different opinions.
Such a development was unknown among the Prophets, further evid-
ence that they were taught by a Single, Eternal Teacher—God—and not
guided by defective human reasoning. Such a unity of belief is also a
strong evidence of Divine Unity, the fundamental principle of their mis-
sion, as declared by Muhammad: "The most meritorious of the words spoken
by me and the Prophets before me is: 'There is no god but God, He is One, hav-
ing no partners.'"49
49.Imam Malik, Muwatta, Hajj, 246; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 5:73.
44

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Chapter 4
The Essentials of Prophethood
According to Muslim theologians, the essentials of Prophethood are
truthfulness, trustworthiness, communicating of God’s messages, intelli-
gence, infallibility, and freedom from all bodily and mental defects.
These are found in every Prophet.
45

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Truthfulness
Truthfulness is the cornerstone of Prophethood. No lies or deceit, wheth-
er explicit or implicit, were ever heard from them. The Qur'an declares:
Mention Abraham in the Book: Surely he was a most truthful Prophet
(19:41); Mention Ishmael in the Book; surely, he was a man of his word, and
he was a Messenger, a Prophet (19:54); and Mention Idris (Enoch) in the
Book; surely he was a most truthful Prophet. We elevated him to an exalted
place (19:56-57). We also read in the Qur'an that a fellow prisoner ad-
dressed Prophet Joseph: Joseph, O most truthful one (12:46).
The Prophets had to be endowed with truthfulness, for God wants
everybody to be truthful and extols the truthful: O you who believe, fear
God and be with the company of the truthful! (9:119), and: The believers are
those who believed in God and His Messenger without ever feeling
doubt thereafter, and strove with their souls and possessions in the way
of God; those are the ones who are the truthful (49:15).
The Qur'an praises believers who, without faltering, carry out their
promises: Among the believers are the valiants who have kept their promise
which they gave to God: Some of them carried out their word [and were mar-
tyred] and the others are expecting (their turn); they have never thought of go-
ing back on their word (33:23).
This verse extols the heroes of Uhud, a decisive turning point in Islam-
ic history. After the Qurayshi unbelievers were defeated at Badr, they
had spent a whole year preparing for a deadly retaliatory blow at the
Muslims. Meeting at the foot of Mount Uhud, a few miles from Madina,
the Muslims at first were victorious and the Quraysh began to flee. At
this crucial point, the archers whom God's Messenger had positioned at
'Aynayn pass left their positions, against the Prophet's command, and
pursued the enemy. Khalid ibn Walid, commander of the enemy's cav-
alry, took this opportunity to surround the Muslims from behind. As a
result, the Muslims experienced a reverse. Such leading figures as
Hamza, Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, 'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, and Anas ibn Nadr
were martyred. Even the Prophet was wounded.
Let us note here that during the battle, God's Messenger, the Prophet
of forgiveness and mercy who was sent as a mercy for creation, raised
his hands toward God and, while bleeding profusely, asked for the en-
emy to be forgiven: "O God, forgive my people, for they do not know."50
50.Muslim, Jihad, 101; Bukhari, Anbiya', 54.
46

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Anas ibn Nadr was the uncle of Anas ibn Malik, the servant of God's
Messenger. Although he had sworn allegiance with God's Messenger in
'Aqabah before he emigrated to Madina, for some reason he did not fight
at Badr. He so regretted this that he told God's Messenger: "O Messenger
of God, if God allows us to confront them once more, they will see what suffer-
ings I will inflict on them!" He fought fearlessly at Uhud, especially when
the Muslims suffered a reverse. Just before being martyred, he told
Mu'adh ibn Jabal with a smile: "By God, I sense the scent of Paradise behind
Uhud."
The Qur'an exalts in the above verse (33:23) those martyrs who fulfilled
their promise to God through His Messenger, as well as others expecting mar-
tyrdom, to show that they were true to their words. They are not the only
ones extolled here; rather, all who fulfill their words and keep their
promises are mentioned here.
God's Messenger was known as a truthful person even before Islam.
The Makkans, even the unbelievers, called him al-Amin, the Trustworthy
One, the Truthful. Even his enemies did not accuse him of lying after he
proclaimed his Prophethood. After the Treaty of Hudaybiya (6 AH),
God's Messenger sent letters to the rulers of neighboring countries. The
Emperor of Byzantium received it in Syria at a time when a Makkan
trade caravan headed by Abu Sufyan was in the area of Damascus. The
Emperor summoned him, and the following conversation took place:
- Do the elite or the weak mostly follow him?
- The elite.
- Has anyone apostatized after converting?
- Not yet.
- Do his followers increase or decrease?
- They increase daily.
- Have you ever heard him tell a lie?
- No, never.
Struck by Abu Sufyan's answers, at that time the bitterest enemy of
Islam, the Emperor acknowledged Muhammad's position: "It is inconceiv-
able for one who has never told a lie during his whole life to invent lies against
God."51 The Emperor was right. Why would a believer who had never
told a lie, even in jest, suddenly begin to lie, especially against God,
when he is 40 years old and getting closer to the grave?
51.Bukhari, Bad'u al-Wahy, 6.
47

--- Sayfa 49 ---
The Makkans agreed unanimously that God's Messenger was a truth-
ful person. Once before his conversion, Yasir asked his son 'Ammar
where he was going. 'Ammar said that he was going to Muhammad. Be-
ing fully satisfied of his son's safety while with Muhammd, he replied:
"Muhammad is a trustworthy person. The Makkans recognize him so. If he
claims Prophethood he must be telling the truth, for no one has ever heard him
tell a lie."
God's Messenger always encouraged truthfulness, as can be seen in his
words as recorded in the following Traditions:
• Promise me six things and I will promise you Paradise: Speak the
truth, keep your promises, fulfill your trusts, remain (sexually) chaste, don't
look at what is unlawful, and avoid what is forbidden.52
• Abandon what arouses your suspicions and follow what is certain.
Truthfulness gives satisfaction; lying causes suspicion.53
• Seek truthfulness even if it might bring you to ruin.54
• Always be truthful, for truthfulness leads to righteousness and right-
eousness leads to Paradise. If you are always truthful and seek truthful-
ness, God records you as such. Never lie, for lying leads to shamefulness
and shamefulness leads to Hell. If you insist on lying and seek deceit,
God records you as such.55
Due to his truthfulness, God's Messenger rose to such a high rank that
his nearness to God is expressed metaphorically in the Qur'an as follows:
Then he approached and came nearer, till he was [distant] two bowlengths, or
even nearer (53:8-9).
Truthfulness always brings salvation, even if it causes one's death. We
die through truthfulness only once, whereas each lie is a different kind of
death. One of the most striking examples of this is the case of Ka'b ibn
Malik, a famous Ansari poet who swore allegiance to God's Messenger at
'Aqabah. Although he took part in almost all the battles, he missed the
campaign of Tabuk without a justifiable excuse.
The Tabuk campaign was very difficult. It took place in mid summer
and, what is more, against the Roman Empire. Although God's Messen-
ger always kept the destination of such campaigns secret, this time he
disclosed it and wanted every believer to participate. Ka'b completed his
52.Ibn Hanbal, 5:323.
53.Tirmidhi, Qiyamah, 60; Ibn Hanbal, 1:200.
54.Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 3:344.
55.Bukhari, Adab, 69; Muslim, Birr, 105; Abu Dawud, Adab, 80.
48

--- Sayfa 50 ---
preparations but, at the last minute, uncharacteristic negligence kept him
from joining the army.
When God's Messenger returned from the campaign, he asked those
who had not fought why they had stayed at home. The Hypocrites lied
and made excuses, but Ka'b, being unable to lie, told the truth. God's
Messenger told him to leave. Thereafter, Ka'b and two other believers
who had done the same thing were boycotted. On the order of God's
Messenger, no Muslim met with them or spoke to them. They repented
publicly, begging God for forgiveness, for 50 days. After this, it was re-
vealed that:
As for those three, the acceptance of their repentance was delayed until, for
them, the Earth, vast as it is, was straitened and their own souls were straitened
to them, and they perceived that there is no fleeing from God and no refuge but
with Him. Then He accepted their repentance so that they could recover their
former state. Verily, God is the One who accepts repentance, Most Merciful.
(9:118)
After this revelation, Ka'b ibn Malik told God's Messenger, upon him
be peace and blessings: "I promise to speak the truth as long as I live."56
Truthfulness is the pivot of Prophethood. It could not be otherwise, for
if a Prophet were to lie, everything connected with the Divine religion
would be upset. All it takes is one lie to call a mission into question. Thus
God declares: If he [Muhammad] had invented false sayings concerning Us,
We would surely have grasped him firmly, and then cut off the artery of his
heart, and none of you could have withheld Us from doing this (69:44-47).
The Prophet never lied or broke his promise, either prior to or during
his Prophethood. A Companion remembered: "Before his Prophethood, we
made an appointment to meet somewhere. It was, however, 3 days after the ap-
pointed time when I remembered it. When I hastened to the appointed place, I
found the future Prophet waiting for me. He was neither angry nor offended.
His only reaction was to say: 'O young man, you have given me some trouble. I
have been waiting here for you for 3 days.'"57
56.Bukhari, Maghazi, 79; Muslim, Tawba, 53.
57.Abu Dawud, Adab, 82.
49

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Some of His Predictions
Ordinary people can establish their truthfulness by their detracator's
inability to provide any proof to the contrary. In the case of a Prophet
who has brought a universal Divine system, people expect more. They
want explanations and rules for everything: theology, law, sociology, hu-
man psychology, economics, history, and so on. Moreover, a Prophet
must be proven truthful in all of them.
The explanations of God's Messenger concerning theology-Divine
Essence, Attributes, and Names-are such that philosophers, religious
scholars, and saints cannot compete with him. Instead, they study his ex-
planations and try to perceive the truths behind them. In addition to
these, he dealt with the most subtle matters of Destiny and human free
will so ably and convincingly that if his knowledge is ignored, we cannot
obtain a true understanding of such matters.
What he said about past nations and previous Prophets has been con-
firmed by historical research and followers of previous Scriptures. Al-
though unlettered, never enjoying the benefit of being able to read or be-
ing taught by another person, he established the most rational, practical,
and just system known to history. Islamic civilization, which based itself
on this system, enabled a large portion of humanity to experience true
happiness for centuries. Indeed, the universal system of life revealed to
him continues to offer a unique alternative for our future in general. The
happy world of the future will be built upon its principles.
Out of hundreds of his predictions, the vast majority of which already
have come true, I would like to present a selection to show his truthful-
ness in this matter.
'Umar reports that one day the Prophet, upon whom be peace, ascen-
ded the pulpit after the dawn prayer and spoke about almost everything
from the creation of the world to the Last Day. He mentioned certain
past events and what will befall humanity until that Day. These predic-
tions demonstrate that his teacher was God, the All-Knowing, and that
he related only what was revealed to him. Before giving specific ex-
amples, we must clarify a few points concerning knowledge of the
Unseen.
Knowledge of the Unseen. The concept of the Unseen pertains to what
is suprasensory and metaphysical, or even metacosmic. In this sense, the
past, the future, and everything beyond ordinary human senses are in-
cluded in the concept of the Unseen, provided that certain concrete in-
dications have not been manifested. In a narrower sense, the Unseen
50

--- Sayfa 52 ---
pertains only to the future. It is this second sense that is used in the fol-
lowing section, as I intend to concentrate on his predictions.
The knowledge of the Unseen is, first of all, with God. As we read in
the Qur'an:
With Him are the keys of the Unseen, none knows them but He. He knows
whatever is in the ground and the sea. Not a leaf falls but He knows it. There is
not a grain in the darkness of the ground nor anything wet, fresh, or dry but is
in a Manifest Record. (6:59)
Say, [O Muhammad]: "I do not tell you that with me are the treasures of God,
nor that I know the Unseen, nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I but follow
what is revealed to me." Say: "Are the blind and the one who sees equal? Will
you not then reflect?" (6:50)
Say: "I have no power over any benefit or harm to myself except as God wills.
If I had the knowledge of the Unseen, I should increase good for myself and no
evil should have touched me. I am only a warner and a bringer of glad tidings
unto people who believe." (7:188)
Does this mean that no one can obtain even a small part of this know-
ledge? To answer this question, we should consider the following points:
• Whatever we have (e.g., health, knowledge, and power) essentially
belongs to God and is, accordingly, from God. We have no power except
that which He has given us, and no knowledge except that which He has
taught us or enabled us to learn. We see and hear because He makes this
possible. This being so, the verses do not exclude people absolutely from
acquiring some of this knowledge-but only if He allows this.
• The concept of the Unseen relates to the future and the past. The
Qur'an presents the stories of past nations as stories of the Unseen. His-
torical research informs us of the past.
• Many people can, by God's Will, glimpse part of the future in
dreams or other ways that are beyond the scope of this book.
• The Qur'an, like the universe and humanity, is an organic entity, for
each verse is interrelated with the others. Thus the first and foremost in-
terpreter of the Qur'an is the Qur'an itself. This means that a complete
and true understanding of a verse depends on understanding all other
relevant verses. It is a creedal principle and explicitly declared that
knowledge of the Unseen, like power, seeing, and hearing, belongs to
God. However, He reveals some of this knowledge to a Messenger
whom He has chosen: [God alone is] the knower of the Unseen and He does
51

--- Sayfa 53 ---
not disclose His Unseen to anyone, except a Messenger whom He has chosen
(72:26-27).
God revealed many secrets to His Messenger, who then related to his
people those that they needed to know. The number his predictions re-
ported in authentic books of Tradition exceed 300, and fall into three cat-
egories: his own time, events after his death, and miraculous explana-
tions that can be understood only in conjunction with scientific
developments.
52

--- Sayfa 54 ---
His Own Time
• As reported by authentic books of Tradition, including Sahih al-
Bukhari, one day God's Messenger mounted the pulpit, preached, and
then told the congregation to ask him whatever they wished to. They did
so. Finally, a young man named 'Abd Allah stood up and asked who his
father was. Since illicit intercourse was widespread in pre-Islamic times,
this young man was attributed to someone other than Hudafa al-Sahmi,
whom he called father. God's Messenger told him his father was Hudafa
al-Sahmi. Freed from groundless accusations, 'Abd Allah was relieved
and thereafter was called 'Abd Allah ibn Hudafa al-Sahmi.
People continued to ask questions until, eventually, 'Umar, noticing
the anger of God's Messenger, stood up and said: "We are pleased with God
as our Lord, with Islam as our religion, and with Muhammad as our Messen-
ger." This eased the Prophet and he came down from the pulpit.58 This
event took place before all the Companions, and no one was reported to
contradict what he said.
• 'Umar reports in a narration recorded in Sahih al-Muslim: Before the
Battle of Badr started, God's Messenger walked around the battlefield and poin-
ted to some locations, saying: "Abu Jahl will be killed here, 'Utba here, Shayba
here, Walid here, and so on." By God, after the battle we found their corpses in
those exact places.59
• Ahmad ibn Hanbal reports: One day, God's Messenger was sitting in
the mosque with his Companions. He told them: "In a few minutes, a man with
a shining face will come. He is one of the best people of Yemen, and has on his
forehead an angel's handprint." After a short while the man came and, kneeling
before God's Messenger proclaimed his conversion. He was Jarir ibn 'Abd Allah
al-Bajali.60
• In his Dala'il al-Nubuwwah, Bayhaqi narrates: Abu Sufyan accepted
Islam during the conquest of Makka, but belief had not yet been established
firmly in his heart. While God's Messenger was circumambulating the Ka'ba, it
occurred to him: "I wonder what would happen if I formed a new army to con-
front this man once more." No sooner had he thought this than God's Messen-
ger approached him and said: "If you do, God will defeat you again."61 This
strengthened Abu Sufyan's belief, and he begged God's forgiveness. He finally
understood that the Messenger was taught by God, the All-Knowing.
58.Bukhari, Fitan, 15.
59.Muslim, Janna, 76, 77.
60.Ibn Hanbal, 4:360-64.
61.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 4:348; Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-Nubuwwa, 5:102.
53

--- Sayfa 55 ---
• As related in the reliable books of Tradition, 'Umayr ibn Wahb,
known as a "diabolic man" before his conversion, conspired with Safwan
ibn Umayya to assassinate God's Messenger. He went to Madina for this
purpose and pretended to be a Muslim. He was taken to the mosque.
However, since the Companions had no trust in him, they formed a pro-
tective circle around God's Messenger. The Messenger asked 'Umayr
why he had come to Madina. All of 'Umayr's lies could not convince
God's Messenger, who finally told him: "As you are not telling the truth, I
will tell it. You conspired with Safwan to kill me in return for 100 camels."
Shocked by the truth of this answer, 'Umayr held the Prophet's hands
tightly in awe and amazement and became a Muslim. He became so
deeply committed to Islam that he came to be called "a most ascetic devotee
of Islam."62
62.Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba fi Tamyiz al-Sahaba, 3:36.
54

--- Sayfa 56 ---
The Future
The reliable books of Tradition contain approximately 300 such predic-
tions, among them the following:
• Bukhari and Muslim report from Usama that: One day I was with
God's Messenger on the roof of a tall building in Madina. Looking around, he
said: "I see seditious events and internal conflicts pouring down like raindrops
among your houses."63
'Umar was very afraid that disorder and sedition might appear in the
Muslim community. One day during his caliphate, he asked Hudhayfa
ibn al-Yaman, to whom God's Messenger had disclosed many secret
things, including future events and who the Hypocrites were, about
them. Hudhayfa responded: "They have nothing to do with you, 'Umar.
There is a gate between you and them." 'Umar asked if the gate would be
opened or broken down. When Hudhayfa replied it would be broken
down, a shocked 'Umar exclaimed: "Then this gate will never be closed
again!" 'Umar was the gate between the Muslim community and sedi-
tion.64 After he was stabbed by a treacherous Persian slave, Muslim unity
received a fatal blow. Since that day, the Muslim world has suffered dis-
cord and sedition.
• Bukhari and Abu Dawud quote Habbab ibn Arat, who said: "During
the days of trouble and torture in Makka, I went to God's Messenger while he
was sitting in the shade of the Ka'ba. I was still a slave then, and the Makkans
tortured me severely. Unable to endure it any longer, I asked him to pray to God
for help and salvation. But he faced me and said: "By God, previous communit-
ies endured much more than this. Some people were forced to lie in ditches and
then sawed in half. This did not make them forsake their faith. They were
skinned alive, but never became weak against the enemy. God will perfect this
religion, but you are impatient. A day will come when a woman will travel alone
by herself from San'a to Hadramut fearing nothing but wild beasts. However,
you show impatience." Habbab concluded: "By God, what God's Messenger pre-
dicted that day has all come true. I have personally witnessed it all."65
• During his last illness, God's Messenger called his daughter Fatima
to his bedside. He whispered something to her, and she burst into tears.
He called her again and whispered something else to her. This time she
displayed great joy. 'A'isha saw this and asked Fatima about it. At first,
Fatima said: "This is a secret belonging to God's Messenger." But after the
63.Bukhari, Fada'il al-Madina, 8; Muslim, Fitan, 9.
64.Bukhari, Sawm, 3; Muslim, Fitan, 27.
65.Bukhari, Manaqib, 22; Abu Dawud, Jihad, 97.
55

--- Sayfa 57 ---
Prophet's death, Fatima told her: "The first time he said he would die of that
illness, which made me weep bitterly. Then he told that I would be his first fam-
ily member to join him after his death, and this made me very happy."66 The
Prophet died of that illness, and Fatima joined him in death 6 months
later.
• As related in most of the six authentic books of Tradition, one day on
the pulpit God's Messenger took his grandson Hasan into his arms and
declared: "This son of mine is a noble one. It is hoped that God will reconcile
through him two large hosts of Muslims."67 Hasan was indeed a noble per-
son. About 35 years after this prediction, he renounced the caliphate in
favor of Mu'awiya, thus demonstrating the truthfulness of his noble
grandfather.
• One day the Messenger put his hand on 'Abd Allah ibn Busr's head
and said: "This boy will live 100 years, and those warts on his face will disap-
pear."68 'Abd Allah lived, as predicted by God's Messenger, for 100 years
and died without any warts on his face.
• As recorded in almost all books of Tradition and the Prophet's bio-
graphy, the Muslims dug a ditch around Madina during the Battle of
Khandaq (the Ditch). The Prophet shared in this work and, to reinforce
his Companions morale, occasionally prayed for them: "O God, the true
life is the life of the Hereafter, so forgive the Helpers and the Emigrants."69 His
Companions would reply enthusiastically: "O God, had it not been for Your
help and grace, we could not have found the Straight Path, paid alms, or prayed.
And so, send down upon us serenity, and make our steps firm if we encounter
the enemy!"70
While digging, a huge rock was uncovered. The Companions could
not remove it, and so called God's Messenger. He came with a lever and
pickaxe, and set out to smash it. Each blow produced a spark and,
through God's inspiration, he predicted a future conquest, saying: "I have
been given the keys of Byzantium; I have been given the keys of Persia; I have
been given the keys of Yemen,"71 and so on. Within 20 years, Persia and
many parts of Byzantium belonged to the Muslims, thanks to the bril-
liant military leadership of Khalid ibn Walid and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas.
66.Ibn Maja, Jana'iz, 65; Muslim, Fadail al-Sahaba, 15; Ibn Hanbal, 3:197.
67.Bukhari, Sulh, 9; Ibn Hanbal, 5:49.
68.Haythami, Al-Majma' al-Zawa'id, 9:404-5.
69.Bukhari, Manaqib al-Ansar, 39; Muslim, Jihad, 127.
70.Bukhari, Maghazi, 29; Muslim, Jihad, 123, 124, 125.
71.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 4:116; Ibn Hanbal, 4:303; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:230.
56

--- Sayfa 58 ---
Byzantium was conquered later by the Ottoman ruler Sultan Mehmed
the Conqueror.
• 'Adiy ibn Khatam reports: One day people complained, in the presence of
God's Messenger, about poverty, deprivation, and unsafe desert roads. He
replied: "A day will come when a woman will travel alone on her camel from
Hira to the Ka'ba with fear of nothing but God alone. A day will come and the
treasures of Chosroes (the Persian ruler) will be distributed among you. A day
will come when people will travel around to find someone to pay the prescribed
alms to, but in vain." When God's Messenger made these predictions, members
of the Tayy tribe used to attack travelers, and the Persian Empire was enjoying
its most splendid days. But I personally witnessed the first two predictions come
true, and I am expecting the third also will prove to be true.72
'Adiy did not live long enough to see the third prediction come true.
However, soon after his death, during the caliphate of 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-
'Aziz, people became so rich that no one could be found to give the pre-
scribed alms to in the vast lands of the Muslim state. Living standards
were very high, and there was no discernible imbalance in the distribu-
tion of wealth.
• While the Prophet's Mosque was being built in Madina, everybody,
including God's Messenger, worked to complete it as quickly as possible.
Some cast sun-dried bricks, and others carried them to construction site.
Meanwhile, 'Ammar ibn Yasir, one of the first Muslims, approached
God's Messenger and, probably to attract his love and affection, said: "O
God's Messenger, they loaded on me two sun-dried bricks." God's Messenger
smiled and, while rubbing the dust off 'Ammar's face, said he would be
martyred: "What a pity (Glad tidings for you, according to another version), O
'Ammar, a rebellious group will kill you."73 'Ammar was martyred about 40
years later at the Battle of Siffin by Mu'awiya's followers.
• God's Messenger was distributing the spoils of a war when a man
with Mongol features told him to be just in distribution. To this impertin-
ence, God's Messenger asked: "Who else will show justice if I am not just? If
I do not show justice, then I have been lost and brought to naught." According
to another version, he said: "If I am not just, then, (by following me) you (the
people) have been lost and brought to naught."74
'Umar was furious with this man, and demanded that God's Messen-
ger allow him to "cut off this hypocrite's head." But the Messenger only
72.Bukhari, Manaqib, 22.
73.Bukhari, Salat, 63; Muslim, Fitan, 70, 72, 73; Ibn Hanbal, 12: 161, 164.
74.Bukhari, Adab, 95; Muslim, Zakat, 142; Ibn Hanbal, 3:56.
57

--- Sayfa 59 ---
said: "In the future, a group of people with chubby faces, slanting eyes, and flat
noses[like this man] will appear. They will recite so much of the Qur'an that,
when compared to their recitation, yours will seem small to you. Nevertheless,
what they recite will not have the slightest effect on them. They will leave the re-
ligion like an arrow shot from a bow. There will, moreover, be a large fatty
growth on the arm of one of them."75
Years passed, and a group called the Kharijites appeared. Bearing
these very characteristics, and basing themselves on a mistaken inter-
pretation of the Qur'an, they rebelled. Caliph 'Ali met and defeated them
at Nahrawan. A corpse with a fatty growth on its arm was taken to 'Ali.
This event, besides proving the truthfulness and Messengership of
Prophet Muhammad, fulfilled another prediction: "O 'Ali, I have fought
for the descent of the Qur'an; you will fight against its misinterpretation."76
• One day God's Messenger slept in the house of Umm Haram, his
foster aunt. He woke up smiling. Umm Haram asked why he was happy,
and he answered: "I dreamed that like kings seated on thrones, a group of
Muslims boarded ships and went off to war." Umm Haram asked him to
pray that she would be included in this group. He did so, and said: "You
will be among them."77 Years passed. During Mu'awiya's caliphate,
Muslims waged war upon Cyprus. Umm Haram was in the army accom-
panying her husband, Ubada ibn Samit. She died there, and her tomb
has been visited ever since.
75.Bukhari, Adab, 95; Muslim, Zakat, 142; Ibn Hanbal, 1:356.
76.Ibn Hanbal, 3:82.
77.Bukhari, Jihad, 3:8; Muslim, 'Imara, 160-61.
58

--- Sayfa 60 ---
The Distant Future
• Once God's Messenger declared: "When the end of time[the Last Day]
approaches, the children of Kantura will appear. They will be slant-eyed,
chubby-faced, and flat-nosed."[30] This description fits the Mongols, as it
does some of the Kharijites, to whom it is traditionally thought to refer.
God's Messenger predicted both the Mongol invasion and the destruc-
tion of the Muslim world, and the Western massacre of Andalusia's
Muslims-two of the most tragic calamities to afflict the Muslim nation.
Always concerned with his people's fate, he used such predictions to
warn Muslims that any deviation from the Straight Path will bring
calamity upon them. God uses wrongdoers and oppressors to chasten
and correct His believing servants, and afterward turns against the op-
pressors and eradicates them.
• God's Messenger foresaw the conquest of Constantinople (present-
day Istanbul): "Certainly, Constantinople will be conquered. How good is the
commander who will conquer it, and how good his army!"78 Hoping to be the
object of the Prophet's praise, Muslim rulers and commanders from the
time of Mu'awiya sought to conquer this city. During one campaign,
Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, the noble Companion, was martyred and buried
near the city walls.
Constantinople finally was conquered by the Ottoman ruler Mehmed
the Conqueror. Besides this great commander and statesman, his two
school friends Hasan of Ulubat and Qadi Khidr Calabi, as well as his tu-
tor Ak Shamsaddin, were also symbols of this conquest. One was in the
army, and the others were in the departments of religious and scientific
education. The prayer and praise of God's Messenger encompasses all of
them.
• God's Messenger predicted and explained the principle reasons for
the Ottoman State's destruction and condition of the Muslim world after
the First World War: "Nations will call each other, as people make invitations
to a meal, to make a concerted attack on you." Someone asked: "Will this hap-
pen because there are only a few of us?" God's Messenger answered: "No,
your numbers will be vast, but you will be as powerless as woodchips or straw
carried in a flood. God will remove your enemies' fear of you and implant within
you a fear of death and a love of the world."79
78.Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:422; Ibn Hanbal, 4:335.
79.Abu Dawud, Malahim, 5; Ibn Hanbal, 5:278.
59

--- Sayfa 61 ---
The prediction, which became reality during the First World War, also
describes our current situation. We are divided into many factions, while
our enemies seek closer unity based on mutual interests. In the past, they
were afraid of us because we saw the grave as a bridal chamber,
something to look forward to. But now, we are so attached to this world
that we do all we can to escape death, even though we know this is im-
possible. We also have been the object of many betrayals. 'Uthman and
'Ali were victims of treachery, and the magnificent Ottoman State was
made sacrificial food for the carnivorous peoples of the world. It experi-
enced uncountable betrayals by nations who had been so prosperous
and peaceful under Ottoman rule.
• God's Messenger predicted the rise of communism in a hadith repor-
ted by Ibn 'Umar. Facing toward the east, he said: "Take care! Anarchy and
subversion will appear from that direction, from where the Age of Satan will be-
gin."80 The Age of Satan, built upon atheism and hedonism, is the oppos-
ite of the Age of the Prophet, based on belief in and devotion to God.
Communism, the unlawful outcome of capitalism, champions hostility to
religion, piety, and all moral and traditional values. In another hadith,
God's Messenger foretold that communism would arise as "a red wind."
• God's Messenger once declared: "The Euphrates will probably go dry,
uncovering a treasure (a mountain, according to another version) of gold be-
neath it. Whoever of you witnesses it, should refrain from taking any of it."81
This hadith alludes to the great war expected to take place along the Eu-
phrates. Although this river has seen many wars, among them the Iran-
Iraq war, this hadith points to a much greater spasm of violence in the
future. While we can take the hadith literally, we also can take it figurat-
ively. For example, oil is known as "black gold." Or, maybe the water itself
will become as valuable as gold and cause regional or even international
wars. Maybe the income obtained from the dams on this river will attract
international attention and cause great wars. In whichever case, God's
Messenger warned that the Euphrates region is like dynamite at the
heart of the Muslim world.
• God's Messenger averred that Christianity would be purified of its
borrowed, pagan elements and join Islam, thus strengthening the Divine
religion.82 This will be a universal turning point in human history, and
80.Bukhari, Fitan, 16; Muslim, Fitan, 45; Ibn Hanbal, 2:50, 72.
81.Bukhari, Fitan, 24; Muslim, Fitan, 30; Abu Dawud, Malahim, 12:13.
82.Muslim, Iman, 244-47.
60

--- Sayfa 62 ---
the believers, at a time when they are gripped by their enemies, will de-
feat and destroy the global representatives of unbelief.
• God's Messenger predicted that agricultural reform and develop-
ments in science and technology would enable farmers to produce a
pomegranate that, on an individual bases, will be enough for twenty
people, and that its rind will provide shade for people. He also proph-
esied that wheat produced in area the size of a house balcony will be
enough to feed a family for a year.83 With the advent of biotechnology
and genetic manipulation, such wonders are probably not too far in the
future.
• In another Tradition, God's Messenger describes the end of time:
"Prior to Doomsday, people will discriminate when greeting others (preferring
to greet only some), trade will be given so much currency and preference that a
wife will help her husband in it, parents and relatives will no longer be visited,
false evidence and false testimony will replace the truth, and writing will gain
prominence."84
All of this has come true. Today, trade is the most preferred way of
making a livelihood, and women are exploited to advertise various
products and services, and to attract customers. The rights of parents
and relatives are no longer considered and, once they become old and
most need attention and affection, they are often placed in old people's
homes or nursing homes. The power of the modern press is unquestion-
able, and lying is now so widespread that few people can resist it. This is
true at all levels, from business lies to false testimony in law suits.
• In a hadith qudsi, the Prophet relates from God: "At the end of time I
will cause knowledge to be obtained by everyone, men and women, slave and
free, and old and young."85 Education is now open to almost everyone
through schools, universities, and the media. Many intellectuals and sci-
entists say that the next age will be the Age of Information.
• In another authentic Tradition, God's Messenger declares: "The Last
Day will not come until the Qur'an is a means of shame and Islam is left
without a powerful group to support it."86 We have seen the truth of this pre-
diction. For nearly a century, Muslims have been persecuted even in
their own lands. While atheists and unbelievers have openly declared
their unbelief everywhere, Islam has been the target of verbal, written,
83.Muslim, Fitan, 110; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 59; Ibn Hanbal, 4:182.
84.Ibn Hanbal, 1:407, 408; Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:98, 448.
85.Darimi, Muqaddima, 27.
86.Kanz al-'Ummal, 14:244.
61

--- Sayfa 63 ---
and even physical assault. Muslims have felt compelled to conceal their
belief, and have become too ashamed to openly declare their belief.
• The Messenger predicted the developments in telecommunication
and transportation. The above hadith continues: "The Hour will not come
until the distances of time and space diminish."87 I have translated the word
taqarub as "diminish." It means "to approach each other" and implies that
before the Day of Judgment, things which previously took a long time
will be possible in a very short time.
This hadith, in addition to predicting modern methods of transporta-
tion and telecommunication, implies that time is relative. The Earth is
gradually taking an elliptical shape. This may cause some changes in the
division and calculation of time. As for the relativity of time alluded to in
the hadith, we know that time differs in some aspects (e.g., division,
length, calculation, and the speed of its passage in or around every
sphere or planet). If humanity manages to leave this solar system, the
present conception of time will completely change. Thus, in a single
word, God's Messenger makes several predictions, some of which have
already come true, and also alludes to several scientific facts.
• God's Messenger also predicted: "A time will come upon people when al-
most everyone will eat from usury, to the extent that those who refrain from it
will be exposed to its 'dust'."88 God's Messenger points to two important
facts:
- A time will come when all formal transactions will involve interest.
No one will be able to avoid it completely. However, those who do not
enter into interest-based transactions will not be held accountable for the
interest they eat unintentionally, as long as they do their best to refrain
from usury.
- God's Messenger may have meant by being exposed to its dust that a
capitalist class would emerge and increase its wealth through interest.
This would gradually lead the working class into deeper and deeper
poverty, which would result in direct and bitter class warfare.
It goes without saying that all these predictions have come true. How
tragic it is that Muslim countries are in such a despised, degenerate state
because, among other things, they are drowning in a swamp of interest
despite the Qur'anic warning that anyone involved in interest-based transac-
tions is at war with God and His Messenger (2:279). If only Muslims had
87.Kanz al-'Ummal, 14:244.
88.Ibn Ma'ja, Tijara, 58; Ibn Hanbal, 2:494; Nasa'i, Buyu', 2.
62

--- Sayfa 64 ---
been conscious of such Qur'anic statements, they would not be in such a
miserable position.
• In the following authentic Tradition, God's Messenger points to an-
other aspect of the present sad state of the Muslim world: "A time will
come upon people when believers conceal themselves as hypocrites do among you
today."89 At the time of the Prophet, hypocrites used to conceal them-
selves by going through the outward motions of the religious rituals. Ac-
cording to this hadith, Muslims will try to conceal themselves, even to
the point of performing their religious obligations in secret. The same
state was described in another hadith: "Sedition and deviation will occur,
and a Muslim will be disgraced for performing the prescribed prayers, just as a
woman is disgraced today because of fornication."
• In another narration, God's Messenger predicted that oil would be
discovered in Taleqan (Iran): "Good tidings to Taleqan, for God's treasuries
are there, but not of gold and silver."90 In the past, treasury meant gold and
silver. For this reason, God's Messenger emphasized that Taleqan's treas-
uries would be something else. What comes to mind first today when
told of such a treasury is oil. However, God's Messenger also might have
implied resources of uranium or diamonds. If this is the case, the predic-
tion has come true, for such resources have been discovered in and
around Taleqan.
• "You will walk in the footsteps of those who preceded you so closely that if,
for example, they put their heads in a lizard's hole, you would do the same." The
Companions asked him if those who preceded you meant the Jews and
Christians, and he answered: "Who else could it be?" Muslims have been
suffering from an identity crisis for two centuries. They are blind imitat-
ors of the West and have been caught up in vices that destroyed all pre-
vious civilizations.
89.Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 11:176.
90.Ibid., 14:591
63

--- Sayfa 65 ---
Scientific Developments
God's Messenger also made many predictions concerning various sci-
entific developments, some of which have already come true. Out of the
many examples, I will cite only a few to illustrate his accuracy in this
regard.
• As related by Bukhari, God's Messenger declared: "God did not send
down an illness for which He did not send a cure."91 This hadith, in addition
to declaring that every illness is curable, is the most comprehensive
statement encouraging medical research. In another Tradition, the Mes-
senger states that "there is a cure for every illness."92
Another version tells us: "Do not neglect to treat your diseases, for God
does not send a disease for which He does not also send a cure. The only excep-
tion is old age."93 Humanity may discover a cure for every illness, but will
never be able to stop our journey from the world of spirits to the material
world and then on to either Paradise or Hell through the stations of em-
bryo, infancy, childhood, youth, old age, the grave, and the Resurrection.
The Prophet encourages us to learn how to cure illnesses, but also warns
us not to neglect preparing for the next world.
God encourages us to pursue scientific knowledge by relating the mir-
acles of earlier Prophets. This brings such matters to the scientists' atten-
tion and thereby shows the limits to their aspirations. By allowing Jesus
the inimitable miracle of bringing the dead back to life, He points out
that we can cure everything but death. The story of Moses' staff shows us
that we can use inanimate things for various purposes, such as obtaining
water from deep underground by using such simple things as a staff like
a centrifuge. However, we will never cause a rock to bring forth abund-
ant water by striking it with a staff, or to change a staff into a snake, both
of which Moses did.
The Qur'an is Prophet Muhammad's greatest miracle, and marks the
farthest limit in literary style and eloquence that humanity can attain. It
also implies that writing and eloquence will have the greatest import-
ance toward the end of time. The Prophets set examples and showed us
the limits to which we may go in material as well as spiritual progress.
• The Messenger advised quarantine to contain outbreaks of conta-
gious diseases: "If you hear that there is pestilence in a place, don't enter it; if
91.Bukhari, Tib, 1.
92.Abu Dawud, Tib, 10; Muslim, Salam, 69.
93.Tirmidhi, Tib, 2; Ibn Ma'ja, Tib, 1; Ibn Hanbal, 4:278.
64

--- Sayfa 66 ---
pestilence breaks out where you are, don't leave it to escape the pestilence."94
According to Ahmad ibn Hanbal, he also declared: "Keep away from the
leper as you do from a lion."95 In this hadith, God's Messenger advises us to
protect ourselves against leprosy. Quarantine is again suggested here as
a way to prevent the spread of leprosy.
• Imam Muslim narrates in his Sahih that God's Messenger declared:
"If a dog licks your bowl, clean it seven times, first time with soil, and the other
six with water."96 This hadith contains the following medical principles re-
lated to bacteria:
- Dogs may carry microbes of certain diseases that can be passed to
people. This fact was discovered recently by scientists.
- A dog's saliva and excrement may contain substances that can dam-
age a person's health.
- At the time of the Prophet, disinfection and sterilization were un-
known. Nevertheless, God's Messenger recommends that a bowl licked
by a dog be cleaned with soil. Today we know that soil is a good antisep-
tic that contains such substances as tetracycline.
In another hadith concerning dogs, God's Messenger expresses a fun-
damental principle of ecology: "If dogs were not a separate community, I
would order their killing."97 This implies that every species is an indispens-
able element of ecological balance.
• As recorded by Sahih al-Tirmidhi and Sunan Abu Dawud, God's
Messenger declares: "The blessings of food lie in washing hands before and
after eating."98 This hadith emphasizes the importance of cleanliness. As
we use our hands, germs accumulate and can be removed only by wash-
ing them. In another hadith, he advises us to wash our hands after we
wake up since "You do not know where your hands have moved while you
sleep."99 At that time, no one knew about microbes.
• As recorded in all six of the most authentic books of Tradition from
as many as 40 Companions, God's Messenger established the principle of
dental care: "If it didn't burden upon community excessively, I would com-
mand them to clean their teeth with miswak[a tooth stick] before each of the five
daily prayers."100 Dental hygiene is of great significance not just for our
94.Bukhari, Tib, 30; Muslim, Salam, 98.
95.Bukhari, Tib, 19; Ibn Hanbal, 2:443.
96.Muslim, Tahara, 91.
97.Abu Dawud, Adahi, 21; Ibn Maja, Sayd, 2; Ibn Hanbal, 4:85.
98.Abu Dawud, At'ima, 11; Tirmidhi, At'ýma, 39; Ibn Hanbal, 5:441.
99.Muslim, Tahara, 87; Abu Dawud, Tahara, 49; Tirmidhi, Tahara, 19.
65

--- Sayfa 67 ---
teeth, but for our entire body. God's Messenger followed this practice,
and so we should do likewise.
• In relation to health and digestion, God's Messenger recommended:
"In eating, apportion a third of your stomach to food, another third to water, and
leave the last third empty. The bowl most distasteful to God is a full stomach."101
In another similar hadith, he said: "What I fear concerning my community is
a large stomach, oversleep, idleness, and the lack of certainty."102
All of the points mentioned here are either antecedent to or a result of
the other. Those who are idle and heedless, who ignore self-control and
self-criticism, are apt to become fat. This causes them to eat more food. A
full stomach encourages more sleep, and the person begins to sleep for
longer periods of time. Such people, now addicted to overeating and ex-
cessive sleeping, will never be able to acquire certainty and deep convic-
tion in Islam. This is the case with most people today.
• Another Tradition concerning health is as follows: "Treat your eyes
with kohl, for it nourishes the eyes and eyelashes."103 Many medical authorit-
ies state that kohl does exactly that. Another substance, recommended by
the Prophet and useful for health as an antibiotic and for its dermatolo-
gical effect, is henna.104 Henna is better and more effective as an antisep-
tic and sterilization agent than such substances as a tincture of iodine.
• Bukhari relates from Abu Hurayra that once God's Messenger said:
"A black cumin seed contains a cure for every illness but death."105 This hadith
contains many truths related to therapy. A patient needs, particularly
during convalescence, foods that are rich in proteins, calories, and vitam-
ins, and that are easily digestible. Scientific investigations have recently
shown that all these properties are found in black cumin.
• Bukhari relates from God's Messenger: "When a fly falls into your bowl,
dip it completely in the food before taking it out. There is disease in one of the
fly's wings, and cure in the other."106 No one at that time knew that flies
carry microbes. Moreover, when a fly drops into a bowl, it tries to hold
one of its wings off the food so that it can take off again. Thus, it leaves
100.Bukhari, Jumu'a, 8; Muslim, Tahara, 42; Abu Dawud, Tahara, 25; Tirmidhi, Tahara,
18; Nasa'i, Tahara, 6; Ibn Ma'ja, Tahara, 7; Ibn Hanbal, 1:80.
101.Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 47; Ibn Hanbal, 4:132.
102.Kanz al-'Ummal, 3:460.
103.Abu Dawud, Tib, 14; Tirmidhi, Tib, 9.
104.Ibn Ma'ja, Tib, 29; Tirmidhi, Tib, 13.
105.Bukhari, Tib, 7; Muslim, Salam, 88.
106.Bukhari, Bad'u al-khalq, 17; Tib, 58; Abu Dawud, At'ima, 48.
66

--- Sayfa 68 ---
bacteria on the food. But when it is submerged with a slight touch, the
tiny bag on the other wing bursts and scatters the anti-bacteria to kill the
germs already left. This is a very recent medical discovery.
• 'A'isha related that once a woman named Fatima bint Abu Khubash
asked God's Messenger: "O God's Messenger, my blood does not stop. Should
I abandon the prescribed prayers?" He replied: "No, you must not, for it is not
menstrual blood but rather a haemorrhage."107 Except by Prophethood, how
could he have distinguished between a normal haemorrhage and men-
strual blood? How could he have known that menstrual bleeding is a
kind of haemorrhage?
• Tariq ibn Suwayd narrates: I used to suffer from an illness, and took
alcohol as a remedy. When alcohol was banned, I asked God's Messen-
ger whether I could continue using this remedy. He told me: "No, for it is
not a remedy; rather, it is the disease itself."108 Scientists now agree that even
a single drop of alcohol is harmful to one's physical and spiritual health.
• God's Messenger proclaimed that ten things are intrinsically neces-
sary for men and therefore ordered by Prophets. Circumcision is one of
them.109 Today, scientists admit that a man's foreskin is exposed and sus-
ceptible to infections, even cancer. Therefore, millions of people are cir-
cumcised in Europe and America.
We are convinced that the West will one day acknowledge the truth of
Islam, and that the prediction made at the beginning of the twentieth
century by Said Nursi will come true: "The Ottoman State is pregnant with
a Western one, as the West is with an Islamic one. Both will give birth to what
they are pregnant with."110
We have so far explained the truthfulness of Prophets, emphasizing
the truthfulness of Prophet Muhammad. As mentioned several times, all
predictions made by a Prophet eventually come true, for they never lie.
They came to guide us to the Straight Path and to lead us to Paradise.
Had they lied even once, they would have guided no one to the truth.
However, their truthfulness, especially that of Prophet Muhammad, will
be manifested as brightly as the sun in the Hereafter, where people will
see everything clearly. In that place, all the tidings they gave about the
next life, the Resurrection, the Place of Gathering, the Final Reckoning,
the Bridge, Paradise, and Hell will be realized.
107.Bukhari, Wudu', 63; Muslim, Hayd, 62; Abu Dawud, Tahara, 109.
108.Muslim, Ashriba, 12; Ibn Ma'ja, Tib, 27.
109.Muslim, Tahara, 49; Abu Dawud, Tahara, 27.
110.Said Nursi, Tarikhca Hayat (Biography), 56.
67

--- Sayfa 69 ---
Trustworthiness
The second attribute of Prophethood is amana, an Arabic word meaning
trustworthiness and derived from the same root as mu'min (believer).
Being a believer implies being a trustworthy person. All Prophets were
the best believers and therefore perfect exemplars of trustworthiness. To
stress this principle, God summarizes the stories of five Prophets using
the same words: The people of Noah denied the Messengers. When their
brother Noah asked them: "Will you not fear God and avoid evil? I am a
trustworthy Messenger to you" (26:105–7). Replace the name Noah with
those of Hud, Lut, Shu'ayb, and Salih, and you have a summarized ver-
sion of these five Prophets' trustworthiness.
Mu'min is also a Divine Name, for God is the ultimate Mu'min, the
source of security and reliability. We put our trust in, confide in, and rely
upon Him. He distinguished the Prophets by their trustworthiness, and
our connection to Him through the Prophets is based entirely on their
trustworthiness and reliability.
Trustworthiness is also an essential quality of Archangel Gabriel. The
Qur'an describes Gabriel as one obeyed and trustworthy (81:21). We re-
ceived the Qur'an through two trustworthy Messengers: Gabriel and
Prophet Muhammad. The former conveyed it; the latter related it to us.
The trustworthiness of God's Messenger. Prophet Muhammad was
completely trustworthy toward all of God's creatures. He was loyal and
never cheated anyone.
God chose the Messenger for his trustworthiness so that he would de-
vote himself totally to delivering the Message truthfully. He was so con-
cerned about his duty that he would repeat the verses while Gabriel was
reciting them to him. God finally revealed: Move not your tongue con-
cerning (the Qur'an) to make haste therewith. It is for Us to collect it, to
establish it in your heart and enable you to recite it. So, when We have
recited it to you, follow its recital. Then it is also for Us to make it clear to
you (75:16–19).
As the Qur'an was given to him as a trust, he conveyed it to people in
the best way possible. He dedicated his life to this sacred cause, con-
stantly aware of his responsibility. In the last year of his life, when he
was delivering the Farewell Pilgrimage's sermon at Mount 'Arafat, he re-
iterated the Commandments of God once more. At the end of each sen-
tence, he told the people: "In the near future, they will ask you about me." He
then would ask them if he had conveyed the Message to them, to which
68

--- Sayfa 70 ---
they responded, each time, with great enthusiasm: "Yes, you have conveyed
it!" He then would call upon God to witness their words.111
Specific events demonstrating the Messenger's trustworthiness. God's
Messenger never thought of concealing even a word of the Qur'an. In
fact, we read in the Qur'an several Divine mild admonitions for a few ac-
tions of his. If he wrote it, as some mistakenly claim, why would he have
included such verses?
The Prophet was raised in a primitive society characterized by cus-
toms that contradicted reason as well as sociological and scientific facts.
For example, as adopted children enjoyed the same legal status as natur-
al children, a man could not legally marry his adopted son's widow or
ex-wife. This practice was abolished, for adoption does not create a rela-
tionship comparable to that with one's biological parents. God solved
this problem, as always, through the Messenger's life in order to separate
a legal fiction from a natural reality, and to establish a new law and
custom.
Zayd, an emancipated black slave and servant of God's Messenger,
was also his adopted son. At the Prophet's request, Zayd married
Zaynab bint Jahsh. Nevertheless, it soon became clear that the marriage
would not last long. Admitting that he was spiritually and intellectually
inferior to his wife, Zayd thought it would be better for him to divorce
her. In the end, the Qur'an commanded Muhammad to marry her: We
gave her in marriage to you (33:37).
Of course, doing so would violate a strong social taboo. As such, and
because the Hypocrites would use this to defame him, he delayed an-
nouncing the Divine decree. God admonished him as follows: Then you
said to him on whom God bestowed grace and unto whom you had
shown favor: "Keep your wife to yourself and fear God." But you hid in your
heart that which God was about to make manifest because you feared
the people[would slander you], whereas God had a better right that you
should fear him (33:37). 'A'isha later commented: "If God's Messenger
could have concealed any Revelation, he would have concealed that verse."112
If Muhammad had not been trustworthy, he would have done just
that. However, such an act is contrary to his character and mission, and
would mean that he had not delivered the Message. Furthermore, God
prohibits him from doing this: O Messenger, deliver what has been sent
111.Abu Dawud, Manasik, 56; Ibn Maja, Manasik, 84; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 5:173.
112.Bukhari, Tawhid, 22; Muslim, Iman, 288.
69

--- Sayfa 71 ---
down to you from your Lord; for if you do not, you will not have ful-
filled your task of His Messengership. God will protect you from men.
God does not guide the unbelievers (5:67). So, God's Messenger passed on
whatever was revealed to Him.
His relations with others. God's Messenger was trustworthy and en-
couraged others to follow his example. Once during the last ten days of
Ramadan, his wife Safiyya visited him while he was keeping vigil in the
mosque. As he was escorting her home, two Companions happened to
pass by. The Messenger stopped them and, unveiling his wife's face,
said: "This is my wife Safiyya." They said: "God forbid any evil thought about
you, O Messenger of God." The Messenger was warning them against hav-
ing evil thoughts about him, for that could cause them to lose their faith
and enter Hell. He gave them and us a lesson, saying: "Satan continuously
circulates within people's blood vessels."113
God's Messenger was an embodiment of trustworthiness. His own
people, even before his Prophethood, called him al-Amin (the Trust-
worthy One). After his declaration, his enemies continued to entrust him
with their precious goods.
He warned his people against lying, breaking their word, and breach-
ing their trust. All of these were condemned as "signs of hypocrisy."114 He
was so meticulous in this matter that when he saw a woman call her
child, saying: "Come on, I'll give you something," he asked her if she was
telling the truth. She replied that she would give him a date, to which
God's Messenger responded: "If you don't give him something, you are a
liar."
His concern in this matter extended even to animals. Once, annoyed at
seeing a Companion trying to deceive his horse, he said: "Stop deceiving
animals. Instead, be trustworthy with them."115 Another time, while return-
ing from a military campaign, a few Companions took some baby birds
from a nest to pet them. The mother bird returned after a short while
and, finding her babies gone, began to fly around in distress. When
God's Messenger was informed, he was so upset that he ordered the ba-
bies returned immediately. Such an order was meant to show that rep-
resentatives of trustworthiness should harm no living creatures.116
113.Bukhari, I'tiqaf, 8; Ibn Maja, Siyam, 65.
114.Abu Dawud, Adab, 80; Ibn Hanbal, 3:447.
115.Bukhari, Iman, 24; Muslim, Iman, 107.
116.Abu Davud, Jihad, 112, Adab, 164; Ibn Hanbal, 1:404.
70

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Each Companion was an embodiment of trustworthiness. By virtue of
this and other laudable virtues, cities and states submitted to Islam. Dur-
ing 'Umar's caliphate, Abu 'Ubayda, the embodiment of justice, com-
manded the Muslim armies in Syria. When the Byzantine Emperor set
out to recapture Hims, Abu 'Ubayda decided to evacuate the city, for his
forces were vastly outnumbered. He had the non-Muslim population as-
sembled and announced: "We collected the protection tax from you because
we had to defend you. Since we can't defend you against the coming Byzantine
assault, we are returning the tax we collected." This was done. Pleased with
the Muslim administration, Christian priests and Jewish rabbis flocked
to the churches and synagogues to pray that God would cause the
Muslim army to be successful.117
Such was the attitude of Muslim conquerors and administrators in the
lands they ruled. Muslims stayed in Spain for eight centuries. If there
were enough Christians left to acquire enough power to expel the
Muslims later on, it was because of the Muslim administration's religious
tolerance. Muslim rulers did not interfere with a conquered people's reli-
gion, language, or culture. If they had done so, there would have been no
Christians left to recapture Spain, no Jews left to conquer Palestine, and
no Christians left in the Balkans to engage in genocide. Nor would Chris-
tians have been able to destroy peoples, cultures, and languages on an
almost-global scale.
Islam emphasizes trustworthiness and security to such an extent that
suspicion and gossip are forbidden:
O you who believe! Avoid much suspicion, for suspicion in some cases is a
grave sin. Do not spy on or gossip about one another. Would one of you like to
eat the flesh of his dead brother? You would abhor it. Fear God, for verily God is
the Acceptor of repentance, the Most Merciful. (49:12)
God's Messenger was so sensitive on this point that once when 'A'isha
commented: "How long her neck is," he said: "You have gossiped about her
and thereby eaten of her flesh!"118
117.Abu Dawud, Adab, 164; Ibn Hanbal, 1:404.
118.Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, 7:359; Al-Targhib wa al–Tarhib, 4:285.
71

--- Sayfa 73 ---
God's Messenger always prayed: "O God, I seek refuge in You from hunger,
for how bad a companion it is! I also seek refuge in You from betrayal, for what
an evil confidant it is!"119 He also had harsh words for those who betray
and are disloyal: "When God gathers together on the Day of Judgment all the
people preceding and to come, a banner will be raised on behalf of every disloyal
person. It will be announced: 'This is because of the disloyalty of so and so!'"120
The heart of God's Messenger was closed to all evil, but open to all
good. He lived in a climate of security, faithfulness, and trustworthiness.
He never cheated, lied, betrayed people, just as he never gossiped about,
slandered, or harbored evil suspicion about someone. In return, people
relied on him and confided in him. His enemies slandered him, but no
one ever accused him of lying and disloyalty. Those who turned their
backs on him were deceived and dragged into wrong ways.
God's Messenger was totally reliable. His trustworthiness had two as-
pects: his relationship with people, and his relationship with God. The
former manifested itself as complete reliability; the latter as perfect reli-
ance on God. When combined, these two aspects ensure a peaceful atmo-
sphere of steadfastness and security.
The Qur'an gives several examples concerning the Prophets' confid-
ence in, and perfect reliance on, God. To cite only a few:
And recite to them the news of Noah, when he said to his people: "O
my people! If my stay (with you) and my reminding (you) of the signs of God is
unbearable to you, then I put my trust in God. So come together with your part-
ners and come to an agreement on your plan! Then let not your affair be a worry
to you. Pass your sentence on me, and give me no respite. (10:71)
[Hud) said to his people:] I call God to witness and bear you witness that I
am free from all that you ascribe as partners in worship to God, beside Him. So,
plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite. I put my trust in God, my
Lord and your Lord. There's not a moving creature but He has grasp of its fore-
lock. Verily my Lord is on a straight path. (11:54–56)
Indeed there has been an excellent example for you in Abraham and
those with him, when they said to their people: "Verily we are free from
you and from whatever you worship besides God; we have rejected you, and
there has arisen between us and you hostility and hatred for ever, until you be-
lieve in God alone,"—except Abraham's saying to his father: "Verily I ask for-
giveness (from God) for you, but I have no power to do anything for you before
119.Abu Dawud, Witr, 32; Nasa'i, Isti'adha, 19:20; Ibn Ma'ja, At'ima, 53.
120.Muslim, Jihad, 9.
72

--- Sayfa 74 ---
God. Our Lord! In you (alone) we put our trust, and to You (alone) we return
in repentance, and to You (alone) is our final return." (60:4)
The nature of unbelief is deviation and opposition. Unbelievers see the
world in darkness and feel alone in an alien world; believers see the
whole universe as a cradle of brotherhood and sisterhood, and feel con-
nected to everything. By its nature, unbelief severs relations and, as a
result, unbelievers feel enmity against everything, especially believers.
They cannot bear the believers' existence, so they try their best to eradic-
ate belief. That is why all Prophets encountered severe opposition and,
with their followers, suffered pitiless acts of cruelty. But due to their
complete confidence in and perfect reliance on God, they never lost heart
because of what befell them in God's Way, nor did they weaken (in will)
nor were they brought low (3:146).
The Messenger's reliance on God made him fearless. He appeared in
the heartland of a desert inhabited by one of the most uncivilized
peoples. Despite their harsh treatment, and the strident hostility of one
of his own uncles, he challenged the whole world and, through complete
trust in God, carried his mission to victory. He had only a handful of
supporters, and his victory came in a very short period—an unparalleled
achievement. We can understand his fearless nature, which developed
out of his absolute confidence in God, through the following anecdotes.
The Quraysh were so eager to kill him that just before his emigration
to Madina they selected one man from each clan. These numbered
roughly 200. Led by Abu Jahl and Abu Lahab, then besieged his house.
God's Messenger told his cousin 'Ali to spend the night in his bed and,
throwing some dust at the hostile men while reciting: We have put a barri-
er before them and behind them, and thus covered them so that they cannot see
(36:9), he departed without being seen.121 He left Makka with his closest
friend, Abu Bakr, and reached Thawr cave, which is at the top of a steep
mountain. Finding him gone, the Qurayshi chiefs sent out search parties.
One of these climbed the mountain up to the cave. Abu Bakr became
anxious, fearing for the life of God's Messenger. However, the latter com-
forted him: Do not be anxious, for God is with us (9:40), and added: "What
do you think of the two men beside whom God is the third?"122
In the Battle of Hunayn, the Muslim army was forced to retreat. All
but a few thought they were about to lose. God's Messenger spurred his
horse forward and shouted: "I am a Prophet. This is not a lie! I am the son of
121.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:27.
122.Bukhari, Tafsir, 9; Ibn Hanbal, 1:4.
73

--- Sayfa 75 ---
'Abd al-Muttalib!"123 His courage and steadfastness were enough for his
Companions to collect themselves and ultimately be victorious.
As related through various channels, during the military campaigns of
Ghatfan and Anmar, a courageous chieftain named Ghowras unexpec-
tedly appeared beside God's Messenger, who was lying under a tree. Un-
sheathing his sword, he asked God's Messenger: "Who will save you from
me now?' "God," the Messenger replied, and then prayed: "O God, protect
me against him as You will." At that moment, Ghowras was knocked down
and his sword slipped from his hand. God's Messenger picked it up and
asked him: "Now, who will save you from me?" Ghowras began to tremble
and pleaded for his life: "You are a noble, forgiving man; only forgiveness is
expected of you." God's Messenger forgave him, and when Ghowras re-
turned to his tribe, he said: "I have just come from the best of humanity."124
Trustworthiness is a cornerstone of belief:
God commands you to give the trust to (the charge of) those qualified
for them, and when you judge between men, to judge with justice. How
excellent is the teaching which He gives you! Truly God is All-Hearing,
All-Seeing (4:58).
According to God's Messenger, breaching a trust is a sign of the end of
time: "When a trust is breached, expect the end of time." When his Compan-
ions asked how a trust would be breached, he answered: "If a job or post is
assigned to the unqualified, expect the end of time."125
Assigning qualified people to jobs or posts is a social trust and plays a
significant role in public administration and social order. Its abuse
causes social disorder. There should be order at all social levels, for some
are to be given responsibilities by others. God's Messenger declared:
"Each of you is a shepherd[manager], and each of you is responsible for your
flock. The ruler is a shepherd responsible for his subjects. A husband is a shep-
herd responsible for his family. A woman is a shepherd responsible for her
husband's house. A servant is a shepherd responsible for managing the duties or
property his master entrusted to him."126 If everyone in a society were to
carry out their responsibilities, we would be living in a "society of trust-
worthy ones." Until that time, we can only imagine such utopias.
Trustworthiness is so essential an aspect of belief that God's Messen-
ger once declared: "One who is not trustworthy is not a believer,"127 and
123.Bukhari, Jihad, 52; Muslim, Jihad, 78.
124.Bukhari, Maghazi, 29, Jihad, 83; Muslim, Fada'il, 13.
125.Bukhari, 'Ilm, 2; Ibn Hanbal, 3,361.
126.Bukhari, Jumu'a, 10; Muslim, 'Imara, 20; Abu Dawud, 'Imara, 1.
74

--- Sayfa 76 ---
described a believer as one whom the people trust with their blood and
property.128 Furthermore, he said: "Promise me the following six things and I
will promise you Paradise: When you speak, speak the truth; when you give a
promise, carry it out; when something is entrusted to you, do not breach it; keep
chaste and don't engage in illicit sexual relations; don't look at what is forbid-
den; and don't grasp what is forbidden."129 Even looking with lust at one to
whom you are not married is forbidden: "God says: "[Such] a glance is like
a poisonous arrow from Satan's quiver. Whoever refrains out of fear of Me, I in-
culcate belief so firmly in their hearts that they will taste it."130
To live in absolute security is only possible if trustworthy people are in
power. If the Muslim world observes the Divine Trust and becomes the
representative of trustworthiness and security in the world, a "new world
order" based on justice and balance will be possible. Otherwise, humanity
will continue to chase after mirages of justice, security, and happiness.
Through his truthfulness, trustworthiness, and other laudable virtues,
God's Messenger left an indelible mark on people of all ages. His every
word and deed proclaimed his Messengership, that he was sent to guide
people to truth, to bring them out of the darkness of ignorance and sav-
agery, slavery and immorality, into the light of knowledge, high morality
and love, compassion and true freedom.
127.Ibn Hanbal, 3:135.
128.Tirmidhi, Iman, 12; Ibn Ma'ja, Fitan, 2.
129.Ibn Hanbal, 5:323.
130.Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 5:328.
75

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Communication
The third attribute of Prophethood is communication of Islamic truths,
otherwise known as "enjoining good and forbidding evil." We say Islamic
truths because every Prophet came with the same Divine Religion based
on submission to God, and had as his sole mission the communication of
this Message.
Just as God manifests His Mercifulness through the sun's warmth and
light, He manifested His Mercy and Compassion for humanity through
Prophets. He chose Muhammad, whom He sent as a mercy for all
worlds, to establish eternally the Message of compassion and mercy. If
he had not been sent to revive and revise the Messages of previous
Prophets and then spread that knowledge throughout the world, we
would be wandering in a terrifying desert of unbelief, misguidance, and
ignorance.
Philosophers, sociologists, and psychologists always have sought an-
swers to such vital questions as: "Who am I?" "Where do I come from?"
"What is my final destination?" "What is the purpose of life?" "What does our
dying mean?" and "Is death absolute non-existence or only a door to a new,
eternal life?" All of us wrestle with such questions. But only through the
enlightenment of the Prophets we can find true satisfaction and peace of
mind. Through them, we understand that this earthly life is just a way
station on our perpetual journeying from the world of spirits to the
world of eternity, a field to be planted with seeds for harvesting in the
eternal world. This world is reached through the intermediate realm of
the grave. With this realization, we are relieved of our anxieties, and the
world is transformed into a flowery garden of recreation and a gathering
place of friends.
Prophets were sent to convey this Message and to illuminate the path
to happiness in this world and the next. Now we will discuss three es-
sential points regarding how a Prophet conveys the Divine Message.
A comprehensive invitation to God.
The Prophets dealt with people and life in a holistic manner, appealing
to each person's intellect, reason, spirit, and all outer and inner senses
and feelings. They never ignored or neglected any human faculties.
The position of a Prophet in relation to Divine Revelation is similar to
that of a corpse in the hands of a mortician: The individual can do
76

--- Sayfa 78 ---
nothing of his own volition.131 God directs and guides a Prophet as ne-
cessary so that he can lead his people. Without this Divine direction, he
would be unable to guide anyone. If he neglected their intellects, the end
result would be a community of poor, docile mystics. If he neglected
their hearts or spirits, a crude rationalism devoid of any spiritual dimen-
sion would be produced. As each individual is comprised of intellect,
spirit, and body, each must be assigned its due part of the Message.
Human beings are active. Therefore, they should be led to those activ-
ities that form the real purpose of their lives, as determined by God and
communicated by the Prophet. God did not create people only to have
them to become passive recluses, activists without reason and spirit, or
rationalists without spiritual reflection and activism. Only when the in-
tellect, spirit, and body are harmonized, and people are motivated to
activity in the illuminated way of the Divine Message, can they become
complete and attain true humanity. All Prophets sought this goal, and
those who seek to follow them should strive for it: Say (Muhammad):
"This is my way: I call (people) to God with wisdom and insight, I and those
who follow me" (12:108).
A Prophet is totally dedicated to his mission, and thus is an altruist
who lives for the happiness and good of others. His happiness lies in see-
ing people devote themselves to God in the hope of salvation, not in ex-
pecting some great reward for his services. He knows that his reward is
with God alone. This indispensable fact is emphasized in the Qur'an: O
my people! I ask of you no wealth for it; my reward is from none but God
(11:29).
The Prophets were charged with conveying the Divine Message. They
did their best, patiently faced many misfortunes and even torment, ful-
filled their responsibilities, and then left the result to God. They knew
with full certainty that only God brings about the desired result. These
three fundamentals set the principles for all those who wish to call others
to Islam.
The method.
Constant striving is an essential feature of delivering he Message, as
well as an important element of the Prophetic method. A Prophet is, so
to speak, obsessed with how to perform his duty. With that goal always
131.This simile is coined with respect to the Prophet's submission to Revelation. He
fulfils whatever he is commanded by Revelation.
77

--- Sayfa 79 ---
uppermost, he considers all circumstances and does everything permit-
ted. As he is not responsible for the results, he leaves them to God. He
knows that he cannot cause anyone to accept the Message, for he is only
sent to convey it as effectively as possible: You[O Muhammad] guide not
whom you like but God guides whom He wills. And He knows best those who
receive guidance" (28:56).
Many Prophets lived with no one accepting their Message. However,
they did not lose heart, weaken, or resort to such improper means as vi-
olence, terror, or deception even when faced with relentless hardship
and torture. When the Last Prophet was severely wounded at Uhud,
some Companions asked him to invoke God's curse on the enemy. In-
stead, he prayed for them, saying: "O God, forgive my people, because they
don't know."132 He made this supplication while his face was bleeding
profusely, since he had once said: "It is as if I were seeing a Prophet who,
while his face was bleeding, prayed for his people: 'O God, forgive my people, be-
cause they don't know.'"
All Prophets reacted in the same way to the torments and false accusa-
tions they had to endure. For example:
The leaders of Noah's people said: "We see you in clear deviation." He
said: "O my people, there is no deviation in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord
of the Worlds. I convey unto you the messages of my Lord, and give sincere ad-
vice to you. And I know from God that which you don't know." (7:60-62)
The leaders of Hud's people, who were unbelievers, said: "We see you
in foolishness; and think you are a liar." He replied: "O my people, there is no
foolishness in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds. I convey unto
you the messages of my Lord, and am a trustworthy adviser to you." (7:66-68)
Nothing changed during the history of Prophethood. The Prophets
conveyed the Message of their Lord for the sole purpose of God's pleas-
ure. A Messenger was sent to every people, as explicitly stated in the
Qur'an: Whoever goes right, then he goes right only for his own soul's
benefit. And whoever goes astray, then he goes astray only to his own
loss. No laden soul can bear another's load. And We never punish until
We have sent a Messenger (17:15), and: And We have sent among every
people a Messenger (saying): "Worship God (alone), and shun all false deit-
ies." (16:36)
After he received the first Revelation, God's Messenger returned home
in a state of great excitement. While wrapped in his cloak, God ordered
132.Qadi Iyad, Shifa' al-Sharif, 1:105; Bukhari, Anbiya', 54; Muslim, Jihad, 105.
78

--- Sayfa 80 ---
him: O you wrapped up in your cloak, arise and warn! Magnify your
Lord. Cleanse your garments, and keep away from all pollution. Do not
show favor, seeking worldly gain. Be patient for the sake of your Lord
(74:1-7). He also was told: O you folded in garments! Keep vigil the night
long, except a little; half of it, or a little less, or a little more, and recite the
Qur'an in slow, measured rhythmic tones. We are about to address to you words
of great gravity (73:1-5).
Every Prophet conveyed God's Message to his people without becom-
ing wearied or daunted. Their people's harshness did not deter them. For
example:
[Noah] said: "O my Lord! Day and night I have called my people. But my
call has only added to their aversion. Every time I call on them to seek Your par-
don, they thrust their fingers in their ears and cover themselves with their gar-
ments, persisting in sin and magnifying themselves in insolent pride. Further, I
have called to them aloud. Further, I have spoken to them in public and in
private, saying: 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord: for He is Oft-Forgiving."'
(71:5-10)
When a people rejects the Prophet sent to them and persists in unbelief
and corruption, God's wrath usually falls upon them. The Qur'an con-
tains accounts of several devastated peoples, and we see their ruins all
over the world.
Consistent effort.
Communicating the Divine Message was the most essential character-
istic of God's Messenger. We are worried when we are hungry or thirsty
or have trouble breathing; he was worried if a day passed during which
he could not convey the Divine Message to someone. He was so con-
cerned about guidance and so pained by unbelief, that God advised him
to take care of his health:[O Muhammad] it may be that you will kill yourself
following after them, with grief that they do not believe in this Message (18:6).
God's Messenger invited all Makkans, both publically and privately, to
God's path. He called some extremely stubborn people, among them
Abu Jahl, at least fifty times. He particularly sought his uncle Abu Talib's
conversion, for he had brought him up and protected him from the
Makkan polytheists. In the eleventh year of his Prophethood, when Abu
Talib was on his deathbed, God's Messenger again invited him to belief.
However, the Makkan chiefs surrounded him in order to prevent this.
79

--- Sayfa 81 ---
God's Messenger was so grieved at Abu Talib's unbelief that he said: "I
will ask forgiveness from God for you as long as I am not forbidden to."133 A
verse was revealed some time later, forbidding him to do this: It is not fit-
ting for the Prophet and those who believe to ask (God) to forgive polytheists,
even though they be near of kin (to them), after it has become clear to them that
they are companions of the Fire (9:113).
Abu Bakr, the Prophet's closest Companion, knew how much God's
Messenger desired his uncle's belief. He took his aged father, who con-
verted on the day of the Conquest of Makka, to God's Messenger and
wept bitterly. When asked why he was sobbing, he explained: "O God's
Messenger, I so desired my father's belief, and now he believes. But I desired
Abu Talib's belief even more, for you desired it. However, God did not grant
him belief. That is why I am weeping."134
One of the best examples of the Messenger's concern for everyone to
believe was his invitation to Wahshi, who had killed his uncle Hamza at
Uhud. After the conquest of Makka, God's Messenger sent for him to ac-
cept Islam. Wahshi returned the invitation with a letter, including the
following verses:
Those who invoke not with God any other deity, nor kill a soul that God has
forbidden, except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual intercourse-whoever
does this shall receive the punishment. Their torment will be doubled on the Day
of Judgment, and they will abide therein forever in disgrace. (25:68-69)
After the verse Wahshi added: "You invite me to accept Islam, but I have
committed all the sins mentioned therein. I have lived immersed in unbelief, had
illegal sexual intercourse and, in addition, killed your uncle, who was most be-
loved by you. Can such a person really be forgiven and become a Muslim?"
God's Messenger sent him a written reply, containing the following
verse:
God forgives not that partners should be associated with Him, but He forgives
save that (anything else) to whom He wills. Whoever associates partners with
God has invented a tremendous sin (4:48).
Wahshi returned the letter with the excuse that the forgiveness prom-
ised in the verse depended on God's Will. Upon this, God's Messenger
sent him a third letter, in which the following verse was included:
133.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 3:153.
134.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 4:48; Ibn Hanbal, 3:160; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 4:116.
80

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Say: "O My servants who have transgressed against their souls! Don't des-
pair of the Mercy of God. God forgives all sins. He is the Oft-Forgiving, the
Most Compassionate" (39:53).
Through this correspondence, God's Messenger opened Wahshi's
heart to belief, and Wahshi could see himself included in the verse men-
tioned in the last letter. This correspondence enabled Wahshi to repent
sincerely and become a Companion.135 Nevertheless, Hamza's martyr-
dom had affected God's Messenger so deeply that he whispered to Wah-
shi: "Try not to present yourself to me too often. I might remember Hamza, and
thus be unable to show you the proper affection."
Wahshi did his best to comply with this request. He would stand be-
hind a pole and try to catch a glimpse of God's Messenger in the hope
that he might be allowed to present himself. When God's Messenger
died soon thereafter, Wahshi set out to find a way of atonement for his
act. When the war of Yamama broke out against Musaylima the Liar, he
hastened to the front lines with the spear he had used to kill Hamza. At
the most critical point, he saw Musaylima trying to flee. Immediately, he
threw his spear at the impostor and killed him. After this, Wahshi pros-
trated before God.136 With tears flowing from his eyes, he was as if say-
ing: "Will you now allow me to show myself to you, O God's Messenger?"
We cannot but wish that God's Messenger was present in spirit at
Yamama and embraced Wahshi to show his pardon and full admission
into his noble company.
Another fine example of God's Messenger's nobility and altruism, as
well as his love for humanity and concern about people's guidance, is his
acceptance of Ikrima as a Companion. Ikrima was one of the staunchest
enemies of Islam and the Messenger, and an active participant in all
plots to defeat him. He fled to Yemen with his wife on the day Makka
was conquered, while many of his comrades chose conversion. His wife,
Umm Hakam, convinced him to go to God's Messenger and ask forgive-
ness. Despite his previous hostility, Ikrima was welcomed by God's Mes-
senger with the compliment: "Welcome, O emigrant rider!" After the con-
quest of Makka, there was no "emigration" in the true sense; God's Mes-
senger was alluding to Ikrima's long journey from Yemen to Madina.
Ikrima was deeply affected by such nobility, and requested him to ask
God's pardon for his sins. When the Messenger did so, Ikrima felt
135.Haythami, Majma' al-Zawa'id, 7:100-1.
136.Bukhari, Maghazi, 21; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:76-7.
81

--- Sayfa 83 ---
exhilarated and promised to spend for the sake of Islam double what he
had spent fighting it. Ikrima fulfilled his promise at the Battle of Yarmuk,
where he was wounded. Seeing his wife crying beside him in the tent, he
told her: "Don't weep, for I won't die before I witness the victory." Some time
later, his uncle Hisham entered and announced the Muslims' victory.
Ikrima asked to be helped to stand up, and when they did so, whispered:
"O God's Messenger, have I carried out the promise I gave you?" Then, he re-
cited: Make me die as a Muslim and join me to the righteous (12:101),
and submitted his soul to God.137
Throughout his life, God's Messenger grieved for the misfortunes of
humanity. He ceaselessly called people to God's way. During his years in
Makka, he walked the streets and visited the nearby annual fairs, always
hoping to gain a few converts. Insults, derision, and torture did not deter
him even once. When: Warn your tribe of the nearest kindred (26:214) was
revealed, he invited his nearest relatives over for a meal. 'Ali later nar-
rated the incident:
God's Messenger invited his relatives to his house. After the meal, he
addressed them: "God has commanded me to warn my nearest relatives. You
are my tribe of the nearest kindred. I will not be able to do anything for you in
the Hereafter unless you proclaim that there is no deity but God." At the end of
his speech, he asked who would support him. At that time, I was a boy
with puny legs and arms. When no one responded, I put aside the pitch-
er in my hand and declared: "I will, O Messenger of God!" The Messenger
repeated the call three times, and each time only I answered him.138
God's Messenger persevered, enduring relentless and increasingly
harsh derision, degradation, beatings, and expulsion from the fairs. He
was actually stoned by children in Ta'if.
Only in the twelfth year of his mission was he able to meet some Mad-
inese at 'Aqaba (located outside of Makka). He told them of Islam, and
they accepted it. The following year, 70 Madinese became Muslims at the
same place. They swore allegiance to God's Messenger and promised to
support him if he emigrated to Madina. He appointed Mus'ab ibn
'Umayr to teach them Islam. This was the beginning of a new phase in
his life. By the time he emigrated to Madina the following year, every
household had at least one convert.139
137.Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:241-3; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 2:496.
138.Ibn Hanbal, 1:159; Haythami, 8:302-3.
139.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:73.
82

--- Sayfa 84 ---
Further remarks.
An important point to note is that while communicating the Message,
the Prophet set an excellent example of ardor in guiding people. The
Companions did their best to imitate his technique. For example, Mus'ab
ibn 'Umayr's technique was so effective and sincere that even the most
stubborn Madinese, such as Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, became Muslims. Sa'd's
initial reaction to Mus'ab's activity was harsh. But when the latter asked
him politely: "First sit and listen. If you are not pleased with what I tell you,
feel free to cut off my head with the sword in your hand," Sa'd's anger sub-
sided. He parted from Mus'ab as a new Muslim.
God's Messenger continued to send Companions to neighboring cities.
He sent Talha to Duwmat al-Jandal, and Bara' ibn A'dhib to Yemen. If a
Companion was not successful, although this was rare, he sent another
in his place. When Khalid and Bara' could not capture the Yemenis'
hearts, God's Messenger sent 'Ali. Shortly thereafter, almost all of them
became Muslims.140
Another important point is his conduct after the Treaty of Hudaybiya.
Some of the Companions considered various conditions dishonorable (to
the Muslims). However, in the ensuing atmosphere of peace, which fol-
lowed years of disruption and war, many enemies of Islam reconsidered
the Message. Eventually, even such leading opponents as Khalid and
'Amr ibn al-'As accepted Islam.141
God's Messenger welcomed Khalid with a compliment: "I was wonder-
ing how a sensible man like Khalid could remain an unbeliever. I had a strong
conviction that you would one day accept Islam."142 He comforted 'Amr ibn
al-'As, who asked him to pray for God's forgiveness of him, and said:
"Don't you know that those who accept Islam are cleansed of all their previous
sins?"143
After the Treaty of Hudaybiyah, God's Messenger sent letters to the
rulers of neighboring countries. He wrote to the Negus, king of
Abyssinia:
From Muhammad, God's Messenger, to the Negus Asham, King of Abyssin-
ia. Peace be upon you! On this occasion, I praise God, the Sovereign, the Holy
One free from all defects, the Giver of security, the Watcher over His creatures. I
140.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 5:120-1.
141.Ibid., 4:272.
142.Ibid., 4:273.
143.Ibid., 4:271.
83

--- Sayfa 85 ---
bear witness that Jesus is a spirit from God, a word from Him, whom He be-
stowed upon Mary, who was chaste, pure, and a virgin. I call you to God, One
with no partner.144
The Messenger urged the Negus to convert by first greeting him with
peace. Since the Negus was a Christian, God's Messenger expressed his
belief in the Prophethood of Jesus and affirmed Mary's virginity and
purity, thus emphasizing the point of agreement between them.
The Negus received the letter, and, kissing it, put it to his head as a
sign of respect. After reading the letter, the Negus accepted Islam
without hesitation and dictated to his secretary the following answer:
To Muhammad, God's Messenger, from the Negus. I bear witness that you
are the Messenger of God. If you command me to come to you, I will do it, but I
am not in a position to make my subjects Muslim. O God's Messenger, I testify
that what you say is all true.145
The Negus was so sincere that one day he told his confidants: "I would
rather be a servant of Muhammad than a king." When he died, God's Mes-
senger performed the funeral prayer for him in absentia.146
The following letter was sent to Heraclius, emperor of Byzantium:
From Muhammad, the servant of God and His Messenger, to Heraclius, the
greatest of the Byzantines. Peace be upon him who follows the guidance. I invite
you to Islam. Embrace Islam and secure salvation, that God may give you a
double reward. If you turn away, you will be burned with, besides your own, the
sins of all those who turn away (among your people). Say: "O people of the
Book. Come to a word common between us and you that we worship none but
God, that we associate nothing in worship with Him, and that none of us shall
take others for lords beside God. If they turn away, say: 'Bear witness that we
are Muslims.'"(3:64)147
The Emperor was moved by the letter. He summoned Abu Sufyan,
who was then in Syria leading a Makkan trade caravan. The following
dialogue took place between them:
- What is this man's family status?
- A noble one.
- Did any of his ancestors claim Prophethood?
- No.
144.Ibid., 3:104.
145.Ibid., 3:105.
146.Bukhari, Jana'iz, 4:65; Muslim, Jana'iz, 62-67.
147.Bukhari, Bad'u al-Wahy, 6.
84

--- Sayfa 86 ---
- Was there a king among his ancestors?
- No.
- Do the elite or the weak mostly follow him?'
- The weak.
- Has anyone apostatized after conversion to his religion?
- So far, nobody has.
- Do his followers increase or decrease?
- They increase daily.
- Have you ever heard him tell a lie?
- No.
- Has he ever broken his promise?
- Not yet, but I don't know whether he will in the future.
Although Abu Sufyan was at that time a ruthless enemy of God's Mes-
senger, he told the truth about him except in his last words, which might
raise doubts about the Messenger's future trustworthiness. The Emperor
was inclined to acknowledge the faith, but seeing the reaction of the
priests near to him, only concluded: "In the very near future, all these lands
I am resting upon will be his." Imam Bukhari narrates that the bishop of the
area accepted Islam.
God's Messenger sent letters to other kings, among them Muqawqis,
the ruler of Egypt, who responded with some presents.148 Chosroes of
Persia tore up the letter, an incident predicting his empire's end, which
took place during 'Umar's caliphate.149
When God orders Muhammad to communicate the Message, He ad-
dresses him as Messenger to show that he has the highest rank among
the Prophets. All other Prophets are addressed by name; Messenger
demonstrates that he is the foremost in conveying the Message. Islamic
civilization, based upon the principles he conveyed, has attracted and
astounded many, so much so that an interesting incident is recorded in
Mizanci Murad Tarihi (History by Mizanci Murad): Auguste Comte, the
atheist French philosopher, after visiting the remains of Islamic Spain,
made a brief study of Islam. When he learned that Prophet Muhammad
was unlettered, he said: "Muhammad was not a god, but he was not just a hu-
man being either."
However, quoting al-Busiri, we say: "The conclusion which we draw after
all the information we have gathered about him is that he is a human being, but
the best among God's creation."
148.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 5:324.
149.Bukhari, 'Ilm, 7:1; Ibn Hanbal, 1:243.
85

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Other important points.
The following three points are important in conveying the Message of
Islam: intelligence, practicing what they preach, and asking for no
reward.
First, intelligence must be used to reach people on their own level. A
Prophetic Tradition states: "We, the community of the Prophets, are com-
manded to address people according to their level of understanding." Those
seeking to spread Islam should know how to approach and gain non-
Muslims' attention. This point can be illustrated by many examples from
the life of God's Messenger. Here are two of them:
God's Messenger won 'Umar's heart by appreciating his good sense.
He told 'Umar: "I can't understand how a reasonable man like you can expect
anything from inanimate objects like stones, wood, or soil." He also inspired
confidence in 'Umar through his good conduct. His committed worship
of God so influenced 'Umar that at last he came to God's Messenger, and
was as obedient and reverent before him as a well-mannered child be-
fore a respected father.
One day, a young man (whose name apparently was Julaybib) asked
God's Messenger for permission to fornicate, since he could not restrain
himself. Those who were present reacted in various ways. Some scoffed
at him, others pulled his robe, and still others readied themselves to hit
him. But the compassionate Prophet drew him near and engaged him in
conversation. He began by asking him: "Would you let someone do this with
your mother?" to which the young man replied: "My mother and father be
your ransom, O God's Messenger, I don't agree with that." The Prophet said:
"Naturally, no one agrees that his mother should be a party in such a disgraceful
act."
He then continued asking Julaybib the same question, but substituting
daughter, wife, sister, and aunt for mother. Every time Julaybib replied
that he would not agree to such an act. By the end of this conversation,
Julaybib had lost all desire to fornicate. But God's Messenger concluded
this "spiritual operation" with a supplication. Placing his hand on
Julaybib's chest, he prayed: "O God, forgive him, purify his heart, and main-
tain his chastity."150
Julaybib became a model of chastity. Some time later he married
through the intermediation of God's Messenger. Not long after that he
150.Ibn Hanbal, 5:256-57.
86

--- Sayfa 88 ---
was martyred in a battle after killing seven enemy soldiers. When his
corpse was located, God's Messenger put his hand on his knee and said:
"This one is of me, and I am of him."151
God's Messenger was so competent and successful in educating people
that it constitutes a conclusive proof of his Prophethood. The most unciv-
ilized, crude, illmannered, ruthless, and ignorant people of that time
were transformed into the most praiseworthy guides of humanity in a
very short period. I wonder whether even the largest, best-equipped
group of professional educators, modern pedagogues, sociologists, psy-
chologists, teachers and the like could achieve in 100 years anywhere in
the modern civilized world even a hundredth of what God's Messenger
accomplished in 23 years in the uncivilized desert of Arabia fourteen
centuries ago. The modern efforts and techniques applied to remove so
insignificant a bad habit as smoking with almost negligible success,
when compared to the Prophet's lasting success in eradicating so many
bad habits and views, prove that Prophet Muhammad was without par-
allel or equal when it came to educating people.
Second, those who want their words to influence people must practice
what they preach. If they do not, how can they expect to succeed, for it is
well known that actions always speak louder than words. The Qur'an is
very explicit in this matter: O you who believe, why do you say that which
you do not do? Most hateful it is in the sight of God that you say what you do
not do (61:2-3).
God's Messenger was the living embodiment of his mission. He was
the foremost in practicing Islam, devotion to God, and servanthood to
Him. It was not uncommon for those who saw him to require no other
proof to believe in his Prophethood. For example, 'Abd Allah ibn Salam,
the renowned Jewish scholar of Madina, believed in him at first sight,
saying: "There can be no lie in this face. One with such a face can only be a
Messenger of God."152
'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha, a famous poet of that time, expressed this fact
in the following couplet:
Even if he had not come with manifest signs,
A single look at him suffices to inspire belief in him.
Those who believed in him were not foolish or unreasonable people.
Among them were such people as the first four caliphs (Abu Bakr,
151.Muslim, Fada'il al-Sahaba, 131.
152.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 163-4.
87

--- Sayfa 89 ---
'Umar, 'Uthman, and 'Ali), all of whom administered a very great state.
They were so profound in spirituality and deep in belief that 'Ali, for ex-
ample, once said: "If the veil (between this material world and the immaterial
world) were raised, my certainty (of the Unseen) would not increase."153
One reason why Prophet Muhammad is still loved deeply by hun-
dreds of millions of people, regardless of unending hostile and negative
propaganda, and why people all over the world embrace Islam daily, is
that he practiced what he preached. For example, he invited people to
worship God sincerely, and is himself the best example of such worship.
He would spend more than half the night in prayer, crying and full of
humility. When asked why he went to such lengths that his feet would
swell, and did so even though he was sinless, he would answer: "Should I
not be a thankful slave of God?"
'A'isha narrated that one night he asked her permission to get up and
pray. He was so sensitive to the rights of his wives that he would seek
their permission to perform supererogatory prayers. He prayed until
daybreak and shed tears. He frequently recited the following verses:
In the creation of the Heavens and the Earth, and in the alternation of day
and night, are signs for those of understanding. Those that remember God
standing, sitting, and lying down, and meditate upon the creation of the
Heavens and the Earth. "Our Lord, You have not created this in vain. Glory be
to You. Protect us from the punishment of the Fire. Our Lord, those whom You
will admit to the Fire You have abased; for wrongdoers there are no helpers. Our
Lord, we have heard a caller calling to faith: 'Believe in your Lord!' So we be-
lieved. Therefore, Our Lord, forgive our sins and erase our evil deeds. Take our
souls in death in the company of the righteous. Our Lord, grant us what You
promised to us through Your Messengers, and do not abase us on the Day of Re-
surrection. You never break the promise." (3:190-94)
Again, 'A'isha reports: I woke up one night and could not see God's
Messenger beside me. I was jealous, lest he had gone to another of his
wives. As I just got up from bed, my hand touched his feet. I noticed that
he was prostrating, praying: "O God, I seek refuge in Your pleasure from
Your wrath, and in Your forgiveness from Your punishment; I also seek refuge
in Yourself from You. I cannot praise You as You praise Yourself."
His life was so simple that once 'Umar, upon seeing him, said: "O Mes-
senger of God, kings sleep in soft, feather beds, while you lie on a rough mat.
You are the Messenger of God and thereby deserve an easy life more than
153.'Ali al-Qari, Al-Asrar al-Marfu'a, 286.
88

--- Sayfa 90 ---
anyone else." God's Messenger answered: "Don't you agree that the luxuries
of the world should be theirs and those of the Hereafter ours?"154 God's Mes-
senger lived for others. He desired a comfortable life for his nation,
provided that his community would not be led astray by world attrac-
tions, but himself lived a very simple life.
Third, God's Messenger, like all Prophets, expected no reward for per-
forming his mission. He suffered hunger, thirst, and every other hard-
ship. He was forced into exile and made the target of many assaults and
traps. He bore all of these simply for the good pleasure of God and the
good of humanity. Abu Hurayra once saw him praying in a seated posi-
tion and asked if he were sick. The Messenger's reply caused Abu Hur-
arya to cry: "I am hungry, Abu Hurayra. Hunger has left me no strength to
stand up for prayer." Hunger was a common feature of Muslim life. One
night, God's Messenger, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar met each other unexpec-
tedly outside. When they asked one another why they were outside, they
all replied: "Hunger."
Even though most of his Companions became wealthier in later years,
the Messenger and his family never changed their very simple lifestyle.
Fatima, his only surviving child, did all of the housework for her family
by herself. Once when captives were distributed in Madina, she asked
her father for a maid. He replied:
O my daughter. I can give you nothing before I satisfy the needs of the
people of the Suffa. However, let me teach you something that is better
for you than having a servant. When you go to bed, say: "Glory be to God,
All praise be to God, God is the Greatest" 33 times each.[Some Traditions say
that the last phrase should be recited 34 times.] This is better for your
next life.
One day he saw her wearing a bracelet (or a necklace, according to an-
other version) and warned her: "O my daughter, do you want people to say of
my daughter that she is wearing a ring of Hellfire? Take it off immediately!"
In addition to receiving no worldly benefit, God's Messenger bore
many tortures. He was beaten many times and left on the ground
covered with dust, and only Fatima would run to his aid. Once he was
being beaten at the Ka'ba, Abu Bakr ran to help him, shouting to those
beating him: "Will you kill a man because he says: 'My Lord is God?'"
154.Bukhari, Tafsir, 287; Muslim, Talaq, 31.
89

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Intellect
Intellect is another important attribute of Prophethood. In this context, it
has a specific meaning: a composite of reasoning power, sagacity, intelli-
gence, sound judgment, and wisdom far surpassing the ability of ordin-
ary people through a sublime power of understanding. It encompasses
and coordinates all human abilities, whether of the heart and soul or of
the mind.
Under the influence of temporary trends, some reduce Islam to a ra-
tionalistic system. They regard reason as the ultimate authority, and
make no distinction between the judgment of sound reason and the ex-
cesses and shortcomings of rationalism. All the principles of Islam, a re-
vealed religion originating in an All-Encompassing Knowledge, can be
confirmed by reason. However, a comprehensive understanding of Islam
requires a Prophetic intellect to grasp the entire meaning of the universe
and humanity. Islam admits reason's ultimate authority; not of human
reason, which is limited by one's capacity and usually conflicts with
another's, but of a Prophet's universal reason, for Islam is the name of the
Divine universal order.
God manifests His Names through veils. His absolute Unity requires
that we attribute effects directly to His creative Power. But His Tran-
scendence, Grandeur, and Majesty require "natural" causes to veil His
acts so that people do not ascribe to Him that which seems disagreeable
to them. He raised the Prophets to communicate His Revelation. As we
cannot receive Revelation directly, the Prophets functioned as a prism re-
ceiving and then reflecting Divine Revelation. They modulated the
Revelation according to their audience's intellectual ability and the pre-
vailing circumstances. In other words, the Prophetic intellect allows a
Prophet to understand everything about his people and thus to answer
all their questions and solve their problems.
If we study the Prophet's achievements, we see that he was a states-
man and commander of the highest order. As the embodiment or most
comprehensive manifestation of the Divine Attribute of Speech, he is the
most influential orator we have ever seen. His words, regardless of their
apparent simplicity, affect everyone, regardless of their intellectual sim-
plicity. As human knowledge increases, we see that these supposedly
simple words are, in fact, like an ocean whose depth is only appreciated
the more deeply one dives into it, or like a rose with petals one within
the other, each one full of meanings.
90

--- Sayfa 92 ---
His level of understanding was so sublime that Wahb ibn Munabbih,
who was well-versed in the Torah and Gospels, said: "When compared to
that of God's Messenger, humanity's total mental capacity and perception is like
a single sand particle compared to all the sand in a vast desert."
91

--- Sayfa 93 ---
Examples of his intellectual capacity
• Before his Prophethood, the Ka'ba was partly ruined by rain and the
ensuing floods. The Quraysh restored it. However, clan warfare almost
broke out when it came to who would have the honor of restoring the
sacred Black Stone to its proper place. Someone suggested that they refer
the matter to whoever appeared first at the Ka'ba. To everyone's relief,
this person was Muhammad. They told each other: "The Trustworthy One
is coming!" After explaining the problem, he asked them to bring a piece
of cloth, which he spread on the ground. Putting the Black Stone on it, he
told each clan chief to hold a corner and lift the cloth. When the Black
Stone was at the required height, Muhammad put it in its place. Clan
warfare was thus averted.
• God's Messenger always assessed a person's or an audience's spiritu-
al and mental capacities accurately. He also spoke directly to a particular
individual at a particular time and under particular circumstances; he
had no need for flattery or falsehood. One time Husayn, an eloquent
speaker renowned for his persuasive rhetoric, sought to dissuade God's
Messenger from his mission. God's Messenger listened carefully to his
argument and then initiated the following dialogue:
- Husayn, how many deities do you worship?
- Eight; one in the Heavens and the others on Earth.
- Which one do you call upon when misfortune befalls you?
- The one in the Heavens.
- Which one do you call when your goods are gone?
- The one in the Heavens.
God's Messenger asked a couple of similar questions, and, upon re-
ceiving the same answer to each question, asked: "According to you, the
one in the Heavens alone answers your call. Yet you continue to associate part-
ners with Him. Isn't this what I've been preaching? There is no deity but God.
Become a Muslim and be saved." This apparently simple argument defeated
Husayn with his own logic.
• Bedouins are often called "people of the desert." Their way of life en-
genders many unique experiences: the loss of a camel, forgetfulness of
where items have been placed, or being caught in a sandstorm. However
many deities they worship, they always ask God, the One, the Unique
Creator of the universe, and Powerful over all things, for help and res-
cue. Their inner sense and sound conscience tell them the truth under the
enchanting desert sky or in the darkness, and they then acknowledge His
92

--- Sayfa 94 ---
Oneness.
This
was
the
case
with
Hamza,
who
proclaimed:
"O
Muhammad, I have perceived in the darkness of the desert night, that God is too
great to be restricted within four walls!"
God's Messenger knew everyone's mood and thus took people "by the
soul" when inviting them to Islam. For example, Ahmad ibn Hanbal re-
ports from Abu Tamima that a Bedouin once asked God's Messenger if
he was Muhammad. Receiving an affirmative answer, the Bedouin asked
to what he was inviting people. The Messenger replied: "To God, the All-
Majestic. I invite them to Him alone, without associating any partners with
Him. He is God whom you call upon when a misfortune befalls you and He who
removes it. It is to Him alone that you pray during drought and famine, and He
sends rain and causes the grass to grow. It is also Him you entreat when you
lose something in the vast desert, and He causes you to find it." These simple,
accurate, and concise words caused the Bedouin to awake to the truth
and embrace Islam on the spot.
History records no other instance of an individual forming such a vir-
tuous community so quickly and from such unpromising people and
meager resources. Prophet Muhammad used the dynamics granted to
him by God so effectively that historians and sociologists still cannot
fully grasp all dimensions of his revolutionary Message. Its waves have
swept through the ages, and continue to attract increasing numbers of
people from all over the world into the peaceful ocean of Islam.
• The Prophet solved problems, as Bernard Shaw pointed out, as eas-
ily as one drinks coffee. Even when faced with the most unexpected
emergencies that would cause even experts to panic, he remained calm
and solved the problem to everyone's satisfaction. His whole life shows
that he was a man of perfect balance, and that this balance was never
lost.
Expanding on this last item, consider the following example. After the
conquest of Makka, many former enemies proclaimed their conversion.
Naturally, it was difficult for them to acquire sincere belief so quickly.
So, God's Messenger sought to "reconcile their hearts" and increase their
commitment by preferring them over the Muslims when distributing the
war spoils after the Battle of Hunayn.
The spoils consisted of 24,000 camels, 40,000 sheep and goats, and
10,000 pounds of gold and silver. God's Messenger gave 300 camels and
250 pounds of gold and silver to Abu Sufyan and his family, 200 camels
to Hakim ibn Hizam, and 100 camels each to Nusayr ibn al-Harith, Qays
ibn Asiyy, Safwan ibn Umayya, Malik ibn Awf, Akra ibn Habis, and
93

--- Sayfa 95 ---
'Uyayna ibn Hisn. Such generosity also did much to repair the Makkan
chiefs' wounded pride.
Some younger Ansaris, despite their devotion to God's Messenger and
Islam, became upset. They did not desire the spoils themselves; rather,
they did not want to see such formerly staunch enemies of Islam, in their
view, rewarded. This might have led to a dissident movement among the
Muslims. When informed of the situation by Sa'd ibn 'Ubada, an Ansari
leader, God's Messenger ordered them to assemble so he could address
them. They did so, and he opened his speech in a dramatic way designed
to attract and hold their attention, and to impress their souls: "O Com-
munity of the Helpers! I hear that you are displeased with me."
He continued in this powerful and impressive style, reminding them
of God's blessings upon them through him. He asked: "Were you not in
misguidance when I came to you? And has God not guided you to the truth
through me? Were you not in poverty when I came to you? And has God not
enriched you through me? Were you not in internal conflicts when I came to
you? And has God not reconciled you through me?" They agreed to all of this,
answering each question with: "True, O God's Messenger! We are indebted
to God and His Messenger!"
After reminding them of these blessings, God's Messenger recounted
their services to Islam, saying: "O Ansar! If you had desired, you could have
answered me differently and said: 'Your people denied you, but we believed in
you. You came to us with no one to defend you, but we admitted and protected
you. Your people exiled you, but we embraced you. You came to us with nothing
to subsist on, and we met all your needs.' If you had responded thus to me, you
would have told the truth and no one would have stood up to contradict you."
He continued: "O Ansar! Even if you're upset with my actions, wouldn't
you rather return home with God's Messenger while they return with camels
and sheep? I swear by God, in Whose Hand of Power is my soul, that if all other
people took a different direction than that of the Ansar, I wouldn't hesitate to go
with the Ansar! Had it not been for the Emigration, I would have wished with
all my heart to be one of the Ansar! O God, protect the Ansar and their descend-
ants!" These words were enough for the Ansar to burst into tears, and all
of them responded with one voice: "We are content with God and His Mes-
senger! We desire nothing else!"
Although uttered on the spur of the moment, this speech both quashed
a potential dissident movement and reconquered the Ansar's hearts.
Let's analyze this speech so that its wisdom can be better understood and
appreciated.
94

--- Sayfa 96 ---
• He addressed the Ansar only, for they were the offended party. This
showed them special honor, and exerted a psychological influence upon
them from the outset. It also prevented any ill-will among the
Muhajirun, who had been forced to emigrate to Madina, or the new
Muslims of Makka, many of whom still had to be won over.
• His speech, when considered in its Arabic original, is an extraordin-
arily eloquent rhetorical document.
• His opening was dramatic, for it was designed to win the audience's
attention. Their attention never wavered, for the rest of his speech was
just as dramatic and effective.
• He did not resort to flattery or diplomacy. Rather, he spoke in plain
sincerity, which was vital in securing the desired influence upon the
listeners.
• The spur-of-the-moment nature of his speech also was significant in
obtaining the desired result. The freshness and force of such an unpre-
pared address, on such occasions, is often more effective than a speech
prepared in advance.
Those few examples illustrate the intellect of God's Messenger, and
show that he did not speak or act of himself; rather, what he said and did
carried the charge or force of one fulfilling a Divine mission.
Concise speech. Another dimension of his intellect is the very concise
nature of his speech. Remember that he is the leader not only of those
who lived during his lifetime, but of every believer to come. He was sent
to address people of every level, from ignorant seventh-century
bedouins to those of the highest intellectual and scientific achievements,
until the Day of Judgment. No one has yet been able to disprove what he
said. Accordingly, after we scrutinize his Traditions and the Qur'an, we
realize that they complement each other in style and content. Moreover,
there is no contradiction between them and established scientific know-
ledge. Ever since the Revelation, billions of people have found in the
Qur'an answers for their intellectual problems, cures for their spiritual
diseases, and models for their behavior in all circumstances.
The enchanting, captivating, and informative words of God's Messen-
ger that so enlightened his Companions intellectually and revived them
spiritually, have exerted the same influence on countless scholars, scient-
ists, Qur'anic exegetes, Traditionists, jurists, spiritual guides, and special-
ists in science and humanities. Such people, the vast majority of whom
have been non-Arab, have used the Qur'an and the Sunna as the founda-
tional sources of their academic studies and endeavors.
95

--- Sayfa 97 ---
Even today, one of his words is enough to cause people to reform
themselves and embrace Islam. He acknowledged this as one of God's
blessings and, to emphasize it as a blessing, would sometimes say: "I am
Muhammad, an unlettered Prophet. No Prophet will come after me. I have been
distinguished with conciseness of speech and comprehensiveness of meaning,"155
and: "O people, I have been honored with conciseness of speech and giving the
final judgment in all matters."156
The nightingale is said to convey the gratitude of plants and flowers to
the All-Provider. Likewise, God's Messenger came to "sing" the praises of
God in the "garden" of humanity and announce His Commandments
with his enchanting "songs." His words opened ever-fresh flowers in all
human hearts and reduced the words of others, regardless of their sur-
face beauty, to nothing. Believers were purified by his words' deep
serenity, exhilarated by the bright atmosphere created through his
speeches, and by the love his personal conduct inspired. Through his
words and deeds, God's Messenger removed the veils from the "face" of
nature
and
embellished
the
"Book
of
the
Universe"
with
Divine
inscriptions.
Many famous rhetors, orators, and poets have preferred to listen to
him or have benefited greatly from his words. Thousands of literary
people have devoted their lives to studying his sayings, and have
compiled multi-volumed books about or out of them. Many thinkers and
scholars have quenched their "thirst" with the "water of life" found therein.
In order to express the beauty and comprehensiveness of his words, we
provide a slightly adapted version of a couplet uttered about the Qur'an:
Almost nothing of this world has come unveiled or pure,
But the words of the Messenger preserve their purity undefiled, and
still wait to be understood fully.
As God's Messenger was unlettered, he was not influenced by his era's
written culture. His conscience was so sound, his intellect so compre-
hensive, and his character so pure that only he could have received Div-
ine Revelation. His mind and heart were fed by Divine Revelation ex-
clusively. Each word and deed was a ray from that Revelation, a sign of
his Messengership. Like a bright, crystal cup of clear, sweet water, his in-
tellect was so pure that Divine Revelation entered it and emerged from
it, drop by drop, in the form of words in their original clarity.
155.Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 11:412.
156.Ibid., 11:425.
96

--- Sayfa 98 ---
The primary expression of Divine Revelation is the Qur'an. It is also
the primary source for Islamic law. Although it contains guidance per-
taining to all aspects of human life, the number of questions and prob-
lems put to God's Messenger meant that a second form of Revelation
was necessary. This took the form of inspiration, an implicit Revelation,
to clarify Qur'anic verses or to establish new principles related to Islamic
conduct. This, together with his daily words and conduct, forms the
second source of Islamic law: the Sunna. This subject is discussed in the
second volume of this book.
Every Prophet was supported by miracles relevant to his time and en-
vironment. For example, Moses' miracles had to appear as magic, for ma-
gic was widespread. Jesus' miracles took the form of healing, for medi-
cine was in wide demand. Similarly, when Muhammad emerged as a
Prophet, four things enjoyed popularity in Arabia: eloquence and flu-
ency in writing and speaking, poetry and oratory, soothsaying and
divination, and knowledge of the past and cosmology. The Qur'an chal-
lenged all known experts in these fields and forced them to surrender.
Prophet Muhammad surpassed them through his wonderful eloquence,
knowledge of the cosmos, and predictions.
As his Prophethood is universal and will exist until the Last Day, his
eloquence and linguistic style will never be surpassed. His words, to-
gether with the Qur'an, supersede all literary works. Their excellence is
everlasting and becomes increasingly vivid as their deeper meanings are
discovered over the course of time. His words and the Qur'an are of such
extraordinary nature and so full of meaning that millions of saints and
people seeking Divine knowledge have obtained perfect knowledge of
the Divine Essence, Attributes, and Names through them. The hidden
truths of the Unseen worlds (e.g., angels, jinn, the Hereafter, Paradise,
and Hell) are unveiled through them.
These two sources have also served as a pure, inexhaustible fountain
of insight for countless jurists, Qur'anic interpreters, Traditionists, histor-
ians, scientists, sociologists, psychologists, and many others. The Qur'an
and the Sunna have enlightened billions of people, and have shown
them how to pray, fast, give alms, and make pilgrimage-even how to eat,
drink, and speak. In short, it has shown them how to conduct themselves
at every moment of their lives.
97

--- Sayfa 99 ---
Examples
• Imam Tirmidhi relates from Ibn 'Abbas, the Scholar of the Umma,
that God's Messenger said to him:
O young man, let me teach you a few principles: Observe the rights of
God so that God will protect you. Observe His rights so that you always
will find Him with you. When you ask something, ask it from God.
When you seek help, seek it from God. Know that if everyone joined to-
gether to help you, they could only do that which God already preor-
dained for you. If everyone joined together to hurt you, they could only
do that which God already preordained for you. The Pen of Destiny has
been lifted, and everything has been ordained.
This hadith encourages submission to God, and belief in His Unity and
the truth of Destiny. We should not conclude that it excludes human free
will; rather, it stresses one's action, prayer, and need to strive for the de-
sired results. It balances this with a warning that since everything is ulti-
mately in the hands of God, we should strive in accordance with His
Commandments and seek the results only from Him.
• Imam Tirmidhi relates from Ibn 'Umar: God's Messenger said: "Live
in the world as if you were a stranger or traveler. Regard yourself as one of the
dead." This succinct hadith encourages us to lead an austere, disciplined
life based on awareness of God. It reminds us of our final destination by
stressing this world's transience, and establishes the balance between this
life and the next.
We are travelers in this world. Mawlana Jalal al-Din al-Rumi, a
thirteenth-century Turkish Sufi, says each individual is like a flute made
of a reed separated from its group. We continually groan with the pangs
of separation from the real Owner and our native land. We set out from
the World of the Spirits and travel through the stations of our mother's
womb, childhood, youth, old age, the grave, and the Resurrection. Fin-
ally, our journey ends either in Paradise or Hell. If we desire a pleasant
journey and a safe arrival in Paradise, we must be aware of this life's
transience and prepare for the eternal life. Although we can taste life's
pleasures to a certain extent, provided they are not specifically forbid-
den, we should not overindulge or forget our true destination.
• Such authentic books of Tradition as Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih al-
Muslim, and Sunan Abu Dawud relate from 'Abd Allah Ibn Mas'ud that
God's Messenger said: "Always tell the truth, for this guides to absolute piety
and piety leads to Paradise. Those who always tell and pursue the truth are
98

--- Sayfa 100 ---
recorded by God as truthful. Don't lie, for this guides to sinfulness and sinful-
ness leads to Hellfire. Those who always tell and pursue lies are recorded by God
as liars."
Truthfulness is an indispensable attribute of Prophethood. Truthful-
ness opens the door of happiness in both worlds. No one can taste true
bliss while living in the darkness of lies and lying. Lying is "an assertion
contrary to God's knowledge," a pillar of unbelief, and the most manifest
sign of hypocrisy. The current prevalence of lying is destroying our se-
curity and morality, and contaminating the whole community (especially
its political circles) like a contagious disease. Any structure based on ly-
ing must eventually perish due to its very nature.
This hadith states that truthfulness leads to absolute piety, while lying
leads to sinfulness. Birr, the Arabic word translated here as piety, encom-
passes every virtue, from sound thinking, truthfulness, and pure inten-
tion to honesty, decency, and good conduct. Its opposite, fujur
(sinfulness), denotes every kind of deviation and evil, among them de-
bauchery, indecency, and perversion.
• Bukhari and Muslim report from Ibn Mas'ud that God's Messenger
said: "A man (or woman) is with him (her) whom he (she) loves." This hadith
is a source of hope and consolation for those unable to adhere com-
pletely to the Divine Commandments. Those who love the Prophets and
saints will be in their company in the Hereafter. Therefore, whoever de-
sires this should love them sincerely and follow them as best they can.
Those who love the enemies of God will be with them in Hell.
Nu'ayman, a Companion, could not stop drinking alcohol. He was
punished several times. When yet another Companion reproached him,
God's Messenger warned that Companion: "Don't help Satan against your
brother! I swear by God that he loves God and His Messenger." Thus, those
who are trying their best to reform themselves, as long as they continue
to perform their obligatory duties and try to refrain from major sins,
should be encouraged, not reprimanded. This is a prerequisite of their
love for God and His Messenger.
• Ibn Hanbal related from Mu'adh ibn Jabal: God's Messenger said:
"Fear God wherever you are. Do good immediately after a sinful act to erase it,
and always be well-mannered in your relationship with people." This concise
hadith establishes the principles of a happy life and describes the way to
eternal bliss. Fear of God is the basis of every virtue and good conduct,
and leads to Paradise. Through this, people can erase their sins with
99

--- Sayfa 101 ---
good deeds, and being well-mannered elevates them to the rank of
perfection.
• God's Messenger declares: "You are governed how you are (according to
your beliefs and life-style.)" This hadith expresses a principle of public and
political administration: A country's political structure is shaped accord-
ing to its people's tendencies, whether directly through democracy or in-
directly through other ways. Both the natural and the social sciences
have their own laws, which we call "God's creational and operational laws of
the universe." According to these laws, if people immerse themselves in
sin and evil, they inevitably will be ruled by evil people. If, by contrast,
they prefer a virtuous life, their government will be good.
The hadith stresses that laws have no sanction on their own; rather,
their authority depends on those who apply them. Therefore, the charac-
ter of government officials is of vital importance. If the people are right-
eous, their rulers or government officials will be righteous. If they are
not, no one can expect a righteous administration. The ruling elite are
like the cream rising to the surface of a liquid: milk has its own kind of
cream, as do lime and alum. When Hajjaj, a despotic commander, was re-
minded of 'Umar's justice, he replied: "If you were like 'Umar's people, I
would be like 'Umar."
The hadith also tells us to develop self-control and discern our own
faults. Social harmony cannot be established if people tend to blame oth-
ers. As emphasized in the Qur'an: God will not change the condition of a
people unless they change themselves (13:11). We are the ones who determ-
ine our fate and make our own history.
• Bukhari, Muslim, and Abu Dawud relate from 'Umar that God's
Messenger said: "Actions are judged according to intentions. One is rewarded
for whatever one intends to do. Whoever emigrates for God and His Messenger
has emigrated for God and His Messenger; whoever emigrates to acquire
something worldly or to marry has emigrated for what is intended." This
hadith concerns a Companion who emigrated to marry Umm Qays. It is
considered a cornerstone of Islamic law and the foremost standard for
evaluating a believer's actions.
Intention is the spirit of our actions. For example, if we fulfill our reli-
gious duties without making a specific intention to do so, they are unac-
ceptable to God. If we do not seek God's good pleasure, what we do is
not rewarded by God. Hijra (sacred emigration in the way of God) can
be considered a twin of jihad (holy struggle in the way of God).
100

--- Sayfa 102 ---
Although there is no hijra after the conquest of Makka, it will continue
elsewhere along with jihad until the Last Day. Believers may emigrate to
preach Islam, as God's Messenger and his Companions did when they
could no longer do this in Makka. Such emigrations are accepted as hijra
when done purely for the sake of God. Intention can sometimes be re-
warded without action. For example, if we sincerely intend to do
something good but cannot, for some justifiable reason, we will be re-
warded for what we intended to do.
Intention multiplies an action's reward, and transforms every action
into a kind of worship. We cannot earn eternal happiness in this short
worldly life. But by intending to worship God as if we were to live
forever, we can become deserving of the eternal life of Paradise. Unbe-
lievers whose hearts are closed to belief, according to the same principle,
deserve the eternal punishment of Hellfire. Believers who sleep after the
night prayer with the intention of getting up before dawn to pray ta-
hajjud are recorded as having worshipped God for the whole night. This
is why God's Messenger declared: "A believer's intention is more rewarding
than his [or her] action."
• Bukhari records that God's Messenger said: "The Muslim is one from
whose tongue and hand Muslims are safe. The Emigrant is one who emigrates
from what God forbids." This short hadith expresses many truths. First of
all, it describes the ideal or norm by beginning with the Muslim, as op-
posed to a Muslim. In this way, our Prophet draws attention to the qual-
ities of perfect Muslims, not to those who are only nominal Muslims.
The Arabic word Muslim, derived from the infinitive silm (security,
peace, and salvation), comes to mean one who desires and gives peace,
security, and salvation. So, the Muslims are those believers who embody
peace, cause no trouble for anyone, from whom all are safe, and who are
the most reliable representatives of peace and security. They strive to
bring peace, security, and salvation to others, and dedicate themselves to
disseminating their inner peace and happiness.
Our Prophet mentions the tongue before the hand, for slander, gossip,
and insult often do far more damage than physical violence. If people
can refrain from verbal assault, they can more easily refrain from physic-
al assault. Moreover, self-defense against physical violence is often easier
than that against gossip and slander. So, true Muslims always restrain
their tongues and hands so that others will be safe from them.
In the same hadith, emigration means more than leaving one's family,
house, possessions, and native land for the sake of God. To be capable of
101

--- Sayfa 103 ---
the latter, one must first emigrate from the material to the spiritual di-
mension of his or her being, from worldly pleasures to an altruistic life,
and from selfish aims to living for a Divine cause. Therefore, obeying
Divine prohibitions is directly related to being a good Muslim and to sac-
rificing one's life in the service of people purely for the sake of God.
• God's Messenger says: "Being a good Muslim causes people to abandon
that which is of no use to them." Such people practice ihsan, a term denot-
ing that we worship God as if we see Him, fully aware that even if we
cannot see God, He sees us all the time. Those who reach this rank can
say: "I was searching for Him in the outer world, but now I have come to under-
stand that He is the Soul within my soul" or "I expected some news from beyond
the world. However, the veil has been removed from my soul and I have seen
myself."
To attain this degree, worshippers should abandon whatever is vain
and useless. They should know that God is watching them, and that
God's Messenger and discerning believers are aware of their deeds' true
value. God says: Say: "Work, and (know that) God will behold your work, and
so will His Messenger and the believers; then you shall be brought back to the
Knower of what is hidden and what is open, and He will declare to you all that
you have done" (9:105).
Good Muslims abandon heedlessness and indifference, do their work
properly, put forth their best efforts in whatever they do, and are serious
and reliable in all dealings and transactions. Flippancy and frivolity in-
jure one's reliability and reduce one's dignity.
• Both Bukhari and Muslim relate that God's Messenger said: "Patience
is shown at the moment of misfortune." In the early days of his mission,
God's Messenger forbade people to visit graves, as some un-Islamic prac-
tices were still observed. After such practices vanished, he encouraged
his Companions to visit graves, and did so himself, for this encourages
people to improve their moral conduct and strive for the next life.
During a visit to Madina's graveyard, God's Messenger saw a woman
weeping bitterly and complaining about Destiny. When he sought to
console her, the woman, who did not recognize him, angrily told him to
go away, for: "You don't know what misfortune has befallen me!" When she
later learned his identity, she hurried after him and, finding him at
home, begged his pardon. God's Messenger told her: "Patience is shown at
the moment of misfortune."
Patience is a key to success and triumph. It means to accept pain,
trouble, misfortune, and similar unpleasant facts without complaint, or
102

--- Sayfa 104 ---
loss of self-control, trust, or belief in God and Destiny. Sometimes one
can achieve patience in difficult circumstances by changing one's atti-
tude, place, preoccupation, or immediate conditions. Performing wudu'
(ritual ablution) or praying also may help one deal with sorrow.
103

--- Sayfa 105 ---
There are several kinds of patience:
- Determination to avoid sins. This elevates one to the rank of the God-
fearing, whom God takes into His care.
- Constant and regular worship of God. This causes one to acquire the
rank of being a beloved of God.
- Acceptance of misfortune without complaint. This causes one to be in-
cluded among the people of patience and those who put their trust in
God.
- Dealing with exasperation. This means having a realistic understanding
of what is required to achieve a specific result. For example, producing a
loaf of bread requires that the field be cultivated, the crop harvested, the
grain taken to a mill, and the dough shaped into loaves and baked in an
oven. If, out of impatience or neglect, this procedure is not followed ex-
actly and in this specific order, a loaf of bread will not be produced.
• Bukhari, Muslim, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal record that God's Messen-
ger said: "The upper hand is better than the lower one." In another hadith,
God's Messenger explains that the upper hand gives to the poor and
needy, while the lower hand takes from others. So, besides expressing
the merits of charity, this hadith encourages people to work and earn
their living.
A subtle point: God's Messenger did not say the one who gives and
the one who receives. Instead, he said the upper hand and the lower
hand. This indicates that the act, not the person, is generally preferable.
As a result, the recipient may sometimes be better than the giver. For ex-
ample some people, like Bara' ibn Malik, appear to be very low but are so
beloved in His sight that whatever they predict, and then swear on by
God, comes true. Such people ask for nothing and are extraordinarily in-
dependent. God's Messenger advised Thawban not to beg. As a result,
he would not even ask someone to pick up a whip he dropped while rid-
ing his camel. So, when seemingly "poor" believers of this quality receive
from people, it cannot be said that they are inferior to those who give.
Islam does not approve of begging either on the individual or the na-
tional level. It should never be forgotten that honor, dignity, and superi-
ority always belong to God, His Messenger, and the believers. Therefore
Muslims should not come under the control or authority of unbelievers,
for this undermines their dignity and superiority.
• Imam Muslim relates from God's Messenger: On the Last Day, God
will not talk to, pay attention to, or purify three types of people. A
104

--- Sayfa 106 ---
painful torment awaits them. These are the people who "drag their robes,"
who remind those they have favored of their favors, and who try to sell
their goods by false oaths.
The hadith begins with thalathatun (three), meaning any three, un-
named, unworthy of being named. In other words, they may be met any-
where, and they and their actions are so despicable that Muslims should
avoid them. God will ignore such people in the next world. This is a
severe punishment, for, as stated in Sura al-Rahman, speech is one of the
foremost and greatest favors of God to humanity. Besides, we will be in
dire need of speaking on the Day of Judgment, when we try to justify ourselves.
These people, however, will be told: Be driven into it (the Fire)! Don't speak to
Me! (23:108).
On that day, everyone will be occupied with their own troubles, and
there will be no refuge except God. Everyone will hope that God will
give them some personal attention, that He will look upon them with
mercy and purify them. But those three sorts of people will have no hope
of being purified and forgiven, since God Almighty will not acknow-
ledge them.
In the hadith, their punishment is announced before their sins are
identified. God's Messenger thereby emphasizes the gravity of their sins
and warns everybody to refrain from them. The first and most grievous
sin is "dragging one's robe," an Arabic idiom for arrogance.
Arrogance means to contest with God for the rule of the Earth. Human
beings, despite their vast weakness, poverty, and powerless are never-
theless enchanted with themselves. They consider their abilities, skills,
position, wealth, apparent accomplishments, and so on worthy of pride.
This leads to self-conceit and self-pride. Though created from a drop of
lowly "water" and unable to choose their time and place of their birth,
family, color, and race, this self-pride grows despite their inability to sat-
isfy their bodies' operative needs.
For example, they cannot satisfy their hunger, thirst, and sleep on their
own. The only reason human beings survive is because God has en-
dowed them with various talents and faculties. But people ignore this
fact, attribute their accomplishments to themselves, and so contest with
God. Such arrogance eventually blinds them to innumerable signs point-
ing to God's Existence, Unity, and Absolute Sovereignty. In the words of
the Qur'an: Those who behave arrogantly on the Earth in defiance of truth-I
will turn them away from My signs: even if they see all the signs, they will not
believe in them; even if they see the way of guidance and right conduct, they will
105

--- Sayfa 107 ---
not choose it for their way. For they rejected Our signs, and gave no heed to
them (7:146).
The second grave sin is reminding others of the favors you have done
for them. This is closely related to arrogance, for those who consider
what God has bestowed upon them as their own possessions and abilit-
ies tend to engage in this sin as well. Those who regard everything as a
gift from God understand that they can benefit others only if He allows
them to do so. As a result, those who do the favor actually feel indebted
to those they have helped, for such actions allow them to receive a spir-
itual reward. This hadith encourages people to disinterested generosity
and altruism, concerning which God's Messenger says: "The generous are
near to God, to Paradise, and to people, and distant from Hell. The miserly,
however, are distant from God, from Paradise, and from human beings, but near
to Hell."
The last grave sin is deception in trade. According to the laws of Islam,
merchants must disclose any defect in what they are selling. Swearing by
God is also prohibited, especially in transactions. If merchants try to sell
their goods through lies or false oaths, or stir up demand by swearing by
God, they are committing a great sin deserving of severe punishment.
This sin is closely linked to the two earlier ones, for it usually originates
in miserliness and one's non-recognition of God. Besides being connec-
ted with unbelief in and distrust of God, these three sins poison society's
life and indicate weak character. Hence, the severity of their punishment.
• Imam Bukhari records in his Sahih that God's Messenger said:
"Whoever guarantees to me what is between their lips and what is between their
legs, I will guarantee them Paradise." As speech is one of the greatest favors
of God, we should use our tongues only for good and useful acts, such as
reciting the Qur'an, praying, telling the truth, and enjoining good and
forbidding evil. We should be modest and well-mannered in our speech,
and not engage in lying, profanity, slander, gossip, and so on. Words
should be chosen carefully, for, as 'Ali said: "Your word is dependent on you
until you utter it; once you utter it, however, you are dependent on it."
Controlling one's sexual lust is also very important for attaining hu-
man perfection and deserving Paradise. God has endowed us with many
faculties and impulses so that we might evolve spiritually by restraining
them and, channeling them into good deeds and virtues, attain higher
spiritual ranks. By struggling to satisfy desires only in lawful ways, we
can attain the rank of sainthood and gain superiority over angels. Since
angels have no carnal desires and thus do not struggle against
106

--- Sayfa 108 ---
temptation, they do not evolve spiritually. However, because of our es-
sential duality, we travel between "the lowest of the low" (becoming even
more wretched than Satan) and "the highest of the high" (surpassing the
angels).
Since Islam bans or blocks the ways leading to forbidden acts, one
should refrain from such acts as displaying personal charm or beauty,
gazing at the opposite sex, and being alone with someone of the opposite
sex in such places that encourage illicit sexual relations. Like holding
one's tongue, this requires strong willpower, self-discipline, and continu-
ous struggle. Even though it seems at first sight to be too difficult, it will
engender great spiritual pleasure, for the pleasure of labor and struggle
lies in labor and struggle themselves. Those who are successful will be
deserving of Paradise.
• Muslim records God's Messenger as having discussed forgiveness.
He once asked:
"Listen. Shall I guide you to the things through which God blots out sins and
elevates you to higher ranks?" When his Companions asked him to do so, he told
them: "Perform wudu' (ritual ablution) as correctly as possible, even in the
most adverse conditions; walk to the mosque for each prayer; and wait for the
next prayer after praying. This is the ribat, this is the ribat (preparation,
dedication).
The hadith begins with Listen to emphasize the importance of what
follows. In this case, it is the five daily prayers.
The prescribed prayer is the pillar of Islam. Without it, Islam cannot be
maintained. When believers pray correctly, they are protected from evil
thoughts and deeds. It is also a sacred ladder for ascending to the Pres-
ence of God. But before we can climb it, we must perform wudu' as per-
fectly as possible. From the first step toward wudu', believers begin to
gain reward. While performing it, they are relieved of the stress of daily
life and cleansed of sins. When performed in difficult circumstances, be-
lievers receive an even greater exhilaration.
Adhan (the call to prayer) is both the call for believers to enter the
Presence of God and the call to prosperity in both worlds. Wudu' is the
preparation that believers must make before entering this Presence. By
performing the supererogatory prayer before the prescribed one, believ-
ers complete their preparations and receive permission from the God's
aide-de-camp, namely, Prophet Muhammad. When the muezzin (caller
to prayer) calls iqamah (the beginning of the prayer), believers enter His
107

--- Sayfa 109 ---
Presence with total respect and reverence, converse with the Unique
Owner of the universe, and petition Him for their needs and desires.
Believers pray five times a day, thereby having their sins erased and
their potential to commit sins changed into "seeds of blessed trees of good
and virtue." There is, however, one condition: The prayer must be per-
formed with absolute sincerity, with pure intention to gain God's good
pleasure only, and in full awareness of being in the Presence of the
Creator and Owner of the universe, the All-Powerful, All-Knowing, All-
Seeing, All-Hearing, and All-Overwhelming.
God's Messenger describes the prescribed prayer as ribat, which can
be translated as dedication to something or guarding the frontier. It ap-
pears in the Qur'an: O you who believe! Persevere in patience and vie in such
perseverance; be alert and prepared for jihad; and fear God, so that you may
prosper (3:200) and: Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of
your power, including horses dedicated to war (8:60).
In the first verse, ribat means being alert and prepared; in the second,
dedicated. By describing the prayer with this term, God's Messenger
stresses the value and importance of struggling in God's way as well as
the primacy of the prescribed prayers in Islam and a believer's life. In an-
other hadith, he calls the former the lesser jihad and the latter the greater
jihad. To succeed in the former, believers must be very attentive while
performing the latter.
By describing the prescribed prayers as ribat, God's Messenger also
emphasizes that Muslims should dedicate their lives to Divine worship
and organize their daily activities around the five daily prayers. They
should ensure that they can pray when necessary and with full attention.
After each prayer, they should wait expectantly for the next one. Those
who pray in such a manner will be cleansed of sins and, moreover, pro-
tected against committing more sins. Then they will experience, as an-
other hadith says, something like a mi'raj (ascension to God's Presence).
• Bukhari relates that God's Messenger said: "God says: 'I have prepared
for My righteous servants such things of which they have never seen, heard, or
imagined.'" Paradise is the place of surprises. The Qur'an tells us of its
bounties using familiar words so that we can get some idea of them. But
as Ibn 'Abbas points out: They are given things in similitude (2:25), means
that these bounties are particular to Paradise in nature and taste; their
appearance, however, is like that of their counterparts in the world. Be-
lievers will be rewarded in Paradise with ever-renewed bounties and,
above all, will observe God free from any qualitative and quantitative
108

--- Sayfa 110 ---
dimensions. An instant of this observation will surpass, in delight and
blessing, thousands of years of life in Paradise. But the greatest bounty of
all in Paradise is that God will be pleased with believers forever.
To be worthy of Paradise, we must be righteous, upright in all our
deeds, and do everything as perfectly as possible. Righteous believers do
not lie or deceive others, and are completely reliable. God is confident
that they will perform their religious duties as carefully as possible and
obey His prohibitions. All other parts of creation are sure such believers
will never hurt them. Such people do everything in full awareness that
God Almighty is watching them. Since they have gained their Lord's
good pleasure, they are counted among those whom God calls My right-
eous servants. That is, they are loved by God and, as a result: "He is their
eyes with which they see, their ears with which they hear, their hands with
which they hold, and their feet on which they walk."
God multiplies the good deeds of His servants and gives, in certain cir-
cumstances, millions of rewards for each deed. This is why believers will
meet in Paradise such bounties as they could never have imagined while
alive.
• In a hadith related by Bukhari and Muslim, God's Messenger says:
"Paradise is surrounded by trouble and tribulation, and Hell is concealed in
pleasure." Paradise and Hell are, in essence, blessings for humanity. Fear
of Hell causes us to observe God's prohibitions so that we may go to
Paradise. However, being saved from Hell and becoming deserving of
Paradise requires great self-discipline and strict intellectual and spiritual
training.
The Qur'an says that human beings are tempted by love of the opposite sex,
children, hoarded treasures of gold and silver, splendid mounts, cattle, and
plantations (3:14). People have a natural attachment to life and its pleas-
ures. Hell is an abode of torment placed within an attractive setting of
enticing lures and pleasures. If we are captivated and live only to satisfy
such desires, we are lured toward Hell. We can reach this destination
easily, for the path to Hell passes through worldly attractions of every
kind.
To reach Paradise, we first have to train ourselves to ignore worldly
attractions. Hell is part of the way to Paradise, for we must travel to Hell
without allowing any of its attractions to seduce us. This requires self-
discipline and continuous struggle against temptation and the carnal
self's desires. Whenever we are invited to enjoy such worldly luxuries as
fame, wealth, and status, we must restrict ourselves to the boundaries set
109

--- Sayfa 111 ---
by Divine Commandments. We must continue to pray, fast, give alms,
and (if possible) perform the pilgrimage to the Ka'ba.
In addition, we must engage only in fairness; honesty; truthfulness;
kindness to the poor, the needy, and orphans; and enjoin good and for-
bid evil. We also must refrain from deception, usury, gambling, drinking
alcohol, backbiting, hypocrisy, and every form of injustice. We should
expect to be tested, for: God will test you with afflictions and something of
fear and hunger, and loss in goods or lives or in the fruits of his toil and earn-
ings (2:155). To reach Paradise, we must persevere, endure affliction, per-
form what is obligatory, avoid sin, and thank God for His bounties and
blessings. Such virtuous acts are hated by our carnal selves.
• Imam Tirmidhi relates that God's Messenger said: I advise you to
fear God and obey, even if a black slave becomes your leader. Those of
you who live long enough will see great controversy, so adhere to my
Sunna and the Sunna of the rightly guided caliphs. Cling to them stub-
bornly. Beware of newly invented matters in religion, for every invented
matter is an innovation. Every innovation is going astray, and every go-
ing astray is in Hellfire.
The Arabic word translated here as "fear of God" is taqwa. Derived from
wiqaya (protection), taqwa means to be in the safe-keeping or protection
of God. This has two aspects. The first is that believers fear God and
obey Him by observing His commands and prohibitions. The second as-
pect is that, by studying nature and life and discovering the laws of God
that control them, people acquire scientific knowledge and order their
lives. Science cannot be established if people do not discover these laws.
In order to be under the safe-keeping of God, true religion and science
should be combined, for they are two expressions of a single truth. Ac-
cording to Muslim sages and scholars, the universe is "the Created
Qur'an," where God's laws issuing from His Attributes of Will, Destiny,
and Power are operative. The Qur'an, the collection of Divine laws issu-
ing from God's Attribute of Speech, is "the composed universe" or "the uni-
verse in words."
The second point is that believers should not disobey their govern-
ment without justifiable cause. Without a leader, a community is like a
broken rosary whose beads have scattered everywhere. Such a situation
of social and political conflict usually results in anarchy and destruction.
The hadith also points out a truth that even modern democracies have
proven unable to grasp: no racial discrimination. It is clearly stated that
an emancipated black slave can lead the Muslim community. This was
110

--- Sayfa 112 ---
not only a theoretical assertion, but was testified to by the numerous and
great black saints, administrators, and scholars who were respected and
obeyed.
God's Messenger also draws attention here to his Sunna. As he is the
most excellent example for all aspects of life, believers are to follow his
example until the Last Day. Such adherence to his example guarantees
that Islam retains its original purity. Any deviation will result in social
and doctrinal splits and new importations into Islam-God has declared:
He had perfected (5:43). Adherence to the way of the first four caliphs also
guarantees of Muslim unity and Islam's maintenance.
This hadith also contains a prediction that his first four political suc-
cessors would be rightly guided, and that disobedience to them would
cause internal splits. Islamic history records the truth of this statement.
Just look at the uprisings during the caliphates of 'Uthman and 'Ali.
• Bukhari and Muslim relate that God's Messenger said: "Believers are
not bitten twice from the same hole." Believers have insight, perceptiveness,
and intelligence, for they are distinguished by their sound reasoning and
spiritual insight. The Muslim community has-and should have-the same
perceptiveness and always be aware of potential dangers or problems.
They may be deceived once, but the insight and awareness provided by
belief should prevent them from being deceived twice. This hadith con-
tains a significant warning for contemporary Muslims, who have been
deceived for centuries by the West and the hypocrites (communists) of
the East. Muslims must take control of their own affairs and re-examine
the quality of their belief.
• One hadith recorded by Bukhari and Muslim calls educators to re-
evaluate their methods: "Human beings are like ores containing silver or gold.
Those who are promising and in leading positions in unbelief are better than
others (in virtue) when they accept Islam and acquire a good understanding of
it." This hadith is very significant, especially, with respect to education
which demands the imparting of insight and perceptiveness. The Proph-
et said: This is my way: I call unto God with insight and sure knowledge, I
and those who follow me (12:108).
Insight implies knowing each individual's character, potential, and
shortcomings. Human beings are not alike in character, capacity, ambi-
tion, and taste. For example, they can be said to "contain coal, copper, sil-
ver, gold, and diamonds." The first step in providing a good education is to
recognize individual potentialities and figure out how to develop them.
Just as you cannot obtain gold from a coal mine, neither can you develop
111

--- Sayfa 113 ---
"copper" people into "gold" people. Conversely, if you try to extract copper
by using the gold-ore extraction method, your efforts will be fruitless.
We also should note that those with great potential always distinguish
themselves. For example, such leading opponents of Islam as 'Umar
eventually embraced Islam and became leading figures of the Muslim
community. This shows that their potential for virtue is refined and de-
veloped fully in the crucible of Islam.
• In another hadith, God's Messenger said: "Surely God grants the
wrongdoer, the oppressor, a reprieve. But once He seizes him, He utterly des-
troys him." Then he recited: Such is the chastisement of your Lord when He
chastises communities in the midst of their wrong: grievous, indeed, and severe
is His chastisement (11:102).
God gives the wrongdoers some time to repent and amend their beha-
vior. If they do not take advantage of this opportunity, He punishes
them severely.
God sometimes uses wrongdoers as a "sword of God" to punishes the
sinful. Muslims often become the target of wrongdoing powers when
they deviate from Islam and abandon the Divine Commandments. This
happens when God wills not to defer their punishment until the Day of
Judgment. For example, after the Muslims split into many competing
factions nine centuries ago, they were exposed to the Mongol invasion
and massacre. Likewise, they tasted the bitterness of overall defeat and
subjugation during and after the First World War. This was because they
were no longer practicing Islam in their lives and because they had sur-
rendered intellectually, spiritually, and materially to un-Islamic trends
coming from the West.
However, every misfortune befalling Muslims is, on account of result-
ing from sin, an occasion and means for self-purification and Divine for-
giveness; the beginning of a new, more splendid revival. So, the near fu-
ture will witness, if God wills, the collapse of wrongdoing powers and a
magnificent revival of Islam and the Muslim world.
• In an authentic Tradition, God's Messenger says: God will shade sev-
en (groups) of people under His shade on the Day when there will be no
shade except His: the just ruler; young people who have grown up in
worship of God, may He be glorified; those people who are greatly at-
tached to mosques; two persons who love each other for God's sake,
meet and then leave each other because of this love; men who refuse the
invitations of beautiful women of rank, saying: "I fear God"; those who
spend in the way of God so secretly that when they give charity to the
112

--- Sayfa 114 ---
one on his left, the one on the right does not see it; and those whose eyes
fill with tears when they mention God in seclusion.
People will be drenched sin sweat up to their necks because of the heat
of the Day of Judgment. Those who wish for His shade must strive for it
according to the instructions outlined in this hadith.
Justice is the foundation of social life, and a just ruler is a rare occur-
rence. Holy and blessed indeed are those young people who can control
their carnal desires and devote themselves to the worship of God.
Designing one's life according to the daily prayers is a laudable virtue
that pleases God Almighty. Another important quality, especially in this
world of individualism and selfishness, is to love each other for God's
sake and regard the Earth as a "cradle of brotherhood and sisterhood."
Chastity requires self-discipline, and is so meritorious that it elevates its
practitioners to the highest ranks. Giving alms purely for God's sake and
without display is almost as much encouraged in Islam as are belief and
the prescribed prayers. Meditation and continuous self-supervision, ac-
companied by a healthy attitude of God-consciousness, prevent people
from sinning and make them worthy of Paradise.
• God is kind and gives favors to everyone. Whatever people have is
from God. Nevertheless, He bestowed special favors on each Prophet
and community according to the dictates of the time. For example, Adam
was favored with knowledge of the names (the keys to all branches of
knowledge). Noah was endowed with steadfastness and perseverance;
Abraham was honored with God's intimate friendship and being the
father of numerous Prophets; Moses was given the ability to administer,
and was exalted by being addressed by God directly; and Jesus was dis-
tinguished with patience, tolerance, and compassion. All Prophets have
some share in these praiseworthy qualities, but each surpasses, on ac-
count of his mission, the others in one or more than one of those
qualities.
Prophet Muhammad has all of the qualities mentioned above, except
for being the father of Prophets. Moreover, because of the universal
nature of his mission, he is further distinguished in the following five
ways. As related by Bukhari, he says: I have been given five things not
given to anyone before me: God helps me by implanting fear in the heart
of my enemies at a distance of one month's walk; the Earth has been
made a place of worship and means of cleansing for me, so whenever it
is time to pray my followers can pray wherever they are; the spoils of
war are lawful for me, although they were not lawful for anyone before
113

--- Sayfa 115 ---
me; I have the right to intercede (with God on behalf of believers); and,
while every Prophet (before me) was sent to his people exclusively, I was
sent to humanity.
It is possible to deduce the following things from this hadith:
Prophethood is a Divine favor bestowed by God on whomever He
wishes.
-The five things mentioned in the hadith are exclusive to the Muslim
community.
-To make your enemies fear you from great distances, maintain complete
sincerity and devotion to the cause of God, as was done during the Era of
Happiness when the Prophet and his true successors ruled the Muslims.
- As Islam recognizes no intermediaries between God and people, there
is no church or organized and professional clergy. Although saintly
people may be allowed to intercede for certain Muslims on the Day of
Judgment, God's Messenger will enjoy the right of all-inclusive interces-
sion for believers of every ummah.
- The spoils of war, forbidden to previous communities as a trial, are
lawful for Muslims, because they must struggle in the way of God until
the Last Day and convey the Message throughout the world.
- While the mission of previous Prophets was restricted to a certain
people and time, God's Messenger was sent as a mercy for all worlds.
114

--- Sayfa 116 ---
Infallibility
Infallibility is a necessary attribute of the Prophets. The original Arabic
word translated here as infallibility is 'isma, which means protecting,
saving, or defending. It appears in the Qur'an in several derived forms.
For example, when Prophet Noah asked his son to board the Ark, the lat-
ter replied: I will betake myself to some mountain; it will save me from the wa-
ter. Noah replied: Today there is not a saving one [active participle] from the
command of God (11:43).
The wife of a high Egyptian official, named Potiphar in the Bible
(Genesis 39:1), uses the same word in: I did seek to seduce him, but he firmly
saved himself guiltless (12:32). The Qur'an calls believers to hold fast to the
rope of God—the Qur'an and Islam—using the same word in a different
form: Hold fast all together to, and protect (against being divided), the rope of
God (3:103). Again, we see the same word in the verse: God will defend
(protect) you from people (5:67).
The infallibility of Prophets is an established fact based on reason and
tradition. This quality is required for several reasons. First, Prophets
came to convey the Message of God. If we liken this Message to pure wa-
ter or light, as the Qur'an does (13:17, 24:35), the Archangel Gabriel (who
brought it) and the Prophet (who conveyed it) also must be absolutely
pure. If this were not the case, their impurity would pollute the Message.
Every falling off is an impurity, a dark spot, in the heart. The hearts or
souls of Gabriel and the Prophet are like polished mirrors that reflect the
Divine Revelation to people, a cup from which people quench their thirst
for the pure, Divine water.
Any black spot on the mirror would absorb a ray of that light; a single
drop of mud would make the water unclear. As a result, the Prophets
would not be able to deliver the complete Message. But they delivered
the Message perfectly, as stated in the Qur'an: O Messenger! Convey what
has been sent to you from your Lord. If you did not, you would not have fulfilled
His mission. And God will defend you from people. Certainly, God guides not
the unbelieving people (5:67) and: Today I have perfected your religion for you,
and I have completed My favor upon you, and I have chosen and approved for
you Islam as religion (5:3).
Second, the Prophets teach their people all the commands and prin-
ciples of belief and conduct. So that the people learn their religion in its
pristine purity and truth, and as perfectly as possible to secure their hap-
piness and prosperity in both worlds, the Prophets must represent and
115

--- Sayfa 117 ---
then present the Revelation without fault or defect. This is their function
as guides and good examples to be followed: You have in the Messenger of
God a beautiful pattern, an excellent example, for anyone who aspires after God
and the Last Day, and who engages much in the remembrance of God (33:21)
and: There is for you an excellent example in Abraham and those with him …
there was in them an excellent example for you—for those who aspire after God
and the Last Day (60:4, 6).
A Prophet can do or say only that which has been sanctioned by God.
If he could, he would have to repent even beyond his current lifetime.
For example, Abraham will tell those who approach him for intercession
on the Day of Judgment to go to Moses, saying he cannot intercede for
them because he spoke allusively three times in his life. Although this is
not a sin, his repentance will continue in the Hereafter.
Third, the Qur'an commands believers to obey the Prophet's orders
and prohibitions, without exception, and emphasizes that it is not fitting
for a believer, man or woman, when a matter has been decided by God and His
Messenger, to have any option about their decision (33:36). It also warns be-
lievers that what falls to them when God and His Messenger have given
a judgment is only to say: "We have heard and obeyed" (24:51). Absolute
obedience to a Prophet means that all of his commands and prohibitions
are correct and beyond reproach.
Prophethood is so great a favor that all Prophets bore extreme hard-
ship while fulfilling the duty of thanksgiving, and always worried about
not worshipping God sufficiently. Prophet Muhammad often implored
God as follows: "Glory be to You. We have not been able to know You as Your
knowledge requires, O Known One. Glory be to You. We have not been able to
worship You as Your worship requires, O Worshipped One."
The Qur'anic verses that are sometimes understood—mistakenly—to
reprimand certain Prophets for some faults or to show that they seek
God's forgiveness for some sin, should be considered in this light.
Besides, God's forgiveness does not always mean that a sin has been
committed.
The
Qur'anic
words
'afw
(pardon)
and
maghfira
(forgiveness) also signify a special favor and kindness, as well as Divine
dispensation, in respect to lightening or overlooking a religious duty, as
in the following verses: If any is forced (to eat of them) by hunger, with no in-
clination towards transgression, God is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
(5:3) and: If… you find no water, then take for yourselves clean sand or earth,
and rub therewith your faces and hands. For God is All-Pardoning and Oft-For-
giving (4:43).
116

--- Sayfa 118 ---
Fifth, sins and pardoning have different types and degrees. These are:
disobeying religious commandments, and forgiveness thereof; disobey-
ing God's laws of creation and life, and forgiveness thereof; and disobey-
ing the rules of good manners or courtesy (adab), and the forgiveness
thereof. A fourth type, which is not a sin, involves not doing something
as perfectly as possible, which is required by the love of and nearness to
God. Some Prophets may have done this, but such acts cannot be con-
sidered sins according to our common definition of that word.
Tradition also proves the Prophets' infallibility. God says of Moses: I
cast love over you from Me (and made you comely and loveable) in order that
you might be brought up under My eye (20:39). Thus, as Moses was brought
up by God Himself and prepared for the mission of Messengership, how
could he possibly commit a sin?
The same is true of all other Prophets. For example, God's Messenger
says of Jesus: "Satan could not touch Jesus and his mother at his birth." Jesus
was protected from birth until his elevation to the Presence of God:
(Mary) pointed to the infant (Jesus). They asked: "How can we talk to an in-
fant in the cradle?" Jesus said: "I am a servant of God. He has given me the
Scripture and made me a Prophet. He has made me blessed wheresoever I be, and
enjoined on me prayer and charity as long as I live. He has made me kind to my
mother, and not overbearing or a wretched rebel. So peace is on me the day I was
born, the day that I die, and the day that I will be raised up to life again."
(19:29-33)
Jesus, like all Prophets, was protected from sin from his birth. God's
Messenger, while still a child and not yet a Prophet, intended to attend
two wedding ceremonies, but on each occasion was overpowered by
sleep.157 Likewise, during his youth he helped his uncles repair the Ka'ba
by carrying stones. Since the stones hurt his shoulders, his uncle 'Abbas
advised him to wrap part of his lower garment around his shoulders for
padding. But as soon as he did so, thereby leaving parts of his thighs ex-
posed, he fell on his back and stared fixedly. An angel appeared and
warned him that: "This is not befitting for you,"158 for in the future he
would tell people to be well-mannered and observe Divinely ordained
standards of conduct, including covering the thighs. In such ways was
the future Prophet protected from the pagan rituals and practices of his
people.
157.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 2:350–1.
158.Bukhari, "Hajj," 42; Ibn Kathir, "Al-Bidaya," 2:350.
117

--- Sayfa 119 ---
God's Messenger says that "all children of Adam make mistakes and err,
and the best of those who make faults and err are the repentant."159 This im-
plies that we are fallible by nature, not that we are condemned to make
such mistakes. Whether by God's Will and special protection or, as will
be explained below, by His showing the way to become free of error or
sin, even the greatest saints who continue the Prophetic mission may be
infallible to some degree.
God promises to protect believers who obey Him in utmost respect
and deserve His protection, and to endow them with sound judgment so
that they can distinguish between truth and falsehood, right and wrong:
O you who believe! If you obey God in utmost respect, He will establish in you a
Criterion (to judge between right and wrong), purify you of all your evils, and
forgive you. God is of grace unbounded (8:29).
God made a covenant with the believers that if they obey Him and strive
to exalt His Word, by proclaiming His religion, He will help them and establish
them firmly in the religion, protecting them against all kinds of deviation (47:7).
This protection from enemies and committing sins depends upon their
support of Islam and the struggle to spread it so that only God is wor-
shipped, and that no partners are associated with Him in belief or wor-
ship, or in the creation and rule of the universe. If believers keep their prom-
ise, God will keep His (2:40); if they break it, God will cause them to fail (17:8).
God protects His servants against sin in different ways. For example,
he may place obstacles in their way, establish a "warner" in their hearts,
or even cause them to suffer some injury so that they physically cannot
sin. Or, He may put a verse in someone's mouth, as happened with a
young man during 'Umar's caliphate.
The young man was so strict and attentive in his worship that he
prayed every prayer in the mosque. A woman who lived on his way to
the mosque had become enamored with him and so sought to seduce
him. Although he resisted her gestures, the moment came when he took
a few steps in her direction. Just at this moment, he felt he was reciting:
Those who fear God, when a thought of evil from Satan assaults them, bring
God to remembrance, and lo! they see (aright) (7:201). Overwhelmed with
shame before God, and with love of God for preventing him from com-
mitting this sin, he fell down dead. When 'Umar was informed of this a
few days later, he went to his grave and shouted: "O young man. For those
who fear the time when they will stand before the Lord, there will be two gar-
dens!" (55:46). A voice from the grave, whether that of the young man or
159.Tirmidhi, "Qiyama," 49; Ibn Maja, "Zuhd," 30.
118

--- Sayfa 120 ---
an angel on his behalf, replied: "O Commander of the Believers, God has
granted me the double of what you say."
This is how God protects His sincere servants. He says in a hadith
qudsi: My servants cannot draw near to me through something else
more lovable to Me than performing the obligations I have enjoined
upon them. Apart from those obligations, they continue to draw near to
Me through supererogatory acts of worship, until I love them. When I
love them, I will be their ears with which they hear, their eyes with
which they see, their hands with which they grasp, and their feet on
which they walk. If they ask Me for something, I will give it to them im-
mediately. If they seek refuge in Me from something, I will protect them
from it.
God guides His true servants to good and protects them from evil. The
servants will and do what is good, and refrain from wickedness. They
ask God for what is good, and whatever they ask is provided. They seek
refuge in God from what is bad, and God protects them according to
their request.
All Prophets were infallible, sinless, and lived completely virtuous
lives. Although God sent numerous Prophets, the Qur'an specifically
mentions only 28 of them. I think it would be proper here to count them
in the words of Ibrahim Haqqi, an eighteenth-century Turkish saint and
religious scholar, who also was an expert in anatomy and astronomy:
Some have regarded it a religious injunction to learn the names of the
Prophets.
God informed us of 28 of them in the Qur'an:
Adam, Enoch, Noah, Hud, and Salih;
Abraham, Isaac, and Ishmael, who was a sacrifice for God;
Jacob, Joseph, Shu'ayb, Lot, and John the Bapitst;
Zachariah and Aaron, the brother of Moses, who spoke to God;
David, Solomon, Elijah, and Job;
Elisha, a relative of Jesus, who was a spirit from God;
Dhul-Kifl and Jonah, who was certainly a Prophet.
The Seal of Prophets is the Beloved of God—Muhammad, Messenger
of God. Scholars disagree on the Prophethood of Ezra, Luqman, and
Dhul-Qarnayn. Some regard them as Prophets, while others consider
them saints of God.
119

--- Sayfa 121 ---
Removing Doubts
Some Qur'anic verses appear to reprimand certain Prophets or entertain
the possibility that a Prophet can sin, according to the usual definition of
that word. Before clarifying specific examples, it may be appropriate to
acquit the Prophets of such accusations.
Genesis 19:30-38 states that Prophet Lot's two daughters caused him to get
drunk so that he would impregnate them. Such a charge against a Prophet is
beyond belief. Lot's people (Sodom and Gomorra) were destroyed by
God for their sexual immorality. Even the Bible says that Lot and his
daughters were the only ones spared, because of their belief, good con-
duct, and decency. This supposed "sin" of Prophet Lot is worse than the
sin of his people, which caused God to destroy them!
In Genesis 38:15-18, Judah, a son of Jacob, is supposed to have engaged in
sexual relations with his daughter-in-law. This woman, in turn, gave birth to
twin boys. Some of the Israelite Prophets were descended from them.
Genesis 49:4 also claims that Jacob's other son, Reuben, slept with his father's
wife (Reuben's step-mother).
Neither
the
sons
of
Jacob,
whom
the
Qur'an
mentions
as
"grandchildren" whose ways should be followed, nor his wives could
have engaged such a behavior. Our Prophet explicitly declared that there
is not a single case of fornication in his lineage back to Adam,160 and that
all Prophets are brothers descended from the same father.161 Our Proph-
et is a descendant of Abraham, as were Judah and the other Israelite
Prophets. Thus, how could any of them be the result of an improper
sexual alliance?
II Samuel 11 records that Prophet David fell in love with the wife of a
commander and committed adultery with her. According to the Bible, he
then had her husband sent to the front line and, after he was killed, mar-
ried her.
David is a Prophet who was given a Divine Scripture (the Psalms) and
who is praised in the Qur'an for his sincere and profound devotion to
God:
Be patient with them, and remember Our servant David, the man of strength
and abilities, who always turned to God in sincere devotion and submission. We
made the mountains declare, in unison with him, Our praises, at eventide and at
160.Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 2:313-4.
161.Bukhari, "Anbiya'," 48; Muslim, "Fada'il," 144.
120

--- Sayfa 122 ---
the break of day, and the birds gathered (in assemblies): all with him did turn to
Him (in profound devotion). We strengthened his kingdom and gave him wis-
dom and sound judgment (in speech and decision). (38:17-20)
Though a king, he lived a simple life by his own labor. He had such a
great awareness of God that he cried a great deal and fasted every other
day. Our Prophet recommended this type of fast to some Companions
who asked about the most rewarding type of supererogatory fasting.162
Could such a noble Prophet ever commit adultery with a married wo-
man, plot her husband's death, and then marry her?
In I Kings 11:1-8, despite God's command: "You must not intermarry with
them, because they will surely turn your hearts after their gods," Prophet So-
lomon is accused of marrying many foreign women belonging to pagan
nations and following their gods and goddesses (idols). Would a Prophet
be able to commit such a grievous sin as following the idols and deities
of other tribes?
If the Qur'an had not been revealed, we would not be sure whether the
previous Prophets really were sincere, devout, and thankful servants of
God. The Qur'an frees Jesus from his followers' mistaken deification of
him and from his own people's denial of his Prophethood, and explains
that God had no sons and daughters. It also clears the Israelite and non-
Israelite Prophets of their supposed "sins" mentioned in the Bible. It
presents Jesus as a spirit from God breathed into the Virgin Mary, Abra-
ham as an intimate friend of God, Moses as one who spoke to God, and
Solomon as a king and a Prophet who prayed to Him humbly:
O my Lord, order me that I may be grateful for your favors, which You have
bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may work the righteousness that
will please You. Admit me, by Your Grace, to the ranks of Your righteous ser-
vants. (27:19)
Solomon never worshipped idols or committed a sin. Despite being
the greatest and most powerful king that ever lived, he remained a
humble servant of God until his death.
Several other assertions are equally impossible to accept. For example:
The Bible claims that although Prophet Isaac wanted to bless his older
son Esau, he mistakenly blessed Jacob, for he could not see through his
wife Rebaka's trick (Genesis 27). Also, the Bible claims that Prophet Jacob
wrestled with God, who appeared to him in the form of a man (Genesis
32:24-30).
162.Bukhari, "Tahajjud," 7, "Sawm," 59; Muslim, "Siyam," 182.
121

--- Sayfa 123 ---
Individual examples
A small minority of Muslim scholars have asserted that the Prophets
may have committed insignificant sins (zalla: error or lapse). To prove
their assertion, they cite some examples from the lives of Adam, Noah,
Abraham, and Joseph.
Before elaborating upon this, it should be noted that lapses and sins
have totally different definitions. Sin, for example, means disobedience
to God's Commands. When the Prophets were faced with a question that
they could not answer, they tended to wait for Revelation. On rare occa-
sions, however, they used their own reason to decide the matter, as they
were the foremost mujtahids (jurists of the highest rank who can deduce
laws from the principles established by the Qur'an and the Sunna). They
might have erred in their judgments or decisions. However, such errors,
which were immediately corrected by God, are not sins.
Moreover, the Prophets always sought God's good pleasure and tried
to obtain whatever was best. If, for some reason, they could not obtain
the best but had to settle for the better, a very rare event, this does not
mean that they sinned. For example: Suppose you must decide whether
to recite the Qur'an in 10 days while giving due attention to each verse,
or recite it in 7 days to express your deep love of the Word of God. If you
choose the first option without knowing that God's greater pleasure lies
in the second, you cannot be considered guilty of a sin. So, a Prophet's
preference of what is better instead of the best is not a sin. However, be-
cause of his position before Him, God might sometimes reproach him
mildly.
Now, we will clarify some individual examples in the lives of certain
Prophets.
Prophet Adam
Adam was in the Garden before his worldly life. While therein, God
told him and his wife Eve not to eat of the fruit of a particular tree. They
disobeyed Him in this matter, and so were expelled from the Garden and
commanded to live on earth.
Although Qur'anic interpreters differ on what the prohibited fruit was,
it was most probably the human inclination toward the opposite sex.
Satan approached Adam and Eve, saying that it was a tree of eternity and of a
kingdom that would never decay, the fruit of which had been prohibited to them
122

--- Sayfa 124 ---
(20:120). Most probably knowing that they were mortal, Adam and Eve
must have desired eternity through offspring, as such a desire is inherent
in people. This also can be deduced from:
Then Satan whispered to them so that he might show to them that which was
hidden from them of their shame. He said: "Your Lord forbade you this tree only
lest you should become angels or become immortal." And he swore to them
(saying): "Truly, I am a sincere adviser to you." Thus did he lead them by a de-
ceit. When they tasted of the tree, their shame was shown to them and they
began to cover (by placing) on themselves some leaves of the Garden…
(7:20-22).
Even if we accept Adam's eating of the forbidden fruit as a lapse, it is
difficult to regard it as deliberate or sustained disobedience or revolt
against God, which might lead us to see the Prophets as fallible. First,
Adam was not a Prophet while in the Garden. Second, this lapse was the
result not of willful disobedience, but merely some sort of forgetfulness.
Concerning this, the Qur'an says: We had made a covenant with Adam be-
fore, but he forgot, and we found on his part no firm resolve (20:115).
Sins committed because of forgetfulness will not be accounted for in
the Hereafter. The Prophet said: "My community is exempt from being ques-
tioned about forgetting, unintentional errors, and what they are compelled to
do." The Qur'an teaches us this prayer: Our Lord, don't condemn us if we
forget or fall into error (2:286).
Adam did not make this lapse deliberately. Although some have read
into this verse Adam's lack of determination to fulfill his covenant with
God, the context does not allow such an interpretation. Adam and Eve
turned to God immediately after their lapse and, in sincere repentance,
entreated Him: Our Lord, we have wronged our own selves. If you don't for-
give us and don't bestow Your Mercy upon us, we certainly shall be among the
lost (7:23).
Destiny had a part in Adam's lapse. God had destined him to be His
vicegerent on Earth, even before his creation and settlement in the
Garden. This is explicit in the Qur'an:
Behold, your Lord said to the angels: "I will make a vicegerent on Earth."
They asked: "Will you make therein one who will make mischief and shed blood,
while we celebrate Your praises and glorify You?" He said: "I know what you
know not" (2:30)
God's Messenger also points to that truth in a hadith:
123

--- Sayfa 125 ---
Adam and Moses met each other in Heaven. Moses said to Adam:
"You are the father of humanity, but you caused us to come down to Earth from
the Garden." Adam replied: "You are the one whom God addressed directly.
Did you not see this sentence in the Torah: 'Adam had been destined to eat of
that fruit 40 years before he ate of it?'"
After reporting this meeting, God's Messenger added three times:
"Adam silenced Moses."163
Adam's life in the Garden and his trial were preliminaries he had to
pass through before his earthly life. He passed these tests. Being chosen
and rescued from the swamp of sin and deviation, he was made a Proph-
et and honored with being the father of thousands of Prophets, including
Prophet Muhammad, and millions of saints: Then his Lord chose him; He
relented toward him, and rightly guided him (20:122).
Prophet Noah
Prophet Noah called his people to the religion of God for 950 years.
When they insisted on unbelief and persisted in their wrongdoing, God
told him to build the Ark. After completing this task, Noah placed
therein, according to God's command, a male and female of each animal, all
his family members (except for those whom God already had said He would pun-
ish), and the believers (11:40).
When the Ark was floating through the mountain-high waves, Noah
saw that one of his sons had not boarded the Ark. He called to him, but
his son rejected his call, saying: I will betake myself to some mountain and it
will save me from the water (11:43). When Noah saw his son drowning, he
called out to God: My Lord, my son is of my family! Your promise is true, and
You are the Most Just of Judges (11:45). God replied: O Noah, he is not of
your family, for his conduct is unrighteous. Do not ask of Me that of which you
have no knowledge. I give you counsel, lest you should act like the ignorant
(11:46).
Some scholars have regarded Noah's appeal as a sin. However, it is
difficult to agree with them. Noah is mentioned in the Qur'an as one of
the five greatest Prophets, and is described as resolute and steadfast. He
thought his son was a believer. It is well known that the religion of God
tells us to judge according to outward appearances. Thus, those who
profess belief and appear to perform the religious duties of primary im-
portance (e.g., prescribed prayers and alms-giving) are treated as
163.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 3; Tirmidhi, "Qadar," 2; Ibn Hanbal, 2:287, 314.
124

--- Sayfa 126 ---
believers. This is why Prophet Muhammad treated the Hypocrites as if
they were Muslims. Apparently, Noah's son hid his unbelief until the
Flood, for it was Noah himself who had prayed beforehand that God
should forgive him, his parents, and all who entered his house in faith,
and all believing men and believing women, and grant to the wrongdo-
ers no increase but perdition (71:28).
God accepted his prayer and told him to board the Ark with his fam-
ily, except those who had already deserved punishment because of their
willful insistence on unbelief. Noah's wife was among those who
drowned. Noah did not ask God to save her, for he either knew or was
informed that she was an unbeliever. He must have thought his son was
a believer. As such, he felt compelled to express, in a manner befitting a
Prophet, his astonishment that God had let him drown. This is why God
replied to him as He did (11:46).
Noah, like every other Prophet, was kind-hearted and caring. Every
Prophet sacrificed himself for the good of humanity and made tireless ef-
forts to guide people toward the truth and true happiness in both
worlds. Concerning Prophet Muhammad's attitude in this respect, God
says: You would nearly kill yourself following after them, in grief, if they believe
not in this Message (18:6).
Noah appealed to his people for 950 years, never once relenting. It is
natural for a Prophet, a father, to show disappointment when he learns
that his son is among the unbelievers who have been condemned to pun-
ishment in both worlds. But since God is the Most Just and Most Com-
passionate, Noah immediately turned to Him and sought refuge with
Him, lest he should ask Him for that of which he had no knowledge: O
my Lord, I seek refuge with you, lest I should ask You for that of which I
have no knowledge. Unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I
shall be lost (11:47).
Prophet Abraham
Abraham, the "intimate friend of God," was one of the greatest Prophets.
God's Messenger took pride and pleasure in his connection with him,
saying: "I am the one whose coming Abraham prayed for and Jesus gave glad
tidings of, and I resemble my forefather Abraham more than anyone else." He
was thrown into fire because of his belief in One God, and the fire be-
came, by God's Will and Power, coolness and a means of safety for him.
125

--- Sayfa 127 ---
Like all Prophets, Abraham never even thought of worshipping that
which was not God. Despite this fact, various erroneous and untrue stor-
ies have found their way into some Qur'anic commentaries. They have
come from a misunderstanding of the following verses:
When the night covered him over, he saw a star and said: "This is my Lord."
But when it set, he said: "I don't love those that set." When he saw the moon
rising in splendor, he said: "This is my Lord." But when it set, he said: "Unless
my Lord guides me, I surely will be among those who go astray." When he saw
the sun rising in splendor, he said: "This is my Lord; this is the greatest (of
all)." But when the sun set, he said: "O my people, I am free from your ascribing
partners to God. I have set my face toward Him Who created the Heavens and
the Earth, a man of pure faith and one by nature upright. I am not among those
who associate partners with God." (6:76-79)
These verses clearly show that Abraham tried, by way of analogy, to
convince his people that no heavenly body could be God. Abraham lived
among the Chaldeans of northern Mesopotamia, a people who knew a
great deal about heavenly bodies and who worshipped them, along with
many other idols. Abraham first argued with his father, telling him that
no idol was worthy of worship: Abraham once said to his father Azar:
"Do you take idols for gods? Surely I see you and your people in manifest devi-
ation" (6:74).
Since Azar was the local idol maker, Abraham began his mission by
opposing him. After that, he sought to guide his people to the truth.
Since they had a great knowledge of heavenly bodies, God instructed
him in such matters and showed him various hidden metaphysical real-
ities so that he might attain complete certainty in belief and convince his
people of their deviation: So also did We show Abraham the inner dimensions
of, and the metaphysical realities behind, the Heavens and the Earth, that he
might have certainty (6:75).
While traveling in mind and heart through heavenly bodies, Abraham
began by telling his people that a star could not be God because it sets.
Although the superstitious might read fortunes into it or attribute some
influence to it, true knowledge shows that it rises and sets according to
God's laws, and that its light is extinguished in the broader light of day.
So why should anyone worship stars?
His second step in this analogy was to show that the moon, although
looking brighter and bigger than a star, could not be God. This is because
it sets like a star, changes its shape from hour to hour, and depends on
some other heavenly body for its light. At this point, Abraham openly
126

--- Sayfa 128 ---
declared that he had been guided by his Lord, and that those who did
not worship only Him had gone astray.
Abraham's final analogy showed that the sun could not be wor-
shipped as God, for despite its size and light, it also disappears from
sight. Thus, worshipping created phenomena is pure folly. After reject-
ing the worship of creation, Abraham declared his faith: I have set my face
toward Him Who created the Heavens and the Earth, a man of pure faith and
one by nature upright. I am not among those who associate partners with God
(6:79).
So, it is a great mistake to infer from these verses that Abraham took
heavenly bodies as God in the early phase of his life.
Abraham's second supposed fault or lapse is that he appealed to God
to show him how He revives the dead. Concerning this, the Qur'an says:
Behold! Abraham said: "My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead." He
asked: "Do you not believe?" He said: "Yes, but to set my heart at rest" (2:260).
In a hadith, God's Messenger says that 70,000 veils separate God from
humanity. This implies that our journey toward God is endless, and that
people have different degrees of knowledge and understanding as well
as varying capacities for spiritual and intellectual satisfaction. Since God
is infinite, unbounded in His Attributes and Names, each individual can
obtain only some knowledge of Him and attain some degree of satisfac-
tion (according to his or her capacity).
Abraham had one of the greatest capacities, and therefore needed to
increase in knowledge of God every day to attain full spiritual satisfac-
tion. The Prophets, like every other human being, were in a constant pro-
cess of spiritual and intellectual growth. Considering each previous stage
of growth inadequate, they incessantly pursued further degrees of con-
viction. For this reason, God's Messenger asked God's forgiveness about
100 times a day and frequently entreated Him, saying: "Glory be to You,
we have not been able to know You as Your knowledge requires, O Known One!
Glory be to You, we have not been able to worship You as Your worship re-
quires, O Worshipped One!"
Once Muhyi al-Din ibn al-'Arabi met Mawlana Jalal al-Din al-Rumi
and asked him: "Who is greater: Prophet Muhammad, who says: 'Glory be to
You, we have not been able to know You as Your knowledge requires, O Known
One,' or Bayazid al-Bistami, who says [in an instance of entranced ecstasy]:
'Glory be to me, how exalted I am!'?" Mawlana's reply also answers those
who try to find fault with Abraham: "Both utterances show to what extent
our Prophet is greater than Bayazid. Our Prophet's heart or soul was like an
127

--- Sayfa 129 ---
ocean, so deep and vast that it could not be satisfied. But Bayazid's soul, in com-
parison, was like a pitcher-easy to fill and quick to overflow."
In order to remove any possible doubt concerning Abraham's convic-
tion, God's Messenger once said: "If Abraham's conviction contained a
doubt, we are more liable to doubt than him."
Abraham's whole life was a constant struggle against unbelief and
polytheism. On only three occasions did he ever use allusions. In other
words, he chose to divert his audience's attention to something else by
making indirect references to the truth. He did this either to avoid har-
assment or explain a religious truth in simpler terms. Since, however,
some scholars consider these allusions to be lies, we must clarify them
here.
The first allusion: When his people wanted him to accompany them to
their religious celebration, he cast a glance at the stars and said he was
sick.
Abraham was not physically sick, but the grief that he might be associ-
ated with his people's falsehoods was preying on his mind and soul. It
was impossible for him to worship idols; rather, he was determined to
destroy them. Once, to avoid participating in their ceremonies, he told
them he was sick and, after they left, smashed their idols. This was not a
lie, for he truly was sick of their idols and idolatry. This is why he did
what he did. The Qur'an praises him for this deed:
Among those who followed Noah's way was Abraham. He came unto
his Lord with a pure, sound heart. He said to his father and his people:
"What do you worship? Do you desire a falsehood, gods other than God? What,
then, is your opinion of the Lord of the Worlds?" Then he cast a glance at the
stars, and said: "I am indeed sick!" So they turned away from him and de-
parted. Then he turned to their gods and asked: "Why don't you eat [of the
offerings before you]? Why don't you speak?" Then he turned upon them,
striking them with might (and breaking them). (37:83-93)
The second allusion: Abraham uses irony to make his point.
As we read in the Qur'an:
We bestowed on Abraham his rectitude before, and were well acquainted with
him. He asked his father and his people: "What are these images to which you
are (so assiduously) devoted in worship?" They replied: "We found our fathers
worshipping them." He said: "Clearly, both you and your fathers have deviated
(from the truth)." They said: "Have you brought us the truth, or are you joking
with us?" He replied: "No, your Lord is the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth,
128

--- Sayfa 130 ---
He who created them. I am a witness [to this truth]. By God, I have a plan for
your idols after you go away and turn your backs." So he broke them to pieces,
(all) but the biggest, that they might turn to it. They exclaimed: "Who has done
this to our gods? He must indeed be some evil-doer!" They said: "We have heard
a youth talk of them: Abraham." They replied: "Bring him before the people, that
they may bear witness." They asked him: "Did you do this to our gods, Abra-
ham?" He answered: "No. He did it. This is their biggest one. Ask them, if they
can speak!" (21:51-63)
Some consider Abraham's final reply to be a lie. The truth is, it is an
example of biting irony. Abraham wanted his people to understand that
things that cannot speak or do them any harm or good are unworthy of
worship. He was so successful in this attempt that his people, unable to
refute his reasoning, could find no way to protect their idols other than
by throwing him into the fire.
Abraham did not say that the idols had been broken by the biggest
one. Look at his answer carefully. He said: "He did it," and then stopped-
there is a significant stop in the reading of the verse-and then continued:
"This is their biggest one!" Therefore, the phrase He did it alludes to the
one who broke the idols, but diverted the audience's attention to the
biggest one with: This is their biggest one!
Once, God's Messenger told an old woman that old people will not
enter Paradise. When he saw that his words distressed her greatly, he
clarified the irony: "Because they will enter it as young people." This is, in a
way, similar to what Abraham did and so is not a lie.
The third allusion: Abraham and his wife Sarah
In a hadith, and also in the Bible (Genesis 20:2-14), we read that Abra-
ham wanted his wife Sarah to reply to those who asked that she was his
sister, not his wife. According to the Bible, Abraham did this because he
would have been killed if her true identity were known. This is not a lie,
for as declared in the Qur'an, all believers are brothers or sisters to each
other.
In conclusion, Abraham never lied. If he had done so, he would have
been reproached by God. However, the Qur'an never mentions that God
reproached him for lying. On the contrary, his allusions are mentioned
where God praises him in the Qur'an. For this reason, the Prophetic Tra-
dition about those allusions should not be treated literally.
129

--- Sayfa 131 ---
Abraham's supposed lapse
Abraham began his mission by calling upon his father Azar, the local
idol maker, to abandon idolatry and turn toward God, the Creator of the
Heavens and the Earth. When his father refused to do so, he left him,
saying that he would ask God to forgive him. He kept his promise: For-
give my father, for he is one of those who go astray (26:86).
Some consider this a lapse, for after all his father was an unbeliever.
However, it is difficult to regard it as a lapse, for Abraham was a Prophet
deputed by God to call people to the truth and salvation. Like every
Prophet, it grieved him to see any of God's servants not following His
way to happiness and salvation in both worlds. We can discern in the
following verses just how much he desired his father to be guided:
(Also) mention in the Book (the story of) Abraham: He was a man of
truth, a Prophet. He asked his father: "My father, why do you worship that
which cannot hear or see, and which cannot benefit you? There has come to me
that knowledge which has not reached you, so follow me. I will guide you to a
straight, even way. Don't serve Satan, for Satan is a rebel against the Most
Merciful. O father, I fear lest a penalty afflict you from the Most Merciful, so
that you become a friend to Satan." (19:41-45)
It was Abraham's duty to call people to worship God, despite their
persistent rejection. Although the Qur'an openly stated that: As to those
who do not believe, it is the same to them whether you warn them or not, for
they will not believe (2:6), God's Messenger never gave up warning them.
Besides calling his father to the truth, Abraham prayed for him until, as
stated in the Qur'an, he realized that his father was an enemy of God.
When he was convinced of this fact, he dissociated himself from him.
God mentions this not as a lapse on Abraham's part, but as a virtue, say-
ing: For Abraham was most tender-hearted, forbearing (9:114).
God also mentions Abraham's conduct as an excellent example to fol-
low: There is for you an excellent example (to follow) in Abraham and those
with him. They said to their people: "We are free of you and whatever you wor-
ship besides God. We have rejected you, and there has arisen enmity and hatred
forever between us and you, unless you believe in God and Him alone." But
Abraham said to his father: "I will pray for forgiveness for you, although I have
no power (to get) anything on your behalf from God."-Our Lord! In You we
have put our trust, and to You we turn in repentance; to You is the final return.
(60:4)
130

--- Sayfa 132 ---
As indicated above, Abraham prayed for his father's forgiveness be-
cause he had promised to do so (9:114). When he saw that his father was
determined to persist in his unbelief, he dissociated himself from him
and no longer sought his forgiveness.
Finally, it should be noted here that some Qur'anic interpreters do not
consider Azar to be Abraham's father. Although it is not a defect on the
part of Abraham to descend from an unbelieving father, for God Almighty
brings forth the living out of the dead, and brings forth the dead out of the living
(3:27), the Qur'an always uses the word ab (which in addition to father
can mean uncle, step-father, foster-father, or grandfather) for Azar.
Although he was told not to seek forgiveness for Azar, the Qur'an
mentions that in his old age he prayed: Our Lord, forgive me, my parents,
and all believers on the day that the Reckoning will be established (14:41). In
this prayer, he uses walid (the one who begot him) for father. It is there-
fore quite possible that Azar was not the one who begot him. According
to the Bible, Abraham's real father was Terah. However, God knows
best.
Prophet Joseph
Prophet Joseph is exalted in the Qur'an as an example of chastity. In
his childhood, his envious brothers threw him down a well and left him
there. A passing caravan found him and later sold him as a slave to a
high official (probably a minister) of the Egyptian court. The Bible gives
his name as Potiphar Genesis 37:36).
Joseph came from a family of Prophets. When someone told God's
Messenger that he was a noble man, the Messenger alluded to this fact,
saying: "The noble one, son of a noble one who is the son of a noble one who is
the son of a noble one. This is Joseph, son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham,
the intimate friend of God." Joseph was still a child in the well, when God
revealed to him that he would one day tell his brothers the truth of what they
had done (12:15). Therefore, from the beginning he was protected from all
vice.
Joseph, an exceptionally handsome young man, soon came to the at-
tention of his master's wife. Eventually, she fell in love with him. In the
words of the ladies of the capital city, quoted by the Qur'an, Joseph in-
spired her with passionate love (12:30). She tried to seduce him by locking the
doors and calling him to come to her. But Joseph, having been given knowledge,
sound judgment, and discernment by God, replied immediately: God forbid!
131

--- Sayfa 133 ---
Truly my Lord has treated me honorably. Assuredly, wrongdoers never prosper
(12:23).
Prophet Joseph had attained the rank of ihsan, which God's Messenger
describes as the believer's ability to worship as if seeing God in front of
him or her. In other words, at every instant he was aware of God watch-
ing him. He also was one whom God had made sincere, pure-hearted,
and of pure intention. Therefore, it is inconceivable that he would betray
God's blessings by succumbing to this temptation. If he had taken only
one step in this direction, he would have become a wrongdoer. Or, if by
"my lord" he meant his master, he would have been a wrongdoer if he
had violated his master's trust.
While narrating the rest of the story, the Qur'an says:
Certainly, she burnt inwardly because of him; and he burnt inwardly because
of her until he saw the evidence of his Lord: thus We did that we might turn
away from him all evil and shameful deeds. For he was one of Our servants,
made beforehand sincere and pure. (12:24)
Unfortunately, the sentence translated here as she burnt inwardly be-
cause of him; and he burnt inwardly because of her until he saw the
evidence of his Lord, has been misunderstood by some interpreters of
the Qur'an to mean "she desired, and was moved toward him; and he desired,
and was moved toward her, but just at that point he saw the evidence of his Lord
and stopped." Some have embellished the evidence of his Lord with such
flights of fancy as Jacob appearing with his hand on his lips and saving
his son from a grave sin.
More than a misunderstanding, this is a slander against a Prophet who
was honored and presented by God as "a most excellent model of chastity,"
and by God's Messenger as the noblest of all. To remove all such doubts,
we will analyze hamma, which we have translated literally as "to burn in-
wardly," for this word has confused some interpreters.
Hamma literally means "to suffer, burn, be troubled inwardly, and be con-
sumed with passion and longing." There is a principle in the sciences of
morphology and semantics that the first and most common meaning of a
word is preferred, unless an inconsistency or inconformity appears in the
context. This principle, together with two other principles to be ex-
plained below, make it impossible to take hamma in its first meaning:
One: Joseph and this lady were worlds apart with respect to their be-
liefs, ambitions, characters, and ways of life. Therefore, each had his or
her own suffering and anxiety, and each was consumed with completely
different ambitions.
132

--- Sayfa 134 ---
Two: The verse containing hamma is a parenthetical one explaining
the virtue of belief and sincerity, which bring God's special favor and
protection. It is not there merely as a part of the story. It also should be
noted that there are stops after each phrase, which shows that they do
not link a chain of events, but rather express three different realities. In
this case, the exact meaning of the verse is as follows:
She was burning inwardly because of her love for Joseph. This love got
Joseph into great trouble; his chastity, good character and reputation
might have been damaged. He had to escape this situation. At this junc-
ture, God's evidence (His protection or something else) came to his aid
and turned all evil away from him, for God already had made him one of
His sincere and pure servants. He was not mukhlis (one purified and sin-
cere due to self-discipline and spiritual training), but rather a mukhlas
(one made by God sincere and pure).
Moreover, the verb hamma in this context does not indicate the begin-
ning of an action, for we read in the previous verse that she already had
started the action: she locked the door and called Joseph to come to her (12:23).
But Joseph refused. So, to say that hamma has the meaning of "to start to-
ward" for both Joseph and the woman contradicts the previous verse, as
well as the next one: So they both hurried to the door, and she tore the shirt
from his back (12:25). It is clear that Joseph ran to the door to escape, that
she ran after him to catch him, and that she tore the shirt from his back.
Some, however, suggest that she desired Joseph and that he might
have desired her if he had not seen his Lord's evidence. Since he had
been protected from the beginning against sin, he could not have any de-
sire for her. In either case, he neither felt something for her nor start to-
ward her. Like every other Prophet, Joseph was infallible.
Prophet Muhammad
God's Messenger is superior to all other Prophets. This could not be
otherwise, for he was sent as a mercy to all the worlds. The religion he
relayed includes all essential tenets of the previously revealed religions
as well as everything necessary to solve all human problems until the
Last Day. In contrast, all earlier Prophets were sent to certain people and
for a limited period.
Prophet Muhammad, in the words of Busiri: " is the sun of virtues and
the others are, in comparison to him, stars diffusing light for people at night."
When the sun rises, both the moon and stars are no longer visible.
133

--- Sayfa 135 ---
Likewise, when the "Sun of Prophethood" (Prophet Muhammad rose to il-
luminate all the universe, starlight became unnecessary.
Like his predecessors, Prophet Muhammad was infallible. We see both
in the Qur'an and history books that, although his enemies slandered
him relentlessly, they never questioned his honesty and infallibility.
They said he was "mad"-he madly loved God and, again, madly de-
sired and sought for the people to be guided. Thus he was "mad," but not
in the sense of being crazy. They said he was a "magician" who charmed
people-he did charm them, but with his personality, as well as with
Islam and the Qur'an, both of which he brought from God. But he was
not a magician. They said he was a "soothsayer"-he made hundreds of
predictions, most of which have already come true and the others wait-
ing to be proven. But he was not a soothsayer.
Like the already discussed Qur'anic expressions that, superficially,
seem to cast doubt on the infallibility of some of the Prophets, there are
several admonitions in the Qur'an regarding some actions of God's Mes-
senger. Before analyzing them, however, we must remember that Proph-
ets, like great jurists, also exercised their personal reason if no explicit or
implicit ruling concerning the matter in question had been revealed.
Just as the Prophet's wives are not the same as other Muslim women
with respect to reward and Divine punishment (see 33:30-32), God does
not treat Prophets as He does other believers. For example, He admon-
ished them when they drank water of zamzam (a well in Makka) instead
of kawthar (a fountain in Paradise). Such admonitions should never be
regarded as the result of sin. Furthermore, these admonitions usually are
really Divine compliments that show the greatness of Prophets and their
nearness to God.
God's Messenger and the prisoners taken during the
Battle of Badr
The small Muslim community of Makka was subjected to the most
brutal tortures. Its members bore them patiently and never thought of re-
taliation, for the Qur'an ordered God's Messenger to call unbelievers
with wisdom and fair preaching, to repel evil with what was better, and
to forgive their faults and evil deeds. When the Muslims emigrated to
Madina to live according to Islamic principles, they left everything be-
hind. However, they continued to be harassed in Madina by both
Makkan polytheists as well as a new group: Madina's Jewish tribes.
134

--- Sayfa 136 ---
Moreover, even though the Ansar (the Helpers) willingly shared all their
possessions with the Emigrants, all Muslims experienced deprivation. In
such straitened circumstances and because they had been wronged, God
permitted them to resist the enemy onslaught. This was just before the
Battle of Badr.
This battle was the Muslims' first military confrontation with the en-
emy forces. Although outnumbered, the believers won a great victory.
Until then, if we do not accept the opinions of some Qur'anic interpreters
that Sura Muhammad, which contains regulations on treating prisoners
of war, was revealed before Sura al-Anfal, no Divine commandment had
been revealed on how to treat captives. Muslims did not know if they
were to kill enemy soldiers or take them as prisoners. Sa'd ibn Mu'adh,
for example, was not pleased when he saw fellow Muslims taking pris-
oners; he was in favor of killing them in the first confrontation.
After the battle ended, the Prophet consulted with his Companions, as
he always did where there was no specific Revelation, on how to treat
the prisoners. Abu Bakr said: "O God's Messenger, they are your people.
Even though they have wronged you and the believers greatly, you will win
their hearts and cause their guidance if you forgive them and please them."
'Umar had a different idea. He said: "O God's Messenger, these prison-
ers are the leading figures of Makka. If we kill them, unbelief will no
longer be strong enough to fight us again. Hand each prisoner over to his
Muslim relative. Let 'Ali kill his brother 'Aqil. Let Abu Bakr kill his son
'Abd al-Rahman. Let me kill my relative so and so."
God's Messenger turned to Abu Bakr and said: "You are like Abraham,
who said: He who follows me is of me, and he who disobeys me-but You are in-
deed Oft-Forgiving, Most Compassionate (14:36). You are also like Jesus,
who said: If You punish them, they are Your servants. If You forgive them,
You are All-Mighty, All-Wise (5:118).
Then he turned to 'Umar and said: "You are like Noah, who said: O my
Lord, don't leave even one unbeliever on Earth" (71:26). You are also like
Moses, who said: "Our Lord, destroy their (Pharaoh's and his chiefs') riches
and harden their hearts so they will not believe until they see the painful chas-
tisement" (10:88).
He followed Abu Bakr's advice.
Every Prophet was sent to guide people to the way of God, and the
mission of each was based on mercy. However, mercy sometimes re-
quires, as in the case of Noah and Moses amputating an arm to ensure
the body's health, or even that the body should undergo a major
135

--- Sayfa 137 ---
operation. Islam, being the middle way of absolute balance between all
temporal and spiritual extremes and containing the ways of all previous
Prophets, makes a choice according to the situation.
Prior to Badr, the Muslims were weak, whereas their enemies, in ma-
terial terms, were strong, formidable, and organized. Thus, conditions
may have required that the Prophet should not have had prisoners of
war until he became completely triumphant in the land (8:67), for they
were fighting for the cause of God, not for some worldly purpose.
However, God Almighty already had decreed that ransom and spoils of
war would be lawful for Muslims. The pure hearts of the Prophet and
Abu Bakr must have felt that God would allow them to take spoils of
war and ransom prisoners. Therefore, they released the prisoners in re-
turn for some ransom before the relevant verses were revealed: Had it
not been for that decree, a severe penalty would have reached them for
the ransom that they took. But if God made it lawful, they could enjoy
what they took in war, lawful and good (8:68-69).
This is mentioned more explicitly in another verse: When you confront
the unbelievers (in battle), smite their necks. When you have thoroughly sub-
dued them, bind them firmly. Thereafter (it is time for) either generosity (release
without ransom) or ransom (recommended) (47:4).
To conclude, the Muslims did not disobey a Divine commandment
that had been revealed already, and so they did not sin. already It was a
decision reached after consultation.
The Prophet's exempting the Hypocrites from the ex-
pedition of Tabuk
The expedition of Tabuk took place in 9 ah (after hijra) during the
summer, when Arabia's heat is intense. The soldiers were sent to face
Byzantium, one of the two local superpowers. Against his usual practice,
God's Messenger announced the expedition's target. Some people asked
to be excused, and God's Messenger execused those whose excuses he re-
garded as justifiable. He did not check to see whether they were telling
the truth for, as a Muslim, he had to judge according to outward signs
and the affirmation of faith.
Besides, as God veils people's shortcomings, God's Messenger never
reproached people directly. When he discerned a defect in an individual
or a fault common in his community, he would mount the pulpit and
give a general warning. He never mentioned any names.
136

--- Sayfa 138 ---
Many hypocrites offered bogus excuses. Despite this, God's Messenger
accepted their excuses. In this case: God forgive you! Why did you grant
them exemption until those who told the truth were manifest to you, and
you knew the liars? (9:43) was revealed.
Although some scholars hold that God reproached His Messenger for
exempting the Hypocrites, the truth is the reverse. Imam Fakhr al-Din al-
Razi and many others, among whom are linguists, have correctly poin-
ted out that God forgive you! is an exclamation, [like God bless you! in
English.] So, the true meaning of the expression is God give you grace!
As explained earlier, it is not necessary for a sin to exist before forgive-
ness is granted. For example, as we saw in verses 4:99, 5:3, and 4:43, for-
giveness may be juxtaposed with grace, for their meanings are closely
allied.
In addition, God's Messenger was motivated by kindness as well as
policy: kindness because, in the urgency of the moment, he did not wish
to refuse those who had real excuses; and policy, because those who
were there just because they were obligated to be there would be a bur-
den and a source of disorder. This is stated explicitly: If they had gone
forth with you, they would have added nothing but mischief; they
would have hurried through your ranks, seeking to cause sedition
among you (9:47).
God's Messenger knew who the Hypocrites were: Surely you will know
them by the tone of their speech (47:30). In addition, God did not will that
they should set out for war: If they had intended to go forth they would cer-
tainly have made some preparation therefor; but God was averse to their being
sent forth; so He made them lag behind, and they were told: "Sit among those
who sit (inactive)" (9:46).
That being so, the meaning of the verse in question is this: "God give
you grace! If you had not excused them when they asked, the Hypocrites would
have been clearly distinguished from the truthful." As we can see, the Prophet
is not being reprimanded; rather, the verse expresses a Divine compli-
ment and affection for him.
Surat al-'Abasa (He Frowned)
Prophethood is not just another job that anyone can do. Each person
has two aspects: heavenly and earthly. We are shaped from dust and cre-
ated from a lowly drop of "water," but nevertheless have been distin-
guished with the "breath of God." As a result, we can rise (or fall) to
137

--- Sayfa 139 ---
infinitely high (or low) levels. All Prophets were of the highest rank. God
chose them and endowed them with all laudable virtues and the highest
degree of intellectual and spiritual faculties.
To catch just a glimpse of the greatness of God's Messenger we should
consider how, by God's Will and Power, he transformed a savage and
backward desert people into the founders of the most magnificent civil-
ization in human history. In addition, according to the rule that "one who
causes something is like its doer," the reward of each believer's deeds, from
the time of the Prophet to the Last Day, is added to the Prophet's reward,
which causes him to grow in spirit incessantly.
Despite this, some classical Qur'anic commentaries and the like con-
tain assertions based on borrowings or unreliable anecdotes incompat-
ible with Prophethood. What is more tragic is that in the Muslim world
itself, "researchers" influenced by either Orientalists or worldly tempta-
tions, have been less-than-respectful toward Prophethood, God's Mes-
senger, and the Sunna. Deceived into mistaking "the sun's reflection for the
sun itself," they regard themselves as free to criticize the Prophet and his
Sunna. One of their pretexts is the initial verses of Surat al-'Abasa:
He frowned and turned away because there came to him the blind man. But
how can you know? Perhaps he might purify himself or be forewarned, and
warning might profit him. As for him who regards himself as self-sufficient, to
him you eagerly attend, though it is not your concern if he does not purify him-
self. But as for him who eagerly hastens to you, and is in fear [of God], you are
heedless of him. (80:1-10)
According to what some Qur'anic interpreters have written, God's
Messenger was once deeply and earnestly engaged in conveying the
Message to pagan Qurayshi leaders when he was interrupted by a blind
man. This man, 'Abd Allah ibn Umm Maktum, was so poor that usually
no one took any notice of him. He desired to benefit from the teaching of
God's Messenger, but the latter disliked the interruption and became im-
patient. As a result, these verses were revealed to reproach the Prophet.
This story is, however, highly questionable for several reasons:
- The narration of the event and its participants are not the same in all
reliable Tradition books as in some Qur'anic commentaries. In total, the
various accounts mention seven people in addition to Ibn Umm
Maktum.
- Several verses explain how previous Prophets behaved toward poor
people. It is inconceivable for a Prophet who always advised his
138

--- Sayfa 140 ---
followers to be with poor people to frown at or turn away from a poor
blind man, especially when he came to listen to him.
- God's Messenger always rejected the calls of Qurayshi leaders to
drive away the poor Muslims if he wanted them to believe in Islam.
- The Qur'an attaches great importance to how a believer behaves in
the presence of God's Messenger. For example, they are "not to depart
without asking for his leave when they are with him." They cannot enter his
house without permission, will have their deeds reduced to nothing if
they raise their voices above his, and will be punished in Hell if they ill-
treat him. Given this, Ibn Umm Maktum should have been reprimanded
for interrupting God's Messenger.
- Ibn Umm Maktum was the son of Khadijah's uncle, and one of those
who accepted Islam in its early days. He had a remarkable position in
Islam. God's Messenger deputed to him the government of Madina twice
while he was on military campaign. So, despite his blindness, he could
not have been so rude as to interrupt God's Messenger while the latter
was inviting the Qurayshi leaders to the truth. He was blind, not deaf.
- The reprimand contained in the relevant verses is too severe to be for
the Prophet. The verbs to frown and to turn away from are never used in
the Qur'an for a Prophet; in fact, they are not even used for ordinary be-
lievers. In this verse, they are used in their third person, singular form. In
the absence of the Prophet, this means disrespect and debasement. Also,
the following expressions are of the type used for the leaders of the un-
believers. Therefore, it is inconceivable that the target of this reprimand
was the Prophet.
- The Qur'anic interpreters who mention this incident add to it that
whenever God's Messenger saw Ibn Umm Maktum afterwards, he
would say to him: "Greetings to you, O one because of whom my Lord admon-
ished me." This addition is not to be found in reliable books of Tradition.
- God's Messenger was very kind-hearted and gave all he had to bring
his people to guidance. The Qur'an states: It grieves him that the believers
should perish. He is ardently anxious over them, and most kind and merciful to
them (9:128).
After all these explanations, we choose to refer the truth of the matter
to God, who is the All-Knowing.
139

--- Sayfa 141 ---
The offer made by the Thaqif tribe
Before entering Islam, the Thaqif tribe tried to get some concessions
from the Prophet, including some exemptions from various religious
duties-as if the Messenger were authorized to do so! As even an ordinary
Muslim would never think of granting such a request, imagine the
Prophet's reaction! The verses revealed concerning this incident say:
They sought to entice you from what we reveal unto you, to substitute against
Us something different. Then, they would certainly have made you a trusted
friend! Indeed, had We not given you strength and firmness, you might nearly
have inclined to them a little. Then, We should have made you taste double
(punishment) in this life, and double in death; and moreover you would have
found none for you to help you against Us. (17:73-75)
First, God's Messenger is the direct addressee and receiver of the Div-
ine Revelation. For this reason, God directly addresses him concerning
collective and individual orders, prohibitions, and responsibilities. This
does not mean that God's Messenger sometimes ignored what he was
told to do. Being the embodiment, representative, and preacher of Islam,
as well as the best example, God's Messenger practiced them most
strictly and experienced the "whole history of Islam" in miniature measure.
In other words, God used him, his time, and his Companions as a pat-
tern according to which the future expansion of Islam would be shaped.
He functioned as a seed from which all future Islamic civilizations,
movements, and sciences-the universal tree of Islam-would grow. For
this reason, such verses should never be taken to suggest that God's Mes-
senger was reproached for doing something wrong. That blessed person,
the Beloved of God and for whose sake God created all the worlds, is ab-
solutely free of defect, fault, and shortcoming.
God's Messenger was extremely eager for the guidance of all people.
To have some understanding of his love and affection for humanity and
existence in general, it is enough to reflect on what a contemporary
Muslim saintly scholar said concerning his eagerness for the guidance
and well-being of his nation:
I have known nothing of worldly pleasures in my life of over eighty years. All
my life has passed on battlefields, and at various other places of suffering. There
has been no torment which I have not tasted and no oppression which I have not
suffered. I care for neither Paradise nor fear Hell. If I witness that the faith of my
nation-that is, all the Muslim peoples-has been secured, I will have no objection
140

--- Sayfa 142 ---
to being burnt in the flames of Hell, for my heart will change into a rose garden
while my body is being burnt.164
God said to His Messenger, consoling him in the face of persistent un-
belief: You will nearly grieve yourself to death, following after them, if they
don't believe in this Message (18:6).
Having seen the eagerness of God's Messenger to guide people, the
Thaqifi leaders tried to extract special concessions. They even added that
if others objected, he might excuse it with the lie that his Lord had
ordered him to do so. From a purely human point of view, it may seem
good policy to make a small concession to fulfill a great mission. But the
Messenger was not the author of Islam; his only responsibility was to
convey it. The religion belongs to God. The verses in question emphasize
this point.
His marriage to Zaynab
During the pre-Islamic period, and still today, cultural, economic, and
spiritual slavery was widespread. Islam came to destroy such slavery
and sought to solve this social, as well as psychological, problem in
stages. Since slavery has a deep psychological aspect, its abolition all at
once could have resulted in even harsher conditions. For example, when
Lincoln abolished slavery in the United States, most slaves had to return
to their owners because their ability to assume responsibility, to choose,
and to manage their affairs as free people had been beaten out of them or
had caused their leaders to be murdered.
Islam established, as a first step, strict principles on how to treat
slaves, as seen in the following hadiths: "Those who kill their slaves will be
killed. Those who imprison and starve their slaves will be imprisoned and
starved. Those who castrate their slaves will be castrated,"165 and "Arabs are not
superior to non-Arabs; non-Arabs are not superior to Arabs. White people are
not superior to black people; black people are not superior to white people. Su-
periority is only in righteousness and fear of God."166
As its second step, Islam enabled slaves to realize their human con-
sciousness and identity. It educated them in Islamic values, and im-
planted in them a love of freedom. On the day of their emancipation,
they were fully equipped to be useful members of the community as
164.Said Nursi, Eptiomes of Light (Mathnawi al-Nuriya) (Izmir, Kaynak: 1999), II.
165.Abu Dawud, "Diyat," 70; Tirmidhi, "Diyat," 17.
166.Ibn Hanbal, 411.
141

--- Sayfa 143 ---
farmers, artisans, teachers, scholars, commanders, governors, ministers,
and even prime ministers.
Another pre-Islamic practice, which still exists in the civil law codes of
many contemporary countries, is allowing adopted children to enjoy the
same legal status as natural children. As a result, a father could not leg-
ally marry his adopted son's widow or divorced wife. This practice was
to be abolished, for neither adoption nor any other method of declaring
someone a son can create a relationship comparable to that between chil-
dren and their natural parents.
Zayd was a black African who had been kidnapped and enslaved as a
child. Khadija, the first wife of God's Messenger, had purchased him in
the Makkan slave market. After she married the Prophet, she gave Zayd
to him as a gift. God's Messenger emancipated him and called him "my
son." When Zayd's parents finally located him and came to Makka to get
him, he refused to go with them, saying that he would rather stay with
God's Messenger.
In order to show the equality between black and white people and
demonstrate that superiority lies in righteousness and devotion to God,
not in descent and worldly position, God's Messenger married Zayd to
Zaynab bint Jahsh of the Hashimite tribe. She was a very devoted and in-
tellectual Muslim woman and had a noble character. God's Messenger
had known her very well since her childhood. Although her family had
wanted her to marry God's Messenger, they agreed to let her marry
Zayd because God's Messenger desired it.
Zayd, however, admitted that he was spiritually inferior to his wife.
He realized through his insight that her sublimity of character made her
fit to be the wife of a far greater man than himself. He asked God's Mes-
senger many times to allow him to divorce her, but each time God's Mes-
senger advised him to remain married to her. Nevertheless, Zayd con-
cluded that he was not his wife's equal and eventually divorced her.
After this, God told His Messenger to marry her, even though this
would violate his society's norms. But as this marriage had been or-
dained in heaven, he submitted and married Zaynab: When Zayd had dis-
solved (his marriage) with her, We gave her in marriage to you, so that there
may be no difficulty and sin for believers in marriage with the wives of their ad-
opted sons if they divorce them. And God's command must be fulfilled (33:37).
Although this marriage was very difficult for God's Messenger to enter
into, God used it to abolish a mistaken custom and establish a new law
and custom. The Messenger always was the first to practice the law or
142

--- Sayfa 144 ---
rule to be established and obeyed, so that it would have enough influ-
ence on others. His marriage to Zaynab was one of the most difficult
commandments he had to carry out. That is why his wife 'A'isha re-
marked: "If the Messenger of God been inclined to suppress anything of what
was revealed to him, he would surely have suppressed this verse."
As expected, the enemies of Islam and the Hypocrites slandered God's
Messenger. Although some of their allegations have found their way into
various Qur'anic commentaries, no such allegation or slander has ever
affected-or will affect-his pure personality and chastity. All scholars
agree that he lived happily with Khadija, a widow 15 years older than
himself, with nothing to suggest any misconduct during their 25-year
marriage (ending only with Khadija's death). Unlike young people, he
did not burn with lust and carnal desires. This clearly shows that his
subsequent marriages, which took place after he was 50 years old, a time
when desire has subsided, were entered into for specific purposes.
In sum, like every other Prophet, God's Messenger has no blemish and
is innocent of what they accuse him. Nor can his infallibility be doubted.
143

--- Sayfa 145 ---
No Bodily or Mental Defects
All Muslim theologians agree that Prophets have no bodily or mental de-
fects. As they were extraordinarily attractive in personality and conduct,
they were also graceful and charming in outward appearance. They were
perfect in bodily structure, handsome, and well-built.
Anas says that God's Messenger was the most handsome of people.
Jabir ibn Samura remarks: "Once during a full moon, we were sitting in the
mosque. God's Messenger came in. I looked first at the shining moon, and then
at his face. I swear by God that his face was brighter than the moon."167
Prophets must be free from all bodily defects, for their appearance
should not repel others. In explaining the Divine wisdom of God's Mes-
senger living for 63 years, Said Nursi writes:
Believers are religiously obliged to love and respect God's Messenger
to the utmost degree, and follow his every command without feeling any
dislike for any aspect of him. For this reason, God did not allow him to
live to the troublesome and often humiliating period of old age, and sent
him to the "highest abode" when he was 63 years old. This was the average life-
span of the members of his community, thus making him the example in this re-
spect also.168
Job's Afflictions
Despite this characteristic being common to all Prophets, false stories
about Job and Moses, either borrowed from Israelite sources or misun-
derstandings of Qur'anic verses, have found their way into Qur'anic
commentaries.
In a hadith, God's Messenger says: "The Prophets undergo the severest tri-
als; the greatest misfortunes strike them. Then come other believers; the firmer
their belief, the bigger their misfortune." Prophet Job is praised in the Qur'an
as a steadfast, excellent servant of God, one ever-turning to his Lord
(38:44). As can be deduced from the Qur'anic verses, and mentioned in
the Bible, he was afflicted with a skin disease, which caused painful sores
from the soles of his feet to the top of his head (Job 2:7). Influenced by Is-
raelite stories, some Qur'anic commentators have added that worms
lived in his sores or abscesses, and that the resulting offensive odor
caused people to leave him.
167.Suyuti, Al-Khasa'is al-Kubra', 1:123; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 7:168.
168.The Letters, 2:84–5.
144

--- Sayfa 146 ---
These additions are completely groundless. If people really left him,
this might have been due to his later poverty. In the beginning, Job was a
rich, thankful servant of God; later on, he lost his wealth and children.
As a Prophet, he could not have had a repulsive or disgusting appear-
ance, with, at least, his face exempt from sores. Nor could his body have
emitted an offensive smell. Contrary to the Biblical account that he
cursed the day of his birth (Job, 3:1) and God openly (Job, 7:20-21), and
justified himself rather than God (Job, 32:2), Job bore his afflictions for
years without any objection. He prayed: Affliction has visited me, and
You are the Most Merciful of the Merciful (21:83). God answered his
prayer and removed his affliction, and restored to him his household
and the like thereof along with them (21:84).
Moses' Speech Impediment
The Qur'an states that Moses, on receiving the order to go to Pharaoh,
supplicated: My Lord, open my breast (relieve my mind and enable me to bear
everything), and ease for me my task. Loosen a knot upon my tongue so that
they may understand my words (20:25–28). Some commentators, influenced
by Israelite sources and misunderstanding Moses' supplication, have as-
serted that he had a speech impediment. According to them, a young
Moses once pulled Pharaoh's beard. Angered, Pharaoh wanted to have
him killed. But his wife, trying to save the child, asked Pharaoh to test
him to see whether he was fit to be judged or decide in his favor.
Bringing a weighing scale, the put a piece of gold in one pan and some
embers in the other. Moses put the embers in his mouth, which gave him
a permanent stutter. So, according to these interpretations, Moses was
asking God to remove his stutter.
An invented story cannot serve as the basis for interpreting a Qur'anic
verse. If Moses had had such a speech impediment, he should have
prayed for the knot—not a knot—to be loosened. What Moses was ask-
ing for was a greater ability to articulate God's Message in Pharaoh's
presence, for he was not as eloquent as his brother Aaron (28:34; Exodus
4:10).
In conclusion, all Prophets were both physically and mentally perfect.
Regardless of what others might claim, there is nothing in their lives to
suggest even the slightest defect. However, some of them may have been
superior to others in certain respects: And those Messengers, some We
have preferred above others; some there are to whom God spoke
[directly], and some He raised in rank (2:253). Prophet Muhammad is
145

--- Sayfa 147 ---
superior to all of them by virtue of being the last Prophet sent to both hu-
manity and jinn. His Mission was not restricted to a certain people or a
certain time; rather, it was directed toward all people and remains valid
until the end of time.
146

--- Sayfa 148 ---
Chapter 5
Prophet Muhammad as Husband and Father
The Prophet and His Wives
Prophet Muhammad personifies the roles of perfect father and husband.
He was so kind and tolerant with his wives that they could not envisage
their lives without him, nor did they want to live away from him.
He married Sawda, his second wife, while in Makka. After a while, he
wanted to divorce her for certain reasons. She was extremely upset at
this news, and implored him: "O Messenger of God, I wish no worldly thing
of you. I will sacrifice the time allocated to me, if you don't want to visit me. But
please don't deprive me of being your wife. I want to go to the Hereafter as your
wife. I care for nothing else."169 The Messenger did not divorce her, nor did
he stop visiting her.
Once he noticed that Hafsa was uncomfortable over their financial
situation. "If she wishes, I may set her free," he said, or something to that ef-
fect. This suggestion so alarmed her that she requested mediators to per-
suade him not to do so. He kept his faithful friend's daughter as his trus-
ted wife.
All of his wives viewed separation from the Messenger of God as a
calamity, so firmly had he established himself in their hearts. They were
completely at one with him. They shared in his blessed, mild, and natur-
al life. If he had left them, they would have died of despair. If he had di-
vorced one of them, she would have waited at his doorstep until the Last
Day.
After his death, there was much yearning and a great deal of grief.
Abu Bakr and 'Umar found the Messenger's wives weeping whenever
they visited them. Their weeping seemed to continue for the rest of their
lives. Muhammad left a lasting impression on everyone. At one point, he
had nine wives and dealt equally with all of them and without any
169.Muslim, "Rada'," 47.
147

--- Sayfa 149 ---
serious problems. He was a kind and gentle husband, and never be-
haved harshly or rudely. In short, he was the perfect husband.
A few days before his death, he said: "A servant has been allowed to
choose this world or his Lord. He chose his Lord."170 Abu Bakr, a man of great
intelligence, began to cry, understanding that the Prophet was talking
about himself. His illness worsened daily, and his severe headache
caused him to writhe in pain. But even during this difficult period, he
continued to treat his wives with kindness and gentleness. He asked for
permission to stay in one room, as he had no strength to visit them one
by one. His wives agreed, and the Messenger spent his last days in
'A'isha's room.
Each wife, because of his generosity and kindness, thought she was his
most beloved. The idea that any man could show complete equality and
fairness in his relationships with nine women seems impossible. For this
reason, the Messenger of God asked God's pardon for any unintentional
leanings. He would pray: "I may have unintentionally shown more love to
one of them than the others, and this would be injustice. So, O Lord, I take
refuge in Your grace for those things beyond my power."171
What gentleness and sensitivity! I wonder if anyone else could show
such kindness to his children or spouses. When people manage to cover
up their lower inborn tendencies, it is as if they have done something
very clever and shown tremendous willpower. But they sometimes ex-
pose these very defects unconsciously while bragging of their cleverness.
The Messenger, despite showing no fault, sought only God's forgiveness.
His gentleness penetrated his wives' souls so deeply that his departure
led to what they must have felt to be an unbridgeable separation. They
did not commit suicide, as Islam forbids it, but their lives now became
full of endless sorrow and ceaseless tears.
The Messenger was kind and gentle to all women, and advised all oth-
er men to follow him in this regard. Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas described his
kindness as follows:
'Umar said: One day I went to the Prophet and saw him smiling. "May God
make you smile forever, O Messenger of God," I said, and asked why he was
smiling. "I smile at those women. They were chatting in front of me before you
came. When they heard your voice, they all vanished," he answered still smiling.
On hearing this answer, I raised my voice and told them: "O enemies of your
170.Bukhari, "Salat," 80.
171.Tirmidhi, "Nikah," 41:4; Bukhari, "Adab," 68.
148

--- Sayfa 150 ---
own selves, you are scared of me, but you are not scared of the Messenger of
God, and you don't show respect to him." "You are hard-hearted and strict,"
they replied.172
'Umar also was gentle to women. However, the most handsome man
looks ugly when compared to Joseph's beauty. Likewise, 'Umar's gentle-
ness and sensitivity seem like violence and severity when compared to
those of the Prophet. The women had seen the Messenger's gentleness,
sensitivity, and kindness, and so regarded 'Umar as strict and severe. Yet
'Umar shouldered the caliphate perfectly and became one of the greatest
examples after the Prophet. He was a just ruler, and strove to distinguish
right from wrong. His qualities enabled him to be caliph. Some of his
qualities might seem rather severe; however, those very qualities en-
abled him to shoulder very demanding responsibilities.
The Prophet’s Consultation With His Wives
The Prophet's consultation with his wives. The Messenger discussed
matters with his wives as friends. Certainly he did not need their advice,
since he was directed by Revelation. However, he wanted to teach his
nation that Muslim men were to give women every consideration. This
was quite a radical idea in his time, as it is today in many parts of the
world. He began teaching his people through his own relationship with
his wives.
For example, the conditions laid down in the Treaty of Hudaybiya dis-
appointed and enraged many Muslims, for one condition stipulated that
they could not make the pilgrimage that year. They wanted to reject the
treaty, continue on to Makka, and face the possible consequences. But
the Messenger ordered them to slaughter their sacrificial animals and
take off their pilgrim attire. Some Companions hesitated, hoping that he
would change his mind. He repeated his order, but they continued to
hesitate. They did not oppose him; rather, they still hoped he might
change his mind, for they had set out with the intention of pilgrimage
and did not want to stop half way.
Noticing this reluctance, the Prophet returned to his tent and asked
Umm Salama, his wife accompanying him at that time, what she thought
of the situation. So she told him, fully aware that he did not need her ad-
vice. In doing this, he taught Muslim men an important social lesson:
172.Bukhari, "Adab," 68.
149

--- Sayfa 151 ---
There is nothing wrong with exchanging ideas with women on import-
ant matters, or on any matters at all.
She said: "O Messenger of God, don't repeat your order. They may resist and
thereby perish. Slaughter your sacrificial animal and change out of your pilgrim
attire. They will obey you, willingly or not, when they see that your order is fi-
nal."173 He immediately took a knife in his hand, went outside, and began
to slaughter his sheep. The Companions began to do the same, for now it
was clear that his order would not be changed.
Counsel and consultation, like every good deed, were practiced by
God's Messenger first within his own family and then in the wider com-
munity. Even today, we understand so little about his relationships with
his wives that it is as if we are wandering aimlessly around a plot of
land, unaware of the vast treasure buried below our feet.
Women are secondary beings in the minds of many, including those
self-appointed defenders of women's rights as well as many self-pro-
claimed Muslim men. For us, a woman is part of a whole, a part that
renders the other half useful. We believe that when the two halves come
together, the true unity of a human being appears. When this unity does
not exist, humanity does not exist—nor can Prophethood, sainthood, or
even Islam.
Our master encouraged us through his enlightening words to behave
kindly to women. He declared: "The most perfect believers are the best in
character, and the best of you are the kindest to their families."174 It is clear that
women have received the true honor and respect they deserve, not just
in theory but in actual practice, only once in history—during the period
of Prophet Muhammad.
The choice God's Messenger gave to his wives. The wives of the Mes-
senger were given the choice of remaining with him or leaving:
O Prophet, say to your wives: "If you desire the life of this world and its glit-
ter, then come! I will provide for your enjoyment and set you free in a handsome
manner. But if you seek God, His Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter,
verily God has prepared for you, the well-doers among you, a great reward."
(33:28-29)
A few of his wives who wanted a more prosperous life asked:
"Couldn't we live a little more luxuriously, like other Muslims do? Couldn't we
have at least a bowl of soup everyday, or some prettier garments?" At first
173.Bukhari, "Shurut," 15.
174.Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 15; Tirmidhi, "Rada'," 11.
150

--- Sayfa 152 ---
sight, such wishes might be considered fair and just. However, they were
members of the family that was to be an example for all Muslim families
until the Last Day.
The Messenger reacted by going into retreat. The news spread, and
everyone rushed to the mosque and began to cry. The smallest grief felt
by their beloved Messenger was enough to bring them all to tears, and
even the smallest incident in his life would disturb them. Abu Bakr and
'Umar, seeing the event in a different light as their daughters were dir-
ectly involved, rushed to the mosque. They wanted to see him, but he
would not leave his retreat. Eventually, on their third attempt, they
gained entry and began to rebuke their daughters. The Messenger saw
what was happening, but only said: "I cannot afford what they want."175
The Qur'an declared: O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other wo-
men (33:32).
Others might save themselves by simply fulfilling their obligations,
but those who were at the very center of Islam had to devote themselves
fully, so that no weakness would appear at the center. There were ad-
vantages in being the Prophet's wife, but these advantages brought re-
sponsibilities and potential risks. The Messenger was preparing them as
exemplars for all present and future Muslim women. He was especially
worried that they might enjoy the reward for their good deeds in this
world, and thereby be included in: You have exhausted your share of the
good things in your life of the world and sought comfort in them (46:20).
Life in the Prophet's house was uncomfortable. For this reason, either
explicitly or implicitly, his wives made some modest demands. As their
status was unique, they were not expected to enjoy themselves in a
worldly sense. Some godly people laugh only a few times during their
lives; others never fill their stomachs. For example, Fudayl ibn 'Iyad nev-
er laughed. He smiled only once, and those who saw him do so asked
him why he smiled, for they were greatly surprised. He told them:
"Today, I learned that my son 'Ali died. I was happy to hear that God had loved
him, and so I smiled."176 If there were such people outside of the Prophet's
household, his wives, who were even more pious and respectful of God
and regarded as "mothers of the believers," would certainly be of a higher
degree.
It is not easy to merit being together with the Messenger in this world
and the Hereafter. Thus, these special women were put to a great test.
175.Muslim, "Talaq," 34, 35.
176.Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat al-Awliya', 8:100.
151

--- Sayfa 153 ---
The Messenger allowed them to choose his poor home or the world's
luxury. If they choose the world, he would give them whatever they
wanted and then dissolve his marriage with them. If they choose God
and His Messenger, they had to be content with their lives. This was a
peculiarity of his family. Since this family was unique, its members had
to be unique. The head of the family was chosen, as were the wives and
children.
The Messenger first called 'A'isha and said: "I want to discuss something
with you. You'd better talk with your parents before making a decision." Then
he recited the verses mentioned above. Her decision was exactly as ex-
pected from a truthful daughter of a truthful father: "O Messenger of God,
do I need to talk with my parents? By God, I choose God and His Messenger."177
'A'isha herself tells us what happened next: "The Messenger received the
same answer from all his wives. No one expressed a different opinion. They all
said what I had said." They did so because they were all at one with the
Messenger. They could not differ. If the Messenger had told them to fast
for a lifetime without break, they would have done so, and endured it
with pleasure. However, they endured hardship until their deaths.
Some of his wives had enjoyed an extravagant lifestyle before their
marriage to him. One of these was Safiyya, who had lost her father and
husband, and had been taken prisoner, during the Battle of Khaybar. She
must have been very angry with the Messenger, but when she saw him,
her feelings changed completely. She endured the same destiny as the
other wives. They endured it because love of the Messenger had penet-
rated their hearts.
Safiyya was a Jewess. Once, she was dismayed when this fact was
mentioned to her sarcastically. She informed the Messenger, expressing
her sadness. He comforted her saying: "If they repeat it, tell them: 'My fath-
er is Prophet Aaron, my uncle is Prophet Moses, and my husband is, as you see,
Prophet Muhammad, the Chosen One. What do you have more than me to be
proud of?'"
The Qur'an declares that his wives are the mothers of the believers (33:6).
Although fourteen centuries have passed, we still feel delight in saying
"my mother" when referring to Khadija, 'A'isha, Umm Salama, Hafsa, and
his other wives. We feel this because of him. Some feel more love for
these women than they do for their real mothers. Certainly, this feeling
must have been deeper, warmer, and stronger in the Prophet's own time.
177.Muslim, "Talaq," 35.
152

--- Sayfa 154 ---
The Messenger was the perfect head of a family. Managing many wo-
men with ease, being a lover of their hearts, an instructor of their minds,
an educator of their souls, he never neglected the affairs of the nation or
compromised his duties.
The Messenger excelled in every area of life. People should not com-
pare him to themselves or to the so-called great personalities of their age.
Researchers should look at him, the one to whom angels are grateful, al-
ways remembering that he excelled in every way. If they want to look for
Muhammad they must search for him in his own dimensions. Our ima-
ginations cannot reach him, for we do not even know how to imagine
properly. God bestowed upon him, as His special favor, superiority in
every field.
153

--- Sayfa 155 ---
God's Messenger and Children
He was an extraordinary husband, a perfect father, and a unique grand-
father. He was unique in every way. He treated his children and grand-
children with great compassion, and never neglected to direct them to
the Hereafter and good deeds. He smiled at them, caressed and loved
them, but did not allow them to neglect matters related to the afterlife. In
worldly matters he was extremely open; but when it came to maintain-
ing their relationship with God, he was very serious and dignified. He
showed them how to lead a humane life, and never allowed them to neg-
lect their religious duties and become spoiled. His ultimate goal was to
prepare them for the Hereafter. His perfect balance in such matters is an-
other dimension of his Divinely inspired intellect.
In a hadith narrated by Muslim, Anas bin Malik, honored as the
Messenger's servant for 10 continuous years, says: "I've never seen a man
who was more compassionate to his family members than Muhammad."178 If
this admission were made just by us, it could be dismissed as unimport-
ant. However, millions of people, so benign and compassionate that they
would not even offend an ant, declare that he embraced everything with
compassion. He was a human like us, but God inspired in him such an
intimate affection for every living thing that he could establish a connec-
tion with all of them. As a result, he was full of extraordinary affection
toward his family members and others.
All of the Prophet's sons had died. Ibrahim, his last son born to his
Coptic wife Mary, also died in infancy. The Messenger often visited his
son before the latter's death, although he was very busy. Ibrahim was
looked after by a nurse. The Prophet would embrace, kiss, and caress
him before returning home.179 When Ibrahim died, the Prophet took him
on his lap again, embraced him, and described his sorrow while on the
brink of tears. Some were surprised. He gave them this answer: "Eyes
may water and hearts may be broken, but we do not say anything except what
God will be pleased with." He pointed to his tongue and said: "God will ask us
about this."180
He carried his grandsons Hasan and Husayn on his back. Despite his
unique status, he did this without hesitation to herald the honor that
they would attain later. One time when they were on his back, 'Umar
178.Muslim, "Fada'il," 63.
179.Muslim, "Fada'il," 62.
180.Bukhari, "Jana'iz," 44; Muslim, "Fada'il," 62; Ibn Ma'ja, "Jana'iz," 53.
154

--- Sayfa 156 ---
came into the Prophet's house and, seeing them, exclaimed: "What a beau-
tiful mount you have!" The Messenger added immediately: "What beautiful
riders they are!"181 They may not have been aware that the Messenger had
honored them. This special compliment was due to their future status as
leaders and family heads of the Prophet's household. Among their des-
cendants would be the greatest and most respected saints. His compli-
ment was not only for his grandsons, but for all his offspring. For this
reason, 'Abd al-Qadir Jilani, a well-known descendant of the Prophet's
household, said: "The Messenger's blessed feet are on my shoulders, and mine
are on the shoulders of all saints." This statement will probably stand for all
saints to come.
The Messenger was completely balanced in the way he brought up his
children. He loved his children and grandchildren very much, and in-
stilled love in them. However, he never let his love for them be abused.
None of them deliberately dared to do anything wrong. If they made an
unintentional mistake, the Messenger's protection prevented them from
going even slightly astray. He did this by wrapping them in love and an
aura of dignity. For example, once Hasan or Husayn wanted to eat a date
that had been given to distribute among the poor as alms. The Messen-
ger immediately took it from his hand, and said: "Anything given as alms
is forbidden to us."182 In teaching them while they were young to be sensit-
ive to forbidden acts, he established an important principle of education.
Whenever he returned to Madina, he would carry children on his
mount. On such occasions, the Messenger embraced not only his grand-
children but also those in his house and those nearby. He conquered
their hearts through his compassion. He loved all children.
He loved his granddaughter Umama as much as he loved Hasan and
Husayn. He often went out with her on his shoulders, and even placed
her on his back while praying. When he prostrated, he put her down;
when he had finished, he placed her on his back again.183 He showed
this degree of love to Umama to teach his male followers how to treat
girls. This was a vital necessity, for only a decade earlier it had been the
social norm to bury infant or young girls alive. Such public paternal af-
fection for a granddaughter had never been seen before in Arabia.
The Messenger proclaimed that Islam allows no discrimination
between son and daughter. How could there be? One is Muhammad, the
181.Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 13:650.
182.Ibn Hanbal, 2:279; Muslim, "Zakat," 161.
183.Bukhari, "Adab," 18; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8:39.
155

--- Sayfa 157 ---
other is Khadija; one is Adam, the other is Eve; one is 'Ali, the other is
Fatima. For every great man there is a great woman.
Fatima, the daughter of the Messenger, is the mother of all members of
his household. She is our mother, too. As soon as Fatima entered, the
Messenger would stand, take her hands and make her sit where he had
been sitting. He would ask about her health and family, show his pa-
ternal love for her, and compliment her.
He loved her like his own self, and Fatima, knowing how fond he was
of her, loved him more than her own self. Her great mission was to be
the seed for saints and godly people. She always watched her father and
how he called people to Islam. She wept and groaned when the Messen-
ger told her that he would die soon, and rejoiced when he told her that
she would be the first family member to follow him.184 Her father loved
her, and she loved her father. The Messenger was totally balanced even
in his love for Fatima. He trained her for the heights to which the human
soul should rise.
The Messenger raised her, as well as all of his other family members
and Companions, in a way to prepare them for the Hereafter. All of us
were created for eternity, and so cannot be satisfied except through
eternity and the Eternal Being. Therefore, we only want Him and long
for Him, either consciously or unconsciously. The essence of all religions
and the message of every Prophet was about the Hereafter. For this reas-
on, the Messenger always sought to prepare his followers for the eternal
peace and permanent bliss; meanwhile, his very existence among them
was a sample of that peace and bliss they would taste in His presence.
He loved them and directed them toward the Hereafter, to the other-
worldly and eternal beauty, and to God. For example, He once saw
Fatima wearing a necklace (a bracelet, according to another version), and
asked her: "Do you want the inhabitants of the Earth and the Heavens to say
that my daughter is holding (or wearing) a chain from Hell?" These few
words, coming from a man whose throne was established in her heart
and who had conquered all her faculties, caused her to report, in her
own words: "I immediately sold the necklace, bought and freed a slave, and
then went to the Messenger. When I told him what I had done, he rejoiced. He
opened his hands and thanked God: 'All thanks to God, Who protected Fatima
from Hell.'"185
184.Muslim, "Fada'il," 98, 99; Bukhari, "Manaqib, " 25.
185.Nasa'i, "Zinat," 39.
156

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Fatima did not commit any sin by wearing this necklace. However, the
Messenger wanted to keep her in the circle of the muqarrabin (those
made
near
to
God).
His
warning
to
her
was
based
on
taqwa
(righteousness and devotion to God) and qurb (nearness to God). This
was, in a sense, a neglect of worldly things. It is also an example of the
sensitivity befitting the mother of the Prophet's household, which repres-
ents the Muslim community until the Last Day. To be a mother of such
godly men like Hasan, Husayn, and Zayn al-'Abidin was certainly no or-
dinary task. The Messenger was preparing her to be the mother first of
his own household (Ahl al-Bayt), and then of those who would descend
from them, such great spiritual leaders as 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani,
Muhammad Baha' al-Din al-Naqshband, Ahmad Rifai', Ahmad Badawi,
al-Shadhili, and the like.
It was as if he were telling her: "Fatima, you will marry a man ('Ali) and
go to a house from which many golden 'rings' will emerge in the future. Forget
the golden chain on your neck and concentrate on becoming the mother for the
'golden chains' of saints who will appear in the spiritual orders of Naqsh-
bandiya, Rifa'iya, Shadhiliyya, and the like." It was difficult to fulfill such a
role while wearing a golden necklace. For this reason, the Messenger was
more severe with his own household than with others. He reminded
them of the straight path by turning their faces toward the other world,
closing all the windows opening on this world, and telling them that
what they need is God.
They were to lead their whole lives looking to the other world. For this
reason, as a sign of his love, the Messenger purified his own household
from all worldly rubbish and allowed no worldly dust to contaminate
them. He turned their faces toward the exalted realms and prepared
them for being together there.
157

--- Sayfa 159 ---
''You Are With Those Whom You Love''
According to this hadith, if you love Prophet Muhammad you will be on
his path, and those on his path will be together with him in the world
beyond. To prepare his household and Companions for this gathering,
the Messenger loved and embraced them. He used this love efficiently.
Bukhari and Muslim gave another example of how he educated them.
'Ali narrates that:
We had no servant in our house, and so Fatima did all the housework
by herself. We lived in a house with just a small room. There, she would
light a fire and try to cook. She often singed her clothes while trying to
increase the fire by blowing. She also baked our bread and carried water.
Her hands became covered in callouses from turning the millstone, as
did her back from carrying water. Meanwhile some prisoners of war
were brought to Madina. The Messenger gave them to those who ap-
plied. I suggested to Fatima that she ask for a servant from her father.
And she did.
Fatima continues:
I went to my father, but he was not at home. 'A'isha said she would tell
him when he came, so I returned home. As soon as we went to bed, the
Messenger came in. We wanted to get up, but he did not let us and in-
stead sat between us. I could feel the cold of his foot on my body. He
asked what we wanted, and I explained the situation. The Messenger, in
an awesome manner, replied: "Fatima, fear God and be faultless in all your
duties to Him. I will tell you something. When you want to go to bed, say
subhan Allah (All glory be to God), al-hamdu lillah (All praise be to God), and
Allahu akbar (God is the greatest) 33 times each. This is better for you than hav-
ing a maid".186
What he was actually saying through this conversation was:
I am turning your faces to the other-worldly realms. There are two
ways for you to reach them and be together with me there: Fulfill your
duties in perfect servitude to your Lord and fulfill your duties to your
husband. If a maid takes your responsibilities, this may make you defi-
cient. You must have two wings to fly to the higher ranks. How can a
man or woman become a perfect slave of God? How can a person be-
come a perfect human being and fulfill all of his or her obligations? It is
your duty to find the answers to these questions. First of all, become a
186.Bukhari, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 9; Muslim, "Dhikr," 80, 81.
158

--- Sayfa 160 ---
perfect slave of God. Then, become a perfect human being by performing
your duties to 'Ali, a great man who represents all the saints who will
descend from your family. If you do so, you will be with me in Heaven,
where all the perfect things and perfect human beings shall come
together.
I cannot help but digress to mention a fact about 'Ali. The Messenger
gave him his daughter in marriage without hesitation, because he de-
served to have such a wife and to be a Prophet's son-in-law. 'Ali was the
king of saints, and was created in this nature. The Messenger once told
him: "O 'Ali, every other Prophet had his own offspring. However, mine
will come from you." 187 'Ali is the father of the Prophet's household,
namely, his grandchildren and later descendants. For this reason, obey-
ing 'Ali means obeying the Messenger, and obeying the Messenger
means obeying God. Also, those who love 'Ali should love the Prophet
and follow his Sunna.
187.Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, Lemalar, 4. Lema.
159

--- Sayfa 161 ---
Why He Had More Than One Wife
Some critics of Islam, either because they do not know the reasons for
these marriages or because they want to portray him as a self-indulgent
libertine, have accused the Messenger of character failings that are in-
compatible with having even average virtue, let alone with the virtue of
God's final Messenger and best example for humanity. The facts, all of
which are easily available in scores of biographies and wellauthenticated
accounts of his sayings and actions, refute all such allegations and show
that these marriages were part of a strictly disciplined life and yet anoth-
er burden he had to bear.
The reasons behind his several marriages, while differing from case to
case, all have to do with his role as the leader of the new Muslim com-
munity, and his responsibility to guide his followers toward the norms
and values of Islam.
Muhammad married his first wife when he was 25 years old, 15 years
before his Prophethood began. Given the cultural and moral climate in
which he lived, not to mention his youth and other factors, he neverthe-
less enjoyed a sound reputation for chastity, integrity, and trustworthi-
ness. As soon as he was called to Prophethood, he acquired enemies who
made all sorts of charges. However, not even his fiercest enemies at-
tacked his reputation, for doing so would have caused them to be ri-
diculed and discredited immediately. It is important to realize that his
life was founded upon chastity and self-discipline from the outset, and
so remained.
When he was 25 and in the prime of life, Muhammad married Khadija,
a widow 15 years his senior. This marriage was very high and exception-
al in the eyes of the Prophet and God. For 23 years, this devoted couple
lived together in complete contentment and fidelity. The Prophet took no
other wives while Khadija was alive, although public opinion and social
norms would have allowed this. Even his enemies admitted that, during
these years, they could find no flaw in his moral character. When she
died during the eighth year of Prophethood, the Prophet found himself
single once again, but this time with children. He remained unmarried
for 4 or 5 years. All of his other marriages began when he was 53 years
old or older, a age when very little real interest and desire for marriage
remains, especially in Arabia where people grow old relatively earlier.
Thus, allegations of licentiousness or self-indulgence are groundless.
160

--- Sayfa 162 ---
People often ask how a Prophet can have more than one wife. There
are three points to be made in answering this question. But, let's first see
who is asking this question. Mostly, they are either Christians or Jews
(People of the Book), or atheists. As such people usually know next to
nothing about Islam, their question is based either on genuine ignorance
or the desire to spread doubt among believers.
Those who neither believe in nor practice a religion have no right to
reproach those who do. Such people are known for their casual relations
and liaisons with numerous sexual partners and their refusal to follow
any moral rules or ethics. Their disguised yet unrestrained self-indul-
gence, as well as their refusal to consider its consequences upon them-
selves and young people in general, not to mention their own children,
has had serious social repercussions. Considering themselves free, they
engage in what most societies consider to be immoral behavior: incest,
homosexuality, polyandry (multiple husbands at the same time), and
others. They never stop to consider what effect such practices have on
the children of such unions. When we understand this, we can take their
criticisms for what they are: a desire, whether conscious or otherwise, to
drag believers into the mess of moral confusion and viciousness in which
they themselves are trapped.
One wonders why Jews and Christians attack the Prophet for his mul-
tiple marriages. Have they forgotten that the great Hebrew patriarchs,
considered Prophets in the Bible and in the Qur'an and revered by Jews,
Christians, and Muslims as exemplars of moral excellence, all practiced
polygamy? Moreover, as in the case of Prophet Solomon, they had far
more wives than Prophet Muhammad, upon him be peace. One wonders
if they are moved more by their anti-Islam bias than genuine concern or
interest.
Polygamy did not originate with the Muslims. Furthermore, in the
case of the Prophet of Islam, it was an essential part of conveying the
message of Islam and bringing unbelievers into its fold. For example, a
religion that encompasses every sphere of life cannot be shy when it
comes to intimate matters. Such things can only be known by one's
spouse. Therefore, there must be women who can give clear instruction
and advice, as such matters cannot be left to the usual allusions, hints,
and innuendoes. The Prophet's wives functioned as teachers who con-
veyed and explained to other women, as well as men, Islamic norms and
rules for correct domestic, marital, and other private concerns.
Some marriages were contracted for specific reasons, such as:
161

--- Sayfa 163 ---
• Since his wives were young, middleaged, and elderly, the require-
ments and norms of Islamic law could be applied correctly to each stage
of their lives and experiences. These provisions were learned and ap-
plied within the Prophet's household and then conveyed to other
Muslims through his wives.
• Each wife was from a different clan or tribe, which allowed him to
establish bonds of kinship and affinity throughout Arabia. This caused a
profound attachment to him to spread among the diverse peoples of the
new Muslim community, and also created and secured equality, brother-
hood, and sisterhood among both in practical matters and in terms of
religion.
• Both before and after the Prophet's death, each wife proved to be of
great benefit and service. They conveyed and interpreted Islam to their
people in all its inner and outer experiences, as well as the qualities,
manners, and faith of the man who was living embodiment of the Qur'an
in every aspect of his life. In this way, their people learned the Qur'an,
the Traditions, tafsir (Qur'anic interpretation and commentary), and fiqh
(understanding of the Islamic law), and so became fully aware of Islam's
essence and spirit.
• These marriages allowed Prophet Muhammad to establish kinship
ties throughout Arabia, and thus to move freely wherever he wished and
to be accepted as a member in each family. In addition, everyone so con-
nected to him felt that they could approach him personally for guidance
on any issue. The entire tribe also benefited from this connection; they
considered themselves fortunate and took pride in their new relation-
ship. For example, such relationships were established for the Umayyads
(through Umm Habiba), the Hashimites (through Zaynab bint Jahsh),
and the Banu Makhzum (through Umm Salama).
So far, what we have said is general and could, in some respects, be
true of all Prophets. However, now we will give brief life sketches of
these women, not in the order of marriage but from a different
perspective.
Khadija was the Prophet's first wife. When they married, she was 40;
he was 25. She was the mother of all his children except for his son
Ibrahim, who did not survive infancy. But she was more than just his
wifes—she was his friend who shared his inclinations and ideals to a re-
markable degree. Their marriage was wonderfully blessed, and they
lived together in profound harmony for 23 years. Through every outrage
and persecution heaped upon him by the Makkans, Khadija was his
162

--- Sayfa 164 ---
dearest companion and helper. He loved her deeply, and married no
other woman while she was alive.
This marriage presents the ideal forms of intimacy, friendship, mutual
respect, support, and consolation. Though faithful and loyal to all his
wives, he never forgot Khadija; for the rest of his life, he often mentioned
her virtues and merits. The Prophet did not remarry for 4 or 5 years after
her death. Providing his children's daily food and provisions, bearing
their troubles and hardships, caused him to be both a father and a moth-
er. To allege that such a man was a sensualist or lusted after women is
beyond belief. If there were even the least grain of truth in it, he could
not have lived as history records that he did.
'A'isha, his second wife (though not in the order of marriage), was the
daughter of Abu Bakr, his closest friend and devoted follower. One of
the earliest converts to Islam, this man had long hoped to cement the
deep attachment between himself and the Prophet by giving 'A'isha to
him in marriage. His acceptance of this arrangement conferred the
highest honor and courtesy on a man who had shared all the good and
bad times with him throughout his mission.
'A'isha, who proved to be a remarkably intelligent and wise woman,
had both the nature and temperament to carry forward the work of
Prophetic mission. Her marriage prepared her to be a spiritual guide and
teacher to all women. She became a major student and disciple of the
Prophet and through him, like so many Muslims of that blessed time, she
matured and perfected her skills and talents so that she could join him in
the abode of bliss both as wife and as student. Her life and service to
Islam after her marriage prove that such an exceptional person was
worthy to be the Prophet's wife.
Over time, she proved to be one of the greatest authorities on Hadith,
an excellent Qur'anic commentator, and a most distinguished and know-
ledgeable expert (faqih) in Islamic law. She truly represented the inner
and outer qualities and experiences of Prophet Muhammad through her
unique understanding.
Umm Salama, of the Makhzum clan, was first married to her cousin.
The couple had embraced Islam at the very beginning and emigrated to
Abyssinia to avoid Qurayshi persecution. After their return, they mi-
grated to Madina with their four children. Her husband participated in
many battles and, severely wounded at Uhud, attained martyrdom
shortly thereafter. Abu Bakr and 'Umar proposed marriage, aware of her
needs and suffering as a widow with children but without means to
163

--- Sayfa 165 ---
support them. She refused, believing that no one could be better than her
late husband.
Some time after that, the Prophet offered to marry her. This was quite
right and natural, for this great woman, who had never shied from sacri-
fice and suffering for Islam, was now alone after having passed many
years among the noblest Arab clan. She could not be neglected and left to
beg her way in life. Considering her piety, sincerity, and all that she had
suffered, she deserved to be helped. By marrying her, the Prophet was
doing what he had been doing since his youth, namely, befriending
those lacking friends, supporting those without support, and protecting
those without protection.
Umm Salama also was intelligent and quick in comprehension. She
had all the capacities and gifts to become a spiritual guide and teacher.
After her marriage to the Prophet, she became a new student in the
school of knowledge and guidance, one to whom all women would be
grateful. Let us recall that, at this time, the Prophet was approaching the
age of sixty. His marriage to a widow with four children and acceptance
of all related expenses and responsibilities can be understood only in
terms of his infinite reserves of humanity and compassion.
Umm Habiba was the daughter of Abu Sufyan who, for a long time,
was the Prophet's bitterest foe and strongest supporter of unbelief. But
despite this, his daughter was one of the earliest converts to Islam and
emigrated to Abyssinia with her husband. Her husband died there, leav-
ing her alone and desperate in exile.
At that time, the few Companions had problems supporting even
themselves. She was faced with several options: conversion to Christian-
ity in return for Abyssinian Christian support (unthinkable); return to
her father's home, now a headquarters of the war against Islam
(unthinkable); or go begging from household to household. This last op-
tion was just as unthinkable as the other two, but had the added disad-
vantage that if she were forced to do so, she would bring shame upon
her family name, as it was one of the richest and noblest Arab families.
God recompensed Umm Habiba for all that she lost or sacrificed in the
way of Islam. She had been reduced to a lonely exile and a grieving wid-
ow in an insecure environment among people who were racially and re-
ligiously different from her. The Prophet, learning of her plight, sent an
offer of marriage through the king Negus. This noble and generous ac-
tion is a practical proof of: We have not sent you save as a mercy for all
creatures (21:107).
164

--- Sayfa 166 ---
Through this marriage, Abu Sufyan's powerful family was linked with
the person and household of the Prophet, a fact that caused them to re-
think their opposition. It also is correct to trace this marriage's influence
beyond Abu Sufyan's immediate family and to the Umayyads, who
ruled the Muslims for almost a hundred years. This clan, whose mem-
bers had been the most hostile to Islam, went on to produce some of
Islam's most renowned warriors, administrators, and governors in the
early period. It was his marriage to Umm Habiba that began this change:
the Prophet's depth of generosity and magnanimity of soul surely over-
whelmed them.
Zaynab bint Jahsh was a lady of noble birth and descent, as well as a
close relative of the Prophet. She also was a woman of great piety, who
fasted a great deal, kept long vigils, and gave generously to the poor.
When the Prophet made known to her parents that he wished her to
marry Zayd (at one time his adopted son), both she and her family were
at first unwilling. The family had hoped to marry their daughter to the
Prophet. Naturally, when they realized that it was the Prophet's wish
that she marry Zayd, they all consented out of their love for the Prophet
and his authority.
As mentioned above, the Messenger made this marriage to abolish
several pagan customs: a freed exslave could not marry a freeborn wo-
man, racial prejudice (Zayd was black; Zaynab was not), an adoptive
father could not marry his adopted son's exwife or widow. The marriage
did not bring happiness to either person. Both were devout Muslims and
loved the Prophet, but they were not compatible. Zayd several times
asked the Prophet to allow him to divorce Zaynab, but the Prophet told
him to be patient and not divorce her. Then, once when the Prophet was
in conversation, Gabriel came and a Divine Revelation was given to him.
This verse announced the Prophet's marriage to Zaynab as a bond
already contracted: We have married her to you (33:37). There was no lust
involved here. Rather, it was such a severe trial that 'A'isha later said:
"Had the Messenger of God been inclined to suppress anything of what was re-
vealed to him, he would surely have suppressed this verse."
Juwayriya bint Harith, daughter of the defeated Banu Mustaliq clan's
chief, was captured during a military expedition. She was held, like other
members of her proud family, alongside her clan's "common" people. She
was in considerable distress when taken to the Prophet, not least because
her kinsmen had lost everything and she really hated the Muslims. The
Prophet understood her wounded pride and dignity, and how to heal
them. He agreed to pay her ransom, set her free, and offered to marry
165

--- Sayfa 167 ---
her. How gladly Juwayriya accepted this offer can easily be imagined.
About 100 families were freed when the Ansar and the Muhajirun
learned that the Bani Mustaliq were now related to the Prophet by mar-
riage. A tribe so honored could not be allowed to remain in slavery. In
this way, the hearts of Juwayriyah and all her people were won.
Safiyya was the daughter of Huyayy, a chieftain of the Jews of Khay-
bar, who had persuaded the Bani Qurayza to break their treaty with the
Prophet. She had seen her family and relatives oppose the Prophet since
her youth. In the Battle of Khaybar, she lost her father, brother, and hus-
band, and herself was captured.
The attitudes and actions of her family and relatives might have
caused her to nurture a deep hatred of and desire for revenge against the
Muslims. But 3 days before the Prophet's appearance in front of
Khaybar's citadel, Safiyya had dreamed of a brilliant moon coming from
Madina, moving toward Khaybar, and falling into her lap. She later said:
"When I was captured, I began to hope that my dream would come true." When
she was brought before the Prophet, he generously set her free and
offered her the choice of remaining a Jewess and returning to her people
or entering Islam and becoming his wife. "I chose God and his Messenger,"
she said. They were married shortly thereafter.
Elevated to the Prophet's household and now a "mother of the believers,"
she experienced firsthand the Companions' honorable and respectful
treatment. She saw the refinement and true courtesy of those who had
submitted their hearts and minds to God. Her attitude to her past experi-
ences changed altogether, and she came to appreciate the great honor of
being the Prophet's wife. This marriage also changed the attitude of
many Jews, as they came to see and know the Prophet closely.
Sawda bint Zam'a was Sakran's widow. This couple had been among
the first to embrace Islam and emigrate to Abyssinia. Sakran died in exile
and left his wife utterly destitute. To relieve her distress, Prophet
Muhammad married her, although he was facing great difficulties in
meeting his own daily needs. This marriage took place some time after
Khadija's death.
Hafsa was the daughter of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, the future second ca-
liph of Islam. Also an exile in Abyssinia and then an immigrant in Mad-
ina, she was widowed when her husband attained martyrdom in the
path of God. She remained without a husband for a while. 'Umar wished
for the honor and blessing of being close to the Prophet in this world and
166

--- Sayfa 168 ---
the Hereafter, just as Abu Bakr had, and so the Prophet married her to
protect and help his faithful disciple's daughter.
Such were the circumstances and motives behind the Prophet's several
marriages. There was no lust involved. Rather, he married them to
provide helpless or widowed women with a dignified subsistence; to
console and honor enraged or estranged tribespeople by bringing former
enemies into some degree of relationship and harmony; to gain certain
uniquely gifted individuals, in particular some exceptionally talented
women, for the cause of Islam; to establish new norms of relationship
between different people within the unifying brotherhood of faith in
God; and to honor with family bonds the men who were to be his imme-
diate political successors. These marriages had nothing to do with self-
indulgence, personal desire, or lust. With the exception of 'A'isha, all of
his wives were widows, and all of his marriages (except for that with
Khadijah) were contracted when he was already an old man. Far from
being acts of self-indulgence, these marriages were acts of self-discipline.
The Prophet was given a special Divine dispensation, one unique to
his person, to have this number of wives. The Revelation restricting
polygamy came after he had contracted all of these marriages. After that
event, he also was forbidden to marry again.
167

--- Sayfa 169 ---
Chapter 6
Prophet Muhammad as Educator
The Educational Atmosphere
Consider the following verse:
It is He who has sent among the unlettered a Messenger of their own, to recite
to them His signs, to purify them, and to instruct them in Scripture and Wis-
dom, although they had been, before, in manifest error. (62:2)
Some of these words are very interesting. God is mentioned in the
third person, because the ignorant, primitive, and savage Arabs did not
know Him. As there was no "He" in their minds, God first emphasizes
the darkness of their nature, their great distance from Him, and indicates
that they cannot be addressed directly by Him.
Then God calls them unlettered. They were not all illiterate, but they
had no knowledge of God and the Messenger. God, by His infinite
Power, sent to this trifling community a Messenger with the greatest
will-power, the most sublime nature, the deepest spirituality, and the
highest morality, by means of whom He would instruct them in how to
become geniuses who would one day govern humanity.
The word among shows that the Messenger was one of them, but only
in the sense of being unlettered. Being chosen by God, he could not pos-
sibly belong to the Age of Ignorance (pre-Islamic Arabia). However, he
had to be unlettered so that God would teach him what he needed to
know. God would remove him from his people, educate him, and make
him a teacher for all unlettered people.
The phrases to recite to them His signs and to purify them point out
that He teaches them about the meanings of the Qur'an and of creation in
a gradual manner, and informs them how to become perfect human be-
ings by striving for spiritual perfection. He guides them to higher ranks
by explaining the Qur'an and the universe to them, and showing them in
168

--- Sayfa 170 ---
minute detail how to lead a balanced and exemplary life in every sphere
of activity.
The sentence although they had been, before, in manifest error indic-
ates that God would purify and educate them even though they had
gone astray. He did all of this through an unlettered Messenger and by
teaching them the Qur'an. Throughout history and even today, this Book
has met the needs of countless brilliant scientists, scholars, and saints.
After the Prophet, humanity saw his flag waving everywhere for cen-
turies. Those who follow him, both now and in the past, reach the
highest spiritual realms on wings of sainthood, piety, righteousness,
knowledge, and science. Those who climbed the steps of good conduct
and spirituality, and knowledge and science, both now and in the past,
saw in each step the "footprints" of Prophet Muhammad and greet him
with "God bless you." They will do the same again in the near future. All
so-called original ideas will disappear one by one, like candles blown
out, leaving only one "sun"—the Qur'an—that will never set. Its flag will
be the only one waving on the horizon, and every generation will rush to
it, breaking the chains around their necks.
169

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Islam Addresses All Human Faculties
As is explicit in the abovementioned verse, the Messenger's method of
education does not just purify our evil-commanding selves; rather, it is
universal in nature and raises human hearts, spirits, minds, and souls to
their ideal level. He respected and inspired reason; in fact, he led it to the
highest rank under the intellect of Revelation.
The universal truths of the Qur'an also state this fact. Moreover, the
Message touches all of our inner and outer senses, makes its followers
rise on the wings of love and compassion, and takes them to places bey-
ond their imagination. His universal call encompasses, in addition to the
rules of good conduct and spirituality, all principles of economics, fin-
ance, administration, education, justice, and international law. He
opened the doors of economic, social, administrative, military, political,
and scientific institutions to his students, whose minds and spirits he
trained and developed to become perfect administrators, the best eco-
nomists, the most successful politicians and unique military geniuses.
If there had been any lack in his teaching of humanity, the aim of his
Prophethood could not have been realized so fully. He said:
Each Prophet before me built some part of this marvelous building, but there
was a gap that needed to be closed. Every person passing by would say: "I won-
der when this building will be completed." The one who completes it is me. After
me, there is no longer any defect in the structure.188
The Qur'an affirms this: This day I have completed your religion for you
(5:3). In short, the Prophet reformed, completed, and perfected the ways
of life that had been lacking, had become deficient, or had deviated from
the Will of God.
All previous Prophets were sent to a certain people and for a fixed
time. However, as God chose Prophet Muhammad and Islam for all
times and peoples, Islam is the perfection of His universal favor upon
His creation. He fashioned Islam in such a way that it pleases everybody.
Therefore, rather than trying to find fault with the Message and the prin-
ciples relayed by The Messenger, people should seek these truths and
principles in order to design their lives according to them.
The Prophet was a man who completed, perfected, and reformed. He
transformed an illiterate, savage people into an army of blessed saints,
188.Bukhari, "Manaqib," 18; Muslim, "Fada'il," 20-23.
170

--- Sayfa 172 ---
illustrious educators, invincible commanders, eminent statesmen, and
praiseworthy founders of the most magnificent civilization in history.
An educator's perfection depends on the greatness of his or her ideal
and the quantitative and qualitative dimensions of his or her listeners.
Even before Prophet Muhammad's demise, the instructors and spiritual
guides he dispatched were traveling in a vast area stretching from Egypt
to Iran and from Yemen to Caucasia for the sole purpose of spreading
what they had learned from him. In succeeding centuries, peoples of dif-
ferent traditions, conventions, and cultures—Persians and Turanians,
Chinese and Indians, Romans and Abyssinians, Arabs and some
Europeans—rushed to his Message.
An educator's greatness also depends on the continuation of his or her
principles. No one can deny that people all over the world accept his
Message and adopt his principles. By God's Will and Power, most of hu-
manity will embrace Islam in the near future.
Remember that The Messenger appeared among a wild and primitive
people. They drank alcohol, gambled, and indulged in adultery without
shame. Prostitution was legal, and whorehouses were indicated by a spe-
cial flag. Indecency was so extreme that a man would be embarrassed to
be called a man. People were constantly fighting among themselves, and
no one had ever been able to unify them into a strong nation. Everything
evil could be found in Arabia. However, the Prophet eradicated these
evils and replaced them with such deeprooted values and virtues that his
people became the leaders and teachers of the civilized world.
Even today we cannot reach their ranks. This has been acknowledged
by such Western intellectuals as Isaac Taylor, Robert Briffault, John
Davenport, M. Pickhtal, P. Bayle, and Lamartine.189
God creates living things from lifeless things. He grants life to soil and
rock. The Prophet transformed "rocks, soil, coal, and copper" into "gold and
diamonds." Just consider the cases of Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali,
Khalid, 'Uqba ibn Nafi', Tariq ibn Ziyad, Abu Hanifa, Imam Shafi'i,
Bayazid al-Bistami, Muhyi al-Din ibn al-'Arabi, Biruni, Zahrawi, and
hundreds of thousands of others, all of whom were brought up in his
school. The Messenger never allowed human faculties to remain
189.To give just one example, Lamartine asks: "Philosopher, orator, apostle, legislator,
warrior, conqueror of ideas, restorer of rational dogmas, of a cult without images; the
founder of twenty terrestrial states and of one spiritual state, that is Muhammad. As
regards all standards by which human greatness may be measured, we may well ask:
Is there any man greater than he?" (Historie de la Turquie, vol. 2, pp. 276–7.) (Tr.)
171

--- Sayfa 173 ---
undeveloped. He developed them and replaced weakness with mar-
velous competency. As a great thinker recalled:
'Umar had the potential to be a great man even before he embraced
Islam. After his conversion, he became a powerful yet very gentle man
who would not step on an ant or kill even a grasshopper. Such was his
compassion, sensitivity, and understanding of justice and administration
that he used to say: 'If a sheep falls into the Tigris because of a destroyed
bridge, God will ask me about it.'
We cannot eradicate such a small habit as smoking, despite all our
modern facilities and practically daily symposia and conferences to com-
bat it. Medical science says smoking causes cancer of the larynx, mouth,
esophagus, windpipe, and lungs; however, people insist on smoking. On
the other hand, the Messenger eradicated countless ingrained bad habits
and replaced them with laudable virtues and habits. Those who saw
them used to say: "My God, his followers are superior even to the angels."
When these people pass over the Bridge above Hell with their light
spreading everywhere, even the angels will ask in awe: "Are they Prophets
or angels?" In fact, they are neither Prophets nor angels; they are the edu-
cated people of the nation of Prophet Muhammad.
Prophet Muhammad had a holistic view of each individual. He took
all of their mental and spiritual capacities and developed them, turning
his own wretched people into paragons of virtue. His wisdom in assess-
ing such potential is another proof of his Prophethood.
172

--- Sayfa 174 ---
Educating by Example
The Messenger represented and expressed what he wanted to teach
through his actions, and then translated his actions into words. How to
be in awe of God, how to be humble, how to prostrate with deep feel-
ings, how to bow, how to sit in prayer, how to cry to God at night—all of
these he first did himself and then taught to others. As a result, whatever
he preached was accepted immediately in his house and by his follow-
ers, for his words penetrated all of their hearts. After him, humanity saw
his standard carried everywhere by people raised on the wings of saint-
hood, purification, devotion to God, and desire to be close to Him.
Wherever
they
went,
they
walked
in
the
footsteps
of
Prophet
Muhammad. Others will do so in the future.
In the house of the Messenger there was a permanent sense of awe.
Those who caught a glimpse of him could feel the allure of Heaven and
the terror of Hell. He swayed to and fro during prayer, trembling with
the fear of Hell and flying on wings of the desire of Heaven. All who saw
him remembered God. Imam al-Nasa'i narrates: "While the Messenger was
praying, a sound, like a boiling pot, was heard."190 He always prayed with a
burning and weeping heart. 'A'isha often found him in the presence of
his Master, prostrating and trembling.191
His behavior inspired and benefited everyone around him. The chil-
dren and wives of every Messenger had the same awe and fear, as the
Messengers preached, ordered, related what they practiced and experi-
enced, and gave examples through their actions. We can assess a
person's impact through his or her behavior while at home. If all ped-
agogues gathered and merged their acquired knowledge about educa-
tion, they could not be as effective as a Prophet.
Many of his descendants have shone among their respective genera-
tions like a sun, a moon, or a star. He brought up his Companions so per-
fectly that almost none of them became heretics.192 None of his progeny
has ever become a heretic, which is a distinction unique to him. Heretics
and apostates have appeared among the households and descendants of
many saintly people, but none of Muhammad's descendants have
190.Nasa'i, "Sahw," 18.
191.Nasa'i, "Ishrat al-Nisa'," 4.
192.Very few among the Companions; the apostates after his death are not
Companions.)
173

--- Sayfa 175 ---
betrayed the roots of their household. If there have been a few exceptions
unknown to us and history, they do not negate the rule.193
193.There's a rule in logic: Exceptions do not invalidate the rule. We do not know of
any heretics among his descendants. But this does not mean that there will not be,
because it is possible. Considering this possibility, we speak with caution.)
174

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Essentials of a Good Education
A real educator must have several virtues, among them the following:
First: Give due importance to all aspects of a person's mind, spirit, and
self, and to raise each to its proper perfection. The Qur'an mentions the
evil-commanding self that drags people, like beasts with ropes around
their necks, wherever it wants to go, and goads them to obey their bodily
desires. In effect, the evil-commanding self wants people to ignore their
God-given ability to elevate their feelings, thoughts, and spirits.
The Qur'an quotes the Prophet Joseph as saying: Surely the self com-
mands evil, unless my Master has mercy (12:53). Commanding evil is inher-
ent in the self's nature. However, through worship and discipline, the
self can be raised to higher ranks, to a position where it accuses itself for
its evils and shortcomings (75:2), and then still higher where God ad-
dresses it: O self at peace! Return unto your Master, well-pleased, well-pleas-
ing (89:27-28).
Higher than the self at peace (at rest and contented) is the self perfectly
purified. Those who rise to this degree of attainment are the nearest to
God. When you look at them you remember God, for they are like pol-
ished mirrors in which all of His attributes are reflected. The Compan-
ions' desire to follow the training provided by Prophet Muhammad en-
abled almost all of them to reach this degree of moral and spiritual per-
fection; millions of people have followed—and continue to follow—their
example.
Second: An education system is judged by its universality, compre-
hensiveness, and quality of its students. His students were ready to con-
vey his Message throughout the world. The Message they conveyed, be-
ing universal in nature and valid for all times and places, found a ready
acceptance among people of different races, religious background, intel-
lectual levels, and age differences from modern-day Morocco and Spain
to the Philippines, from the Russian steppes to the heart of Africa. Its
principles remain valid. Despite numerous upheavals and changes, as
well as social, economic, intellectual, scientific, and technological revolu-
tions, his system remains the most unique and original, so much so that
it is the hope of the future of humanity.
Third: An education system is judged by its ability to change its stu-
dents. The example of smoking was mentioned earlier, as was that of
how Islam and the Prophet's spread of it transformed the tribes of Arabia
into their exact opposite within the space of just two or three decades. To
175

--- Sayfa 177 ---
those who deny or question his Prophethood, we challenge them to go
anywhere in the world and accomplish, over the course of 100 years,
even one-hundredth of what he accomplished in the deserts of Arabia
1,400 years ago. Let them take all of the experts they can gather, and then
we will wait to see their results.
When Prophet Muhammad was conveying the Message, Arabia was
isolated from its neighbors by vast deserts and rightfully could be con-
sidered one of the most backward areas of the world in terms of its cul-
tural, intellectual, and moral life. The Hijaz, where the Prophet was born,
had experienced no social evolution and had attained no intellectual de-
velopment worthy of mention. Dominated by superstitions, barbarous
and violent customs, and degraded moral standards, people lived in sav-
agery. They drank wine, gambled, and indulged in what even average
societies consider immoral sexual activities. Prostitutes advertised their
services by hanging a flag on the doors of their houses.
It was a land without law and a government. Might was right, as in
many parts of the world today, and looting, arson, and murder were
commonplace. Any trivial incident could provoke intertribal feuding,
which sometimes developed into peninsula-wide wars.
These were the people Prophet Muhammad appeared among. With
the Message he relayed from God and his way of preaching it, he eradic-
ated barbarism and savagery, adorned Arabia's wild and unyielding
peoples with all praiseworthy virtues, and made them teachers of the
world. His domination was not physical or military; rather, he
conquered and subjugated them by becoming the beloved of their hearts,
the teacher of their minds, the trainer of their souls, and the ruler of their
spirits. He eradicated their evil qualities, and implanted and inculcated
in his followers' hearts exalted qualities in such a way that they became
second nature to all of his followers.
But this transformation was not limited only to the people of his own
time and place, for this process continues even today wherever his Mes-
sage spreads. It was not only quickly accepted in Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Per-
sia, Egypt, Northern Africa, and Spain at its first outburst, but, with the
exception of the now-vanished brilliant civilization of Islamic Spain, it
has never lost its vantage ground. Since it first appeared, it has never
stopped spreading.
Many world-renowned individuals have been raised in the school of
Muhammad. Certainly, we come across numerous great historical fig-
ures in other schools of education as well. God has honored humanity
176

--- Sayfa 178 ---
with great heroes, eminent statesmen, invincible commanders, inspired
saints, and great scientists. However, most of them have not made a
deep impression on more than one or two aspects of human life, for they
confine themselves to those fields. But since Islam is a Divine way for all
fields of life, a Divine system encompassing all aspects of life—"like a per-
fect work of architecture all of whose parts are harmoniously conceived to com-
plement and support each other, nothing lacking, with the result of an absolute
balance and solid composure," according the Muhammad Asad, a Jewish
convert—its students usually combine within themselves the spiritual
and the rational, the intellectual and the material, the worldly with the
other-worldly, the ideal with the real, and the scientific and the revealed
(by God).
At its very outset, Islam abolished tribal conflicts and condemned ra-
cial and ethnic discrimination. The Prophet put the Qurayshi chiefs un-
der Zayd's command (an emancipated black slave), and innumerable
scholars and scientists, commanders, and saints appeared among
conquered peoples. Among them was Tariq ibn Ziyad, an emancipated
Berber slave who conquered Spain with 90,000 valiant warriors and laid
the foundations of one of the most splendid civilizations of world his-
tory. After this victory, he went to the palace where the defeated king's
treasury was kept. He said to himself:
Be careful, Tariq. Yesterday you were a slave with a chain around your
neck. God emancipated you, and today you are a victorious commander.
However, you will change tomorrow into flesh rotting under earth. Fin-
ally, a day will come when you will stand in the Presence of God.
The world and its pomp could not attract him, and he continued to
live a very simple life. What kind of education could transform a slave
into such a dignified and honorable person?
However, his conquest of Spain was not his real victory. This came
when he stood before the treasury of the Spanish king and reminded
himself that one day he would die and face God. As a result of this self-
advice, he took none of the treasure for himself.
'Uqba ibn Nafi' was another great commander who conquered north-
ern Africa and reached the Atlantic coast. There he stood and said: "O
God, if this sea of darkness did not appear before me, I would convey Your
Name, the source of light, to the remotest corners of the world."
Before his conversion, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud took care of 'Uqba ibn
Abi Mu'ayt's sheep. He was a weak, little man who everyone ignored.
After becoming a Muslim, however, he was one of the most senior
177

--- Sayfa 179 ---
Companions. During his caliphate, 'Umar sent him to Kufa as a teacher.
In the scholarly climate he established there, the greatest figures of
Islamic jurisprudence grew up, among them Alqama, Ibrahim al-
Nakha'i, Hammad ibn Abi Sulayman, Sufyan al-Thawri, and especially
Imam Abu Hanifa, the founder of the largest Islamic legal school.
Ikrima was the son of Abu Jahl, the harsh and inflexible leader of the
Qurayshi unbelievers. Finally, after the Conquest of Makka, he conver-
ted to Islam. This event so changed him that he welcomed martyrdom 3
years later at the Battle of Yarmuk. His son, Amir, was martyred with
him.
Hansa was one of the finest poetesses before Islam. Becoming a
Muslim, she abandoned poetry because: "While we have the Qur'an, I can-
not write poems." She lost her four sons at the Battle of Qadisiyya. This
great woman, who had lamented her brother's death before the appear-
ance of Islam with a great poem, did not lament this loss. Instead, she
deepened her submission to God and said only: "O God, all praise be to
You. You have bestowed on me while alive the possibility of offering you as mar-
tyrs my four sons that you gave me."
The school of Prophet Muhammad also produced the most just rulers
in history. Besides Abu Bakr, 'Uthman, 'Ali and many others who suc-
ceeded them, 'Umar has been recognized in almost every age as one of
the world's most just and greatest statesmen. He used to say: "If a sheep
falls from a bridge even on the river Tigris and dies, God will call me to account
for it on the Day of Judgment." When you compare the pagan 'Umar to the
Muslim 'Umar, you easily see the sharp contrast between the two and
understand how radically Islam changes people.
178

--- Sayfa 180 ---
Further Remarks
Due to misconceptions and secular tendencies, especially in the West in
recent centuries, most people define religion as blind faith, meaningless
acts of worship, a consolation for life's problems. Such mistaken ideas
have developed in Christendom partly due to Christianity's historical
mistakes and shortcomings. Some secularized, worldly Muslims have
compounded this mistake by reducing Islam to an ideology, a social, eco-
nomic, and political system. They ignore one fact stated in the Qur'an,
the Traditions, and throughout Islamic history: Islam, the middle way
between all extremes, addresses itself to all human faculties and senses,
as well as to each individual's mind, heart, and feelings, and encom-
passes every aspect of human life. That is why Prophet Muhammad
stressed learning, trading, agriculture, action, and thought.
Moreover, he encouraged his people to do perfectly whatever they
did, and condemned inaction and begging. For example, he said: "God
loves a believing, skilful servant." The Qur'an declares: Say: "Work; and God
will surely see your work, and the Messenger and the believers" (9:105). As all
of our actions will be displayed on the Day of Judgment, we cannot be
careless and do something half-heartedly just to get rid of it. Moreover,
The Messenger declares: "When you do something, God likes you to do it
perfectly."194
Islam encourages people to work, and considers our lawful attempts
to earn our living and support our family to be acts of worship. Unlike
medieval Christianity, it does not idealize (nor even advise) life as a her-
mit. It forbids dissipation and luxury on the grounds that if we live a
self-indulgent life here and neglect our religious duties, our prosperity in
both worlds will be in jeopardy. For example, in a concise saying that
summarizes the essentials of a happy economic and social life and
prosperity in both this world and the next, The Messenger declares:
When you are involved in speculative transactions, occupied only with
animal-breeding, content with agriculture, and abandon striving in the way of
God to preach His religion, God will subject you to such a humiliation. He will
not remove it until you return to your religion.195
This hadith is extraordinarily apt in describing the pitiable condition
of Muslims over the last few centuries. Speculative transactions signify
the dying of a healthy economic life and the resort to unlawful, self-
194.Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 3:907.
195.Abu Dawud, "Buyu'," 54; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:84.
179

--- Sayfa 181 ---
abandoned ways of earning one's living. Contentment with agriculture
and animal breeding is the sign of laziness and abandoning scientific in-
vestigation—the Qur'an explicitly states that God created humanity as
His vicegerent and entrusted us with knowledge of the names of things.
This means that we are to establish science and exploit natural resources
by discovering the Divine laws of nature and reflecting on natural phe-
nomena. However, while doing this, we should seek God's good pleas-
ure and practice Islam.
The Qur'an contains many verses, such as Say: "Are they equal—those
who know and those who don't know?" (39:9), that emphasize the import-
ance of knowledge and learning. It also warns that among His servants,
only those who have knowledge truly fear God (35:28), meaning that true
piety and worship is possible only through knowledge. Confining know-
ledge to religious sciences devoid of reflection and investigation inevit-
ably results in contentment with animal breeding and agriculture, in
idleness and the neglect of striving in the way of God. The ultimate res-
ult is misery, poverty, and humiliation.
The Messenger drew attention to this important fact in some other Tra-
ditions, such as: "An hour of reflection and contemplation is better than a year
of (supererogatory) religious worship," and "A powerful believer is better and
more lovable to God than a weak one."196 Being powerful requires both spir-
itual and physical health as well as scientific and technical competence.
Restricting the meaning of being powerful to physical strength shows
one's total lack of understanding of what true power is based on.
In conclusion, being a good Muslim is possible only through being a
good student in the school of Prophet Muhammad.
This attitude was displayed by Ja'far ibn Abi Talib, the Prophet's cous-
in, who emigrated to Abyssinia to escape severe Qurayshi persecution.
He once told the Negus, ruler of Abyssinia: "O king, we used to drink
blood, eat carrion, fornicate, steal, kill each other, and plunder. The
powerful used to oppress the weak. We used to do many other shameful
and despicable things."
Prophet Muhammad set the best example for his people in belief, wor-
ship, and good conduct—in short, in all aspects of life. His people con-
sidered having daughters a source of shame, and so buried them alive.
When the Prophet came with the Divine Message, women enjoyed their
rights fully. Once a girl came to The Messenger and complained: "O
196.Muslim, "Qadar," 34; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 10; Ibn Hanbal, 3:366.
180

--- Sayfa 182 ---
Messenger of God, my father is trying to force me to marry my uncle's son. I
don't want to marry him." The Messenger sent for her father and warned
him not to do this. The man promised that he would not do so. The girl
then stood up and said: "O Messenger of God, I didn't intend to oppose my
father. I came here only to find out whether Islam allows a father to marry his
daughter to somebody without her consent."
The Messenger warned his Companions not to beg. However poor and
needy they were, the Companions did not beg from anybody. They were
so sensitive in this matter that they even refrained from asking help. If,
for example, one of them dropped his whip while on a mount, he would
dismount and pick it up himself rather than ask someone to pick it up
and hand it to him.197
Prior to Islam, people worshipped idols and did not give due respect
to their parents. God's Message told them: Your Master has decreed that
you shall not worship any but Him, and to be good to parents (17:23). This
Divine decree changed them so radically that they began asking the Mes-
senger if they would be punished if they did not return the looks of their
parents' with a smile. The Qur'an ordered them not to usurp an orphan's
property (17:34) and forbade theft. This made them so sensitive to others'
rights that history does not record more than one or two thefts in that
blessed period of the Prophet's rule.
Murder was extremely widespread in pre-Islamic Arabia. However,
when the Prophet came with the prohibition: Slay not the soul God has for-
bidden (17:33), this evil was all but eradicated. The Messenger also for-
bade fornication. This ended all kinds of sexual immorality. However,
we do find one incident of fornication during that period. It is as follows:
One day a pale and exhausted man came to The Messenger and ex-
claimed: "O Messenger of God, cleanse me!" The Messenger turned his face
from him, but the man insisted, repeating his demand four times. At last,
the Messenger asked: "Of what sin shall I cleanse you?" The man replied
that he had fornicated. This sin weighed so heavily on his conscience that
he desired to be punished. The Messenger asked those present: "Is he in-
sane?" When told he was not, he told them to see if he was drunk. They
examined him and found him sober. In the face of his insistent confes-
sion, The Messenger had to order the man to be punished. After it, he sat
and wept.
197.Muslim, "Zakat," 108; Ibn Ma'ja, "Jihad," 41.
181

--- Sayfa 183 ---
A few days later, the man's partner appealed to The Messenger to
cleanse her. Many times The Messenger turned away from her and sent
her back. In utmost remorse, she insisted on being punished. The Mes-
senger sent her back once more, saying: "You may be pregnant. Go and give
birth to your child." The woman did so, and then returned with the same
request. The Messenger excused her: "Go back, for perhaps your child needs
feeding." After the child had been weaned, the woman came again. When
someone reproved her while the punishment was being carried out, the
Prophet frowned at him and said: "By God, this woman repented of her sin
so much that if her repentance were shared out among all the people of Madina,
it would be enough to cover them with forgiveness also."
Prophet Muhammad established such a magnificent system and
formed such an excellent community that not even a Plato, a Thomas
Moore, a Campanella, or any other utopian has been able to imagine its
equal. Among thousands of other examples, the following illustrates this
fact.
Abu Hurayra, one of the poorest Companions, once came to The Mes-
senger. He had not eaten anything for some days. An Ansari by the
name of Abu Talha took him home to give him some food. But there was
no other food in his house except some soup that his wife had made for
the children. She asked her husband what she should do, and they de-
cided upon the following: They would put their children to bed without
feeding them. As the soup was too little to satisfy all of them, only the
guest should have it. While they were sitting at the table and getting
ready to eat, Abu Talha's wife would knock the candle over, extinguish-
ing it apparently by mistake. In the resulting darkness, they would act as
if they were eating, although Abu Hurayra would be the only one eating.
This is what they did. Abu Hurayra ate until he was satisfied, and then
left, unaware of what had really happened.
The following day, they went to pray the morning prayer in the
mosque. At the end of the prayer, the Messenger turned to them and
asked: "What did you do last night, that caused this verse to be revealed in
praise of you: They prefer others above themselves, even though poverty be their
portion. (59:9)?"
182

--- Sayfa 184 ---
Chapter 7
The Military Dimension
Islam is the religion chosen by God for humanity’s individual and col-
lective welfare in this world and the next. It is based on belief in and
worship of God, and does not countenance associating any partners with
Him, whether in the form of something created, a person, or a concept.
True belief and worship requires a deep concern for all animate and in-
animate things. The deeper their belief in and submission to God is, the
deeper is their concern for all creatures. Belief in God’s Unity prevents
humanity from enjoying and exercising absolute freedom in dealing with
creatures.
Islam is derived from the Arabic root s-l-m, which means salvation,
peace, and submission. In its religious context, it is the expression of
God’s Grace flowing in the universe’s arteries, the Divine system to
which all creatures (except humanity) have submitted willingly. The uni-
verse displays perfect order, for everything therein is muslim, in the
sense that it submits to God’s laws. Even people who reject belief in God
or worship that which is not God are muslims, as far as their bodily ex-
istence is concerned. While we journey between being an embryo and a
corpse, every bodily tissue and every limb follows the course prescribed
for them by God’s law.
The fundamental Islamic principle of Divine Unity implies that hu-
manity necessarily must be in harmony with the surrounding world. The
vast muslim universe displays a coherence and harmony of which our
world is a part. Although our world is subject to laws special to itself and
to the general “laws of nature,” it is also in harmony with other laws
governing
surrounding
phenomena.
Human
beings,
unlike
other
creatures who tread “the path of nature,” have free will. We bear the gift
of freedom and the obligation to harmonize our life with nature. This
harmony is also the path of our exaltation and progress, the path upon
which God created human nature:
183

--- Sayfa 185 ---
Set your face to the religion, a man of pure faith—God’s original nature in
which He originated humanity. There is no changing God’s creation. That is the
right religion, but most of humanity know it not. (30:30)
To harmonize our lives with nature, we first should realize our per-
sonal integrity. To do this, we must apply our free will to our energies
(e.g., desires, thoughts, and actions) to keep them within the limits estab-
lished by God. If we do not recognize such limits, we might usurp anoth-
er’s property, seek illicit sexual relations, and indulge in other sins. If we
do not recognize such limits with respect to our intellect, we may use it
to deceive others. Our powers must be held in check, our intellect used
with wisdom, and our desire and anger restrained by lawful behavior
and moderation. In addition, we should remember that we are social be-
ings; if we do not restrain ourselves as God demands, wrongdoing, in-
justice, exploitation, disorder, and revolution will occur in society.
God does not approve of wrongdoing and disorder. Rather, it is His
Will that we live in peace and justice. Therefore, those who believe in
God and worship Him faithfully are obliged to work for justice in this
world. Islam calls this responsibility jihad.
184

--- Sayfa 186 ---
Jihad
Jihad has the literal meaning of exerting our best and greatest effort to
achieve something. It is not the equivalent of war, for which the Arabic
word is qital. Jihad has a much wider connotation and embraces every
kind of striving in God's cause. A mujahid is one who is sincerely de-
voted to his or her cause; who uses all physical, intellectual, and spiritual
resources to serve it; who confront any power that stands in its way; and,
when necessary, dies for this cause. Jihad in the way of God is our
struggle to win God's good pleasure, to establish His religion's suprem-
acy, and to make His Word prevail.
A related principle, that of enjoining good and forbidding evil (amr bi
al-ma'ruf wa nahy 'an al-munkar) seeks to convey the message of Islam
and establish a model Islamic community. The Qur'an introduces the
Islamic community as a model community required to inform humanity
of Islam and of how the Prophet lived it: Thus We have made you a com-
munity justly balanced, that you might be witnesses for all humanity, and the
Messenger may be a witness for you (2:143).
The greater and lesser jihad
There are two aspects of jihad. One is fighting to overcome carnal de-
sires and evil inclinations—the greater jihad. The other is encouraging
others to achieve the same objective—the lesser jihad.
The Muslim army was returning to Madina after they had defeated the
enemy in a battle, when the Messenger of God said to them: "We are re-
turning from the lesser jihad to the greater one." When the Companions
asked what the greater jihad was, he explained that it was fighting with
the carnal self.
The aim of either jihad is that the believer be purified of sins and so at-
tain true humanity. The prophets were sent for this purpose. God says in
the Qur'an:
Thus We have sent unto you a Messenger from among you, who recites unto
you Our revelations (and makes Our signs known to you), and who purifies you
and instructs you in the Book and in the Wisdom, and also instructs you in
what you don't know. (2:151)
Human beings are in some sense like raw minerals to be worked upon
by Prophets, who purify and refine them by removing the seal from their
hearts and ears, by lifting the veils from their eyes. Enlightened by the
185

--- Sayfa 187 ---
Prophets' message, people can understand the meaning of the laws of
nature, which are signs of God's Existence and Unity, and can penetrate
into the subtle reality behind things and events. Only through the guid-
ance of Prophets can we attain the high status expected of us by God.
In addition to teaching the signs, Prophets also instructed their people
in the Book and in Wisdom. As the Qur'an was the last Revelation to the
Last Prophet, God means the Qur'an when He speaks of the Book, and
the Sunna when He speaks of Wisdom. We must therefore follow the
Qur'an and the Prophet's Sunna if we desire to be rightly guided.
The Prophet also teaches us what we do not know, and so humanity
will continue to learn from the Prophet until the Day of Judgment. We
learn from him how to purify ourselves of sin. By following his way,
many great saints have attained their distinctions as saints. Among them,
'Ali says that his belief in the pillars of Islam is so firm that even if the
veil of the Unseen were lifted, his certainty would not increase. 'Abd al-
Qadir al-Jilani is said to have had insight into the mysteries of the sev-
enth heaven. These and many others, such as Fudayl bin 'Iyaz, Ibrahim
bin Adham, and Bishr al-Khafi might well have been endowed with
Prophethood, if God had not already set a seal on Prophethood.
The dark clouds of ignorance have been removed from our intellectual
horizon through the guidance of Prophet Muhammad, and many more
advances will be made in science and technology as a result of the light
he brought from God.
Jihad is the legacy of the Prophets, and Prophethood is the mission of
elevating men to God's favor by purifying them. Jihad is the name given
to this prophetic mission, which has the same meaning as bearing wit-
ness to the truth. Just as judges listen to witnesses to settle a case, so
those who have performed jihad have borne witness to God's Existence
and Unity of God by striving in His way. The Qur'an says: God bears wit-
ness that there is no god but He and so do the angels and the people of learning,
maintaining justice. There is no god save He, the All-Mighty, the Wise (3:18).
Those who have performed jihad will also bear witness to the same truth
in the heavenly court, where the case of unbelievers will be settled.
Those who bear witness to God Existence and Unity the remotest parts
of the world and preach this truth. This was the duty of the Prophets as
stated in the Qur'an, and it should be our duty as well:
… Messengers who brought good news to humanity and who admonished
them, so that they might have no argument against God after their coming. God
is the All-Mighty and the All-Wise. God Himself bears witness by what He has
186

--- Sayfa 188 ---
revealed to you that it has been revealed with His knowledge; and so do the an-
gels. There is no better witness than God. (4:165–66)
God has sent a Prophet to every people, so that every people can have
an idea of Prophethood. As the term used to describe the activity of
Prophethood, jihad is deeply engraved on the heart of every believer so
that he or she feels a profound responsibility for preaching the truth in
order to guide others to the Straight Path.
The lesser jihad, usually taken to mean fighting in God's cause, does
not refer only to military struggle. The term is comprehensive, for it in-
cludes every action done for God's sake. Whether speaking or keeping si-
lent, smiling or making a sour face, joining or leaving a meeting, every
action taken to ameliorate the lot of humanity, whether by individuals or
communities, is included in its meaning.
While the lesser jihad depends on mobilizing all material facilities and
is performed in the outer world, the greater jihad means a person's fight-
ing against his or her carnal soul. These two forms of jihad cannot be
separated from each other.
The Messenger of God has taught us how to perform both forms of the
jihad. He has established the principles of preaching the truth, which
have application until the Day of Judgment. When we scrutinize the way
he acted, we shall see that he was very systematic. This is actually anoth-
er proof of his Prophethood and a wonderful example of following the
way of God in behavior.
The believers kept their belief vigorous and active by means of jihad.
Just as a tree keeps its leaves as long as it yields fruits, so believers can
preserve their vigor as long as they perform jihad. Whenever you en-
counter a hopeless pessimist, you soon realize that he or she is one who has aban-
doned jihad. Such people have been deprived of the spirit, and are sunk in pess-
imism because they have abandoned preaching the truth. Whoever performs ji-
had unceasingly does not lose his or her enthusiasm and always tries to increase
the scope of his or her activities. Every good deed results in a new one, so that
believers never become deprived of a good: As for those who strive for us We
surely guide them to our path. God is with the good (29:69).
There are as many paths leading to the Straight Path as the number of
breaths drawn in creation. Whoever strives for His cause is guided, by
God, to one of these paths and is save from going astray. Whoever is
guided to His Straight Path by God lives a balanced life. They neither ex-
ceed the limits in their human needs and activities or in their worship
187

--- Sayfa 189 ---
and other religious observances. Such balance is the sign of true
guidance.
All sacrifices made in fighting oppressive unbelievers, no matter how
great, only constitute the lesser jihad of striving to discharge religious
obligations as perfectly as possible. The greater jihad is much harder to
accomplish, since it requires us to fight against our own destructive
drives and impulses, such as arrogance, vindictiveness, jealousy,
selfishness, self-conceit, and the carnal desires.
Although the person who abandons the lesser jihad is liable to spiritu-
al deterioration, he or she may recover. Everything in the universe
praises and glorifies God with each breath and is, accordingly, a sign of
God's Existence and Unity. A person may be guided to the Straight Path
through one of these signs. For this reason, it is said that there are as
many paths leading to the Straight Path of God as the breaths of all His
creatures. A person returning from the lesser jihad is vulnerable to
worldly weaknesses. Pride, love of comfort and ease may captivate that
person. Thus the Prophet warned us through his Companions by saying,
while returning to Madina after a victory: "We are returning from the lesser
jihad to the greater."
The Companions of the Prophet were fearless on the battlefields, and
as sincere and humble as dervishes in worshipping God. Those victori-
ous warriors used to spend most of their nights praying to God. Once,
when night fell during battle, two of them took turns in standing guard.
One rested while the other prayed. Having become aware of the situ-
ation, the enemy shot a shower of arrows at him. He was hit and bled
profusely, but did not abandon his prayer. When he finished his devo-
tions, he woke his friend, who asked him in amazement why he had not
done so sooner. He replied: "I was reciting Surat al-Kahf, and I did not wish
the deep pleasure I found in this prayer to be interrupted."
The Companions went into a trance-like state of ecstasy when in pray-
er, and would recite the Qur'an as if it were being revealed directly to
them. Thus, they did not feel the pain caused by arrows which penet-
rated their bodies. Jihad, in its lesser and greater aspects, found complete
expression in them.
The Prophet combined these two aspects of jihad in the most perfect
way in his own person. He displayed monumental courage on the battle-
fields. 'Ali, one of the most courageous figures of Islam, confesses that
the Companions took shelter behind the Prophet at the most critical mo-
ments of fighting. To give an example, when the Muslim army
188

--- Sayfa 190 ---
experienced a reverse and began to scatter in the first phase of the Battle
of Hunayn, the Prophet urged his horse toward the enemy lines and
shouted to his retreating soldiers: "I am a Prophet, I do not lie! I am the
grandson of 'Abd al-Muttalib, I do not lie!"
Jihad's stages and main principles. The first Revelation to The Messen-
ger was the command: Read! This command, coming at a time when
there was nothing readily available to read, meant that believers should
use their intellectual and spiritual faculties to discern God's acts in the
universe and His laws related to its creation and operation. Through
such discernment, believers seek to purify themselves and their minds of
all ignorance-based superstitions and to acquire true knowledge through
observation and contemplation.
We are not composed only of our minds. God has endowed us with
many faculties, each of which needs satisfaction. So while feeding our
minds with the Divine signs in the universe, we seek to cleanse our
hearts of sin. We live a balanced life in awareness of Divine supervision,
and continuously seek His forgiveness. In this way, we eventually con-
quer our desire for forbidden things and, through prayer, ask God to en-
able us to do good deeds.
Thus Read! signifies action. For The Messenger, who already was ab-
solutely pure in spirit and devoid of superstition, it meant that it was
time to start his mission as a Messenger of God. He was to recite the
Revelation in public and instruct people about His signs. By doing this,
he would purify their minds of superstitions carried over from the Age
of Ignorance, and their hearts of sin. He would enlighten them, intellec-
tually and spiritually, by instructing them in the Revealed Book of God
(the Qur'an) and His Created Book (the universe): We have sent among
you, of yourselves, a Messenger who recites Our signs to you, purifies you, and
instructs you in the Book and in the Wisdom, and also instructs you in what
you don't know (2:151).
After he received this first revelation, The Messenger returned home in
great agitation. He was sleeping wrapped in a cloak, enwrapped by his
people's suffering and this heavy responsibility, when God commanded
him: O enwrapped one, keep vigil the night long, save a little (a half of it, or di-
minish or add a little), and chant the Qur'an in measure, for We shall charge
you with a weighty word (73:1-5).
The short period between the first revelation and the spreading of the
Message, a period marked by such verses as those mentioned above, was
a preliminary stage for The Messenger. He had to prepare himself to
189

--- Sayfa 191 ---
convey the Qur'an by keeping long night vigils and reciting the Qur'an
in measure.
In addition to conveying the Message, jihad, as discussed above, en-
tails the believers' struggles with their carnal selves to build a genuine
spiritual character, one overflowing with belief and inflamed with love.
These two dimensions of jihad continue until the believer dies (the indi-
vidual sphere) and until the Last Day (the collective sphere). Therefore,
soon after this verse was revealed, The Messenger received the following
revelation: O enshrouded one, arise and warn! Magnify your Master, purify
your robes, and flee defilement! Do not show favor, seeking worldly gain! For
the sake of your Master, be patient! (74:1-7).
These revelations ordered the Prophet to begin preaching Islam. He
started with his family members and nearest relatives and, after Warn
your tribe of nearest kindred (26:214) was revealed, spread this call
throughout his tribe. His subsequent public preaching was met with de-
rision, threats, torture, enticing bribes if he would stop, and boycott.
In Makka, The Messenger never resorted to or allowed retaliation.
Islam came not to spread trouble or cause dissention, but, in the words
of Amir ibn Rabi', to bring people out of the darkness of unbelief into the
light of belief, to free them from serving that which is not God so that
they can serve the One True God, and to elevate them from the pits of
the Earth to the heights of Heaven.
As Islam literally means peace, salvation, and submission, it obviously
came to establish peace. This is established first in our inner worlds, so
that we are at peace with God and natural environment, and then
throughout the world and the universe. Peace and order are fundament-
al in Islam, which seeks to spread in a peaceful personal and collective
atmosphere. It refrains from resorting to force as much as possible, never
approves of injustice, and forbids bloodshed: Whoever kills someone, other
than in retaliation for murder or corruption on the Earth, in effect has killed hu-
manity; whoever saves a life in effect has saved humanity (5:32).
Coming to eradicate injustice and corruption, and to "unite" the Earth
with the Heavens in peace and harmony, Islam calls people with wis-
dom and fair exhortation. It does not resort to force until the defenders
of their corrupt order, which is rooted in injustice, oppression, self-in-
terest, exploitation, and usurpation of others' rights, seek to prevent its
preaching in peaceful ways and to suppress it. Thus, force is allowed in
the following cases:
190

--- Sayfa 192 ---
• If unbelievers, polytheists, or those who cause trouble and corrup-
tion actively resist the preaching of Islam and prevent others from listen-
ing to its message. As Islam is a Divine religion seeking to secure human
well-being and happiness in both worlds, it has the right to present itself.
If this is not allowed, theoretically, its opponents are given three alternat-
ives: accept Islam, allow its preaching in peaceful ways, or admit its rule.
If they reject these alternatives, force is allowed.
However, there is an important point to mention. In order to use force,
there must be an Islamic state. It was allowed only after the Prophet
emigrated to Madina and established an independent state, for the
Muslims had been wronged. The verses revealed to give this permission
explain the Islamic view of just war:
(Fighting is) permitted to those who are fought against, because they have
been wronged. God is able to give them victory. Those who have been driven
from their homes unjustly only because they said: "Our Master is God." For
had it not been for God's repelling some people by means of others, cloisters and
churches and synagogues and mosques, wherein the Name of God is much men-
tioned, would have been pulled down. God helps one who helps Him [His reli-
gion]. God is All-Strong, All-Mighty. Those who, if We give them power in the
land, establish worship and pay zakat and enjoin the good and forbid the evil.
And God's is the sequel of events. (22:39-41)
It is clear from these verses and from history that Islam resorts to force
only to defend itself and establish freedom of belief. Under Muslim rule,
Christians, Jews, Zoroastrians, Hindus, and adherents of other religions
are free to practice their religion. Even many Western historians and
writers have agreed that Christians and Jews experienced the most pros-
perous and happiest period of their history under Muslim rule.
• Islam, being the true religion revealed by God, never approves of in-
justice. As declared in: We have written (decreed) in the Psalms after the
Torah (and remind once more in the Qur'an) that My righteous servants will
inherit the Earth. (21:105), God's righteous servants must submit the Earth
to His rule, which depends on absolute justice and worship of the One
God. They also are obliged to strive until persecution, as well as any
worship of and obedience to false deities and unjust tyrants, is ended.
Thus Muslims are to fight for the feeble and oppressed:
How should you not fight for the cause of God and of the feeble and
oppressed men and women and children, who cry: "Our Master! Bring us
out of this town whose people are oppressors! Give us from Your presence some
protecting friend! Give us from Your presence some defender!" (4:75)
191

--- Sayfa 193 ---
Some rules
As believers cannot transgress God's limits, they must observe His
rules related to fighting. Some are deduced direct from the Qur'an and
Sunna, and are as follows:
• A believer is one from whom God has bought his or her life and wealth in
exchange for Paradise (9:111). They are dedicated solely to His cause and
seek only His good pleasure. Therefore, whoever fights for other causes
(e.g., fame, wealth, racial or ideological considerations) is excluded from
God's good pleasure.
• Fight in the way of God against those who fight you, but do not transgress.
God does not love transgressors (2:190). Believers are told not to fight neut-
ral parties, and to reject unscrupulous methods or indiscriminate killing
and pillage, which characterize all wars waged by non-Muslims. The ex-
cesses alluded to consist of, but are not limited to, fighting women and
children, the old and the injured, mutilating enemy corpses, destroying
fields and livestock, and other acts of injustice and brutality. Force is to
be used only when unavoidable, and only to the extent absolutely
necessary.
• When fighting cannot be avoided, the Qur'an tells believers not to
avoid it. Rather, they must prepare themselves, both morally and spiritu-
ally, and take precautions. These are:
- Strive for that spiritual stage when 20 Muslims can overcome 200 of
the enemy: O Prophet! Exhort the believers to fight. Twenty steadfast men
shall overcome 200; 100 hundred steadfast men shall overcome 1,000 unbeliev-
ers, because unbelievers have no understanding or sound judgment (8:65), and
when those who will meet their Master exclaim: How often a small com-
pany has overcome a mighty host by God's leave! God is with the steadfast
(2:249).
To attain such a rank, Muslims must have an unshakable belief and
trust in God and avoid all sins as much as possible. Belief and piety or
righteousness are two unbreakable weapons, two sources of inexhaust-
ible power: Don't faint or grieve, for you shall gain the upper hand if you are
true believers (3:139), and The sequel is for the righteous people (7:128).
- In addition to moral strength, believers must equip themselves with
the latest weaponry. Force is vital to obtaining the desired result, so be-
lievers cannot ignore it. Rather, they must be further advanced in science
and technology than unbelievers so that the latter cannot use their su-
periority for their own selfish benefit. As Islam states that "right is might,"
192

--- Sayfa 194 ---
believers must be able to prevent unbelievers and oppressors from show-
ing that "might makes right": Make ready for them all you can of armed
force and tethered horses, that thereby you may dismay the enemy of
God and your enemy, and others beside them whom you don't know;
God knows them. Whatever you spend in the way of God will be repaid
to you in full, and you will not be wronged (8:60).
An Islamic state should be powerful enough to deter the attacks of un-
believers and oppressors, as well as their plans to subject weaker people.
It should be able to secure peace and justice, and to prevent any other
power from causing trouble or corruption. This will be possible when
Muslims equip themselves with strong belief and righteousness, and
with scientific knowledge and the latest technology. They must combine
science and technology with faith and good morals, and then use this
force for the good of humanity. Belief in God calls for serving people.
Greater belief means a greater concern for the created's welfare. When
Muslims attain this rank, God will not allow unbelievers to defeat believ-
ers (4:141). Otherwise, what the Prophet predicted will happen: "(The
forces of unbelief) will unite to make a concerted attack upon you. They will
snatch the morsel out of your mouths and pillage your table."
- When fighting is necessary, Muslims must report for duty, for:
O you who believe! What ails you that when you are told: "Go forth in the
way of God," you sink down heavily to the ground? Are you so content with the
life of the world, rather than the world to come? Yet the enjoyment of the life of
the world, compared with the world to come, is a little thing. If you don't go
forth, He will afflict you with a painful doom. He will replace you with another
people; and you will not hurt Him. God is powerful over everything. (9:38-39)
God loves those who battle for His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid
structure. (61:4)
O you who believe! Shall I show you something that will save you from a
painful doom? You should believe in God and His Messenger, and strive for the
cause of God with your wealth and your lives. That is better for you, if you only
knew. He will forgive your sins and admit you into Gardens underneath which
rivers flow, and to dwelling places goodly in Gardens of Eden. That is the
mighty triumph; and other things you love, help from God, and a nigh victory.
Give good tidings to believers. (61:10–13)
- A community is structured and functions like a body, for it demands
a "head" having "intellect." Therefore, obedience to the head is vital for
communal prosperity. When The Messenger was raised in Arabia,
people resembled a broken rosary's scattered beads and were unaware of
193

--- Sayfa 195 ---
the need for obedience and the benefits of collective life. The Messenger
inculcated in them the feeling of obedience to God, His Messenger, and
their superiors, and used Islam as an unbreakable rope to unite them:
O you who believe! Obey God, the Messenger, and those of you who are in
authority. If you have a dispute concerning anything, refer it to God and the
Messenger if you believe in God and the Last Day. That is better and more
seemly in the end. (4:59)
O you who believe! When you meet an army, hold firm and remember and
mention God much, so that you may be successful. Obey God and His Messen-
ger, and don't dispute with each other lest you falter and your strength departs.
Be steadfast, and God is with the steadfast. (8:45–46)
The Companions' consciousness of obedience made many previously
impossible things possible. For example, when he appointed the 18-year-
old son of his emancipated (black) slave as commander of an army con-
taining many elders, among them Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman, no
Companion objected. In another case, during a military expedition the
commander ordered his soldiers to throw themselves into a fire. Even
though this was not an Islamic order, some tried to obey it. However,
others prevented them from committing suicide and persuaded them to
ask The Messenger whether they had to obey such un-Islamic orders. Al-
though it is unlawful to obey sinful orders, obedience to law is vitally
important to a community's collective life, particularly if it wants to win
a war.
- Believers must remain steadfast and are forbidden to flee the
battlefield:
O you who believe! When you meet unbelievers in battle, don't turn your
backs to them. Whoever does so on that day, unless maneuvering for battle or in-
tending to join a company, has incurred God's wrath, and his habitation will be
Hell—an evil homecoming! (8:15-16)
Fleeing the battlefield is one of the seven major sins, for it causes dis-
order in the ranks and demoralizes the others. Their belief in God and
the Hereafter cannot be firm, for their actions show they prefer this life to
the Hereafter. Believers may leave the battlefield only to maneuver, as a
tactic, or to join another company.
In the Battle of Yarmuk (636 CE), 20,000 valiant Muslims fought—and
defeated—200,000 Byzantines. Qabbas ibn Ashyam, one of the heroes,
realized that he had lost a leg (around noon) only when he dismounted
from his horse hours later. His grandson later introduced himself to Ca-
liph 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, saying: "O Caliph, I am the grandson of the
194

--- Sayfa 196 ---
one who lost his leg at noon but became aware of it only toward
evening."
During the Battle of Mu'ta (629 CE), the Muslim army consisted of
3,000 soldiers; the opposing Byzantine forces had about 100,000 soldiers.
The Muslims fought heroically, and both armies retreated at the same
time. Despite this, the Muslims thought that they had fled the battlefield
and so were ashamed to meet The Messenger. However, he welcomed
and consoled them: "You didn't flee; you retreated to join me. You will collect
strength and fight with them again." It happened just as he said, for just be-
fore his death the Muslim army raided southern Syria; 2 years later, the
Muslims dealt the Byzantines a deadly blow at Yarmuk.
195

--- Sayfa 197 ---
Early Military Expeditions
With the arrival of The Messenger in Madina, the struggle between Islam
and unbelief entered a new phase. In Makka the Prophet had devoted
himself almost exclusively to expounding Islam's basic principles and to
his Companions' moral and spiritual training. After the Emigration (622
CE), however, new Muslims belonging to different tribes and regions
began to gather in Madina. Although the Muslims held only a tiny piece
of land, the Quraysh allied itself with as many tribes as possible to ex-
terminate them.
In these circumstances, the small Muslim community's success, not to
mention its very survival, depended upon several factors. In order of im-
portance, there were:
• Propagate Islam efficiently and effectively to convert others.
• Demonstrate the unbelievers' falsehoods so convincingly that
nobody could doubt Islam's truth.
• Face exile, pervasive hostility and opposition, economic hardship,
hunger, insecurity, and danger with patience and fortitude.
• Regain their wealth and goods usurped by the Makkans after they
emigrated.
• Resist, with courage and force of arms, any assault launched to frus-
trate their movement. While resisting, they should ignore the enemy's
numerical or material superiority.
In addition to threats from Makka and its allies, the young community
had to contend with Madina's three Jewish tribes, which controlled
Madina's economic life. Although they had been waiting for a Prophet,
they opposed The Messenger because he was not Jewish. One of the first
things the Messenger did in Madina was to sign a pact with the Jews.
Despite this, the Jews continued to harbor considerable ill-will toward
the Messenger and plot against him and Islam. For example, the skilled
Jewish poet Ka'b ibn Ashraf composed poems satirizing The Messenger
and instigating his enemies.
In Madina, another hostile element began to emerge: hypocrisy. The
Hypocrites can be divided into four broad groups, as follows:
• Those who had no faith in Islam but entered the Muslim community
to cause trouble within its ranks.
• Those who understood political realities and so sought some advant-
age by seeming to convert. However, they maintained contacts with anti-
196

--- Sayfa 198 ---
Islamic forces in the hope that they could benefit from contacts with both
sides and thus not be harmed.
• Those who had not made up their minds yet, but seemed to have
converted because those around them were doing so.
• Those who accepted Islam as the true religion but found it difficult
to abandon their inherited way of life, superstitions, and customs, as well
as to exercise the self-discipline required by Islam.
In such severe circumstances, The Messenger decided to dispatch mil-
itary expeditions into the desert's heart. He had several goals in mind,
some of which were as follows:
• Unbelievers tried to extinguish the Light of God with their mouth,
but, although they were averse, God willed to perfect His Light (61:8).
The Messenger wanted to prove that unbelievers could not exterminate
Islam, and to show that Islam could not be ignored.
• Makka enjoyed a central position in Arabia. As the peninsula's most
formidable power, all other tribes felt some sort of adherence to it. By
sending military expeditions to neighboring areas, The Messenger
wanted to display Islam's power and break the Quraysh's dominance.
Throughout history, the concept of "might is right" has usually been a
norm, for "right" is often too weak to rule. In Arabia, the Quraysh had
might and wealth, and so neighboring tribes obeyed them. Islam came to
make right prevail, and so The Messenger had to break Makka's grip.
• His Mission was not restricted to a fixed period or nation, for he was
sent as a mercy for all the worlds. Thus he was charged with conveying
Islam as far as possible. To succeed, he had to know what was going on
in the peninsula. These expeditions served as vanguards providing him
with the information he needed to pave the way for the preaching of
Islam.
• One of the most effective ways to crush your enemies is to drive
them to unpremeditated, premature actions, for this allows you to retain
the initiative. The Messenger surely was informed of the Quraysh's con-
tacts with 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, leader of Madina's Hypo-
crites. He also was alert to their possible attacks on Madina. After a
Qurayshi military force entered Madina's suburbs and the returned to
Makka with its plunder, The Messenger dispatched military expeditions
to encourage the Quraysh to act before thinking. He then could thwart
their plots.
197

--- Sayfa 199 ---
• The Quraysh lived on trade with the international markets in Syria
and Yemen, and so had to secure their trade routes. But now that the
Muslims were in Madina, these routes could be threatened. While
strengthening his position, the Prophet also was dispatching military ex-
peditions to paralyze the Quraysh's hopes and plans of defeating him.
• Islam's commandments seek to guarantee security of life and prop-
erty, chastity and belief, as well as physical, mental, and spiritual health.
Given this, murder and theft, robbery and plundering, usurpation and
interest (or usury), gambling, alcohol, illicit sexual relations, anarchy,
and the propagation of atheism are forbidden. The Arabic word for be-
lief, iman, means giving security. Thus a mu'min (believer) never cheats,
and all are safe from a believer's tongue and hand. Believers do not lie,
break their promise, or betray a trust. Also, they do not earn their liveli-
hood through stealing, usurpation, and interest-based transactions. In
addition, they seek to harm no one, for they are convinced that those
who kill even one person are like those who kill humanity.
When The Messenger was raised as a Prophet, Arabia had no security
of life or property, chastity, health, or belief. One of his tasks, therefore,
was to establish absolute security in every aspect of life. Once he said to
Adiy ibn Khatam: "A day will come when a woman will travel, riding in a lit-
ter, from Hira to Makka and fear nothing except God and wolves."198 By dis-
patching military expeditions, The Messenger sought to establish secur-
ity therein and show everyone that only Islam would bring them
security.
Expeditions
The first post-Emigration military expedition, led by Hamza, was sent
toward Sif al-Bahr. It arrived just as a Qurayshi trade caravan was re-
turning from Damascus. The Quraysh had usurped all the Emigrants'
possessions and traded them in Damascus. The Messenger used this situ-
ation to display Muslim power and directly threaten Quraysh's economic
well-being. No clash took place in this first confrontation, but the desert
tribes witnessing the incident were inclined to acknowledge another
source of power in the peninsula.
This expedition was followed by another one commanded by 'Ubayda
ibn Harith. With the same purpose in mind, 'Ubayda went as far as
Rabigh, a valley on the way to Makka. The 60 Muslim cavalrymen
198.Bukhari, "Manaqib," 25.
198

--- Sayfa 200 ---
encountered a Qurayshi force of 200 armed men. An exchange of arrows
took place and, fearing defeat, the Makkan force eventually withdrew to-
ward Makka.199
Military expeditions, some led by The Messenger, now followed one
another. In two of the expeditions he commanded, The Messenger went
to Abwa and Buwat, respectively, with the intention of threatening
Qurayshi trade caravans and intimidating the Quraysh.200 In Abwa, he
concluded a treaty with the Banu Damra tribe: neither side would fight
the other, and Banu Damra would not aid the Muslims' enemies.
Shortly before the Battle of Badr (624 CE), The Messenger sent an ex-
pedition of about 10 people, commanded by 'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, to
Nakhla, located a few miles from Makka on the way to Ta'if. He told
them to follow the Quraysh's movements and gather information about
their plans. While they were in Nakhla, a Qurayshi trade caravan coming
from Ta'if halted there. Something happened unexpectedly, and the
Muslims killed one Makkan and captured the rest (except one) and their
belongings. These were taken to Madina.
This event occurred toward the end of Rajab and the beginning of
Sha'ban. Therefore, it was uncertain whether the sanctity of Rajab, one of
the four holy months, had been violated. The Quraysh, those Jews
secretly allied with them, and the Hypocrites made full use of this pos-
sible violation in their anti-Muslim propaganda campaign. They claimed
that the Muslims shed blood in a sacred month, a time when doing so is
prohibited.
Since the incident had taken place without his approval, The Messen-
ger explained to its participants that he had not ordered them to fight.
Other Muslims also reproached them. However, a Revelation consoled
them on account of their pure intention with hope for God's mercy:
They question you concerning the holy month, and fighting in it. Say:
"Fighting in it is a heinous thing, but to bar from God's way, and unbelief in
Him, denying entry into the Holy Mosque, expelling its people from it are more
heinous in God's sight. Persecution is more heinous than killing." They will not
cease to fight with you till they turn you from your religion, if they are able; and
whoever of you turns from their religion and dies unbelieving—their works have
failed in this world and the next. Those are the inhabitants of the Fire; therein
they shall dwell forever. But the believers, and those who emigrate and struggle
199.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:241; Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 2:7.
200.Ibn Hisham, 2:241, 248.
199

--- Sayfa 201 ---
in God's way—those have hope of God's Mercy. God is All-Forgiving, All-Com-
passionate. (2:217–18)201
The verses answered the objections of the anti-Muslim forces. In short,
fighting during the holy months is an evil act. However, those who had
subjected the believers to continual and indescribable wrong for 13 years
merely because they believed in the One God had no right or justification
to raise such an objection. Not only had they driven the Muslims from
their homes, they had placed the Holy Mosque beyond their reach, a
punishment unknown in the Ka'ba's approximately 2,000-year known
history. With such a record, who were they to raise such an outcry over a
small incident, especially one that had taken place without the Prophet's
approval?
201.Ibn Hisham, 2:252.
200

--- Sayfa 202 ---
A general evaluation
About 20 military expeditions preceded the Battle of Badr. Through
these activities, the Messenger seized control of the desert and paralyzed
Makka’s morale. In addition, most of the desert tribes began to acknow-
ledge Islam’s power and come to some agreement with the Muslims.
Only one expedition resulted in the Muslims actually killing or wound-
ing enemy soldiers. To prove that Islam guaranteed security, they
neither plundered caravans nor usurped the bedouins’ property.
The Messenger formed an intelligence network to inform him of
everything happening in the desert and in Makka. This system was so
sophisticated that probably most of his Companions in Madina did not
know, for example, that his uncle ‘Abbas was left in Makka as an intelli-
gence agent. When the Messenger set out on a military campaign, no one
knew his real intention and destination.202 He used couriers to commu-
nicate with his soldiers fighting at the front, and news reached him
through a series of relay stations. With this system, his information was
always up-to-date.
Only Emigrants participated in these expeditions. First of all, the
Quraysh were at war with the Emigrants and did not want them to be
sheltered in Madina. Besides, it was the Emigrants who had been forced
out and made to leave all their possessions behind. As the Helpers had
sworn allegiance to the Messenger, they were expected to realize on their
own that they also should fight in the way of God.
The military genius of the Messenger showed itself in his choice of milit-
ary commanders. His uncle Hamza led the first military expedition.
Besides his courage and strength, Hamza had sound judgment, good
opinions, and a high administrative ability. Until his community adop-
ted his ideas and opinions, the Messenger chose to practice them
through his relatives. Since his mission’s military dimension was dis-
played for the first time in Madina, the Messenger put his own relatives
on the front line until everyone became used to this. It should be noted,
however, that these commanders were capable and eminent generals
who were highly qualified for the post. In addition, they were wholly de-
voted to Islam.
Hamza was martyred at Uhud after killing more than 20 enemy soldiers.
‘Ubayda ibn Harith, the Prophet’s cousin, eventually died from wounds
he received at Badr. Before he died, he asked the Messenger: “O the
202.Ibn Hisham, 4:39-42; Ibn Kathir, Al-Bidaya, 4:332-335.
201

--- Sayfa 203 ---
Messenger, I did not die fighting at the front. Am I considered a mar-
tyr?”203
The expedition sent to Nakhla was commanded by ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh,
the son of the Prophet’s paternal aunt. In the second stage of the Battle of
Uhud, he fought heroically. He came across Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas and
told him:
“Come on and pray, and I’ll say amen for your prayer. Then I’ll pray and you
say amen for mine.” Sa‘d prayed: “O God, make me encounter one of the
strongest enemy soldiers, and let me defeat him.” Ibn Jahsh said amen and then
prayed: “O God, let me encounter one of the strongest enemy soldiers. After I
wound him severely, let him kill me, and cut off my ears and nose and lips so
that I shall come to Your Presence bleeding profusely. You will ask me: ‘Abd Al-
lah, where are your ears, nose, and lips?’ and I’ll respond: ‘O God, I was
ashamed to come to Your Presence with my members with which I had sinned,
so I sacrificed them while fighting in the way of Your Beloved One.’”
When the battle ended, ‘Abd Allah ibn Jahsh was found lying with his ears,
nose, and lips cut off and his abdomen lanced.204
Lastly, by sending a series of military expeditions, the Messenger agit-
ated the Quraysh into an unpremeditated action. On the pretext of recap-
turing their trade caravan, 1,000 Makkan soldiers left for Badr, some 90
miles toward Madina.
203.Hakim. Mustadrak, 3:188; Ibn Kathir, 3:334.
204.Ibn Hajar, Al-Isaba, 1:286-287.
202

--- Sayfa 204 ---
The Battles
The Battle of Badr
As Muslim power solidified in Madina, the Quraysh began to worry
about a possible threat to their trade route to Syria. In a letter addressed
to 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, the Quraysh threatened to kill all
Madinese men and enslave their women unless they expelled The Mes-
senger. The Prophet put a timely end to this, and Ibn Ubayy did not pur-
sue the matter. Next, when Sa'd ibn Mu'adh went to Makka to perform
the minor pilgrimage ('umra), he was stopped at the Ka'ba's entrance
and prevented from performing the circumambulation. Also, the
Makkans sent quite regular invading parties. Given such incidents, the
Muslims had to extend their control over the Syrian trade route to force
the Quraysh and other unfriendly tribes to reconsider. It also was time
for the Prophet to show the forces arrayed against him that the preaching
of Islam could not be stopped or eradicated from its adherents' hearts,
and that polytheism and unbelief would surrender to Islam.
At the beginning of 624 CE, a large Qurayshi caravan en route to
Makka from Syria, and escorted by no more than 40 security guards, ar-
rived at a place within reach of the Muslims. It contained goods that had
been purchased with the Emigrants' property. Naturally Abu Sufyan, the
caravan's leader, feared a Muslim attempt to retrieve their stolen prop-
erty. And so he sent a messenger to Makka asking for help and
reinforcements.
This caused an uproar throughout Makka. Leading Qurayshi chiefs
decided to fight the Prophet. About 1,000 fighters left Makka, amidst
much pomp and show, to crush the Muslims' rising power. They also
wanted, as always, to terrorize neighboring tribes to ensure their trade
caravans' continued safety.
The Messenger, always informed of developments that could affect his
mission, realized that if an effective step were not taken right then, the
preaching of Islam might suffer a blow. Had the Quraysh taken the initi-
ative and attacked Madina, the city's small Muslim community might
have perished. Even if the Quraysh only brought their caravan safely to
Makka by dint of their military strength, the Muslims' political and milit-
ary prestige would be undermined. Once this happened, their lives,
property, and honor would be jeopardized.
203

--- Sayfa 205 ---
Deciding to use his available resources, the Prophet left Madina. Al-
though he may have wanted a decisive battle with the Quraysh, most
Muslims wanted to capture the caravan and retrieve their property. The
Prophet assembled the people and told them that the Qurayshi trade
caravan was in the north and its invading army was in the south, mov-
ing toward Madina. He also informed them that God had promised that
they would be able to seize either party. It was for them to choose which
target to attack.
Aware of the Prophet's intention, an Emigrant named Miqdad ibn
'Amr replied:
"O Messenger of God. Proceed as God has commanded you. We are with you
wherever you go, even as far as Bark al-Ghimad. We shall not say, as the Chil-
dren of Israel said to Moses: 'Go forth, you and your Master, and fight. We shall
remain here sitting.' We rather say: 'Go forth, you and your Master, and fight,
and we shall fight on your side as long as the eyelid of any one of us keeps
moving.'"205
Until the Battle of Badr, The Messenger had not sought military aid
from the Ansar. This was the first time they would prove their commit-
ment to Islam. Without addressing them directly, The Messenger again
put the two alternatives before his audience. Realizing what The Messen-
ger was doing, an Ansari named Sa'd ibn Mu 'adh, the leader of the Aws
tribe, rose and said:
O Messenger of God. I think your question is directed to the Ansar. We be-
lieve in you, affirm that you are the Messenger of God, and bear witness to the
truth of your teachings. We took the oath of allegiance to you that we would hear
and obey you. O Messenger of God, do as you wish! By the One Who has sent
you with the truth, if you were to take us to the sea and plunge into it, none of
us should remain behind. So take us along to the battlefield with God's
blessings.206
The decision was made to fight. This was also the decree of God, as
mentioned above.
The Makkan army consisted of 1,000 fighters, including 600 soldiers in
coats of mail and 200 cavalrymen, and was accompanied by singers and
dancers. Dancing and drinking parties were held whenever it halted. The
soldiers arrogantly vaunted their military power and numerical strength
to
the
tribes
and
settlements
it
passed,
and
boasted
of
their
205.Ibn Sa‘d, 3:162.
206.Muslim, “Kitab al-Jihad wa al-Siyar,” 30; Waqidi, Maghazi, 1:48-49.
204

--- Sayfa 206 ---
invincibility.207 Even worse, they were fighting for no lofty ideal; rather,
they sought to defeat the forces of belief, truth, justice, and good morals.
The Muslim army was made up of 313 fighters: 86 Emigrants and 227
Ansar. Only two or three Muslims had horses, for resources were scarce.
There were no more than 70 camels, so three or four persons took turns
riding each camel. The Messenger took turns with two others. When
they asked him to ride the camel and exclude them from the turns, The
Messenger answered: "You are no better in strength than me. Concerning the
reward, I am not in less need of it than you."208
The Muslim soldiers were fully devoted to and ready to die for the
cause of Islam. To accomplish what He had decreed, God made The Mes-
senger dream that the number of Makkan soldiers was small, just as He made
the number of the Muslims appear smaller in the eyes of the Makkans (8:44).
The two armies met at Badr. The Makkans outnumbered the Muslims
by three to one and were far better equipped. However, the Muslims
were fighting for the most sublime cause: to establish God's religion,
based on belief, good morals, and justice. Deeply convinced of Islam's
truth and eager to die for it, they were ready for battle.
Being the first to reach the battlefield, they positioned themselves
around the wells. They also benefited from the heavy downpour of the
previous night, for it provided them with an abundant supply of water
that they quickly stored in large containers. The rain also compacted the
loose sand in the upper part of the valley in which they pitched their
tents. This allowed them to plant their feet firmly and move with less dif-
ficulty. In the valley's lower part, however, where the Quraysh army sta-
tioned itself, the ground was marshy. In addition to these Divine bless-
ings, God sent a feeling of drowsiness over the Muslims and gave them a
feeling of peace and security (8:11).
From their campsite, the Muslim army could see the whole battlefield.
It was divided into three parts: one center and two flanks. The central
force consisted of the leading Emigrants and Ansar who were foremost
in devotion to The Messenger. Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, a member of one of
Makka's richest families who had accepted Islam as a youth, carried the
standard of The Messenger. He was so handsome that when he would
go out wearing his silk clothes, before his conversion, Makkan girls
would stare at him from their windows. After he embraced Islam,
207.Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, 2:430.
208.Ibn Hanbal, 1:411, 418.
205

--- Sayfa 207 ---
however, he followed The Messenger wholeheartedly. He sacrificed
whatever he had in the way of God, and was martyred at Uhud, during
which he again bore the Prophet's standard. When he lost his right arm,
he took the standard in his left hand; when he lost his left arm, he was
left with a "head" to protect The Messenger, before whom he was finally
martyred.209
The flanks were commanded by 'Ali and Sa'd ibn Mu'adh. 'Ali was
famous for his courage and deep devotion to The Messenger. He had
been only 9 or 10 years old when he told The Messenger: "I will help you,"
after the Messenger had gathered his kinsmen at the outset of his mis-
sion to seek their conversion and support.210 On the night of the
Prophet's Emigration, 'Ali had slept in the Prophet's bed so he could
leave Makka in safety.211 By the time those surrounding the house dis-
covered this ruse, The Messenger had reached Thawr cave. 'Ali was
wholly dedicated to the cause of God.
The Messenger took all necessary precautions and made the best pos-
sible preparations. He mobilized his resources and chose his best and
most qualified men as commanders. He stationed his army at the valley's
upper part. He then pitched his tent where he could see the whole battle-
field and have his commands conveyed instantaneously. As the final
prerequisite, he prayed with great earnestness and humility:
"O God, here are the Quraysh who in their vainglory seek to deny and cry lies
against Your Messenger. O God, support us with the help You promised me. O
God, were this small group of Muslims to perish, no one in the whole world
would remain to worship You."212
After the prayer, he threw a handful of dust at the enemy saying: "May
their faces be scorched."213
Badr was a severe test for the Muslims. They would either win or be
martyred, for they were commanded not to flee. They could retreat in or-
derly fashion under strong enemy pressure, as a stratagem to seek rein-
forcements or regroup with another party in the rear (8:15), but not be-
cause of cowardice and defeatism. Such a disorderly flight would reveal
that they preferred their lives over Islam, a major and deadly sin.
209.Ibn Sa‘d, 3:120.
210.Ibn Hanbal, 1:159.
211.Ibn Hisham, 2:127.
212.Ibid., 1:621.
213.Ibid., 1:668; Ibn Hanbal, 1:368.
206

--- Sayfa 208 ---
The battle begins.
In the Quraysh's first frontline were 'Utba ibn Rabi'a, his brother
Shayba, and his son Walid. They challenged the Muslims to single com-
bat. Three young Ansar went forward. "We will not fight Madina's farmers
and spherherds!" 'Utba shouted arrogantly. This was, in fact, what The
Messenger expected. He ordered 'Ali, Hamza, and 'Ubayda ibn Harith
forward for single combat. Hamza fought and killed 'Utba, and 'Ali
killed Walid with two blows. 'Ubayda, who was old, fought Shayba and
was wounded on his knee. Hamza and 'Ali rescued him, killed Shayba,
and carried 'Ubayda away.214
The Quraysh were shocked by such an unexpected beginning. The
Muslims' belief and sincerity won them God's help. The Quraysh, who
had exulted in their power, were decisively defeated by the ill-equipped
Muslims. Seventy Qurayshis were killed. 'Awf and Mu'awwidh, two
young Ansari brothers, joined with 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud to kill Abu
Jahl, who The Messenger called the "Pharaoh of the Muslim community.215"
Almost all Qurayshi leaders were killed: Abu Jahl, Walid ibn Mughira, 'Utba
ibn Rabi'a, 'As ibn Sa'id, Umayyah ibn Khalaf, and Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid.
Prior to the battle, The Messenger had indicated the spots where they would die,
saying: "'Utba will be killed here; Abu Jahl here, Umayyah ibn Khalaf here,"
and so on.216
Seventy Qurayshis were captured. God allowed the Muslims to
ransom them, and some were released. However, those who could read
and write were to be released only after they had taught these skills to
the unlettered Muslims. Such treatment proved very beneficial for the
Muslims' image. First, those captives who had expected execution gladly
paid the ransom. Second, Madina's low literacy rate was raised and the
newly literate Muslims could be more effective in preaching Islam and
gaining people's respect. Third, literate captives could learn about Islam
and be in close contact with Muslims. This was certain to soften their
hearts and accelerate their conversion, together with that of their famil-
ies. Fourth, the captives' families and relatives were so glad to see their
captive family members, whom they had presumed dead, that they be-
came much more receptive to Islam.
214.Ibn Hisham, 2:277.
215.Ibid., 2:280-287; Ibn Kathir, 3:350.
216.Abu Dawud, 2:53; Muslim, 5:170.
207

--- Sayfa 209 ---
The decisive victory gained at Badr made Islam a force to be reckoned
with throughout Arabia, and many hardened hearts were inclined to ac-
cept Islam.
208

--- Sayfa 210 ---
The Battle of Uhud
The victory of Badr alerted the peninsula's hostile forces. The Muslims
were in a state of unease, and endured the wrath of most neighboring
societies.
Madina's Jewish tribes were not eager to honor their agreements with
The Messenger after his Emigration. During the Battle of Badr, they
favored the Makkan polytheists; afterwards, they openly encouraged the
Quraysh and other Arab tribes to unite against the Muslims. They also
collaborated with the Hypocrites, who were apparently an integral part
of the Muslim body politic. To sabotage the spread of Islam, they began
to fan the flames of old animosities between the Aws and Khazraj, the
two tribes of Madinan Muslims. Ka'b ibn Ashraf, chief of Banu Nadir,
went to Makka and recited stirring elegies for the Makkans killed at Badr
to provoke the Quraysh into renewed hostilities. He also slandered the
Muslims and satirized The Messenger in his poems.
The Jewish tribes' violation of their treaty obligations exceeded all
reasonable limits. A few months after Badr, a Muslim woman was
treated indecently by some Jews of Banu Qaynuqa, the most anti-Muslim
Jewish tribe. During the ensuing fight, a Muslim was martyred and a Jew
was killed. When The Messenger reproached them for this shameful con-
duct and reminded them of their treaty obligations, the Jews threatened
him: "Don't be misled by your encounter with a people who have no knowledge
of warfare. You were lucky. By God, if we fight you, you will know that we are
the men of war."
Finally, The Messenger attacked the Banu Qaynuqa, defeated them,
and banished them from Madina's outskirts. In addition, upon the order
of The Messenger, Muhammed ibn Maslama killed Ka'b ibn Ashraf and
ended his trouble-making activities.217
The reasons for the battle. The Quraysh were still smarting from their
defeat at Badr. Their women were mourning their dead warriors almost
daily, and encouraged the survivors to revenge themselves. In addition,
the Jewish efforts to rouse their feelings of revenge were like pouring oil
on flames. Within a year (625 CE), the Quraysh attacked Madina with an
army of 3,000 soldiers, including 700 in coats of mail and 200
cavalrymen.
217.Ibn Hisham, 3:58.
209

--- Sayfa 211 ---
Informed of the Makkans' march upon Madina, The Messenger con-
sulted with his Companions about how to meet this threat. He had
dreamed that he was in his coat of mail with his sword notched, and that
some oxen were being slaughtered. He interpreted this to mean that they
should defend themselves within Madina's boundaries, and that a lead-
ing member of his kinsmen, together with some Companions, would be
martyred.218 He also knew that the Makkan army was coming to fight on
open ground. Thus, if the Muslims defended themselves within Madina,
the Makkan army could not mount a long siege. He stressed once more
that Muslims represent peace and security, and that they should resort to
force only to eliminate an obstacle to the preaching of Islam or to defend
themselves, their faith, or their country.
However, several young people longed for martyrdom. Upset that
they had not fought at Badr, they wanted to fight the enemy outside of
Madina. The Messenger gave in to this ultimately majority demand.
When these young people repented, upon warning from their elders
about their insistence, and the elders informed The Messenger of this, the
Messenger replied: "It does not befit a Prophet to take off his coat of mail once
he has put it on."219
Having decided to follow the majority, The Messenger and 1,000 war-
riors left Madina for Uhud, a volcanic hill only a few miles from its west-
ern outskirts. Its main feature was a plain that stretched out before it.
When they were only half way there, however, 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn
Salul turned back with his 300 men. This event, coming just before the
battle began, caused such perplexity and confusion that the Banu Salama
and Banu Haritha tribes also wanted to turn back. Eventually, they were
persuaded to remain.
The
Messenger
advanced
with
the
remaining
ill-equipped
700
Muslims. He lined them up at the foot of Mount Uhud so that the moun-
tain was behind them and the Qurayshi army in front of them. The en-
emy could launch a surprise attack from only one mountain pass. The
Messenger posted 50 archers there under the command of 'Abd Allah ibn
Jubayr. He told him not to let anyone approach or move from that spot,
adding: "Even if you see birds fly off with our flesh, don't move from this
place."220
218.Ibid. 3:664–7.
219.Bukhari, "I'tisam," 28; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:68.
220.Bukhari, "Jihad," 164; Abu Dawud, "Jihad," 6.
210

--- Sayfa 212 ---
The standard bearer was Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr. Zubayr ibn 'Awwam
commanded the cavalry, and Hamza commanded the infantry. The army
was ready to fight. To encourage his Companions, the Prophet brought
forth a sword and asked: "Who would like to have this sword in return for
giving its due?" Abu Dujana asked: "What is its due?" "To fight with it until
it is broken," the Prophet answered. Abu Dujana took it and fought.221
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and 'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh prayed to God to make
them encounter the strongest enemy soldiers. Hamza, the Prophet's
uncle and "Lion of God," wore an ostrich feather on his chest. The verse
revealed to describe the godly persons around previous Prophets poin-
ted also to them:
Many a Prophet there was, with whom a large number of God-devoted men
fought. They fainted not for anything that befell them in the way of God, neither
weakened nor abased themselves. God loves the steadfast. Nothing else did they
say but: "Our Master, forgive our sins, and that we exceeded in our affair. Make
our feet firm, and help us against the unbelievers." God gave them the reward of
the world and the good reward of the Hereafter. God loves those who do good.
(3:146–48)
In the first stage, the Muslims defeated the enemy so easily that Abu
Dujana, with the sword the Prophet had given him, pushed into the cen-
ter of the Qurayshi army. There he met Abu Sufyan's (the Qurayshi com-
mander) wife Hind. He tried to kill her but, "in order not to dirty the sword
given by the Prophet with a woman's blood," spared her. 'Ali killed Talha ibn
'Abi Talha, the enemy's standard-bearer. All who carried the Qurayshi
standard were killed by 'Ali, 'Asim ibn Thabit, or Zubayr ibn 'Awwam.
After that, such self-sacrificing heroes of the Muslim army as Hamza,
'Ali, Abu Dujana, Zubayr, and Miqdad ibn 'Amr flung themselves upon
the enemy and routed them.
When the enemy began to flee, the Muslims gathered the spoils. The
archers on the mountain pass saw this and said to themselves: "God has
defeated the enemy, and our brothers are collecting the spoils. Let's join them."
'Abd Allah ibn Jubayr reminded them of the Prophet's order, but they
said: "He ordered us to do that without knowing the outcome of the battle." All
but a few left their posts and began to collect booty. Khalid ibn Walid,
still an unbeliever and commander of the Qurayshi cavalry, seized this
opportunity to lead his men around Mount Uhud and attacked the
Muslims' flank through the pass. 'Abd Allah ibn Jubayr's depleted forces
could not repel them.
221.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 128; Ibn Hanbal, 3:123.
211

--- Sayfa 213 ---
The fleeing enemy soldiers came back and joined the attack from the
front. Now, the battle turned against the Muslims. Both of these sudden
attacks by superior forces caused great confusion among the Muslims.
The enemy wanted to seize The Messenger alive or kill him, and so at-
tacked him from all sides with swords, spears, arrows, and stones. Those
who defended him fought heroically.
Hind, having lost her father and brothers at Badr, urged Wahshi, a
black slave, to kill Hamza. When the scales turned, Hamza fought like a
furious lion. He had killed almost 30 people when Wahshi's lance
pierced him just above the thigh. Hind came forward and ordered
Hamza's stomach split open. She then mutilated his body and chewed
his liver.
Ibn Kami'a martyred Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, the Muslims' standard-bear-
er who had been fighting in front of him. Mus'ab resembled The Messen-
ger in build and complexion, and this caused Ibn Kami'a to announce
that he had killed The Messenger. Meanwhile, the Messenger had been
wounded by a sword and some stones. Falling into a pit and bleeding
profusely, he stretched his hands and prayed: "O God, forgive my people,
because they do not know (the truth)."222
The rumor of the Prophet's martyrdom led many Companions to lose
courage. In addition to those like 'Ali, Abu Dujana, Sahl ibn Hunayf,
Talha ibn 'Ubaydullah, Anas ibn Nadr, and 'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, who
fought self-sacrificingly, some Muslim women heard the rumor and
rushed to the battlefield. Sumayra, of the Badu Dinar tribe, had lost her
husband, father, and brother. All she asked about was The Messenger.
When she saw him, she said: "All misfortunes mean nothing to me as long as
you are alive, O The Messenger!"223 Umm 'Umara fought before the Mes-
senger so heroically that he asked her: "Who else can endure all that you en-
dure?" That pride of womanhood took this opportunity to ask him to
pray for her: "O Messenger of God, pray to God that I may be in your company
in Paradise!" The Messenger did so, and she responded: "Whatever happens
to me from now on doesn't matter."224
Anas ibn Nadr heard that The Messenger had been martyred. He
fought so valiantly that he suffered 80 wounds.225 They found Sa'd ibn
Rabi' dying with 70 wounds on his body. His last words were: "Convey
222.Qadi 'Iyad, Shifa', 1:78–9; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 4:93.
223.Ibn Hisham, 3:99.
224.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 8:413–5.
225.Ibn Hanbal, 3:201; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9:44.
212

--- Sayfa 214 ---
my greetings to The Messenger. I sense the fragrance of Paradise from behind
Uhud."
Besides Abu Dujana and Sahl ibn Hunayf, 'Ali stood in front of The
Messenger and defended him. Three times the Messenger pointed to
some of the enemy who were advancing toward them; each time 'Ali at-
tacked and routed them.
Despite the indescribable resistance of the Muslim warriors around
The Messenger, defeat seemed inevitable until Ka'b ibn Malik, seeing
The Messenger, shouted: "O Muslims! Good tidings for you! This is The
Messenger, here!" The scattered Companions advanced toward him from
all sides, rallied around him, and led him to the safety of the mountain.
The reasons for the setback at Uhud.
Before explaining the reasons for this setback, it should be pointed out
that the Companions, after the Prophets, are superior to everybody else
in virtue. They are honored with being the comrades and trainees of
Prophet Muhammad, the greatest of creation, the one for whose sake the
universe was created and who was sent as a mercy for all the worlds.
Therefore, according to the rule "the greater the blessing, the greater the re-
sponsibility," they had to be the most obedient to God and His Messenger.
We read, for example, whoever of the Prophet's wives commits manifest
indecency, the punishment for her will be doubled … you are not like
any other women (33:30, 32). Likewise, even a small sin committed by a
Companion deserves severe punishment. They are all included in those
"foremost in belief and nearness to God," and their conduct is an example to
be followed by later generations. Therefore, they must be pure in belief
and intention, sincere in worship and devotion, upright in conduct, and
extremely careful in refraining from sin and disobedience.
God raised the Community of Muhammad as the best community to enjoin
the good and forbid the evil, and believe in One God (3:110) and appointed them
as a middle nation so that they may be witnesses to humanity, and the Messen-
ger may be a witness to them (2:143). In the early years of the Madinan era,
the Companions consisted of true believers and Hypocrites. Therefore,
God wanted to sift His true witnesses against all humanity, and see who
strove hard in His Way and remained steadfast (3:141–42). The Battle of
Uhud, therefore, was a decisive test to sift out the sincere and steadfast
from the hypocritical and wavering, and served to make the Islamic
community more stable and formidable.
213

--- Sayfa 215 ---
After these preliminary notes, we can summarize why the Muslims ex-
perienced a setback as follows:
• The Messenger, the commander-in-chief, thought they should stay
within Madina. The younger Companions, inexperienced and excited,
urged him to march out of the city. This was a mistake, even though for
the sake of martyrdom in the way of God, since the Messenger tended to
apply different tactics in battles and knew in advance that the Quraysh
army was coming to fight in an open field.
• The archers posted to defend the army left their posts. They misin-
terpreted the Messenger's order not to leave for any reason and went to
collect booty.
• The 300 Hypocrites, one-third of the army, deserted half-way and re-
turned to Madina. This undermined the morale of the Banu Salama and
Banu Haritha tribes, who were only persuaded with difficulty not to
leave. Moreover, there was a small group of Hypocrites who demoral-
ized the Muslim ranks during the battle.
• Several Companions became impatient. They acted, in certain re-
spects, inconsistently with the dictates of piety and were lured by materi-
al wealth.
• Some believers thought that as long as the Messenger was with
them, and as long as they enjoyed God's support and help, the unbeliev-
ers could never beat them. However true this was, the setback taught
them that deserving God's help requires, besides belief and devotion, de-
liberation, strategy, and steadfastness. They also perceived that the
world is a field of testing and trial:
Many ways of life and systems have passed away before you; journey in the
land, and behold how was the end of those who did deny (the Messengers). This
is an exposition for humanity, and a guidance and an admonition for the God-
fearing. Don't faint or grieve, for you shall gain mastery if you are true believ-
ers. If a wound has touched you, a like wound already touched the (unbelieving)
people (at Badr); such days We deal out in turn among humanity, that God may
see who are the believers, and that He may take witnesses from among you; and
God loves not the evil-doers; and that God may prove the believers, and blot out
the unbelievers. (3:137-41)
• Those who had not taken part in Badr sincerely prayed to God for
martyrdom. They were deeply devoted to Islam and longed to meet
God. Some, like 'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, Anas ibn Nadr, Sa'd ibn Rabi',
'Amr ibn Jamuh, and Abu Sa'd Haysama tasted the pleasure of martyr-
dom; the martyrdom of the others was delayed. The Qur'an sings the
214

--- Sayfa 216 ---
praises of them as follows: Among the believers are men who were true to
their covenant with God; some of them have fulfilled their vow by death (in
battle), and some are still awaiting, and they have not changed in the least
(33:23).
• Any success or triumph lies with God, Who does whatever He wills
and cannot be questioned. Belief in God's Unity means that believers
must always ascribe their accomplishments to God and never appropri-
ate anything good for themselves. If the decisive victory of Badr gave
some Muslims a sort of self-pride, and if they imputed the victory to
their own prudence, wise arrangement, or some material causes, this
would have been part of the reason for their setback.
• Among the Qurayshi army were several eminent soldiers and com-
manders (such as Khalid ibn Walid, Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl, 'Amr ibn al-'As,
and Ibn Hisham) who were destined by God to be great servants of
Islam in the future. They were the ones most esteemed and respected
among the people. For the sake of their future service, God may not have
willed to hurt their feelings of honor completely. So, as expressed by Be-
diuzzaman Said Nursi, the Companions of the future defeated the Com-
panions of the present.
• The following verses explain the reasons for that setback together
with its aftermath, and the lessons to be taken from it:
Did you suppose you should enter Paradise without God displaying which of
you have struggled and who are patient? (3:142)
Muhammad is naught but a Messenger; Messengers have passed away before
him. Will you, if he should die or is slain, turn back on your heels? Whoever
should turn back on his heels will not harm God in any way; and God will re-
compense the thankful. It is not given to any soul to die save by the leave of God,
at an appointed time. Whoso desires the reward of this world, We will give him
of this; and whoso desires the reward of the other world, We will give him of
that; and We will recompense the thankful. (3:144–5)
God fulfilled His pledge to you when by His leave you blasted them, until you
lost heart, and quarreled about the matter, and disobeyed, after He had shown
you that you longed for. Some of you sought this world and some of you sought
the next. Then He turned you from them, that He might try you; and He has
pardoned you. God is bounteous to the believers. When you were going up, not
twisting about for anyone, and the Messenger was calling you in your rear; so
He rewarded you with grief after grief that you might not sorrow for what es-
caped you neither for what smote you. God is aware of the things you do.
(3:152–3)
215

--- Sayfa 217 ---
Those of you who turned away on the day two hosts encountered—Satan
made them slip because of some of their lapses; but God has pardoned them. God
is All-Forgiving, All-Clement. (3:155)
O believers, be not as the unbelievers who say concerning their brothers, when
they journey in the land, or are upon expeditions: "If they had been with us,
they would not have died and not been slain"—that God may make that an an-
guish in their hearts. For God gives life, and He makes to die; and God sees all
that you do. If you are slain or die in God's way, forgiveness and mercy from
God are a better thing than what they amass; if you die or are slain, it is unto
God that you shall be mustered. (3:156–8)
If God helps you, none can overcome you; if He forsakes you, who can help
you after Him? Therefore let the believers put all their trust in God. (3:160)
Why, when an affliction visited you, and you had visited twice over the like of
it, did you say: "How is this?" Say: "This is from your own selves; God is
powerful over everything." And what visited you, the day the two hosts en-
countered, was by God's leave, that He might mark out the believers and that He
also might mark out the Hypocrites, to whom it was said: "Come, fight in the
way of God, or repel!" They said: "If only we knew how to fight, we would fol-
low you." They that day were nearer to unbelief than to belief. (3:165–7)
Count not those who were slain in God's way as dead. They are alive with
their Master, by Him provided, rejoicing in the bounty that God has given them,
and joyful in those who remain behind and have not joined them yet. No fear
shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow, joyful in blessing and bounty from
God, and that God leaves not to waste the wage of the believers. (3:169-71)
God will not leave the believers in the state in which you are, till He shall dis-
tinguish the corrupt from the good, and God will not inform you of the Unseen;
but God chooses out of His Messengers whom He wills. Believe then in God and
His Messengers; if you believe and avoid disobeying God, there shall be for you a
mighty wage. (3:179)
The last stage of the Battle of Uhud and the campaign of Hamra' al-
Asad. After this confusion ended, his Companions rallied around the
Prophet, who was wounded and had fainted. Many of his Companions
also were wounded. They retreated to mountain's safety. The Qurayshi
army began to leave the battlefield, thinking they had revenged them-
selves for Badr. Seeing that they could not crush the Muslims' resistance,
they mounted their camels and, leading their horses, headed for Makka.
The Messenger worried that the Makkans might return and launch an-
other attack on Madina. On the second day of Uhud, therefore, he
ordered those who had fought the day before to gather together and
216

--- Sayfa 218 ---
pursue the unbelievers. Although some of the Banu 'Abd al-Qays, ap-
pointed by Abu Sufyan, tried to discourage this line of action by saying:
"The people have gathered against you, therefore fear them," this only increased
the believers' faith. They retorted: God is sufficient for us; what an excellent
Guardian He is! (3:173).226
Most were seriously wounded; some could not stand and had to be
carried by their friends.227 At this highly critical moment, they girded up
their loins and prepared to lay down their lives at the Messenger's be-
hest. They accompanied him to Hamra' al-Asad, eight miles from Mad-
ina. The Makkan polytheists had halted and were talking about a second
attack on Madina. However, when they saw the believers they had sup-
posedly just defeated coming toward them, they could not muster suffi-
cient courage and so continued on to Makka.
The Messenger's prudence and military genius turned a defeat into a
victory. The enemy did not have enough courage to confront the
Muslims' resolution yet again by marching upon Madina, and so re-
treated to Makka. God revealed the following verses in praise of the
Muslim heroes:
Those who answered God and the Messenger after the wound had smitten
them—to all those of them who did good and behaved in utmost devotion to God,
shall be a mighty wage; those to whom the people said: "The people have
gathered against you, therefore fear them." But it increased them in faith, and
they said: "God is sufficient for us; what an excellent Guardian He is!" So they
returned with blessing and bounty from God, untouched by evil. They followed
the good pleasure of God, and God is of bounty abounding. (3:172–74)
226.Ibn Hisham, 3:120–1; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 4:43.
227.Ibn Hisham, 3:101.
217

--- Sayfa 219 ---
Battle of Trench
Toward the Battle of the Trench.
The Jewish Banu Nadir tribe was originally the sworn ally of the
Muslims in Madina. However, its members secretly intrigued with the
Makkan pagans and the Madinan Hypocrites. They even tried to kill the
Prophet while he was visiting them, breaking the laws of hospitality and
their treaty. The Messenger asked them to leave their strategic position,
about three miles south of Madina, and they agreed to do so. But when
'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy, the Hypocrites' chief, promised them help in case
of war, the Banu Nadir demurred.
The Muslim army then besieged them in their fortresses. The Banu
Nadir, seeing that neither the Makkan polytheists nor the Madinan Hy-
pocrites cared enough to help them, left the city. They were dismayed,
but their lives were spared. Given 10 days to leave, along with their fam-
ilies and all they could carry, most of them joined their brethren in Syria
and others in Khaybar.
While returning from Uhud, Abu Sufyan had challenged the Muslims
to a re-match at Badr the following year.228 But when the appointed time
arrived, his courage failed him. As a face-saving device, he sent Nu'aym
ibn Mas'ud (then an unbeliever) to Madina to spread the rumor that the
Quraysh were making tremendous war preparations and gathering a
huge and invincible army. However, when the Prophet reached Badr
with an army of 1,500 fighters, there was no enemy to meet him. They
stayed there for 8 days, waiting for the threatened encounter. When no
sign of the Quraysh army appeared, they returned to Madina. This cam-
paign was called Badr al-Sughra (Badr the Minor).
In 5 AH (627 CE), the Messenger was informed that the desert tribes of
Anmar and Sa'laba had decided to attack Madina. Accompanied by 400
fighters, he reached Zat al-Riqa' and, hearing that the enemy tribes had
fled, returned to Madina.229 After this campaign, he marched upon the
pagan Banu Mustaliq tribe, which had made preparations to fight the
Muslims. With 700 warriors, the Messenger attacked and defeated
them.230 On the way back to Madina, the Hypocrites tried, and failed, to
cause dissension among the Emigrants and the Ansar. The verses sent
228.Ibn Hisham, 3:94; Ibn Sa'd, 2:59.
229.Ibn Hisham, 3:213.
230.Ibn Kathir, 4:178–9.
218

--- Sayfa 220 ---
down revealed all their secrets and how polluted their inner world was
(63:1-11).
219

--- Sayfa 221 ---
In 627, a group of the expelled Banu Nadir Jews, including Sallam ibn
Abi al-Huqayq, Huyayy ibn Akhtab, and some of the Banu Wa'il, went
to Makka. They met with the Quraysh, urged them to continue the fight,
and promised their help and support. These Jews then went to Ghatafan
and Qays Aylan tribes and, promising them help, encouraged them to
fight against the Messenger. These intrigues resulted in a great anti-
Muslim confederacy of Makkan polytheists, the desert tribes of central
Arabia, Jews already expelled from Madina, Madina's remaining Jews
(the Banu Qurayza), and the Hypocrites (led by 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy
ibn Salul). The last two constituted a fifth column within Madina.
When the Messenger was informed of this anti-Muslim gathering of
confederates (ahzab) through his intelligence service, he consulted his
Companions. It was their unanimous view that they should remain in
Madina and fight from there. Salman al-Farisi suggested digging a
trench around the city. It took 6 days of feverish labor to dig this trench.
The Messenger divided the Muslims into groups of ten and told them to
compete with each other. It was a hard task, there was not much time,
and hunger was rampant. Yet all the Companions worked enthusiastic-
ally. In order to not feel the hunger, each fastened a rock around his
stomach and recited, while digging:
We are those people who
Took the oath of allegiance to Muhammad;
Therefore we shall fight in the way of God
As long as we live.
By God, if God had not enabled us to,
We would have neither been guided
Nor given alms, nor performed prayers.
Send down unto us calmness and tranquility
And make our feet firm if we confront the enemy!
The Messenger, who dug alongside them with two rocks fastened
around his stomach, answered them with the couplet:
O God, the real life is the life of the Hereafter
So, forgive the Helpers and the Emigrants.
While digging the ditch, the Companions unearthed a huge rock that
they could not break. Informing the Messenger of this, he began to strike
it with his pickaxe. In the light of the resulting sparks, he predicted: "I
have been given the keys to Persia; my community will conquer it." He struck
the rock a second time and, in the light of the resulting sparks, declared: "God is
220

--- Sayfa 222 ---
the Greatest. I have been given the keys to Byzantium. My community will con-
quer it."231
Madina under threat
The allies advanced against Madina in the hope of destroying the
Muslims on an open battlefield. However, when they faced this new
strategy, they took the first blow. Numbering around 20,000, they
camped near the ditch. The Madinans had no more than 3,000 soldiers.
Moreover, the Jewish Banu Qurayza and the Hypocrite fifth columns
already had contacted the enemy. As stated in Qur'an 33:12–20, when the
Hypocrites first saw the enemy, they were already in a defeatist mood.
Not content with disloyalty themselves, they tried to infect others, who
made feeble excuses to withdraw. If the enemy could gain entrance, they
would betray the city.
The Messenger once again displayed his sagacity and military genius:
he kept the soldiers within the city and stationed them so that they could
safeguard their homes against possible Banu Qurayza attacks. The most
critical moment came when the Banu Qurayza sent a man into Madina to
learn the conditions of the Muslim women. However, their hopes were
frustrated when this man was killed by Safiyya, the Prophet's aunt.
While the war was continuing with exchanges of arrows and stones,
The Messenger engaged in diplomatic attempts to split the Allies. He
contacted the Ghatafan's leaders and, offering them peace, urged them to
withdraw their people. Nu'aym ibn Mas'ud, an Ally leader who before
the battle had come to Madina to sow discord, already was inclining to-
ward Islam. During the battle, he secretly entered Islam and followed the
The Messenger's order to stir up the Banu Qurayza. Nu'aym set them
against the Quraysh by asserting that the Makkans would abandoned
them and so they should withhold their help until the Quraysh gave
them hostages. Then he told the Quraysh that the Banu Qurayza would
not fulfill their promise and would try to stall by asking for Qurayshi
hostages to share their plight in the case of defeat. This stratagem suc-
ceeded, and dissension grew among the Allies.232
The Messenger, supported by Sal mountain behind the city, had
ordered a narrow point to be made in the trench, as he expected that
leading Qurayshi horsemen would try to cross there. It happened as he
231.Ibn Hisham, 3:230; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 4:116.
232.Ibn Hisham, 3:240–2.
221

--- Sayfa 223 ---
had expected, and some of the most renowned Qurayshi warriors at-
tempted to cross for single combat with Muslim fighters. Among them
were 'Amr ibn 'Abd Wudd, Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl, Hubayra ibn Abi Wahb,
Dirar ibn al-Khattab, and Nawfal ibn 'Abd Allah ibn al-Mughira.
Boasting of his strength and fighting ability, 'Amr dismounted from
his horse and faced 'Ali, who was ordered by the Messenger to fight him.
'Amr advanced with his sword drawn. He brought his sword quickly
against 'Ali, but it caught in 'Ali's shield. 'Ali struck him with such
strength that dust rose around them. Then the words Allahu akbar (God
is the Greatest) were heard: 'Ali had killed his opponent.233 He also killed
Dirar, Hubayra, and Nawfal.234 No other Qurayshi horsemen or generals
could get across at that spot.
The siege lasted 27 days. The Muslims suffered greatly from hunger,
cold, unending barrages of arrows and stones, attempts and concen-
trated assaults to cross the trench, and betrayals and intrigues within
Madina. The Qur'an describes this situation as follows:
When they came against you from above and from below, and when
your eyes swerved and your hearts reached your throats, while you
thought thoughts about God; there it was that the believers were tried, and
shaken most mightily. And when the Hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is
sickness, said: "God and His Messenger promised us only delusion." And when
a party of them said: "O people of Yathrib, there is no abiding here for you,
therefore return!" And a party of them were asking leave of the Prophet, saying:
"Our houses are exposed"; yet they were not exposed. They desired only to flee.
(33:10-13)
After almost 4 weeks, during which the enemy was disheartened by it
failure and the believers proved their steadfastness and loyalty, there
was a piercing blast of cold wind from the east. The enemy's tents were
torn up, their fires were extinguished, and sand and rain beat their faces.
Terrified by the portents against them, and already riven by discord,
they soon gave up. Hudayfa al-Yamani, sent by the Messenger to spy on
the enemy's movements, heard Abu Sufyan shout: "Come on, we're going
home!"235 The Muslims were victorious by God's help, for hidden
forces—the Angels—were helping them: O believers, remember God's bless-
ing upon you when hosts came against you, and we loosed against them a wind,
and hosts you didn't see. God sees the things you do (33:9).
233.Ibn Hisham, 3:235–6.
234.Ibn Kathir, 4:123.
235.Ibn Hisham, 3:243.
222

--- Sayfa 224 ---
The Battle of the Trench was the last Qurayshi attempt to destroy
Islam and the Muslims. Following their withdrawal in defeat and humi-
liation, the Messenger declared: "From this moment we will march upon
them; they will no longer be able to raid us."
After the Allies were routed and returned to their homes, the Messen-
ger focused on to the Banu Qurayza, who had betrayed their agreement
with the Messenger and allied themselves with the Quraysh. They also
had given asylum to the Banu Nadir's leaders, like Huyay ibn Akhtab,
who had been expelled from Madina and continued to conspire against
the Muslims.
No sooner had the Messenger returned from this battle than
Archangel Gabriel came and said: "I have not taken off my coat of mail, and I
am going to the Banu Qurayza." The Messenger ordered his Companions to
march upon this Jewish tribe, and had his tent pitched opposite their
fortresses. He would have forgiven them if they had asked, but they pre-
ferred to resist. The Messenger besieged them for 25 days. At last they
asked for surrender terms, agreeing that they should submit to Sa'd ibn
Mu'adh's judgment, who decreed the sentence according to the Torah.
This was the end of the Banu Qurayza's conspiracies, as well as of the
Jewish presence in Madina.
Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, a leader of the Ansar, had been wounded in the
Battle of the Trench. He prayed: "O God, if I am able to fight once more be-
side the Messenger, make me live. Otherwise, I am ready to die." He died a
martyr shortly after the Jewish conspiracies ended.
223

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Toward the Conquest of Makka
As will be elaborated later, the treaty of Hudaybiya was a clear victory
that opened a door to new and greater victories for Islam. The Makkan
threat ended, and the Messenger sent envoys to neighboring countries to
invite them to Islam. He also set out to solve the other problems he faced
within Arabia.
Most of the Banu Nadir Jews had resettled in Khaybar. Together with
them, the Jews of Khaybar continued to work against Islam in league, at
various times, with either the Quraysh or the Banu Ghatafan. The Banu
Nadir had been instrumental in forming the 20,000-man anti-Muslim al-
liance defeated during the Battle of the Trench. Seeking to end this con-
tinually hostile Jewish presence so that Arabia could be made secure for
the future and free preaching of Islam, the Muslims acted.
The Banu Qurayza's punishment roused the Jews of Khaybar to ally
themselves with the Banu Ghatafan and attack Madina.236 They were
making preparations for this when, after the treaty of Hudaybiya, the
Messenger marched upon Khaybar. He made as if to attack the Banu
Ghatafan, and forced them to shelter in their confines without daring to
help the Jews in Khaybar. Then he suddenly turned toward Khaybar.
The village's farmers, who had left their homes early with their farming
tools, saw the Muslim army approach the city and began running and
taking shelter in their formidable citadels.
The Messenger besieged Khaybar for 3 weeks. Toward the end of the
siege, he gathered his soldiers and told them: "Tomorrow I will hand the
standard to him who loves God and His Messenger and is loved by God and His
Messenger. God will enable us to conquer Khaybar through him."237 On the
next day, almost everyone was hoping to receive the standard. However,
the Messenger asked for 'Ali. Told that "he has sore eyes," the Messenger
sent for him, applied his saliva to 'Ali's sore eyes, and gave him the
standard.238 'Ali went to the fortress and, after a fierce battle, Khaybar
was conquered. Among the prisoners was Safiyya, a noble woman and
daughter of Huyay ibn Akhtab, the Banu Nadir's chief. By marrying her,
the Messenger established a relationship with the conquered people.
236.Ibn Hisham, 3:226; Diyarbakri, Khamis, 1:540.
237.Bukhari, "Maghazi," 38
238.Bukhari, 5:77; Muslim, 4:1872.
224

--- Sayfa 226 ---
The Battle of Mu'ta.
In the peaceful atmosphere brought about by the treaty of Hudaybiya,
the Messenger sent letters to neighboring kings inviting them to the fold
of Islam. King Shurahbil of Busra, a Christian Arab, killed the envoy
(Harith ibn 'Umayr). This was an unforgivable breach of international
custom and the prestige of Islam, and could not remain unanswered. The
Messenger formed an army of 3,000 men, with Zayd ibn Haritha as com-
mander, and said: "If something happens to Zayd, Ja'far ibn Abi Talib will as-
sume the command. If Ja'far is martyred, 'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha will assume
the command. In case something happens to 'Abd Allah, choose one among you
as the commander."
When the Muslim army reached Mu'ta, it confronted a 100,000-man
Byzantine army. Obviously it would be a fierce battle. Each Muslim
would have to fight about 33 of the enemy. In the meantime, the Messen-
ger was in the mosque, relating the fighting to those around him. Zayd
took the standard. He thrust himself into the enemy ranks and was mar-
tyred. The standard passed to Ja'far ibn Abi Talib. He also rose up to
Paradise. 'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha took the standard and was martyred.
Now the standard was in the hands of one of the "swords of God,"239
meaning Khalid ibn Walid, who would, from then on, be called "the
Sword of God."240
When it was night, Khalid stationed the troops at the rear in the front
rank, and changed the wings, positioning those on the right to the left
and vice versa. Seeing new troops before them in the morning, the Byz-
antine army was demoralized. When night fell, the sides parted with
each other and retreated. The Muslim army returned to Madina with
only 12 losses. Although this was a victory for the Muslims, they were
ashamed to meet the Messenger. However, he welcomed and consoled
them: "You didn't flee. You retreated to join me, and will go against them
later."
239.Bukhari, "Maghazi," 44.
240.Ibn Hanbal, 5:299; Tabari, 3:110.
225

--- Sayfa 227 ---
The Conquest of Makka and Its Aftermath
In 5 ah (627 CE), the Messenger had a dream or a vision that he and his
Companions would enter the Holy Mosque of Makka in safety, with
their heads shaven or trimmed, and without fear. As will be explained
later, earlier they had not been allowed to enter Makka and so made a
treaty with the Quraysh at Hudaybiya. At first, the Muslims did not like
the conditions, but the verses revealed after the treaty described it as a
clear victory.
The 2 years following this event proved the truth of these words. Such
leading Qurayshi figures as Khalid ibn Walid and 'Amr ibn al-'As be-
came Muslims, and Islam spread across Arabia. Jewish conspiracies were
ended, and Islam crossed into other lands through the letters sent to
neighboring kings. At the end of this period, the Banu Bakr (a Qurayshi
ally) attacked the Banu Khuda'a (the Muslims' ally) and killed some of
them. The truce between the Muslims and the Quraysh was now over.
No longer able to resist the Muslims, Abu Sufyan came to Madina in the
hopes of renewing it. However, the Messenger refused to meet with
him.241
The Messenger began to prepare for war. As always, he kept the affair
quite secret and no one, including his wives and closest friends, knew
where the campaign would be. When Abu Bakr asked his daughter
'A'isha, the wife of the Messenger, where the Messenger intended to
march, she told him that she did not know.242 However, an Emigrant
named Khatib ibn Abi Balta'a guessed his intention and sent a letter to
the Quraysh informing them of the Messenger's preparations. The Mes-
senger, learning of this through Revelation, ordered 'Ali and Zubayr to
take the letter from the woman to whom Khatib had entrusted it. They
did this successfully.243
The Messenger left Madina with 10,000 men. Two years before, they
had numbered 1,600 when his attempted minor pilgrimage ('umra) res-
ulted in the treaty of Hudaybiya. The resulting peaceful atmosphere
caused many to reconsider and accept Islam.
The Companions did not know the destination until they were
ordered to head for Makka. When they approached this holy city, the
Messenger ordered each soldier to light a fire, for the Makkans would
241.Ibn Hisham, 4:31.
242.Ibn Hisham, 4:39.
243.Ibn Hisham, 4:41.
226

--- Sayfa 228 ---
light a fire for every tent while traveling in the desert.244 As a result, they
estimated the Muslim army to consist of about 30,000 men. Having no
realistic way to resist, they surrendered. Abu Sufyan, who had been in-
vited by the Messenger to see the Muslim army, also advised this.
The Messenger did not desire bloodshed. Dividing his army into six
columns, each one entered Makka through a different route. He ordered
the commanders to avoid bloodshed unless they were attacked. To real-
ize this goal and conquer Makka peacefully, he announced: "Those who
shelter in the Ka'ba are safe, those who shelter in Abu Sufyan's house are safe,
and those who stay in their own houses are safe."245
Being a Prophet of absolute mercy, one who came to secure the happi-
ness of humanity both in this world and the next, the Messenger entered
Makka, bowing on the back of his mule, as a victorious conqueror. He
displayed no self-pride and had no thought of vengeance or retaliation.
He proceeded toward the Ka'ba in complete modesty and absolute grat-
itude to God, who had made him victorious in his sacred mission. Stop-
ping at the Ka'ba, he asked his enemies: "How do you expect me to treat
you?" They replied: "You are a noble man, the son of a noble man." The Mes-
senger stated: "This day there will be no reproach on you. God will forgive you;
He is the Most Merciful of the Merciful. You can go away."246
This marked the end of polytheism in Makka. While he was destroy-
ing the idols at the Ka'ba, he recited: "Say: 'Truth has come and falsehood
has disappeared. Indeed falsehood is subject to disappearance.'" (17:81)247 Al-
most all Makkans now became Companions, although just one day be-
fore they had been his enemies.
244.Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 4:330; Ibn Hisham, 6:41–5.
245.Ibn Kathir, ibid., 4:331–2.
246.Ibn Sa'd, 2:142; Ibn Hisham, 4:55; Tabari, 3:120; Balazuri, Futuh al-Buldan, 1:47.
247.Bukhari, 5:93; Muslim, 3:1408; Ibn Hisham, 4:59; Ibn Sa'd, 2:136.
227

--- Sayfa 229 ---
The Battle of Hunayn
The Arab tribes were waiting to see who would win before accepting
Islam, saying: "If Muhammad prevails over his people, he is a Prophet." Con-
sequently, after the Muslims' victory they began to enter Islam in
throngs. This shocked the pagans, who organized a great gathering near
Ta'if to coordinate their plans of attack. The Hawazin and the Thaqif,
famous for courage and archery, took the lead and prepared a great ex-
pedition against Makka. Informed of their movements by 'Abd Allah ibn
Hadrad, whom he had sent to them, the Messenger left Makka with
12,000 Muslims who were enthusiastic over the 2,000 new conversions.
To protect Makka and consolidate the new Muslims' belief by healing
their wounded feelings, the Messenger did not want to fight within
Makka.
The battle was joined at Hunayn, a valley between Makka and Ta'if.
The new Muslims had more enthusiasm than wisdom, more a spirit of
elation than of faith and confidence in the righteousness of their cause.
The enemy had the advantage of knowing the ground thoroughly. They
laid an ambush in which the Muslims' advance guard was caught or in-
tentionally pushed by the Messenger, who might have planned to draw
the enemy in under the guise of retreat. However, the retreat was con-
fused and took place under a shower of enemy arrows. The Prophet,
calm as ever in his faith and wisdom in that hour of danger, spurred his
horse forward. His uncle 'Abbas was on his right, and his uncle's son
Fadl was on his left. While Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith was trying to stop
him, the Messenger was shouting: "Now war has been kindled. I am the
Prophet, that is no lie. I am the descendant of 'Abd al-Muttalib."248
'Abbas shouted: "Companions who made the pledge of allegiance under the
acacia tree!"249 From all sides came the response: "Labbayk! (at your ser-
vice!)," and they rallied to the Prophet. The enemy, now in the center of
the Muslim army, was surrounded on all sides. The Messenger's cour-
age, wisdom, and steadfastness changed a seeming defeat into a decisive
victory. It was by God's help that the Muslims won the day. They com-
pleted the victory with an energetic pursuit of the enemy, capturing their
camps, flocks and herds, and families, which they had boastfully
brought with them in expectation of an easy victory.
248.Bukhari, "Jihad," 52; Muslim, "Jihad," 78.
249.Ibn Kathir, 4:373.
228

--- Sayfa 230 ---
The routed enemy took refuge in Ta'if. The Muslims' victory per-
suaded the desert tribes to accept Islam, and shortly thereafter the rebel
tribes and Ta'if also surrendered and entered Islam.
229

--- Sayfa 231 ---
The Expedition to Tabuk
The outcome of the Muslim Byzantine encounter in Mu'ta came as a
shock to Arabia and the Middle East, for the Byantines had not won,
even though they had outnumbered the Muslims by thirtythree to one.
Ultimately, thousands of people from the semi-independent Arab tribes
living in Syria and adjoining areas converted to Islam. To avenge himself
for Mu'ta and prevent the advance of Islam, Heraclius (the Byzantine
Emperor) ordered military preparations to invade Arabia.
The Messenger, always aware of developments bearing on his mission,
promptly decided to challenge the Byzantines on the battlefield. Any
show of Muslim weakness might have revived the dying forces of Arabi-
an polytheism and hostility, which had received a crushing blow at
Hunayn. Such a development also could encourage the Hypocrites in
and around Madina to cause serious damage to Islam from within. They
already were in touch with the Ghassanid Christian prince and with the
Byzantine Emperor, and had built a mosque—which the Qur'an calls the
Mosque of Dirar (Dissension) (9:107)—near Madina to serve as their op-
erational base.
Realizing the gravity of the situation, the Messenger publicly appealed
to the Muslims to prepare for war and, against his usual practice, de-
clared that the Byzantines were his target.
It was mid-summer. The scorching heat was at its peak, the harvest
season had just arrived, and there was a shortage of material resources.
What was more, the enemy was one of the two current superpowers.
Despite all this, the Companions responded ardently to his call and com-
menced their war preparations, all contributing much more than their
financial means warranted. Huge amounts of money were donated by
such wealthy Companions as 'Uthman and 'Abd al-Rahman ibn al-
'Awf.250 Those who could not be included in the Muslim army, due to
shortages of riding animals and other necessary supplies, wept so bit-
terly and lamented their exclusion so pathetically that the Messenger
was moved. God praised them in Qur'an 9:92. The occasion, in fact,
served as a touchstone for distinguishing the sincere from the insincere,
the believers from the Hypocrites.
In Rajab 9 ah/631 ce the Messenger and 30,000 soldiers left Madina
and marched to Tabuk, quite close to what was then Byzantine territory
in Syria. The Byzantine Emperor, who had begun amassing a huge army,
250.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 18; Ibn Hisham, 4:161; Tabari, Tarikh, 3:143; "Tafsir," 10.161.
230

--- Sayfa 232 ---
abandoned his plans and withdrew his army, for the Messenger arrived
before he was expected and well before Byzantine troop concentrations
were completed.251
The Messenger stayed in Tabuk for 20 days, and forced several buffer
states under Byzantine hegemony to pay the poll tax (jizya) and live un-
der his rule. Many Christian tribes embraced Islam willingly.252 This
bloodless victory enabled the Muslims to consolidate their position be-
fore launching a prolonged conflict with the Byzantines, and shattered
the power of both unbelievers and Hypocrites in Arabia.
251.Ibn Sa'd, 2:165–8; Tabari, Tarikh, 3:100–11.
252.Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 5:13.
231

--- Sayfa 233 ---
A General Evaluation of His Military Achievements
A significant point concerning the Messenger is that he was the most em-
inent commander in human history. To understand this dimension of his
sacred mission, consider these following points:
• No other Prophet carried his mission to decisive victory in all as-
pects of life. Moses, who most resembles the Messenger, died while his
people were still in the desert and unable to conquer Palestine after sev-
eral decades of preaching. Jesus' mission sought mainly to infuse a spir-
itual and moral revival among the Jews, who were drowning in material-
ism. After his elevation to Heaven, his disciples conveyed his message to
Rome, despite severe persecution. Unfortunately, the price to be paid
was the degeneration of Jesus' original creed.
When Prophet Muhammad died, he left behind a Muslim Arabia and
dedicated Companions ready to convey Islam throughout the world. He
achieved this end with a handful of self-sacrificing people who previ-
ously had not heard of belief or Scripture, and who had known nothing
of civilized social life, world politics, good morals, and self-discipline. He
transformed desert tribes engaged in civil wars and unending feuds, and
equipped them with belief, sincerity, knowledge, good morals, love of
humanity, compassion, and activism. They dedicated themselves to a
Divine cause, and the result was an army of light. Rabi' ibn Amir,
Muslim envoy to the Persian commander during the War of Qadisiya,
said the Prophet
…elevates people from the dark pits of worldly life to the high, bound-
less realm of the spirit; from the humiliation of worshipping false and
human-made divinities to the honor and dignity of worshipping One
God, the only Creator and Sustainer of the universe; and frees them from
the oppression and depression brought about by false religions and hu-
man systems to the luminous and peaceful climate of Islam."
• The Messenger never sought a worldly kingdom; he was sent to
guide humanity to salvation in both worlds. His goal was to revive
people, not to kill them. To achieve this, however, he had to arrange mil-
itary expeditions and sometimes command armies. He sent out about 80
such expeditions, and actually commanded 28 of them. Fighting took
place in almost half of these campaigns, and only around 1,000 people
died: approximately 250 Muslims were martyred, and 750 non-Muslims
were killed. He established Islam, brought absolute security to Arabia for
the first time, and opened the way to global security at the cost of only
232

--- Sayfa 234 ---
1,000 lives. This is, as so many of his other achievements are, unequalled
in world history.
• The Messenger was the first to legislate an international law. Al-
though the concept was known before Islam, international law was very
limited. For example, there were no recognized rules concerning prison-
ers of war. The Messenger established a set of rules to bring a "discipline"
to fighting. For example, the following is the order given by him and all
his true successors to departing armies, an order obeyed to the letter by
Muslims in their wars as Muslims:
Always keep fear of God in your mind. Remember that you can't afford to do
anything without His grace. Don't forget that Islam is a mission of peace and
love. Don't destroy fruit trees or fertile fields in your paths. Be just, and spare
the feelings of the vanquished. Respect all religious persons who live in hermit-
ages or convents, and spare their edifices. Don't kill civilians, or violate
women's chastity and the conquered's honor. Don't harm old people and chil-
dren, or accept gifts from the civilian population. Don't billet your soldiers or
officers in civilians' homes.253
• The Messenger always took preliminary precautions and left noth-
ing to chance. He always acted with great care, insight, and forethought,
and so never met with any setbacks. He had no part in the reverse
suffered at Uhud. Also, he was extraordinarily successful in getting in-
formation from the enemy without resorting to force or torture. For ex-
ample, some Muslim soldiers who had captured an enemy soldier tried
to force information out of him about the enemy's numbers and equip-
ment. The Messenger ordered his release and asked him how many
camels his army slaughtered every day. Calculating how many camels
are eaten by how many people in a day, he tried to work out how many
soldiers were coming toward him.
• The Messenger established a military intelligence service to provide
him with all necessary information about the enemy. No news of his
own movements, however, was ever leaked. Before setting out to con-
quer Makka, Khatib ibn Abi Balta'a secretly sent a letter with a woman to
his relatives in Makka about the preparations. However, the Prophet was
informed of this and sent 'Ali and Zubayr to intercept her, which they
did.
Also, the Messenger kept his military preparations and ultimate des-
tination a secret. He tended to march in one direction, and then turn
253.Andrew Miller, Church History, 285; Bukhari, "Manaqib," 9.
233

--- Sayfa 235 ---
toward his real destination later on. His tactics were characterized by
speed, surprise attack, and flexibility. In most of his campaigns, he
caught the enemy unprepared and overcame them relatively easily. For
example, in the Battle of Khaybar, the Jews learned of his approach only
because their farmers were abandoning their fields after seeing him in
the early morning. They only had time to shelter in their citadels. When
he marched upon Makka, his advance planning was so perfect that the
Makkan poytheists surrendered unconditionally.
• Being a Prophet who brought a universal religion from God, the
Messenger taught it so effectively that his Companions were always
ready to sacrifice themselves. This was one of the main factors lying be-
hind his victories. His Companions placed all of their reliance and con-
fidence in him. Therefore, he inculcated fear in enemies' hearts, as he
himself said: "I am supported by God through implanting fear in the hearts of
my enemies from a distance of a month's walk."254 He used psychology to de-
moralize his enemies. Poets like Hassan ibn Thabit and 'Abd Allah ibn
Rawaha wrote or recited verses to demoralize the enemy. While per-
forming the minor pilgrimage one year after the treaty of Hudaybiya, he
ordered his Companions to run around the Ka'ba to demonstrate their
strength to the Makkans watching from the neighboring hills. While run-
ning, 'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha recited:
I start with the name of God,
Apart from Whom there is no other god,
And Muhammad is the Messenger of God.
O unbelievers, and sons of unbelievers, clear out of his way.
The Messenger was pleased with his recitation, and said: "His words are
more penetrating to the Quraysh than arrows."255
• The Messenger introduced new strategies and shattered the unity of
allied enemy tribes. During the Battle of the Trench, the Jewish Banu
Qurayza broke their treaty with the Muslims at a most critical moment
and joined the Qurayshi siege. Left between two hostile camps, the Mes-
senger offered peace to the Banu Ghatafan, a Qurayshi ally. This discour-
aged the Banu Ghatafan from continuing the war. He also engendered
disagreement and mutual mistrust between the Quraysh and the Banu
Qurayza. During the campaign of Khaybar, he pretended to march upon
the Banu Ghatafan, allies of the Jews of Khaybar. Thus this tribe re-
mained inactive and did not help the Jews.
254.Bukhari, "Tayammum," 1, "Salat," 56.
255.Nasa'i, Sunan, 5:212; Ibn Hisham, 4:13; Ibn Sa'd, 2:121.
234

--- Sayfa 236 ---
• The Messenger did what he had to do, without hesitation or irresolu-
tion, at each step of his life. He never retreated or gave up hope during a
battle. He stood steadfast during the critical moments of Uhud and
Hunayn. He called to his scattering Companions: "Do not scatter! I am
Muhammad, the Messenger of God. That is no lie!" When the Jewish tribes in
and around Madina refused to honor their agreements, the Messenger
marched upon them immediately. He did the same thing against the
Banu Qurayza after the Battle of the Trench, without even stopping to
take off his coat of mail, and against the Qurayshi army a day after the
setback at Uhud. Such incidents are very significant in showing his resol-
ution and invincibility.
• In almost every campaign, the Messenger took the initiative to attack
and direct the battle. Even in set battles, like those of Badr, Uhud, and
the Trench, he kept the initiative. His use of surprise strategies and ef-
fective tactics defeated the enemy. He also used time and any opportun-
ity most effectively.
• The Messenger usually changed his battle tactics and strategy. For
example, during Badr he launched an overall attack after demoralizing
the enemy in single combat. In the first stage of Uhud, he rendered the
enemy cavalry inactive through archers stationed in the Aynayn moun-
tain pass. Hurling such eminent warriors as Hamza, 'Ali, Abu Dujana,
and Zubayr upon the enemy, he won the victory in the first stage of the
battle. As for the Trench, he faced the enemy with a long, deep trench
around Madina and, remaining within the city's confines, forced the en-
emy to retreat after a 4-week siege.
• The Messenger was never short of necessary reinforcements or lo-
gistics, and always kept his lines of communication open. He brought
up, along with such extraordinary statesmen as Abu Bakr and 'Umar and
people of profound scholarship and spirituality, great soldiers and invin-
cible commanders. His education was based on three basic elements:
• Continuous physical training. He urged his Companions to train in
archery, wrestling, swimming, and riding horses. Sometimes arranged
competitions and footraces, in which he himself occasionally particip-
ated. He also stressed the need to preserve one's health and strength.
• Good morals and being well-mannered.
• Devotion to God with unshakable belief, submission, and reliance,
and obedience to God, himself, and others in authority.
The Muslim army conveyed peace and security to the lands it
conquered. Each soldier was absolutely dedicated to Islam. The only
235

--- Sayfa 237 ---
criterion for them to judge between people was belief in God. They did
not feel true love for anybody who opposed God and His Messenger,
even if they were their parents, children, or siblings (58:22). As a result,
sometimes family members faced each other on the battlefield.
Belief and submission made the Muslim soldiers so powerful and fear-
less that neither the numerical strength of the enemy nor fear of death
could prevent them from conveying the Divine Message. 'Abd Allah ibn
Hudafa al-Sahmi, captured by the Byzantines, was told by a Christian
priest that his life would be spared if he converted. He was given 3
minutes to decide. 'Abd Allah replied: "Thank you, father. You have given
me 3 minutes to tell you about Islam."
236

--- Sayfa 238 ---
Chapter 8
A Universal Leader
His Appointment of Competent People
The Messenger appointed promising and competent Muslims to the
work they could do best. He felt no need to change any appointment, for
the person proved, through personal uprightness and competence, that
he or she was the proper choice.
The Makkan period of Islam was inscribed in the Muslim community's
memory as a time of unbearable persecution and torture. Abuse was not
meted out only to the poor and unprotected Musims (i.e., 'Ammar, Bilal,
and Suhayb), but also to powerful Muslim members of the Qurayshi elite
(i.e., Abu Bakr and 'Umar).256 To protect his followers, the Messenger
permitted those who were poor and unprotected to emigrate to Abyssin-
ia. But he kept the powerful ones (i.e., 'Ali, Zubayr, Abu Bakr, 'Umar,
and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas) in Makka, for Islam needed their support to
spread and implant itself in Makka. These powerful Muslims went on to
occupy the highest administrative positions of the Muslim state.
Abu Dharr was a poor, blunt, and upright bedouin who never re-
strained his faith or his feelings. When he heard Muhammad's declara-
tion of Prophethood, he came to Makka and converted. The Messenger
used to preach Islam secretly in the earliest stage of his Prophethood.
Abu Dharr was very pious and austere. However, since public adminis-
tration requires special skills, the Messenger did not accept his request
for an administrative post, saying: "You cannot manage the people's affairs.
Don't apply for such jobs, for we don't assign such jobs to those who apply for
them."257
The Messenger refused Abu Dharr, but implied the caliphates of Abu
Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman. Holding the hands of Abu Bakr and 'Umar,
256.Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 3:40–1, 102–3; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:234.
257.Muslim, "'Imara," 16–7.
237

--- Sayfa 239 ---
he said: "I have four viziers, two in the heavens and two in the world. Those in
the heavens are Gabriel and Michael; as for those in the world, they are Abu
Bakr and 'Umar."258 Concerning the caliphate of 'Uthman, he declared: "It
will be a trial for him."259
258.Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 11:563, 13:15.
259.Bukhari, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 5:7; Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 29.
238

--- Sayfa 240 ---
He Knew His People
The Messenger knew his people more than they knew themselves. Like
Abu Dharr, 'Amr ibn 'Abatha was a bedouin. He came to Makka and,
meeting the Messenger, asked rudely: "What are you?" The Messenger
replied very gently: "A Prophet of God." Such gentleness caused 'Amr to
kneel down and declare: "I will follow you from now on, O Messenger." The
Messenger did not want 'Amr to stay in Makka, for he would be unable
to endure the torments inflicted upon the believers. So he told him:
"Return to your tribe, and preach Islam among them. When you hear that I am
victorious, come and join us."
Years later, 'Amr came to Madina's mosque and asked the Messenger:
"Do you recognize me, O Messenger?" The Messenger, who had an ex-
traordinarily strong and keen memory (another dimension of his Proph-
ethood) answered promptly: "Aren't you the one who came to me in Makka?
I sent you back to your tribe and told you to join us when you heard that I was
victorious." 260
I mentioned the case of Julaybib earlier. After the moral lesson of the
Messenger, Julaybib became an honest, chaste young man. Upon the
Messenger's request, a noble family gave him their daughter in marriage.
Shortly afterwards, Julaybib took part in a battle and, after killing 7 en-
emy soldiers, was martyred. When his corpse was brought to the Mes-
senger, he put his head on Julaybib's knees and said: "O God, this one is of
me, and I am of him."261 He had discovered Julaybib's essential virtue and
foreseen his future service for Islam.
The conquest of Khaybar was an occasion for the Messenger to
demonstrate his unique ability to recognize each Muslim's potential,
skills, and shortcomings. When the siege was prolonged, he declared:
"Tomorrow I will hand the standard to one who loves God and His Messenger
and is loved by them."262 This was a great honor, and all Companions earn-
estly hoped for it. He gave it to 'Ali, despite his youth, because of his
great military and leadership skills. He took the standard and conquered
the formidable stronghold of Khaybar.
Whoever the Messenger gave a job to performed it successfully. For
example, he described Khalid ibn Walid as "a sword of God";263 Khalid
260.Muslim, "Musafirin," 294; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4:112.
261.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 131.
262.Bukhari, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 9; Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 34.
263.Bukhari, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 25.
239

--- Sayfa 241 ---
was never defeated. Besides such great soldiers and invincible com-
manders as Qa'qa'a, Hamza, and Sa'd, the Messenger made 'Usama ibn
Zayd commander over a great army containing such leading Muslims as
Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, Talha, and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. 'Usama was
the approximately 17-year-old son of Zayd, the Messenger's black eman-
cipated slave. His father had commanded the Muslim army at Mu'ta
against the Byzantines, and was martyred.
The Messenger was 25 when he married Khadija bint Khuwaylid, a
widow 15 years his senior. He did not marry another woman until her
death in the tenth year of his Prophethood. All of his subsequent mar-
riages, after the age of 53, were directly related to his mission. One im-
portant reason for this was that each wife had a different character and
temperament, and so could convey to other Muslim women Islam's rules
for women. Each one served as a guide and teacher for womanhood.
Even such leading figures in subsequent generations as Masruq, Tawus
ibn Kaysan, and Ata' ibn Rabah benefited considerably from them. The
science of hadith is especially indebted to 'A'isha, who related more than
5,000 Traditions from the Messenger and was a great jurist.
Subsequent events proved how wise and apt were the Messenger's the
choices, not least in the matter of marriage.
240

--- Sayfa 242 ---
His Wisdom
Leaders gain the love and trust of their people and are followed by them
in proportion to their ability to solve their problems. These can be per-
sonal or public, or related to individual's private life, or the community's
social, economic, and political affairs.
Some leaders resort to force and terror, or sanctions or punishments
(i.e., exile, imprisonment, loss of citizenship rights), torture, or spy into
private affairs to solve their problems. But such solutions have only
short-term benefits. In addition, they create a vicious circle in which the
more people struggle to solve problems by such means, the more they
entangle themselves in them.
The Messenger solved all problems so skillfully and easily that no one
challenged him. Although his people were by nature quarrelsome, ignor-
ant, wild, and rebellious, he delivered a Message to them that was so
grave that If We had sent down this Qur'an onto a mountain, you would
have seen it humbled and rent asunder out of fear of God (59:21). He trans-
formed them into a harmonious community of peace, happiness, know-
ledge, and good morals. Reflect closely upon the utopias imagined in the
West, such as The Republic (Plato), Utopia (Thomas Moore), and Civitas
Solis (T. Campanella), and you will see that, in essence, they dreamed of
Madina during the time of Prophet Muhammad. Humanity has never
witnessed the equal of that society.
In the first volume, we described how he prevented an imminent clan
war among the Quraysh while repairing the Ka'ba,264 and how he pre-
vented a possible disaster after the Battle of Hunayn.265 In addition, he
264.Each clan claimed the honor of reinserting the sacred Black Stone in its place.
Requested by the tribe to solve this problem, the future Prophet of Islam spread his
mantle on a piece of cloth on the ground and, putting the Black Stone on it, invited
the chiefs of the four major clans entrusted with repairing the Ka'ba to each take one
corner of the cloth. When they raised the Black Stone to the spot where it was to be
inserted, he took it and inserted it firmly in itsposition. (I think it will be better to
publish this book in one volume, and therefore refer such information (as given in
footnotes 3, 4 and the like) to the pages where they are told.
265.Some Ansar were not happy with the way the Prophet divided the spoils after this
battle, which occurred soon after Makka was conquered. The Prophet gave large
amounts of booty to the new Makkan Muslims to strengthen their faith. To avoid a
communal split, he called the Ansar together and reminded them of what he had
bought them, how they had received him, and that he would always be with them.
When he asked them if they still wanted the booty, they answered in unison that all
they wanted was for him to stay with them.
241

--- Sayfa 243 ---
skillfully solved an impending Emigrant—Ansar conflict while returning
from fighting the Banu Mustaliq. When an internal clash nearly broke
out when the army halted by a well, the Messenger immediately gave
the order to march.
242

--- Sayfa 244 ---
Merging Two Different Communities
The
emigration
to
Madina
marks
a
turning
point
for
Prophet
Muhammad and for Islam. Belief, emigration, and holy struggle are
three pillars of a single, sacred truth; three spouts of a fountain from
which the water of life flows for the soldiers of truth. After drinking,
they convey their message without becoming wearied and, when the op-
position cannot be overcome, set out for a new land without regard for
home, property, and family. The Prophet's emigration is so significant
and sanctified that the virtuous people around him were praised by God
as remain known as "the Emigrants" (Muhajirun). Those who welcomed
them so warmly to Madina are known as "the Helpers" (Ansar). The Islam-
ic calendar begins with this event.
Despite its significance, emigration is a difficult undertaking. When
the Muslims resettle in Madina after years of persecution, they were des-
titute. Moreover, some were extremely poor, and others, who had earned
their lives by trade, had no capital. The Muslims of Madina were mostly
farmers, and the city's commercial life was controlled by Jews. Another
serious problem was that just before the Messenger's arrival, the Madin-
ans had decided to make 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul their chief. This
plan naturally was abandoned, which made him a bitter enemy of the
Messenger and an important foe. The Makkan polytheists still wanted to
defeat the Prophet, and worked with him to achieve their goal. He told
them: "Don't worry if he spreads Islam here. The main danger is that he might
ally with the Christians and Jews against paganism. That is the real threat."
After he settled in Madina, the Messenger helped his people build a
mosque. The importance of the mosque for the Muslim community's col-
lective life is unquestionable. They meet there five times a day and, in
the Presence of God, their Master, Creator, and Sustainer, increase in be-
lief and submission to Him, the Prophet and Islam, and strengthen their
solidarity. Especially in the first centuries of Islam, mosques functioned
as places of worship and as centers of learning. The Prophet's Mosque in
Madina was, in the time of the Prophet himself and his immediate polit-
ical successors, also the center of government.
Immediately after settling in Madina, the Messenger established broth-
erhood between Muslims, particularly between the Emigrants and the
Helpers. They became very close to each other. For example, Sa'd ibn
Rabi' took his Emigrant "brother" 'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Awf home and
said: "Brother, you have left everything in Makka. This house, with everything
in it, belongs to both of us. You don't have a wife here; I have two. Whichever of
243

--- Sayfa 245 ---
them you like, I'll divorce her so that you may marry her." 'Abd al-Rahman
answered him in tears: "Brother, may God bless you with your wife!
Please show me to the city bazaar so that I may do some business."266
This brotherhood was so deep, sincere, and strong that the Helpers
shared everything with the Emigrants. This lasted for some time.
However, when the Emigrants had become accustomed to their new en-
vironment, one day they asked the Messenger: "O Messenger of God. We
emigrated here purely for the sake of God. But our Helper brothers are so good to
us that we fear we will consume in this world the reward of our good deeds,
which we expect to get in the Hereafter. Also, we feel very indebted to them.
Please ask them to let us earn our own living."
The Messenger sent for the Helpers and told them of the situation. The
Helpers unanimously objected, finding it unbearable to be separated
from their brothers. In the end, to spare the Emigrants' feeling of in-
debtedness, the Helpers agreed that the Emigrants would work in their
fields and gardens in return for wages until they could build their own
houses.267
As a second step in solving immediate problems, the Messenger
signed a pact with the Jewish community in Madina. This document,
which some scholars describe as Madina's first constitution, confeder-
ated the Muslims and Jews as two separate, independent communit-
ies.268 Since the Messenger took the initiative in making this pact and ac-
ted as the final arbiter in all disputes, Madina came under Muslim
control.
To guarantee Muslims' security within this city-state, the Messenger
ordered the establishment of a new bazaar. Until then, Madina's econom-
ic life had been controlled by the Jewish community. After this, Jewish
economic domination began to decline, for they no longer monopolized
Madina's commerce.
While the Muslim community was establishing itself and growing in
strength, it was forced to respond to internal and external attacks. After
their victory of Badr, the Muslims fought the Makkans again at the foot
of Mount Uhud. Their easy victory during the battle's first part was fol-
lowed, unfortunately, by a reverse when the archers' disregarded the
Prophet's instructions. Seventy Muslims were martyred, and the Messen-
ger was wounded. The Muslim army took shelter on the mountain and
266.Bukhari, "Manaqib al-Ansar," 3; Ibn Kathir, 3:279.
267.Bukhari, "Hiba," 35; Muslim, "Jihad," 70.
268.Ibn Hisham, 2:147.
244

--- Sayfa 246 ---
prepared to fight back. Lacking enough courage for a further attack, the
Makkan forces left. Nevertheless, they changed their mind halfway and
decided to march upon Madina. Informed of this, the Messenger mobil-
ized his troops. A single order was enough to accomplish this, even
though they were ill or wounded. His every call was a breath of life for
their souls, a breath that could revive old, rotten bones. Busiri says:
Were his value and greatness to be demonstrated by miracles,
The bones that have rotted away were revived by calling his name.
The half-crushed army set out to counter the enemy. Almost everyone
was wounded, but no one wanted to stay behind. In describing the situ-
ation, one Companion said: "Some Companions couldn't walk. They said:
'We want to be present at the front where the Messenger has ordered us to go.
Even if we cannot fight, we will stand there with spears in our hands.' They
were carried on other people's shoulders or backs." Seeing the Muslim army
marching toward them, Abu Sufyan ordered his troops to return to
Makka. In praising those heroes of Islam, the Qur'an says: Those to
whom the people said: "The people have gathered against you, therefore fear
them"; but it increased them in faith, and they said: "God is sufficient for us;
an excellent Guardian is He" (3:173).269
269.Bukhari, "Maghazi," 25; Ibn Sa'd, 2:42–9; Ibn Hisham, 3:99-111, 128.
245

--- Sayfa 247 ---
Consultation
The Messenger's wisdom was demonstrated when he consulted his
Companions. This practice is so important in Islam that he never reached
a decision, especially in public affairs, without it. Sometimes he even
held counsel about his personal affairs. To cite only a few examples:
• 'A'isha accompanied the Prophet on the Banu Mustaliq campaign. At
one halt, she lost her necklace and set out to find it. She returned to find
that the army had left without her, as the camel drivers thought she was
in her litter. Safwan, charged with collecting what was lost or left behind
caravans, found her and brought her back to the army. In the ensuing
scandal, her fidelity was questioned, mainly by the Hypocrites.
The Messenger knew she was innocent. However, since the Hypocrites
used this incident to slander him, he consulted some of his Companions
like 'Umar and 'Ali. 'Umar said that 'A'isha was undoubtedly chaste and
pure, and that she had been slandered. When asked how he knew, he
replied: "O The Messenger, once you were praying. You stopped and explained
that Archangel Gabriel had come and informed you that there was some dirt in
your slippers. If there were some impurity in 'A'isha, God certainly would have
informed you."270 The Messenger, who once said: "Whoever takes counsel,
does not regret it in the end,"271 always consulted those who could give in-
formed advice on a particular matter.
• He consulted with his Companions before Badr, the first major post-
Emigration military encounter, about whether the Muslims should fight
the approaching Makkan army. The Muslim forces numbered 305 or 313,
while the Makkans numbered around one thousand. As mentioned, one
spokesman each for the Emigrants and the Helpers stood up and pro-
claimed their readiness to follow him wherever he might lead them.272
During his life, all Companions continually promised to follow him in
every step he took, and to carry out all of his orders. Despite this, the
Messenger consulted with them about almost every community-wide
matter so that this practice would become second nature.
• During Badr, the Muslim army was positioned somewhere on the
battlefield. Hubab ibn Mundhir, who was not a leading Companion,
stood up and said: "O Messenger, if God has not ordered you to assume this
place, let's arrange ourselves around the wells and then seal all but one to deny
270.Halabi, Insan al-'Uyun, 2:613.
271.Maythami, Majma' al-Zawa'id, 2:280.
272.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 3:162 ; Muslim, "Jihad," 83 ; Ibn Hisham, 2:266–7.
246

--- Sayfa 248 ---
water to the enemy. Set up your camp at the side of that open well (from which
we will take water), and we will encircle you." The Messenger adopted this
view.273
• In 5 ah, the Quraysh allied themselves with certain desert tribes and
the Jewish Banu Nadir, who had emigrated from Madina to Khaybar.
The Prophet, forewarned of their plans, asked for ideas about how to de-
feat the enemy offensive. Salman al-Farisi suggested digging a defensive
trench around Madina, a stratagem hitherto unknown to the Arabs. The
Messenger ordered it to be done. This war was forever after known as
the Battle of the Trench (or Ditch).274
• The Muslims found the Treaty of Hudaybiya unpalatable, and were
reluctant to obey the Prophet's order to sacrifice their sacrificial animals
without making the pilgrimage. (One condition of the treaty was that
they could not enter Makka that year.) The Messenger consulted with his
wife Umm Salama. She replied: "O Messenger, don't repeat your order lest
they disobey you and perish. Sacrifice your own animals and take off your pil-
grim dress (ihram). When they understand the order is decisive, they'll obey you
without hesitation." The Messenger did as she suggested.
273.Ibn Hisham, 2:272.
274.Ibn Hisham, 3:235; Ibn Sa'd, 2:66.
247

--- Sayfa 249 ---
A Manifest Victory: The Treaty of Hudaybiya
The Messenger was a man of action. He never hesitated about putting
his plans or decisions into action, for that would confuse and demoralize
his followers. The Messenger always acted with deliberation and consul-
ted others. But once he had decided or planned something, he carried it
out immediately and had no second thoughts or a reason to regret his
decision. Before acting, he took the necessary precautions, considered the
probabilities, and consulted available experts. The ensuing finality of his
decisions was an important reason for his victories and why his Com-
panions followed him so completely.
One event worthy of further elaboration is the Treaty of Hudaybiya. In
6 ah, the Messenger told his Companions that he had dreamed they
would shortly enter the Holy Mosque in Makka in security, with their
heads shaved or their hair cut short. His Companions, especially the
Emigrants, were delighted. During that year, the Prophet set out for
Makka with 1,500 unarmed men in pilgrim dress (ihram).
Informed of this event, the Quraysh armed themselves and the neigh-
boring tribes to keep the Muslims out of Makka. They sent some 200 sol-
diers, led by Khalid ibn Walid and Ikrima ibn Abu Jahl, as far as Qura'
al-Ghamim. Seeing the Muslims approaching, they returned to Makka to
spread the news. When the Muslims reached Hudaybiya, about 12 miles
from Makka, the Messenger told them to halt. Learning that there was a
shortage of water, he threw an arrow down Hudaybiya's only well.
Water began to gush and fill the well. Everyone drank some, performed
wudu', and filled their water-skins.275
As the Makkans refused to let the Muslims enter Makka, the Messen-
ger sent Budayl ibn Warqa, a man from the Khuda'a tribe (the Muslims'
ally), to announce that the Muslims had come for pilgrimage and thus
were unarmed. The Quraysh, in reply, sent 'Urwa ibn Mas'ud al-Thaqafi.
While talking to the Messenger 'Urwa tried to grasp his beard, a sign of
jesting. Mughira ibn Shu'ba struck his hand, saying he would cut it off if
'Urwa tried such a thing again, for his hand was impure.
Mughira was 'Urwa's cousin, and had accepted Islam about 2 months
earlier. In fact, only a few months ago 'Urwa had paid the blood money
for a crime Mughira had committed. How Islam had changed Mughira!
The Companions' commitment to their cause and devotion to the Mes-
senger shocked 'Urwa, who returned to the Quraysh and said: "I have
275.Muslim, Hadith No.1834; Bukhari, 4:256.
248

--- Sayfa 250 ---
visited Chosroes, Caesar, and the Negus. None of their subjects are so devoted to
their rulers as his Companions are to Muhammad. I advise you not to struggle
with him."276
The Quraysh did not heed his advice. Nor did they give a warm wel-
come to Kharash ibn Umayya, whom the Messenger sent after 'Urwa.
Kharash was followed by 'Uthman ibn 'Affan, who had powerful relat-
ives among the Quraysh. Although 'Uthman came to negotiate with the
Makkans, they imprisoned him. When he did not return at the expected
time, rumors circulated that he had been killed. At this point, the Proph-
et, sitting under a tree, took an oath from his Companions that they
would hold together and fight to the death. He represented the absent
'Uthman by proxy in this oath. Only Jadd ibn Qays, who hid behind a
camel, did not take it. The revelation that came on this occasion reads:
God was well pleased with the believers when they were swearing allegiance to
you under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down
peace of reassurance on them, and has rewarded them with a near victory
(48:18).
In that moment of tension, a cloud of dust appeared in the distance.
This turned out to be a Makkan delegation led by Suhayl ibn 'Amr.
When the Messenger learned this, he took his name ("easiness") as a good
omen and told his Companions: "The situation has eased." Eventually, the
Quraysh agreed to a truce and the Treaty of Hudaybiya was concluded.
Under this treaty, the Prophet and his followers could make pilgrim-
age the following year, not this one, at which time the Makkans would
vacate the city for 3 days The treaty also stipulated a 10-year truce, that
people or tribes could join or ally themselves with whoever they wished,
and that Qurayshi subjects or dependents who defected to Madina
would be returned. This last condition was not reciprocal, and thus was
opposed in the Muslim camp. It shocked people like 'Umar, who ques-
tioned the Messenger about it. However, it really was of little import-
ance. Muslims sent back to Makka were not likely to renounce Islam; on
the contrary, they would be agents of change within Makka.
Just before the treaty was signed, Abu Jandal, Suhayl's son, arrived in
chains and asked to join the Muslims. The Messenger had to return him
to his father in tears. However, he whispered to him: "God will shortly
save you and those of your like."277
276.Bukhari, 3:180; Ibn Hanbal, 4:324; Tabari, 3:75.
277.Ibn Hisham, 3:321–333; Ibn Kathir, 4:188-193.
249

--- Sayfa 251 ---
Shortly after the treaty was signed, 'Utba ibn Asid (also known as Abu
Basir) defected to Madina. The Quraysh sent two men to demand his re-
turn. On their way back to Makka, Abu Basir escaped, killed one man
and wounded the other. The Messenger, citing the treaty's terms, did not
allow him to stay in Madina. So he settled at Iyss, a place on the road
from Makka to Syria. The Muslims held in Makka began to join Abu
Basir. As this settlement grew, the Makkans perceived a potential threat
to their trade route. This forced them to ask the Messenger to annul the
relevant term and admit defecting Makkans to Madina.
The Qur'an called the Treaty of Hudaybiya "a manifest victory": We
have given you a manifest victory (48:1). This proved true for several
reasons, among them:
• By signing this treaty after years of conflict, the Quraysh admited
that the Muslims were their equals. In effect, they gave up their struggle
but did not admit it to themselves. Seeing the Makkans deal with the
Prophet as an equal and a ruler, a rising tide of converts flowed toward
Madina from all over Arabia.
• Many Qurayshis would benefit from the resulting peace by finally
reflecting on what was going on. Such leading Qurayshis as Khalid ibn
Walid, 'Amr ibn al-'As, and 'Uthman ibn Talha, all famous for their milit-
ary and political skills, accepted Islam. 'Uthman was the person entrus-
ted with the Ka'ba's keys, and after the conquest of Makka the Messenger
honored him with the same task.
• The Quraysh used to regard the Ka'ba as their exclusive property,
and made its visitors pay them a tribute. By not subjecting the Muslims'
deferred pilgrimage to this condition, the Quraysh unwittingly ended
their monopoly. The bedouin tribes now realized that the Quraysh had
no right to claim exclusive ownership.
• At the time, there were Muslim men and women living in Makka.
Not everyone in Madina knew who they were. Some were serving the
Messenger as spies. Had a fight taken place in Makka, the victorious
Muslim army might have killed some of them. This would have caused
great personal anguish, as well as the martyrdom or identification of the
Prophet's spies. The treaty prevented such a disaster.
The Qur'an points to this fact: He restrained their hands from you, and
your hands from them, in the hollow of Makka, after He made you vic-
tors over them. God sees the things you do. They are the ones who disbe-
lieved, and banned you from the Holy Mosque, and hindered the sacrifi-
cial animals from reaching their place of sacrifice. If it had not been for
250

--- Sayfa 252 ---
certain believing men and believing women (in Makka) whom you knew
not—lest you should trample them and thus incur guilt for them un-
knowingly; that God may admit into His Mercy whom He will—(the be-
lievers and unbelievers) had been clearly separated, then We would have
chastised the unbelievers among them with a painful chastisement
(48:24–25).
• The Prophet performed the minor pilgrimage the following year.
The assertion: "There is no god but God, and Muhammad is the Messenger of
God," rang throughout Makka. The Quraysh, camped on Abu Qubays
Hill, heard this portent of Islam's coming triumph. This was, in fact,
God's fulfilling the vision He had given to His Messenger: God has indeed
fulfilled the vision He vouchsafed to His Messenger: You shall enter the Holy
Mosque, if God wills, in security, your heads shaved, your hair cut short, not
fearing. He knew what you knew not, and, granted, besides this, a nigh victory
(48:27).
• The treaty allowed the Messenger to deal with others. In the post-
treaty expeditions, the Muslims conquered the formidable Jewish cit-
adels of Khaybar, telling them either to convert or accept Muslim rule by
paying tribute in lieu of protection (jizya). Their neighbours, as well as
other Arab tribes, were impressed with the Islamic state's growing
strength.
The Muslims faithfully observed the treaty's terms; however, a tribe al-
lied to the Makkans did not. The Banu Bakr attacked the Banu Khuda'a,
who were allied with the Prophet. So in December 629, the Messenger
marched a 10,000-man army against Makka, and captured it with almost
no resistance on the first day of the new year. The Ka'ba was purified of
idols and, over the next couple of days, the Makkans accepted Islam.
This was due to happen because:
He has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth, that
He may uplift it above every religion. God suffices as a witness. Muhammad is
the Messenger of God, and those who are with him are hard against the unbe-
lievers, merciful to one another. You see them bowing, prostrating, seeking grace
from God and (His) good pleasure. Their mark is on their faces, the trace of pros-
tration. That is their likeness in the Torah, and their likeness in the Gospel is: as
a seed that puts forth its shoot, and strengthens it, and it grows stout and rises
straight upon its stalk, pleasing the sowers, that through them He may enrage
the unbelievers. God has promised those of them who believe and do deeds of
righteousness forgiveness and a mighty wage (48.28–29).
251

--- Sayfa 253 ---
Ending Racism
Racism is one of our age's severest problems. Everyone has heard of how
black Africans were transported across the Atlantic Ocean in specially
designed ships, thought of and treated exactly like livestock. They were
enslaved, forced to change their names and religion and language, were
never entitled even to hope for true freedom, and were denied all human
rights. The West's attitude toward non-Westerners remained unchanged
until recent times. As a result, the political and social condition of Afric-
ans, even in the case of their descendents who lived in the West amidst
non-black Americans or Europeans as theoretically equal fellow citizens,
remained second-class (or even lower) citizens.
When the Messenger was raised as a Prophet, such racism was preval-
ent in Makka in the guise of tribalism. The Quraysh considered them-
selves (in particular) and Arabs (in general) superior to all other people.
The Messenger came with the Divine Message and proclaimed that: "No
Arab is superior to a non-Arab, and no white person is superior to a black per-
son";278 Superiority is by righteousness and devotion to God alone
(49:13); and: "Even if a black Abyssinian Muslim were to rule over
Muslims, he should be obeyed."279
The Messenger eradicated color-based racism and discrimination so
successfully that, for example, 'Umar once said of Bilal, who was black:
"Bilal is our master, and was emancipated by our master Abu Bakr."280 Zayd
ibn Haritha, a black slave emancipated by the Messenger, was his adop-
ted son before the Revelation banned such adoption. The Prophet mar-
ried him to Zaynab bint Jahsh, one of the noblest (and non-black) Arab
and Muslim women. In addition, he appointed Zayd commander of the
Muslim army sent against the Byzantine Empire, even though it in-
cluded such leading Companions as Abu Bakr, 'Umar, Ja'far ibn Abu
Talib (the Messenger's cousin), and Khalid ibn Walid (the invincible gen-
eral of the age).281 The Prophet appointed Zayd's son Usama to com-
mand the army he formed just before his death. Included therein were
such leading Companions as Abu Bakr, 'Umar, Khalid, Abu 'Ubayda,
Talha, and Zubayr. This established in the Muslims' hearts and minds
that superiority is not by birth or color or blood, but by righteousness
and devotion to God.
278.Ibn Hanbal, 5:441.
279.Muslim, " 'Imara," 37.
280.Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, 1:165.
281.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 63.
252

--- Sayfa 254 ---
During his caliphate, 'Umar paid Usama a higher salary than his own
son, 'Abd Allah. When his son asked why, 'Umar replied: "My son, I do so
because I know the Messenger loved Usama's father more than me, and Usama
more than you."282
282.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 4:70; Ibn Hajar, 1:564.
253

--- Sayfa 255 ---
The Last Word
Prophet Muhammad had all the necessary leadership qualities for suc-
cess in every aspect of life. But, more importantly, he was able to lead his
community to success in every field. He is the source from which flowed
all later developments related to command, statecraft, religion, spiritual
development, and so on in the Muslim world.
In general, leaders should have the following qualities:
• Realism. Their messages and demands should not contradict reality.
They should understand prevailing conditions as they actually are, and
be aware of any advantages and disadvantages.
• Absolute belief in their message. Their conviction should never fal-
ter, and they should never renounce their mission.
• Personal courage. Even if left alone, they should have enough cour-
age to persevere. When some of his pursuers reached the mouth of the
cave in which they were hiding, Abu Bakr was afraid something would
happen to the Messenger. However, the Prophet only said: Don't worry,
for God is with us (9:40).
• Strong willpower and resolve. They should never experience even
one moment of hopelessness.
• Awareness of personal responsibility. Everything should be directed
toward fulfilling this responsibility. In no way should they be seduced
by the world's charms and life's attractions.
• Far-sighted and goal-centered. Leaders should be able to discern and
plan for potential developments. They should know how to evaluate the
past, present, and future to reach a new synthesis. Those who frequently
change their opinions only spread chaos in the community.
• Personal knowledge of each follower. Leaders should be fully aware
of each follower's disposition, character, abilities, shortcomings, ambi-
tions, and weak points. If they lack this knowledge, how can they fill va-
cant posts with the appropriate people?
• Strong character and praiseworthy virtues. Leaders should be de-
termined but flexible while carrying out decisions, and know when to be
unyielding and implacable or relenting and compassionate. They should
know when to be earnest and dignified, when to be modest, and always
be upright, truthful, trustworthy, and just.
• No worldly ambitions or abuse of authority. Leaders should live like
the
poorest
members
of
their
community.
They
should
never
254

--- Sayfa 256 ---
discriminate among their subjects; rather, they should strive to love
them, prefer them over themselves, and act so that their people will love
them sincerely. They should be faithful to their community, and secure
their community's loyalty and devotion in return.
The Messenger possessed all of these qualities, and many more as
well. To cite only a few examples, he never even thought of abandoning
his mission when confronted with great hostility and tempting bribes.
Instead, he would tell them: "Say: 'There is no god but God,' and prosper in
both worlds."283 When his Companions complained about the harsh con-
ditions and persecution in Makka, he answered: "You show haste. A day
will come and a woman will travel from Hira [a town in southern Iraq]
to Makka alone on her camel (in security) and circumambulate the Ka'ba
as an act of worship, and the treasuries of the Sassanid Emperor will be
captured by my community."284
Once the Makkan leaders came to him and said: "If you meet with us on
a day when others, especially those poor ones, are not present, we may talk to
you about accepting your religion." They despised poor Muslims like Bilal,
'Ammar, and Habbab, and desired special treatment. The Messenger re-
jected such proposals without a second thought. The verses revealed ad-
dressed him as follows: Send not away those who call on their Master morn-
ing and evening, seeking His Face (6:52), and Persevere together with those
who call on their Master morning and evening, seeking His Face (18:28).
283.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 1; Muslim, "Iman," 355.
284.Bukhari, "Manaqib, " 25.
255

--- Sayfa 257 ---
Chapter 9
Other Dimensions of His Prophethood
His Prayers and Supplications
The Messenger always prayed to God before any action. When we look
through the books of Tradition (Hadith), we find no case in which he did
not pray. As mentioned earlier, prayer is a mystery of servanthood to
God, and the Messenger is the foremost in servanthood. This is made
clear with every repetition of the declaration of faith: "I bear witness there
is no god but God; I also bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and Mes-
senger." Note that he is called servant before Messenger. Whatever he in-
tended to do, he referred it to God through prayer.
God is the Creator of us and whatever we do. Although we should
take necessary precautions and follow precedents to accomplish things
in this material world, where cause and effect has a special place, we
should never forget that everything ultimately depends on God for its
existence. Therefore, we must combine action and prayer. This is also re-
quired by our belief in God's Unity.
The Messenger's knowledge of God can never be equaled. As a result,
he was the foremost in love of, and paradoxically, in fear of Him. He was
perfectly conscious that everything depends on God for its existence and
subsistence. Whatever God wills, happens: When He wills a thing, His
command is to say to it "Be," and it is (36:82). Things exist and the universe
operates according to the laws established by God and the fulfillment of
prerequisites. Fully aware of this, the Messenger did what he had to and
then, combining action with prayer, left the result to God with absolute
confidence.
His supplications have been transmitted to us. When we read them,
we see that they have deep meaning and accord exactly with the sur-
rounding circumstances. They reflect profound belief, deep sincerity, ab-
solute submission and complete confidence. Some examples are given
below:
256

--- Sayfa 258 ---
• When you go to bed, perform wudu' as you do before daily prayers
and pray: "O God, hoping for (Your Mercy) and fearing (Your wrath), I submit
myself to You, refer my affairs to You, and take refuge in You. There is no
refuge or source of safety from Your wrath except You. I believe in the Book You
sent down, and the Prophet you raised."
• Without sins, a soul is like a polished mirror or a white piece of
cloth. Sins dirty the soul, and can be expunged only by repentance and
asking His forgiveness. The Prophet used to pray the following, even
though he was sinless: "O God, put between me and errors a distance as great
as that which you have put between East and West. O God, cleanse me of my er-
rors as a white garment is cleansed of dirt." The words used and the compar-
isons made in this prayer are so meaningful that their explanation could
fill a whole volume.
In addition to these supplications for specific cases, the Prophet also
left behind comprehensive supplications of various lengths. We present
some of them here:
• God, I ask You for all good, including what is at hand and what is
deferred, what I already know and what I don't know. I take refuge in
You from every evil, including what is at hand and what is deferred,
what I already know and what I don't know.
•God, nothing hinders what You grant, nor is anything granted that
You hinder. No wealthy one can do us good, as wealth belongs to You.
• God, I have not told anything, taken an oath, made a vow, or done
anything that You did not previously will. Whatever You willed is, and
whatever You didn't will is not. There is no strength or power save with
You, and You are indeed All-Powerful over everything.
• God, whatever prayer I have said, let it be for whomever You have
mercy, and whatever curse I have called down, let it be for whomever
You have cursed. Surely You are my Guardian in this world and the
Hereafter. Make me die as a Muslim, and include me among the
righteous.
• God, I ask You for contentment after misfortune, a peaceful life after
death, the pleasure of observing Your Face, and a desire to meet You. I
take refuge in You from wronging others and from being wronged, from
showing animosity and being subject to animosity, and from erring or
committing unforgivable sins. If You leave me to myself, you leave me in
weakness, need, sinfulness and error. I depend only on Your Mercy, so
forgive all my sins, for only You can do so. Accept my repentance, for
You are the Oft-Relenting, All-Compassionate.
257

--- Sayfa 259 ---
• God, You deserve most to be mentioned, and none but You deserve
to be worshipped. You are more helpful than anyone whose help may be
sought, more affectionate than every ruler, more generous than anyone
who may be asked for something, and more generous than anyone who
gives. You are the Monarch without partners, and the Unique One
without like. Everything is perishable except You. You are never obeyed
but by Your permission, and never disobeyed but within Your know-
ledge. When somebody obeys You, You reward them; when someone
disobeys You, You forgive them. You witness everything, being nearer to
it than any other witness; and protect everything, being nearer to it than
any other protector. You ordained the acts of all people and determined
their time of death. You know what is in every mind, and all secrets are
manifest to You. The lawful is what You have made lawful; the forbid-
den is what You have forbidden. Religion is what You have laid down;
the commandment is what You have decreed. The creation is Your cre-
ation, and the servants are Your servants. You are God, the All-Clement,
All-Compassionate. I ask You, for the sake of the light of Your Face, by
which the Heavens and Earth were illuminated, for the sake of every
right belonging to You, and for the sake of those who ask of You, to for-
give me just in this morning and just in this evening, and to protect me,
by Your Power, from Hellfire.
• God, I seek refuge in You from all knowledge that gives no benefit,
from a heart that does not fear You, from an unsatisfied soul, and from
prayer that cannot be answered.
• God, I ask You for steadfastness in my affairs, resolution in guid-
ance, gratitude for Your bounties and acceptable service to You, and a
truthful tongue and a sound heart. I seek refuge in You from the evil of
what You know. I ask You for the good of what You know, and Your for-
giveness for what You already know. Surely You are the Knower of the
Unseen.
• God, I ask You to enable me to do good, to refrain from vice, to love
the poor, and to forgive me and have mercy on me. When You will
people's deviation and dissension and disorder in public life, make me
die before taking part in that disorder. I ask You for Your love and for
the love of whom You love, and the love of the acts that will make me
nearer to Your love.
• God, I ask You for the good in the beginning and in the end, in its
most comprehensive form with its beginning and result, its manifest and
secret kinds, and for the highest rank in Paradise.
258

--- Sayfa 260 ---
• God, help me remember and mention You, thank You, and worship
You most properly.
• God, I ask You for guidance, fear of You, chastity, and independence
of others.
• God, bring all of our affairs to a good conclusion, protect us from
disgrace and ignominy in the world, and from being tormented in the
Hereafter.
• God, we ask You for all of the good for which Your Prophet
Muhammad asked You, and seek refuge in You from every evil from
which Your Prophet Muhammad sought refuge in You.
Prayer was a fundamental part of the Prophet's life. All the supplica-
tions quoted, together with many, have become keys in the hands of
such great saints as Abu Hasan al-Shadhili, Ahmad al-Badawi, Ahmad
al-Rifa'i, and 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, who used them to knock on the door
of God's Mercy.
259

--- Sayfa 261 ---
The Prophet of Universal Mercy
The beginning of existence was an act of mercy and compassion without
which the universe would be in chaos. Everything came into existence
through compassion, and by compassion it continues to exist in
harmony.
Muslim sages say that the universe is the All-Compassionate One's
breath. In other words, the universe was created to manifest the Divine
Name the All-Compassionate. Its subsistence depends on the same
Name. This Name manifests itself first as the All-Provider, so that all liv-
ing creatures can receive the food or nourishment they need to survive.
Life is God Almighty's foremost and most manifest blessing, and the
true and everlasting life is that of the Hereafter. Since we can deserve
this life by pleasing God, He sent Prophets and revealed Scriptures out
of His compassion for humanity. For this reason, while mentioning His
blessings upon humanity in Surat al-Rahman (the All-Merciful), He begins:
Al-Rahman. He taught the Qur'an, created humanity, and taught it speech
(55:1-4).
All aspects of this life are a rehearsal for the afterlife, and every
creature is engaged in action toward this end. Order is evident in every
effort, and compassion resides in every achievement. Some "natural"
events or social convulsions may seem disagreeable at first, but we
should not regard them as incompatible with compassion. They are like
dark clouds or lightning and thunder that, although frightening, never-
theless bring us good tidings of rain. Thus the whole universe praises the
All-Compassionate.
Muslim sages consider the Qur'an a "created book" issuing from His At-
tribute of Will. To write a book that people could not understand would
be pointless. Therefore, He created Muhammad to tell people what the
universe really means, and to relay His Commandments in the Qur'an
through Muhammad so that we can know what is expected of us. Only
by following these Commandments can we attain an eternal life of hap-
piness. The Qur'an is the ultimate and most comprehensive Divine
Revelation; Islam is the last, perfected, and universal form of Divine Reli-
gion; and Prophet Muhammad is the embodiment of Divine Compas-
sion, one sent by God as a mercy for all worlds.
Prophet Muhammad is like a spring of pure water in the heart of a
desert, a source of light in an all-enveloping darkness. Whoever appeals
to this spring can take as much water as needed to quench their thirst, to
260

--- Sayfa 262 ---
become purified of all their sins, and to become illumined with the light
of belief. Mercy was like a magic key in his hands, for with it he opened
hearts that were so hardened and rusty that no one thought they could
be opened. But he did even more: he lit a torch of belief in them.
The Messenger preached Islam, the religion of universal mercy.
However, some self-proclaimed humanists say that Islam is "a religion of
the sword." This is completely wrong. They make a great deal of noise
when animals are killed or when one of their own is harmed, but are si-
lent when Muslims are massacred. Their world is built on personal in-
terest. It should be pointed out that abusing the feeling of compassion is
just as harmful—sometimes even more harmful—than having no com-
passion at all.
Amputating a gangrenous limb is an act of compassion for the whole
body. Likewise oxygen and hydrogen, when mixed in the proper ratios,
form water, a most vital substance. When this ratio changes, however,
each element resumes its original combustible identity.
Similarly, it is quite important to apportion compassion and to identify
who deserves it, for "compassion for a wolf sharpens its appetite, and not be-
ing content with what it receives, it demands even more." Compassion for
wrongdoers makes them more aggressive and encourages them to work
against others. In fact, true compassion requires that such people be pre-
vented from doing wrong. When the Messenger told his Companions to
help people when they were just and unjust, they asked him to explain
this seeming paradox. He replied: "You help such people by preventing them
from engaging in injustice." So, compassion requires that those who cause
trouble either be deprived of their means for, or prevented from, doing
so. Otherwise, they eventually will take control and do as they please.
The Messenger's compassion encompassed every creature. In his role
as an invincible commander and able statesman, he knew allowing
blood-stained, blood-thirsty people to control others would be the most
terrible form of tyranny imaginable. Therefore, out of compassion, he re-
quired that lambs should be able to live in security against wolves' at-
tacks. He desired, of course, that everyone be guided. In fact, this was his
greatest concern: Yet it may be, if they believe not in this Message, you will
consume yourself, following after them, with grief (18:6).
But how should he deal with those who persisted in unbelief and
fought him to destroy both him and his Message? He had to fight such
people, for universal compassion encompasses every creature. This is
261

--- Sayfa 263 ---
why, when he was wounded severely at Uhud, he raised his hands and
prayed: "O God, forgive my people, for they don't know."285
The Makkans, his own people, inflicted so much suffering on him that
he finally emigrated to Madina. Even after that, the next 5 years were far
from peaceful. However, when he conquered Makka without bloodshed
in the twenty-first year of his Prophethood, he asked the Makkan unbe-
lievers: "How do you expect me to treat you?" They responded unanim-
ously: "You are a noble one, the son of a noble one." He then told them
his decision: "You may leave, for no reproach this day shall be on you.
May
God
forgive
you.
He
is
the
Most
Compassionate
of
the
Compassionate."286
Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror said the same thing to the defeated
Byzantines after conquering Istanbul 825 years later. Such is the univer-
sal compassion of Islam.
The Messenger displayed the highest degree of compassion toward
the believers: There has come to you a Messenger from among yourselves;
grievous to him is your suffering; anxious is he over you, full of concern for you,
for the believers full of pity, compassionate (9:128). He lowered unto believers
his wing of tenderness through mercy (15:88), and was the guardian of believ-
ers and nearer to them than their selves (33:6). When one of his Companions
died, he asked those at the funeral if the deceased had left any debts. On
learning that he had, the Prophet mentioned the above verse and an-
nounced that the creditors should come to him for repayment.287
His compassion even encompassed the Hypocrites and unbelievers.
He knew who the Hypocrites were, but never identified them, for this
would have deprived them of the rights of full citizenship they had
gained by their outward confession of faith and practice. Since they lived
among Muslims, their unbelief in eternal life may have been reduced or
changed to doubt, thus diminishing their fear of death and the pain
caused by the assertion of eternal non-existence after death.
God did not send a collective destruction upon the unbelievers, al-
though He had eradicated many such people in the past: But God would
never chastise them while you were among them; God would never chastise
them as they begged forgiveness (8:33). This verse refers to unbelievers of
whatever time. God will not destroy peoples altogether as long as those
who follow the Messenger are alive. Besides, He has left the door of
285.Bukhari, "Anbiya'," 54; Muslim, "Jihad," 104.
286.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 4:55; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 4:344.
287.Muslim, "Fara'iz," 14; Bukhari, "Istiqraz," 11.
262

--- Sayfa 264 ---
repentance open until the Last Day. Anyone can accept Islam or ask
God's forgiveness, regardless of how sinful they consider themselves to
be.
For this reason, a Muslim's enmity toward unbelievers is a form of
pity. When 'Umar saw an 80-year-old priest, he sat down and sobbed.
When asked why he did so, he replied: "God assigned him so long a life
span, but he has not been able to find the true path." 'Umar was a disciple of
the Messenger, who said: "I was not sent to call down curses on people, but as
a mercy" and
I am Muhammad, and Ahmad (praised one), and Muqaffi (the Last Prophet);
I am Hashir (the final Prophet in whose presence the dead will be resurrected);
the Prophet of repentance (the Prophet for whom the door of repentance will al-
ways remain open), and the Prophet of mercy.
Archangel Gabriel also benefited from the mercy of the Qur'an. Once
the Prophet asked Gabriel whether he had any share in the mercy con-
tained in the Qur'an. Gabriel replied that he did, and explained: "I was
not certain about my end. However, when the verse: (One) obeyed, and
moreover, trustworthy and secured (81:21) was revealed, I felt secure about it."
When Ma'iz was punished for fornication, a Companion verbally abused
him. The Messenger frowned at him and said: "You have backbitten your
friend. His repentance and asking God's pardon for his sin would be
enough to forgive all the sinners in the world."288
The Messenger was particularly compassionate toward children.
Whenever he saw a child crying, he sat beside him or her and shared his
or her feelings. He felt the pain of a mother for her child more than the
mother herself. Once he said: "I stand in prayer and wish to prolong it.
However, I hear a child cry and shorten the prayer to lessen the mother's
anxiety."
He took children in his arms and hugged them. Once when hugging
his beloved grandsons Hasan and Hussayn, Aqra ibn Habis told him: "I
have 10 children, and have never kissed any of them." The Messenger respon-
ded: "One without pity for others is not pitied." According to another ver-
sion, he said or added: "What can I do for you if God has removed compassion
from you?"
Once, he said: "Pity those on Earth so that those in the Heavens will pity
you." Once when Sa'd ibn 'Ubada became ill, the Messenger visited him
at home and, seeing his faithful Companion in a pitiful state, began to
288.Muslim, "Hudud," 17-23; Bukhari, "Hudud," 28.
263

--- Sayfa 265 ---
cry. He said: "God does not punish because of tears or grief, but He punishes
because of this," and he pointed to his tongue.289 When 'Uthman ibn
Mad'un died, he wept profusely. During the funeral, a woman remarked:
"'Uthman flew like a bird to Paradise." Even in that mournful state, the
Prophet did not lose his balance and corrected the woman: "How do you
know this? Even I don't know this, and I am a Prophet."
A member of the Banu Muqarrin clan once beat his maidservant. She
informed the Messenger, who sent for the master. He said: "You have
beaten her without any justifiable right. Free her."290 Freeing a slave free was
far better for the master than being punished in the Hereafter because of
that act. The Messenger always protected and supported widows,
orphans, the poor and disabled even before announcing his Prophet-
hood. When he returned home in excitement from Mount Hira after the
first Revelation, his wife Khadija told him: "I hope you will be the Prophet of
this Umma, for you always tell the truth, fulfill your trust, support your relat-
ives, help the poor and weak, and feed guests."291
His compassion even encompassed animals. We hear from him: "A
prostitute was guided to truth by God and ultimately went to Paradise because
she gave water to a dog dying of thirst. Another woman was sent to Hell because
she left a cat to die of hunger." Once while returning from a military cam-
paign, a few Companions removed some young birds from their nest to
stroke them. The mother bird came back and, not finding its babies,
began to fly around screeching. When told of this, the Messenger became
angry and ordered the birds to be put back in the nest.292
Once he told his Companions that God reproached an earlier Prophet
for setting fire to a nest of ants.293 While in Mina, some of his Compan-
ions attacked a snake in order to kill it. However, it managed to escape.
Watching this from afar, the Messenger remarked: "It was saved from your
evil, as you were from its evil." Ibn 'Abbas reported that when the Messen-
ger saw a man sharpening his knife directly before the sheep to be
slaughtered, he asked: "Do you want to kill it many times?"
'Abd Allah ibn Ja'far narrates: "The Messenger went to a garden in Madina
with a few Companions. A very scrawny camel was in a corner. Seeing the
289.Bukhari, "Jana'iz," 45; Muslim, "Jana'iz," 12.
290.Muslim, "Ayman," 31, 33; Ibn Hanbal, 3:447.
291.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 1:195;
292.Abu Dawud, "Adab," 164, "Jihad," 112; Ibn Hanbal, 1:404.
293.Bukhari, "Jihad," 153; Muslim, "Salam," 147.
264

--- Sayfa 266 ---
Messenger, it began to cry. The Messenger went to it and, after staying beside it
for a while, severely warned the owner to feed it properly."
His love and compassion for creatures differed from that of today's
self-proclaimed humanists, for he was sincere and balanced in this re-
gard—a Prophet raised by God, the Creator and Sustainer of all beings,
for the guidance and happiness humanity and jinn, and the harmony of
existence. As such, he lived for others, and was a mercy for all the
worlds, a manifestation of Compassion.
265

--- Sayfa 267 ---
His Mildness and Forbearance
Mildness is another dimension of his character. He was a bright mirror
in which God reflected His Mercy. Mildness is a reflection of compas-
sion. God made His Messenger mild and gentle, thereby allowing him to
gain many converts to Islam and overcome numerous obstacles.
After the victory of Badr, the Battle of Uhud was a severe trial for the
young Muslim community. Although the Messenger wanted to fight on
the outskirts of Madina, most Muslims desired to fight on an open battle-
field. When the two armies met at the foot of Mount Uhud, the Messen-
ger positioned 50 archers in 'Aynayn pass and ordered them not to move
without his permission, even if they saw that the Muslims had won a de-
cisive victory.
The Muslim army, having only one-third of the men and equipment of
the enemy, almost defeated the Makkan polytheists in the initial stage.
Seeing the enemy fleeing, these archers forgot the Prophet's command
and left their post. Khalid ibn Walid, the Makkan cavalry's commander,
saw this and, riding round the mountain, attacked the Muslims from be-
hind. The fleeing enemy soldiers turned back, and caught the Muslims in
a cross-fire. They began to lose, more than 70 were martyred, and the
Messenger was wounded.
He might have reproached those who had urged him to pursue their
desires as well as the archers who had abandoned their post, but he did
not. Instead, he showed leniency: It was by the mercy of God that you were
gentle to them; if you had been harsh and hard of heart, they would have dis-
persed from about you. So pardon them and ask forgiveness for them and consult
with them in the affair. And when you are resolved, then put your trust in God;
surely God loves those who put their trust (in Him) (3:159).
This verse shows two prerequisite for leadership: mildness and leni-
ency toward those who make well-intentioned mistakes, and the import-
ance of consultation in public administration.
This mildness and forgiveness was a reflection of God's Names the
All-Mild, All-Clement, and All-Forgiving. God does not stop providing
for people despite their rebellion or unbelief. While most people disobey
Him by indulging in unbelief, by explicitly or implicitly associating part-
ners with Him, or transgressing His Commandments, the sun continues
to send them its heat and light, clouds full of rain come to their aid, and
the soil never stops feeding them with its fruits and plants. God's
266

--- Sayfa 268 ---
Clemency and Forgiveness are reflected through the Messenger's com-
passion, mildness, and forgiveness.
Like Abraham, whom he used to say that he resembled, The Messen-
ger was mild, imploring, clement, and penitent (11:75), as well as gentle
to believers and full of pity and compassion for them (9:128). Abraham
was never angry with people, regardless of how much they tormented
him. He wished good even for his enemies, and implored God and shed
tears in His Presence. Since he was a man of peace and salvation, God
made the fire into which he was thrown cool and safe (21:69).
Like him, the Messenger was never angry with anybody because of
what they did to him. When his wife 'A'isha was slandered, he did not
consider punishing the slanderers even after she was cleared by the
Qur'an. Bedouins often behaved impolitely with him, but he did not
even frown at them. Although extremely sensitive, he always showed
forbearance toward both friend and foe.
For example, while he was distributing the spoils of war after the
Battle of Hunayn, Dhu al-Huwaysira objected: "Be just, O Muhammad."
This was an unforgivable insult, for the Prophet had been sent to estab-
lish justice. Unable to endure such offences, 'Umar demanded permis-
sion to kill "that hypocrite" on the spot. But the Messenger only replied:
"Who else will show justice if I am not just? If I don't show justice, then I am
lost and brought to naught." According to another possible meaning of this
expression, he said: "If I am not just, then, by following me, you people have
been lost and brought to naught." In addition, he implied that this man
would later take part in a seditious movement. This came true during the
caliphate of 'Ali: Dhu al-Huwaysira was found dead among the Khar-
ijites after the Battle of Nahrawan.
Anas ibn Malik related that a Jewess offered a roasted sheep to the
Messenger after the conquest of Khaybar. Just before he took the first
bite, he stopped and told the others not to eat, saying: "This sheep tells me
it has been poisoned." Nevertheless, a Companion named Bishr died imme-
diately after his first bite (taken before the Messenger had spoken). The
Messenger sent for the woman and asked her why she had poisoned the
meat. She replied: "If you're really a Prophet, the poison won't affect you. If
you're not, I wanted to save people from your evil." The Messenger forgave
her for her conspiracy to kill him. According to some reports, however,
Bishr's relatives demanded that she be punished, and she subsequently
was.
267

--- Sayfa 269 ---
Once when the Prophet was going home after talking to his Compan-
ions in the mosque, a bedouin pulled him by the collar and said rudely:
"O Muhammad! Give me my due! Load up my two camels! For you will load
them up with neither your own wealth nor that of your father!" Without show-
ing any sign of being offended, he told others: "Give him what he wants."
Zayd ibn San'an narrates: Before I embraced Islam, the Messenger
borrowed some money from me. I went to him to collect my debt before
its due time, and insulted him: "O you children of 'Abd al-Muttalib, you are
very reluctant to pay your debts!" 'Umar became very angry with me and
shouted: "O enemy of God! Were it not for the treaty between us and the Jewish
community, I would cut off your head! Speak to the Messenger politely!"
However, the Messenger smiled at me and, turning to 'Umar, said: "Pay
him, and add 20 gallons to it, because you frightened him."
'Umar relates the rest of the story: We went together. On the way,
Zayd said unexpectedly: "'Umar, you were angry with me. But I find in him
all the features of the Last Prophet recorded in the Torah, the Old Testament. It
contains this verse: His mildness surpasses his anger. The severity of impudence
to him increases him only in mildness and forbearance. To test his forbearance, I
provoked him deliberately. Now I am convinced that he is the Prophet whose
coming the Torah predicted. So, I believe and bear witness that he is the Last
Prophet."294
This mildness and forbearance was enough for the conversion of Zayd
ibn San'an, a Jewish scholar.
The Messenger was extremely meticulous in practicing Islam. Nobody
could match his supererogatory prayers. Despite being sinless, he spent
more than half the night praying and crying, and sometimes fasted two
or three successive days. Every moment he took another step toward the
"praised station" set for him by God. He was very tolerant toward others.
Not wanting to burden his community, he did not perform the super-
erogatory prayers in the mosque. When people complained that an imam
was prolonging the prayer, the Prophet mounted the pulpit and said: "O
people! You cause people to dread the prayer. When you lead a prayer, don't
prolong it, for others are sick or old or in urgent need." Once his congregation
complained about Mu'adh ibn Jabal, saying he prolonged the night pray-
er. The Prophet's love for Mu'adh did not stop him asking three times if
he was a trouble-maker.295
294.Suyuti, al-Khasa'is, 1:26; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, 1:566.
295.Muslim, "Salat," 179; Nasa'i, "Iftitah," 71; Bukhari, "Adab," 74.
268

--- Sayfa 270 ---
The Messenger's mildness and forbearance captured hearts and pre-
served Muslim unity. As stated in the Qur'an, if he had been harsh and
hard-hearted, people would have abandoned him. But those who saw
him and listened to him were so endowed with Divine manifestations
that they became saints. For example, Khalid ibn Walid was the Quray-
shi general who caused the Muslims to experience a reverse at Uhud.
However, when he was not included in the army that set out on the day
after his conversion, he was so upset that he wept.
Like Khalid, Ikrima and 'Amr ibn al-'As were among those who did
great harm to the Messenger and the Muslims. After their conversions,
each became a sword of Islam drawn against unbelievers. Ibn Hisham,
Abu Jahl's brother, converted to Islam shortly before the Messenger
passed away. He was such a sincere Muslim that just before he was mar-
tyred at Yarmuk, he did not drink the water that Hudayfa al-'Adawi
offered him. Rather, he asked that it be given to nearby wounded fellow
Muslim groaning for water. He died, having preferred a fellow Muslim
over himself.
Such people attained high ranks in the enlightening atmosphere of the
Messenger. They became his Companions, regarded and respected as the
most virtuous people after the Prophets by almost all Muslims since the
earliest days of Islam. Explaining their greatness, Said Nursi, the great
twentieth-century Muslim revivalist, says: I wondered why even the
greatest saints like Muhyi al-Din ibn al-'Arabi could not attain the rank
of the Companions. One day God enabled me to perform in prayer a
prostration that I could never repeat. I concluded that it is impossible to
attain the Companions' ranks, for all of their prostrations were like that
in meaning and merit.
The Messenger brought up the Companions. Their greatness is shown
in the fact that despite their small numbers, they successfully conveyed
Islam to the furthest reaches of Asia and Africa within a few decades. In
those areas, Islam became so deeply rooted that despite the concerted ef-
forts undertaken by the superpowers of each era to extinguish Islam, it
continues to gain new momentum and represents the only realistic al-
ternative for human salvation. The Companions were transformed from
their wretched pre-Islamic state to being guides and teachers of a consid-
erable part of humanity until the Last Day, the vanguard of the most
magnificent civilization in history.
In addition, the Messenger was absolutely balanced. His universal
compassion did not prevent him from executing Divine justice, and his
269

--- Sayfa 271 ---
mildness and forbearance kept him from breaching any Islamic rule or
humiliating himself. For example, during a military campaign Usama
ibn Zayd threw an enemy soldier to the ground. When he was about to
kill him, the man declared his belief in Islam. Judging this to be the result
of a fear of imminent death, Usama killed him. When informed of the in-
cident, the Messenger reprimanded Usama severely: "Did you cleave his
heart open and see (if what you suspected is true)?" He repeated this so many
times that Usama said later: "I wished I had not yet become a Muslim on the
day I was scolded so severely."
Likewise, once Abu Dharr got so angry with Bilal that he insulted him:
"You son of a black woman!" Bilal came to the Messenger and reported the
incident in tears. The Messenger reproached Abu Dharr: "Do you still have
a sign of Jahiliya?" Full of repentance, Abu Dharr lay on the ground and
said: "I won't raise my head (meaning he wouldn't get up) unless Bilal put his
foot on it to pass over it." Bilal forgave him, and they were reconciled. Such
was the brotherhood and humanity Islam created between once-savage
people.
270

--- Sayfa 272 ---
His Generosity
The Messenger is the most polished mirror in which God's Names and
Attributes are reflected to the highest degree. As the perfect manifesta-
tion of these Names and Attributes, an embodiment of the Qur'an and
Islam, he is the greatest and most decisive and comprehensive proof of
God's Existence and Unity, and of the truth of Islam and the Qur'an.
Those who saw him remembered God automatically. Each of his virtues
reflected a Name or Attribute of God, and is a proof of his Prophethood.
Like his mildness and forbearance, his generosity is another dimension
of his excellent, matchless personality, a reflection and proof of his
Prophethood.
The people of Arabia were renowned for their generosity even in pre-
Islamic times. When we look at that era's poetry, we see that the Arabs
were proud of their generosity. However, their generosity was not for
the sake of God or for an altruistic motive; rather, it was the cause of self-
pride. But the Messenger's generosity was purely for God's sake. He nev-
er mentioned, and did not like to have mentioned, it. When a poet
praised him for his generosity, he attributed whatever good he had or
did to God. He never attributed his virtues and good deeds to himself.
The Messenger liked to distribute whatever he had. He engaged in
trade until his Prophethood, and had considerable wealth. Afterwards,
he and his wealthy wife Khadija spent everything in the way of God.
When Khadija died, there was no money for her burial shroud. The Mes-
senger had to borrow money to bury his own wife, the first person to
embrace Islam and its first supporter.296
If the Messenger had desired, he could have been the richest man in
Makka. But he rejected such offers without a second thought. Although
God mandated that one-fifth of all war spoils should be at the
Messenger's free disposal, he never spent it on himself or his family. He
and his family lived austerely and survived on scanty provisions, for he
always gave preference to others. For example, his share of the spoils of
Hunayn was of 40,000 sheep, 24,000 camels, and 16 tons of silver. Safwan
ibn Umayya, from whom the Messenger had borrowed some weapons,
gazed upon the spoils with greed and bewilderment. Aware of this, the
Messenger gave him as many camels as he wanted. Astounded with
such generosity, Safwan ran to his people and announced: "O my people!
Accept Islam without hesitation, for Muhammad gives in such a way that only
296.Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 3:158–9.
271

--- Sayfa 273 ---
one who has no fear of poverty and relies fully on God can give!" Such generos-
ity was enough to guide Safwan and his people, who had been among
the bitterest enemies of Islam until just before that day, to the truth.297
The Messenger regarded himself a traveler in this world. Once he said:
"What connection do I have with this world? I am like a traveler who takes shade
under a tree and then continues on his way." According to him, the world is
like a tree under which people are shaded. No one can live forever, so
people must prepare here for the second part of the journey, which will
end either in Paradise or Hell.
The Messenger was sent to guide people to truth. Therefore, he spent
his life and his possessions to this end. Once 'Umar saw him lying on a
rough mat and wept. When the Messenger asked him why he was weep-
ing, 'Umar replied: "O Messenger of God, while kings sleep in soft feather
beds, you lie on a rough mat. You are the Messenger of God, and as such deserve
an easy life more than anyone else." The Messenger answered: "Don't you
agree that the luxuries of the world should be theirs, and that those of the Here-
after should be ours?"298
Islam does not approve of monastic life. It came to secure justice and
human well-being, but warns against over-indulgence. Thus many
Muslims have chosen an ascetic life. Although individual Muslims gen-
erally became rich after the Messenger passed away, others like Abu
Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Ali preferred an austere life. This was partly because
they felt the need to live as the poorest of their people, and partly be-
cause they strictly followed the Prophet's example. During his caliphate,
Abu Bakr was offered a glass of cold water to break his fast during Ra-
madan. He brought the glass to his lips and suddenly began to weep.
When asked why, he answered: "One day, the Messenger drank such a glass
of cold water offered to him and wept. He said that God says: 'On that day, you
will be questioned concerning every bounty.' We will be questioned about this
water. I remembered that and wept."299
In the early days of his Caliphate, Abu Bakr earned his living by milk-
ing a woman's sheep. Some time later, he was given a small salary. While
on his death-bed, he gave a pitcher to those around him and asked them
to give it to the new caliph after his death. 'Umar succeeded him and,
when he broke the pitcher, some coins came out, together with the fol-
lowing letter: "I lived according to the living standards of the poorest of
297.Ibn Hisham, 4:135; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, 2:187; Muslim, "Fada'il," 57.
298.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 2; Muslim, "Talaq," 31.
299.Muslim, "Ashriba," 140; Abu Nu'aym, "Hilya," 1:30.
272

--- Sayfa 274 ---
Madina, and put in this pitcher the amount left of my salary. Therefore,
these coins belong to the public treasury and must be returned there." On
reading the letter, 'Umar wept and remarked: "O Abu Bakr, you have left
an unbearable burden on your successors."
The Messenger was, in the words of Anas, "the most comely and generous
person." Jabir ibn Samura reports: "Once we were sitting in the mosque, and a
full moon was shining above us. The Messenger entered. I looked first at the
moon and then at his face. I swear by God that the Messenger's face was bright-
er than the moon."300
The Messenger never refused anyone and, as Farazdak said, only said
the word "no" when reciting the profession of faith while praying. Once,
a bedouin came and asked the Messenger for something. The Messenger
complied with his request. The bedouin continued to ask, and the Mes-
senger continued to give until he had nothing left. When the bedouin
asked again, he promised that he would give it to him when he had it.
Angered by such rudeness, 'Umar said to the Messenger: "You were asked
and you gave. Again you were asked and you gave, until you were asked once
more and you promised!" 'Umar meant that the Messenger should not
make things so difficult for himself. The Messenger did not approve of
'Umar's words. 'Abd Allah ibn Hudafa al-Sahmi stood up and said: "O
Messenger, give without fear that the Owner of the Seat of Honor will make you
poor!' Pleased with such words, the Messenger declared: "I was commanded to
do so!"
He never refused a request, for it was he who said: "The generous are
near to God, Paradise, and people, but distant from the Fire. The miserly are dis-
tant from God, Paradise, and people, but near to the Fire," and: "O people!
Surely God has chosen for you Islam as religion. Improve your practice of it
through generosity and good manners." His mercifulness rose up as mois-
ture into the sky, and then rained as generosity so that hardened hearts
would be fertile enough to grow "good trees whose roots are firm and whose
branches are in the Heavens, and which yield their fruits every season by the
leave of their Master."
300.Suyuti, al-Khasa'is, 1:123; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 7:168.
273

--- Sayfa 275 ---
His Modesty
In society, each person has a window—status—through which he or she
looks out to see others and be seen. If the window is built higher than
their real stature, people try to make themselves appear taller through
vanity and assumed airs. If the window is set lower than their real
stature, they must bow in humility in order to look out, see, and be seen.
Humility is the measure of one's greatness, just as vanity or conceit is the
measure of low character.301
The Messenger had a stature so high that it could be said to touch the
"roof of the Heavens." Therefore, he had no need to be seen. Whoever
travels in the realm of virtues sees him before every created being, in-
cluding angels. In the words of Said Nursi, the Messenger is the noble
aide-de-camp of God. He lowered himself to stay in the world for a
while so that people might find the way to God. Since he is the greatest
of humanity, he is the greatest in modesty. This follows the well-know-
ing adage: "The greater one is, the more modest one is."
The Messenger never regarded himself as greater than anybody else.
The only way he could be distinguished from his Companions was by
his radiant face and attractive person. He lived and dressed like the
poorest people and sat and ate with them, just as he did with slaves and
servants. Once a woman saw him eating and remarked: "He eats like a
slave." The Messenger replied: "Could there be a better slave than me? I am a
slave of God."302
One time when he was serving his friends, a bedouin came in and
shouted: "Who is the master of this people?" The Messenger answered in
such a way that he introduced himself while expressing a substantial
principle of Islamic leadership and public administration: "The master of
the people is the one who serves them." Ali says that among people the Mes-
senger was one of them. When he and Abu Bakr reached Quba while
emigrating to Madina, some Madinese who did not know what the
Prophet looked like tried to kiss Abu Bakr's hands. The only external
sign distinguishing one man from the other was that Abu Bakr seemed
older than the Messenger.
While the Muslims were building their mosque in Madina, the Proph-
et carried two sun-dried bricks; everyone else carried one.303While
301.Said Nursi, Letters 2,315.
302.Haythami, Majma', 9:21.
303.Bukhari, 1:111; Muslim, 2:65; Semhudi, Wafa', 1:237; Ibn Sa'd, 1: 240.
274

--- Sayfa 276 ---
digging the trench to defend Madina, the Companions bound a stone
around their stomachs to quell their hunger; the Messenger bound two.
When a man seeing him for the first time began trembling out of fear, be-
cause he found the Prophet's appearance so awe-inspiring, the Messen-
ger calmed him: "Brother, don't be afraid. I am a man, like you, whose mother
used to eat dry bread."304 Another time, an insane woman pulled him by
the hand and said: "Come with me and do my housework." He complied
with her request.305 'A'isha reported that the Messenger patched his
clothes, repaired his shoes, and helped his wives with the housework.306
Although his modesty elevated him to the highest rank, he regarded
himself as an ordinary servant of God: "No one enters Paradise because of
his or her deeds." When asked if this was true for him as well, he replied
that he could enter Paradise only through the Mercy of God.
His Companions always asked for his advice or permission before any
action. Once 'Umar asked his permission to go for the minor pilgrimage.
The Messenger allowed this, and even asked 'Umar to include him in his
supplications. 'Umar rejoiced so much that later he would say: "If the
worlds had been granted to me that day, I wouldn't have felt the same
happiness."
Humility was one of the Prophet's greatest qualities. As he attained a
higher rank each day, he increased in humility and servanthood to God.
His servanthood is prior to his Messengership, as seen in the declaration
of faith: "I bear witness that there is no god but God; I also bear witness that
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger." He preferred being a Prophet-
slave to being a Prophet-king.
One day, while sitting with Archangel Gabriel, the Messenger men-
tioned that he had not eaten for several days. As soon as he said this, an-
other angel appeared and asked: "O Messenger of God, God greets you and
asks if you wish to be a Prophet-king or a Prophet-slave?" Gabriel advised him
to be humble toward his Master. As humility was a fundamental part of
his character, the Messenger replied: "I wish to be a Prophet-slave."307 God
praises his servanthood and mentions him as a servant in several verses:
When the servant of God stood up in prayer to Him, they (the jinn) were well
nigh upon him in swarms (to watch his prayer) (72:19), and: If you are in doubt
304.Ibn Maja, "At'Ima," 30; Haythami, 9:20.
305.Qadi 'Iyad, al-Shifa', 1:131, 133.
306.Tirmidhi, Shama'il, 78; Ibn Hanbal, 6:256.
307.Ibn Hanbal, 2:231; Haythami, 9:18.
275

--- Sayfa 277 ---
concerning that which We have sent down on Our servant, then bring a sura of
the like thereof, and call your witnesses beside God if you are truthful (2:23).
After Khadija and Abu Talib died, the Messenger became convinced
that he could no longer expect any victory or security in Makka. So be-
fore things became too critical, he sought a new base in Ta'if. As the
townspeople proved to be quite hostile, he felt that he had no support
and protection. But then God manifested His Mercy and honored him
with the Ascension, raising him to His Presence. While narrating this in-
cident, God mentions him as His servant to show that he deserves As-
cension through his servanthood: Glory be to him, Who carried His servant
by night from the Holy Mosque to the Furthest Mosque, the precincts of which
We have blessed, that We might show him some of Our signs. He is the All-
Hearing, the All-Seeing (17:1).
Humility is the most important aspect of the Messenger's servanthood.
He declared: "God exalts the humble and abases the haughty."308 'Ali de-
scribes the Messenger in the following terms:
He was the most generous person in giving, and the mildest and the foremost
in patience and perseverance. He was the most truthful in speech, the most ami-
able and congenial in companionship, and the noblest of them in family. Who-
ever sees him first is stricken by awe, but whoever knows him closely is deeply
attracted to him. Whoever attempts to describe him says: 'I have never seen the
like of him.'309
308.Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, 3:113; Haythami, 10:325.
309.Tirmidhi, Hadith No. 3880.
276

--- Sayfa 278 ---
The Ethos Created by the Messenger
It is difficult for us to understand Prophet Muhammad fully. As we tend
to compartmentalize the universe, life, and humanity itself, we have no
unitary vision. However, Prophet Muhammad perfectly combined a
philosopher's intellect, a commander valor, a scientist's genius, a sage's
wisdom, a statesman's insight and administrative ability, a Sufi master's
spiritual profundity, and a scholar's knowledge in his own person. Philo-
sophers produce students, not followers; social or revolutionary leaders
make followers, not complete people; Sufi masters make "lords of submis-
sion," not active fighters or intellectuals. But in Prophet Muhammad we
find the characteristics of a philosopher, a revolutionary leader, a warrior
and statesman, and a Sufi master. His school is one of the intellect and
thought, revolution, submission and discipline, and goodness, beauty,
ecstasy, and movement.
Prophet Muhammad transformed crude, ignorant, savage, and obstin-
ate desert Arabs into an army of skilled fighters, a community of sincere
devotees of a sublime cause, a society of gentleness and compassion, an
assembly of sainthood, and a host of intellectuals and scholars. Nowhere
else do we see such fervor and ardor combined with gentleness, kind-
ness, sincerity, and compassion. This is a characteristic unique to the
Muslim community, one that has been visible since its earliest days.
The "Garden" of Muhammad.
Islam, the school of Prophet Muhammad, has been a "garden" rich in
every kind of "flower." Like cascading water, God has brought forth from
it such majestic people as Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali, 'Umar ibn
Abd al-'Aziz, Mahdi al-'Abbasi, Harun al-Rashid, Alp Arslan, Mehmed
the Conqueror, Selim, and Sulayman. These were not only statesmen of
the highest caliber and invincible commanders, but also men of pro-
found spirituality, deep knowledge, oration, and literature.
The blessed, pure climate of the Messenger produced invincible gener-
als. Among the first generation we see such military geniuses as Khalid,
Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, Abu 'Ubayda, Shurahbil ibn Hasana, and A'la al-
Khadrami. They were succeeded by such brilliant generals as Tariq ibn
Ziyad and 'Uqba ibn Nafi, both of whom combined military genius with
human tenderness and religious conviction and devotion.
When 'Uqba, the conqueror of North Africa, reached the Atlantic
Ocean, 2,000 miles away from Arabia, he cried out: "And now, God, take
277

--- Sayfa 279 ---
my soul! If this sea didn't stretch out before me, I would convey Your holy
Name across it to other lands!" We can hardly imagine Alexander the
"Great" thinking such thoughts as he set out for Persia. Yet as conquerors,
the two men achieved comparable feats. 'Uqba's idealism and his
"possibility" with respect to the Divine Will would be transmuted into ir-
resistible action in this world. Alexander's empire crashed after his
death; the lands 'Uqba conquered still retain Islam as their dominant
worldview, creed, and life-style 14 centuries later, despite attempts to
change this reality.
Tariq was a victorious commander, not only when he defeated the
90,000-man Spanish army with a handful of self-sacrificing, valiant men,
but also when he stood before the king's treasure and said: "Be careful,
Tariq! You were a slave yesterday. Today you are a victorious commander. And
tomorrow you will be under the earth." Yavuz Selim, an Ottoman Sultan
who regarded the world as too small for two rulers, was truly victorious
when he crowned some kings and dethroned others, and also when he
silently entered Istanbul at bedtime, after conquering Syria and Egypt, to
avoid the people's enthusiastic welcome. He also was victorious when he
ordered that the robe soiled by his teacher's horse be placed over his
coffin because of its sanctity—it had been "soiled" by the horse of a
scholar.
During the rapid conquests after the Prophet, many conquered people
were distributed among the Muslim families. Those emancipated slaves
eventually became the foremost religious scholars: Hasan ibn Hasan al-
Basri (Basra); 'Ata ibn Rabah, Mujahid, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, and Sulayman
ibn Yasar (Makka); Zayd ibn Aslam, Muhammad ibn al-Munkadir, and
Nafi' ibn Abi Nujayh (Madina); 'Alqama ibn Qays al-Nakha'i, Aswad ibn
Yazid, Hammad, and Abu Hanifa Nu'man ibn Thabit (Kufa); Tawus and
ibn Munabbih (Yemen); 'Ata ibn 'Abd Allah al-Khorasani (Khorasan);
and Maqhul (Damascus). They all opened as splendid, sweet-smelling
flowers in the garden of Muhammad. They established the Islamic legal
code and brought up thousands of jurists, who wrote and complied
volumes that are still valued as legal references.
One of these jurists, Imam Abu Hanifa, founded the Hanafi legal
school, which has hundreds of millions of followers today. He brought
up such great scholars as Imam Abu Yusuf, Imam Zufar, and Imam
Muhammad Hasan al-Shaybani, who taught Imam Muhammed Idris al-
Shafi'i. The notes Abu Hanifa dictated to Imam al-Shaybani were ex-
pounded centuries later by Imam Sarakhsi (the "Sun of Imams") in the 30--
volume
work
Al-Mabsut.
Imam
Shafi'i,
who
established
the
278

--- Sayfa 280 ---
methodological principles of Islamic law, is regarded as reviver or re-
newer (mujaddid) of religious sciences. However, when his students told
Imam Sarakhsi that Imam Shafi'i had memorized 300 fascicles of the
Prophetic Traditions, the latter answered: "He had the zakat (one-fortieth) of
the Traditions in my memory.'
Imam Shafi'i, Abu Hanifa, Imam Malik, or Ahmad ibn Hanbal, and so
many others, were brought up in the school of Prophet Muhammad.
And then there are such Qur'anic interpreters as Ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Ibn Kathir, Imam Suyuti, Allama Hamdi Yazir, and
Sayyid Qutb. In addition, there are such famous hadith collectors as
Imam Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi, Abu Dawud, Ibn Ma'ja, Nasa'i, Ibn
Hanbal, Bayhaqi, Darimi, Daraqutni, Sayf al-Din al-Iraqi, Ibn Hajar al-
Asqalani, and many others. They are all ever-shining stars in the lumin-
ous sky of Islamic sciences. All received their light from Prophet
Muhammad.
According to Islam, God created humanity on the best pattern, as the
most universal and all-embracing theater of Divine Names and Attrib-
utes. But people, because of their heedlessness, can fall to the lowest
levels. Sufism, the inner dimension of Islam, leads people to perfection
or enables them to reacquire their primordial angelic state. Islam has
produced countless saints. As it never separated our metaphysical quest
or gnosis from the study of nature, many practicing Sufis were also sci-
entists. Such leading saints as 'Abd al Qadir al-Jilani, Shah Naqshband,
Ma'ruf al-Karkhi, Hasan Shazili, Ahmad Badawi, Shaykh al-Harrani,
Ja'far al-Sadiq, Junayd al-Baghdadi, Bayazid al-Bistami, Muhy al-Din al-
'Arabi, and Mawlana Jalal al-Din al-Rumi have illumined the way to
truth and trained others to purify their selves.
Being embodiments of sincerity, Divine love, and pure intention, Sufi
masters became the motivating factor and the source of power behind
the Islamic conquests and the subsequent Islamization of those lands.
Figures like Imam Ghazali, Imam Rabbani, and Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
are revivers or renewers of the highest degree, and combined in them-
selves the enlightenment of sages, the knowledge of religious scholars,
and the spirituality of great saints.
Islam is the middle way. Its elaborate hierarchy of knowledge is integ-
rated by the principle of Divine Unity (tawhid). There are juridical, social
and theological sciences, as well as metaphysical ones, all deriving their
principles from the Qur'an. Over time, Muslims developed elaborate
philosophical, natural, and mathematical sciences, each of which has its
279

--- Sayfa 281 ---
source in a Beautiful Name of God. For example, medicine depends on
the Name All-Healing; geometry and engineering on the Names All-Just
and All-Determiner, and All-Shaper and All-Harmonizing; philosophy
reflects the Name All-Wise.
Each level of knowledge views nature in a particular light. Jurists and
theologians see it as the background for human action; philosophers and
scientists see it as a domain to be analyzed and understood; and meta-
physicians consider it the object of contemplation and the mirror reflect-
ing suprasensible realities. The Author of Nature has inscribed His Wis-
dom upon every leaf and stone, on every atom and particle, and has cre-
ated the world of nature in such a way that every phenomenon is a sign
(aya) singing the glory of His Oneness.
Islam has maintained an intimate connection between science and
Islamic studies. As a result, the traditional education of Islamic scientists,
particularly in the early cneturies of Islam, was broad enough to com-
prise most of the sciences of that time. In later life, each scientist's
aptitude and interest would cause him or her to become an expert and
specialist in one or more sciences.
Universities, libraries, observatories, and other scientific institutions
played a major role in the continuing vitality of Islamic science. These,
together with students who would travel hundreds of miles to study un-
der acknowledged scholars, ensured that the whole corpus of knowledge
was kept intact and transmitted from one place to another and from one
generation to the next. This knowledge did not remain static; rather, it
continued to expand and enrich itself. Today, there are hundreds of
thousands of Islamic (mainly in Arabic) manuscripts in the world's lib-
raries, a large number of which deal with scientific subjects.310
For example, Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Kindi (the "Philosopher of the Arabs")
wrote on philosophy, mineralogy, metallurgy, geology, physics, and
medicine, among other subjects, and was an accomplished physician. Ibn
al-Haytham was a leading Muslim mathematician and, without doubt,
the greatest physicist. We know the names of over 100 of his works.
310.George Sarton, in his monumental Introduction to the History of Science, divided
his work into chronological chapters, naming each chapter after the most eminent
scientist of that period. From the middle of the second century ah (eight century ce)
to the middle of the fifth century ah (eleventh century ce), each fifty-year period car-
ries the name of a Muslim scientist. Thus we have the "Time of al-Kharizmi," the
"Time of al-Biruni," and so on. These chapters also contain the names of many other
important Islamic scientists and their main works. (Tr.)
280

--- Sayfa 282 ---
Some 19 of them, dealing with mathematics, astronomy, and physics,
have been studied by modern scholars. His work exercised a profound
influence on later scholars, both in the Muslim world and in the West,
where he was known Alhazen. One of his works on optics was translated
into Latin in 1572.
Abu al-Rayhan al-Biruni was one of the greatest scholars of medieval
Islam, and certainly the most original and profound. He was equally
well-versed in mathematics, astronomy, the physical and natural sci-
ences, and also distinguished himself as a geographer and historian, a
chronologist and linguist, and as an impartial observer of customs and
creeds.
Such
figures
as
al-Kharizmi
(mathematics),
Ibn
Shatir
(astronomy), al-Khazini (physics), Jabir ibn Hayyan (medicine) are re-
membered even today. Andalucia (Muslim Spain) was the main center
from which the West acquired knowledge and enlightenment for
centuries.
Islam founded a most brilliant civilization. This should not be con-
sidered surprising, for the Qur'an begins with the injunction: Read: In the
Name of Your Master Who creates (96:1). The Qur'an told people to read
when there was very little to read and most people were illiterate. What
we understand from this apparent paradox is that humanity is to "read"
the universe itself as the "Book of Creation." Its counterpart is the Qur'an, a
book of letters and words. We are to observe the universe, perceive its
meaning and content, and through those activities gain a deeper percep-
tion of the beauty and splendor of the Creator's system and the in-
finitude of His Might. Thus we are obliged to penetrate into the
universe's manifold meanings, discover the Divine laws of nature, and
establish a world in which science and faith complement each other. All
of this will enable us to attain true bliss in both worlds.
In obedience to the Qur'an's injunctions and the Prophet's example,
Muslims studied the Book of Divine Revelation (the Qur'an) and the
Book of Creation (the universe) and eventually erected a magnificent
civilization. Scholars from all over Europe benefited from the centers of
higher learning located in Damascus, Bukhara, Baghdad, Cairo, Faz,
Qairwan, Zeituna, Cordoba, Sicily, Isfahan, Delhi and other great Islamic
cities. Historians liken the Muslim world of the medieval ages, dark for
Europe but golden and luminous for Muslims, to a beehive. Roads were
full of students, scientists, and scholars traveling from one center of
learning to another.
281

--- Sayfa 283 ---
For the first 5 centuries of its existence, the realm of Islam was a most
civilized and progressive area. Studded with splendid cities, gracious
mosques, and quiet universities, the Muslim East offered a striking con-
trast to the Christian West, which was sunk in the Dark Ages. Even after
the disastrous Mongol invasions and Crusades of the thirteenth century
ce and onwards, it displayed vigor and remained for ahead of the West.
Although Islam ruled two-thirds of the known civilized world for at
least 11 centuries, laziness and negligence of what was going on beyond
its borders caused it to decay. However, it must be pointed out clearly
that only Islamic civilization decayed—not Islam. Military victories and
superiority, which continued into the eighteenth century, encouraged
Muslims to rest on their laurels and neglect further scientific research.
They abandoned themselves to living their own lives, and recited the
Qur'an without studying its deeper meanings. Meanwhile, Europe made
great advances in sciences, which they had borrowed from the Muslims.
What we call "sciences" are, in reality, languages of the Divine Book of
Creation (another aspect of Islam). Those who ignore this book are
doomed to failure in this world. When the Muslims began to ignore it, it
was only a matter of time before they would be dominated by some ex-
ternal force. In this case, that external force was Europe. European
cruelty, oppression, and imperialism also contributed greatly to this
result.
Every civilization has its own characteristics distinguishing it from
others. The present modern civilization is, although having made great
contributions to humanity’s development in the fields of sciences and
technology, is primarily materialistic and is considerably far from satis-
fying humanity’s perennial needs. It is because of this that according to
many Western sociologists such as Oswald Spengler it cannot last for
long. Spengler has predicted its collapse on the grounds that it is against
human nature and values. The bright world of the future will be built on
the firm foundation of the wedding of sciences with faith, spirituality,
and morality, and it will also attach due importance to basic human val-
ues and rights. Islam will make the greatest contribution to this world.
282

--- Sayfa 284 ---
ENDNOTE: A Tribute to the Prophet
This is the tribute of Lamartine, a French historian, to the Prophet of
Islam: “Is there any man greater than Muhammad?”
Never a man set himself, voluntarily or involuntarily, a more sublime aim,
since this aim was superhuman: To subvert superstitions which had been inter-
posed between man and his Creator, to render God unto man and man unto
God; to restore the rational and sacred idea of divinity amidst the chaos of the
material and disfigured gods of idolatry then existing. Never has a man under-
taken a work so far beyond human power with so feeble means, for he had in the
conception as well as in the execution of such a great design no other instrument
than himself, and no other aid except a handful of men living in a corner of
desert. Finally, never has a man accomplished such a huge and lasting revolu-
tion in the world, because in less than two centuries after its appearance, Islam,
in faith and arms, reigned over the whole of Arabia, and conquered in God’s
name Persia, Khorasan, Western India, Syria, Abyssinia, all the known contin-
ent of Northern Africa, numerous islands of Mediterranean, Spain, and a part of
Gaul.
If greatness of purpose, smallness of means, and astounding results are the
three criteria of human genius, who could dare to compare any great men to
Muhammad? The most famous men created arms, laws, and empires only. They
founded, if anything at all, no more than material powers which often crumbled
away before their eyes. This man moved not only armies, legislation, empires,
peoples, and dynasties, but millions of men in one-third of the then-inhabited
world; and more than that, he moved the altars, the gods, the religions, the ideas,
the beliefs, and the souls. On the basis of a Book, every letter of which has be-
come law, he created a spiritual nationality which has blended together peoples
of every tongue and of every race. He has left to us the indelible characteristic of
this Muslim nationality, the hatred of false gods, and the passion for the One
and immaterial God. This avenging patriotism against the profanation of
Heaven formed the virtue of the followers of Muhammad: the conquest of one-
third of the Earth to his creed was his miracle. The idea of God’s Unity pro-
claimed amidst the exhaustion of fabulous theogenies was in itself such a miracle
that upon its utterance from his lips it destroyed all the ancient temples of idols
and set on fire one-third of the world. His life, his meditations, his heroic revil-
ing against the superstitions of his country, and his boldness in defying the fur-
ies of idolatry; his firmness in enduring them for thirteen years in Makka, his
acceptance of the role of the public scorn and almost of being a victim of his fel-
low countrymen: all these and, finally his incessant preaching, his wars against
odds, his faith in his success and his superhuman security in misfortune, his
283

--- Sayfa 285 ---
forbearance in victory, his ambition which was entirely devoted to one idea and
in no manner striving for an empire; his endless prayer, his mystic conversa-
tions with God, his death and his triumph after death; all these attest not to an
imposture but to a firm conviction. It was his conviction which gave him the
power to restore a creed. This creed was twofold: God’s Unity and the immateri-
ality of God—the former telling what God is, the latter telling what God is not.
Philosopher, orator, apostle, legislator, warrior, conqueror of ideas, restorer of
rational dogmas, of a cult without images; the founder of twenty terrestrial
states and of one spiritual state, that is Muhammad. As regards all standards by
which human greatness may be measured, we may well ask: Is there any man
greater than he? (Tr.)
284

--- Sayfa 286 ---
Chapter 10
The Sunna and Its Place in Islamic Legislation
The science of Hadith deals with Prophet Muhammad's life, especially his
words and actions, and the actions he approved of in others. In this sec-
tion, we will restrict ourselves to his own words and actions. These
words and their meanings are his alone, for they were not included in
the Qur'an, the Recited Revelation and whose meaning and wording be-
long to God exclusively. His actions include those whose rule and au-
thority we are obliged to follow as laws, and his personal affairs, which
are a source of spiritual reward and blessing if followed.
The science of fiqh (Islamic law) does not concern itself with the
Prophet's personal affairs. The fuqaha' (jurists) consider that if those af-
fairs touch upon the voluntary and purposed acts, they should be dealt
with under the relevant law. However, if they are matters of the
Prophet's personal likes and dislikes, which are not a basis for legisla-
tion, they are of no concern to the fuqaha'. According to the muhaddithun
(scholars of Hadith, or Traditionists), everything related to the Messen-
ger is included in the meaning of Hadith (Tradition) and concerns the
Traditionists.
The Sunna is the record of the Messenger's every act, word, and con-
firmation, as well as the second source of Islamic legislation and life (the
Qur'an is the first one). All scholars of religious sciences, and sometimes
those of the natural scientists, use it to establish the principles of their
disciplines and to solve difficulties. The Qur'an and authentic prophetic
Traditions enjoin Muslims to follow the Sunna.
The Qur'an and the Sunna are inseparable. The Sunna clarifies the am-
biguities in the Qur'an by expanding upon what is mentioned only
briefly in it, specifies what is unconditional, enables generalizations from
what is specifically stated, and particularizations from what is generally
stated.
285

--- Sayfa 287 ---
For example, how to pray, fast, give alms, and make pilgrimage was
established and expounded in the Sunna. So were such principles or le-
gislation that no one can inherit from the Prophet, killers cannot inherit
from their victims, the meat of domestic donkeys and wild animals can-
not be eaten, and men cannot marry a wife's female cousins if she is still
living. Indeed, the Sunna is relevant to all aspects of Islam, and Muslims
must design their lives according to it. For this reason, it has been stud-
ied and transmitted to each new generation with almost the same care as
the Qur'an.
The Messenger ordered his Companions to obey his Sunna absolutely.
He spoke distinctly, so they could understand and memorize his words,
and encouraged them to convey his every word to future generations.
Sometimes he even urged them to write his words down, for: "Whatever I
say is true." The Companions were fully attentive to what his words and
deeds and showed a great desire to mold their lives to his, even in the
smallest details. They regarded his every word and deed as a Divine
trust to which they must adhere and follow as closely as possible. View-
ing his words as Divine gifts, they internalized and preserved them and
transmitted them to future generations.
As truthfulness is the cornerstone of the Islamic character, the Com-
panions did not lie. Just as they did not distort or alter the Qur'an, they
did their best to preserve the Traditions and entrust them to future gen-
erations by either memorizing them or writing them down. Among the
Hadith compilations made during the time of the Companions, three are
very famous: Al-Sahifa al-Sadiqa by 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As, Al-
Sahifa al-Sahiha by Hammam ibn Munabbih, and Al-Majmu' by Zayd ibn 'Ali
ibn Husayn.
The Companions were extremely conscientious in relating the Tradi-
tions. For example, 'A'isha and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar would relate them
word for word, not changing even one letter. Ibn Mas'ud and Abu al-
Darda' would tremble, as if feverish, when asked to report a Tradition.
Caliph 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz (ruled 717-20 ce) ordered that the or-
ally preserved and circulated individual Tradition compilations be writ-
ten down. Such illustrious figures as Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib, Sha'bi,
'Alqama, Sufyan al-Thawri, and Zuhri pioneered this sacred task. They
were followed by the greatest specialists, who were entirely focused on
the Traditions' accurate transmittal, as well as studying their meaning
and wording and their narrators' careful critiques.
286

--- Sayfa 288 ---
Thanks to these Traditionists, we have the second source of Islam in its
original purity. Only through studying the Prophet's life and then con-
forming our own to it can we gain God's good pleasure and travel the
way leading to Paradise. The greatest saints receive their light from this
"sun" of guidance, Prophet Muhammad, and send it to those in darkness
so that they may find their way.
287

--- Sayfa 289 ---
The Sunna and Its Role
Sunna literally means "a conduct and a good or evil path to be followed." This
is the meaning used in the following hadith: "Those who establish a good
path in Islam receive the reward of those who follow it, without any decrease in
their reward. Those who establish an evil path in Islam are burdened with the
sins of those who follow it, without any decrease in their burden."311
This term also has different terminological connotations according to
each group of Traditionists, methodologists, and jurists. Traditionists
view it as including everything connected to the religious command-
ments reported from the Messenger and categorized, according to the
Hanafi legal school (followers of Abu Hanifa), as obligations, necessities,
practices particular to or encouraged by the Prophet himself as recom-
mended and desirable.
Methodologists consider it to be every word, deed, and approval of
the Messenger as related by his Companions. Jurists, who approach it as
the opposite of innovation in religion (bid'a), consider it a synonym for
hadith. They use it for the Prophet's words, deeds, and approvals, all of
which provide a basis for legislation and categorizing people's actions.
Derived from the word haddatha (to inform), hadith literally means a
tiding or information. Over time, it has assumed the meaning of every
word, deed, and approval ascribed to the Messenger. Ibn Hajar says:
"According to the Shari'a, the Hadith is everything related to the Messenger."
Another literal meaning is something that takes place within time.
This is why some scholars of fine discernment write that Hadith is that
which is not Divine, eternal, or without beginning in time. This fine line
separates the Hadith from the Qur'an, as the latter is Divine, and eternal,
and without beginning in time. The Messenger distinguished his words
from the Qur'an: "It is two things only, nothing else: the Word and guidance.
The best word is the Word of God, and the best guidance is the guidance of
Muhammad."312
311.Muslim, "Zakat," 69; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 203.
312.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 7.
288

--- Sayfa 290 ---
Categories of the Sunna
The Sunna is divided into three categories: verbal, practical, and based
on approval.
The Verbal Sunna
This category consists of the Messenger's words, which provide a basis
for many religious commandments. To cite a few examples:
• "No bequest to the heir."313 In other words, people cannot bequeath
any of their wealth to their heirs, since they will naturally inherit the
bulk of the estate. A bequest can be made to the poor or some social ser-
vice institutions.
• "Don't harm (others), and don't return harm for harm."314 That is, do not
engage in any negative and damaging behavior toward others, and do
not retaliate against them by returning bad for bad.
• "A tenth will be given (out of crops grown in fields) watered by rain or
rivers; but a twentieth (out of those grown in fields) watered by people
(irrigation or watering)."315 The Qur'an enjoins charity, but goes into no
detail about how to do so correctly. All such regulations were estab-
lished by the Sunna.
• "A sea is that of which the water is clean and the dead animals are lawful to
eat." He gave this response when someone asked him if wudu' could be
done with sea-water. This has provided a basis for many other rulings.
The Practical Sunna
The Qur'an usually lays down only general rules and principles. For
example, it enjoins prayer and pilgrimage but does not describe in detail
how to perform them. The Messenger, taught by God through inspira-
tion or through Gabriel, provided this information through his actions.
His life was one long, unique example to be followed by all Muslims. For
example, he led the daily prayers before his Companions five times a
day and ordered them to pray as he prayed.316
313.Ibn Ma'ja, "Wasaya," 6; Tirmidhi, "Wasaya," 5.
314.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1:313.
315.Tirmidhi, "Zakat," 14; Bukhari, "Zakat," 55.
316.Bukhari, "Adhan," 18; Ibn Hanbal, 5:53.
289

--- Sayfa 291 ---
The Sunna based on approval. The Messenger corrected his Compan-
ions' mistakes usually by ascending the pulpit and asking: "Why has
somebody done this?"317 When he saw something agreeable in them, he
gave his approval either explicitly or by keeping silent. For example:
• Two Companions traveling in the desert could not find enough wa-
ter for wudu' before praying, and so used sand (tayammum). When they
found water later on before the prayer's time had passed, one of them
performed wudu' and repeated the prayer, and the other did not. When
they asked The Messenger about it later, he told the one who had not re-
peated the prayer: "You acted in accordance with the Sunna." Then, he
turned to the other one and said: "For you, there is double reward."318
• The Messenger ordered a march upon the Banu Qurayza immedi-
ately after the Battle of the Trench. He said: "Hurry up! We'll perform the
afternoon prayer there." Some Companions, concluding that they should
hasten and pray over there started out without delay. Others understood
that they were to hasten to the Banu Qurayza's territory only, and that
they could pray before departing. The Messenger approved of both
interpretations.319
317.Bukhari, "Salat," 70; Muslim, "Nikah," 5.
318.Darimi, "Tahara," 65; Abu Dawud, "Tahara," 126.
319.Darimi, "Maghazi," 30, "Khawf," 5.
290

--- Sayfa 292 ---
The Sunna in the Qur'an
The Sunna is the main source of our religious life. It is promoted and en-
couraged by the Qur'an: He Who raised among the unlettered ones a Messen-
ger from them, reciting to them His revelations, purifies them and instructs
them in the Book and the Wisdom (62:2). According to most Qur'anic inter-
preters and Traditionists, the Wisdom signifies the Sunna. The Qur'an,
being a miraculous exposition, contains nothing superfluous and does
not exceed the proper terms. As Wisdom comes after Book, it must be
something different. The Book is the Qur'an, and the Wisdom is the
Sunna showing how the Qur'an is to be applied to our daily lives.
The Qur'an enjoins absolute obedience to the Messengers, for they
have been sent to guide people to truth in every sphere of their lives. Our
loyalty is to God, Who has sent His Messenger and told us to obey him,
and not to that man personally: We have not sent a Messenger save to be
obeyed by God's leave (4:64), and: O you who believe! Obey God and His Mes-
senger, and do not turn away from him (8:20).
Obedience to God means unconditional obedience to what has been
revealed in the Qur'an. Obedience to the Messenger means following his
way of life as closely as possible by obeying what is enjoined and prohib-
ited in the Qur'an and by the Messenger. The Sunna is a comprehens-
ively detailed account of his life. He told his community: "Take care! I
have been given the Book and its like together with it."320
As stated in 8:20, Muslims must not turn away from the Messenger.
Therefore, disobeying, belittling, or criticizing the Sunna amounts to
heresy or even apostasy. Many other verses emphasize the necessity of
following the Sunna, such as: O you who believe! Obey God and obey the
Messenger and those in authority from among you (4:59). The verse stresses
obedience to God and to the Messenger. The repetition of obey in the im-
perative mood indicates that the Messenger is authorized to command or
forbid, and that Muslims must do what he says. Besides, where obedi-
ence to those Musims in authority is ordered, the Prophet has a far great-
er right to be obeyed.
Another verse states: Obey God and His Messenger and do not dispute with
one another, lest you should be dissolved (dispersed) and your strength fade
away; and be steadfast (8:46). Muslim strength and unity lie in submission
to God and His Messenger. The Messenger established the Sunna by liv-
ing the Qur'an, which means that it is the only way his community can
320.Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 5.
291

--- Sayfa 293 ---
follow. Based on this, we can say that the Sunna is both more compre-
hensive than the Qur'an and indispensable for leading an upright life in
Islamic terms.
Muslims can obey God and show their love for Him only by obeying
the Messenger or by following his Sunna: Say (O Muhammad): "If you
love God, follow me so that God loves you" (3:31), Surely there is for you in the
Messenger an excellent example for him who aspires to God and the Hereafter,
and mentions God oft (33:21), and many other verses. Those who claim to
love God or that God loves them, despite their non-adherence to the
Sunna, are seriously deluded and astray.
Muslims must cling to the Sunna if they want to remain on the Straight
Path and avoid deviation. For example: One day a woman said to 'Abd
Allah ibn Mas'ud: "I have heard that you call down God's curse upon
women who tattoo their bodies, pluck their facial hair, force their teeth
apart in order to look more beautiful, and who change the creation of
God." Ibn Mas'ud answered: "All of this is found in the Qur'an." The wo-
man objected: "I swear by God that I have read the entire Qur'an, but I
couldn't find anything related to this matter." Ibn Mas'ud told her: "Our
Prophet called God's curse upon women who wear wigs, who join
somebody's hair to theirs, and who have tattoos on their bodies. Haven't
you read: Whatever the Messenger brings you, adopt it; whatever he forbids
you, refrain from it (59:7)?"321
The Qur'an also declares: Nay, by your Master, they will never become be-
lievers until they choose you as judge to settle the matters in dispute between
them (4:65).
321.Muslim, "Libas," 120.
292

--- Sayfa 294 ---
The Sunna in the Traditions
The way of the Prophet is the way of God. As the Sunna is the way of the
Prophet, those who reject it are, in essence, rejecting (and disobeying)
God. As the Prophet stated: "Whoever obeys me, obeys God; whoever dis-
obeys me, disobeys God."322 Such disobedience is "rewarded" with Hell: "My
nation will enter Paradise, except those who rebel." When asked who these
rebels were, the Prophet answered: "Whoever obeys me will enter Paradise;
whoever disobeys me rebels."323
The Sunna links all past, present, and future Muslims. It also enables
Muslims to maintain their unity, as it forms a unique culture and system.
Concerning this, the Messenger declared: "Those who survive me will wit-
ness many disputes and disagreements. Therefore, follow my way and the way of
my rightly-guided and rightly-guiding successors. Hold firm to that way—cling
to it with your teeth."324
Following the Sunna, on both the individual and the collective level,
becomes vital when Islam is attacked and Muslims lose their supremacy.
The Messenger stated that "at a time when the Muslim community breaks
with Islam and consequently disintegrates, the one who holds firm to his Sunna
gains the reward of a martyr."325 Given this, those who criticize it should be
asked, as the Qur'an asks unbelievers: Where are you headed?
322.Bukhari, “Ahkam,” 1; Ibn Maja, “Muqaddima,” 1.
323.Bukhari, “I‘tisam,” 2; Ibn Hanbal, 2:361.
324.Abu Dawud, “Sunna,” 5; Tirmidhi, “‘Ilm,” 16; Ibn Maja, “Muqaddima,” 6.
325.Abu Nu‘aym, Hilya’, 8:200; Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, 4:198.
293

--- Sayfa 295 ---
The Sunna's Role
The Sunna has two main functions. First, it enjoins and prohibits, lays
down the principles related to establishing all religious obligations and
necessities, and determines what is lawful or unlawful. Second, it inter-
prets the Qur'an.
In each daily prescribed prayer, we recite: Guide us to the Straight Path,
to the path of those you have blessed, not of those who incurred (Your) wrath,
nor of the misguided (1:5–7). The verses mention, but do not specify, two
groups of people. According to the Prophet, those who incurred God's
wrath are Jews who have gone astray, and the misguided are Christians
who have gone astray.326
The Jews killed many of their Prophets and caused trouble in many
places. Although they had once followed Divine guidance and guided
others to the Straight Path (during the times of Moses, David, and So-
lomon), over time many of them went astray and incurred both God's
wrath and public ignominy. Those who follow this way also are in-
cluded in those who incurred (Your) wrath. Such Jews are condemned
harshly in the Bible as well. In fact, the Bible is much harsher toward
them than the Qur'an. In many verses, the Qur'an reproaches such Jews
and Christians very mildly and compassionately.
At first, the Christians obeyed Jesus and followed his way despite
severe persecution. They heroically resisted all forms of hypocrisy and
Roman oppression. But over time, many came under the influence of
various Middle Eastern religions and philosophies as well as Roman pa-
ganism. By the time Christianity became the Roman Empire's official re-
ligion, it already was divided into many sects and had more than 300
Gospels in circulation. Although many remained devoted to the original
creed of Jesus, many others contaminated these pure teachings with bor-
rowed elements. The Qur'an therefore describes them as the misguided.
By making the above interpretation, the Prophet explained how
people who had been blessed with Divine guidance could go astray and
end up deserving God's wrath. Thus, he warned Muslims not to follow
such Jews and Christians.
Out of many examples showing how the Sunna interprets the Qur'an,
we also cite the following:
326.Tirmidhi, "Tafsir al-Qur'an," 2; Tabari, "Tafsir," 1:61, 64.
294

--- Sayfa 296 ---
• When the verse: Those who believed and did not mix their belief with
wrongdoing: for them is security and they are those who are truly guided (6:82)
was revealed, the Companions, well aware what wrongdoing meant,
asked the Messenger fearfully: "Is there one among us who has never done
wrong?" The Messenger explained: "It's not as you think. It's as Luqman
said to his son: Don't associate any partners with God; surely, associating part-
ners with God is a grave wrongdoing (31:13).327
• 'A'isha and Ibn Mas'ud are of the opinion that the mid-time prayer
in: Attend the prayers without any omission and the mid-time prayer (2:238) is
the afternoon prayer. Once 'A'isha ordered her servant to write a copy of
the Qur'an for her and reminded her: "When you come to the verse: Attend
the prayers without any omission, and the mid-time prayer, inform me." When
this verse was to be copied out, 'A'isha dictated to her servant: Attend the
prayers without any omission, and the mid-time prayer, the afternoon prayer,
and added: "This is what I heard from the Messenger."328 Although there are
some other interpretations, 'A'isha and Ibn Mas'ud were certain that it
was the afternoon prayer.
In addition to interpreting the Qur'an's ambiguities, the Sunna fills in
the details about those subjects that the Qur'an mentions only briefly. For
example, the Qur'an orders Muslims to pray properly, but does not ex-
plain how they should pray. Although some leading interpreters deduce
the prayer times from such verses such as: Perform the prayer correctly at
the two ends of the day and nigh of the night; surely the good deeds remove the
evil deeds (11:114), the exact prayer time was established by the Prophet
as follows:
On two occasions, Archangel Gabriel led me in the five daily prayers at the
Ka'ba. On the first time, he prayed the noon prayer at noon, when an item's
shadow was only as long as its base. When the shadow was as long as the actual
item, he prayed the afternoon prayer. He prayed the evening prayer when it was
time for a person to break the fast. He prayed the late evening (or night) prayer
when dusk disappeared, and the dawn (or morning) prayer when those who in-
tend to fast can no longer eat or drink. The second time, he prayed the noon
prayer when an item's shadow was as long as the actual item, and prayed the af-
ternoon prayer when it was twice as long as the actual item. He prayed the even-
ing prayer at the same time he had prayed it previously. He prayed the night
prayer after one-third of the night had passed, and the dawn prayer when it was
lighter and the sun had still not risen. Then he turned to me and said: "O
327.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 31/1.
328.[3] Tirmidhi, "Tafsir al-Qur'an," 3.
295

--- Sayfa 297 ---
Muhammad, each of the five daily prayers should be performed between these
two periods of time, as the Prophets before you did it."329
The Messenger also taught his community everything related to pray-
er: its conditions; all obligatory, necessary, and commendable acts that
validate and ennoble it; and all acts that invalidate and damage it. He
passed on, both through words and actions, all that they needed to know
about worship. This all-inclusive term is not limited to the actual pray-
ers, but also includes such areas as fasting, alms-giving, pilgrimage, and
many more. Just as he told his followers to "pray as you see me pray," he
told them to "learn from me the rites and ceremonies of pilgrimage"330 after he
actually performed it with his Companions. If the Qur'an had gone into
such exhaustive detail on such matters, it would have been many times
its present size.
The Sunna also restricts general laws and commandments in the
Qur'an. For example, it lays down general principles of inheritance.
When the Prophet's daughter Fatima went to Abu Bakr, the first Caliph,
and asked for her inheritance, Abu Bakr replied: "I heard the Messenger
say: 'The community of the Prophets does not leave anything to be inherited.
What we leave is for charity." This hadith excludes the Prophets and their
children from the laws of inheritance. Likewise, the Messenger decreed
that "the killer (of his testator) would be disinherited."331 In other words, if
someone kills his or her parents, brother (sister), or uncle (aunt), they
cannot inherit from them.
The Qur'an commands: And the thief, male and female, cut off the hands of
both, as a recompense for what they have earned, and a punishment exemplary
from God; God is All-Mighty, All-Wise (5:38). Whether this punishment is
to be applied to every thief, or only to those who steal goods of a certain
value, is not clear. Also, in: O believers, when you stand up to pray wash your
faces, and your hands up to elbows… (5:6), the hand extends to the elbow.
But the Qur'an does not mention specifically what part of the hand
should be cut, nor in what circumstances this punishment should be ap-
plied. For example, during 'Umar's caliphate there was a period of fam-
ine, and he did not apply this punishment.
The Qur'an decrees: O you who believe! Consume not your goods among
yourselves in vanity[through theft, usury, bribery, hoarding, and so on], except
it be trade by mutual agreement (4:29). Islam encourages trade as a
329.Abu Dawud, "Salat," 2; Tirmidhi, "Mawaqit," 1.
330.Nasa'i, "Manasik," 220; Ibn Hanbal, 3:366.
331.Tirmidhi, "Fara'id," 17.
296

--- Sayfa 298 ---
livelihood, as long as it is carried out according to Islamic law. One con-
dition, as stated in the verse, is mutual agreement. However, the Messen-
ger decreed: "Don't sell fruits until their amount is definite in the tree[so that
the amount to be given as alms can be determined]" and: "Don't go to meet
peasants outside the market to buy their goods[Let them earn the market prices
of their goods]."
In sum, the Qur'an contains general principles that are explained by
the Messenger and then applied by him to daily life. God allowed His
Messenger to issue rulings, as necessary, and ordered the believers:
Whatever the Messenger brings you, adopt it; whatever he forbids you, refrain
from it (59:7).
297

--- Sayfa 299 ---
Chapter 11
Establishing the Sunna
The Sunna had to be established
The Sunna as one of the two main sources of Islam was memorized, re-
corded, and carefully preserved so that it could be passed down without
distortion or alteration. The Sunna is included in the meaning of: We have
sent down the dhikr[the collection of Divine instructions and recitations, the
Divine guidance] in parts, and certainly We are its preserver (15:9).
The Sunna, the unique example set by the Messenger of God for all
Muslims to follow, shows us how to bring our lives into agreement with
God’s Commands and obtain His good pleasure. This being the case, the
Messenger stood at the intersection of ignorance and knowledge, truth
and falsehood, right and wrong, and this world and the other. He estab-
lished, through his words as well as his actions and those of which he
approved, the Divine way that all Muslims must follow.
The Sunna is the window opened on the Messenger of God, the sacred
way leading to the blessings of Islam. Without it, Muslims cannot imple-
ment Islam in their daily lives, establish a connection with the Messen-
ger, or receive his blessings. Those who ignore it run a grave danger of
deviating and placing themselves outside Islam, for it is an unbreakable
rope guaranteeing Muslim unity and elevating those who hold fast to it
to Paradise.
There are several motives for establishing the Sunnah. Among them
are the following:
The Qur'an urges Muslims to follow the Sunna. God commands:
Whatever the Messenger brings you, adopt it; whatever he forbids you, refrain
from it; fear God and seek His protection, surely God is He Whose punishment
is severe (59:7). Besides relaying the Qur'an to humanity, the Messenger
expanded on it through the Sunna. The word whatever covers
everything related to the Qur'an (the Revelation Recited) and the Hadith
(the Revelation Unrecited). The Messenger only spoke what was
298

--- Sayfa 300 ---
revealed to him, or inspired in him, by God. Verse 59:7 tells Muslims to
obey the Messenger so that they can become deserving of God's protec-
tion. Aware of this, the Companions paid close attention to his every
word and were very careful in carrying out his commands.
A Muslim can obtain God's good pleasure and attain true bliss in both
worlds only by following the Sunna, for its sole purpose is to lead hu-
manity to safety and eternal happiness. The Qur'an declares: Verily, there
is for you a most excellent example in the Messenger of God, for him who aspires
to God and the Last Day, and mentions God oft (33:21).
The Messenger encourages Muslims to learn his Sunna. The Compan-
ions knew what they needed to do to avoid eternal punishment and re-
ceive God's blessing, and so zealously memorized and recorded the
Prophet's sayings. They heard him pray: "[On the day when some faces will
be radiant and some mournful], may God make radiant[with joy and happiness]
the face of the one who has heard a word from me and, preserving (memorizing)
it, conveys it to others."332 According to another version, he prayed: "May
God make radiant the face of the servant who has heard my speech and, commit-
ting it to memory and observing it in daily life, conveys it to others."333
The Companions also knew the Prophet would intercede for them
only if they followed the Sunna: "On the Day of Judgment, I will put my
head on the ground and ask God to forgive my nation. I will be told: 'O
Muhammad, raise your head and ask; you will be given whatever you ask. Inter-
cede; your intercession will be accepted.'"334
The Messenger spoke distinctly and sometimes repeated his words so
his audience could memorize them.335 He taught them supplications and
recitations that were not in the Qur'an with the same care and emphasis
as he taught the Qur'an.336 He continually urged his Companions to
spread his words and teach others what they knew. If they did not, he
warned them: "If you are asked about something you know and then conceal
that knowledge, a bridle of fire will be put on you on the Day of Judgment."337
The Qur'an also conveys this warning: Those who conceal what God has sent
down of the Book and sell it for a little price, they do not eat in their bellies but
332.Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 7.
333.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 18.
334.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 2/1; Muslim, "Iman," 322.
335.Bukhari, "Manaqib," 23; Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 160.
336.Muslim, "Salat," 61; Abu Dawud, "Salat," 178.
337.Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 3; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 24.
299

--- Sayfa 301 ---
the fire; God shall not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor shall He
purify them; for them is a painful torment (2:174).
Keeping these words and warnings in mind, the Companions strove to
memorize the Qur'an and the Sunna and to record the latter. They then
lived their lives in accordance with Islamic principles and commands,
and conveyed what they knew to others. They formed study and discus-
sion groups to refine their understanding. The Messenger encouraged
them to do this: "If people come together in a house of God and recite from the
Book of God and study it, peace and tranquillity descends upon them, (God's)
Compassion envelops them, angels surround them, and God mentions them to
those in His presence."338
338.Muslim, "Dhikr," 38; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 17.
300

--- Sayfa 302 ---
Other Motives
The Companions lived in an ethos that never lost its freshness. Like a
growing embryo in the womb, the Muslim community grew and flour-
ished, eventually including all areas of life. It was fed continuously with
Revelation. Such factors, along with the Sunna and the Companions' de-
votion to the Prophet, drove them to record or memorize whatever The
Messenger said or did.
For example, when 'Uthman ibn Mad'un died, the Messenger shed as
many tears as he had over Hamza's corpse. He kissed his forehead and
attended the funeral. Witnessing this, a woman said: "How happy you are,
'Uthman. You have become a bird to fly in Paradise." The Messenger turned
to her and asked: "How do you know that, while I, a Prophet, do not know?
Unless God informs, no one can know whether someone is pure enough to de-
serve Paradise and whether he will go to Paradise or Hell." The woman collec-
ted herself, and said that she would never make such an assumption
again.339 Is it conceivable that she and the Companions present at the fu-
neral should have forgotten that event? They did not forget it, as well as
others that they witnessed during the Prophet's lifetime.
Another example: Quzman fought heroically at Uhud, and was finally
killed. The Companions considered him a martyr. However, the Prophet
told them that Quzman had gone to Hell. Someone later informed them
that Quzman had committed suicide because of his wounds, and had
said before he died: "I fought out of tribal solidarity, not for Islam." The
Messenger concluded: "God strengthens this religion even through a sinful
man."340 Like others, that event and his final comment could never have
been forgotten by the Companions, nor could they have failed to men-
tion it whenever they talked about Uhud or martyrdom.
A similar incident took place during the conquest of Khaybar. 'Umar
reports: "On the day Khaybar was conquered, some Companions listed the mar-
tyrs. When they mentioned so-and-so as a martyr, the Messenger said: 'I saw
him in Hell, for he stole a robe from the spoils of war before it was distributed.'"
He then told me to stand up and announce: 'Only believers (who are true rep-
resentatives or embodiments of absolute faith and trustworthiness) can enter
Paradise.'"341
339.Ibn Athir, "Usd al-Ghaba," 3:600.
340.Muslim, "Iman," 178; Bukhari, "Iman," 178.
341.Muslim, "Iman," 182.
301

--- Sayfa 303 ---
Each word and action of the Messenger refined the Companions' un-
derstanding and implementation of Islam. This motivated them to ab-
sorb his every word and action. When they settled in newly conquered
lands, they conveyed their knowledge to the new Muslims, thereby en-
suring that the Sunna would be transmitted from one generation to the
next.
They were so well-behaved toward the Messenger that they would re-
main silent in his presence and let bedouins or others ask him questions.
One day a bedouin named Dimam ibn Tha'laba came and asked rudely:
"Which one of you is Muhammad?" They replied that he was the white-
complexioned man sitting against the wall. The bedouin turned to him
and asked loudly: "O son of 'Abd al-Muttalib, I will ask you some ques-
tions! They may be injurious to you, so don't become annoyed with me."
The Prophet told him to ask whatever was in his mind. He said: "Tell me,
for the sake of God, your Master and the Master of those before you, did
He send you to these people as a Prophet?" When the Prophet said that
this was true, Dimam asked: "Tell me, for God's sake, is it God Who
ordered you to pray five times a day?" When the Prophet said that this
was true, Dimam continued questioning him in the same manner about
fasting and alms-giving. Always receiving the same answer, Dimam an-
nounced: "I am Dimam ibn Tha'laba, from the tribe of Sa'd bin Bakr. They sent
me to you as an envoy. I declare that I believe in whatever message you have
brought from God."342
Like many others, this event too was not allowed to fall into oblivion;
rather, it was handed down to succeeding generations until it was recor-
ded in the books of Tradition.
Ubayy ibn Ka'b was one of the foremost reciters of the Qur'an. One
day the Messenger sent for him and said: "God ordered me to recite Surah
al-Bayyina to you." Ubayy was so moved that he asked: "Did God mention
my name?" The Messenger's answer moved him to tears.343 This was so
great an honor for Ubayy's family that his grandson would introduce
himself as "the grandson of the man to whom God ordered His Messen-
ger to recite Sura al-Bayyina."
This was the ethos in which the Companions lived. Every day a new
"fruit of Paradise" and "gift" of God was presented to them, and every
day brought new situations. Previously unaware of faith, Divine Scrip-
ture, and Prophethood, these desert Arabs, gifted with a keen memory
342.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 161.
343.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 98/1,2,3; Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 122.
302

--- Sayfa 304 ---
and a talent for poetry, were brought up by the Messenger to educate fu-
ture Muslim generations. God chose them as His Messenger's Compan-
ions, and willed them to convey His Message throughout the world.
After the Prophet's death, they conquered in the name of Islam all the
lands from Spain to China, from Caucasia to India, with unprecedented
speed. Conveying the Qur'an and the Sunna everywhere they went,
many of the conquered people joined their households and embraced
Islam. The Muslims instructed these new Muslims in the Qur'an and the
Sunna, thereby preparing the ground for all the leading Muslim scholars
and scientists to come.
The Companions considered memorizing and transmitting the Qur'an
and the Sunna as acts of worship, for they had heard from the Messenger
say: "Whoever comes to my mosque should come either to learn the good or to
teach it. Such people have the same rank as those who fight in the way of
God."344
So, as Anas reports, they frequently met to discuss what they heard
from the Messenger.345 Women also were taught by the Messenger, who
set aside a specific day for them. His wives actively conveyed to other
women whatever they learned from the Messenger. Their influence was
great, for through them the Prophet established family ties with the
people of Khaybar (through Safiyya), the Banu Amir ibn Sa'sa'a (through
Maymuna), the Banu Makhzum (through Umm Salama), the Umayyads
(through Umm Habiba), and the Banu Mustaliq (through Juwayriya).
The women of these tribes would come to their "representative" among
the Prophet's household ask her about religious matters.
In the last year of his Messengership, the Messenger went to Makka
for what has become known as the Farewell Pilgrimage. In his Farewell
Sermon at 'Arafat to more than 100,000 people, he summarized his mis-
sion and told his audience: "Those who are here should convey my speech to
those who are not."346 Some time later, the last verse to be revealed com-
manded the Muslim community to practice and support Islam: Fear a day
when you will be returned unto God and every soul shall be paid what it earned;
they will not be wronged (2:281).
344.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 17.
345.Muhammad 'Ajjaj al-Khatib, "al-Sunna Qabl al-Tadwin," 160.
346.Bukhari, "'Ilm," 9; Ibn Hanbal, 5:41.
303

--- Sayfa 305 ---
The Companions and the Sunna
The Companions obeyed the Messenger in everything. They were so im-
bued with love for him that they strove to imitate him in every possible
way. In fact, the Qur'an itself led them to do this, for it states that obey-
ing the Messenger is directly related to belief: But no, by your Master! They
will not believe till they make you the judge in disputes between them, then they
shall find in themselves no impediment touching your verdict, but shall sur-
render in full submission (4:65). The following are only a few examples of
their degree of submission.
• Shortly before his death, the Messenger raised an army, appointed
Usama to command it, and told him to "advance only as far as the place
where your father was martyred, and strengthen our rule there." The
Messenger took to his bed before the army departed. When Usama vis-
ited him, the Messenger prayed for him. The army was just about to set
out when the Messenger died. Abu Bakr, his political successor and the
first caliph, dispatched the army without a second thought, despite up-
risings in various parts of Arabia. He accompanied the soldiers to the
outskirts of Madina and said: "By God, even if wolves attack us from all dir-
ections, I will not lower a flag hoisted by the Messenger."347
• The Messenger's death shocked and grieved Madina's Muslims. The
subsequent election to choose the caliph caused some dissension among
the Companions. Abu Bakr shouldered a very heavy task, for the army
was waiting to be sent, reports of uprisings were coming in, and small
groups were not satisfied with his election. Just at this juncture Fatima,
the Prophet's daughter, asked him for her share in the land of Fadak.
Abu Bakr did not want to offend her, but also was determined to remain
faithful to the Sunna. He used to say: "I can't forsake anything that the Mes-
senger did." He had heard something from the Messenger, which Fatima
had not: "We, the community of the Prophets, do not bequeath anything.
Whatever we leave is charity."348
• After the conquest of Makka, people from all over Arabia embraced
Islam. Of course, many were not as devoted to Islam as the Companions.
Some apostatized and, following Musaylima the Liar, revolted against
Madina. Others showed signs of revolt by refusing to pay the prescribed
alms-tax. Abu Bakr fought such people until peace and security reigned
in Arabia once again.
347.Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa', 74.
348.Bukhari, "Khums," 1; Muslim, "Jihad," 52.
304

--- Sayfa 306 ---
• 'Umar was known as "the one who submits himself to truth." Unaware
of the Prophet's decree, he put forward his own judgment about how
much money should be paid to compensate someone for a cut finger. A
Companion opposed him: "O Commander of the Faithful! I heard the Mes-
senger say: 'The blood money for both hands together is the same as that paid for
a life. This amount is shared out equally among the fingers, as ten camels for
each.'" 'Umar instantly withdrew his ruling and said to himself: "O son of
Khattab! Do you dare to judge, through your own reasoning, on a matter the
Messenger decreed?"
• Abu Musa al-Ash'ari went to visit 'Umar in his office. He knocked on
the door three times and then left, as he received no answer. After Abu
Musa left, 'Umar opened the door and asked who had knocked. Learning
that Abu Musa had knocked, 'Umar sent for him and asked why he had
left. Abu Musa answered: "The Messenger said: 'When you visit
someone, knock on the door. If you are not allowed to enter after you
knock for the third time, go away,'" 'Umar asked him if he could verify
this hadith, which was unknown to him. Abu Musa brought Abu Sa'id
al-Khudri, who testified to its truth, and 'Umar conceded.349
• When 'Umar was stabbed while prostrating in the mosque, he was
asked if he wanted to designate his successor. 'Umar answered: "If I des-
ignate, one who is better than me (Abu Bakr) did so. If I do not designate, one
who is better than me (the Messenger) did not do so." 'Umar was certain to
follow the latter action. However, to prevent any possible disagreement,
he left the matter to a consultative committee that he formed for this very
purpose.
• When 'Umar saw Zayd ibn Khalid al-Juhani perform a supererogat-
ory prayer after the afternoon prayer, he reproached him for doing what
the Messenger had not done. Zayd told him: "Even if you break my head
into pieces, I shall never give up this two rak'ah prayer, for I saw the
Messenger perform it." Umm Salama, one of the Prophet's wives, repor-
ted that one day her husband could not perform the two rak'ah super-
erogatory prayer after the noon prayer because he was busy with a visit-
ing delegation. So, he prayed that prayer after the afternoon prayer.
Zayd must have seen the Messenger perform it at that time.
• 'Ali once drank water while standing. Maysara ibn Ya'qub criticized
him: "Why are you drinking while standing?" 'Ali answered: "If I do so,
it's because I saw the Messenger do so. If I drink while sitting, it's because I saw
the Messenger do so."350
349.Muslim, "Adab," 7/33; Ibn Hanbal, 3:19.
305

--- Sayfa 307 ---
• Instead of washing the feet during wudu', Muslims can wipe the up-
per surface of light, thin-soled boots worn indoors (or inside overshoes)
with wet hands. Showing the Sunna's supremacy over personal reason-
ing, 'Ali said: "If I had not seen the Messenger wipe the upper surface of his
light, thin-soled boots, I would deem it more proper to wipe their soles."351
• If a Muslim kills another by mistake, the killer's heirs must pay
blood-money. 'Umar thought that a wife could not inherit any blood-
money due to her husband. However, Dahhak ibn Abi Sufyan informed
him that when Ashyam ibn Dibabi had been killed, the Messenger had
given some of the blood-money to his wife. 'Umar declared: "From now
on, wives will inherit from the blood-money of their husbands."352
• Abu 'Ubayda ibn Jarrah commanded the Muslim armies fighting in
Syria. When 'Umar went to visit him in Amwas, pestilence had broken
out already. Before 'Umar entered the city, 'Abd al-Rahman ibn al-'Awf
told him: "I heard the Messenger say: 'If you hear that pestilence has broken
out in a place, don't enter it. If you are in such a place already, don't leave it.'"
'Umar, so obedient to the Sunna, returned home without seeing his faith-
ful friend for the last time.
350.Ibn Hanbal, 1:134.
351.Abu Dawud, "Tahara," 63.
352.Abu Dawud, "Fara'id," 18; Ibn Ma'ja, "Diyat," 12; Tirmidhi, "Fara'id," 18.
306

--- Sayfa 308 ---
Further Remarks on the Sunna's Importance
The Qur'an declares:
It is not for any believer, man or woman, when God and His Messenger have
decreed a matter, to have the choice in the affair. Whosoever disobeys God and
His Messenger has gone astray into manifest error (33:36).
… Those who believe in Our signs, those who follow the Messenger, the un-
lettered Prophet, whom they find written down with them in the Torah and the
Gospel, enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, making lawful the good
things and making unlawful the corrupt things, and relieving them of their
loads and the fetters that were upon them. Those who believe in him and succor
him and help him, and follow the light that has been sent down with him—they
are the ones who prosper (7:156–57).
The Traditions declare:
• The best of words is the Book of God; the best way to follow is that
of Muhammad. The worst affair is innovations (against my Sunna). Each
innovation is a deviation.353
• "Everyone of my community will enter Paradise, except those who
rebel." When they asked who these rebels were, he replied: "Whoever
obeys me will enter Paradise; whoever disobeys me is a rebel."354
• In the case of my community, I am like someone who has lit a fire.
Insects and butterflies flock to it. I hold you by the cloth[of your gar-
ments to keep you away from the fire], but you pull yourselves into it.355
• Don't let me find any of you seated in armchairs, who, when
something I ordered or forbade is reported to them, respond: "We have
no knowledge of it. So, we follow whatever we find in the Book of
God."356
• Be careful! Surely I have been given the Book and its like together
with it.357
• Those who outlive me will witness many controversies. Follow my
way and that of the rightly guided successors (caliphs) who will guide to
truth. Hold fast to it and cling to it stubbornly with your teeth. Refrain
353.Muslim, "Jumu'a," 43; Nasa'i, "'Iydayn," 22; Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 5.
354.Bukhari, "I'tisam," 2.
355.Muslim, "Fada'il," 17,18; Bukhari, "Riqaq," 26.
356.Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 5; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 2; Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 10.
357.Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 5.
307

--- Sayfa 309 ---
from newly invented things (in religion), for each such thing is an innov-
ation, and each innovation is a deviation.358
• I have left to you two precious things that, if you hold fast to them,
will never lead you astray: The Qur'an and the Sunna.359
358.Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 16; Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 5; Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 6.
359.Imam Malik, Muwatta', "Qadar," 3.
308

--- Sayfa 310 ---
Relating the traditions
The Companions and the immediately following generations were metic-
ulous in narrating or transmitting these Traditions.37 They showed the
utmost care and exactness in separating sound Traditions from those
that had been fabricated (to meet personal or sectarian needs). After
memorizing them word for word, they transmitted the sound ones to the
following generations.
309

--- Sayfa 311 ---
The Messenger's Warning and the Companions' Self-Control
Islam is distinguished from unbelief by its firm rooting in truthfulness.
True Muslims do not lie. The Companions and their successors proved
their attachment to Islam by their personal sacrifices in its cause. In addi-
tion, they feared God, lived austerely, and avoided life's comforts. Many
great scholars and saints appeared among them, and their examples con-
tinue to be followed even today.
The Messenger warned people not to lie about him: "Those who lie about
me should prepare their abodes in the Fire"360 and: "Whoever relates from me
falsely is a liar."361 In the face of such warnings, would the Companions,
who had sacrificed their entire lives for the cause of Islam, even think of
lying about the Messenger?
Based on these considerations, the Companions took great care when
narrating Traditions so that no mistake or misunderstanding would oc-
cur. For example 'Ali, the Prophet's cousin and son-in-law who was al-
ways with him, used to say: "I fear to narrate a Tradition from the Messenger
so much that I would rather fall from Heaven than speak a lie on his behalf."362
'Abd Allah ibn al-Mas'ud, one of the most knowledgeable and nearest
Companions, was similarly careful. When asked to report from the Mes-
senger, he began with: "The Messenger of God said," stopped and bowed his
head, breathed deeply and unbuttoned his collar while his eyes filled with tears.
After the narration, he added: "The Messenger of God said this, or something
like this, or something more or less like this."363
Zubayr ibn 'Awwam, one of the ten Companions assured Paradise,
narrated only a few Traditions from the Messenger. When his son asked
him why, he replied: "I am so afraid that I might say something contrary to
what the Messenger really said. For he declared: 'Those who lie about me inten-
tionally should prepare their abodes in the Fire.'"364 Anas ibn Malik, who
served the Messenger for 10 years, said: "If I were not so afraid of making a
mistake, I would relate many more narrations from the Messenger."365
360.Bukhari, "'Ilm," 38; Muslim, "Zuhd," 72; Abu Dawud, "'Ilm," 4; Tirmidhi, "Fitan,"
70.
361.Muslim, "Muqaddima," 1.
362.Bukhari, "Istitaba," 6; Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 28.
363.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 3.
364.Bukhari, "'Ilm," 38; Muslim, "Zuhd," 72.
365.Darimi, "Muqaddima," 25.
310

--- Sayfa 312 ---
'Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Layla met 500 Companions. When he visited
a place, people would say: "The man who met 500 Companions has come to
our town." He had a great influence on Abu Hanifa and Imam Abu Yusuf.
He reports: "I was personally familiar with 120 Companions. Sometimes all of
them were in the same mosque. When they were asked about something, each
would wait for the other to answer. If they were asked to narrate a Tradition, no
one would dare to. Finally, one of them would place his trust in God and begin
to narrate. He would always add: 'The Messenger said this, or something like
this, or something more or less like this.'"366
Zayd ibn Arqam was one of the first people to embrace Islam. In the
early days of Islam, the Messenger would meet with the Muslims
secretly in his house. Zayd was appointed superintendent of the public
treasury during the caliphates of 'Umar and 'Uthman. When he saw
'Uthman give items from the treasury to his relatives, he told him: "O
Commander of the Faithful. People will suspect me and will no longer trust me.
Allow me to resign." When 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Layla asked him to
narrate a Tradition, Zayd answered: "My son, I have become old and forget-
ful. Narrating about the Messenger is not something easy."367
366.Dhahabi, Siyaru A'lam al-Nubala', 4:263.
367.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 3.
311

--- Sayfa 313 ---
Literal Narration
Although the literal narration is better and always preferable, narration
of meaning is allowed if the narrator has an expert command of Arabic,
if the word used is appropriate in the given context, and if the original
has been forgotten. However, the Companions always narrated Tradi-
tions literally despite this permission. For example, one day 'Ubayd ibn
'Umayr narrated: "A hypocrite resembles a sheep left between rabidayn
(two flocks)." 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar objected: "He did not say so. I heard
the Messenger say: 'A hypocrite resembles a sheep left between
ghanamayn (two flocks).'"368 The meaning is the same; the difference is
only between the words rabidayn and ghanamayn.
This same care was adopted by the scholars or narrators belonging to
the generation immediately following the Companions, known as the
Tabi'un (those who follow). For instance, someone narrated in the pres-
ence of Sufyan ibn 'Uyayna: "The Messenger forbade leaving the juice (of
grapes, dates, and the like) to ferment (an yuntabadha) in bowls made of
pumpkin and lined with pitch." Sufyan objected: "I heard Zuhri narrate:
'The Messenger forbade leaving the juice (of grapes, dates, and the like)
to ferment (an yunbadha) in bowls made of pumpkin and lined with
pitch.'"369 There is no difference in meaning, only in the verb's
conjugation.
Bara ibn 'Adhib related:
The Messenger advised me: Perform wudu' before going to bed. Then lie on
your right side and pray: "O God, I have submitted myself to You and commit-
ted my affair to You. I have sheltered in You, in fear of You, and in quest of You.
There is no shelter from You except in You. I believe in Your Book You sent
down, and Your Prophet You raised." To memorize this immediately, I repeated
it to the Messenger and said at the end of it "Your Messenger You raised." He
corrected the final sentence, saying: "and Your Prophet You raised."370
People dream when they sleep. True dreams constitute 1/46 of Proph-
ethood, for the Messenger had true dreams during the first 6 months of
his 23-year period of Prophethood. As they are related to Prophethood,
not to Messengership,371 the Messenger corrected Bara. This care was
shown by almost all Companions, who studied the Traditions they heard
from
the
Messenger
and
then
discussed
their
meanings
and
368.Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi, Musnad, 248.
369.Khatib al-Baghdadi, al-Kifaya fi 'Ilm al-Riwaya, 178.
370.Bukhari, "Da'awat," 6.
312

--- Sayfa 314 ---
connotations. The Messenger told them: "Memorize and study the Tradi-
tions, for some are related to others. Therefore, come together and dis-
cuss them."372
371.A Prophet is one who receives revelation but is not given a Book and therefore fol-
lowing the way of a previous Messenger. While a Messenger is he who usually re-
ceives a Book or Pages and sets a way to follow. (Tr.)
372.Darimi, "Muqaddima," 51.
313

--- Sayfa 315 ---
Verification
The Companions strove to verify the Tradition's meaning. None of them
lied, for their fear of Divine punishment was too great. However, report-
ers might have misunderstood the Tradition, missed an important point
while receiving it from the Messenger, or interpreted it incorrectly. With
no intention of opposing the Messenger, they exerted themselves to un-
derstand his true purpose and discussed what they received from him.
A woman once asked Caliph Abu Bakr if she could inherit from her
grandchildren. He answered: "I have seen nothing in the Qur'an that al-
lows this, nor do I remember the Messenger saying anything on this
point." Mughira ibn Shu'ba stood up and said: "The Messenger allowed
the grandmother to receive one-sixth (of the estate)." Abu Bakr asked
Mughira if he could produce a witness to testify to this. When
Muhammad ibn Maslama testified to it, Abu Bakr gave the woman one-
sixth of her grandson's estate.
When the Messenger declared: "Those called to account for their deeds on
the Day of Judgment by God will be ruined," 'A'isha asked: "What about the
Divine declaration in the Qur'an: Then they will be called to account (for
their deeds), and it will be an easy act of giving account'?" The Messenger
answered: "It is about presentation. Everyone will give account to God for their
deeds. If those who did evil deny their evil deeds, God will inform them of their
deeds. Such people will be ruined."373
As recorded in Bukhari, 'Umar narrates:
I heard Hisham ibn Hakim pronounce some words of Surat al-Furqan some-
what differently from the way the Messenger taught me. I waited patiently until
he had finished praying, and then asked him: "Who taught you such a recita-
tion?" When he told me that he had learned it from the Messenger, I took him to
the Messenger and explained the situation. The Messenger asked Hisham to re-
cite the sura, which he did. The Messenger nodded, saying: "This is the way it
was revealed to me." Then he asked me to recite, which I did. Again he nodded
and said: "Thus it was revealed." He added: "The Qur'an is revealed in seven
different ways. Recite it in the way easiest to you."
The Companions were so devoted to the Sunna that they would travel
long distances to learn just one hadith. For example, Abu Ayyub al-An-
sari traveled from Madina to Egypt to check one hadith's exact wording.
Among those who had received it from the Messenger, only 'Uqba ibn
373.Bukhari, "'Ilm," 35; Muslim, "Janna," 79
314

--- Sayfa 316 ---
Amir was still alive and living in Egypt. Abu Ayyub arrived in the capit-
al city and, calling on its governor Maslama ibn Mukhallad, found a
guide to take him to 'Uqba. When he found this Companion in a street,
he asked him about: "Whoever covers (hides) a believer's defect in the
world, God will cover his (or her) defects in the Hereafter." Being told by
'Uqba that his memory was correct, Abu Ayyub took his leave, saying: "I
came just to ask about this hadith. I wouldn't like to make my intention
impure[by staying] for some other reason."374
As related in Bukhari, Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah traveled for a whole month
just to receive a hadith directly from its narrator, 'Abd Allah ibn Unays.
Finding 'Abd Allah, he said: "I've been informed that you relate a hadith that
I didn't hear from the Messenger. Fearing that one of us may die before I learn
it, I have come to you." Jabir learned the hadith and returned to Madina.
Such journeys continued throughout the following centuries. Sa'id ibn
al-Musayyib, Masruq ibn Ajda, and others made long journeys to learn a
single hadith or even to confirm a single letter of one hadith. Kathir ibn
Qays relates that one such lover of knowledge traveled from Madina to
Damascus to learn a single hadith from Abu al-Darda'. The Tabi'un ex-
hibited the same degree of caution as the Companions when narrating a
Tradition. As stated by A'mash, they would prefer the sky to collapse on
them than to add so much as a wrong vowel to a hadith.375
The Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jama'a agree on the Companions' absolute
truthfulness. However, after internal conflicts broke out among the
Muslims, the Tabi'un began to scrutinize whatever hadiths they heard
and to inquire about their narrators' truthfulness. Muhammad ibn Sirin
says: "Before, we didn't ask about the narrators. But after the internal conflicts
broke out, we began to ask."376
People of weak character and ungrounded faith fabricated Traditions
to promote their sectarian beliefs. The Nasiba (the Umayyads and their
supporters who opposed 'Ali) forged Traditions in favor of 'Uthman and
Mu'awiya and against 'Ali, and the Rafidites (Shi'a extremists) forged
Traditions against 'Uthman and Mu'awiya and for 'Ali. This caused
meticulous, truth-seeking scholars to undertake a detailed and careful
examination of each reported hadith and its narrators' character. Abu al-
'Aliya says: "We were no longer content with what was reported to us from a
Companion. We traveled to receive it directly from the Companion or
374.Khatib al-Baghdadi, "al-Rihla fi Talab al-Hadith," 118–24.
375.Khatib al-Baghdadi, al-Kifaya fi 'Ilm al-Riwaya, 178.
376.Muslim, "Muqaddima," 5.
315

--- Sayfa 317 ---
Companions who had narrated it, and to ask other Companions who knew about
it."
Imam Muslim relates that Bushayr al-'Adawi narrated a hadith to Ibn
'Abbas. Noticing that the latter was not paying attention to him, Bushayr
asked in surprise: "Why aren't you listening to me? I'm narrating a
hadith." Ibn 'Abbas answered: "In the past, our hearts would jump for joy
and excitement when somebody began to narrate a hadith, saying: 'The Messen-
ger said.' We would be fully attentive. But after people began to travel from
place to place, we only receive from those whom we already know."377
Ibn 'Abd al-Barr, the great scholar of Muslim Spain (Andalusia), re-
ports from Amir ibn Sharahil al-Sha'bi, one of the greatest Tabi'un schol-
ars: Rabi' ibn Husayn related to Sha'bi the hadith: "Those who recite ten
times: 'There is no god but God, One, and He has no partner. His is the king-
dom, and His is all praise. He gives life and causes death. He is powerful over
everything,' may earn as much reward as those who free a slave." Sha'bi asked
Rabi' who had narrated that hadith to him. He said that 'Abd al-Rahman
ibn Abi Layla' had done so. Sha'bi then left and found Ibn Abi Layla,
who was living in another city. Ibn Abi Layla testified to the hadith's au-
thenticity, saying he had heard it from Abu Ayyub al-Ansari.378
Such great scholars as Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, Ibn Sirin, Sufyan al-Thawri,
Amir ibn Sharahil al-Sha'bi, Ibrahim ibn Yazid al-Naha'i, Shu'ba, Abu
Hilal, Qatada ibn Di'ama, Hisham al-Dastawa'i and Mith'ar ibn Qudam
did their best to determine which Traditions were authentic and which
were fabricated. When they were unsure of a Tradition's authenticity,
they would consult each other. For example, Abu Hilal and Sa'id ibn Abi
Sadaqa asked Hisham al-Dastawa'i about one Tradition's exact wording
just to be sure. Shu'ba and Sufyan al-Thawri referred to Mith'ar a matter
about which they did not have exact knowledge. Such great scholars did
not allow fabricated Traditions to spread. Whenever and wherever they
heard people known for their sectarian views narrate a Tradition, these
Traditionists would ask who had related this Tradition to them.
Those truth-loving and truth-seeking scholars did not refrain from re-
vealing the weaknesses of their families or relatives. For example, Zayd
ibn Unaysa warned Traditionists not to receive hadith from his brother,
perhaps because of his forgetfulness, carelessness, or sectarianism. When
asked about his father, 'Ali ibn al-Madini, the first to write on the
377.Muslim, "Muqaddima," 5.
378.M. 'Ajjaj al-Khatib, op. cit., 222.
316

--- Sayfa 318 ---
Companions, answered: "Ask others about him." When they insisted, he
explained: "Hadith means religion. My father is weak on this point."
Waki' ibn Jarrah, who was brought up in the school of Abu Hanifa and
was a tutor of Imam Shafi'i, said: "As far as I know, I have never forgot-
ten anything once I heard it. Nor do I remember anything that I had to
repeat in order to memorize, if I only heard it once." Despite his keen
memory, Imam Shafi'i once complained to Waki' about his poor
memory. Waki' answered: "Refrain from sin. Knowledge is a light from
God, and so cannot be granted to sinful people." When his father Jarrah
was narrating a hadith, Waki' was always nearby. When asked why, he
answered: "My father works in the state's finance department. I am afraid he
might soften some Traditions in favor of the government. I accompany him to
prevent such a lapse."379
While the Traditions were being written down, they also were being
memorized by some of the greatest Traditionists of Islamic history. For
example, Ahmad ibn Hanbal memorized around one million Traditions,
including authentic, good, weak, and fabricated ones (some were identic-
al in text but had different narration chains). His Musnad contains only
40,000 Traditions out of 300,000 Traditions. Yahya ibn Ma'in memorized
both authentic and fabricated Traditions. When Ibn Hanbal asked him
why he did so, he replied: "I inform people of fabricated Traditions so they
may choose the authentic ones." Many other scholars engaged in this activ-
ity and knew hundreds of thousands of them by heart. Among them, the
most famous are Zuhri, Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Qattan, Bukhari, Muslim,
Daraqutni, Hakim, Dhahabi, Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, and Imam Suyuti.
Thanks to the tremendous efforts of such Traditionists, authentic Tra-
ditions were distinguished from fabricated ones. In addition to recording
authentic Traditions in volumes and memorizing them, many Tradi-
tionsits wrote volumes on the narrators' character so people would know
who was reliable or unreliable, careful or careless, profound and meticu-
lous or superficial, and God-fearing or heedless. When people warned
them that revealing the defects of others brings shame upon those
people, the scholars would answer: "Hadith means religion. Therefore it
should be given greater care than the hiding of the narrators' defects." Yahya
ibn Sa'id al-Qattan, renowned for being alert to sins, used to say: "In the
presence of God, I would rather have them as enemies than the Messenger."
379.Ibn Hajar, ibid., 6:84.
317

--- Sayfa 319 ---
Ensuring Authenticity
There were several ways to tell whether a Tradition had been fabricated
or not. One was to encourage the narrators to confess. This was not un-
common among those who had fallen into sectarianism and then, being
guided to the truth, acknowledged the Traditions they had fabricated.
In addition, the Traditionists were extremely sensitive to lying. If it
could be proven that a narrator had lied even once during his or her life,
all Traditions coming from that source were rejected. Narrators had to be
completely truthful, have a keen memory, be very careful in practicing
Islam, and not be involved in sectarianism. Moreover, if reliable narrat-
ors became forgetful or had similar mental difficulties, their Traditions
were no longer accepted. For example, when Ibn Abi Lahi'a, famous for
austerity and God-consciousness, lost the notebook from which he used
to relate Traditions, Imam Bukhari restricted himself to those of his nar-
rations confirmed or reinforced by other reliable narrators.
It is said that one's literary style is identical with that particular per-
son. In other words, if you are a careful reader, you can identify an au-
thor by his or her style and distinguish him or her from others. Tradi-
tionists dedicated themselves to Hadith, and were so familiar with the
field that they could distinguish easily between the Prophet's sayings
and those of everyone else, no matter how gifted.
Another way was to judge them according to the Qur'an and the mut-
awatir hadith. If three or more Companions reported a hadith from the
Prophet, which was then handed down by several transmission chains of
reliable narrators, it is mutawatir. Traditions reported from the Prophet
by one Companion are called ahadi. Such Traditions usually were accep-
ted as authentic after judged according to the Qur'an and mutawatir
Traditions.
Although not an objective method, some saintly scholars saw the Mes-
senger while awake and received directly from him. The hadith qudsi: "I
was a hidden treasure. I wished to be known, and so created the universe" is re-
ported to belong to this class.380 Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti is reported to have
met with the Messenger several times while awake. Before writing down
a hadith he considered authentic, Imam Bukhari performed wudu' and
referred it to the Messenger. He recorded the hadith in his notebook only
380.Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa', 1:132; 'Ali al-Qari, "al-Asrar al-Marfu'a," 269.
318

--- Sayfa 320 ---
after receiving the Messenger's approval.381 Some Traditionists saw the
Companion who had narrated the hadith from the Prophet.
The Traditionists wrote multi-volume works about narrators. Included
in such accounts was the various narrators' life histories: where and
when they were born, where they emigrated and lived, their teachers,
from whom they received and to whom they narrated Traditions, and
when and where they died. The first book of this genre was 'Ali ibn al-
Madini's Kitab al-Ma'rifat al-Sahaba (The Book of Knowledge about the
Companions). Among the most significant are the following: Ibn 'Abd al-
Barr's Al-Isti'ab fi Ma'rifat al-Ashab (The Comprehensive Book of Know-
ledge about the Companions), Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani's Al-Isaba fi Tamyiz
al-Sahaba (Finding the Truth in Judging the Companinons), Ibn al-Athir's
Usd al-Ghaba (The Lions of the Forest), Ibn Sa'd's Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra' (a
most comprehensive biographical dictionary of the leading Companions
and of the Tabi'un scholars), and Tarikh Ibn Asakir (History by Ibn
Asakir), Tarikh al-Bukhari (History by Bukhari) and Yahya ibn Ma'in's Al-
Tarikh al-Kabir (The Great History).
The greatest Traditionists, among them Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi,
Abu Dawud, Nasa'i, Ibn Maja, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, collected authen-
tic Traditions in voluminous books. Others, such as Maqdisi, collected
fabricated Traditions; still others, who came later, tested once more the
authenticity of all previously collected Traditions. Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 597
ah) judged several Traditions in Ibn Hanbal's Musnad to be either weakly
transmitted or fabricated, although Ibn al-Jawzi himself belonged to Ibn
Hanbal's legal school. Later, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani made a detailed ex-
amination of these very same Traditions and, with the exception of thir-
teen, proved their authenticity. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti (d. 911 ah) scrutin-
ized those Traditions once more and concluded that none were fabric-
ated, although a few may have weak chains of transmission. Suyuti also
reviewed Ibn al-Jawzi's Al-Mawdu'at al-Kubra' (A Great Collection of
Fabricated Traditions) and sorted out the authentic ones. Thinking that
the rest might not be fabricated either, he wrote Al-Laa'li al-Masnu'a (The
Artifical Pearls).
Other great Traditionists compiled additional compendia. Such lead-
ing Traditionists as Bukhari and Muslim, tremendously exacting schol-
ars, did not include many Traditions in their collections. Hakim's Al-
Mustadrak 'ala al-Sahihayn (Addendum to The Two Collections of
Authentic Traditions) is a voluminous appendix to Bukhari and Muslim.
381.Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 9:49.
319

--- Sayfa 321 ---
It was reviewed closely by Hafiz Dhahabi, who was famous for his keen
memory.
In later centuries, books were written on widespread maxims, wise
sayings, or proverbs that are regarded as Hadith. Sakhawi's Maqasid al-
Hasana and Ajluni's Kashf al-Khafa' examined them one by one and ex-
plained which are truly Traditions and which are not. For example, apart
from many authentic Traditions and Qur'anic verses encouraging people
to learn, such popular sayings as: "Seek knowledge from the cradle to the
grave" and "Seek knowledge even if it is in China" were tested by the Tradi-
tionists and shown not to be real Traditions.
After such tremendous studies, detailed examinations, and exacting
verifications, we can state that the collections of authentic Traditions no
longer contain fabricated Traditions. Those who continue to question the
Traditions and Sunna act out of nothing more than religious, political,
and ideological prejudice, as well as from biased Orientalist scholarship,
to cast doubt on this vital source of Islam and its implementation in one's
daily life.
320

--- Sayfa 322 ---
Examples
Some Examples of Fabricated Traditions are the following:
• Abu Hanifa is perhaps the greatest Muslim jurist, and still shines
like a sun in the sky of Islamic jurisprudence. But the saying attributed to
the Prophet that "Abu Hanifa is the lamp of my nation"382 is not a hadith.
It must have been fabricated for sectarian considerations.
• "Have white cockerels" must have been forged by a white cockerel
seller, even though we like white cockerels.
• "Beware of the evil of one to whom you have done good" is another
illogical saying wrongly attributed to the Prophet. You can win
somebody's heart by being good to him or her. If it were permissible to
attribute a saying to the Prophet, I would say: "Do good to the one whose
evil you fear," for it is said that "people are the slaves of the good done to
them."
• Although rationality is a principle of Islam, Islam does not depend
upon rationalism. No one can judge the Qur'an and the Prophet accord-
ing to the dictates of individual reason. Islam is the collection of prin-
ciples established by God, the Owner and Giver of all reasoning and in-
tellect. Therefore, the saying: "Discuss among yourselves a saying attrib-
uted to me. If it agrees with the truth, confirm it and adopt it as a reli-
gious principle. It doesn't matter whether I have uttered it or not," is a
fabrication.
• Another saying wrongly attributed to the Messenger is: "I was born
in the time of the just king." This was fabricated to exalt the Persian king
Anushirwan. No one can confer honor on the Messenger, who himself
brought honor to the whole of creation, most particularly to our world.
• Another widespread beautiful saying is also mistakenly thought to
be a Tradition: "Cleanliness comes from belief." The meaning is true, but
it was not reported from the Messenger through a sound chain of trans-
mission. Instead, he said: "Purity (in body, mind, and heart) is half of be-
lief, and al-hamdu li-llah (all praise be to God) fills up the balance
(where the good deeds will be weighed)."383
• Aqiq is a place located between Madina and Makka. During a jour-
ney, the Messenger told those traveling with him to: "Set up your tents at
Aqiq." In Arabic, the word translated as set up your tents is takhayyamu.
382.Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa', 1:33.
383.Muslim, "Tahara," 1; Tirmidhi, "Da'awat," 86.
321

--- Sayfa 323 ---
Since diacritical points were not used in writing during the early days of
Islam, this word was confused with takhattamu (wear a ring). In addi-
tion, aqiq is used for cornelian. All this led to a false Tradition: "Wear a
ring of cornelian," with the addition of "because it removes poverty."384
• "Looking at a beautiful face is an act of worship" is another false Tra-
dition, one plainly slanderous against the Messenger.
• The saying: "Seek knowledge even if it is in China" is another false
Tradition. It may have been fabricated to encourage learning. However,
the Prophet has many sayings, and the Qur'an urges Muslims to learn or
to seek knowledge: Only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge
(35:28), and: Say: "Are they equal—those who know and those who don't
know?" (39:9). In addition, the Prophet said: "Angels spread their wings be-
neath the feet of those who seek knowledge, because they are pleased (with
them)."385
Some examples of authentic Traditions labelled as fabricated are the
following:
• Imam Bukhari relates in his Sahih: This is in the Torah: "O Prophet,
We have sent you as a witness, a bringer of good tidings and a warner,
and a refuge for the unlettered. You are My servant and Messenger. I
named you 'the one who places his trust in God.' He is not harsh and
rude, nor one who shouts in the streets. He does not repel evil with evil;
instead, he pardons and forgives. God will not take his soul until He
guides the deviant people to believe that there is no god but God, and
thereby opens blind eyes and deaf ears and hardened hearts."386
Orientalists and their Muslim followers criticize this hadith because it
was reported by 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As, who sometimes nar-
rated from Ka'b al-Ahbar. What they neglect to consider is that:
This hadith does not contradict the characteristics of the Messenger de-
scribed in the Qur'an and other Islamic sources.
Despite their distortions and alterations, the Torah and the Gospels
still contain references to the Messenger. The Qur'an points to this in sev-
eral verses, among them: Those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered
Prophet whom they find written in the Torah and the Gospel with them (7:157);
This is their like in the Torah, and their like in the Gospel is this (48:29).
Husayn Jisri, who lived during the first half of the twentieth century,
384.Ajluni, op. cit., 1:299; Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, 56.
385.Abu Dawud, "'Ilm," 1; Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 19.
386.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 48/3, "Buyu'", 50; Darimi, "Muqaddima," 2.
322

--- Sayfa 324 ---
found 124 allusions to the Messenger in the Torah and the Gospels. The
Gospel of Barnabas explicitly mentions Prophet Muhammad.
Ka'b al-Ahbar was a Jew who accepted Islam. Numerous Christians
and Jews embraced Islam, especially during its early spread in Africa
and Asia. They brought with them their previous knowledge, but that
which was contrary to Islam was either corrected or mostly rejected.
Such Companions as 'Abd Allah ibn 'Abbas, Abu Hurayra, Anas ibn Ma-
lik, and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As listened to Ka'b's narrations from
the Torah. It was impossible for them to accept anything contrary to
Islam. 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr was an ascetic who was deeply devoted to
Islam and the Prophet. Would he would lie or fabricate a Tradition,
knowing what the punishment for such an action would be?
• During a severe famine and drought, Caliph 'Umar held the hand of
'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle, and prayed: "O God! While he was alive our
Prophet prayed to You for rain, and You sent down rain. Now we take
his uncle as the means to pray to You for rain, so send down rain."387
Some criticize this Tradition based on Jahiz's objection. But Jahiz is not
a Traditionist; rather, he sought to deny even the most authentic Tradi-
tions. His teacher was Nazzam, a materialist belonging to the Mu'tazila
heterodox sect. Jahiz criticizes this Tradition in his Al-Bayan wa al-Taby-
in: "In all the Traditions attributed to 'Umar with regard to praying for rain,
there are defects making it difficult for us to accept their authenticity. In some
versions, he prayed on the pulpit; in others, in an open area; and still in others,
after a prescribed prayer. Such confusions show that those Traditions are not
authentic."
The science of Hadith requires profound speciality. Jahiz is not a spe-
cialist. Neither is Ibn Abi al-Dunya, who, although a blessed ascetic, criti-
cizes this Tradition in his book, which contains many mistakes and fab-
ricated Traditions. Imam Ghazali is one of the few great revivers of the
Islamic religious sciences and one of our greatest religious guides. Yet if
you mention him as a reference in a disputed matter of Hadith, Tradi-
tionists will laugh at you. A doctor is not asked about engineering, and
no one goes to a chemist for medical information or advice.
Second, using somebody or something as a means to reach God,
provided you understand that the means do not affect the outcome, is al-
lowed: O you who believe! Fear God and seek a means to Him (5:35). The
Companions usually asked the Messenger to pray on their behalf. Once
387.Bukhari, "Istithqa'," 3, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 11.
323

--- Sayfa 325 ---
during a drought, they asked him to pay for rain. He did so, and it
rained so heavily that they had to ask him to pray for it to stop. He
prayed on the pulpit, and the people went to their houses in sunlight.
After this explicit favor of God, the Messenger said: "I bear witness that
God is powerful over everything, and that I am His servant and
Messenger."388
The Qur'an encouraged the Companions to ask the Messenger to seek
God's forgiveness for them, emphasizing that his praying is a means of
peace and tranquility: We never sent any Messenger, but that he should be
obeyed, by the leave of God. If, when they wronged themselves, they had come to
you, and prayed forgiveness of God, and the Messenger had prayed forgiveness
for them, they would have found God All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (4:64);
and: Pray for them; your prayers are a comfort for them (9:103). Once a blind
man complained to the Messenger about his blindness. The Messenger
advised him to perform wudu' correctly, pray two rak'as, and say: "O
God, I ask You and turn to You for the sake of Your Prophet
Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy. O Muhammad, I turn to my Master
for your sake for my need to be met. O God, accept his intercession with
You on my behalf!" The man did so and recovered his sight.389
In conclusion, nothing in the Tradition disqualifies it from being
authentic.
• It is reported in almost all of the six most authentic books of Tradi-
tion: "If a dog licks your bowl, clean it seven times; the first time with soil, the
other six with water."390
Some who are unaware of Hadith principles and medical develop-
ments doubt this Hadith's authenticity, despite its authentic chain of
transmission and its being a proof of Muhammad's Prophethood. Had he
not been a Prophet taught by God, how could he have known medical
facts discovered only centuries later? We now know that dogs may carry
microbes of certain diseases that can be transferred to human beings.
Also, their saliva and excrement may contain substances harmful to hu-
man health. Moreover, no one in the Propeht's era knew about disinfec-
tion and sterilization. The Messenger, being a Prophet taught by the All-
Knowing, recommends soil to clean a bowl licked by a dog. Today we
know
that
soil
is
a
good
anstiseptic
containing
substances
like
tetracycline.
388.Bukhari, "Istithqa'," 14; Abu Dawud, "Istithqa'," 2; Ibn Ma'ja, "Iqama," 154.
389.Ibn Maja, "Iqama," 189; Tirmidhi, "Da'awat," 118.
390.Muslim, "Tahara," 91; Bukhari, "Wudu'," 33; Abu Dawud, "Tahara," 37.
324

--- Sayfa 326 ---
Some interpret seven times to mean as many times as needed to clean
the bowl. So, Hanafi jurists regard it as sufficient to clean the bowl three
times.
• Some contemporary critics, including the French convert Maurice
Bucaille, were quick to criticize the following Tradition, reported by Abu
Hurayra: "When a fly falls into one of your bowls, dip it completely in the food
before taking it out, for there is disease in one wing[or side] and a cure in the
other."391 This Tradition's narrators are beyond reproach. It was included
by Bukhari, Abu Dawud, Nasa'i, Darimi, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal.
Like the previous Tradition, this one contains a proof of Muhammad's
Prophethood. At that time, no one knew that flies carry microbes.
Moreover, we now know that when a fly falls into a bowl, it tries to hold
one of its wings off the food so that it can take off again. As a result, it
leaves its bacteria in the food. But when it is submerged in the food with
a slight touch, the tiny bag on the other wing or side (the word janah has
both meanings) bursts open and scatters anti-bacteria to kill the germs
left on the food.
• Another authentic, but criticized, Tradition mentioned in all the au-
thentic books of Tradition is: "It is not worth setting out to vis-
it[intending to gain spiritual reward] any mosque other than these three:
Al-Masjid al-Haram[the Holy Mosque surrounding the Ka'ba], the
Mosque of the Prophet[in Madina], and al-Masjid al-Aqsa'[just south of
the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem]."392 This Tradition is criticized for be-
ing reported by Companions who narrated from Ka'b al-Akhbar or that
it sanctifies Masjid al-Aqsa'. This pretext is completely groundless, for
Masjid al-Aqsa' does not belong to the Jews. Our Prophet turned to it
while praying in Makka.
It is also the symbol of Islam's terrestrial dominion. Our Prophet was
first taken to Masjid al-Aqsa' during his Ascension and led prayer there
before the souls of the previous Prophets. God declares that He blessed
the vicinities of this mosque (17:1). This blessed land surrounding it was
first captured by Prophet Yusha (Joshua) ibn Nun after the death of
Moses. After Prophet Muhammad, it was recaptured during 'Umar's ca-
liphate. Salah al-Din Ayyubi, one of the greatest Muslim commanders,
retook it from the Crusaders. If the Messenger included it among the
391.Bukhari, "Tib," 58; Abu Dawud, "At'ima," 48; Ibn Ma'ja, "Tib," 31; Darimi, "At'ima,"
12.
392.Bukhari, "al-Salat fi Masjid Makka," 1; Muslim, "Hajj," 511; Tirmidhi, "Salat," 126.
325

--- Sayfa 327 ---
three mosques most blessed and worthy of visiting, despite difficulties of
travel, it is because God sanctified it.
Despite their sanctity, however, it is a mistake to assume a special kind
of prayer in those mosques. As reported by Ibn 'Abbas, a woman prom-
ised God that she would pray in Masjid al-Aqsa' if she recovered from
her illness. She recovered and, before setting out, called on Maymuna
(one of the Messenger's wives), who told her: "Stay here, mind your house,
and pray in the Mosque of the Prophet. I heard the Messenger say: 'Prayer per-
formed here is 1,000 times better than that performed in any other mosque, ex-
cept the Mosque of the Ka'ba.'"393
• The Messenger declared: "Among my Community there will always
be a group who support the truth, until the Command of God will
come[the Last Day]. Those who oppose them will not be able to harm
them."394
Despite being recorded in almost all authentic books of Tradition and
proved by the long history of Islam, this Tradition has been subjected to
unjustifiable criticism. Islam has resisted all attacks. No earthly power
has been able to destroy it. Even after the concerted efforts to do so dur-
ing the last 3 centuries, Islam is the only alternative, stronger and fresher
than ever, for true human happiness and prosperity in both worlds. God
has preserved Islam through a devoted self-sacrificing community in
every period. This community concentrated, in one period, in Damascus,
and in another, in Baghdad or Istanbul; once around 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-
'Aziz, and then around Imam Ghazali or Imam Rabbani. While concen-
trating around a particular person in one place, they may have come to-
gether, in another, around someone else. Nor will the world be lacking in
such groups in the future.
• Another Tradition denied by some is: "When you get up from your bed,
don't put your hand in a bowl[of food or drink] before washing it three times.
You don't know where your hands have been while you were asleep."395 Ahmad
Amin and Abu Rayya, under the influence of the Orientalist Goldziher,
ridicule this Tradition, even though it contains principles of hygiene.
People often suffer from allergies or an itch. They might have scratched
the affected places while sleeping, thereby accumulating germs, particu-
larly under their fingernails. If such people eat (from communal bowls)
without washing their hands, other people may become infected.
393.Muslim, "Hajj," 510; Bukhari, "Masjid Makka," 1; Nasa'i, "Manasik," 124.
394.Muslim, "'Imara," 170; Bukhari, "I'tisam," 10; Abu Dawud, "Fitan," 1.
395.Abu Dawud, "Tahara," 50; Bukhari, "Wudu'," 26; Muslim, "Tahara," 87–8.
326

--- Sayfa 328 ---
The Messenger always depended on Revelation, whether explicit or
implicit. His Companions, famous for truthfulness, followed him as
closely as possible and narrated whatever they received from him.
Meticulous, truth-loving Traditionists collected the Traditions reaching
them through reliable, trustworthy, and upright narrators. Some authen-
tic Traditions predict certain future events and scientific developments.
Just as none of these have yet proven to be false, so too no one has been
able to falsify any other authentic Traditions.
Creation still holds some mysteries, and will continue to do so, regard-
less of human scientific and other progress. Psychic events or supernor-
mal phenomena like telepathy and second sight, necromancy and other
transcendental experiences, give clues to the existence of worlds or di-
mensions different from our own. As it is possible to find references to
this in the Qur'an, some Traditions also may be dealt with from this
viewpoint.
• As recorded in authentic books of Tradition, Tamim al-Dari, a Chris-
tian convert, tells of a hairy creature called "Jassasa" whom he saw in a
strange island, and of a gigantic man who lives in a cave and introduces
himself as the Dajjal (Anti-Christ).396 We cannot deny this Tradition on
positivistic premises, just as we cannot deny that the breast of our Proph-
et was burst open.
• Another Tradition that we can deal with partly from the same view-
point is that God enjoined 50 daily prayers during the Ascension of
Prophet Muhammad. On his return, Moses warned him about the diffi-
culty of such an order. After the Prophet's repeated appeals, God re-
duced the number to five.397
There are delicate points in the hadith. God is All-Forgiving, and al-
though He knows how many prayers a day His servants can endure, He
expects them to pray to Him for forgiveness and to realize their goals.
Praying or supplicating is a mystery of servanthood to God and the
cornerstone of servanthood. When servants perceive their poverty, inad-
equacy, and impotence, they come to depend on their Master's absolute
and infinite Richness and Power, thereby acquiring immeasurable power
and inexhaustible wealth. Servants should be repeatedly reminded of
this fundamental point so that they are not left to their carnal, evil-com-
manding, and self-conceited selves. If they are not so reminded, they are
subject to incurable, unrecoverable helplessness and destitution.
396.Muslim, "Fitan," 119; Abu Dawud, "Malahim," 15; Ibn Ma'ja, "Fitan," 33.
397.Bukhari, "Salat," 1; Nasa'i, "Salat," 1; Muslim, "Iman," 263; Ibn Ma'ja, "Iqama," 194.
327

--- Sayfa 329 ---
As Prophet Muhammad is the last Prophet, he encompasses all aspects
and dimensions of Prophethood, and confirms all previous Prophets. If
we compare Prophethood to a huge blessed tree with branches spread-
ing throughout the universe, Prophet Muhammad represents all its as-
pects and dimensions. His Prophethood is rooted deeply in the mission
of the previous Prophets. Therefore, it is natural for him to benefit from
his roots. Moses preceded him, so desiring ease for his nation in carrying
out its religious duties, Prophet Muhammad justifiably followed his ad-
vice. Prophet Muhammad, although the greatest Prophet, never allowed
his followers to regard the others Prophets as inferior to him.
This matter requires further elaboration, as there is much to be said on
it. However, this subject is beyond the scope of this book.
328

--- Sayfa 330 ---
The Number of Authentic Traditions
Some Orientalists and their Muslim followers try to cast doubt on the
Sunna's authenticity on the pretexts that some Companions narrate too
many Traditions and that there are vast numbers of Traditions.
First, the Traditions are not limited to the Messenger's words. Rather,
they cover his entire life: all his actions, likes and dislikes, and approvals
or tacit confirmations of what his Companions said and did. He lived for
23 years among his Companions as a Messenger of God. He taught them
Islam down to its minutest details. He led the prayer five times a day,
every detail of which was recorded, for he told them: "Pray as you see
me praying." He fasted and explained all of its details to them, just as he
did for alms-giving and pilgrimage. The essentials of belief and pillars of
Islam—prayer, fasting, alms-giving, and pilgrimage—alone are the sub-
jects of countless books.
Being a universal Divine system that includes everything related to
human life, Islam has laws and regulations for individual and collective
life: spiritual and material, social and economic, political and military,
and all other aspects faced during one's daily life. He laid down prin-
ciples related to all these. He constantly warned his Companions against
deviation, and encouraged them to be deeper, more sensitive, and more
careful servants of God. He told them about former nations and pre-
dicted future events. Abu Zayd 'Amr ibn Akhtab reported that there
were times when the Prophet would ascend the pulpit after the dawn
prayer and address the congregation until noon. He would continue to
address them after the noon and afternoon prayers, telling them what
had happened from the beginning of the world until that time, and what
would happen from then until the Last Day. Such addresses would in-
clude information on the upheavals of the other world, the grave, the Re-
surrection, the Great Mustering, balancing people's deeds, the Last Judg-
ment, the Bridge, and Hell and Paradise.
The Messenger commanded armies, heard and tried cases as a judge,
sent and received envoys and delegations. He signed peace treaties,
waged war, and dispatched military expeditions. He laid down rules of
hygiene and principles of good conduct and high morality. His miracles
number in the hundreds. As he set an example to be followed by
Muslims, and because of the vital importance of Hadith in Islam as well
as his Companions' love of him, his life was recorded from beginning to
end.
329

--- Sayfa 331 ---
The Messenger honored the universe with his Messengership, His ser-
vanthood to God, and his exalted, peerless personality. As honored wit-
nesses of his life, the Companions recorded everything related to him.
When they scattered throughout the lands conquered by Islam, new con-
verts asked them to relate Traditions from the Messenger. They were so
deeply devoted to him that they remained extraordinarily faithful to
their memories of him.
Once during his caliphate, 'Umar passed by the house of 'Abbas, the
Prophet's uncle, on his way to the Friday congregational prayer. A few
drops of blood fell on his robe from the gutter. He became so angry that
he pulled the gutter to the ground, saying to himself: "Who slaughtered
an animal on this roof so that its blood should stain my robe when I'm
going to the mosque?" He reached the mosque and, after the prayer,
warned the congregation: "You are doing some wrong things. I was
passing by such and such a wall on my way here, when some blood
dropped onto my robe from the gutter. I pulled the gutter to the
ground."
'Abbas was upset and sprang to his feet: "O 'Umar, what have you
done!? I personally saw the Messenger put that gutter there in person."
Now, it was 'Umar's turn to be upset. He said to 'Abbas in great agita-
tion: "By God, I will lay my head at that wall's foot and you will put your
foot on it to replace the gutter. Until you do that, I will not raise my head
from the ground." Such was their devotion and faithfulness to the
Messenger.398
The Messenger implanted such a zeal for learning in his followers'
hearts that Islamic civilization, under the blessed shadow of which a con-
siderable portion of humanity lived peacefully for centuries, was built on
the pillars of belief, knowledge, piety, and brotherhood. In the lands
through which the pure water of Islam flowed, innumerable flowers
burst open in every field of science, and the scent diffused by them exhil-
arated the world.
Some of these flowers, like Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, read in two or three
sessions the entire collection of authentic Traditions compiled by Imam
Muslim. Imam Nawawi dedicated himself so thoroughly to teaching and
writing that he never married—he did not want to assign any time to
anything other than knowledge. Imam Sarakhsi, a great Hanafi jurist,
was imprisoned in a well by a king. During that time, he dictated his mo-
numental 30-volume compendium, Al-Mabsut, to his students from
398.Ibn Hanbal, 1:210.
330

--- Sayfa 332 ---
memory. When his students told him that Imam Shafi'i, founder of the
Shafi'i legal school and regarded by some as the second reviver
(mujaddid) of Islam, had memorized 300 fascicules of Traditions, he
answered: "He knew the zakat (one-fortieth) of what I know."399
The works of Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Fakhr al-Din al-
Razi, Imam Suyuti, and others cover so many volumes that when di-
vided among the days of their lives, we can see that they wrote about 20
pages every day. We cannot study or even read during our lives what
each wrote during his lifetime.
Anas ibn Sirin, son of Muhammad ibn Sirin, one of the greatest
Tabi'un scholars, says: "When I arrived in Kufa, 4,000 people were at-
tending Hadith courses in mosques; 400 were experts in Islamic jurispru-
dence."400 To understand what it meant to be an expert in Islamic juris-
prudence, consider the following: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, whose Musnad
contains 40,000 Traditions chosen from among the one million in circula-
tion, was not considered an expert jurist by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari. Nor was
he given the same status as Abu Hanifa, Imam Abu Yusuf, Imam Shafi'i,
Imam Malik, and the like. The fact that some did not consider such a
great figure an expert jurist shows just what intellectual and scholarly
heights a jurisprudent had to reach to be regarded as an expert.
The general atmosphere was extremely propitious for the develop-
ment of both religious and secular sciences, especially the science of Tra-
dition. Every Muslim strove to acquire knowledge of Islam and recog-
nize its Holy Prophet fully. People had a great aptitude for literature and
languages, for poetry was widespread during the pre-Islamic period.
The Qur'an came, first of all, as an absolute and incomparable linguistic
miracle. No literary or poetic expert denied its eloquence, and almost all
of them gave up poetry after their conversion to dedicate themselves to
the Qur'an and the Hadith. One of them, the poetess Hansa, became so
deeply devoted to Islam that when her four sons were martyred at
Qadisiyah, she praised God, saying: "O God, You gave me four sons, all
of whom I have sacrificed in the way of Your Beloved (Prophet). Praise
be to You, to the number of thousands."401 That blessed woman found
eight linguistic or poetic mistakes in a stanza of Hassan ibn Thabit, a
famous Companion and poet. After the Revelation, she gave up poetry
and focused on the Qur'an and the Hadith.
399.Muqaddima li-Usul al-Sarakhsi, 5.
400.M. 'Ajjaj al-Khatib, op. cit. 150–1.
401.Ibn Athir, Usd al-Ghaba, 7:90.
331

--- Sayfa 333 ---
Life was quite simple in the desert. This enabled people to commit
themselves to Islamic sciences. Also, they had very keen memories. For
example, the Messenger once asked Zayd ibn Thabit to learn Hebrew;
within a couple of weeks, he could read and write letters in it. Ibn Shihab
al-Zuhri, Qatada ibn Diama, Sha'bi, Ibrahim ibn Yazid al-Nakha'i, Imam
Shafi'i, and many others publicly said that they never forgot a word after
they memorized it. They could do this after either reading or hearing
something only once.
When Imam Bukhari arrived in Baghdad, ten leading persons in
Islamic sciences tested his knowledge of Hadith and memory. Each re-
cited ten Traditions, changing either the order of the narrators in a chain
of transmission or the chains with each other. For example, the famous
Tradition: "Actions are judged according to intentions… " has the follow-
ing chain (in descending order): Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Ansari, from
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Taymi, from Alqama ibn Waqqas al-Laysi,
from 'Umar ibn al-Khattab. When they were finished, Imam Bukhari cor-
rected the chains one by one from memory and repeated each Tradition
with its own sound chain of transmission. The scholars then admitted his
learning and knowledge of Hadith. Ibn Khuzayma went so far as to say:
"Neither Earth or Heaven has seen a second person as knowledgeable as
you in this field."
Imam Bukhari never sold his knowledge for worldly benefits. When
the ruler of Bukhara invited him to his palace to teach his children, the
great Imam refused, saying: "Knowledge cannot be debased by being
taken to a ruler. If the ruler desires knowledge, he should personally
come to knowledge." The ruler replied by asking him to assign one day a
week to his children. Bukhari refused again, saying: "I'm busy with
teaching the Umma of Muhammad. So, I cannot waste my time teaching
your children." The ruler exiled him, and this greatest figure in the sci-
ence of Hadith spent his last days in exile.
332

--- Sayfa 334 ---
Recording the Traditions
The first written compilations of Traditions were made during 'Umar ibn
'Abd al-'Aziz's caliphate, at the beginning of the second Islamic century
of Hijra (719-722). However, it should be remembered that all Traditions
that would be collected and arranged in books were in oral circulation.
In addition, most of them already had been recorded in individual
collections.
The overwhelming majority of Arabs were unlettered. When the
Revelation began, a desire to learn to read and write was aroused and
encouraged by the Prophet. Remember that he released literate prisoners
captured at Badr only after each of them had taught ten Muslims to read
and write. Moreover, the Revelation began with the command: Read, in
the name of your Master, Who has created. He created man from a clot suspen-
ded (on the wall of the womb). Read, Your Master is the All-Munificent, Who
taught (to write) with the pen. He taught man what he had not known (96:1-5).
Despite the importance attached to knowledge and learning, in the
early period of his Messengership the Prophet did not allow his Com-
panions to write down what he said. For example, as related in Sahih al-
Muslim, he said: "Don't write down what I say. If you have written down
something received from me that is not part of the Qur'an, destroy it." 402
He did not want the Companions to confuse the Qur'anic verses with his
own words. The Qur'an was still being revealed and recorded on sheets
or fragments of leather or wood; it would assume its final book form at a
later date.
This was an understandable precaution, for he wanted to be sure that
later generations would not mistake his words for those of God. This is
clear from a Tradition narrated by Abu Hurayra: "The Messenger once
came near us while some friends were writing down what they had
heard him say. He asked what they were writing, and they replied:
'What we heard you say.' The Messenger warned: 'Do you know that the
communities preceding you went astray because they wrote down that
which is not found in the Book of God?'"403
Another reason for this prohibition is that most of the Qur'anic Revela-
tions came on specific occasions. Thus, some of its verses are concise and
clear while others are ambiguous. Allegorical verses appear beside expli-
cit and incontrovertible ones. As a purely Islamic community was still
402.Muslim, "Zuhd," 72; Darimi, "Muqaddima," 42.
403.Khatib al-Baghdadi, Taqyid al-'Ilm, 34.
333

--- Sayfa 335 ---
evolving, some commandments came to replace earlier ones. The Mes-
senger also had to address, on various occasions, people with widely
varying temperaments and levels of understanding, as well as "new" and
"old" Muslims. For example, when a new Muslim asked what the best
deed was, he answered that it was belief and performing the five pre-
scribed prayers. However, during a time when jihad had priority, he said
it was jihad in the way of God. Further, since Islam is for all time and all
people, he frequently resorted to allegories, similes, parables, and
metaphors.
These and other factors might have led him to forbid certain individu-
als to record his words. If everyone had kept a personal account and
been unable to distinguish between the real and the metaphorical, the
concrete and the abstract, the abrogated and the abrogating, the general
and the particular and occasional, the result would have been chaos and
misunderstanding. For this reason, 'Umar sometimes warned people not
to narrate Prophetic Traditions carelessly.
However, many Traditions state that the Messenger allowed his Com-
panions to write down his words. A time came when the Companions
attained the intellectual and spiritual maturity to distinguish between
the Qur'an and the Hadith. Therefore, they could give the proper atten-
tion and importance to each, and understand the circumstances relevant
to each Tradition. And so the Messenger encouraged them to record his
Traditions.
Abu Hurayra relates: "'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As is the only Com-
panion who has as many Traditions as I do. I didn't write them down,
but he did." 'Abd Allah reported that he wrote down whatever he heard
from the Messenger. Some people told him: "You're writing down
everything coming from the Messenger's mouth. He is a human being;
sometimes he is angry and other times he is pleased." 'Abd Allah re-
ferred the matter to the Messenger, who pointed to his mouth and said:
"Write down, for I swear by Him in Whose hand is my life that only
truth comes out from this."404
Whether angry or pleased, the Messenger never spoke on his own; out of
personal caprice or whim. Whatever he spoke, is a Revelation [explicit or impli-
cit] revealed (53:3-4). As his every word and action had some bearing on
Islam, they had to be recorded. The Companions did this holy task either
through memorizing or recording what they heard or saw. As a result,
his life is the most complete biography ever produced. Every aspect,
404.Abu Dawud, "'Ilm," 3; Ibn Hanbal, 2:162; Darimi, "Muqaddima," 43.
334

--- Sayfa 336 ---
even its minutest details, has been handed down throughout the genera-
tions. This is why we should feel indebted to the Companions and the
two or three generations after them, especially the great Traditionists,
who recorded and then transmitted his words and actions.
Someone once complained to the Messenger: "O Messenger of God, we
hear many things from you. But most of them slip our minds because we
cannot memorize them." The Messenger replied: "Ask your right hand
for help." In other words, write down what you hear. When Rafi' ibn
Khadij asked the Messenger whether they could write down what they
heard from him, he was told that they could. As recorded in al-Darimi's
Sunan, the Messenger advised: "Record knowledge by writing."405 Dur-
ing the conquest of Makka, the Messenger gave a sermon. A Yemeni
man named Abu Shah, stood up and said: "O Messenger, please write
down these [words] for me." The Messenger ordered this to be done.406
'Ali had a sheet, which he attached to his sword, upon which was writ-
ten narrations about the blood-money to be paid for injuries, the sancti-
fication of Madina, and some other matters. Ibn 'Abbas left behind a
camel-load of books, most of which deal with what he had heard from
the Messenger and other Companions. The Messenger sent a letter to
'Amr ibn Hazm, which dealt with blood-money for murder and injury,
and the law of retaliation. This letter was handed down to Abu Bakr ibn
Muhammad, his great-grandson.
Likewise, a scroll transferred from the Messenger to Abu Rafi' was
handed down to Abu Bakr ibn 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Harith, one of the
Tabi'un.407 A leading scholar of that generation, Mujahid ibn Jabr, saw
'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr's compilation Al-Sahifat al-Sadiqa. Ibn al-Athir, a
renowned historian, writes that it contained about 1,000 Traditions, half
of which were recorded in authentic books of Tradition, with the chain
from 'Amr ibn Shu'ayb, from his father, and from his grandfather,
respectively.
Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari also left behind a voluminous book con-
taining the sayings he had heard from the Messenger.408 Al-Sahifa al-
Sahiha is another important source of Hadith from the earliest period.
Hammam ibn Munabbih, its compiler, followed Abu Hurayra whenever
he went and wrote down the Prophetic sayings reported by him. This
405.Darimi, "Muqaddima," 43.
406.Abu Dawud, "'Ilm," 3; Tirmidhi, "'Ilm," 12.
407.Khatib al-Baghdadi, "al-Kifaya," 330.
408.Ibn Sa'd, 7:2; Khatib al-Baghdadi, ibid., 354.
335

--- Sayfa 337 ---
compilation, recently published by Muhammad Hamidullah, has been
carbon-dated to a period thirteen centuries ago. Almost all of its Tradi-
tions can be found either in Musnad ibn Hanbal or the Sahihayn of Bukhari
and Muslim.
After these first simple compilations, Caliph 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz,
who reigned between 99-101 ah, decided that all oral and written au-
thentic Traditions should be compiled systematically into books. He
ordered Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn 'Amr ibn Hazm, governor of
Madina, to supervise this task. Muhammad ibn Shihab al-Zuhri,
renowned for his profound learning and keen intelligence, undertook the
task and acquired the honor of being the first official compiler of Tradi-
tions. But such an honor was not restricted solely to him: 'Abd al-Malik
ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Jurayj (Makka), Sa'id ibn Abi 'Aruba (Iraq), Awza'i
(Damascus), Zayd ibn Qudama and Sufyan al-Thawri (Kufa), Hammad
ibn Salama (Basra), and 'Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak (Khorasan) also were
involved.
This period of official and systematic compilation was followed by the
period of classification by such great Traditionists as Abu Dawud al-Tay-
alisi, Musaddad ibn Musarhad, al-Humaydi, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
who brought out their Musnads. 'Abd al-Razzaq ibn Hammam and oth-
ers formed their Musannafs, and Ibn Abi Dhi'b and Imam Malik pro-
duced their al-Muwattas. Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Qattan and Yahya ibn Sa'id
al-Ansari also should be mentioned among the pre-eminent figures of
this period.
Then came the period of such great Traditionists as Bukhari, Muslim,
Abu Dawud, Nasa'i, Tirmidhi, and Ibn Ma'ja, who produced the well-
known, six most authentic books of Tradition. These celebrated persons,
and such other illustrious people like Yahya ibn Ma'in, included in their
collections what they believed to be the most authentic Traditions after
judging them according to the strictest criteria.
For example, Imam Bukhari sought a Tradition from a man renowned
for his reliability and piety. When he saw that man hold his hat toward
his animal as if it contained something to eat, in an attempt to entice it to
come to him, he asked the man if the hat contained some food for the an-
imal. When told that it did not, Bukhari took no Traditions from him. In
his view, one who could deceive an animal in this way might also de-
ceive people. Such were the exacting criteria applied when judging the
reliability of narrators.
336

--- Sayfa 338 ---
In short, the Prophetic Traditions were either written down or memor-
ized during the time of the Companions. When the first Islamic century
ended, they were circulating widely in both oral and written form. Ca-
liph 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz tasked eminent scholars with producing the
first official compilation in different cities. Authentic Traditions were dis-
tinguished from fabricated ones according to the most stringent care and
criteria. After they were classified, one of the most systematic and accur-
ate compilations or collections was undertaken by the most prominent
Traditionists of that time. Later on, new authentic books of Traditions
were produced. Also, such illustrious critics of Tradition as Ibn Hajar al-
Asqalani, Ibn Abd al-Barr, Dhahabi, Ibn al-Jawzi, and Zayn al-Din al-
Iraqi reviewed all Traditions and wrote large compendiums about their
narrators.
As a result of such scholarly activity, the Sunna has reached us
through the most reliable channels. No one can doubt the authenticity of
this second source of Islam, which approaches the Qur'an in purity, au-
thenticity, and reliability.
337

--- Sayfa 339 ---
Chapter 12
The Companions and the Tabi‘un
The Companions
The Companions constitute the first pure and blessed channel through
which the Qur'an and the Sunna were transmitted to later generations.
God is the All-Trustworthy and Inspirer of Trust. The Qur'an describes
Archangel Gabriel as trustworthy and as one, obeyed and having power
(81:20–21). Prophet Muhammad was renowned for his trustworthiness.
The Qur'an was entrusted to the Companions, who memorized and re-
corded it so that it could be transmitted. This blessed community, which
was praised in the Torah and Gospel, was the living embodiment of al-
most all laudable virtues and sought nothing but the good pleasure of
God. In addition to the Qur'an, they absorbed the Sunna, lived discip-
lined lives in strict accordance with the Prophet's example, and exerted
all their efforts to both represent and transmit it with complete accuracy.
According to Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, scholars define a Companion as "a
believer who saw and heard the Messenger at least once and died as a
believer."409 Even though some scholars have stipulated that a "potential"
Companion should have lived in the Messenger's company for one or
even two years, most scholars say it is enough to have been present in
his radiant atmosphere long enough to derive some benefit from it.
Of course, the Companions are not equal to each other in rank or
greatness. Some believed in the Messenger at the very outset of his mis-
sion, and conversions continued until his death. The Qur'an grades them
according to precedence in belief and to conversion before and after the
conquest of Makka (9:100; 57:10). The same gradation also was made by
the Messenger. For example, he reproached Khalid for offending
'Ammar, saying: "Don't bother my Companions!"410 He also frowned at
409.Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, 1:7.
410.Ibn Athir, Usd al-Ghaba, 4:132.
338

--- Sayfa 340 ---
'Umar when he annoyed Abu Bakr, and asked: "Why don't you leave my
Companions to me? Abu Bakr believed in me when all of you denied
me." Abu Bakr knelt down and explained: "O Messenger of God, it was
my fault!"411
Hakim al-Nisaburi divided them into twelve ranks, and most scholars
accept his ranking:
• The four Rightly Guided Caliphs (Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and
'Ali), and the rest of the ten who were promised Paradise while
still alive (Zubayr ibn al-'Awwam, Abu 'Ubayda ibn al-Jarrah,
'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Awf, Talha ibn 'Ubaydullah, Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas, and Sa'id ibn Zayd).
• Those who believed prior to 'Umar's conversion and met secretly
in Arqam's house to listen to the Messenger.
• Those who migrated to Abyssinia.
• The Helpers (Ansar) who swore their allegiance to the Messsenger
at al-'Aqaba.
• The Helpers who swore their allegiance at al-'Aqaba the following
year.
• The Emigrants who joined the Messenger during the hijra before
his arrival in Madina from Quba, where he stayed for a short
while.
• The Companions who fought at Badr.
• Those who emigrated to Madina between the Battle of Badr and
the Treaty of Hudaybiya.
• The Companions who swore allegiance under a tree during the ex-
pedition of Hudaybiya.
• Those who converted and emigrated to Madina after the Treaty of
Hudaybiya.
• Those who became Muslims after the conquest of Makka.
• Children who saw the Messenger any time or any place after the
conquest of Makka.
Muslim scholars of the highest rank, whose minds are enlightened by
scientific knowledge and whose souls are illumined by religious know-
ledge and practice, agree that Prophets are the greatest members of hu-
manity. Immediately after them come the Companions of the Last
Prophet, who is the greatest Prophet.
Although some Companions may have the same rank as previous
Prophets in a particular virtue, no one can equal a Prophet in general
411.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 7/3.
339

--- Sayfa 341 ---
terms. Likewise, some of the greatest saints or scholars can compete with
the Companions or even excel some of them in particular virtues, but
even a Companion of the lowest rank, such as Wahshi (the slayer of
Hamza), is still greater, in general terms, than all who come after the
Companions. All Muslim scholars, whether Traditionists, theologians, or
saints, agree upon this.
340

--- Sayfa 342 ---
Factors in Their Greatness
Relation to Messengership
Prophethood is greater than sainthood, and Messengership is greater
than Prophethood. Every Prophet is a saint, but no saint is a Prophet. Al-
though every Messenger is a Prophet, not every Prophet is simultan-
eously a Messenger. Prophet Muhammad is the last and greatest Prophet
and Messenger. The Companions are related directly to his Messenger-
ship and connected with him on account of his Messengership. All who
come after the Prophet, however great they may be, are connected with
him on account of sainthood only. Therefore, a Companion is greater
than a saint to the degree that Messengership is greater than sainthood
(the distance between them cannot be measured).
The benefits of company
Nothing can compare with the enlightenment and spiritual exhilara-
tion gained from a Prophet's actual presence or company. No amount of
reading what an intellectual, especially a spiritual, master has written
can benefit you as much as learning directly from a Prophet. Thus the
Companions, particularly those who were with him most often and from
the very beginning, benefited so much that they were elevated from
crude, ignorant, and savage desert people to the rank of being
humanity's religious, intellectual, spiritual, and moral guides until the
Last Day.
To be a Companion, one would have to go back to the Makka or Mad-
ina of the seventh century ce, listen to the Messenger attentively and ob-
serve him speaking, walking, eating, fighting, praying, prostrating, and
so on. Since this is impossible, no one can attain the rank of the Compan-
ions, who were endowed with Divine coloring in the Messenger's
presence.
Truthfulness
Islam is based on truthfulness and the absence of lies. The Compan-
ions embraced Islam in its original, pristine purity. For them, being a
Muslim meant abandoning all previous vices, being purified in the radi-
ant atmosphere of Divine Revelation, and embodying Islam. They would
rather die than tell a lie. The Messenger once declared that if apostasy
341

--- Sayfa 343 ---
were as repugnant to a person as entering fire, then that person must
have tasted the pleasure of belief. The Companions tasted this pleasure
and, being sincere Muslims, could not lie, as this was almost as serious
as apostasy. We have trouble understanding this point fully, for people
in our own time regard lying and deceit as skills, and almost all virtues
have been replaced by vices.
The atmosphere created by Revelation
The Companions were honored with being the first to receive the Div-
ine Messages through the Prophet. Every day they were given original
messages and invited to a new "Divine table" full of the ever-fresh
"fruits" of Paradise. Every day they experienced radical changes in their
lives, were elevated closer to God's Presence, and increased in belief and
conviction. They found themselves in the verses of the Qur'an, and could
learn directly whether or not God approved of their actions.
For example, whenever and wherever: Those who are with him are hard
against the unbelievers, merciful one to another. You see them bowing, prostrat-
ing, seeking blessing from God and good pleasure. Their mark is on their faces,
the trace of prostration (48:29) was revealed, eyes turned primarily to Abu
Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and 'Ali. After all, they were famous for being
with the Messenger from the very beginning, their hardness toward un-
believers, their mercy to fellow Muslims, and for frequent and long bow-
ing and prostration before God while seeking His good pleasure.
When: Among the believers are men who were true to their covenant with
God; some of them have fulfilled their vow by death, and some are still awaiting,
and they have not changed in the least (33:23) was recited, everyone re-
membered the martyrs of Uhud, especially Hamza, Anas ibn Nadr, and
'Abd Allah ibn Jahsh, as well as others who had promised God to give
their lives willingly in His Way.
While God explicitly mentioned Zayd ibn Haritha in: So when Zayd had
accomplished what he would of her … (33:37),412 He declared in 48:18 that
He was well pleased with the believers when they swore fealty to the
Messenger under a tree during the expedition of Hudaybiya.
In such a blessed, pure, and radiant atmosphere, the Companions
practiced Islam in its original fullness and pristine purity, based on deep
perception, profound insight, and knowledge of God. So, even an ordin-
ary believer who is aware of the meaning of belief and connection with
God, and who is trying to practice Islam sincerely, can grasp some
342

--- Sayfa 344 ---
glimpse of the purity of the first channel through which the Sunna was
transmitted to the next generation.
The difficulty of the circumstances
The reward of a deed changes according to the circumstances in which
it is done and the purity of the doer's intention. Striving in the way of
God in such severe circumstances as fear, threats, and shortage of neces-
sary equipment, and purely for His sake, is far more rewarding than the
same action performed in a free and promising atmosphere.
The Companions accepted and defended Islam in the severest circum-
stances imaginable. The opposition was extremely inflexible and unpity-
ing. In Muhyi al-Din ibn al-'Arabi'a Musamarat al-Abrar, Abu Bakr is re-
ported to have told 'Ali after the Prophet's death that the early Compan-
ions did not go out except at the risk of their lives-they always feared
that a dagger would be thrust at them. Only God knows how many
times they were insulted, beaten, and tortured. Those who were weak
and enslaved, such as Bilal, 'Ammar, and Suhayb, were tortured almost
to death. Young people like Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and Mus'ab ibn
'Umayr, were beaten, boycotted, and imprisoned by their families.
Yet none of them ever thought of recanting or opposing the Messen-
ger. For the sake of God, they forsook everything they had-their homes,
native lands, and belongings-and emigrated. The believers of Madina
welcomed them enthusiastically, protected them, and shared with them
everything they had. They fulfilled their covenant with God willingly,
sold their goods and souls to God in exchange for belief and Paradise,
and never broke their word. This gained them so high a rank in the view
of God that no one can attain it until the Last Day.
The severity of circumstances, along with other factors, made the
Companions' belief strong and firm beyond compare. For example, the
Messenger once entered the mosque and saw Harith ibn Malik sleeping
412.The Messenger declares: "My Companions are like stars; whomever of them you
follow, you will be guided to the True Path." This hadith is explicitly corroborated by
the verse: Remember you said to him whom God favored (33:37) By "him whom God
favored", the verse refers to Zayd ibn Haritha, the emancipated slave of the Messen-
ger, who is not included in the greatest of the Companions. God orders all Muslims
to follow the way of those whom He favors: "Guide us to the Straight Path, the path
of those whom You favored" (1:5). This means that the Companions, especially the
greatest among them, are guides by whom one can find the True or Straight Path.
(Tr.)
343

--- Sayfa 345 ---
there. He woke him up. Harith said: "May my father and mother be sac-
rificed for your sake, O Messenger of God! I am ready to carry out your
orders!" The Messenger asked him how he had spent the night. Harith
answered: "As a true believer." The Messenger said: "Everything that is
true must have a truth (proving it). What is the truth of your belief?"
Harith replied: "I fasted during the day and prayed to my Master in ut-
most sincerity all night long. Now I am in a state as if I were seeing the
Throne of my God and the recreation of the people of Paradise in
Paradise." The Messenger concluded: "You have become an embodiment
of belief."413
The Companions became so near to God that "God was their eyes with
which they saw, their ears with which they heard, their tongues with
which they spoke, and their hands with which they held."
The Companions in the Qur'an
Ibn Hazm voices the opinion of many leading scholars: "All of the
Companions will enter Paradise." It is possible to find proofs in the
Qur'an testifying to this assertion. The Qur'an describes the Companions
as follows:
Muhammad is the Messenger of God. Those who are with him are hard to-
ward the unbelievers, merciful one to another.[They kept so long vigils that] you
see them bowing, prostrating, seeking blessing, bounty (of forgiveness and
Paradise) and good pleasure (of God). Their mark is on their faces, the trace of
prostration. This is their likeness in the Torah and in the Gospel: as a seed that
puts forth its shoot, and strengthens it, and it grows strong and rises straight
upon its stalk, pleasing the sowers, that through them it may enrage the unbe-
lievers. God has promised those of them who believe and do deeds of righteous-
ness forgiveness and a mighty wage[He will reward them in Paradise with the
things that neither eyes will ever have seen nor ears heard]. (48:29)
And as: The Outstrippers, the first Emigrants and Helpers, and those who
followed them in good-doing-God is well-pleased with them, and they are well-
pleased with Him; He has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers
flow, therein to dwell forever; that is the mighty triumph. (9:100)
Abu Hurayra never missed a discourse of the Messenger. He was al-
ways with him, and stayed in the antechamber of the Prophet's Mosque.
He suffered hunger almost all the time. Once he went to the Messenger
and told him that he had eaten nothing for days. Abu Talha took him as
413.Haythami, Majma' al-Zawa'id, 1:57; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 13:353.
344

--- Sayfa 346 ---
a guest, but unfortunately there was little in his house to eat. So, he
asked his wife Umm Sulaym to " put the children to bed early, and put on the
table whatever we have to eat. When we sit at the table, put out the candle pre-
tending to make its light brighter. No one sees in the dark whether one is really
eating or not. I will act as if I am eating, and thus our guest can satisfy his hun-
ger." After the dawn prayer, the Messenger turned to them, smiled, and
said: "What did you do last night? This verse was revealed concerning you:
Those who made their dwelling in the abode[Madina], and in belief, before
them[the Emigrants] love whoever has emigrated to them, not finding in their
breasts any need for what they have been given, and preferring others above
themselves, even though poverty be their portion. Whoever is guarded against
the avarice of his own soul, those - they are the prosperous. (59:9)
We also read of the Companions: God was well-pleased with the believers
when they were swearing fealty to you under the tree, and He knew what was in
their hearts, so He sent down peace, calm and tranquility upon them, and rewar-
ded them with a nigh victory (48:18).
The Companions swore many oaths of allegiance to the Messenger,
promising to protect him and carry, by God's Will, Islam to ultimate vic-
tory as best they could. They kept their promise at the cost of all their be-
longings and lives. Most were martyred either during the Prophet's life-
time or while conveying Islam throughout the newly conquered lands. It
is still possible to find, in almost every part of the Muslim world, tombs
where several Companions are buried. Also, they raised numerous
scholars in jurisprudence, Traditions, Qur'anic interpretation, as well as
in history and the biography of the Prophet. The Qur'an states: Among be-
lievers are those who were true to their covenant with God; some have fulfilled
their vow by death, and some are still awaiting, and they have not changed in
the least (33:23).
The Companions in Hadith.
The Prophet also praised the Companions and warned Muslims not to
attack or insult them. For example, Bukhari, Muslim, and other Tradi-
tionists relate from Abu Sa'id al-Khudri that the Messenger warned:
"Don't curse my Companions, don't curse my Companions! I swear by Him in
Whose hand is my life that even if you had as much gold as Mount Uhud and
spent it in the way of God, this would not be equal in reward to a few handfuls
of them or even to half of that."
345

--- Sayfa 347 ---
The Companions have such a high value because they accepted,
preached, and protected Islam in the severest circumstances. Besides, ac-
cording to the rule that "the cause is like the doer," the reward gained by
all Muslims from that time until the Last Day is being added to the Com-
panions' record, without taking away any of the doers' rewards. Had it
not been for their efforts to spread Islam wherever they went, no one
would know of it or be able to become Muslim. So, all Muslims after the
Companions should feel indebted to them and, rather than thinking of
criticizing them, should pray for them: As for those who came after them,
they say: "Our Master, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in belief,
and put not into our hearts any rancor toward those who believe. Our Master,
surely You are the All-Gentle, the All-Compassionate" (59:10).
Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban quote 'Abd Allah ibn Mughaffal's warning
that he heard from the Messenger: Oh God, Oh God! Refrain from using bad
language about my Companions! Oh God, Oh God! Refrain from using bad lan-
guage about my Companions! Don't make them the target of your attacks after
me! Whoever loves them loves them on account of his love of me; whoever hates
them hates them on account of his hatred of me. Whoever hurts them hurts me;
whoever hurts me "hurts" God.414
Imam Muslim relates in his Sahih that the Messenger declared: Stars
are means of security for the heaven. When they are scattered, what was prom-
ised for Heaven befalls it. I am the means of security for my Companions. When
I leave the world, what was promised for my Companions will befall them. My
Companions are means of security for my nation. When they leave the world,
what was promised for my nation will befall it.415
As recorded in Bukhari, Muslim, and other authentic books of Tradi-
tion, the Messenger declared: "The best people are those living in my time.
Then come those who follow them, and then come those who follow them. Those
will be followed by a generation whose witness is sometimes true, sometimes
false."416
The
time
of
the
Companions
and
the
two
succeeding
414.Tirmidhi, “Manaqib,” 58; Ibn Hibban, 9:189; Ibn Hanbal, 5:57. Hurt is used figurat-
ively, in the sense of displeasing, offending, or attracting the wrath of God to
yourself.
415.Muslim, “Fada’il al-Sahaba,” 207. That is, Heaven is maintained by the stars’ delic-
ate order. When this order collapses, it means the final destruc-tion of the universe.
The Prophet was a means of security for his Companions. Twenty years after his
death, people began slandering the Companions. Their existence, particularly of the
leading ones, was a means of security for the Muslim nation. After their deaths, mis-
fortune began to visit the Muslims. (Tr.)
416.Muslim, “Fada’il al-Sahaba,” 212; Bukhari, “Fada’il al-Ashab,” 1.
346

--- Sayfa 348 ---
generations was the time of truthfulness. People of great righteousness
and exacting scholars appeared during these first three generations.
Later generations contained many who lied and perjured themselves to
reinforce false beliefs or attain worldly aims. It was natural for liars and
members of heterodox sects (as it is for biased Orientalists and their
Muslim followers) to lie about the Companions and the pure Imams of
the two generations succeeding them, as they were strongholds of Islam
and strengthened its pillars.
In his Hilyat al-Awliya', Abu Nu'aym quotes 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar:
Whoever desires to follow a straight path should follow the path of those who
passed away: The Companions of Muhammad. They are the best of his Umma,
the purest in heart, the deepest in knowledge, and the furthest from any false dis-
play of piety. They are a community whom God chose for His Prophet's com-
pany and His religion's conveyance. Try to be like them in conduct and follow
their way. They are the Companions of Muhammad. I swear by God, the Master
of the Ka'ba, that they were on true guidance.417
As recorded by Tabarani and Ibn al-Athir, 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, one
of the first people to embrace Islam in Makka and sent to Kufa as a teach-
er by 'Umar, said: "God looked at the hearts of His true servants and
chose Muhammad to send to His creatures as a Messenger. Then He
looked at the hearts of people and chose his Companions as the helpers
of His religion and the viziers of His Prophet." He also said: "You may ex-
cel the Companions in fasting, praying, and in striving to worship God better.
But they are better than you, for they paid no attention to the world and were
most desirous of the Hereafter."418
The companions who excelled narrating Traditions
God Almighty created people with different dispositions and poten-
tials so that human social life would be maintained through mutual help
and the division of labor. Therefore, some Companions were good farm-
ers, successful tradesmen or businessmen, students, military command-
ers, and administrators. Some, especially the Ashab al-Suffa (those who
stayed in the antechamber of the Prophet's Mosque) never missed a
teaching of the Messenger and tried to memorize his every word. These
Companions later narrated to people whatever they heard from or saw
about the Messenger. Fortunately, they outlived the others by God's Will
417.Abu Nu‘aym, Hilya, 1:305.
418.Ibid., 1:375.
347

--- Sayfa 349 ---
and, together with 'A'isha, constituted the first, golden channel through
which the Sunna was transmitted. The following is a brief description of
their characters and lives:
Abu Hurayra was from Yemeni tribe of Daws. He became a Muslim in
the early days of 7th year ah at the hands of Tufayl ibn 'Amr, the chief of
his tribe. When he emigrated to Madina, the Messenger was busy with
the Khaybar campaign. He joined him in Khaybar. The Messenger
changed his name, 'Abd al-Shams, to 'Abd al-Rahman, saying: "A man is
not the slave of either the sun or moon."
Abu Hurayra was very poor and modest. One day the Messenger saw
him cradling a cat and nicknamed him Abu Hirr (the father or owner of
a cat). People soon began to call him Abu Hurayra. However, he liked to
be called Abu Hirr, since this title was given to him by the Messenger.
He lived with his non-Muslim mother. Always praying her conver-
sion, one day he asked the Messenger to pray for this. He did so, and be-
fore he lowered his arms, Abu Hurayra ran to his house, so sure was he
that the Messenger's prayer would be accepted. When he arrived, his
mother stopped him at the door so that she could finish ghusl (total ritu-
al ablution). She then opened the door and declared her conversion.
After this, Abu Hurayra requested the Messenger to pray that believers
should love him and his mother. The Messenger did so. Therefore, love
of Abu Hurayra is a mark of belief.
This Companion had an extraordinarily keen memory. He slept the
first third of night, prayed and did his daily supererogatory recitations in
the second third, and went over the Traditions he had memorized in or-
der never to forget them in the last third. He memorized more than 5,000
Traditions. He never missed a discourse of the Messenger, sought to
learn his Traditions, and was a lover of knowledge.
One day he prayed: "O God, grant me knowledge I will never forget."
The Messenger heard him and said: "O God, amen." On another day, he
told the Messenger: "O Messenger of God, I don't want to forget
something that I hear from you." The Messenger asked him to take off
his cloak and spread it on the ground, which Abu Hurayra did. The Mes-
senger then prayed and emptied his hands onto the cloak as if he had
filled them with something from the Unseen. He ordered Abu Hurayra
to fold up the cloak and hold it to his breast, which he did. After narrat-
ing this incident, Abu Hurayra used to say: "I folded it up and held it to
my breast. I swear by God that[since then] I have not forgotten anything
I heard from the Messenger."
348

--- Sayfa 350 ---
Abu Hurayra paid no heed to the world. He usually fasted 3 or 4 days
successively because of poverty. Sometimes he writhed with hunger on
the ground and said to those passing by: Istaqra'tuka, which has a
double meaning: "Will you not recite to me some Qur'an?" and "Will you
not feed me?" Ja'far Tayyar understood him better than anybody else and
took him as a guest.
Abu Hurayra patiently endured such hardship for the sake of Hadith.
To those who sometimes warned him that he was narrating too many
Traditions, he replied sincerely: "While my Emigrant brothers were busy
in the bazaar and my Helper brothers with farming, I tried to keep my
soul and body together to keep company with the Messenger." Some-
times he said: "Were it not for the verse: Those who conceal the clear signs
and the guidance that We have sent down, after We have shown them clearly in
the Book, they shall be cursed by God and the curses (2:159), I would narrate
nothing."
Some claim that other Companions were opposed to Abu Hurayra's
narrating. This claim is groundless. Many Companions, among them
Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar, 'Abd Allah ibn 'Abbas,
Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari, Anas ibn Malik, and Wasila ibn Aslam,
narrated Traditions from him. Some asked Abu Ayyub why he narrated
from Abu Hurayra despite his earlier conversion, to which he would
reply: "He heard from the Messenger many things we did not hear."
Many leading Tabi'un also received numerous Traditions from him,
including Hasan al-Basri, Zayd ibn Aslam, Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib (who
married Abu Hurayra's daughter so that he could benefit from him
more), Sa'id ibn Yasar, Sa'id al-Makburi, Sulayman ibn Yasar, Sha'bi
(who received Traditions from 500 Companions), Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr, and Qasim ibn Muhammad (who is accepted as a link in the chain
of
Nakshbandi
spiritual
guides).
Hammam
ibn
Munabbih
and
Muhammad ibn Munkadir are the most famous of the 800 people who
received Traditions from him.
'Umar appointed Abu Hurayra as governor to Bahrayn. However,
when he made a small amount of wealth by trade during his period of
office, 'Umar had him investigated. Although he was found innocent and
requested to return to office, Abu Hurayra declined, saying: "That is
enough for me as a governor."
Abu Hurayra, despite claims to the contrary by such Orientalists as
Goldziher and their Muslim followers like Ahmad Amin, Abu Rayya,
and 'Ali 'Abd al-Razzaq, was never anti-'Ali and pro-Umayyad. He
349

--- Sayfa 351 ---
should have supported 'Ali in the internal conflicts so that sedition
would be crushed, but chose to remain neutral, for: "Seditions will ap-
pear, during which the one who sits[silent] is better than the one who
stands[to participate]; the one who stands is better than him who
walks[to participate], and the one who walks is better than him who
runs[in them]." This hadith might not have been related to the internal
conflicts during 'Ali's caliphate, but Abu Hurayra thought that it was
and so remained neutral.
Abu Hurayra opposed the Umayyad government. He once stood in
front of Marwan ibn Hakam and narrated the hadith: "The destruction of
my community will be in the hands of a few callow (young) men from
the Quraysh." Marwan responded: "May God's curse be upon them,"
pretending not to understand who was meant. Abu Hurayra added: "If
you like, I can inform you of their names and characteristics."
He was frequently heard to pray: "O God, don't make me live until the
sixtieth year." This supplication was so famous that whoever saw Abu
Hurayra recalled it. He had heard from the Messenger that some inex-
perienced, sinful young men would begin to rule the Muslims in 60 ah.
He died in 59 ah, and Yazid succeeded his father Mu'awiya one year
later.
There is no proof that 'A'isha was opposed to Abu Hurayra's narrat-
ing. Both 'A'isha and Abu Hurayra lived long lives and, except for the
following incident, she never criticized his narrations. Once when he was
narrating Traditions near her room while she was praying, she finished
her prayer and came out, only to find that he had left. She remarked:
"The Messenger's Traditions should not be narrated in this way, one after
another," meaning that they should be narrated slowly and distinctly so
that the listeners could understand and memorize them.
Some claim that Imam Abu Hanifa said: "I don't take the opinions of
three Companions as evidence in jurisprudence. Abu Hurayra is one of
them." This is simply a lie. Allama Ibn Humam, one of the greatest
Hanafi jurists, regarded Abu Hurayra as a significant jurist. Besides,
there is nothing to prove that Abu Hanifa said that.
Abu Hurayra narrated more than 5,000 Traditions. When gathered to-
gether, they make perhaps a volume 1.5 times as long as the Qur'an.
Many people have memorized the Qur'an in 6 months or even quicker.
Abu Hurayra had a very keen memory and spent 4 years with the Mes-
senger, who prayed for the strength of Abu Hurayra's memory. It would
be tantamount to accusing Abu Hurayra of deficient intelligence to claim
350

--- Sayfa 352 ---
that he could not have memorized so many Traditions. In addition, all of
the Traditions he narrated were not directly from the Messenger. As
leading Companions like Abu Bakr, 'Umar, Ubayy ibn Ka'b, 'A'isha, and
Abu Ayyub al-Ansari narrated from him, he also received Traditions
from them.
While Abu Hurayra was narrating Traditions in the presence of Mar-
wan ibn Hakam at different times, the latter had his secretary record
them written secretly. Some time later, he asked Abu Hurayra to repeat
the Traditions he had narrated to him earlier. Abu Hurayra began: "In
the name of God, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate," and narrated
the same Traditions with exactly the same wording. So, there is no reas-
on to criticize him for narrating so many Prophetic Traditions.
'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas was born 4 or 5 years before the Hijra. He had
a keen intelligence and memory, and was an inspired man. The Messen-
ger prayed for him: "O God, make him perceptive and well-versed in the
religion, and teach him the hidden truths of the Qur'an."419 During his
lifetime, he came to be known as "The Great Scholar of the Umma," "the
Sea" (One Very Profound in Knowledge), or "The Translator (Clarifier) of
the Qur'an."
He was a very handsome, tall man endowed with great eloquence. His
memory was such that he memorized an 80-couplet poem by 'Amr ibn
Rabi'a at one reading. Besides his profound knowledge of Qur'anic inter-
pretation, Tradition, and jurisprudence, he also was well-versed in liter-
ature, particularly in pre-Islamic poetry. In his Tafsir, Ibn Jarir al-Tabari
relates either a couplet or verse from him in connection with the inter-
pretation of almost each Qur'anic verse.
He was greatly loved by the Companions. Despite his youth, 'Umar
appointed him to his Advisory Council, which consisted of elder Com-
panions. When asked why he had done this, 'Umar tested their level of
understanding of the Qur'an. He asked them to explain: When comes the
help of God, and victory, and you see men entering God's religion in throngs,
then proclaim the praise of Your Master, and seek His forgiveness; for He is Oft-
Returning[in grace and mercy] (110:1-3). The elders answered: "It orders
the Prophet to praise God and seek His forgiveness when he sees people
entering Islam in throngs after the help of God and victory came." 'Umar
was not satisfied, and so asked Ibn 'Abbas the same question. He replied:
"This sura implies that the death of the Messenger is near, for when
people
enter
Islam
in
throngs,
it
means
that
the
mission
of
419.Bukhari, "Wudu'," 10; Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 138.
351

--- Sayfa 353 ---
Messengership has ended." 'Umar turned to the council and explained:
"That's why I include him among you."420
Ibn 'Abbas was famous for his deep insight, profound learning, keen
memory, high intelligence, perceptiveness, and modesty. When he
entered a gathering place, people would stand in respect for him. This
made him so uncomfortable that he told them: "Please, for the sake of the
help and shelter (you gave the Prophet and the Emigrants), don't stand
for me!" Although one of the most knowledgeable Muslims, he showed
great respect to scholars. For example, he helped Zayd ibn Thabit mount
his horse by holding the stirrup steady and explained: "We have been
told to behave like this toward our scholars." In return, Zayd kissed his
hand without his approval and remarked: "We have been told to behave
like this toward the Messenger's relatives."421
As noted above, Ibn 'Abbas did not like people to stand for him to
show respect. However, when he was buried, something occurred that
was as if the dead had stood in respect for him and the spirit beings wel-
comed him. A voice was heard from beneath the grave: O soul at peace!
Return unto your Master, well-pleased, well-pleasing! Enter among My ser-
vants! Enter my Paradise! (89:27-30).422
Ibn 'Abbas brought up many scholars in every branch of religious
knowledge. The Makkan school of jurisprudence was founded by him.
Such leading Tabi'un scholars as Sa'id ibn Jubayr, Mujahid ibn Jabr, and
Ikrima acknowledged: "Ibn 'Abbas taught us whatever we know." He
narrated about 1,600 Traditions.
'Abd Allah Ibn 'Umar was the only one of 'Umar's nine sons to be
called Ibn 'Umar (the son of 'Umar). This shows that he had greater
worth to be called 'Umar's son or to be mentioned with the name of
'Umar. Although 'Umar is the second greatest Companion, 'Abd Allah
may be regarded superior in knowledge, piety, worship, and devotion to
the Sunna. His care in following the Prophet's example was such that
Nafi', Imam Malik's tutor, narrates: "While we were descending 'Arafat,
Ibn 'Umar entered a hole. When he came out, I asked him what he had
done there. The Imam answered: 'While descending 'Arafat, I was be-
hind the Messenger. He went down into that hole and relieved himself. I
felt no need to do that now, but I don't like to oppose him.'"423 Also, no
420.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 110/3.
421.Ibn Hajar, 2:332.
422.Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, sura al-Fajr, verses 27-30. Haythami, Majma', 9:285
423.Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:131.
352

--- Sayfa 354 ---
one ever saw him take more or less than three swallows of water, for he
saw the Messenger drink water in three swallows.
Ibn 'Umar was born in the early years of Islam. He saw his father
beaten severely by the Makkan polytheists many times.424 When the
Muslims emigrated to Madina, he was about 10 years old. The Messen-
ger did not let him fight at Badr because he was too young. When he was
also prevented from fighting at Uhud, he returned home so grief-stricken
that he spent the whole night asking himself: "What sin have I commit-
ted that they did not include me in the army fighting in the way of the
Messenger?"425
Ibn Khalliqan relates in Wafayat al-A'yan (The Death of the Notables)
from Sha'bi:
Once in their youth, 'Abd Allah ibn Zubayr, his brother Mus'ab ibn Zubayr,
'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, and 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar were sitting near the
Ka'ba. They thought that each should ask God for something special in the hope
that the prayer would be accepted. Ibn Zubayr prayed: "O God, for the sake of
Your Grandeur, Honor, and Majesty, make me a ruler in Hijaz." Mus'ab
stretched out his arms and prayed: "O God, for the sake of Your Honor,
Majesty, and Grandeur, of Your Throne and Seat, make me a ruler in Iraq."
'Abd al-Malik raised his hands and prayed: "O God, I ask You to make me a
ruler over all the Muslims and secure, through me, Muslim unity even at the
cost of some lives." When 'Abd Allah prayed, he asked: "O God, don't take my
soul before You guarantee Paradise for me."426
The prayers of the first three were accepted: 'Abd Allah ibn Zubayr
ruled for a while in Hijaz and was eventually martyred by Hajjaj the
Tyrant, the notorious Umayyad governor. Mus'ab ruled in Iraq for a
short time. 'Abd al-Malik succeeded his father, Marwan, as caliph and
secured Muslim unity of Muslims, though at the cost of many lives and
much bloodshed.
As for Ibn 'Umar, Imam Sha'bi remarks: "Whether the Imam's prayer
was accepted or not will be clear in the Hereafter." Sha'bi knew
something: "Ibn 'Umar never opposed the Prophet's descendants or sup-
ported the Umayyads. Hajjaj was afraid of him. Once, Hajjaj gave a ser-
mon before the noon prayer that was so long that the noon prayer's time
was almost over. Ibn 'Umar warned him: 'O Governor, time is passing
without waiting for you to finish your sermon.' Hajjaj was full of rancor
424.Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:374.
425.Bukhari, "Maghazi," 6; I Sa'd, 4:143.
426.Ibn Khalliqan, Wafayat al-A'yan, 2:30
353

--- Sayfa 355 ---
and enmity for Ibn 'Umar. Finally, during a pilgrimage he found
someone to prick Ibn 'Umar's heel with a poisonous spear while he was
in pilgrim attire. The poison eventually killed him."427
'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, one of the first five or six people to embrace
Islam, also narrated a considerable number of Traditions. As a youth, he
tended the flocks of such Qurayshi leaders as Abu Jahl and 'Uqba ibn
Abi Mu'ayt. After his conversion, he would no longer be separated from
the Messenger. He entered the Prophet's house without asking to do so
and so frequently that people thought he was a family member. During
military or non-military expeditions, he carried the Prophet's water bag,
wooden sandals, and mat upon which he slept or sat. Eventually, he be-
came known as "the caretaker of the pattens (sandals-like shoes), couch,
and water bag."428
Ibn Mas'ud worked some wonders. For example, while he was once
being tortured in Makka, he became invisible to his torturers. The Mes-
senger called him "the son of the mother of a slave," and advised his
Companions: "Whoever wants to recite the Qur'an as if it were being re-
vealed for the first time, let him recite it according to the recitation of the
son of the mother of a slave."[16] One day the Messenger asked him to
recite some of the Qur'an to him. Ibn Mas'ud excused himself: "O Mes-
senger of God, shall I recite it to you while the Qur'an is being revealed
to you?" However, the Messenger insisted: "I would prefer to hear it
from others." Ibn Mas'ud began to recite Surat al-Nisa'. When he reached
verse 41: How then will it be, when We bring forward from every nation a wit-
ness, and bring you as a witness against those?, the Messenger, whose eyes
were full of tears, stopped him, saying: "Stop, please. This is enough."429
Ibn Mas'ud, who was short and weak, once climbed a tree because the
Messenger asked him to do so. Those present laughed at his legs. The
Messenger warned them, saying: "Those legs will weigh more than
Mount Uhud according to the measure of the Hereafter in the other
world."430
Caliph 'Umar sent him to Kufa as a teacher and with a letter, in which
he said: "O people of Kufa! If I did not prefer you over myself, I would
not have sent Ibn Mas'ud to you."431 Ibn Mas'ud lived in Kufa during the
427.Ibn Sa'd, 4:185-7.[15] Bukhari, "Fada'il al-Ashab," 27; Ibn Sa'd, 3:153.
428.Ibn Ma'ja, "Muqaddima," 11; Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:318; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, 2:369.
429.Tirmidhi, "Tafsir al-Qur'an," 5.
430.Ibn Sa'd, 3:155.
431.Ibid., 157.
354

--- Sayfa 356 ---
caliphate of 'Umar and trained many scholars. Such great Tabi'un schol-
ars as Alqama ibn Qays, Aswad ibn Yazid al-Naha'i, and Ibrahim ibn
Yazid al-Naha'i grew up in the ethos established by Ibn Mas'ud. One of
the people attending Alqama's courses asked him who had been his
teacher. When Alqama answered that he had learned from 'Umar,
'Uthman, 'Ali, and Ibn Mas'ud, the man responded: "Good! Good!"
Ibn Mas'ud continued to stay in Kufa during 'Uthman's caliphate.
However, after 'Uthman summoned him to Madina to investigate a
groundless complaint about him, Ibn Mas'ud did not want to go back to
Kufa, as he was already very old. One day a man ran to him and said:
"Last night I dreamed that the Messenger was telling you : 'They have af-
flicted you much after me, so come to me.' You answered: 'Alright, O
Messenger of God. I will not leave Madina any more.' A few days later
Ibn Mas'ud became ill. 'Uthman visited him, and the following conversa-
tion took place between them:
- Do you have any complaints?
- I have many complaints.
- Of what?
- Of my sins while going to God.
- Is there something you desire?
- God's mercy.
- Would you like me to send for a doctor?
- The "doctor" has made me ill. So, there is nothing the doctor you will
send for can do for me.432
Ibn Mas'ud spent about 20 years in the company of the Messenger. He
narrated approximately 800 Traditions.
Besides those four great Companions, 'A'isha, Abu Sa'id al-Khudri,
Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah, and Anas ibn Malik are the other Companions who
narrated many Traditions.
'A'isha lived with the Messenger for 9 years. She had great talents, a
keen intelligence and memory, and a deep insight and perceptiveness.
She had a great curiosity to learn new things, and asked the Messenger
to explain those matters that she found it hard to understand.
432.Ibn Kathir, 7:183.
355

--- Sayfa 357 ---
Abu Sa'id al-Khudri lived in the mosque's antechamber and was al-
ways with the Messenger. He lived a long life, and a time came when he
was regarded as the most knowledgeable person of Madina.
Jabir Ibn 'Abd Allah is the son of 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn Haram al-
Ansari, who was martyred at Uhud. After the Messenger's death, he
lived in Madina (where he lectured in the Prophet's Mosque), Egypt, and
Damascus. Such leading Tabi'un scholars as 'Amr ibn Dinar, Mujahid,
and Ata' ibn Abi Rabah attended his lectures.433 People gathered around
him in Damascus and Egypt to learn of the Messenger and his
Traditions.
Anas Ibn Malik served the Messenger for 10 years in Madina. After
the Messenger's death, he lived a very long life, during which he must
have taught the Prophetic Traditions to those around him.
All the Traditions recorded in Kanz al-'Ummal, including authentic
and defectively transmitted ones, number 46,624. It is possible someone
to memorize them within a short time. Among the Traditionists of early
Islamic ages, many people memorized more than 100,000 Traditions, in-
cluding fabricated ones. Given this fact, it cannot be claimed by the
Sunna's detractors and doubters that the number of Traditions narrated
from certain Companions is too great for them to have memorized and
narrated.
433.Ibn Hajar, 1:213.
356

--- Sayfa 358 ---
The Tabi'un
In many of the places where the Qur'an praises the Companions, it also
mentions the blessed generations following in their way. For example:
The Outstrippers (the first to embrace Islam and excel others in virtue), the
first of the Emigrants and the Helpers, and those who followed them in doing
good, God is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. He has
prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein to dwell
forever; that is the mighty triumph. (9:100)
The Tabi'un, first of all, must be among those praised together with the
Companions. Like them, they were well-pleased with God regardless of
whether He sent them good or bad, blessing or misfortune. Conscious of
their servanthood before God, they worshipped Him in deep respect and
reverence. Like the Companions, they loved Him deeply and trusted
Him completely. The Messenger praised them, saying: "Good tidings for
those who have seen me and believed in me, and good tidings for those
who see those who saw me."434
The Tabi'un followed in the Companions' footsteps and showed them
due respect. They cherished no rancor and enmity against any of the be-
lievers, and wished everyone well:
As for those who came after them, they say: "Our Master, forgive us and our
brothers, who preceded us in belief, and put not into our hearts any rancor to-
wards those who believe. Our Master, surely You are the All-Gentle, the All-
Compassionate." (59:10)
As described in 9:100, this blessed generation followed the Compan-
ions in doing good (ihsan). In addition to meaning respect, being well-
wishing and altruistic, one hadith says that ihsan also means: "Doing
good (ihsan) is that you worship God as if you were seeing Him; if,
however, you do not actually see Him, surely He sees you."435
This generation came at a time when conspiracies and hypocrisy
caused great internal dissension. At this critical juncture, they protected,
defended, and practiced Islam in deep consciousness and devotion. They
became the referents of: Our Master, in You we trust, to You we turn, and to
You is the homecoming (60:4).
Some of them performed 100 rak'as of nightly prayers, recited the
whole Qur'an every 2 or 3 days, always did their obligatory prayers in
434.Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:86; Haythami, Majma', 10:20; Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, 11:530.
435.Bukhari, "Tafsir," 31/2; Abu Dawud, "Sunna," 16; Muslim, "Iman," 5-7.
357

--- Sayfa 359 ---
congregation in a mosque, always slept (like Masruq) in prostration be-
fore the Ka'ba, and did not laugh loudly during their whole lives.
Uways al-Qarani is generally regarded as the greatest Tabi'un. Al-
though old enough to have seen the Prophet, he had no opportunity to
do so. One day while sitting with his Companions, the Messenger ad-
vised them: "If you see Uways al-Qarani, ask him to pray for you."436
During his caliphate, 'Umar asked Yemeni pilgrims about Uways. When
he was found one year among the pilgrims, 'Umar requested him to pray
for him. Uncomfortable at being identified, Uways was never seen again
among people until he was martyred at the Battle of Siffin fighting for
'Ali.437
There were many illustrious Tabi'un, among them Masruq ibn al-
Ajda', Ata' ibn Abi Rabah, Hasan al-Basri, Muhammad ibn Sirin, 'Ali
Zayn
al-'Abidin,
Qasim
ibn
Muhammad,
and
Muhammad
ibn
Munkadir, who were peerless in knowledge, piety, and righteousness.
Muhammad ibn Munkadir was called al-Bakka' (the one who cries
much), due to his fear of God. Once his mother told him: "O my son, if I
had not known you since childhood, I would think you are crying for
some sin. Why do you cry so much?" He said that he did so because he
was deeply conscious of God's Majesty, of the terror of the Day of Judge-
ment, and of Hell.438 When asked on his death-bed why he was crying,
he replied: "I am afraid I'll be included in the meaning of the verse: Yet
there will appear to them from God that they never reckoned with (39:47)."
Masruq ibn al-Ajda' worshipped God very earnestly. He used to sleep
in prostration before tha Ka'ba. When they suggested that he should lie
down during his last illness, he answered: "By God, if someone appeared
and told me that God wouldn't punish me, even then I would continue
to pray with the same earnestness as before."439 He did so because he
was following the Prophet, who, when asked by 'A'isha why he tired
himself so much with praying, answered: "Shall I not be a thankful
servant?"
Sa'id ibn Jubayr was a student of Ibn 'Abbas. He spent the day
preaching Islam and the night praying. He fought against Hajjaj on the
side of 'Abd al-Rahman al-Kindi. When finally he was seized, the sol-
diers taking him to Hajjaj spent a night in a monastery in a big forest.
436.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 223–4.
437.Muslim, "Fada'il al-Sahaba," 223–4.
438.Abu Nu'aym, Hilya, 3:146.
439.Ibn al-Jawzi, Sifat al-Safwa, 3:15.
358

--- Sayfa 360 ---
Sa'id wanted to pray in the forest. The soldiers let him, thinking that
wild animals would tear him to pieces. The soldiers watched him pray
through a window, and saw wild animals gather around him also to
watch.
When his captors used torture to force him to swear allegiance to Haj-
jaj, he always refused: "You are in the wrong, wronging the Prophet's
descendants. I'll never take the oath of allegiance to you." Before he was
executed, he recited the verse Muslims recite during the animal sacrifice:
I have turned my face to Him who originated the Heavens and the Earth, a man
of pure faith; I am not of those who associate partners with God (6:79). When
they turned his face away from the prayer direction (qibla), he recited: To
God belong the East and the West; Wherever you turn, there is the Face of God
(2:115). They struck his neck with a sword and from his lips came out:
"There is no god but God, Muhammad is the Messenger of God."440
Such were the people who received the Traditions from the Compan-
ions and transmitted them to succeeding generations. Among them, the
following few are also worth some fuller mention to recognize that
blessed generation more closely:
Sa'id Ibn al-Musayyib the Tabi'un's foremost Traditionist, jurist, and
Qur'anic interpreter, was born in 15 ah. He met most of the Companions,
among them 'Umar, 'Uthman, and 'Ali. Sa'id was a renowned for his re-
flection and memory, as well as for his piety, righteousness, and pro-
found devotion. These characteristics caused everyone to consider him,
even during his lifetime, the greatest Traditionist of his time.
At the early age of around 20, Sa'id began to give opinions and deliver
legal verdicts, just as Hasan al-Basri had done in Basra. The Companions
admired him greatly. 'Abd Allah ibn 'Umar once remarked: "If the Mes-
senger had seen that young man, he would have been very pleased with
him."441
He was extremely careful about performing his daily prayers in con-
gregation in the mosque. "I always have said the opening takbir of the
daily prayers just after the imam for 50 years," he used to say. He never
neglected even one item of the Sunna. Once when he was ill and doctors
advised him to stay in 'Aqiq valley for a month, he objected: "Then how
can I come to the mosque for the night and dawn prayers?" He was not
440.Abu Nu'aym, Hilya, 4:291–5; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 9:117.
441.M. 'Ajjaj al-Khatib, al-Sunna Qabl al-Tadwin, 485.
359

--- Sayfa 361 ---
content to perform the prescribed prayers anywhere except in the
Prophet's Mosque.
He did not swear allegiance to Caliph Walid. Although Hisham, gov-
ernor of Madina, had him beaten daily until the stick was broken, he did
not yield. When his friends, such as Masruq and Tawus, advised him to
give an oral consent to Walid's caliphate to end the beatings, he always
replied: "People do what we do. If we consent, how will we be able to ex-
plain this to them?"442
Sa'id had married Abu Hurayra's daughter in order to be nearer to
him and to improve his knowledge and understanding of Abu Hurayra's
Traditions. When Caliph 'Abd al-Malik appealed to him that his son
Hisham be allowed to marry Sa'id's daughter, he refused and, in the face
of increasing pressure and threats, offered her to Ibn Abi Wada', who
stayed in the madrasa.
Imam Shafi'i considered all of Sa'id's Traditions unquestionably au-
thentic, even if the Companion from whom he had received it was not
mentioned. This means that for Imam Shafi'i, Sa'id was of the same rank
as the Companions in knowledge and narration of the Prophetic Tradi-
tions. Among those who received Traditions from him, Ata' ibn Abi Ra-
bah, Qatada, Muhammad al-Baqir ('Ali's great-grandson), Zuhri, and
Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Ansari are worthy of special mention.
Alqama ibn Qays al-Nakha'i During the time of the Tabi'un, Basra
was honored by, in particular, Hasan al-Basri; Yemen by Tawus ibn
Qaysan; Madina by Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib; and Kufa by Alqama ibn
Qays al-Nakha'i. Kufa was first enlightened by 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud
during 'Umar's caliphate, and then directly by 'Ali, when he moved the
caliphate there. This gave Alqama a splendid opportunity to meet many
Companions and to learn about the Messenger's life and Traditions at
first hand.
Alqama is the founder of the Kufa school of Islamic religious sciences.
Those who saw him remembered 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, for he followed
the latter's footsteps in prayer, conduct, and in practicing Islam. 'Amr ibn
Shurahbil, among the great scholars who narrated Traditions from
Alqama, frequently suggested to those near him: "Let's go to the one who
resembles Ibn Mas'ud the most in conduct and attitudes."443 Ibn Mas'ud
442.Ibn Sa'd, Tabaqat, 5:126.
443.Ibn Sa'd, 6:86; Abu Nu'aym, 2:98.
360

--- Sayfa 362 ---
represented the Messenger wholly. As the Messenger desired to listen to
Ibn Mas'ud recite the Qur'an, so Ibn Mas'ud liked to listen to Alqama.444
Imam Abu Hanifa, generally accepted as the greatest Muslim jurist
and a man famous for his piety and austerity, admired Alqama so much
that he would say: "Alqama is probably more profound in[knowledge] of
Tradition and jurisprudence than some Companions."
One day, someone came to Alqama and insulted him greatly. The il-
lustrious scholar showed no indignation and, after the man had finished,
recited the verse: Those who hurt believing men and believing women, without
their having earned it, have laid upon themselves calumny and manifest sin
(33:58). The man retorted: "Are you a believer?" Alqama answered
humbly: "I hope so."445
Alqama struggled with falsehood in his time, and did not obey the
misguided Umayyad administrators. As he received Traditions from
hundreds of Companions, many leading figures among his own and suc-
ceeding generations narrated from him. Alqama brought up the most il-
lustrious scholars of the Kufan school, people such as Aswad ibn Yazid
al-Nakha'i, Ibrahim al-Nakha'i, and Hammad ibn Abi Sulayman, and
provided Kufa with a propitious ethos for bringing up Sufyan al-Thawri,
Abu Hanifa, and many others.
'Urwa ibn Zubayr ibn Al-'Awwam's father was one of the ten for
whom Paradise was promised while alive. 'Urwa's grandmother was
Safiyya, the Prophet's paternal aunt, and his mother was Asma' bint Abu
Bakr, who spent much of her life with 'A'isha. 'Urwa can be considered a
student of his aunt 'A'isha. He also was taught by Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib,
who was 7 or 8 years his senior.
'Urwa was one of the seven greatest jurists of his time. He transmitted
most of the Traditions narrated by 'A'isha. He also received Traditions
from 'Ali, 'Umar, Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, and many other
Companions. Many illustrious figures of succeeding generations, among
them Qatada ibn Di'ama, Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Ansari,
and Zayd ibn Aslam, narrated from him.
Like his contemporaries, 'Urwa was extremely pious. For example, one
of his feet became infected with gangrene and he had to have it ampu-
tated. While it was being amputated with a saw, he did not complain,
but only said: We have encountered weariness from this journey of ours
444.Ibn Sa'd, 6:90–1.
445.Ibn Sa'd, 6:86; Abu Nu'aym, 2:100.
361

--- Sayfa 363 ---
(18:62). When one of his four sons died some time later, he stretched his
arms before the Ka'ba and glorified God, saying: "O God, You gave me
four limbs, two arms and two legs, and four sons. You have taken one
from both groups and left to me the remaining three. Many thousands of
thanks to You!"446 'Urwa was certainly included in the meaning of: God is
well-pleased with them, and they are well-pleased with Him (98:8).
Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Shihab al-Zuhri known as Ibn Shihab
al-Zuhri, narrated one-fourth of the Prophetic Traditions coming from
the Tabi'un. His father, Muslim, had struggled against the Umayyads,
particularly Hajjaj. As a result, the Umayyad government usually kept
him under surveillance—he did not, as alleged, support the Umayyads.
Like others honored by God as the most reliable narrators of the
Prophetic Traditions, Ibn Shibab al-Zuhri had an extraordinarily keen
memory. He memorized the Qur'an before he was 7 years old—it took
him only 8 days. When he was 18 years old, he began to practice ijtihad
(ruling on Islamic religious or legal matters based on the principles laid
down in the Qur'an and the Sunna). He forgot nothing after he learned it:
"I have betrayed nothing that God put in my heart as a trust."447
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri received his first education from Sa'id ibn al-
Musayyib, who taught him for 8 years. He was also taught by
'Ubaydullah ibn 'Abd Allah ibn 'Utba, one of the seven leading jurists of
the time. His life was wholly dedicated to Hadith: "I shuttled between
Hijaz and Damascus for 40 years for the sake of Hadith."448
Some accuse him of flattering the Umayyads. This lie is contradicted
by historical facts. It is true that he tutored Caliph Hisham's sons.
However, this is not a fault and does not mean that he supported the
Umayyads. He should, in fact, be praised for trying to guide the future
rulers of the Muslim community to truth.
In his first meeting with Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, Caliph 'Abd al-Malik re-
minded him that his father had supported 'Abd Allah ibn Zubayr in his
dispute with the Umayyads for many years. But Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri nev-
er feared to speak the truth to the Umayyad rulers. Some Umayyads al-
leged that 'Ali was referred to in: as for him among them who took upon him-
self the greater part of it, a mighty chastisement awaits him, coming after: Those
who came with slander are a band of you; do not reckon it evil for you; rather it
is good for you. Every man of them shall have the sin that he has earned charged
446.Abu Nu'aym, 2:179.
447.Abu Nu'aym, 3:364; Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, 1:109.
448.Ibn Kathir, 9:375.
362

--- Sayfa 364 ---
to him (24:11). (This verse was revealed on the occasion of the slander
against 'A'isha).
This was, of course, a great lie against 'Ali. Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri openly
stated in the Umayyad court that this verse refers to 'Abd Allah ibn
Ubayy ibn Salul, leader of Madina's Hypocrites. When the Caliph
frowned, Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri retorted: "May you be left without a father!
I swear by God that if a herald were to announce from heaven that God
allows lying, I would not lie at all!"449
Although Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri defended 'Ali to the Umayyads, he was
accused of fabricating pro-Umayyad Traditions by Ya'qubi, a Shi'ite his-
torian. Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi, another Shi'ite historian, made the same claim
against Abu Hurayra. According to Ya'qubi's false account, Caliph 'Abd
al-Malik had Jerusalem's Masjid al-Aqsa' repaired to encourage the
Muslims to circumambulate it instead of the Ka'ba. He asked Ibn Shihab
al-Zuhri to fabricate a Tradition to that effect, which (it was claimed) he
did: "It is not worth traveling[for prayer] except to the three mosques:
Masjid al-Haram, Masjid al-Aqsa', and my Masjid here[in Madina]."
Earlier in this book, I argued in favor of this Tradition's authenticity. In
fact, Ya'qubi laid himself open to ridicule through such an unreasonable
account, for:
• No Jewish, Chrisitan, or Islamic history book has recorded that
Masjid al-Aqsa' has been circumambulated as the Ka'ba is.
• The Qur'an extols Masjid al-Aqsa' and the Muslims therefore
revere it; it does not need a fabricated Tradition to secure this
reverence.
• Caliph 'Abd al-Malik, Caliph 'Umar, Nur al-Din al-Zangi, and
Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi all had it repaired.
• Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri could not have met 'Abd al-Malik during his
reign and fabricated a hadith for him at a time when his own fath-
er (along with 'Abd Allah ibn Zubayr) was fighting against the
caliph.
• Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri was not a famous Traditionist at this time. He
only began to compile the Traditions in a formal manner during
the Caliphate of 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz.
• 'Abd al-Malik was not the sort of man to attempt such an absurd
fraud. Before his caliphate, he was very pious, an authority on
Traditions, and well-acquainted with the scholars of his genera-
tion. Although he did not succeed, as caliph, in retaining his
449.M. ‘Ajjaj al-Khatib, Al-Sunna qabl al-Tadwin, 509-10.
363

--- Sayfa 365 ---
former reputation among scholars for piety, he could not have
lowered himself so far to fabricate a hadith.
Despite its absurdity, Goldziher used Ya'qubi's account to defame Ibn
Shihab al-Zuhri, the first formal compiler of the Traditions and a narrat-
or of one-fourth of them. "Modern" researchers in the Muslim world,
such as Ahmad Amin, 'Ali Hasan 'Abd al-Qadir, and Abu Rayya, who
are spokesmen for the Orientalists, repeat the same claims.
The science of Hadith is founded on the most secure and sound pillars,
and its original sources are there for anyone who wants to study them.
Goldziher and his followers, on the other hand, base themselves on folk-
loric and poetical books, such as 'Iqd al-Farid and Al-Aghani (Songs), and
on books dealing with animals, like Kitab al-Hayawan. These books, and
all similar ones, have nothing to do with Hadith and have no scientific
approach.
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri is one of the greatest Hadith authorities. Leading
Hadith experts, such as Ibn al-Madini, Ibn Hibban, Abu Khatim, Hafiz
al-Dhahabi, and Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, agree upon his indisputable au-
thority. He received Traditions from many Companions, and numerous
scholars among the first and second generations after the Companions
narrated from him.
Among the Tabi'un are many others worthy of mention, like Aswad
ibn Yazid al-Nakha'i, Nafi' (who taught Imam Malik, founder of the Ma-
liki legal school), and Tawus ibn Qaysan, who did not sleep for 40 years
between the night and dawn prayers. However, the scope of this book
does not allow me to go into further detail.
364

--- Sayfa 366 ---
From the same author on Feedbooks
Questions and Answers about Islam (Vol.1) (2000)
In this book Fethullah Gulen, sensitive to the real questions people
have - the questions given rise to by the modern age - has tried, through
patient argument, to answer people's doubts and questions.
Islam, probably the most misunderstood religion in the world, is
among the hot reading topics for people all over the world. Questions
and Answers about Islam Vol. 1 and 2 have been prepared to provide
first-hand information from one of the most leading Islamic scholars of
our time.
The Essentials of the Islamic Faith (2005)
In Essentials of the Islamic Faith, the Author explains the principal ele-
ments of Islamic belief - belief in the existence and Unity of God; in Re-
surrection and the Day of Judgment; in Divine Scriptures and other fa-
miliar themes of Islamic discourse. What is special and unique about the
presentation of them in this book is that the author is constantly aware of
the encroachment (and the seductive appeal) of cultural attitudes which
are hostile not to Islam only but to any religious and contemplative way
of life.
Here are some of the topics covered
Does the Qur'an Allude to Scientific Developments?
Science and Religion
The Qur'an Proves Muhammad's Prophethood
The Holy Qur'an
The Prophet's Marriages
Miracles Cannot be Denied
Prophet Muhammad's Miracles
Prophet Muhammad's Predictions
Prophet Muhammad's Knowledge of the Past
Prophet Muhammad's Achievements
Muhammad's Character and High Morality
Prophet Muhammad's Life
Prophet Muhammad in the Bible
Prophethood and Muhammad's Prophethood
The Resurrection in Revealed Scriptures
The Benefits of Belief in the Resurrection
Questions on Destiny and Human Free Will
365

--- Sayfa 367 ---
The Divine Wisdom in Creating People Differently
Divine Destiny and Decree, and Divine Grace
Destiny and Human Free Will
Divine Decree and Destiny
Divine Decree and Destiny, and Human Free Will
Satan and Humanity
Spells and Sorcery
Jinn and Human Beings
Angels and Jinn In This World
Jinn and Their Functions
Angels and Their Functions
The Spirit In The Intermediate World
Death and The Spirit After Death
Dreams
Supernormal Phenomena
The Spirit and Its Identity
Arguments For The Existence of Invisible Beings
False Arguments About the Origin of Existence
The Existence and Unity of God
All Traditional Arguments For God's Existence
Science and Islam
Science and Quran
Religious Education of the Child (2006)
In this work, topics such as acquainting children with mosques at an
early age, answering any lingering questions in a child's mind from the
beginning, worshipping an praying within sight of our children (in order
to set them a practical example), respect for the Qur'an and similar topics
are covered from the perspective of the Qur'an and Sunna.
If we want our children to be courageous, we should not frighten them
with ideas of vampires, ghosts, giants, etc. We should raise them as
strong individuals with a firm faith which will enable them to face up to
any kind of difficulty.
If we really wish our children to have faith, all our attitudes and sens-
itivities in certain subjects, the way we go to bed and get up, the way we
exert ourselves in prayer, the way we spread our affectionate wings over
our children, must all reflect our faith in Allah and their hearts must be
filled with such faith. We should always try to be the ideal for them, to
avoid any kind of behavior which might make them feel contempt for us.
366

--- Sayfa 368 ---
367

--- Sayfa 369 ---
www.feedbooks.com
Food for the mind
368