--- Sayfa 3 ---
THE FAMILY
The Secr et Fundamentalism
a t the Hear t of Amer ican Po w e r
J E F F S H A R L E T

--- Sayfa 4 ---
In memory of Nancy Goodlin Sharlet

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Contents
Introduction: The  Avant-Garde of American Fundamentalism
1
I. AWAKENINGS
1. Ivanwald
13
2. Experimental Religion
56
3. The Revival Machine
73
II. JESUS PLUS NOTHING
4. Unit Number One
87
5. The F Word
114
6. The Ministry of Proper Enlightenment
144
7. The Blob
181
8. Vietnamization
205
9. Jesus + 0 = X
241
10. Interesting Blood
257
III. THE POP U LAR FRONT
Interlude
287
11. What Everybody Wants
291
12. The Romance of American Fundamentalism
322

--- Sayfa 6 ---
v | C O N T E N T S
i
13. Unschooling
336
14. This Is Not the End
370
Ac know ledg ments
389

Notes
393

Index
433
About the Author
Other Books by Jeff Sharlet
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Introduction
T H E  A V A N T- G A R D E O F
 A M E R I C A N F U N D A M E N T A L I S M
T
his is how they pray: a dozen  clear-eyed,  smooth- skinned
“brothers” gather in a huddle, arms crossing arms over shoul-
ders like the weave of a cable, leaning in on one another and swaying
like the long grass up the hill from the  house they share, a hand-
some, gray,  two-story colonial that smells of new carpet,  Pine-Sol,
and aftershave. It is decorated with lithographs of foxhunters and
pictures of Jesus, and, in the bunk room, a drawing of a “C–4” ma-
chine gun given to them by their  six-year-old neighbor. The men
who live there call the  house Ivanwald. At the end of a  tree-lined
cul-de- sac in Arlington, Virginia, quiet but for the buzz of lawn
mowers and kids playing tag in the park across the road, Ivanwald is
one  house among many, clustered like mushrooms, nearly two dozen
house holds devoted, like these men, to the service of a personal Je-
sus, a Christ who directs their every action. The men tend every
tulip in the  cul-de- sac, trim every magnolia, seal every driveway
smooth and black as boot leather. Assembled at the dining table or
on their lawn or in the hallway or in the bunk room or on the bas-
ketball court, they also pray, each man’s head bowed in humility and
swollen with pride (secretly, he thinks) at being counted among this
select corps for Christ, men to whom he will open his heart and
whom he will remember when he returns to the world not  born- again
but remade, no longer an individual but part of the Lord’s revolu-
tion, his will transformed into a weapon for what the young men call
spiritual war.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
2 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“Jeff,” says Bengt, one of the  house leaders, “will you lead us in
prayer?”
Surely, brother. I have lived with these men for close to a month,
not as a  Christian—a term they deride as too narrow for the world
they are building in Jesus’ honor—but as a follower of Christ, the
phrase they use to emphasize what matters most to their savior. Not
faith or kindness but obedience. I don’t share their faith, in fact, but
this does not concern them; I’ve obeyed, and that is enough. I have
shared the brothers’ meals and their work and their games. I’ve
wrestled with them and showered with them and listened to their
stories: I know which man resents his father’s fortune and which man
succumbed to the flesh of a woman not once but twice and which
man dances so well he is afraid of being taken for gay. I know what it
means to be a brother, which is to say I know what it means to be a
soldier in the army of God. I have been numbered among them.
“Heavenly Father,” I begin. Then, “O Lord,” but I worry that
doesn’t sound intimate enough. I settle on “Dear Jesus.” “Dear Jesus,
just, please, Jesus, let us fight for Your name.”
This is a story about two great spheres of belief, religion and politics,
and the ways in which they are bound together by the mythologies of
America. America—not the legal entity of the United States but the
idea with which Europe clothed a continent that it believed naked
and  wild—America has been infused with religion since the day in
1630 when the Puritan John Winthrop, preparing to cross the Atlan-
tic to found the Massachusetts Bay Colony, declared the New World
the city upon a hill spoken of by Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew. Three
hundred and  fifty-nine years later, Ronald Reagan, during the last
days of his presidency, would see in Washington’s traffic jams that
same vision, like a double exposure: “a tall proud city, built on rocks
stronger than oceans,  wind- swept,  God-blessed.” In his farewell ad-
dress he’d call it a shining city upon a hill. This is a story about that
imaginary place, so real in the minds of those for whom religion,
politics, and the mythologies of America are one singular story, and

--- Sayfa 9 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 3
how that vision has shaped America’s projection of power onto the
rest of the world.
My “brothers”  were members of a very peculiar group of believers,
not representative of the majority of Christians but of an avant- garde of
the social movement I call American fundamentalism, a movement that
recasts theology in the language of empire. Avant- garde is a term usually
reserved for innovators, artists who live strange and dangerous lives
and translate their strange and dangerous thoughts into pictures or
poetry or fantastical buildings. The term has a political ancestry as
well: Lenin used it to describe the elite cadres he believed could spark
a revolution. It is in this sense that the men to whom my brothers ap-
prenticed themselves, a seventy-year-old  self-described “invisible” net-
work of followers of Christ in government, business, and the military,
use the term avant-garde. They call themselves “the Family,” or “The
Fellowship,” and they consider themselves a “core” of men responsible
for changing the world. “Hitler, Lenin, and many others understood
the power of a small core of people,” instructs a document given to an
inner circle, explaining the scope, if not the ideological particulars, of
the ambition members of this  avant- garde are to cultivate.1 Or, as a
former Ivanwald brother who’d used his Ivanwald connections to fi nd
a foothold in the insurance industry told my brothers and me during a
seminar on “biblical capitalism,” “Look at it like this: take a bunch of
sticks, light each one of ’em on fire. Separate, they go out. Put ’em to-
gether, though, and light the bundle. Now you’re ready to burn.”
Hitler, to the Family, is no more real than Attila the Hun as drafted
by business gurus who promise unstoppable “leadership” techniques
drawn from history’s killers; or for that matter Christ, himself, as ren-
dered in a business best seller called Jesus, CEO. The Family’s avant- garde
is not composed of neo-Nazis, or crypto- Nazis, or fascists by any tradi-
tional definition; they are fundamentalists, and in this  still-secular age,
fundamentalism is a religion of both affl  uence and revolution.
“Fundamentalist” is itself a relatively recent and  much-contested
word, coined early in the last century by a conservative Baptist who
wanted to clear away the confusion about what Christians, by his
lights,  were supposed to stand for.2 What they stood for, in fact, was

--- Sayfa 10 ---
4 | J E F F S H A R L E T
confusing. One of the biggest surprises to be found in “The Funda-
mentals,” a series of dense pamphlets published between 1910 and
1915, is the argument that evolution is reconcilable with a literal
reading of scripture. Much has changed since then; such is the evolu-
tion of American fundamentalism. Imagine it traveling a path twisted
like that of a Möbius strip, the visual paradox made popular in M. C.
Escher’s optical illusions, from liberation to authoritarianism. Amer-
ican fundamentalism’s original sentiments  were as radically demo-
cratic in theory as they have become repressive in practice, its dream
not that of Christian theocracy but of a return to the first century of
Christ worship, before there was a thing called Christianity. The “age
of miracles,” when church was no more than a word for the great
fellowship—the profound friendship—of believers, when Christ’s
testament really was new, revelation was unburdened by history, and
believers  were martyrs or martyrs-to- be, pure and beautiful.
Is fundamentalism too limited a word for such utopian dreams?
Lately some scholars prefer “maximalism,” a term meant to convey
the movement’s ambition to conform every aspect of society to God.
In contemporary America—from the Cold War to the Iraq War, the
period of the current incarnation’s  ascendancy—that means a cul-
ture remade in the image of a Jesus strong but tender, a warrior who
hates the carnage he must cause, a  man-god ordinary men will follow
as he conquers the world in order to conform it to his angry love.
These are days of the sword, literally—wealthy members of the
movement gift one another with real blades crafted to battle stan-
dards, a fad inspired by a Christian best seller called Wild at Heart:
Discovering the Secret of a Man’s Soul. As jargon, then, maximalism isn’t
bad, but I think fundamentalism still strikes closest to the move-
ment’s desire for a story that never changes, a story to redeem all that
seems random, a rock upon which history can rise.
I offer these explanations not as excuses for the consequences of
American fundamentalism, an expansionist ideology of control bet-
ter suited to empire than democracy, but to point to the defining
tension of a creed that is both fearful and proud even as it proclaims
itself joyous and humble. It is a martyr’s faith in the hands of the

--- Sayfa 11 ---
•
•
•
T H E F A M I L Y | 5
powerful, its cross planted in the  blood- soaked soil of manifest des-
tiny. It is the strange and dangerous offspring of two intensely fertile
sets of stories, “America” and “Christianity.”
Before moving into Ivanwald, I spent several months on the road,
researching God in America for an earlier book. My quarry soon
became the gods of America: a pantheon. Not Vishnu or Buddha or
the Goddess, though they reside here too, but a heaven crowded with
the many diff erent Christs believed in by Americans. There’s a Jesus
in Miami’s Cuban churches, for instance, who seems to do nothing
but wrestle Castro; a Jesus in Heartland, Kansas, who dances around
a fire with witches who also consider themselves Christians; a Jesus
in Manhattan who dresses in drag; a baby Jesus in New Mexico who
pulls cow tails and heals the lame or simply the sad by giving them
earth to eat; a  muscle- bound Jesus in South Central L.A. embla-
zoned across the chest of a man with a gun in his hand; a Jesus in an
Orlando megachurch who wants you to own a black Beamer.
So many Jesuses. And yet there has always been a certain order
to America’s Christs, a certain hierarchy. For centuries, the Christ of
power was high church, distant, and well mannered. The austere,
severe god of Cotton Mather, the Lord of the Ivy League and country
club dinners. But from the beginning another Christ has been vying
for control, the ecstatic Christ of the Great Awakeners, Jonathan
Edwards and Charles Grandison Finney, the angry farmer god Wil-
liam Jennings Bryan saw crucified on a cross of gold, the  sword-
tongued, fire-eyed Revelation Jesus of a thousand street-corner
ranters. A Christ of absolute devotion, not questions. A volatile, exu-
berant, American god, almost democratic, almost totalitarian. This
wild Christ is not supplanting the old, upper-crust Jesus; rather, the
followers of these two visions of the divine are finding common
cause. The elite and the populist Jesuses are merging, becoming
once again a Christ who thrives not so much as a deity or through a
theology as what the historian Perry Miller called in The New England
Mind, his 1939 classic account of Puritanism, a mood.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
6 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“You can’t put a heart in a box,” one of my Ivanwald brothers, a
Senate aide named Gannon Sims, told me one night. He was trying
to make me understand why political terminology, left and right,
liberal and conservative, could not contain the movement’s vision. We
were sitting on Ivanwald’s porch, listening to the crickets and watch-
ing a silvery moon over the Potomac River wink through the trees.
Gannon, former student body president of Baylor University, twisted
his class ring. He had blue eyes and blond hair and a voice like an
angel born in Texas; he sang in a choir and wrote songs about Jesus
and hoped one day to be a senator like the one he worked for, Don
Nickles, then the  second-ranking Republican. Gannon wanted
power. Not for himself but for God. It wasn’t up to him; Jesus would
use him. “I don’t try to explain,” he told me. “I just get involved.”
Gannon referred to Senator Nickles as a member of the Family,
and he dropped names of others he called members with ease: Sena-
tor James Inhofe, Republican of Oklahoma, for instance, who’d trav-
eled across Africa on the Family’s behalf, insisting that the continent’s
leaders hear him out about his American Christ before any business
could occur, and Representative Joe Pitts, Republican of Pennsylva-
nia, a leader of the  anti- abortion movement since the 1970s who of-
ten stopped by the Cedars, a Family retreat for political leaders. But
such elected  officials—means to an end—didn’t really impress Gan-
non because in the end he hoped for, the kingdom of heaven on earth
toward which both he and the congressmen in the Family were
working  wouldn’t be a democracy.
“It won’t?” I asked.
“King-dom,” said Gannon.
I remembered something another brother, Pavel, had said. He
was Czech. His father had been influential in the former communist
regime and the  post-Soviet one that followed, but now he was a busi-
nessman, which was why, Pavel told me, he had sent him to Ivan-
wald. “Contacts,” he said, shrugging his shoulders. One time we had
a visitor, a Venezuelan evangelist, who asked Pavel if he had come to
Ivanwald to learn about the American way of life. Pavel smiled. He
was very tall, and he had a head shaped like a lightbulb. Alone among

--- Sayfa 13 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 7
the brothers he possessed what might be called a sense of irony. “This
is not America,” he replied.
But it is.
What follows, “Awakenings,” begins with my own, at Ivanwald.
Not to the exclusive truth of Ivanwald’s Christ but to what Charles
W. Colson, the Watergate felon who was born again through the
Family, called in his memoir, Born Again, “a veritable underground of
Christ’s men all through government.” This  so-called underground is
not a conspiracy. Rather, it’s a  seventy-year-old movement of elite
fundamentalism, bent not on salvation for all but on the cultivation of
the powerful, “key men” chosen by God to direct the affairs of the
nation. From Ivanwald I traveled backward, to American fundamen-
talism’s forebears: Jonathan Edwards, there at the creation of the
First Great Awakening in 1735, and Charles Grandison Finney, who
awakened the nation again a century later.
Edwards, remembered mostly for one violent phrase—“We are
sinners in the hands of an angry  God”—gave to what would eventu-
ally become American fundamentalism not its fury but its “heart,” a
sentimental story shaped and softened ever since by elite believers.
Finney, the great revivalist of the Second Great Awakening, provided
to the growing evangelical movement the theatrical tools for rallying
its masses. Edwards and Finney are ancestors of the two great strands
of American fundamentalism, elite and populist. Populist fundamen-
talism takes as its battleground domestic politics, to be conquered
and conformed to the will of God; elite fundamentalism sees its mis-
sion as the manipulation of politics in the rest of the world. Both
populists and elites call their attempts to control the lives of others
“evangelism.”
Secular America recognizes radical religion only when it marches
into the public square, bellowing its intentions. When Charles Finney
built the nation’s first megachurch 170 years  ago—at Broadway and
Worth, in lower  Manhattan—he understood that making a spectacle
of faith provided a foundation for power. More recently, Jerry Fal-

--- Sayfa 14 ---
8 | J E F F S H A R L E T
well and Pat Robertson translated the tent revivals of old into politi-
cal networks, moral majorities, and Christian co alitions. But now,
even that modernization has become shiny with age. Falwell is dead;
Robertson is a farce. The secular media finds itself wondering—as it
has periodically ever since the Scopes “monkey” trial of 1925—
whether theocratic politics are gone for good from America.
Not likely. From Jonathan Edwards and the Revolutionary War
that followed the First Great Awakening to the War on Terror, the
theocratic strand has been woven into the American fabric, never
quite dominant but always stronger and more enduring than those
who imagine religion to be a personal, private affair realize.
Part Two, “Jesus Plus Nothing,” brings the elite thread into the
twentieth century through the story of the founder of the Family, a
Norwegian immigrant named Abraham Vereide, and his successor,
Doug Coe. Vereide counseled presidents and kings and was spiritual
adviser to more senators and generals than Billy Graham has prayed
with in all his days of bowing to power. And yet his story is un-
known. He preferred it that way; God, thought Vereide, works
through men who stay behind the scenes. In Vereide’s day, the Fam-
ily maintained a formal front organization, International Christian
Leadership. In Coe’s, it “submerged,” following instructions he is-
sued in 1966, an era of challenge to the kind of establishment power
Vereide and Coe protected as God-ordained.
Why  haven’t we seen them and their work? The secular assump-
tion since the Scopes trial has been that such beliefs are obsessions of
the fringe. In their populist  manifestations—prurient antipornogra-
phy crusaders, rabid John Birchers, screaming foes of abortion wield-
ing bloody fetuses like weapons—they often are. But there is another
thread of American fundamentalism, invisible to secular observers,
that ran through the  post-Scopes politics of the twentieth century,
concerned not so much with individual morality as with “Christian
civilization,” Washington, D.C., as its shining capital. It is this elite
thread, the  avant- garde of American fundamentalism, and the ways
in which it has shaped the broad faith of a nation and the uneasy poli-
tics of empire, that is at the heart of my story.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 9
Part Three, “The Popular Front,” carries that story into the pres-
ent. The current manifestation of fundamentalist power is  only—
only!—the latest revival of emotions stirred by Jonathan Edwards
nearly three hundred years ago, the fear of an angry God, the love of
a personal Jesus, and the ecstasy wrought by the Holy Ghost. That
trinity of sentiments was bound together then by the belief that to
the Europe an conquerors of the New World was given the burden of
spreading their  light—their  power—to all of humanity.
This is not a book about the Bible thumpers portrayed by Holly-
wood, pinched little hypocrites and  broad- browed lunatics, repre-
sentatives of that subset of American fundamentalism that declares
itself a bitter nation within a nation. Rather, it’s a story that begins on
Ivanwald’s suburban lawn, with a group of men gripping each other’s
shoulders in prayer. It is the story of how they got there, where they
are going, and where the movement they joined came from; the story
of an American fundamentalism, gentle and militant, conservative
and revolutionary, that has been hiding in plain sight all along.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
I.
Awakenings

--- Sayfa 19 ---
1.
I V A N W A L D
N
ot long after September 11, 2001, a man I’ll call Zeke1
came to New York to survey the ruins of secularism. “To bear
witness,” he said. He believed Christ had called him.
He wandered the city, sparking up conversations with people he
took to be  Muslims—“Islamics,” he called  them—knocking on the
doors of mosques by day and sliding past velvet ropes into sweaty
clubs by night. He prayed with an imam (to Jesus) and may or may
not have gone home with several women. He got as close as possible
to Ground Zero, visited it often, talked to street preachers. His
throat tingled with dust and ashes. When he slept, his nose bled. He
woke one morning on a red pillow.
He went to bars where he sat and listened to the anger of men
and women who did not understand, as he did, why they had been
stricken. He stared at photographs and paintings of the Towers. The
great steel arches on which they’d stood reminded him of Roman
temples, and this made him sad. The city was fallen, not just literally
but spiritually, as decadent and doomed as an ancient civilization.
And yet Zeke wanted and believed he needed to know why New
York was what it was, this city so hated by fundamentalists abroad
and, he admitted after some wine, by fundamentalists—“Believers,”
he called them, and  himself—at home.
At the time Zeke was living at Ivanwald. His  brothers-in-Christ,
the youngest eighteen, the oldest in their early thirties, were much
like him: educated, athletic, born to affluence, successful or soon to

--- Sayfa 20 ---
14 | J E F F S H A R L E T
be. Zeke and his brothers  were fundamentalists, but not at all the
kind I was familiar with. “We’re not even Christian,” he said. “We
just follow Jesus.”
I’d known Zeke on and off for twelve years. He’s the older
brother of a woman I dated in college. Zeke had studied philosophy
and history and literature in the United States and in Europe, but he
had long wanted to find something . . . better. His life had been a
pilgrim’s progress, and the path he’d taken a circuitous version of the
route every fundamentalist travels: from confusion to clarity, from
questions to answers, from a mysterious divine to a Jesus who’s so
familiar that he’s like your best friend. A really good guy about whom
Zeke could ask, What would Jesus do? and genuinely find the an-
swer.
His  whole life Zeke had been searching for a friend like that,
someone whose words meant what they meant and nothing less or
more. Zeke himself looks like such a man, tall, lean, and muscular,
with a square jaw and wavy, dark blond hair. One of his grandfathers
had served in the Eisenhower administration, the other in Kenne-
dy’s. His father, the family legend went, had once been considered a
possible Republican contender for Congress. But instead of seeking
office, his father had retreated to the Rocky Mountains, and Zeke,
instead of attaining the social heights his pedigree seemed to predict,
had spent his early twenties withdrawing into theological conun-
drums, until he peered out at a world of temptations like a wounded
thing in a cave. He drank too much, fought men and raged at women,
disappeared from time to time and came back from wherever he had
gone quieter, angrier, sadder.
Then he met Jesus. He had long been a committed Christian, but
this encounter was different. This Jesus did not demand orthodoxy.
This Jesus gave him permission to stop struggling. So he did, and his
pallor left him. He took a job in finance and he met a woman as
bright as he was and much happier, and soon he was making money,
in love, engaged. But the questions of his youth still bothered him.
Again he drank too much, his eye wandered, his temper kindled. So,
one day, at the suggestion of an older mentor, he ditched his job, put

--- Sayfa 21 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 15
his fiancée on hold, and moved to Ivanwald, where, he was told, he’d
meet yet another Jesus, the true one.
When he came up to New York, his sister asked if I would take him
out to dinner. What, she wanted to know, was Zeke caught up in?
We met at a little Moroccan place in the East Village. Zeke ar-
rived in bright white tennis shorts, spotless white sneakers, and
white tube socks pulled taut on his calves. His concession to Manhat-
tan style, he said, was his polo shirt, tucked in tight; it was black. He
flirted with the waitress and she giggled, he talked to the people at
the next table. Women across the room glanced his way; he gave
them easy smiles. I’d never seen Zeke so charming. In my mind, I
began to prepare a report for his sister: Good news! Jesus has fi nally
turned Zeke around.
He said as much himself. He even apologized for arguments we’d
had in the past. He acknowledged that he’d once enjoyed getting a rise
out of me by talking about “Jewish bankers.” (I was raised a Jew by my
father, a Christian by my mother.) That was behind him now, he said.
Religion was behind him. Ivanwald had cured him of the God problem.
I’d love the place, he said. “We take Jesus out of his religious wrap-
ping. We look at Him, at each other, without assumptions. We ask
questions, and we answer them together. We become brothers.”
I asked if he and his brothers prayed a great deal. No, he said, not
much. Did they spend a lot of time in church?  None—most churches
were too crowded with rules and rituals. Did they study the Bible in
great depth? Just a few minutes in the morning. What they did, he
said, was work and play games. During the day they raked leaves and
cleaned toilets, and during the late afternoon they played sports, all
of which prepared them to serve Jesus. The work taught humility, he
said, and the sports taught will; both were needed in Jesus’ army.
“Wait a minute,” I said. “Back up. What leaves? Whose toilets?”
“Politicians,” he said. “Congressmen.”
“You go to their  houses?”
“Sometimes,” Zeke answered. “But mostly they come to us.”
I was trying to picture it—Trent Lott pulling up in a black Lin-
coln, a toilet badly in need of a scrub protruding from the trunk. But

--- Sayfa 22 ---
16 | J E F F S H A R L E T
what Zeke meant was that he and his brothers raked and polished for
politicians at a retreat called the Cedars, designed for their spiritual
succor.
“Really?” I said. “Like who?”
“I can’t really say,” Zeke answered.
“Who runs it?”
“Nobody.”
“Who pays?”
“People just give money.” Then Zeke smiled. Enough questions.
“You’re better off seeing it for yourself.”
“Is there an organization?” I asked.
“No,” he said, chuckling at my incomprehension. “Just Jesus.”
“So how do you join?”
“You don’t,” he said. He smiled again, such a broad grin. His
teeth were as white as his sneakers. “You’re recommended.”
Zeke recommended me to Ivanwald, and because I was curious and
had recently quit a job to write a book about American religious
communities, I decided to join for a while. I had no thought of inves-
tigative reporting; rather, my interest was personal. By the time I got
there, I’d lived for short spells with “Cowboy Christians” in Texas,
and with “Baba lovers,” America’s most benign cultists, in South
Carolina, and in Kansas with hundreds of naked pagans. I thought
Ivanwald would simply be one more bead on my agnostic rosary. I
thought of the transformation Ivanwald had worked on Zeke, and I
imagined it as a sort of spiritual spa where angry young men smoothed
out their anxieties with new-agey masculine bonding. I thought it
would be silly but relaxing. I didn’t imagine that what I’d find there
would lead me into the heart of American fundamentalism, that a
spell among Zeke’s Believers would propel me into dusty archives
and the halls of power for the next several years. I had never thought
of myself as a religious seeker, but at Ivanwald I became one. Since
then, I’ve been searching, not for salvation, but for the meaning be-
hind the words, the hints of power, that I found there.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 17
Zeke was gone by the time I arrived. He had returned to finance,
a path the brothers approved of, and to his fiancée, whom they did
not—she was a graduate student and a  free- spirited Scandinavian
who loved to party. Jeff  Connally, one of the Ivanwald house leaders
who picked me up at Union Station in Washington one April eve-
ning, told me he thought Zeke might have made the wrong choice.
Zeke’s fiancée did not obey God. She was, he said, a “Jezebel.” Jeff
was a small, sharply handsome man with cloudy blue eyes above high
cheekbones. When he said “Jezebel,” he smiled.
Jeff had come with two other brothers: Gannon Sims, the Baylor
grad, and Bengt Carlson, the other house leader, a  twenty-four-year-
old North Carolinian with spiky brown eyebrows. In the car, after a
long silence, he said, “Well, I think you’re probably the most misun-
derstood Ivanwalder ever.”
“Yeah?” I said.
“I didn’t really know how to explain you to the guys,” Bengt
went on. “So I just told him we got a new dude, he’s from New York,
he’s a writer, he’s Jewish, but he wants to know Jesus. And you know
what they said?”
“No,” I answered, my fingers curling around the door handle.
“Bring him on!” My three new brothers laughed, and Gannon’s
Volvo eased down tree-lined streets, each smaller and sleepier than
the last, until we arrived at the gray colonial that was to be my new
home. Bengt showed me my bunk and two drawers in a bureau and a
cubbyhole in the bathroom for my toiletries. One by one, a dozen
men drifted by in various states of undress, slapping me on the back
or the ass or hugging me, calling me “brother.” Someone was playing
the soundtrack to Hair. One man crooned the words to “Fellatio,” but
then he said he was just kidding, and another switched out Hair for
Neil Young’s “Keep On Rockin’ in the Free World.” Pavel the Czech
winked.
Ready for bed, the men introduced themselves. From Japan there
was Yusuke, a management consultant studying Ivanwald in order to
replicate it in Tokyo; from Ecuador, a former college soccer star
named Raf, a Catholic who was open about his desire for business

--- Sayfa 24 ---
18 | J E F F S H A R L E T
connections. From Atlanta there was  thick-necked Beau and bespec-
tacled Josh, best friends who’d put off their postcollege careers; from
Oklahoma, Dave, a tall, redheaded young man with a wide, daffy
smile on a head of uncommon proportions. “Our pumpkin on a bean-
pole,” one of the brothers called him, a “gift” to our brotherhood
from former representative Steve Largent, who Dave said had ar-
ranged with Dave’s father for Dave to be sent to Ivanwald to cure him
of a mild case of college liberalism.
Before the lights went out after midnight, they came together to
pray for me, Jeff Connally’s voice just above a whisper, asking God to
“break” me. Dave, already broken, mumbled an amen.2
Ivanwald, which sits at the end of Twenty-fourth Street North in
Arlington, was known only to its residents and to the members and
friends of the Family. The Family is in its own words an “invisible”
association, though it has always been organized around public men.
Senator Sam Brownback (R., Kansas), chair of a weekly,  off-the-record
meeting of religious right groups called the Values Action Team
(VAT), is an active member, as is Representative Joe Pitts (R., Penn-
sylvania), an avuncular  would-be theocrat who chairs the  House ver-
sion of the VAT. Others referred to as members include senators Jim
DeMint of South Carolina, chairman of the Senate Steering Com-
mittee (the powerful conservative caucus cofounded back in 1974 by
another Family associate, the late senator Carl Curtis of Nebraska);
Pete Domenici of New Mexico (a Catholic and relatively moderate
Republican; it’s Domenici’s status as one of the Senate’s old lions that
the Family covets, not his doctrinal purity); Chuck Grassley (R.,
Iowa); James Inhofe (R., Oklahoma); Tom Coburn (R., Oklahoma);
John Thune (R., South Dakota); Mike Enzi (R., Wyoming); and
John Ensign, the conservative casino heir elected to the Senate from
Nevada, a  brightly tanned, hapless figure who uses his Family con-
nections to graft holiness to his  gambling-fortune name. “Faith- based
Democrats” Bill Nelson of Florida and Mark Pryor of Arkansas, sin-
cere believers drawn rightward by their understanding of Christ’s

--- Sayfa 25 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 19
teachings, are members, and Family stalwarts in the  House include
Representatives Frank Wolf (R., Virginia), Zach Wamp (R., Tennes-
see), and Mike McIntyre, a North Carolina Democrat who believes
that the Ten Commandments are “the fundamental legal code for the
laws of the United States” and thus ought to be on display in schools
and courthouses.3
The Family’s historic roll call is even more striking: the late sena-
tor Strom Thurmond (R., South Carolina), who produced “confi-
dential” reports on legislation for the Family’s leadership, presided
for a time over the Family’s weekly Senate meeting, and the Dixie-
crat senators Herman Talmadge of Georgia and Absalom Willis
Robertson of Virginia—Pat Robertson’s  father—served on the
behind-the- scenes board of the organization. In 1974, a Family prayer
group of Republican congressmen and former secretary of defense
Melvin Laird helped convince President Gerald Ford that Richard
Nixon deserved not just Christian forgiveness but also a legal pardon.
That same year, Supreme Court Justice William Rehnquist led the
Family’s first weekly Bible study for federal judges.4
“I wish I could say more about it,” Ronald Reagan publicly de-
murred back in 1985, “but it’s working precisely because it is pri-
vate.”
“We desire to see a leadership led by God,” reads a confidential
mission statement. “Leaders of all levels of society who direct proj-
ects as they are led by the spirit.” Another principle expanded upon
is stealthiness; members are instructed to pursue political jujitsu by
making use of secular leaders “in the work of advancing His king-
dom,” and to avoid whenever possible the label Christian itself, lest
they alert enemies to that advance. Regular prayer groups, or “cells”
as they’re often called, have met in the Pentagon and at the Depart-
ment of Defense, and the Family has traditionally fostered strong ties
with businessmen in the oil and aerospace industries.
The Family’s use of the term “cell” long predates the word’s cur-
rent association with terrorism. Its roots are in the Cold War, when
leaders of the Family deliberately emulated the organizing techniques
of communism. In 1948, a group of Senate staffers met to discuss

--- Sayfa 26 ---
20 | J E F F S H A R L E T
ways that the Family’s “cell and leadership groups” could recruit
elites unwilling to participate in the “mass meeting approach” of
populist fundamentalism. Two years later, the Family declared that
with democracy inadequate to the fight against godlessness, such
cells should function to produce political “atomic energy”; that is,
deals and alliances that could not be achieved through the clumsy
machinations of legislative debate would instead radiate quietly out
of political cells. More recently, Senator Sam Brownback told me
that the privacy of Family cells makes them safe spaces for men of
power—an appropriation of another term borrowed from an enemy,
feminism.5 “In this closer relationship,” a document for members
reads, “God will give you more insight into your own geographical
area and your sphere of influence.” One’s cell should become “an in-
visible ‘believing group’ ” out of which “agreements reached in faith
and in prayer around the person of Jesus Christ” lead to action that
will appear to the world to be unrelated to any centralized organiza-
tion.
In 1979, the former Nixon aide and Watergate felon Charles W.
Colson—born again through the guidance of the Family and the
ministry of a CEO of arms manufacturer Raytheon—estimated the
Family’s strength at 20,000, although the number of dedicated “as-
sociates” around the globe is much smaller (around 350 as of 2006).
The Family maintains a closely guarded database of associates, mem-
bers, and “key men,” but it issues no cards, collects no offi  cial dues.
Members are asked not to speak about the group or its activities.6
“The Movement,” a member of the Family’s inner circle once
wrote to the group’s chief South African operative, “is simply inex-
plicable to people who are not intimately acquainted with it.” The
Family’s “po litical” initiatives, he continues, “have always been misun-
derstood by ‘outsiders.’ As a result of very bitter experiences, there-
fore, we have learned never to commit to paper any discussions or
negotiations that are taking place. There is no such thing as a ‘confi-
dential’ memorandum, and leakage always seems to occur. Thus, I
would urge you not to put on paper anything relating to any of the
work that you are doing . . . [unless] you know the recipient well

--- Sayfa 27 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 21
enough to put at the top of the page ‘PLEASE DESTROY AFTER READ-
ING.’ ”*
“If I told you who has participated and who participates until this
day, you would not believe it,” the Family’s longtime leader, Doug
Coe, said in a rare interview in 2001. “You’d say, ‘You mean that
scoundrel? That despot?’ ”7
A friendly, plainspoken Oregonian with dark, curly hair, a lazy
smile, and the broad,  thrown- back shoulders of a man who recognizes
few superiors, Coe has worked for the Family since 1959 and been
“First Brother” since founder Abraham Vereide was “promoted” to
heaven in 1969. (Recently, a successor named Dick Foth, a longtime
friend to John Ashcroft, assumed some of Coe’s duties, but Coe re-
mains the preeminent figure.) Coe denies possessing any authority, but
Family members speak of him with a mixture of intimacy and awe.
Doug Coe, they say—most people refer to him by his first and last
name—is closer to Jesus than perhaps any other man alive, and thus
privy to information the rest of us are too spiritually “immature” to
understand. For instance, the necessity of secrecy. Doug Coe says it
allows the scoundrels and the despots to turn their talents toward the
service of Jesus—who, Doug Coe says, prefers power to  piety—by
shielding their work on His behalf from a hardhearted public, unwill-
ing to believe in their good intentions. In a sermon posted online by
a fundamentalist website, Coe compares this method to the mob’s.
“His  Body”—the Body of Christ, that is, by which he means
Christendom—“functions invisibly like the mafia. . . . They keep
their organization invisible. Everything visible is transitory. Every-
thing invisible is permanent and lasts forever. The more you can make
your organization invisible, the more influence it will have.”
For that very reason, the Family has operated under many guises,
some active, some defunct: National Committee for Christian Lead-
ership, International Christian Leadership, National Leadership
*In a fit of pique or stunning stupidity, the recipient immediately responded to inform the Family
that he accepted the rebuke and had made multiple copies of it for the other South African opera-
tives as well, one of which survives. James F. Bell to Ross Main, May 19, 1975. Folder 25, Box
254, Box 459, Billy Graham Center Archives. Main to Doug Coe, June 19, 1975. Ibid.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
22 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Council, the Fellowship Foundation, the International Foundation.
The Fellowship Foundation alone has an annual bud get of nearly $14
million. The bulk of it, $12 million, goes to “mentoring, counseling,
and partnering with friends around the world,” but that represents
only a fraction of the network’s finances. The Family does not pay big
salaries; one man receives $121,000, while Doug Coe seems to live
on almost nothing (his income fluctuates wildly according to the
off-the- books support of “friends”), and none of the fourteen men on
the board of directors (among them an oil executive, a defense con-
tractor, and government officials past and present) receives a penny.
But within the organization money moves in peculiar ways, “man-to-
man” financial support that’s off the books, a constant proliferation of
new nonprofits big and small that submit to the Family’s spiritual
authority, money flowing up and down the quiet hierarchy. “I give
or loan money to hundreds of people, or have my friends do so,”
says Coe.8
Each group connected to the Family raises funds independently.
Ivanwald, for example, was financed in part by an entity called the
Wilberforce Foundation. Major evangelical organizations such as
Young Life and the Navigators have undertaken the support of Family
operatives, and the Family has in turn helped launch Christian con-
servative power houses such as Chuck Colson’s Prison Fellowship, a
worldwide ministry that has declared “civil war” on secularism, and
projects such as Community Bible Study, through which a failing
Texas oilman named George W. Bush discovered faith in 1985.
The Family’s only publicized gathering is the National Prayer
Breakfast, which it established in 1953 and which, with congressio-
nal sponsorship, it continues to organize every February at the Wash-
ington, D.C., Hilton. Some 3,000 dignitaries, representing scores of
nations and corporate interests, pay $425 each to attend. For most,
the breakfast is just that, muffins and prayer, but some stay on for
days of seminars organized around Christ’s messages for particular
industries. In years past, the Family organized such events for execu-
tives in oil, defense, insurance, and banking. The 2007 event drew,
among others, a contingent of aid-hungry defense ministers from

--- Sayfa 29 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 23
Eastern Europe, Pakistan’s famously corrupt Benazir Bhutto, and a
Sudanese general linked to genocide in Darfur.
Here’s how it can work: Dennis Bakke, former CEO of AES, the
largest independent power producer in the world, and a Family in-
sider, took the occasion of the 1997 Prayer Breakfast to invite Ugan-
dan president Yoweri Museveni, the Family’s “key man” in Africa, to
a private dinner at a mansion, just up the block from the Family’s
Arlington headquarters. Bakke, the author of a popular business book
titled Joy at Work, has long preached an ethic of social responsibility
inspired by his evangelical faith and his  free-market convictions: “I
am trying to sell a way of life,” he has said. “I am a cultural imperial-
ist.” That’s a phrase he uses to be provocative; he believes that his
Jesus is so universal that everyone wants Him. And, apparently, His
business opportunities: Bakke was one of the pioneer thinkers of en-
ergy deregulation, the  laissez-faire fever dream that culminated in
the meltdown of Enron. But there was other,  less-noticed fallout,
such as the  no- bid deal Bakke made with Museveni at the 1997 Prayer
Breakfast for a $500-million dam close to the source of the White
Nile—in waters considered sacred by Uganda’s 2.5-million–strong
Busoga minority. AES announced that the Busoga had agreed to “re-
locate” the spirits of their dead. They weren’t the only ones opposed;
first environmentalists (Museveni had one American arrested and
deported) and then even other foreign investors revolted against a
project that seemed like it might actually increase the price of power
for the poor. Bakke didn’t worry. “We don’t go away,” he declared.
He dispatched a young man named Christian Wright, the son of one
of the Prayer Breakfast’s organizers, to be AES’s  in-country liaison to
Museveni; Wright was later accused of authorizing at least $400,000
in bribes. He claimed his signature had been forged.9
“I’m sure a lot of people use the Fellowship as a way to network,
a way to gain entrée to all sorts of people,” says Michael Cromartie,
an evangelical Washington think tanker who’s critical of the Family’s
lack of transparency. “And entrée they do get.”10
The president usually arrives an hour early, meets perhaps ten
heads of state—usually from small nations, such as Albania, or

--- Sayfa 30 ---
24 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Ecuador, or Benin, that the United States uses as proxies in the
United  Nations—without publicity, and perhaps a dozen other use-
ful guests chosen by the Family. “It totally circumvents the State
Department and the usual vetting within the administration that
such a meeting would require,” an anonymous government infor-
mant told a sympathetic sociologist. “If Doug Coe can get you some
face time with the President of the United States, then you will take
his call and seek his friendship. That’s power.”11
The president always speaks last, usually to do no more than
spread a dull glaze of civil religion over the proceedings. For years,
the main address came from Billy Graham, but now it’s often deliv-
ered by an outsider to Christian conservatism, such as Saudia Arabia’s
longtime ambassador to the United States, Prince Bandar, or Senator
Joe Lieberman, or, as in 2006, Bono. “This is really weird,” said the
rock star.
“Anything can happen,” according to an internal planning docu-
ment, “the Koran could even be read, but JESUS is there! He is infil-
trating the world.”12 Too bland most years to merit much press, the
breakfast is regarded by the Family as merely a tool in a larger pur-
pose: to recruit the powerful attendees into smaller, more frequent
prayer meetings, where they can “meet Jesus man to man.”
In the pro cess of introducing powerful men to Jesus, the Family
has managed to effect a number of behind-the- scenes acts of diplo-
macy. In 1978 it helped the Carter administration organize a world-
wide call to prayer with Menachem Begin and Anwar Sadat. At the
1994 National Prayer Breakfast, Family leaders persuaded their South
African client, the Zulu chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, to stand down
from the possibility of civil war with Nelson Mandela. But such be-
nign acts appear to be the exception to the rule. During the 1960s,
the Family forged relationships between the U.S. government and
some of the most oppressive regimes in the world, arranging prayer
networks in the U.S. Congress for the likes of General Costa e Silva,
dictator of Brazil; General Suharto, dictator of Indonesia; and Gen-
eral Park Chung Hee, dictator of South Korea. “The Fellowship’s
reach into governments around the world,” observes David Kuo, a

--- Sayfa 31 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 25
former special assistant to the president in Bush’s first term, “is al-
most impossible to overstate or even grasp.”13
In 1983, Doug Coe and General John W. Vessey, chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, informed the civilian ambassadors of the Cen-
tral American nations that the Prayer Breakfast would be used to
arrange “private sessions” for their generals with “responsible lead-
ers” in the United States; the invitations would be sent from Republi-
can senators Richard Lugar and Mark Hatfield, and Dixiecrat John
Stennis, the Mississippi segregationist after whom an aircraft carrier
is now named. The Family went on to build friendships between the
Reagan administration and the Salvadoran general Carlos Eugenios
Vides Casanova, found liable in 2002 by a Florida jury for the torture
of thousands, and the Honduran general Gustavo Alvarez Martinez,
who before his assassination was linked to both the CIA and death
squads. El Salvador became one of the bloodiest battlegrounds of the
Cold War; U.S. military aid to Honduras jumped from $4 million per
year to $79 million.14 In Africa, the Family greased the switch of U.S.
patronage from one client state, Ethiopia, to another that they felt
was more promising: Somalia. “We work with power where we can,”
Doug Coe explains, “build new power where we can’t.” Former sec-
retary of state James Baker, a longtime participant in a prayer cell
facilitated by Coe, recalls that when he visited Albania after the col-
lapse of Eastern Europe an communism, the Balkan nation’s foreign
minister met him on the tarmac with the words, “I greet you in the
name of Doug Coe.”15
Coe’s status within Washington has been quantitatively calcu-
lated by D. Michael Lindsay, a Rice University sociologist who traded
on his past work with evangelicals as a  pollster—and his sympathetic
perspective—to win interviews with 360 evangelical elites. “One in
three mentioned Coe or the Fellowship as an important influence,”
he reports. “Indeed, there is no other or ganization like the Fellow-
ship, especially among religious groups, in terms of its access or
clout among the country’s leadership.”16 At the 1990 National Prayer
Breakfast, President George H. W. Bush praised Doug Coe for what
he described as “quiet diplomacy, I  wouldn’t say secret diplomacy.”

--- Sayfa 32 ---
26 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Bush was apparently ignorant of one of the nation’s oldest laws, the
Logan Act, which forbids private citizens to do just that lest foreign
policy slip out of democratic control. Sometimes Coe’s role is formal;
in 2000, he met with Pakistan’s top economic officials as a “special
envoy” of Representative Joe Pitts, a key power broker for the region,
and when he and Bush Senior hosted an off-the-record luncheon with
Iraq’s ambassador to the United States in the  mid-1980s, he may also
have been acting in some official capacity. Mostly, however, he trav-
els around the world as a private citizen. He has prayed with dicta-
tors, golfed with presidents, and wrestled with an island king in the
Pacific. He has visited nearly every world capital, often with con-
gressmen at his side, “making friends” and inviting them back to the
Cedars, the Family’s headquarters, bought in 1978 with $1.5 million
donated by (among others) Tom Phillips, then the CEO of arms
manufacturer Raytheon, several oil executives, and Clement Stone,
the man who financed the campaign to insert “under God,” into the
Pledge of Allegiance.17
Coe, who while I was at Ivanwald lived with his wife in an ele-
gantly appointed carriage  house on the mansion’s grounds, considers
the mansion a refuge for the persecuted and the affl  icted: Supreme
Court Justice Clarence Thomas retreated there when Anita Hill ac-
cused him of sexual harassment; Senator David Durenberger, a conser-
vative Catholic, boarded there to escape marital problems that began
with rumors of an affair and ended with Durenberger’s pleading guilty
to misuse of public funds; James Watt, Reagan’s anti-environmental sec-
retary of the interior, weathered the controversy surrounding his
appointment in one of the Cedars’ bedrooms.18 A waterfall has been
carved into the mansion’s broad lawn, from which a bronze bald ea-
gle watches over a forested hillside sloping down to the Potomac
River. The mansion is white and pillared and surrounded by magno-
lias, and by red trees that do not so much tower above it as whis-
per. The Cedars is named for these trees, but Family members
speak of it as a person. “The Cedars has a heart for the poor,” they like
to say.
By poor they mean not the thousands of literal poor living in

--- Sayfa 33 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 27
Washington’s ghettos, but rather the poor in spirit: the senators, gen-
erals, and prime ministers who coast to the end of Twenty-fourth
Street in Arlington in black limousines and town cars and hulking
SUVs to meet one another, to meet Jesus, to pay homage to the god
of the Cedars. There they forge relationships beyond the “din of the
vox populi” and “throwaway religion” in favor of the truths of the
Family. Declaring God’s covenant with the Jews broken, the group’s
core members call themselves the new chosen. 19
The brothers of Ivanwald were the Family’s next generation, its
high priests in training. Sometimes the brothers would ask me why I
was there. They knew that I was “half Jewish,” that I was a writer,
and that I was from New York City, which most of them considered
to be only slightly less wicked than Baghdad or Paris. I didn’t lie to
them. I told my brothers that I was there to meet Jesus, and I was:
the Jesus of the Family, whose ways are secret. The brothers  were
certain that He had sent me to them for a reason, and perhaps they
were right. What follows is my personal testimony, to the enduring
power of this strange American god.
At Ivanwald, men learn to be leaders by loving their leaders.
“They’re so busy loving us,” a brother once explained to me, “but
who’s loving them?” We were. The brothers each paid four hundred
dollars per month for room and board, but we were also the caretak-
ers of the Cedars, cleaning its gutters, mowing its lawns, whacking
weeds, blowing leaves, and sanding. And we were called to serve on
Tuesday mornings, when the Cedars hosted a regular prayer break-
fast typically presided over by Ed Meese. Meese is best remembered
for his oddly prurient antiporn crusade as Ronald Reagan’s ethically
challenged attorney general; less-often recalled is his 1988 resigna-
tion following a special prosecutor’s investigation of his intervention
on behalf of an oil pipeline for Saddam Hussein. He remains a power-
ful Washington presence, a  quick-witted man who presents himself
as an old gumshoe, carrying messages back and forth between social
and fiscal conservatives. In 2005 and 2006, he shepherded Supreme

--- Sayfa 34 ---
28 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Court justices John Roberts and Samuel Alito through their nomina-
tion pro cesses; in 2007, he gave the religious Right’s stamp of ap-
proval to Attorney General Michael Mukasey.20 Each week at the
Cedars, his breakfast brought together a rotating group of ambassadors,
businessmen, and American politicians. Three of Ivanwald’s brothers
also attended.
The morning I was invited, Charlene, the cook, scrambled up
eggs with blue tortillas, Italian sausage, peppers, and papaya. Three
women from Potomac Point, an “Ivanwald for young women” across
the road from the Cedars, came to serve. They wore red lipstick and
long skirts (makeup and “feminine” attire were required on duty)
and had, after several months of cleaning and serving in the Cedars
while the brothers worked outside, grown unimpressed by the  high-
powered clientele. “Girls don’t sit in on the breakfasts,” one of them
told me, though she said that none of them minded because it was
“just politics,” and the Bible generally reserves such doings for
21
men.
The breakfast began with a prayer and a sprinkle of scripture
from Meese, who sat at the head of a long, dark oak table. Matthew
11:27: “No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows
the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to re-
veal him.” That morning’s chosen introduced themselves. They were
businessmen from Dallas and Oregon, a Chinese Christian dissident
leader, and two ambassadors, from Benin and Rwanda, who sat side
by side. Rwanda’s representative, Dr. Richard Sezibera, was an in-
tense man who refused to eat his eggs and melon. He drank cup after
cup of coffee, and his eyes  were bloodshot. A man I didn’t recognize,
whom Charlene identified as a former senator, suggested that nego-
tiators from Rwanda and Congo, trapped in a war that had killed
more than 2 million, should stop worrying about who will get the
diamonds and the oil and instead focus on who will get Jesus. “Power
sharing is not going to work unless we change their hearts,” he said.
Sezibera stared, incredulous. Meese chuckled and opened his
mouth to speak, but Sezibera interrupted him. “It is not so simple,”
the Rwandan said, his voice flat and low. Meese smiled. Everyone in

--- Sayfa 35 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 29
the Family loves rebukes, and  here was Rwanda rebuking them. The
former senator nodded. Meese murmured, “Yes,” stroking his ma-
roon leather Bible, and the words “Thank you, Jesus” rippled in whis-
pers around the table as I poured Sezibera another cup of coff ee.
The brothers also on occasion sat in quietly on meetings at the
Family’s four- story, redbrick Washington townhouse, a former con-
vent at 133 C Street SE, run by a Family affi  liate called the C Street
Foundation. Eight congressmen lived there, paying  below-market
rents.22 The C Street House is registered as a church, which allows it
to avoid taxes. There’s a  house mother and a TV the size of a small
movie screen, usually tuned to sports, and a prayer calendar in the
kitchen that tells residents which “demonic strongholds,” such as
Buddhism or Hinduism, they are to wage spiritual warfare against
each day. Eight Christian college women do most of the serving, but
we brothers  were on occasion called to stand in for them, the better
to find spiritual mentors.
The day I worked at C Street, half a dozen congressmen  were
trading stories over lunch about the power of prayer to “break
through” just about anything: political opposition, personal pride, a
dull policy briefing. They spoke of their devotions as if they were
running backs moving the ball, chuckling over how prayer flum-
moxed the “other team.” They didn’t mean Democrats—a few  were
Democrats—but the godless “enemy,” broadly defi ned. All credit to
the coach, said one congressman, who was dabbing his lips with a red
napkin that read “Let Me Call You SWEETHEART . . . I  Can’t Re-
member Your Name.” Later that day, I ran into Doug Coe himself,
who was tutoring Todd Tiahrt, a Republican representative from
Kansas. Tiahrt is a short shot glass of a man, two parts flawless hair
and one part teeth. He wanted to know the best way “for the Chris-
tian to win the race with the Muslim.” The Muslim, he said, has too
many babies, while Americans kill too many of theirs.
Coe agreed that too many Muslim babies could be a problem. But
he was more concerned that Tiahrt’s focus on labels like Muslim and
Christian might get in the way of the congressman’s prayers. “Religion”
distracts people from Jesus, Coe said, and allows them to isolate

--- Sayfa 36 ---
30 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Christ’s will from their work in the world. God’s law and our laws
should be identical “People separate it out,” he warned Tiahrt. “ ‘Oh,
okay, I got religion, that’s private.’ As if Jesus  doesn’t know anything
about building highways or Social Security. We gotta take Jesus out
of the religious wrapping.”
“All right, how do we do that?” Tiahrt asked.
“A covenant,” Doug Coe answered. The congressman half smiled,
as if caught between confessing his ignorance and pretending he
knew what Doug Coe was talking about. “Like the Mafia,” Coe
clarified. “Look at the strength of their bonds.” He made a fist and
held it before Tiahrt’s face. Tiahrt nodded, squinting. “See, for them
it’s honor,” Coe said. “For us, it’s Jesus.”
Doug Coe listed other men who had changed the world through
the strength of the covenants they had forged with their “brothers”:
“Look at Hitler,” he said. “Lenin, Ho Chi Minh, bin Laden.” The
Family possessed a weapon those leaders lacked: the “total Jesus” of a
brotherhood in Christ.
“That’s what you get with a covenant,” said Doug Coe. “Jesus plus
nothing.”23
The regimen at Ivanwald was so precise it was relaxing: no swear-
ing, no drinking, no sex, no self. Watch out for magazines and don’t
waste time on newspapers and never watch TV. Eat meat, study the
Gospels, play basketball; God loves a man who can sink a  three-pointer.
Pray to be broken. “O Heavenly Father. Dear Jesus. Help me be hum-
ble. Let me do Your will.” Every morning began with a prayer, some
days with outsiders—a former Ivanwald brother, now a business-
man, or another executive who used tales of high finance to illumi-
nate our lessons from scripture, which he supplemented with xeroxed
midrash from Fortune—and Fridays with the women of Potomac
Point. But most days it was just us boys,  bleary-eyed, gulping coffee
and sugared cereal as Bengt and Jeff C. laid out lines of Holy Word
across the table like strategy.
The dining room had once been a deck, but the boys had walled

--- Sayfa 37 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 31
it in and roofed it over and unrolled a red Persian carpet, transform-
ing the space into a sort of monastic meeting hall, with two long ta-
bles end to end, ringed by a dozen chairs and two benches. The fi rst
day I visited Ivanwald, Bengt cleared a space for me at the head of the
table and sat to my right. Beside him, Wayne slumped in his chair, his
eyes hidden by a cowboy hat. Across from him sat Beau, an Atlantan
with the build and athletic intensity of a wrestler, still wearing the
boxers and T-shirt he’d slept in. Bengt alone looked sharp, his hair
combed, golf shirt tucked tightly into pleated chinos.
Bengt asked Gannon to read our text for that morning, Psalm
139: “O Lord, you have searched me and you know me.” The very
first line made Bengt smile; this was, in his view, an awesome thing
for God to have done.
Bengt’s manners and naive charm preceded him in every encoun-
ter. He was kind to his brothers and excellent with small children,
tall and strong and competent with any tool, deadly whenever he got
hold of the  ball—any ball; all sports seemed to Bengt just a step
more challenging than breathing. His eyes were deep and kind of
sad, but he liked to laugh, and when he did he sounded like a friendly
donkey, an Eyore for whom things  were suddenly not so bad. When
you told him a story, he’d respond, “Goll- y!” just to be nice. When
genuinely surprised, he’d exclaim, “Good  ni- ight!” Sometimes it was
hard to remember that he was a  self-professed revolutionary. He
asked Gannon to keep reading, and then leaned back and listened.
“Where can I go from your Spirit? Where can I flee from your
presence? If I go up to the heavens, you are there; if I make my bed in
the depths, you are there.”
Bengt raised a hand. “That’s great, dude. Let’s talk about that.”
The room fell silent as Bengt stared into his Bible, running his finger
up and down the gilded edge of the page. “Guys,” he said. “What—
how does that make you feel?”
“Known,” said Gannon, almost in a whisper.
Bengt nodded. He was looking for something  else, but he didn’t
know where it was. “What does it make you think of?”
“Jesus?” said Beau.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
32 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Bengt stroked his chin. “Yeah . . . Let me read you a little more.”
He read in a monotone, accelerating as he went, as if he could per-
suade us through a sheer heap of words. “For you created my inmost
being; you knit me together in my mother’s womb,” he concluded.
His lips curled into a half smile. “Man! I mean, that’s intense, right?
‘In my mother’s womb’—God’s right in there with you.” He grinned.
“It’s like,” he said, “it’s like, you  can’t run.  Doesn’t matter where you
turn, ’cause Jesus is gonna be there, just waiting for you.”
Beau’s eyes cleared, and Gannon nodded. “Yeah, brother,” Bengt
said, an eyebrow arched. “Jesus is smart. He’s gonna get you.”
Gannon shook his head. “Oh, he’s already got me.”
“Me, too,” Beau chimed. Then each man clasped his hands into
one fist and pressed it against his forehead or his chin and prayed,
eyes closed and Jesus all over his skin.
The sweetest words of devotion I heard at Ivanwald came from the
one man there who thought Jesus had a message more complicated
than “Obey.” Riley was the son of a Republican businessman from
Wisconsin, but he sounded like a Spaniard who’d learned his English
in Sweden. He’d “spent time overseas,” he explained, and the accent
had just rubbed off. Nobody believed  him—he was clearly the most
pretentious follower of Jesus since Saul changed his name to Paul and
declared himself a  Christian—but nobody scorned him for his airs.
Riley wore his dirty brown hair long and tied in a braided ponytail,
and if it was cool outside he favored a  Guatemalan- style poncho. He
didn’t share the views of the other brothers; in fact, he stayed only
long enough to attend a demonstration in Washington against Plan
Colombia, a nearly $5- billion military aid package for that country’s
right-wing regime and U.S. defense contractors that began in 1999.
The Saturday of the demonstration, Riley slipped out before
dawn, and I woke up early to attend a  three-hour prayer meeting at
the Cedars with some elder brethren: a Republican political couple
from Oregon, an old stalwart of the movement who had for many
years presided over a Family retreat in Bermuda called Willowbank,

--- Sayfa 39 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 33
and John Nakamura, a businessman who that year was volunteering
as host of the Cedars. We met in a room appointed with statues of
bald ea gles and photos of friends of the Family: there was Richard
Nixon, scowling over the sofa, and there was Jimmy Carter, the first
openly evangelical chief executive, flashing his toothy smile in a
frame on the coffee table.24 We got on our knees and held hands, and
together we prayed, some of us rocking, some of us approaching the
gift of tongues, Jesus-Jesus-Jesus, praying with Nakamura’s guidance
for Dick Cheney’s ailing heart and for Bush, “who has said he knows
the Lord.” Roy Cook, one of Doug Coe’s oldest friends, prayed for
Jesus to “turn the evil” in the hearts of journalists, who “tell stories
that go against the work Jesus is doing at the Cedars.” Then we began
praying about the demonstration Riley was attending. We prayed
that the “stratagems of evil and  wickedness”—that’d be  Riley—
would be washed from the streets by God’s rain.
That night the brothers had their weekly house meeting. There
was serious business. While I’d been praying at the Cedars, Riley had
been arrested at the demonstration. Released after several hours, he
hunkered down on Ivanwald’s floor  cross-legged and unraveled a tale
of crowds and cops, handcuffs, and what he believed to be gentle
heroism. He’d ridden in a police van with an old man, impossibly
frail, soaked from the rain. “I asked him if he knew Jesus,” Riley said,
“and this old man smiled. So I asked him why he had done this thing,
let himself be put into jail, and do you know what he said?” The
brothers did not. “He said, ‘For me it is a form of prayer.’ ” After the
police let Riley go, he took the metro to Arlington and walked to
Ivanwald in a driving rain. “At first I was not happy. But then I
thought about what that old man said, and the rain began to change,
or maybe I did. As I walked home to you brothers, the rain felt like a
baptism.”
The brothers  were quiet. Finally, Jeff C. spoke up from across
the room. “Thank you, brother.” Murmurs rippled around the circle.
Nervous laughter followed. Beau said, “Riley, can we pray for you?”
and Riley said yes. Beau then asked Riley if he would lead us in this
prayer. He would. So we closed our eyes and prayed with Riley for

--- Sayfa 40 ---
34 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the old man soaked to the bone and then for the police and for an end
to Plan Colombia, at which point the men’s prayers sputtered into
confusion;  wasn’t military aid between one  God-led government and
another a good thing? The brothers  were relieved when Riley an-
nounced he was going back to Wisconsin. He walked into the pour-
ing rain with his backpack and his sleeping bag. It was a mile and a
half to the station. Nobody offered him a  ride.
After Riley left, the brothers stood up and started moving furni-
ture. “Okay,” Jeff  C. said, clapping his hands. “You ready, brothers?”
I looked around. My brothers  were blank-faced or smirking, clearing
a space on the floor. “Jeff,” Jeff C. said to me, “Andrew”—the other
new man, a balding Australian who said he’d come to Ivanwald at the
recommendation of a conservative Australian politician named Bruce
Baird—“you guys are going to arm wrestle. Think of it,” he said,
putting a finger on his chin and mocking a pose of thoughtfulness, “as
a test of your manhood.”
He instructed us to lie down on our bellies. We lay like snakes
facing each other and rose up on torsos, gripping hands, awaiting the
signal.
“Fumble!” someone shouted. “Fumble! Fumble!”
I twisted around to find out what they meant, but not in time—all
I saw was a blur of T-shirts and legs flying at me, and then the first
man hit, slapping me back to the floor and flattening my lungs into
empty airbags. Then the second man landed, and the third, and some-
one shouted, “Get his arms!” Did they think I was a stratagem of wick-
edness? Had they decided that the evil in my journalist’s heart could
not be overcome even by Jesus? I swung my one free fist and felt it col-
lide with a stomach that remained unmoved because it was being
pressed down by the weight of two, three more men, each of them
flailing away at my ribs. I felt my face redden and my ears fill with a
roar, and if I’d had any breath left, I would have screamed. But then I
heard the brothers laughing, and in between blows I felt hands slap-
ping my ass and ruffling my hair, and I understood what was happen-
ing. This was scripture in action, the verses we all memorized together
(failure to do so meant sleeping in the cold basement): Ecclesiastes

--- Sayfa 41 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 35
4:9, “Two are better than one”; Philippians 2:2, “fulfill ye my joy that
ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind.” The brothers  were of one mind and thirteen bodies, crushing
Christ into me, and there was nothing I could do but to give in to
their love. They wanted to welcome me. To brotherhood, to Jesus, to
the Family. I gasped. A man near the bottom of the pile on top of me
squeaked. “I can’t breathe,” someone above me whispered. One
more man fell on top of us, jumping from the couch onto the tower.
The Australian, who’d somehow escaped full fumble, gave it a push.
It tumbled, I was free, and Jeff C. offered me his hand. Ecclesiastes
4:10: “If one falls down, his friend can help him up.”
“Congratulations, brother,” he said. “You’re one of us.”
A few weeks into my stay, David Coe, Doug’s son, dropped by Ivan-
wald. My brothers and I assembled in the living room, where David
had draped his tall frame over a burgundy leather recliner like a frat
boy, one leg hanging over a padded arm.
“You guys,” David said, “are here to learn how to rule the world.”
He was in his late forties, with dark,  gray- fl ecked hair, an olive com-
plexion, teeth like a slab of white marble, dark eyes so big they didn’t
need to move to take in the room. We sat around him in a rough
circle, on couches and chairs, as the afternoon light slanted through
the wooden blinds onto a wall adorned with a giant tapestry of the
Last Supper. Rafael, a wealthy Ecua doran, had a hard time with En-
glish, and he didn’t understand what David had said. He stared, lips
parted in puzzlement. David seemed to like that. He stared back,
holding Raf ’s gaze like it was a pretty thing he’d found on the ground.
“You have very intense eyes,” David said.
“Thank you,” Raf mumbled.
“Hey,” David said, “let’s talk about the Old Testament.” His voice
was like a river that’s smooth on the surface but swirling beneath.
“Who”—he paused—“would you say are its good guys?”
“Noah,” suggested Ruggi, a  shaggy-haired guy from Kentucky
with a silver loop on the upper ridge of his right ear.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
36 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“Moses,” offered Josh, a lean man from Atlanta more interested
in serving Jesus than his father’s small empire of shower door manu-
facturing.
“David,” Beau volunteered.
“King David,” David Coe said. “That’s a good one. David. Hey.
What would you say made King David a good guy?” He giggled, not
from nervousness but from barely containable delight.
“Faith?” Beau said. “His faith was so strong?”
“Yeah.” David nodded as if he hadn’t heard that before. “Hey, you
know what’s interesting about King David?” From the blank stares of
the others, I could see that they did not. Many didn’t even carry a full
Bible, preferring a slim volume of New Testament Gospels and Epis-
tles and Old Testament Psalms, respected but seldom read. Others
had the  whole book, but the gold gilt on the pages of the first  two-
thirds remained undisturbed. “King David,” David Coe went on,
“liked to do really, really bad things.” He chuckled. “Here’s this guy
who slept with another man’s  wife—Bathsheba,  right?—and then
basically murdered her husband. And this guy is one of our heroes.”
David shook his head. “I mean, Jiminy Christmas, God likes this guy!
What,” he said, “is that all about?”
“Is it because he tried?” asked Bengt. “He wanted to do the right
thing?” Bengt knew the Bible, Old Testament and New, better than
any of the others, but he off ered his answer with a question mark on
the end. Bengt was dutiful in checking his worst sin, his fierce pride,
and he frequently turned his certainties into questions.
“That’s nice, Bengt,” David said. “But it isn’t the answer. Anyone
 else?”
“Because he was chosen,” I said. For the first time David looked
my way.
“Yes,” he said, smiling. “Chosen. Interesting set of rules, isn’t it?”
He turned to Beau. “Beau, let’s say I hear you raped three little girls.
And now  here you are at Ivanwald. What would I think of you, Beau?”
Beau, given to bellowing Ivanwald’s daily call to sports like a bull
elephant, shrank into the cushions. “Probably that I’m pretty bad?”
“No, Beau.” David’s voice was kind. “I wouldn’t.” He drew Beau

--- Sayfa 43 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 37
back into the circle with a stare that seemed to have its own gravita-
tional pull. Beau nodded, brow furrowed, as if in the presence of
something profound. “Because,” David continued, “I’m not  here to
judge you. That’s not my job. I’m  here for only one thing. Do you
know what that is?”
Understanding blossomed in Beau’s eyes. “Jesus?” he said. David
smiled and winked. “Hey,” he said. “Did you guys see Toy Story?” Half
the room had. “Remember how there was a toy cowboy, Woody?
And then the boy who owns Woody gets a new toy, a spaceman?
Only the toy spaceman thinks he’s real. Thinks he’s a real spaceman,
and he’s got to figure out what he’s doing on this strange planet. So
what does Woody say to him? He says, ‘You’re just a toy.’ ” David sat
quietly, waiting for us to absorb this. “Just a toy. We’re not really
spacemen. We’re just toys. Created for God. For His pleasure, noth-
ing  else. Just a toy. Period.”
He walked to the National Geographic map of the world mounted
on the wall. “You guys know about Genghis Khan?” he asked. “Geng-
his was a man with a vision. He  conquered”—David stood on the
couch under the map, tracing, with his hand, half the northern
hemisphere—“nearly everything. He devastated nearly everything.
His enemies? He beheaded them.” David swiped a finger across his
throat. “Dop, dop, dop, dop.”
Genghis Khan’s genius, David went on, lay in his understanding
that there could be only one king. When Genghis entered a defeated
city, he would call in the local headman. Conversion to the Khan’s
cause was not an option, as Genghis was uninterested in halfhearted
deputies. Instead, said David, Genghis would have the man stuffed
into a crate, and over the crate’s surface would be spread a tablecloth,
on which a wonderful meal would be arrayed.
“And then, while the man suff ocated, Genghis ate, and he didn’t
even hear the man’s screams.” David stood on the couch, a finger in
the air. “Do you know what that means?”
To their credit, my brothers did not. Perhaps on account of my
earlier insight, David turned to me. “I think so,” I said. “Out with the
old, in with the new.”

--- Sayfa 44 ---
38 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Yes, he nodded. “Christ’s parable of the wineskins. You  can’t
pour new into old.” One day, he continued, some monks from Eu-
rope show up in Genghis Khan’s court. Genghis welcomes them in
the name of God. Says that in truth, they worship the same great
Lord. Then why, the monks ask, must he conquer the world? “I don’t
ask,” says Genghis. “I submit.”
David returned to his chair. “We elect our leaders,” he said. “Je-
sus elects his.”
He reached over and squeezed the arm of Pavel. “Isn’t that great?”
David said. “That’s the way everything in life happens. If you’re a per-
son known to be around Jesus, you can go and do anything. And that’s
who you guys are. When you leave  here, you’re not only going to
know the value of Jesus, you’re going to know the people who rule the
world. It’s about vision. Get your vision straight, then relate. Talk to
the people who rule the world, and help them obey. Obey Him. If I
obey Him myself, I help others do the same. You know why? Because
I become a warning. We become a warning. We warn everybody that
the future king is coming. Not just of this country or that but of the
world.” Then he pointed at the map, toward the Khan’s vast, reclaim-
able empire.
That night, I slipped out of the  house at close to eleven, padded
around the pool of light cast by the streetlamp, and began making my
way up the grassy hill of the park across the road. I had my cell phone
with me, and behind the big oak tree at the top I hoped I could call a
friend undetected. David Coe’s lesson had been more than I could
take without a dose of ordinary conversation, the kind that doesn’t
involve “warnings” and decapitations. But halfway up the slope a
voice shot through the dark and hit me like a hardball: “Halt! Who
goes there?”
Ten yards to my right stood Jeff C., lit by a pale yellow full
moon.
“Secret orders, man,” I said. “Going to have to kill you.” The joke
was as lame as Jeff C.’s, and neither of us laughed. I walked slowly in

--- Sayfa 45 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 39
his direction, debating whether I should tell him I was out there for
meditation or for exercise. Phone  calls—contact with the outside
world—was allowed but discouraged for new brothers. A  late-night
run, I decided. Endurance was something the brothers respected, en-
durance and strength and coordination, honing your body with exer-
cise just as you hone your soul with prayer. Cardiovascular health was
especially important if you wanted to have a heart for spiritual war.
But that night, Jeff C. had a heart for contemplation. “Look at the
old fort,” he said, gesturing down the hill at Ivanwald. “Guys come
here and get changed. I think of all the guys that have gone through
here over the years, and I wonder, How many of ’em come back?
How many of ’em end up staying at the mansion?”
Along with Bengt, Jeff C. was a  house leader, but if you asked
him what he did for a living, he would cock his head, half smile,
crinkle his  sapphire- blue eyes like a  natural- born southern  lawyer—
which is what his father was—and say, “Well, I work for the revolu-
tion.” He’d studied rhetoric at Chapel Hill, and he loved making
declarations that begged a conversation mainly because he’d laced
them with subtle, nagging aggression.
“Maybe you’ll come back to the Cedars one day,” he said. He
squeezed my shoulder. “C’mon, brother,” he said, his fi ngers digging
in and guiding me down the hill. “You can make your calls tomor-
row.”
The next morning, Jeff C. and I  were up early, lacing our sneak-
ers for a run down by the river. Sitting on the porch, he asked me
why my Bible was a King James. I said I liked the passion of the lan-
guage. “Yeah,” Jeff C. said—he always agreed with everything, at
first. Then he looked up from his sneakers as if something had just
occurred to him. “You know, I’m not sure it’s about passion.”
“No?” I said.
“No, I think it’s about Jesus.”
“Not the Old Testament,” I said.
“Well,” said Jeff  C., “you take Psalms, for example, every one of
them, the way to read it is like it’s just another piece of Jesus.” He
stared at me, half smiling, head cocked.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
40 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“Which part,” I asked, “would you say is in Psalm 137?” Jeff C.’s
lip twitched, his eyes shifted. “You know,” I said, “ ‘O Daughter of
Babylon’?” He arched his left eyebrow. “ ‘O Daughter of Babylon,’ ” I
recited, “ ‘who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewardeth
thee as thou hast served us, happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth
thy little ones against the stones.’ Which part of Jesus is that?”
Jeff C. smiled fully and nodded. “Brother,” he said, clapping a
hand on my knee. “I’m not sure. But I’m pretty sure He’ll let you
know when it’s time.” Then he stood up and ran, waving over his
shoulder as he went. He knew he was too fast for me.
We were at Ivanwald, a Family associate named Terry instructed,
to study “the fundamentals, as opposed to the fancy plays,” by which
he meant “discipline,” as opposed to “sissy stuff,” an authoritarian
faith, not a questioning one. Terry—golf- shirted and twitchy, drum-
ming his fingers on our dining room table—was one of the many
middle- aged men in the  cul-de- sac who seemed to have no other job
than to dispense wisdom. We should pray to be “nothing.” We were
there to “soften our hearts to authority.” Democracy, we were told,
was “rebelliousness.” We instituted a rule that every man must wipe
the toilet bowl after he pisses, not for cleanliness but to crush his “in-
ner rebel.”
Jeff C. crushed his by abstaining from “shady” R-rated movies,
lest they provoke lusty dreams. He was a beautiful man, but he was
indifferent to the effect he had on the opposite sex. The Potomac
Point girls brought him cookies; the wives of the Family’s older men
asked him to visit. One night, when the guys went on a  swing-
dancing date with the Potomac Pointers, more worldly women
flocked to Jeff C., begging to be dipped and twirled. The feeling was
not mutual. “I just don’t like girls as much as guys,” he told me one
day while we painted a new coat of “Gettysburg Gray” onto Ivan-
wald. He was speaking not of sex or of romance but of brotherhood.
“I like”—he paused, his brush suspended  midstroke—“competence.”
He wasn’t gay. He  wasn’t, technically, anything. He was  twenty-

--- Sayfa 47 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 41
five, but he was a virgin. He had kissed a girl once, and the experi-
ence had not moved his heart like Jesus did every day. He asked me
once what sex with a woman was like, “emotionally,” but before I
could even think of how to answer, he silenced me. Sex for him was
pure and nonexis tent in the natural order of things, a myth, elusive
and sweet. Jeff C. didn’t need to sully it with details for it to be
true.
He ran nearly every day, often alone, down by the Potomac. On
the basketball court anger sometimes overcame him: “Shoot the ball!”
he would snap at Rogelio, a shy  eighteen-year-old from Paraguay, one
of several internationals and the youngest brother. But later Jeff C.
would turn his lapse into a lesson, citing scripture, a verse we were
to memorize or else be banished, by Jeff C. himself, to a night in the
basement. Ephesians, chapter 4, verses 26–27: “In your anger do not
sin: Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry, and do not
give the devil a foothold.”
Jeff C.’s pride surfaced in unexpected ways. Once, together in
the kitchen after lunch, I mentioned that I’d seen the Reverend Al
Green perform, up in Massachusetts, no less. This bothered Jeff C.
He was a southerner and I was not, and he did not like this news of
Yankee privilege. Also, he was certain I considered him racist, be-
cause that’s what he believed all New Yorkers thought about all
North Carolinians. He wanted me to know that as a southern white
man, he was blacker than me. “I got an Alabama blacksnake in my
pants,” he said. He was not just black, he was a black man. “Brother,
you’re nothing but a white boy.”
“Agreed,” I said, hoping to calm him down.
But he could not be soothed. He left the room and returned with
a box and put in a CD and cranked up Al Green. He started to
groove. His hands balled into fists, his blue eyes wide. He began sing-
ing, a honey falsetto. “Here I a-a-m . . .” He grabbed his crotch and
shook his head like a rag, wrenched his shirt up and ran his hand over
his hard stomach, going deeper and deeper into Green. Then he
froze, dropped back to his ordinary voice as if he was narrating. “In
college, I used to work in this pizza parlor,” he said. “It was a buncha,

--- Sayfa 48 ---
42 | J E F F S H A R L E T
I dunno, junkies. Heroin.” He grinned. “But, man, they loved Al Green.
We had a poster of him. He was, he was—man! Shirtless, leather
pants. Low leather pants.” Jeff C. tugged his waistband down. “Hips
cocked.” He slid across the floor and grabbed my waist so tight I
could feel his pulse beating. Then he moonwalked away and snapped
his knees together with his feet spread wide, hands in the air, testify-
ing, baring his smooth, flat torso.
The spiritual bonds among Family members  were, Doug Coe re-
minded us, expressions of love, though he used the term not merely
to connote affection. Love in the Family was the love that “conquers,”
the love that “consumes.” It was the love of competition, the love that
“breaks a man down”; the love without which one was “a nothing,” “a
minus,” “a zero.” But with it one was a “plus,” a “warrior,” a man. The
love, a Family elder once explained to me, that Jesus himself pro-
claimed when he said, “I came not to bring peace but a sword. For I
am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter
against her mother.” The se nior brother who quoted Christ’s sword at
me did not mean anything so blunt as an actual blade but rather the
divisiveness of a faith that scorns earthly affections that come be-
tween Jesus and his soldiers. The word heart was similarly unmoored
in the Family’s vocabulary, made weirdly functional, an expression of
a quality or skill. A leader, for instance, was said to have a “heart for
the Lord”; a man lower down in rank might have a “heart for His
Word,” a “heart for laborers” (not the working class but missionar-
ies), or, like my brothers and me, the  men-in-training, a “heart for
spiritual war.”
Spiritual war was a struggle to be fought everywhere, at all
times. Through witnessing and activism and proselytizing and the
passage of laws—or, rather, the “discovery” of laws already written
for us by God—and, most of all, through prayer. The brothers prayed
after sports and before every meal, over Froot Loops in the morning
and steaks at night. At the beginning of each workday, or before we
went out on a “date”—chastely accompanying a group of Potomac

--- Sayfa 49 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 43
Point sisters to a suitable movie, or an evening of swing dancing—we
prayed. Our prayers  were contradictions: We prayed because God
was “awesome,” because we were “nothing,” and because the only
thing we were good for was His praise. But we also prayed because
we wanted things, like, say, a BMW, or divine guidance for our lead-
ers, or a sunny day on which to paint the  house. “Prayer,” Andrew
the Australian told me, “is everything you need.” A gentle sentiment,
at first blush, seemingly uncontroversial. But consider what Andrew
did not think one needed: “rights,” a word I put in quote marks be-
cause he did. “Rights,” the Family taught, are the product of an ar-
rogant mind—an infringement on God’s sovereignty.
The more I learned about the Family, the more difficulty I had in
classifying its theology. It is Protestant, to be sure, though there are
Catholic members. Its leadership regards with disdain not only the
mainline denominations, but also evangelicals they consider “luke-
warm.” And yet they distance themselves from the bullying of tel-
evangelists and moral scolds as well, in part because of theological
diff erences (Jesus, they believe, instructs them to cultivate the pow-
erful regardless of their doctrinal purity) and in part based on style
(the Family believes in a subtler evangelism). “They take the same
approach to religion that Ronald Reagan took to economics,” says a
Senate staffer named Neil MacBride, a political liberal with conser-
vative evangelical convictions that put him at odds with the Family’s
unorthodox fundamentalism. “Reach the elite, and the blessings will
trickle down to the underlings.”
Based on the almost-ecumenical face it presents at the National
Prayer Breakfast—that of a Jesus to whom the Family welcomes non-
Christians to pray—the Family might be considered neo-evangelical.
Neo-evangelicals distance themselves from populist fundamentalism,
which they consider a “folk”—read: white trash—religion, given to
unseemly displays of emotion and tied too closely to cultural tradi-
tions. Whereas populist fundamentalists are strident and hectoring,
neo-evangelicals pride themselves on flexibility. Unlike many pre-
millennialists who, awaiting Christ’s imminent return, merely do their
best to stay out of trouble and to keep their eyes shut in prayer,

--- Sayfa 50 ---
44 | J E F F S H A R L E T
neo-evangelicals are willing to engage the world in the hope that
they can neaten things up in time for His arrival. They hew to Cal-
vin’s belief that worldly power can help shape a holy community, but
they resist any kind of ethics or man-made morality, which they dis-
miss as legalism and consider almost a sin in itself.
But at Ivanwald, or in a prayer cell at the Cedars, or in conversa-
tions with world leaders, the Family’s beliefs appear closer to a more
marginal set of theologies sometimes gathered under the umbrella
term of dominionism, characterized for me by William Martin, a reli-
gious historian at Rice University and Billy Graham’s offi  cial biogra-
pher, as the “intellectual heart of the Christian Right.” Dominionist
theologies hold the Bible to be a guide to every decision, high and
low, from whom God wants you to marry to whether God thinks
you should buy a new lawn mower. Unlike neo-evangelicals, who
concern themselves chiefly with getting good with Jesus, dominion-
ists want to reconstruct early Christian society, which they believe
was ruled by God alone. They view themselves as the new chosen
and claim a Christian doctrine of covenantalism, meaning covenants
not only between God and humanity but at every level of society,
replacing the rule of law and its secular contracts. Since these cove-
nants are signed, as it were, in the Blood of the Lamb, they are writ-
ten in ink invisible to nonbelievers.
One night I asked Josh Drexler, a brother from Atlanta who was
hoping to do mission work overseas, if I could look at some materi-
als the Family had given him. “Man, I’d love to share them with
you,” he said, and retrieved from his bureau drawer two folders full
of documents. While my brothers slept, I sat at the end of Ivanwald’s
long, oak dining table and copied passages from them into my note-
book.
In a document titled “Our Common Agreement as a Core Group,”
members of the Family are instructed to form a core group, or a cell,
which is defined as “a publicly invisible but privately identifiable group
of companions.” The cell has “veto rights” over each member’s life,

--- Sayfa 51 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 45
and everyone pledges to monitor the others for deviations from
Christ’s will. A document called “Thoughts on a Core Group” ex-
plains that “Communists use cells as their basic structure. The mafi a
operates like this, and the basic unit of the Marine Corps is the four
man squad. Hitler, Lenin, and many others understood the power of
a small core of people.”
Jesus, continues the document, does not relate to all souls equally.
“He had levels of relationships much like concentric rings.” The
masses  were the outermost fringe; next were the hundreds who saw
Jesus after he rose from the dead, and then came a ring of seventy,
and so on until one reached the “inner circle.” “It’s quite obvious,”
the document concludes, “that he revealed more of himself to these.”
Later, I’d learn that the Family had drawn up blueprints for an under-
ground chapel-cum-bunker beneath the Cedars, its altar designed on
this concentric model of access to Christ’s love. At its heart would
stand Doug Coe, said by the brothers to be as close to Jesus as the
disciple John. That’s why Coe could walk into any politician’s offi  ce,
went their thinking; Jesus held the doors to power open.
Another document sets forth  self-examination questions:
“4. Do I give only verbal assent to the policies of the Family or
am I a partner in seeking the mind of the Lord?” The Family is aware
that politicians and businessmen use it for strictly worldly ends, but it
constantly pushes even its most cynical members toward sincerity.
The Family does not ask them to stop seeking power or raking in
profits; rather, it wants them to believe that they do so not for their
own gain but for God’s.
“7. Do I agree with and practice the financial precepts of the
Family?” These precepts do not require one to tithe to good works.
Rather, the Family’s two major financial principles concern appear-
ances. To practice the precepts of the Family, one must declare one’s
own fortune—great or small—wholly a gift from Jesus. It’s not yours,
even if it is; you’re not really rich, even if you are. This allows Family
members to be like Jesus himself by giving freely to other Family
members without regard for  formality—a pro cess that has the added
advantage of being off the books.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
46 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“13. Am I willing to work without human recognition?” The
Family’s commitment to secrecy—they call it privacy—demands a
sort of political ascetism that they think of as humility. It is nothing
of the sort; the Family renounces public accountability, not power.
Long-term goals are best summarized in a document called
“Youth Corps Vision.” Another Family project, Youth Corps distrib-
utes pleasant brochures featuring endorsements from political
leaders—among them Tsutomu Hata, a former prime minister of
Japan, former secretary of state James Baker, and Yoweri Museveni,
president of Uganda—and full of enthusiastic rhetoric about helping
young people to learn the principles of leadership. The name Jesus is
never mentioned.
But “Youth Corps Vision,” which is intended only for members of
the Family (“it’s kinda secret,” Josh cautioned me), is more direct.
The Vision is to mobilize thousands of young people  worldwide—
committed to the principles, precepts, and person of Jesus
Christ . . .
A group of highly dedicated individuals who are united together
having a total commitment to use their lives to daily seek to
mature into people who talk like Jesus, act like Jesus, think
like Jesus. This group will have the responsibility to:
—see that the commitment and action is maintained to
the overall vision;
—see that the finest and best invisible organization is
developed and maintained at all levels of the work;
—even though the structure is hidden, see that the Fam-
ily atmosphere is maintained, so that all people can feel a part
of the Family.
Youth Corps, whose programs are often centered around
Ivanwald- style  houses, prepares the best of its recruits for positions
of power in business and government abroad. Its programs are in
operation in Rus sia, Ukraine, Romania, India, Pakistan, Uganda,
Nepal, Bhutan, Ecuador, Honduras, Peru, and other countries. The

--- Sayfa 53 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 47
goal: “Two hundred national and international world leaders bound
together relationally by a mutual love for God and the family.”
From time to time, Bengt would walk down to the Cedars or next
door to the  house of Lee Rooker, a Department of Education offi  cial,
or hop onto his bike or into his Volkswagen and drive over to—the
brothers didn’t know where he went, just that he was missing. No
one worried. They all knew Bengt was having leadership lessons.
Bengt had been tapped to become a future father of the Family.
Sometimes, though, he seemed skeptical about his patrimony.
One day not long after I’d arrived, Bengt and I drove into Wash-
ington to pick up a new brother at the bus station. I’d spent the day
chipping and sanding green paint, and because there’d been no mask
most of the time, I was still coughing up paint dust. “You’ll get used
to it,” Bengt said.
“It’s fine,” I said. “This is what I’m  here for.”
Bengt laughed. “Paint in your nose?”
“The work,” I said. “It’s a kind of prayer, right?”
Bengt glanced over at me. “Can be,” he said.
I pressed the point. “You do the work every day until it’s like
praying. Isn’t that the idea?”
“It is,” Bengt said. “But you have to be careful. Even work can
distract you.” We stopped at a red light. “Sometimes,” Bengt said.
“Lately. Lately, I’ve been feeling like I’ve been losing the vision.
Work is just work. Not because I don’t like it. Because I like it so
much. I like what I’ve learned to do. I can let my head fill up with this
whole world of details until there’s no room for God. I know He’s in
there, but I’m not paying Him the attention He’s due.”
“What do you do then? Do you pray?”
“I’ve had my more nihilistic moments.” He paused, and we drove
in silence, cruising through downtown D.C.’s deserted nighttime
streets. Bengt turned right onto Rhode Island Avenue. “Yeah,” he
said. “I pray. But sometimes it’s like putting pieces together. Trying
to get this thing to work like it’s supposed to.”

--- Sayfa 54 ---
48 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“Which is . . . ?”
“I have enjoyed,” Bengt said, “in the past anyway, the complete
absence of doubt.”
We pulled up to the bus depot, a squat, pale brick of a building
tucked behind  Union Station. We were a few minutes early, and we
talked. Bus station hustlers drifted toward the car but kept their dis-
tance; addicts who  couldn’t even stand watched us through cloudy
eyes.
“That’s what prayer is?” I asked. “Absence?”
Bengt paused. “Yeah, I think it is.”
Bengt stared at a fat woman in a red halter top; she was slapping
a skinny drunk on the shoulder. When his Redskins cap fell off , he
looked as if he might cry.
“You go in,” Bengt said. “I’ll wait here.”
Most of the brothers didn’t know it, but Bengt was thinking of
going to graduate school. He had chosen a university close enough to
commute to from Ivanwald, and a course of study in the classics that
would complement his understanding of Jesus and provide him with
an advanced degree that could prove useful on a political résumé.
Two weeks into my stay, he began working on his application. After
dinner every night, he’d disappear into the little office beside his up-
stairs bunk room to write his essay on the  house’s one computer. At
breakfast Jeff  C. would ask him how it was going, and he’d plow his
fingers through his hair and sigh. Handing out work assignments for
the day, he’d repeat himself needlessly.
One sweltering afternoon, he gave up writing and decided to
chop down two magnolia trees in the front yard. All of Ivanwald’s
neighbors agreed that they were a shady, symmetrical adornment of
what, without them, would look like a parking lot, but Bengt  couldn’t
be stopped: the trees had to go. They had to die, and they had to be
killed by his hand. With a  long- blade Stihl chewing up magnolia,
green leather muffs protecting his ears, his eyes hidden by goggles,
Bengt relaxed for the first time in days. It took just a few hours to
reduce the trees to a stack of five-foot lengths of branch. He put a

--- Sayfa 55 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 49
booted foot on the pile and pressed, listening to the wood crack, and
he smiled. “I just love getting a job done,” he said.
“Bengt,” I said later that night, “I may be able to help with your
essay.” Bengt looked confused. “Before I came here,” I said, “that sort
of thing was my job.” Bengt smiled, clapped me on the  shoulder—
he’d just found the tool he needed.
A few days later, he gave me the essay. After I’d done some edit-
ing, we sat down in the office one night after dinner to talk it over.
The room was barely big enough for the two of us; we sat with our
legs crossed in opposite directions so as not to knock knees. “All
right, dude,” Bengt said. “Lay it on me. I’m ready.” He leaned for-
ward to peek at the pages. When he saw the amount of ink I’d added,
he guffawed, slapped his knee, frowned, crossed his arms over his
chest. “I can take it, boy,” he said.
And he could; we marched through the text line by line, dissect-
ing  run-ons and shuffling clauses and  chain-sawing irrelevant phrases.
When we were done with the line-edit, we began moving whole sec-
tions, crafting from Bengt’s collage of his life a chronological intel-
lectual autobiography. My formal education has been a progression from
confusion and despair to hope, the essay began. Its story hewed to the
familiar fundamentalist arc of lost and found: every man and woman
a sinner, fallen but nonetheless redeemed. And yet Bengt’s sins were
not of the flesh but of the mind. In college he had abandoned his boy-
hood ambition of becoming a doctor to study philosophy: Nietzsche,
Kierkegaard, Hegel. Raised in the faith, he saw his ideas about God
crumble before the disciplined rage of the philos ophers. “I cut and
ran,” he told me. To Africa, where by day he worked on ships and in
clinics, and by night read Dostoyevsky and the Bible, its darkest and
most seductive passages: Lamentations, Job, the Song of Songs. These
authors  were alike, his essay observed. They wrote about [suffering] like
a companion.
I looked up. “A double,” I said, remembering Dostoyevsky’s alter
egos.
Bengt nodded. “You know how you can stare at something for a

--- Sayfa 56 ---
50 | J E F F S H A R L E T
long time and not see it the way it really is? That’s what scripture had
been to me.” Through Dostoyevsky he began to see the Old Testa-
ment for what it is: relentless in its horror, its God a fire, a whirl-
wind, a plague. Even worse is its Man: a rapist, a murderer, a
wretched thief, a fool.
“But,” said Bengt, “that’s not how it ends.”
Bengt meant Jesus. I thought of the end of The Brothers Karamazov:
the saintly Alyosha, leading a pack of boys away from a funeral to
feast on pancakes, everyone clapping hands and proclaiming eternal
brotherhood. In Africa, Bengt had seen people who  were diseased,
starving, trapped by war, but who seemed nonetheless to experience
joy. Bengt recalled listening to a group of starving men play the
drums. “Doubt,” he said, “is just a prelude to joy.”
I had heard this before from mainstream Christians, but I sus-
pected Bengt meant it differently. A line in Dostoyevsky’s The Pos-
sessed reminded me of him: Shatov, a nationalist, asks Stavrogin, the
coldhearted radical whom he had revered, “Wasn’t it you who said
that even if it was proved to you mathematically that the Truth was
outside Christ, you would prefer to remain with Christ outside the
Truth?”
“Exactly,” Bengt said. In Africa he had seen the trappings of
Christianity fall away. All that remained was Christ. “You can’t argue
with absolute power,” Bengt said.
I put the essay down. Bengt nudged it back into my hands. “I
want to know what you think of my ending.” He had written about a
passage from the Gospel of John in which John, with two travelers,
encounters Jesus on the road. John hints at Christ’s importance, so
the two men travel with him. “Then Jesus turns around and asks the
two men one question,” Bengt had written. “ ‘What do you want?’ he
asks.” The question, Bengt thought, might mean, “Why are you fol-
lowing me?” or “What is it that you are doing?” But Bengt had de-
cided that what Christ was asking was “What do you desire?”
The word was important to him. “That’s what it’s about,” he said.
“Desire.” The way he said the word made it sound almost angry. He
shifted in his chair. “Think about it: ‘What do you desire?’ ”

--- Sayfa 57 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 51
“God?”
“Yes.”
“That’s the answer?” I asked.
“He’s the question,” was Bengt’s retort. Downstairs, most of the
men had gone to sleep; from the living room we could hear someone
quietly picking a guitar.
“Bengt,” I said, “I don’t understand.”
“You know,” he said, “I don’t either. That’s what I’ve kind of
come to realize. The thing is, I don’t need to. I can just trust in the
Lord for my directions. He’ll tell me what I need to know.”
“A voice?” I said, surprised.
“A prayer,” he answered. The voice he heard was his own, his
prayers, transformed by his inverted theology into revelation. What
he wanted was what God wanted.
“Absence?” I said, realizing that what he’d meant by the absence
of doubt was the absence of self- awareness, the absence of an under-
standing of his thoughts as distinct from God’s and thus always sub-
ject to—doubt. But I did not say this. Instead, I just repeated myself.
“Absence,” I said, without a question mark.
“Totally, brother.”
He half smiled, satisfied with this alchemy of logic by which
doubt became the essence of a dogma. God was just what Bengt de-
sired Him to be, even as Bengt was, in the face of God, “nothing.”
Not for aesthetics alone, I realized, did Bengt and the Family reject
the label Christian. Their faith and their practice seemed closer to a
perverted sort of Buddhism, their Christ everywhere and nowhere at
once, His commands phrased as questions, His will as palpable as
one’s own desires. And what the Family desired, from Abraham Ver-
eide to Doug Coe to Bengt, was power, worldly power, with which
Christ’s kingdom could be built, cell by cell.
Whenever a sufﬁ ciently large crop of God’s soldiers was bunked
up at Ivanwald, Doug Coe made a point of stopping by for dinner.
The brothers viewed his visit as far more important than that of any

--- Sayfa 58 ---
52 | J E F F S H A R L E T
senator or prime minister. The night he joined us, he wore a crisply
pressed golf shirt and dark slacks, and his skin was well tanned. He
brought a guest with him, an Albanian politician whose pale face and
ill-fitting gray suit made Doug Coe seem all the more radiant. In his
early seventies, Coe could have passed for fifty: His hair was dark, his
cheeks taut. His smile was like a lantern.
“He hates the limelight,” Gannon had warned me. “It’s not about
him, it’s about Jesus, so he doesn’t like people to know who he is.”
But he knows who you are. When I reintroduced myself that night,
he cut me short. “I remember you,” he said, and moved on to the
next man.
“Where,” Coe asked Rogelio, “are you from, in Paraguay?”
“Asunción,” he said.
Doug Coe smiled. “I’ve visited there many times.” He chewed
for a while. “Asunción. A Latin leader was assassinated there twenty
years ago. A Nicaraguan. Does anybody know who it was?”
I waited for someone to speak, but no one did. “Somoza,” I said.
The dictator overthrown by the Sandinistas.
“Somoza,” Coe said, his eyes sweeping back to me. “An interest-
ing man. I liked to visit him. A very bad man, behind his machine
guns.” He smiled like he was going to laugh, but instead he moved his
fork to his mouth. “And yet,” he said, a bite poised at the tip of his
tongue, “he had a heart for the poor.” There was another long si-
lence.
“Do you ever think about prayer?” he asked, but it wasn’t a ques-
tion. Coe was preparing a parable.
There was a man he knew, he said, who didn’t really believe in
prayer. So Doug Coe made him a bet. If this man would choose
something and pray for it every day for  forty-five days, he wagered
God would make it so. It didn’t matter whether the man believed or
whether he was a Christian. All that mattered was the fact of prayer.
Every day. Forty-five days. He  couldn’t lose, Coe told the man. If
Jesus didn’t answer his prayers, Coe would pay him $500.
“What should I pray for?” the man asked.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 53
“What do you think God would like you to pray for?” Doug Coe
asked him.
“I don’t know,” said the man. “How about Africa?”
“Good,” said Coe. “Pick a country.”
“Uganda,” the man said, because it was the only one he could
remember.
“Fine,” Coe told him. “Every day, for  forty-five days, pray for
Uganda. ‘God, please help Uganda. God, please help Uganda.’ ”
On the  thirty-second day, Coe told us, this man met a woman
from Uganda. She worked with orphans. Come visit, she told the
man, and so he did, that very weekend. And when he came home, he
raised $1 million in donated medicine for the orphans. “So you see,”
Doug Coe told him, “God answered your prayers. You owe me five
hundred dollars.”
There was more. After the man had returned to the United
States, the president of Uganda called the man at his home and said,
“I am making a new government. Will you help me make some deci-
sions?”
“So,” Doug Coe told us, “my friend said to the president, ‘Why
don’t you come and pray with me in America? I have a good group of
friends—senators,  congressmen—who I like to pray with, and they’d
like to pray with you.’ And that president came to the Cedars, and he
met Jesus. And his name is Yoweri Museveni, and he is now the
president of all the presidents in Africa. And he is a good friend of
the Family.”
“That’s awesome,” Beau said.
Coe had told this story many times before, I’d learn; it now ap-
pears recycled in evangelical sermons around the world, a bit of fun-
damentalist folklore. It’s false. Doug’s friend was not just an ordinary
businessman but a  well-connected former Ford administration offi  cial
named Bob Hunter. He may have made a bet with Coe, but his trip
was hardly as casual as Coe suggested; I later found two memos total-
ing eighteen pages that Hunter had submitted to Coe, “A Trip to East
Africa—Fall 1986,” and “Re: Organizing the Invisible,” detailing his

--- Sayfa 60 ---
54 | J E F F S H A R L E T
meetings with Ugandan and Kenyan government offi  cials (many of
whom he already knew) and the possibility of recruiting each for the
Family. Central to Hunter’s mission was representing the interests of
American political  figures—Republican senator Chuck Grassley and
Reagan’s assistant secretary of state for Africa, Chester A. Crocker,
among  them—who might influence newly independent Uganda away
from Africa’s Left.25 The following year, Museveni met with Ronald
Reagan at the White  House; he’s served as an American proxy ever
since. Once heralded as a democratic reformer, Museveni rules Uganda
to this day, having suspended term limits, intimidated the press, and
installed the kind of corrupt but stable regime Washington prefers in
struggling nations.
“Yes,” Coe told us, “it’s good to have friends. Do you know what
a difference a friend can make? A friend you can agree with?” He
smiled. “Two or three agree, and they pray? They can do anything.
Agree. Agreement. What’s that mean?” Doug looked at me. “You’re a
writer. What does that mean?”
I remembered Paul’s letter to the Philippians, which we had be-
gun to memorize. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be likeminded.
“Unity,” I said. “Agreement means unity.”
Doug Coe didn’t smile. “Yes,” he said. “Total unity. Two, or
three, become one. Do you know,” he asked, “that there’s another
word for that?”
No one spoke.
“It’s called a covenant. Two, or three, agree? They can do any-
thing. A covenant is . . . powerful. Can you think of anyone who
made a covenant with his friends?”
We all knew the answer to this, having heard his name invoked
numerous times in this context. Andrew from Australia, sitting be-
side Coe, cleared his throat: “Hitler.”
“Yes,” Doug Coe said. “Yes, Hitler made a covenant. The Mafia
makes a covenant. It is such a very powerful thing. Two, or three,
agree.” He took another bite from his plate, planted his fork on its
tines. “Well, guys,” he said, “I gotta go.”

--- Sayfa 61 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 55
As Doug Coe left, my brothers’ hearts were beating hard: for the
poor, for a covenant. “Awesome,” Bengt said. We stood to clear our
dishes.
On one of my last nights at Ivanwald, the neighborhood boys asked
my brothers and me to play flashlight tag. There  were six boys, rang-
ing in age from maybe seven to eleven, all junior members of the
Family. It was balmy, and the streetlight glittered against the black-
top, and hiding places beckoned from behind trees and in bushes.
One of the boys began counting. My brothers, big and small, scat-
tered. I lay flat on a hillside. From there I could track movement in
the shadows and smell the mint leaves planted in the garden. A figure
approached. I sprang up and ran, down the sidewalk and up through
the garden, over a wall that my pursuer, a small boy, could hardly
climb. But once he was over, he kept charging. Just as I was about to
vanish into the trees, his flashlight caught me. “Jeff -I-see-you, you’re
It!” the boy cried. I stopped and turned. He kept the beam on me. I
heard the slap of his sneakers as he ran across the driveway. “Okay,
dude,” he whispered. He clicked off the flashlight. Now I could see
him. Little Stevie, whose drawing of a machine gun we’d posted in
our bunk room. He handed the flashlight to me, spun around, started
to run. Then he stopped and looked over his shoulder. “You’re It
now,” he whispered and disappeared into the dark.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
2.
E X P E R I M E N T A L R E L I G I O N
. . . the election will obtain, and the rest will be blinded.
—JONATHAN EDWARDS, “SINNERS IN
THE HANDS OF AN ANGRY GOD”
L
ittle Stevie was right: As soon as I left Ivanwald, I became It.
That is, I’ve been chasing the story I first encountered there ever
since, trying to fit the religious practice I found in that Arlington
cul-de- sac onto a spectrum of belief where it seems to have no place.
It was at once as ordinary as a game of golf and stranger than any-
thing I’d seen in years of reporting from the margins of faith. Maybe
it was nothing but country club fundamentalism, worth little more
attention than Rotary or the Freemasons. But experienced from
within, the Family was as perfectly absurd  and—granted its own
logic—as perfectly rational as the Catholic dirt eaters of Chimayo,
New Mexico, who consider the dusty soil in one small spot in the
mountains capable of curing any ailment; or Shinji Shumeikai, an inter-
national sect of religious aesthetes who believe that by building mod-
ernist architectural masterpieces in remote places they’re restoring
the planet’s balance, literally. But such convictions are  self-contained,
interested mostly in internal purity. Indeed, the more eccentric the
religion, the more sharply its followers tend to define themselves
against the rest of society.
And yet, despite the Family’s theological  oddities—its concen-

--- Sayfa 63 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 57
tric rings of secrecy, its fascination with megalomaniacs from Mao to
Hitler, its conviction that being one of God’s chosen provides divine
diplomatic immunity—it is anything but separate from the world. It
so neatly harmonizes with the political shape of worldly things, in
fact, that it’s nearly indistinguishable from secular conceptions of
social order. It’s “invisible” not because it’s hiding, but because it’s
not. Dismissed as “civil religion” by observers who know it only by
the National Prayer Breakfast’s annual broadcast on C-Span, the
Family’s long-term project of a worldwide government under God is
more ambitious than Al Qaeda’s dream of a Sunni empire. Had I not
stumbled into its heart, I would never have seen it. Since I had, I be-
gan to ask basic questions. Was the Family’s vision simply a pious
veneer on business as usual? Do its networks actually influence the
world the rest of us live in? Is it an aberration in American religion,
or the result of a long evolution?
This last is a very different question from the one usually asked
about radical religion: “What do the believers want?” An understand-
able concern, but one that obscures the true shape of fundamental-
ism. Those of us not engaged in “spiritual war” attempt to contain
fundamentalism by reducing its ambitions to a program, an agenda:
the abolition of abortion, homosexuality, or maybe sex in general.
If the fundamentalists ever won, we tell ourselves, we would all be
forced to live like Puritans, or worse—the Taliban. Fundamental-
ism, we conclude, is therefore  un-American and doomed to wither
on our democratic soil.
But faith, radical or tepid, gentle or authoritarian, is always more
complicated and enduring than a caricature. The Family has grown
and taken root directly at the center of American democracy, inter-
twining with the world as it is. “Business as usual” is the Family’s
business. The elite fundamentalism of the Family doesn’t lead us
back to Plymouth Rock, much less to the Taliban’s Kabul. The Fami-
ly’s faith is not that of a  walled-off  community but of an empire; not
one to come but one that already stretches around the globe, the soft
empire of American dollars and, more subtly, American gods. If we
want to understand this fundamentalism, we must ask not what it

--- Sayfa 64 ---
58 | J E F F S H A R L E T
wants to do but what it has done: how it has run parallel to and at
times flowed into the main currents of history. We must solve the
equation presented by Doug Coe: Jesus plus nothing. J + 0 = X. To
solve for X, the role of elite fundamentalism, we’ll need to consider
our variables: American Jesuses, plural, and nothing. Nothing, in this
equation, stands for a great deal. All that fundamentalism has aban-
doned, the story it does not tell: the history of where it came from
and how it came to live so close to the center of American power.
The plainest expression of the relationship between the theology
of Jesus plus nothing and the mundane world of secular democracy
may be found in the words of George W. Bush. Bush is not a member
of the Family, although his faith was shaped in a Bible study in Mid-
land, Texas, organized by a group the Family started in the late
1970s for the very purpose of bringing influential men into personal
relationships with each other and with a particular concept of Jesus.
In 1989, Doug Coe, addressing a private gathering of evangelical
leaders in Colorado Springs, assured them that Bush Senior—a secu-
lar sort whom they’d backed with reservations—was a Family rela-
tion, if perhaps a distant one. Moreover, he’d surrounded himself
with godly men such as James Baker and Jack Kemp and, yes, even
Dan Quayle, all associates of the Family. Most promising of all, said
Coe, was Bush Junior, a good influence on his father.1 Twelve years
later the younger Bush ran for president. At a 1999 debate in Des
Moines, Iowa, the moderator asked the  then-candidate to identify his
favorite philos opher. His opponents had already named John Locke
and Thomas Jefferson, but Bush said Jesus, because Jesus had changed
his heart. A murmur of surprise rippled through the crowd. The
moderator asked Bush to say more, implicit in his question the prob-
lem of how heart reconciles with the traditional province of philoso-
phy, mind. Bush answered as if the audience was not in the room.
“Well, if they don’t know, it’s going to be hard to explain.”
Pundits scoffed, but Bush’s response proved brilliant, a flare in the
night for fundamentalist  America—the equivalent of Ronald Reagan’s

--- Sayfa 65 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 59
flirty 1980 remark to a convention of the National Religious Broadcast-
ers, “You can’t endorse me, but I can endorse you.” And Bush’s words
meant more than those of Reagan, who seemed merely to promise politi-
cal favors. Bush avowed a strength of belief that must be felt to be fully
understood, a faith outside the tidy terminology of liberal religion. You
must be in the Word to get this powerful feeling. Well, if they don’t know,
it’s going to be hard to explain. It’s beyond rational definitions. It’s an idea
that denies ideas, a fixed intellectual position that rejects the primacy of
intellect and the significance of “positions.” Jesus plus nothing.
As a statement of philosophy, Bush’s first  answer—because He
changed my heart—insists on timelessness (Jesus in the present tense),
spacelessness (Jesus in Texas, in Des Moines, in Bush’s body), and
selflessness, though this last not in the sense of a modesty of spirit that
might lead one to help others, but rather in that of an inward gaze
that is simultaneously narcissistic and blind to the particulars of the
self it sees there, able only to perceive a heart remade by God. There’s a
word for this  wide-eyed stare: piety. We are all familiar with the fig-
ures of the pious church lady and the sanctimonious school marm, and
yet such characters fail to embody the meaning of piety as it has existed
for hundreds of years in Christianity and took root in America, first
through the Puritans and then, in the fashion in which it lives on to-
day, in the 1730s, in Northampton, Massachusetts, summoned from
the hearts of men, women, and children by the words of Jonathan
Edwards, the author of the Great Awakening.
Edwards’s legacy lies not in the Republic built on the Enlighten-
ment ideas of Locke and Jeffersonian skepticism, but in the fact that
more than two centuries later, that nation remains one of the most re-
ligious on Earth, much of it devoted to a vision of Christendom that
originated with him. That this vision was at its inception theocratic is
barely worth mentioning; among the elites of Edwards’s day, theocracy
was simply the “Calvinist scheme” which their forebears had come to
the New World to pursue. That the United States is, as much as ever, a
Christian nation, is a more controversial claim. “Historians of the
United States,” notes George Marsden, Edwards’s most perceptive bi-
ographer, “have been prone to give much more attention to Benjamin

--- Sayfa 66 ---
60 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Franklin than to Edwards as a progenitor of modern America.” That
oversight explains why most of American history cannot account for
the country’s ongoing religious fervor. Although American fundamen-
talism has lately attempted to claim Franklin as a  forebear—a collec-
tion titled American Destiny: God’s Role in America trumpets three
apparently pious utterances of Franklin’s out of context and without
mentioning his equal enthusiasm for the sensual life and a Christless
deism—the legacy of Franklin’s ideas remains staunchly secular. But
the nation does not. Christ thrives in America not so much as an idea or
a deity as a mood: a feeling, a conviction, a sentimental commitment to
manifest destiny on a personal level, with national implications.
When I left Ivanwald, one of the se nior men, a former chief coun-
sel to Republican senator Don Nickles, told me I was making a terrible
mistake. “You may not be able to come back,” he said. He left it un-
clear whether that would be my choice or the Family’s, but I think I
know now what he meant. If I left, prematurely in his eyes, I would
literally no longer be within the mood. The ideas I’d encountered
there might travel with me (as they have, in a manner the Family
didn’t anticipate), but the mood could not. After I left, I went to the
Billy Graham Center Archives at Wheaton College, where the Fam-
ily had deposited more than 600 boxes of documents, and I sifted
through these seventy years of its history in search of explicit theol-
ogy, an explanation for what I’d encountered. There  were snatches of
argument, passages of theory, references and allusions which I have
since spent several years pursuing. But most of all there was the mood.
Oftentimes, in letters to one another, Family men wrote of it as a
“spirit” that spread like a disease, a “contagion,” they called it. Men
would come from around the world to spend time with Doug Coe, or
his pre deces sor, Abraham Vereide, to “catch the spirit of the work.”
Sometimes they’d talk politics; sometimes they’d make business deals.
But more often they simply basked together in the glory of “the work.”
One did not “learn” anything; one found it in one’s own heart.
There is little taste for history among Family members, and the dis-
array of the 600 boxes it shipped off to the Billy Graham Center sug-
gests that nobody has ever been interested in looking backward. Not to

--- Sayfa 67 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 61
1935, when the Family began as a businessmen’s antilabor alliance in
Seattle, and certainly not farther back, to the roots of “the work.” Those
origins lie not in the New Testament, which is ultimately little more
than a fabric from which the Family constructs contemporary realities,
but in the dream of a Christian nation, “awakened,” as it was by Jonathan
Edwards in 1735, by a piety infused with enthusiasm and—an element
overlooked by most historians of the Great Awakening—an adoration of
power, divine and worldly, the intangible foundation of American em-
pire. The love of power—world-changing power, messianic power—is
not an American invention; but our civil religion, the belief that such a
love can coexist peacefully with both God and democracy, is.
Biographers of Edwards note the unlikely marriage within his
thought of the rigors of John Calvin—who argued that God cares so
little for good deeds or bad that he saves whom he will and damns the
rest of us—with the revelations of the Enlightenment, Locke’s political
ideas and the scientific discoveries of Isaac Newton. But Edwards was
no mere synthesizer. His preaching and writing helped spark a fire of
religiosity that swept the colonies and leaped back across the ocean to
the heart of the British Empire. Edwards rationalized religion; set it on
a course of wildfire evangelism; and built a web of ideas in which the
radicalism of the American Revolution would be entangled with a spiri-
tual authoritarianism, an idea of God that did not so much emphasize
might rather than love as equate the two. Edwards’s Jesus was personal,
intimate, dedicated, like the Family, to the slow breaking of souls.
Of all insects, no one is more wonderful than the spider, especially with
respect to their sagacity and admirable way of working.
—JONATHAN EDWARDS, “OF INSECTS,” IN HIS PRIVATE JOURNAL, 17162
Edwards’s genius was to describe his God not through declaration
but through observation. He wrote like a naturalist, of flowers and
insects and cloud formations, all of creation bursting with revelation.
“And scarce any thing,” he confessed, “among all the works of nature,

--- Sayfa 68 ---
62 | J E F F S H A R L E T
was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning.” Edwards “felt God” at
the first appearance of a thunderstorm: “I would fix myself in order
to view the clouds, and see the lightnings play, and hear the majestic
and awful voice of God’s thunders.”
He was tall and slender, his face long and his features delicate, his
skin pale. He spoke in a soft, lovely voice, and he liked to sing aloud
during storms, his lyrics the raw form of the prose he would later
commit to writing. He began every day at four, because Christ  rose
early, too, just three days after his crucifixion. Then he prayed, se-
cret prayers. Later, his wife, Sarah, would join him in his study, and
they would pray together in that light that rises before the sun, the
same blue light one finds at the heart of a flame.
He ate very little. He often studied for a dozen hours or more,
time passed “not in perusing or treasuring up the thoughts of others,”
wrote his nephew, but in wrestling with data from his own congre-
gation, tested against ideas transmitted directly from God. “New
Light,” the believers at the time called the religion of Jonathan Ed-
wards. As a young man, he studied the Opticks of Newton, wrote pa-
pers about rainbows and twinkling stars, and took delight in science’s
discovery that the color of things in this world is not inherent but
merely a matter of perception. He loved to look at flowers; he thought
often of how they would soon die. Fruit trees proved yet more re-
vealing. “That of so vast and innumerable a multitude of blossoms
that appear on a tree, so few come to ripe fruit.” So was it, he con-
cluded, with “the mass of mankind.”
He wrote of “true religion” as not of outward forms but of in-
ward emotion. He called this quality aff ection and rated it more highly
than the thoughts and deeds of great men. He wrote about people
with whom powerful men had never concerned themselves.
One such was a woman named Abigail Hutchinson, whose last
days Edwards presented as a case study of conversion in the long es-
say that first brought him  trans-Atlantic fame. Edwards had the good
fortune to publish A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God in the
Conversion of Many Hundred Souls in 1736, just as developments in the
technology and economics of publishing  were giving rise to that

--- Sayfa 69 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 63
modern genre known as “current events.” Lengthy works might be
made widely available so quickly that narratives that had once been
“history” now became part of an ongoing conversation. He hoped
that his careful case study of revival, played out in the microcosm of
one sick young woman’s ravaged body, would forge out of religion a
new natural science. He had experimented on himself toward this
end for years, recording day by day, sometimes hour by hour, the
most trivial workings of God and Satan within his own mind and
body. He monitored what he ate and how it affected his prayers,
noted how many hours he slept and whether fatigue served as a good
tool with which to break his will. But his experiments, before 1735,
remained unreplicated, unverified. The Awakening of Abigail Hutchin-
son afforded him a guinea pig on whom to test the effi  cacy of devo-
tion, the science of mind, the subjugation of heart to power.
Abigail Hutchinson was a sickly, unmarried young woman who
worked in a shop. She lived with her parents, people known for intel-
ligence and sobriety, who  were neither wealthy nor very poor. Their
house was smoky, dark, and cold. They measured time by the sun
and the sound of churchbells.
Before her conversion, Abigail was “still, quiet, reserved.” She
was gentle. There was, Edwards  observed—with  approval—nothing
fanciful about her. She was very thin.
The spark that lit the spiritual fire which was to consume her
came not from scripture nor from Edwards’s pulpit but from the
news of another woman’s conversion, a young and popular and no
doubt pretty girl, “one of the greatest  company-keepers in the  whole
town,” Edwards described her, granted a “new heart” by God, “truly
broken and sanctifi ed.” The formerly loose woman’s popularity grew
as the men who once had courted her gathered round to hear the
sweet young thing testify. One Monday in the spring of 1735, as the
ice on the Connecticut River crackled and boomed and melted back
into cold black water, Abigail’s brother, a converted man, decided to
speak with Abigail about “the necessity of being in good earnest in

--- Sayfa 70 ---
64 | J E F F S H A R L E T
seeking regenerating grace.” Abigail fumed. Why did she need to be
told the necessity of being in “good earnest,” a quality now attributed
to a woman who went walking with men in the dark? Abigail was in
good earnest. Why did she not experience the  grace—the joy—now
said to be visited upon a harlot?
Abigail decided to search for the answer in scripture, starting
from page one. She read about Eve, who took the devil’s fruit in her
mouth; Ham, who looked at his naked father and laughed; Lot’s
daughters, who raped their father. God ran javelins through those
whose love was wrong, incinerated those whose gifts  were not wor-
thy, broke infants beneath the hooves of horses ridden by infidels. No
one was spared. After three days of reading, Abigail was too terrified to
continue. Before, she had listened to the Reverend Edwards’s sermons—
nearly all variations on a theme, damnation, delivered in tones, Har-
riet Beecher Stowe would later imagine, “calm and  tender”—but she
had not heard. Now she saw: she was wicked, born wicked right from
the start, cursed as Eve. She had murmured against God. “Her very
fl esh,” Edwards recorded, “trembled for fear.”
She shuddered when she recalled the doctors she’d consulted.
Why had she believed her body deserved anything more than what
God had given?
What had God given?
Hunger. A craving for food. At the same time an inability to con-
sume. A slow strangling. The war of flesh, of belly, of the throat that
closes, of the tongue that feels food’s texture, sweet and savory. Suf-
fering was the gift of the divine.
The next day she skipped ahead to Jesus, the New Testament, “to
see if she could not find some relief there for her distressed soul.” By
Saturday, she could no longer read. “Her eyes  were so dim,” observed
Edwards, “that she could not know the letters.” She had been pious
all her life, but now she knew that her devotions had availed her of
nothing in Christ’s eyes. She went to her good older brother. The
Bible had become like a weapon turned against her, a knife held to
her throat. It had revealed her to herself as filthy, defiled by sin; she
was nothing, deserved nothing.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 65
The next morning,  Sabbath-day, she was too sick to get out of
bed. But she needed to hear the Reverend Edwards. No, her family
said, and restrained her; so he came to her. Around thirteen hundred
people lived in Northampton then, and no man was better known.
His grandfather, Solomon Stoddard, had built the congregation to
which he ministered, and, in many ways, had built the town. Its resi-
dents called him “the pope of the Connecticut Valley.” Edwards in-
herited the mantle, if not the full authority. Whereas Stoddard had
memorized his sermons the better to perform them, Edwards gripped
the pulpit and read softly, his pale face proof to his congregation of
his sincerity. At times, they felt they could almost see through him.
Before the Awakening, he had wasted no time on chatter and had
not often visited his flock in their homes. But in 1735, as revival
burned through the town, he began making rounds, taking notes,
asking questions, and shy Abigail became an object of great fascina-
tion to him. He visited her in her home, she visited him in his. Some-
thing great was happening in the valley; the fear of God had never
been more palpable. Travelers spent a night and left transformed,
carrying with them the spores of revival; stories would return to
Northampton of spiritual fires lit across New England. In Boston,
they called it hysteria; Edwards believed that Northampton’s far re-
move secured it from dangerous ideas. To the west of the mountain
lay wilderness. To the east, church steeples scraped the underbelly
of clouds like thorns. Before Edwards’s ascension to the pulpit,
Northampton had reveled in its frontier freedom. It was a tobacco
town, the giant green leaves aged until brown and hung like bodies in
barns the sides of which opened like gills. Ale was more commonly
drunk than water.
And then,  revival—compared to its fervor, drunkenness must
have seemed dull. God was wilder and more terrifying than the
woodlands to the west, and also gentler, like late day winter sun
turning the snow fi elds golden.
Edwards exalted. In revival, the ecstasy of the thunderstorm was
wed at last to the theology he had crafted in his years of studying
scripture, science, and the work of spiders. Come in, come in, he’d

--- Sayfa 72 ---
66 | J E F F S H A R L E T
say to the young men and women who knocked on his door. Men
would scream and weep on his knee; women’s faces would flush,
and they’d lay down before him. Such enthusiasm thrilled him, but
it also frightened him. He knew about the tricks of the mind and the
lies of the heart. Few said as much, but everyone knew: this could
be Satan.
Cotton Mather, a rival of Edwards’s grandfather, would have
frowned and barred his door to the young revivalists. Edwards the
pastor surely considered doing the same. But Edwards the scientist
consoled, encouraged, and most of all, recorded. Page after page of
data: “Some have had such a sense of the dis pleasure of God, and the
great danger they were in of damnation, that they could not sleep at
nights,” he wrote, “and many have said that when they have laid
down, the thoughts of sleeping in such a condition have been fright-
ful to them; they have scarcely been free from terror while asleep,
and they have awakened with fear. . . .”
Such was Abigail. A sweet soul who had never before given of-
fense to anyone, she had grown violent of spirit in her despair. Ed-
wards sympathized with her anguish. As a younger man he, too, had
often wondered if he could anticipate heaven, his fear greatest when
he felt closest, could almost smell the milk and honey. He likened
souls such as his and Abigail’s, those that paused on the cusp of salva-
tion, to “trees in winter, like seed in the spring suppressed under a
hard clod of earth.”
This was how she blossomed: After three days of scripture read-
ing and three days of terror, she awoke on a Monday morning before
dawn. Her mind felt like a windless pond, clear and flat and still, re-
flecting the heavens. And then words filled her, language flowing in
like water. “The words of the Lord are pure words, health to the
soul, and marrow to the bones.” And: “It is a pleasant thing for the
eyes to behold the sun.” A light so bright . . .
Abigail exclaimed to her good older brother, I have seen! As she
had suffered in terror for three days, so “she had a repetition of the
same discoveries of Christ three mornings together.” Each time be-
fore dawn. Each dark morning, her frail body cold beneath layers of

--- Sayfa 73 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 67
quilts, the sky  blue- black in the window, her skin sallow and wed too
closely to the bone, the light  came—“brighter and brighter.”
Her cheeks, no doubt pale like Edwards’s, would have reddened,
her eyes, huge in her emaciated skull, opened wide and shone like
dark lanterns. She bloomed. She became a visible saint of the Lord.
She asked her brother to help her to the homes of unconverted neigh-
bors, that they might, she said, “see and know more of God.” He was
shining in her glassy eyes. She wanted to go right away! House by
house! Now! Now! She wanted to be a warning.
Death became her obsession; Edwards did not discourage her.
Together they spoke of her body, its submission to the divine. Her
sister tried to feed her. She could swallow nothing. I have been “swal-
lowed by God,” she told her minister. He must have shivered; he had
often thought of salvation in those very words.
Did Edwards lust for Abigail? He was not an unsensual man. He
was a writer of love poems for his wife, Sarah, said to be the most
beautiful woman along the Connecticut River, and father of ten
children. He’d confessed to running elaborate mathematical prob-
lems through his mind to resist temptation. And yet despite the de-
vices with which he meant to defend his purity, the thought of Abigail
penetrated his mind. “Once, when she came to me,” he wrote, “she
was like a little child, and expressed a great desire to be instructed,
telling me that she longed very often to come to me for instruction,
and wanted to live at my house, that I might tell her what was her
duty.”
Did Abigail long for more than the pastoral care? She was not so
ambitionless as she had once seemed. She wanted, most of all, to be
seen, and the more she spoke of dying, rapturously, the more he saw
her; indeed, seemed to stare at her, even wrote about her. “I am will-
ing to live, and quite willing to die,” she told him, “quite willing to
be sick, and quite willing to be well.” Anything for God.
She stopped drinking water. Her sister cried; Abigail smiled. “O
sister, this is for my good!” Her sister could not understand. “It is best,”
explained Abigail, “that things should be as God would have them.”
Her brother read to her from the Book of Job, pausing as he came

--- Sayfa 74 ---
68 | J E F F S H A R L E T
upon a passage about worms feeding on a dead body. No, go on. “It
was sweet to her,” Edwards mused, “to think of her being in such cir-
cumstances.”
Her eyes sank into her skull, her nostrils collapsed. Her hair be-
came brittle. For three days she lay dying. Young men and women
came to her bed and leaned in close to her dry lips to hear her. “God
is my friend!” she’d whisper. Over and over. God is my friend!
He had finally made her a woman. “Her flesh,” wrote Edwards
near the end, “seemed to be dried upon her bones.” On Friday noon,
June 27, 1735, her “weak clog” of a body submitted to Christ’s de-
sire. She was, at last, beautiful in the eyes of God, and of Jonathan
Edwards.
Years after the revival, not long before his church purged him in
1750, Edwards wrote a reevaluation of what he had  wrought—in es-
sence, an appeal to reason, one that laid the foundation for the hybrid
of science and faith that would become the cornerstone of fundamen-
talism: “As that is called experimental philosophy, which brings opin-
ions and notions to the test of fact,” Edwards formulated, “so is that
properly called experimental religion”—not in the sense of innova-
tion, but of the science of sainthood—“which brings religious affec-
tions and intentions, to the like test.”
Such tests  were for the most part exercises of the mind. For ex-
ample, Edwards was fascinated by atomic power. Not nuclear, of
course, but what he perceived as the indivisibility of atoms, about
which he had learned from Newton. The smallest of particles, he
concluded, was also the most powerful, for it alone was possessed of
the power of resis tance; one could not break it down any further,
surely proof of an animating force, a creator.
And then, Edwards surpassed Newton. In 1723, thinking of light
and color, perhaps the green leaves of summer—which, Edwards
had come to understand, were not really green, had no color at
all—he leaped centuries ahead to imagine an indivisible atom di-
vided, the power that binds it broken, an almost incomprehensible

--- Sayfa 75 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 69
reversal of creation. That is, imagined the mind of God as he knew it
removed from the green of the leaves, the blue of the sky, our bodies
that are not our own. “Deprive the world of light and motion,” he
wrote, “and the case would stand thus with the world: There would
be neither white nor black, neither blue nor brown, bright nor shaded,
pellucid nor opaque, no noise or sound, neither heat nor cold, neither
fluid nor wet nor dry, hard nor soft, nor solidity, nor extension, nor
figure, nor magnitude, nor proportion; nor body, nor spirit. What
then is become of the universe? Certainly, it exists nowhere but in
the divine mind.”
In Boston and London he was judged a genius or a fanatic. In the
little towns around Northampton, people thought of him as either a
new Moses, leading them to the Promised Land they had long be-
lieved the colonies to be, or vulgar  Ahab—angry, obsessed, ignorant
of the compromises one must make to get along. His own relations
among the  so-called River Gods of the  valley—powerful merchants
and more conventional preachers—rebuked him. He would not have
survived in his pulpit as long as he did had he not been protected by a
cousin, John Stoddard, another grandson of Solomon Stoddard. But
whereas Edwards followed his grandfather to the pulpit, Stoddard
followed his grandfather’s example to power. The wealthiest land-
owner for miles, he made himself magistrate, representative to the
assembly, and colonel of the militia. He was a feudal lord, and Ed-
wards was the high priest of his benefactor’s authority.
His religion was radical, available to all classes and even to slaves,
an inspiration to the nascent sense of individual liberty that would
become the American Revolution, but his politics were warlike
and controlling. Empire struck him as an ideal vessel for the Gospel.
He preached often against envy, but named as envy only that feel-
ing which filled those of lesser wealth, or lesser land, or lesser status,
who determined to band together to wrest power from above. Such
less-privileged men gathered in taverns—Northampton had  three—and
instead of contemplating Christian harmony, conspired in “party
spirit” to reshape not their souls but their fields. The wealthiest few
of the valley owned at least a quarter of its arable ground.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
70 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Sin fermented in such taverns, charged Edwards, listing a catalog
of crimes of the spirit that might just as easily come from the mouth
of a fundamentalist today. He railed against the common man’s pro-
pensity toward lawsuits, against young women who carried them-
selves like men and young men who dressed in an unmanly style.
Pornography was another vice that preoccupied him. His downfall
began when he rebuked a group of boys—converted Christians, no
less—for stealing and reading midwives’ manuals and applying their
studies with hands-on investigations, the science of groping. The
boys got off, so to speak, because they were wealthy, but another
story surfaces when we consider that the boys in turn rebuked the
reverend. Don’t you point fingers, they said; we know where yours
have been. Did you hold Abigail’s hand as she lay dying?
The spring of Northampton’s revival, Edwards spent much time
counseling his uncle, Joseph Hawley, who under his nephew’s tute-
lage began to see secrets within himself, and  worse—the meaning-
lessness of self, of “Joseph Hawley.” The hand of God dangled him
over the pit by a spindly leg as if he was nothing but a spider. An an-
gry God, yes, but what was  worse—overlooked by historians who
emphasize the wrath of Edwards’s  sermons—He was also a loving
God. “Majesty and meekness joined together,” wrote Edwards,
“. . . an awful sweetness.” Edwards cared little for the Calvinism of
his forebears when put next to the vision of God he seemed to most
favor, that of a giant mouth awaiting your submission—waiting to
swallow you, Edwards would write in his diaries, to make you one
with everything. Which is to  say—nothing. Only your sense of being
kept this from happening now, now. Not hellfire but the temptations of
self—what later generations of evangelicals would rage against as
secular  humanism—birthed Joseph Hawley’s despair.
Hawley stopped sleeping. He stayed up at night in the still of his
home, “meditating on terror.” In March, another man in a similar state
slit his own throat, but he was in such a  hysteria—a man of such weak
character—that he botched the job and survived, blocked from en-
tering hell as well as heaven. Joseph Hawley was not such a fool. He
was a seller of guns and tobacco, a man of substance in Northampton.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 71
But his nephew Jonathan revealed to him a deeper reality, in which
substance itself became suspect. In May Edwards preached to the
congregation as he might have spoken to Hawley in private settings:
“You have seen the filthiness of toads . . .” You, declared Edwards
with great and compelling certainty, are even lower. Next to the
souls of the unchosen, even “putrefied flesh” smells sweet to God.
Hawley, a man “of more than common understanding,” took the les-
son. Using what must have been a sharp  blade—he also sold
knives—he opened beneath his firm chin a bright red smile.
The pious and the melancholy, those who  were saved and those
were waiting, those who did not care at all—every sort of person
came now to Jonathan Edwards, knocking on the pastor’s door. Can I
come in? I heard something . . . He knew what they’d heard. He’d been
hearing it from them for days now, each testimony so much like the
last that he must have forgotten who was giving voice to the words,
man or woman, ancient or child, saying this: I heard a strange voice in
my mind; it seemed so compelling and right (like yours, Reverend Edwards).
Edwards recorded the data. Cut your own throat, the voice without
a body whispered into the ears of his flock. Cut your own throat! Now!
Now!
He did not count the bodies of those who did so.
Salvation was for Edwards a science, worthy of careful record
keeping. The twin shadows of righteousness and  purity—hatred and
self-loathing—he dismissed as undeserving of the scrutiny of his
amazing mind. Or did he? “Remember,” he wrote to himself once,
“to act according to Prov. 12:23, ‘A prudent man concealeth knowl-
edge.’ ” He did as much in his Faithful Narrative, weaving a web of
logic and argument beneath the surface of a story that attracted a
popular audience drawn by its portrait of sin and tragic account of
redemption. In so doing, Edwards staked out a political position as
well as a spiritual one, a subtly elitist conception of knowledge as a
property to be possessed in different portions according to a divine
hierarchy. The wise man of Christ knows that only to some does God

--- Sayfa 78 ---
72 | J E F F S H A R L E T
give a calling, the power to draw closer to Him and understand His
grand plan.
In 1750, Edwards’s congregation purged him. Not for the blood
that flowed from his revival, but simply as a result of the power he’d
unleashed. To preserve the old Puritan order, Edwards had destroyed
it; but he was ill prepared for what the new  believers—fiercer in
their faith than ever Puritans had  been—would build from the ruins,
not just in Northampton but across the colonies. Edwards’s books
enflamed men to burn other books on town commons, his tale of
Abigail Hutchinson gave license to women to tear at their dresses on
the cobblestoned streets of cities, screaming for contact with a God
as intimate as Edwards’s story. In Northampton, the believers turned
against him not for the pain his religion drew forth but for shying
away from the radicalism of the revolution he had inspired.
He went west—to an Indian mission in Stockbridge, a town
even closer to the edge of British civilization than Northampton, it-
self a city considered by proper Bostonians still half-wild. Among the
Mahican Indians he pondered the vicissitudes of the mood he had
stoked, its brightness and its darkness, its hymnody and its screech-
ing, the new birth it offered and the death’s-head that grinned alike
on the saved and the damned. He was a man given to the study of
oneness. Perhaps he recognized that the heart full of feeling and the
calculating mind full of knowing, like the thunder and lightnings he
so adored, were simply two expressions of the same phenomenon, an
American religion, one so well suited to the brutal demands of the
building of a new  Jerusalem—conquest; unrestrained capital; the
rights of men and women to speak for themselves; and the rights of
stronger men to command their submission for the greater  cause—
that it would still insist, two and a half centuries later, that all the
world is a frontier, in dire need of revival, and a new chosen people.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
3.
T H E R E V I V A L M A C H I N E
T
he myth persists,” wrote the historian Timothy L. Smith
several decades ago, “that revivalism is but a  half- breed child of
the Protestant faith, born on the crude frontier, where Christianity
was taken captive by the wilderness.”1 Like all myths, it is almost
true. But the captive taken was wilderness itself, and the captor was
the American religion. Jonathan Edwards—and, later, Charles Gran-
dison  Finney—did not so much tame the wilderness of the American
mind as tap its secret power. Nearly a hundred years after Edwards
awakened Northampton, Finney would lead a series of revivals across
the Northeast and Britain that would win for his populist vision of
evangelicalism not the hundreds who  were converted under Edwards,
but uncounted multitudes. In what was then the heart of Manhattan
he built the Broadway Tabernacle, the country’s fi rst megachurch. It
seated 2,500, and often close to twice that number crowded into the
sanctuary—a pillared theater in the round like a Roman stadium—
for Finney’s orchestrations of scripture and sentiment, moralism and
sensation. Crowds fell like wheat before his beautiful, terrifying,
consoling voice. Most receptive to his message  were the new little big
men of the nation, the petit bourgeoisie, physicians, inventors, entre-
preneurs,  self-made men and their wives, wealthier than the old Pu-
ritan aristocracy. “Under my preaching,” Finney boasted of just one
of his many revivals in the new city of Rochester, “judges and lawyers
and educated men  were converted by the scores.”2
Andrew Jackson, elected in 1828, extended the vote to men

--- Sayfa 80 ---
74 | J E F F S H A R L E T
without property. Charles Grandison Finney, whose early career
strangely mirrored Jackson’s presidency, extended the passionate
God of the frontier, the pious morality of hellfire and certainty, to
the men and women who would lay the foundations of the Gilded
Age. Here we find the origins of evangelicalism as we know it: the
marriage of new money and “new life” that would stoke the furnaces
of industrial empire. It was a different expression of democracy than
Jackson’s, but just as potent. And, overlooked by the successive gen-
erations of evangelicals and fundamentalists who study Finney’s re-
vivals to this  day—Billy Graham insists that “no one can read [Finney]
without being challenged by his passion for  evangelism”3—we find
also an intimacy, a love of secret feelings that Edwards would have
understood and that we can recognize in the blend of masculinity
and sentiment, muscle and tender  self-regard, that suffuses funda-
mentalism even now.
On the afternoon of October 7, 1821, after yet another church
service that left him bored, Charles Grandison Finney decided to
settle the question of God. “A splendid pagan of a man,” in his grand-
son’s description, he was, at twenty-nine,  six-two, thick-chested,
could wrestle any challenger to the ground.4 Women thought him
the most elegant dancer in Adams, a farming hamlet on the rough
western edge of New York. His sandy hair was thin on top but given
to a rakish curl, and his violet eyes  were so bright they leap out even
from black-and-white photographs, “intense, fixating, electrifying,
madly prophetic eyes,” wrote the historian Richard Hofstadter, “the
most impressive eyes—except perhaps for John C. Calhoun’s—in
the portrait gallery of nineteenth-century America.”5
Finney led the Presbyterian church choir, and he enjoyed discuss-
ing theology with his pastor, but until that October day in 1821, he’d
had little use for and less belief in the Lord. Long set in the pride of
his own intellect, he was past the usual age of such inquiries. As a
young man he’d hoped to find a way to Yale, but instead he became a
schoolteacher and now he was a lawyer, and many people believed

--- Sayfa 81 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 75
that soon he’d be a politician, perhaps a senator one day. If that was
to come to pass, he decided, he’d better get his inner life in order.
That Sunday in October, he cleared his schedule for Monday and Tues-
day and resolved to decide by Wednesday whether he was a man
of God.
The truth was that religion had been creeping up on him. As a
boy he had witnessed powerful Baptist preaching, the stomping,
shouting, Holy Ghost power kind, but as a man he had remained im-
mune to the revivals that swept the region so often that it would later
be called the “Burned Over District” for the intensity of its spiritual
fi res.6 Then, one day, he bought a Bible. For his law library, he said,
and everyone believed him. Finney preferred it that way. He took to
shutting his office door, clogging the keyhole with a rag lest anyone
peep on him, and praying in whispers. When the Bible had been just
one more big book among the tomes of law in his library, he’d read it
openly. Now, it became a secret companion.
He had a reputation to uphold; his very name was in Adams the
standard of Logic and Reason. “If religion is true,” one man de-
manded of his wife, “why don’t you convert Finney? If you Christians
can convert Finney, I will believe in religion.”
But no one could convert Finney. “I had not much regard for the
opinions of others,” he’d confessed. As he sought God from Sunday
night through Monday and Tuesday, it seemed as if his heart grew
harder. “I could not shed a tear; I could not pray.” On Tuesday night,
terror struck him. He thought he would die. “I knew that if I did, I
should sink down to hell.” He wanted to scream. He braced himself
in bed and waited for dawn.
As soon as light broke, he dressed and hurried to his offi  ce, to
return to the Bible that taunted him. The town was already awake.
He nodded and smiled at farmers and ladies, quickening his pace to
avoid unbearable conversation. And then, he froze. Stopped and
stood dead still in the middle of the dirt road that was the town’s
main street. Creaky wagon wheels rolled left and right, their drivers
cursing. Women may or may not have spoken to him. Good day, Mr.
Finney. Mr. Finney? Oh, dear. He doesn’t hear. Quite unlike him! Just how

--- Sayfa 82 ---
76 | J E F F S H A R L E T
long he stood still, he’d never be able to say. There was only one sen-
tence among his thoughts, but it seemed to come from elsewhere,
spoken in vibrating, terrifying tones that did not correspond to the
seconds and sounds of the material world.
Will. You. Accept. It. Now. Today?
He bolted. Walking fast, smiling at passersby so they wouldn’t
notice his distress, a cold, clammy feeling overtaking him. He aimed
himself for a piece of woods over a hill on the north side of the vil-
lage, but he charted an indirect path, because he did not want anyone
to know where he was going. “I skulked along under the fence, til I
got so far out of sight that no one from the village could see me. I
then penetrated into the woods.” He found himself a closet of trees,
fallen timber crisscrossing to create a mossy fort open to the sky. He
crawled in on a damp bed of pine needles and  fire-red oak leaves and
knelt. There, he determined, he would Accept It Now Today, and if he
did not he would not return to the world. He waited for prayer. For
“relief.” But he could find none. When he opened his mouth, he
heard only the rustle of leaves. He squeezed his eyes shut and groaned.
Somewhere close by, a twig snapped. Finney started, opened his
eyes, began to rise, blood flushing his cheeks. Had he been discov-
ered?  Openmouthed like a fish flopped down among the trees, the
knees of his lawyer’s suit brown with dirt like those of a farmer? Had
they seen his knobby knuckles knitted together like those of a school-
boy? Would they laugh? Would God?
Then Finney broke. He screamed. “What!” he bellowed. What!
His voice lowered and quickened and heaved on a sea of gulping air
and grief and shame. “Such- a-degraded- sinner- as-I-am, on my knees,
confessing my sins to the great and holy God, and ashamed to have
any human being, and a sinner like myself know it, and find me on
my knees endeavoring to make my peace with my offended God!”
He went on for hours, tears streaming, his hands and his faith
brown with the dirt of the forest floor, his knees dark with mud, his
body aching, “releasing” all his shame, all his pride. He had found his
enemy at last. It was his own mind. God, he’d say, gave him promises
and revealed to him truths too precious for words. “They did not

--- Sayfa 83 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 77
seem so much to fall into my intellect as into my heart.” The mind, he
realized, was nothing but a tool.
Finney rose and began walking, stumbling like a drunken man
back to town, his feet tangling, but his mind so quiet “it seemed as if
all nature listened.” He’d left before breakfast. By the time he returned,
his law partner, Benjamin Wright, had gone home, but, he’d later
say, Jesus Christ himself stood in the offi  ce, “ face to face,” awaiting his
deposition. Into the darkness came then the Holy Spirit. “Like a wave
of electricity, going through and through me. Indeed it seemed to
come in waves, and waves of liquid love.” Finney roared out loud, his
shame dissolved in his fear and ecstasy. “I shall die if these waves con-
tinue to pass over me.” The waves kept rolling, and he dipped and
bobbed in the spirit, the crests and the troughs of the ocean soaking
one message into his bones, the  idea-that-is-not- an-idea that he would
take as his text for what would become the greatest revival since the
days of Jonathan Edwards: before God, you are nothing.
Finney titled the first postconversion chapter of his memoirs “I
Begin My Work With Immediate Success.” Not for him Jonathan
Edwards’s curiosity about the workings of the Holy Spirit he was so
certain flowed through him like electric current. Finney’s was the
faith of the industrial age. Whereas Edwards wondered if religion
might, like light itself, be subject to natural laws, Finney hit a switch
and expected the power to flow. Likewise their political understand-
ing of evangelism: Edwards studied Locke and anguished over the
democratic contradictions of revival. Finney read the law books of
Blackstone and took his Bible unfi ltered and applied what he learned
with equal-opportunity fervor. By Finney’s reckoning, every citizen
had the  right—the  obligation—to be as zealous as the man he called
“President Edwards,” in honor of Edwards’s brief tenure as the head
of Princeton University.
The night after Finney returned from his forest grotto a changed
man, a member of the choir that old  God-spurning Finney had led
came to see him. The chorister found Finney in the dark. The lawyer’s

--- Sayfa 84 ---
78 | J E F F S H A R L E T
shoulders  were shaking. His breath was loud and heaving. “What ails
you?” the visitor asked. Finney wiped away his tears. “I am so happy
that I cannot live,” he answered.
But he did, into the dawn, at which point the Holy Spirit checked
in on him. “Will you doubt? Will you doubt?” a voice demanded.
Finney the lawyer knew the answer to that one. Same as a verdict,
guilty or not guilty, black or white. “No! I will not doubt; I cannot
doubt.” Satisfied with Finney’s reply, the Spirit “then cleared the sub-
ject up” in Finney’s mind, the subject being the question of his con-
version and whether he was saved. He was.
If such instant grace is a commonplace of American fundamental-
ism today, it was an oddity to be doubted in Finney’s time. Saul had
become Paul in a flash some eighteen hundred years previous, and
there had been other miracles since, but not every country lawyer
could call the voices in his head God’s and be believed. Not until then,
anyway; American Christendom was changing fast. Finney’s epiphany
contained in it the summation of two developing ideas of the times,
ideas that would vastly expand Christ’s jurisdiction over America in
the minds of believers: the radical notion that to perceive the divine is
to accept divine authority, without question; and the mechanistic un-
derstanding of faith as instantaneous for all who want it. Sign here,
and you’re a soldier in the army of God, ready for battle.
Finney sallied forth to his law office clad in his new spiritual armor
and promptly began the war. Benjamin Wright passed by, and Finney
threw off some remark. He did not pay enough attention to remember
what it was, but such was the “efficacy” of his new religion that the re-
mark he made pierced Wright “like a sword.” Next came a client, ready
to go to court on a civil matter. Finney shook his head. He could not
even offer an apology. He was, he said, an “enlisted” man now. He quit
his life’s love, lawyering, on the spot and set about the cause of convict-
ing souls. His method? Wander, argue, destroy. He was, if not the most
educated man in the countryside, probably the brightest between Lake
Erie and the Atlantic. Moreover he was a physical giant by the stan-
dards of the day, and his voice was deep, and there  were those radiant
eyes. Nobody could stand firm before his onslaught.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 79
The first to fall was a young man in a shoemaker’s shop, affl  icted
by modern ideas, universalism, the awkward faith of those
not-quite- secular citizens who styled themselves sophisticated. “The
young man saw in a moment that I had demolished his argument” and
immediately fled. To safety? To reprieve from insistent evangelists?
Impossible. Finney had shown him by force of logic the absolute cer-
tainty of God’s total power. All that remained was for the man to
conform his will. That was his only real choice: conform or be
damned. Finney watched, pleased, as the broken universalist ran to
the edge of town, hopped a fence, and made for the forest grotto.
God would meet him in among the dark trees and fix his soul.
The grotto never failed. Finney’s faith was, in comparison to that
of Edwards, almost mechanical; it was industrial. In the weeks that fol-
lowed, Finney sent a pro cession of townspeople tromping into the
woods, there to repeat the form of his own intimate encounter. The
story of his forest salvation was the secret weapon of his crusade,
the mythic ammunition behind his “arguments” for the undeniable au-
thority of God, more persuasive in his raw country town than the
principles of Blackstone, spiritualized. Or rather, the two narratives
worked in tandem, offering the citizens of pastoral Adams, New
York—adrift in the great  in- between of America, no longer wilderness
and not yet  settled—both savagery and civilization, a weeping, scream-
ing, singing forest god and a straightforward,  law-based,  citizen-Christ
for the democratizing nation.
Finney’s law partner, Wright, a respectable man with connec-
tions to the coming political powers of the state, thought he could
accept the latter without the former. Swept up in the townwide re-
vival that followed in the wake of Finney’s conversion, Wright deter-
mined to settle his accounts with the new Jesus. But “he thought that
he had a parlor to pray in,” and he would not go to the forest like
Finney’s other soldiers. Wright prayed in his parlor for days and
nights. Jesus would not answer. He prayed out loud into the early
morning. Jesus would not answer. Because Jesus had chosen a place
shadowed by trees for their meeting. I’m not proud! Wright wept, but he
could not receive the wave of Jesus-love of which Finney had spoken,

--- Sayfa 86 ---
80 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the power without which he was certain he would die. He took from
his pocket a small knife, weighed it in his hand, imagined its bite.
Relief. He was not proud; he would prove it with blood.
But he was proud, and he threw the knife away, “as far as he could,”
said Finney, because Lawyer Wright knew he was too petty to resist
temptation. For weeks he struggled. One night he collapsed in the
muddy street, kneeling in puddles. See? I am not proud! But he was.
He would not accept the Christ waiting for him among the trees.
“One afternoon I was sitting in our office,” recalled Finney, when
the shoemaker’s universalist, now a “Christian,” burst into the room.
“Esquire Wright is converted!” he shouted. He had been up in the
woods himself, there to pray, when he heard from a neighboring val-
ley the echoes of shouting. He had climbed a hill for a view and spot-
ted Wright in the distance. Wright was a fat man, heavy, not athletic
like Finney, but there he was in the wild, marching and shouting.
Like a soldier on watch, pivoting and turning, pivoting and turning,
to and fro. He’d stop, wind back his arms like wings and clap “with
his full strength and shout ‘I will rejoice in the God of my salvation!’ ”
As the man told the story, Finney heard shouting, looked up, and
saw Lawyer Wright marching down the hill. The big man inter-
cepted old Father Tucker on the edge of town and lifted him off the
ground and squeezed him, dropped him, marched. Stopped, clapped,
barked, “I’ve got it!” Wright fell to his knees before Finney and told
him that he had been saved. He’d had a choice: suicide or the trees.
Jonathan Edwards had been a scientist of religion, maybe a mad
one. Finney—nothing if not sane, his language plain, “colloquial and
Saxon”—became its promoter, its mass distributor, a pious variation
on his  better-remembered contemporary, Phineas Taylor Barnum.
He favored raw emotion as his medium but practiced religion like a
country lawyer, an American exhorter. “I came right forth from a
law office to the pulpit, and talked to the people as I would have
talked to the jury.” Old churchmen shivered at his vulgar words. “Of
course,” he said of that crowd, “to them I was a speckled bird.”

--- Sayfa 87 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 81
Theologians of that time and historians of ours parse Finney’s
words to discover whether he broke with Edwards or continued his
tradition. They take a typical Finney proclamation such as this—
“Knowing your duty, you have but one thing to do, PERFORM
IT”—and consider it in light of debates over Calvinism and, if they’re
bold, the politics of Andrew Jackson. But they give little credence to
the words Finney felt must be capitalized. PERFORM IT. Finney’s was
a faith of action, a fact commonly noted. He was an abolitionist, a
temperance man. Less considered is the emphasis of the action that
bridged the theological isms and the politics of the day: performance.
The subtle delights and terrors of spectacle that link Finney’s revivals
to those of our present megachurch nation.7
For Edwards, revival had been a strange and wonderful phenome-
non, a displacement of ordinary air by the immaterial body of the Holy
Ghost. But it was delicate, revival, neither a force to be directed nor
one that would abide exploitation. Its politics were implicit. For Finney,
a self-taught preacher declaring a frontier Christ for the industrial age,
revival was a machine made up of “new measures”: “powerful preach-
ing,” a  well-timed hymn, the “protracted  meeting”—movements of
the Spirit scheduled on a daily basis for weeks at a time. Its politics
were as plain as the public confessions of sinners called to grease the
gears of Finney’s cleverest innovation, the anxious bench, the titillation
of which P. T. Barnum would never rival.8
Finney was recently married when he conceived of the anxious
bench, but not much drawn to his wife. He left her alone for most of
the first six months of their marriage while he wandered from church
to meeting house to schoolhouse to parlor in the little towns of west-
ern New York, preaching wherever he could find a pulpit or a room
full of people. His reputation was growing, as the tall young man
who spoke hellfire, who called sinners blistered and skinned and broken
down. And what’s more, called them by name. Not for Finney ab-
stractions of theology and tics of old English that distanced the man
in the pulpit from the men and  women—mostly women—who filled
the pews. Finney said “you.” And he stared at you. And if he found
out your name, he’d call you a sinner. It was thrilling.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
82 | J E F F S H A R L E T
One warm spring day, Finney walked three miles through a pine
forest to a church in the town of Rutland. The fi rst to arrive, he took
a seat in the pews. He carried no sermon. A crowd began to gather,
but nobody recognized him. In walked a woman, slender and lovely,
“decidedly” so, graceful, wearing a bonnet adorned with plumes. “She
came as it were sailing around, and up the broad aisle toward where I
sat, mincing as she came.” She sat right behind him. He could feel her
close to him. He shifted his hips, threw an elbow over the back of his
chair. Watched her watching him. Two beautiful creatures, a delight
to behold. His violet eyes consumed her, “from her feet up to her bon-
net and then down again. He was not secret in his glances.
She blushed. Hello, stranger.
His lips  were thick and wide, set in a strange, calm smile, brown
like his skin from the sun. But he did not look like a farmer. There
were those Finney eyes, giant and glowing. When he opened his
mouth, his voice was low, not tender.
“Don’t you believe that God thinks you look pretty?”
What?
“Don’t you think all the people will think you look so very nice?”
The blood must have drained from her cheeks.
His voice dropped lower. “Did you come here to divide the wor-
ship of God’s  house?”
This, Finney noted, made the pretty, proud thing “writhe.”
“I followed her up in a voice so low that nobody  else heard me,
but I made her hear me distinctly.”
Vanity, “insufferable vanity.”
The woman was trembling, “her plumes  were all in a shake.” At
last, Finney was ready to preach. He ascended to the pulpit and re-
vealed himself as the man the congregation had been waiting for. The
woman must have gasped; she began to shake.
He preached to a full house that followed him deep into the lit-
eral gospel. They saw what he had done to the woman and wanted
him to slay them also, to convict them, to crush them. Such words
were part of his new measures. Then—“I did what I do not know I
had ever done before.” He called on those who would be saved to rise

--- Sayfa 89 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 83
from their seats and come to the front of the hall, there to stand ex-
posed in their sin. Of course the woman  rose, the first to respond.
She fell out into the aisle. “Shrieked,” remembered Finney.
Her squeal excited the crowd. They too surged forward, moan-
ing and stumbling and screaming, eager to feel, as the shrieking
woman had, the intensity of conversion. The machine was working,
electrifi ed by the anxious bench, Finney’s most thrilling invention.
“T h e Spirituality of Christians does not lie in secret Whispers, or
audible Voices,” wrote an eighteenth-century New England divine who
was firmly opposed to  revivalism—its God-chosen men, its shouters
and fainters and  falling-down people.9 True religion, he believed, did
not depend on special revelations for the  self- anointed nor the noisi-
ness of a crowd shaking with Holy Ghost electricity.
Perhaps not. But power requires both, whispers and voices, the
intimacy of the grove and the public outcry of the anxious bench.
Finney’s revival machine made use of both, and more important,
made them interchangeable: private experience became public reli-
gion’s badge of authenticity, and public religion’s pulsing current
gave to Finney’s inner piety the intensity of a collective, a movement,
a multitude. “The church,” Finney would declare of the community
of believers years after he’d left the upstate wilds, “was designed to
make aggressive movements in every direction.” Finney meant this
politically—believers  were “bound to exert their influence to secure
a legislation that is in accordance with the law of God”—but also as a
matter of performance.10 “The church” was not bricks and mortar,
nor even simply the sum of Bible- Christians, Finney’s term for follow-
ers of his protofundamentalism. The church, to Finney, was the indi-
vidual’s encounter with Jesus in the wilderness, the mass contagion
of the anxious bench; and it was the chemical reaction that occurred
when the certainty of the former combined with the jolt of the latter
to force the issue of Finney’s American Christ onto the nation.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
II.
Jesus Plus
Nothing

--- Sayfa 93 ---
4.
U N I T N U M B E R O N E
The Idea, Part 1
A
familiar tableau: a man on his knees before dawn, praying
secret prayers for guidance. Only now it’s the 1920s, and the
heir to the title of First Revivalist is Billy Sunday, a former ballplayer
who worked the stage as if he was covering second base and calling
the game at the same time, dashing back and forth between velvet
curtains, winding up for a big throw and hollering at the batter. Sin-
ner! was Sunday’s cry. He railed against reds and women’s libbers and
tippling bohemians. Christ he considered a man of action and then
some. Jesus, he preached, was a boxer, a brawler, a  two-fi sted man’s
man who was also God. A twofer! Gone was the Jesus of Jonathan
Edwards, austere and intellectual. And fading, too, was Finney’s
Christ, an idea of the divine that reflected Finney’s own raw, native
vision. Sunday preached a prosperity gospel—God loves the
wealthy—and lived it as well. He was not a crook but a hustler, milk-
ing the masses with his  holy-rolling vaudeville routines. Preoccupied
with fame, he revived the nation again but left it largely unaltered.
He did not advance the theocratic project, was not the next key man
of American fundamentalism.
That honor goes to our man kneeling in the dim blue of predawn
Seattle, murmuring prayers in a foreign tongue. The man is a Norwe-
gian immigrant named Abraham Vereide, known to most as Abram, a
preacher who has found in America the stature and respectability—by

--- Sayfa 94 ---
88 | J E F F S H A R L E T
way of a prestigious pulpit—that eluded him in his native Norway.
Still, something is beyond his grasp. He wants the peace he’s certain
God has promised him, yet suffering, in the abstract, distracts him.
Abram is immune to despair by this point in his life, but it bothers
him, and he wishes it wouldn’t.
He is a big  man—fit and square in the shoulders and in the jaw,
his face broad, severe, and intensely handsome—and a bighearted
man, too, and intelligent, but also simple, and glad to be so. He likes
things to be in their places: God in His heavens, Abram by his Bible,
men working where God puts them, all content with their calling.
So it is clear something is wrong with the world: the poor. They are,
it seems plain to him, out of place. Literally out of order. Something
has gone wrong. God promised us we would be happy when we
reached the Promised Land, and what, if not that, is America?
So what does God have in mind? Abram has not yet found an an-
swer. He keeps praying.
This morning, 4:30 a.m., he prays alone but he is not alone. His
son, Warren, is watching. He has newspapers to deliver. He moves
quietly through the darkened  house, pulling on socks and dungarees
and tiptoeing down the back stairs so as not to wake his mother, so
often ill, restricted to bed but never resting easy. Just before the last
step, Warren hears a  noise—a sudden intake of breath followed by an
exhalation. Like laughter, only it’s followed by a moan. Then Warren
hears a voice coming from the kitchen. Perched on his step like a
mouse, not making a sound, Warren listens to his father’s deep mur-
mur, still thick with the accent of the fjords. Abram’s voice sounds
strange—not the way it does when he speaks to Warren or Warren’s
mother or to the big men he counts as his friends. This morning he
sounds as if he is talking to someone he loves and respects and of
whom he is just a little bit afraid.
“Do you want me, Lord, to go as Thy Ambassador?”
Silence. Abram’s shoulders seem to settle. Maybe he smiles. He
has received instructions.
“It is done,” Abram says, and Warren takes advantage of his father’s

--- Sayfa 95 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 89
moment of serenity to slip out into the early morning, leaving Abram
alone with his God.1
Abram prayed like this for years, and the years grew darker, the
poor poorer, the world more broken, until one day in April of 1935 he
received not just instructions for the day before him but a vision for
the decades; God’s hand moving His people in an entirely new direc-
tion. The revelation God gave him was simple: To the big man went
strength, to the little man went need. Only the big man was capable of mending
the world. But who would help the big man? Who would console him
when he, as Abram did sometimes, wept in the early mornings? That
the big men of society wept Abram never doubted. He thought that
powerful people, so clearly blessed by God, must surely possess equally
great reserves of compassion and love that they wished to shower
down on the weak, if only someone would show them how.
Abram would show them how. This was his vision. His life thus
far—in 1935, he was  forty-nine, his  once-dark brow gray like a
North Pacific  breaker—had followed an arc, he believed, but it had
taken him a long time to see it. His ministry, he now realized, was
not “among those who have had the bottom knocked out of life, its
derelicts, its failures,” as a friend would write years later, “but, ultima-
tely, among those even more in need, who live dangerously in high
places.”
For nearly 2,000 years, Abram concluded, Christianity—that
is, the religion, the rituals, the stuff of men with their weak, sinful
minds—had bent all its energies toward the poor, the sick, the starv-
ing. The “down and out.” Christianity gave them fishes when it could
and hope when it had nothing  else to offer. But what good had it
done? What had been accomplished between Calvary and 1935?
Just look at Seattle, Abram’s adopted hometown: nearly half the
city was on relief, and the other half was  dark-eyed, eyeing the bless-
ings of the “top men” with envy, which is a blight on a man’s soul. A
rich man may have little hope of getting into heaven, but an envious

--- Sayfa 96 ---
90 | J E F F S H A R L E T
man could turn to violence and lose all hope for this world or the next.
Abram had to help such creatures, the derelicts, the failures. How? By
helping those who could help them—the high and the  mighty—that
they might distribute the Lord’s blessings to the little men, whose envy
would be soothed, violence averted, disorder controlled.
Thereafter, Abram would spend his days arranging the spiritual
affairs of the wealthy. It would be another decade—ten years spent
cultivating not just Seattle’s big men but those of the  nation—before
Abram would coin a phrase for his vision: the “new world order.” By
then, 1945, he’d moved to Washington, D.C., and he cut a diff erent
fi gure than he had as a preacher. He wore double- breasted suits with
lapels like wings,  polka-dotted bow ties, and  wide- brimmed fedoras.
He was often seen with his dark overcoat thrown over his shoulders
like a cape. Other men considered him a spectacular dresser; those
who knew him well considered his stylishness itself a minor miracle,
since Abram was not wealthy. But God provided. As a young itiner-
ant preacher, he’d traveled on horse back with a  six-gun and a Bible,
traveling from farmer to farmer. Now, he carried a silk handkerchief
instead of a pistol, and he moved from rich man to rich man. He
stayed in the best hotels and  clubs—the Waldorf-Astoria in New
York, the  Union League in Chicago, Hotel Washington in the na-
tion’s capital—as the guest of friends, and he traveled over the years
in the best cars (God led a rich man to give him the use of a
twenty-thousand-dollar Duesenberg), on private planes, in Pullman
cars especially reserved for his use.
When as a young preacher out West he had once faced a pressing
debt of twenty- five dollars and had no hope of paying it, a woman
unknown to him squeezed  twenty- five dollars into his hand. She told
him, he claimed, that she had been moved by God to give him cash;
had set out for his church with five dollars; had been stopped by the
Lord at the threshold and been given to understand that Abram re-
quired more of her; had plucked another twenty dollars from her
purse; and had floated toward the beautiful preacher, her money—
the equivalent today of hundreds of dollars—pressed, through no
will of her own, from her hand to his.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 91
His hands  were enormous, his fingers long. His face was  granite—
a straight, lipless line of a mouth and a jaw so square it could’ve been
used in a geometry class. His eyes, set deep and serious beneath long
dark lashes and craggy brows, looked like pale ice. They were the
eyes not of a seducer but a persuader, a gaze men more than women
remembered. “God gave him a majestic figure,” his eldest son, War-
ren, would recall. Like all those entranced by his father, Warren be-
lieved that God had granted Abram his manly appearance for a
purpose: to win powerful men to his cause.
Abram would become an exponent of a religion for the  elite—the
“up and out,” as he called  them—for the rest of his life. He termed
this trickle- down faith the Idea, and it was really the only idea he ever
had—the only one, he believed, God gave him. In one sense, it was
nothing more than a defense of the status quo. It neither challenged
power nor asked for anything from the powerful but their good in-
tentions. In another, it was the most ambitious theocratic project of
the American century, “every Christian a leader, every leader a Chris-
tian,” and this ruling class of Christ-committed men bound in a fel-
lowship of the anointed, the chosen, key men in a voluntary
dictatorship of the divine.
From Seattle, Abram traveled the world with the Idea, winning to
its self-satisfied simplicity the allegiance of senators, ambassadors,
business executives, and generals. Every president beginning with
Eisenhower has attended the annual National Prayer Breakfast Abram
founded in 1953. He never achieved his  dream—the United States is
no more a theocracy today than it was in Charles Finney’s lifetime—but
in his pursuit of it he stood at the vanguard of an elite fundamentalism
that shaped the last half century of American and world politics in
ways only now becoming visible. Abram, observed two approving
evangelical writers in a 1975 study, Washington: Christians in the Corri-
dors of Power, “personally influenced thousands of community, national,
and world leaders, who in turn influenced countless others, a remark-
able chain reaction . . .  Many of them have never heard of [Abram],
much less seen him. But his shadow is upon them.”2
Shadow is indeed the word for Abram’s legacy. In 2005, Time

--- Sayfa 98 ---
92 | J E F F S H A R L E T
magazine labeled Abram’s successor, Doug Coe, the stealth persuader,
a term that might just as easily have fit his mentor. Abram’s  upper-
crust faith was not a conspiracy, but it was not meant for the masses,
either. Until recently, those  masses—fundamentalist as well as
secular—barely knew it existed.3
Abram heard his own peculiar God for the first time in Norway,
one June morning in 1895 when as an eight-year-old boy he was tak-
ing his father’s cattle to pasture in the high cold fields of the Norwe-
gian village from which Abram’s family took their surname. In later
life, Abram would often insist that he had been born poor, but among
the white  houses and red barns of the  one-thousand-year-old village
of Vereide, his family’s home—close to the church and surrounded
by oak  trees—was far from the humblest. The inlet near the village
was narrow enough to resemble a river, and over it loomed two
mountains, the peaks of which  were perfect triangles of black and
white, laced with snow even in June. In between stretched farmland,
the future that awaited Abram if he remained. His father was a fore-
man of sorts for land owned by the crown. But Abram was restless, a
popular boy yet angry and given to fighting.
His mother had died shortly before the June day on which he first
heard God’s voice, and her last prayers had been for a calming of her
boy’s temper. That June morning, he took those prayers with him
into the fields. As he closed the gate behind him, his grief combined
with his anger into a cloud of guilt and regret, of longing for his
mother and for the good son he believed he should have been. He
couldn’t bear himself: he ran. He abandoned the cows. He hid in a
grove of elder trees, crying and shivering despite the sun that crept
through the leaves. A brook burbled, and the air smelled of cow
dung. He wanted to pray, but he didn’t know how. He’d never paid
attention to his mother’s prayers. Then, into his mind came words:
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee and called thee by name, thou art mine.
Abram would later say that at the time he had not yet read the
Book of Isaiah, from which those words came. Perhaps he had read

--- Sayfa 99 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 93
the verse, or heard it spoken by his mother, or maybe it was as he’d
come to believe years later, in America: a supernatural call to the
divine. Whichever the case, those words  were the first intimations
of what would become Abram’s theology. They resolved the  age-old
question of theodicy—why does God let bad things happen to good
people?—by ignoring the fact that they had happened at all. Rather
than wrestle with grief and loss, as the best Christian thinking does
so profoundly, Abram found in the grove the seeds of a faith that he’d
thereafter use as a shield against even the awareness of pain, of doubt,
of the danger of despair and the hard, precious hope won from that
knowledge. This was the birth of Abram’s “positive” Christianity: the
censorship of suffering.
Ten years later, eighteen years old and educated to that point but
with no prospects in Norway other than a life in the field, Abram left
for America, the “land of the Bible unchained,” as he dreamed of it.
He arrived at Ellis Island after a stormy voyage, and very first thing a
woman rushed up to him and said, “Welcome!” and pressed into his
hands a New Testament. Abram thought her rude and wonderful,
just like America. But her kindness added no advantage. Besides his
new American Bible and a Norwegian copy, he had nothing. His
clothes  were homespun, stitched by his sisters; his shoes  were goat-
skin, from a goat he had slaughtered; his suitcase was a leather box of
his own devising. He had only the name of a countryman who would
help to seek out in Butte, Montana, a boomtown run like a fiefdom
by giant Anaconda Copper, and just enough money to get there, a
hard journey of fifteen days.
His connection turned out to be a man in a shack by the railroad,
but the old hand knew what to do with a new Norwegian. “Let’s go
uptown and meet the boys,” he said, and took Abram past a row of
brothels punctuated by whore-lined alleys to a saloon. At the saloon
Abram’s guide sat him at a bar amid a gang of miners who sweated
whiskey and copper, and all clinked glasses in his honor. He would
not raise his glass. They called him a dumb greenhorn. He didn’t
care. They cursed him. He stood up,  broad- shouldered and  straight-
backed, his icy blue eyes set in handsome features, ruddy but clear, a

--- Sayfa 100 ---
94 | J E F F S H A R L E T
rebuke to the scars hard labor and whoring had written across his
companions. He frowned upon them, the whiskey, the cleavage of
women, the stink of the men, the rumble of the bar, the land of
mammon unchained.
“You are in America  now—do like Americans do,” one man
said.
That was exactly what Abram planned; he would do as the
Americans of his imagination did. “No, thank you,” he said, his
voice controlled. “I never tasted liquor in my life, and I can get along
without it.”
Into the cold night under a sky filled with strange stars, he walked
until he came to the cliffs that loom over Butte. He shivered and
stared at the mines below, lit up for night shifts like glittering stones.
There he wept, and then he shouted, to the God he had been certain
he would find in America. And out of the darkness, he would say to
the end of his days, he heard the voice of his Lord, speaking the clean
English the immigrant would soon master. This time the words came
from Proverbs: There is yet a future and your hope shall not come to
naught.
“In America,” he’d assured his worried father, “education is free,
money is plentiful, and everyone has a chance.” Instead, his first ex-
perience of the United States was the savage life of immigrants, men
and women pressed into the hardest, most dangerous work. In the
days that followed, he did such labor himself, knocking around the
copper camps of Montana, a  once-healthy farm boy eventually laid
low by sickness and industrial poison, “copper-tinged water” that put
him into a state of semiconsciousness that lasted for days, hallucina-
tory hours spent flat on his back in the shack by the railroad tracks,
his gaunt body sweating away the butter and beef and herring on
which he had grown strong in Norway. It was God’s doing, he be-
lieved: “The Europe an starch had to be washed out.”
And it was. The boy from the village that bore his family name
worked as a section hand, a floor mopper, and a hard laborer, beaten
out of his wages again and again by crooked bosses who called him a
“big-footed  Norwegian”—feet, apparently, being the currency of

--- Sayfa 101 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 95
bigotry with regard to Norsemen. On the Fourth of July 1905,
Abram asked to be paid for work he had done as a paint er in the town
of Basin so he could buy some “American clothes” to celebrate the
holiday. Stick it, said the boss. So Abram took the American option:
“when I heard the train whistle, bound from Basin to Butte, I said
goodbye.” In Butte on that Fourth of July, Abram spent his last dime
on a streetcar  ride to a park on the edge of the city, where he found a
grove of trees far from the American celebration. He had no money,
no friends, no place to sleep. The city was too far behind for him to
walk back, but that didn’t matter: Abram wanted to die right there
and be done. It was a moment like Finney’s, only starker: Abram’s
suffering was in his belly as well as his soul. He sat in the shade of the
trees beneath the high plains sun and waited for an answer. He’d
brought all his possessions with him in a small bundle—the goat hide
suitcase from home lost along the  way—and from it he took out his
New Testament and began to read through his tears. As his eyes
scanned the  now-familiar words, he sensed God Himself once again
speaking: Ye have not chosen me, but I chose you . . . The Gospel of John,
chapter 15, verse 16 . . .  Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, he
shall give it to you.
Then—a sign, Abram  thought—through the woods, came a man
who found Abram wiping away his tears. The man had a beautiful
smile. He opened his mouth to speak. Abram would later remember
not so much the words as their sound: this messenger from God was
a Norwegian. Not an angel but a former saloonkeeper who’d found
Jesus before he’d found Abram. As if, Abram thought, God was lin-
ing up all his experiences in the New World to reveal a singular les-
son. Ye have not chosen me, but I chose you . . . The Norwegian took
Abram home to live with his family that Fourth of July, and through
him Abram eventually found his way to a Methodist seminary, the
free education he had boasted of to his father, and the hand in mar-
riage of a  well-off minister’s daughter, the  middle-class step up into
American life Abram had been looking for. Whatsoever you ask the Fa-
ther in my name, he shall give it to you.
The one word that does not appear in the notes on his life Abram

--- Sayfa 102 ---
96 | J E F F S H A R L E T
prepared near the end of his life, when instead of sheepskin he wore
silk and gabardine, when instead of miners and cowboys he preached
to senators and presidents, is power. But in 1935, when Abram was
just beginning to dream his real ministry, he wrote the word once,
in the margin of a church program. It was at the bottom of a list of
names of men he had recruited. Besides each was a responsibility: or-
ga ni za tion, finances. Beside his own name, he wrote power—and then
crossed it out. If it must be said, it can’t be had. Power, Abram real-
ized as he moved through the high corner offices of businessmen and
leaders, has nothing to do with forcing the devil behind you or mak-
ing the company increase your wages. Power lies in things as they
are. God had already chosen the powerful, his key men. There they
are, Jesus whispered in Abram’s ear; go and serve them.
Throughout the 1920s, Abram directed Seattle’s division of
Goodwill Industries. He didn’t just open stores for used clothes; he
organized 49,000 housewives into  thirty- seven districts and set them
to work salvaging goods for the poor. In 1932, Franklin Roo sevelt,
governor of New York, invited Abram to his office to discuss his or-
ganizing system. Later he’d come to see Rus sian red running through-
out Roo sevelt’s New Deal, but at the time Abram was captivated by
another man summoned to advise the governor, James Augustine
Farrell, president of the United States Steel Corporation. Abram had
met industry chiefs before then, but  here was a titan. A tall, stern
man of dark suits and high collars, Farrell had led U.S. Steel for de-
cades, since not long after its creation as the biggest business enter-
prise in history, and he had a reputation as an industrial free thinker.
The year before he’d rebuked a group of businessmen for treating
workers like animals. Farrell looked on his employees more like
children. Big business, he believed, ought to act as a big brother,
and to that end he insisted that the age of competition had passed;
captains of industry must be freed of antitrust legislation so that
they might better council together for the good of the innocent and
the poor.
Abram fixed his rapt attention on the “steel shogun,” as the press
of the time called the industrialist. “Mr. Farrell reviewed the history

--- Sayfa 103 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 97
of America,” he’d remember, “and pointed out that we have had
nineteen  depressions—five major  ones—and that every one was
caused by disobedience to divine laws.” Farrell offered no evidence
for his dismissal of economic factors, but he did have a solution on
hand. “Now,” Abram recorded his words, “I am a Roman Catholic
and we don’t go in much for revivals and such things, but I am sure as
I am sitting  here that if we don’t get a thorough revival of genuine
religion . . . with a return to prayer and the  Bible”—an oddly Prot-
estant  aim—“we are headed for chaos.” Farrell suggested that the
time had come for the “leaders of industry” to take the reins not just
of the economy but of the entire nation in order to restore it to a
godly path.
Farrell, a former steelworker himself and thus living proof in his
own mind that equal opportunity existed for all, was likely too mod-
est to mention U.S. Steel’s own efforts in this regard; most notably,
its relief program for the Pennsylvania steeltown of Farrell, renamed
just that year in honor of the great man himself. A desperate measure
by a community of 30,000 utterly dependent on U.S. Steel and
starving because of that fact. In Farrell, U.S. Steel fought the spiri-
tual roots of its economic woes not through revival but by evicting
from company housing those who  were not part of the nation’s godly
heritage: foreign-born workers, black workers, and even the old
white men who had built Farrell and now approached retirement and
pensions. U.S. Steel replaced them all with young peons paid low
wages. It was not a matter of getting the job done, since the mills
were shuttered and there was no work to be done. U.S. Steel simply
saw an opportunity for a correction.3
But then, so did the men and women whom companies such as
U.S. Steel were liquidating. It’s hard now, in the present United
States, to imagine the fear that attended the Depression years, and
harder still to remember the anger. Most forgotten of all is the opti-
mism of ordinary people pushed to an edge over which they peered
and saw not the abyss they had been told by their employers and their
politicians awaited them,  but—maybe, if they built it themselves—a
future dramatically different from the past.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
98 | J E F F S H A R L E T
The 1930s were the hungry years, yes; but they were also radical,
which is to say, visionary—an era of political imagination. American
history has plunked Roo sevelt at the left edge of the spectrum of our
political life, but at the time Roo sevelt was closer to the middle. To his
right  were fools and fascists; these  were the days when one might re-
spectably admire the methods of “Mr. Hitler” and wonder, in the
pages of newspapers or on the floor of Congress, whether there might
not be some part of his approach for Americans to copy. And to Roo-
sevelt’s left? There lies the missing history of America without which
the rise of Abram’s religion, the fundamentalism of the “up and out,”
the gospel of power for the powerful that soothes the consciences of
fundamentalism’s elite to this day, cannot be understood. The elite
fundamentalist movement of which Abram would be a pioneer arose
in response to a radical age. Abram’s biographers say that for a brief
moment in 1932, a Roo sevelt aide charged with building a brain trust
from which the future president’s cabinet could be constructed pro-
moted Abram to take charge of a social services portfolio on the
strength of his Goodwill work, and began including him in meetings.
“Abram was introduced to the inner workings of the economic and
political forces of the nation,” wrote Abram’s friend and biographer
Norman Grubb. There he saw “how serious was the danger of leftwing
elements actually taking over the nation.”
As far as Abram was concerned, they did. He had begun drawing
up plans for  government- backed religious revival as a cure for the na-
tion, but FDR went the way of the New Deal. Roo sevelt’s name
rarely appears in Abram’s papers thereafter.
Nor, for that matter, does the name of anyone Abram thought
beyond God’s sphere of influence. Abram perfected a  feel-good fun-
damentalism that was every bit as militant and aggressive as today’s
populist front but incapable of uttering a harsh word. It was country
club fundamentalism, for men who believed in their own goodness
and proved it to themselves and each other by commending Christ
and the next fellow’s fine effort at following His example. They fol-
lowed the law of kindergarten: if you have nothing nice to say about
someone, say nothing at all. Or put it in terms of abstraction, the

--- Sayfa 105 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 99
preeningly polite language of upper-class religion: One might talk
about a “Red Menace,” but good Christians did not discuss what they
deemed Roo sevelt’s communistic tendencies: One might bemoan moral
decay, but it would not do to mention the name of a fellow business-
man who kept ladies on the side. Only once, in the notes Abram gave
his friend Grubb, did he come close to identifying an enemy: the no-
torious “B.”
Who is B? The Red Menace in the shape of a man, subversion
personifi ed, a zombie from Moscow.
That is, B belonged to a  union. Which  union? Hard to say. Two
candidates present themselves, but neither fits Abram’s description
precisely. Rather, the mysterious B who inspired Abram to gather his
decades of work and contacts and fundamentalist refinements into
the Idea seems to be an amalgam of the two most powerful labor
chiefs on the West Coast in 1935, and, indeed, perhaps the country:
Dave Beck, the Teamster warlord of Seattle, and Harry Bridges, the
Australian- born champion of longshoremen from San Diego to Van-
couver.
The two men  were a study in contrasts. Beck, with his “pink
moon face and icy blue eyes,” as the journalist John Gunther de-
scribed him, a  union leader so conservative he was “probably the
most ardent exponent of capitalism in the Northwest,” ran Seattle
like a fiefdom with bully-boy squadrons of brass-knuckled goons and
a mayor who actually boasted of being in Beck’s pocket. Bridges, “a
slight, lanky fellow,” observed the radical writer Louis Adamic, “with
a narrow, longish head, receding dark hair, a good straight brow, an
aggressive hook nose, and a  tense-lipped mouth,” operated out of San
Francisco but at only thirty-four years old had a  rank- and-file follow-
ing across the trades and industries up and down the coast. Beck
wore double- breasted suits and painted ties and thought he looked
pretty damn good in black and white on the front page of a paper.
Bridges dressed like the longshoreman he was: black canvas Frisco
Jeans with his iron cargo hook hanging from the back pocket, denim
shirt, and a flat white cap. A shave, maybe, for a special occasion. He
rarely spoke to reporters.4

--- Sayfa 106 ---
100 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Beck’s integrity can best be summed up by the fact that years
later—by then he was the boss of the  whole union—when he was
summoned to Washington to account for himself and his mysterious
riches, he pled the Fifth, got drummed out of the Teamsters like a
bad punch line, and Jimmy Hoffa took over. After Beck, even the
Kennedy brothers thought Hoffa was good news.
Bridges? In 1934, the legend spread that the San Francisco ship
owners sent an ex-prize fighter with $50,000 to try and buy him.
Bridges met the boxer alone; considered putting the cash into the
strike fund; but said no because he gleaned it was a trap. Had he taken
the money, he would have been dead in two minutes, and his  union
brothers would have found an impossible wad of cash on his corpse,
and that would have made for a very different story than the one that
got around.
Abram knew Beck was a crook and probably knew Bridges was
not, but he likely loathed them with equal intensity. Beck’s muscle
made a mockery of the government of God-led men Abram dreamed
of for Seattle, and Bridges’s  pure-hearted radicalism must have
seemed to Abram like a devil’s parody of religious conviction.
“ ‘B’,” wrote Abram of the conditions that sparked the Idea, “had
a lot of folks up in arms against him, but most of them had now in-
volved themselves in one way or another and didn’t dare squeal.
Some played the game and liked it, and others paid through the nose;
but whether you  were a businessman, a contractor, or a labor leader,
you went along.”
This “B” is almost definitely Beck; no businessman in America
“went along” with Harry Bridges. And yet it was Beck, ironically,
who inadvertently exposed big business of the 1930s for what it was:
a racket with rewards reserved for the big men. In most parts of
the country, that would be someone like James A. Farrell or Henry
Ford, commanding Pinkertons and the police; in Seattle, it was
Dave Beck, Teamster, who owned the law. That’s why Abram hated
him: Beck was living evidence that God’s invisible hand blessed the
ruthless as much as or more than those whom he considered the de-
serving.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 101
But Abram had been living in San Francisco in 1934, leading
prayer meetings for a group of business executives at the Pacific
Union Club, and he had witnessed the power of Bridges up close,
worse than anything he had seen during his years of preaching and
organizing in Boston, New York, and Detroit. “It was the utter help-
lessness of the rank and file,” wrote his friend Grubb, “under the po-
litical control of subversive forces in the saddle.”
That’s not  Beck—his hit squads struck any  union meeting that
showed radical inclinations harder than the most brutal lumber baron
could imagine. Abram wanted to convert communists; Beck wanted
them beaten and dumped in the drink. No, the “subversive forces in
the saddle” must have been Bridges, although Bridges was not subver-
sive, he was a revolutionary. And in 1934 and ’35, to  Abram—indeed,
to much of the  world—it looked as if he might be successful.
Bridges was the  anti-Abram. Raised middle class and Roman-
Catholic in Melbourne, Australia, he shipped out to sea when he was
sixteen and got off the boat in America four years later. Abram had
his faith, and Bridges had his. God hadn’t spoken to him; a Wobbly
had—a member of the Industrial Workers of the World. They aimed
for one simple goal, paradise on Earth. They called it One Big  Union
and fought for it with the fine art of sabotage: Wobblies blasted steam
into the pipes of refrigerated shipping containers, sabotaged blacktop
so it cracked open, literally jammed wrenches into the works. They
didn’t steal from the rich and give to the poor; they were the poor,
and they took. Most of all, though, they lingered and gabbed and
winked at one another and then quit—they loved leaving work be-
hind. “Hallelujah, I’m a bum again,” went a favorite American Wob-
bly song. Abram had nightmares about such hymns, mistook their
radicalized Tin Pan Alley humor for the ponderous phrasing of the
Eu ro pe an “Internationale.”5
But the Wobblies  weren’t red; they were romantic, deliberately
and desperately so, skeptical of power and or ganization and compro-
mise, and constantly amused by themselves. Sabotage, after all, is a

--- Sayfa 108 ---
102 | J E F F S H A R L E T
kind of joke—not just on the bosses but also on anyone who works,
on the very idea of work. The God Wobblies believed in had made
humanity not for hard labor but for pleasure. Why  else did He give us
legs on which to dance?
And yet the first noble truth of the Wobblies was suff ering, a
sure thing for as long as there was a ruling class with which to wage
war. So Wobblies fought, but they fought for the paradise they felt in
their bones and their bellies had been promised to them. A city upon
a hill. What else was worth fighting for?
Their dream was ill defined, less an agenda than a story, about
class warfare and the spoils that would one day go to the victors.
They didn’t have politics, they had a parable.
Wobblies whispered in young Bridges’s ears as God had spoken
to Abram in the elder trees. But Bridges was of a more independent
turn of mind. He liked the Wobbly story about the One Big  Union
still to come, and took it as his own, but he didn’t believe workers
would win squat without organization. That idea he took from the
communists, though he wasn’t a communist, either. Like Abram, he
loved to be around people and yet was a loner, kept his own counsel,
looked inward, and what he found there he told no one. But unlike
Abram, there is no record of him crying but for the day he stood by
the coffi  ns of two men he had led out on strike. The police had shot
them down. Bridges wept and said nothing.
What the two men shared  were dreams. The Australian and the
Norwegian  were utopians in the American vein. Bridges thought the
Promised Land awaited construction; Abram thought it was simply
to be recovered. Bridges had read a bit of theory, Abram some theol-
ogy, but both believed that they could bring forth the good life for all
who would accept it without recourse to ideology. Bridges took the
communists into his ranks but never entered theirs, Abram strolled
along the fence of fascism but never hopped over. Neither man cared
much about ideas; both believed in power. Bridges wanted to see it
redistributed. Abram wanted to see it concentrated.
Like Abram, Bridges knocked around, first as a sailor, then as an
oil rigger, and finally as part of a San Francisco steel gang, unloading

--- Sayfa 109 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 103
heavy metal on the docks. Like Abram, he’d been beaten out of his
wages. He got beaten every day, in fact, just like every other long-
shoreman. The shipowners had multiple methods for keeping their
workers in line. Once, the San Francisco dockers had been among
the toughest  union men in the country, but the company had broken
them back in 1919, herding them into the “Blue Book,” a company
collective in which the CEO effectively served as union boss, negoti-
ating with himself. The bosses thought they were being kind. So did
Abram. To him, such arrangements seemed like the “reconciliation”
promised by Christianity, the solution at last to the old problem of
labor and capital. The laws of property obtained—was it not the
company’s right to hire and fire at will?—but  were softened, in the
minds of Blue Book believers, by the company’s voluntary decision to
treat its employees not as hostile contractors but as children. That
made sense to Abram, who divided the world between big men and
little men and preferred the company of the former.
By 1933, the “children,” the workers, ate—that is,  earned—only
if they could survive the  shape-up, the  speed-up, and the straw boss.
The  shape-up began before dawn, in San Francisco, Portland, Seattle.
Along the Embarcadero, the long curving cobblestoned street between
the Bay City and its  eighty-two piers, 4,000 men gathered in the fog
and the dark, hoping to be picked for one of fifteen hundred jobs. They
jostled for a place close to the front of the crowd and puff ed themselves
up to look thick and strong even if they hadn’t eaten in days. They felt,
more than one man would remember, like whores trying to look
pretty. The  picker—the pimp—was called the straw boss. If you
wanted to be chosen, you promised him a part of your wages. And if he
gave you a job, you might work for four hours or twenty-four. You
might work with a gang or with a small crew, too few men for the task.
That was the  speed-up: the job didn’t go faster; you did. Longshoremen
were not a delicate breed, but they collapsed with exhaustion and some
dropped dead, their heart muscles bursting. Say a word about what you
saw around you, and you  were gone. Silence was golden. For the com-
pany, that is. In 1933 it shaved a dime off wages, and the Blue Book
“union” accepted the loss as the cost of harmony.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
104 | J E F F S H A R L E T
But a few men didn’t, and that summer, emboldened by FDR’s
New Deal, they organized. By spring of 1934 they were talking
strike. In May it sparked: first in Seattle, where longshoremen bat-
tled deputized vigilantes, took their riot clubs away from them, and
sent five to the hospital; then in San Francisco, where police shot a
twenty-year-old kid in the heart as he led a striker’s charge just hours
after joining the  union. There was something almost quixotic in the
first responses of the owners: in San Francisco, shippers trolled fra-
ternity  houses for the state’s best young men, who considered a few
days of heavy labor the duty of gentlemen, and the Berkeley football
coach recruited three squads of big-shouldered boys from the Golden
Bears to join down-on-their-luck white-collar workers on a floating
barracks for strikebreakers, a ship called the Diana Dollar.
Abram followed a  teeth-rattling roller coaster of news for months,
as the papers reported one day a red tide rising and the next labor
peace in the offing. Neither story was true. The army of strikers
grew larger and larger, bakers and cooks and waiters and even the
proud and conservative Teamsters swelling the dockers’ ranks.
No peace was coming. “Riot Expected,” declared the papers in
one of their grimmer moods. The Chamber of Commerce drafted a
declaration and put it on the front page of the Chronicle: “American
principles” vs. “un-American radicalism.” The chamber stood for
“free labor,” for the “American Plan,” for the “right to work.” Lose
San Francisco, and Seattle and Portland would fall like dominoes.
“The winning of the strike means the abandoning of control by pri-
vate owners over their own property,” declared the columnist Chapin
Hall. “San Francisco is the real seat of war and right nobly is she
standing up to the firing line.”
Seven hundred policemen in dark blue patrolled the waterfront
on foot and in black cars and on high chestnut  horses. Twice that
number and more picketed or searched for strikebreakers. The mid-
dle class began contemplating  last-minute vacations. The wives of
the wealthy bunkered up at the  Union Club, where Abram led prayer
meetings for businessmen. As the blue tear gas sent tendrils up the
hill, they must have felt frustrated by his optimistic lessons in biblical

--- Sayfa 111 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 105
capitalism. Scripture has much to say about honest dealing and even
more about handling the heathen, but not once does it mention orga-
nized labor. Kenneth Kingsbury, the president of the Standard Oil of
California (and later a member of Abram’s movement), peered out of
the club’s windows one day and saw pickets peering back; he pan-
icked. A sign of the apocalypse, Kingsbury instructed a federal man
to write his employers in Washington, was that Kenneth Kingsbury
could not leave the club to hail a cab.
On July 3, the Industrial Association of San Francisco resolved to
open the port by force. Mayor Angelo Rossi, a florist by trade, did
not stop them. At 1:30 p.m. the steel doors of Pier 38 rolled up, and
five trucks full of goods from the moribund ships in the harbor rolled
out, police cruisers behind and alongside them. Driving the trucks
were not ordinary strikebreakers but business executives, “key men,”
in Abram’s vernacular. Young James A. Folger of Folger’s Coffee
took the lead. A crowd of 5,000 pickets watched without making a
sound. The businessmen raced to a warehouse four blocks inland and
unloaded: birdseed, coffee, and tires. They went back for more. The
strikers looked on. No songs, no chants, no stones. Silent witness to
the labor of businessmen. This was the story the papers told when
Abram opened their pages on the Fourth of July 1935, his twentieth
anniversary in “the land of the Bible unchained.”
Did Folger and his 700 bodyguards in blue think, for just a mo-
ment, that peace was at hand? A police captain with gold braid
gleaming on his shoulder, riding on the running board of a police
cruiser with his revolver in the air, shouted, “The port is open!”—
and gave the strikers the signal for which they had waited. They
roared and attacked with cobblestones ripped from the street and
bricks and stones, with clubs they tore from policemen’s hands and
with wooden shafts they hurled like spears. The police opened fire
into the crowd.
And with that, the first fight was  over—thousands melted into
alleys, dragging the wounded with them. Blood pooled between the
cobblestones. The air smelled acrid. At night the blue and green
lights of helpless ships blinked from the bay and went unanswered.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
106 | J E F F S H A R L E T
The pool halls, the bars, the tattoo parlors, the brothels,  were silent.
Vice had been conquered, the Christian city on a hill defended from
the barbarians.
There  were not many picnics on the Fourth. A train burned and
thirteen policemen’s wives  were given reason to curse the red bas-
tards. The governor said troops  were coming. The commanders of
the Guard strategized.
“My men . . . will talk with bayonets,” said their general.
This was not what Abram had dreamed of. Where  were his key
men, his top men, his up and out? Out of the city, hiding in the
hills.
The next morning, the police went forward in waves, rows of
Martians in khaki gas masks and black helmets, revolvers drawn. A
few blocks from the water, on Rincon Hill, a knoll tall as a  four- story
building, a crowd of longshoremen gathered. From widemouthed
riot guns police thumped out gas shells that sliced through dry brown
grass and sparked it like tinder. Strikers scorched their fingers on the
shells and hurled them back down the hill. Blue smoke from the gas,
black and gray from the grass, an oily stink that pushed the armies
away from one another. Up the knoll went the strikers. Policemen in
ripped uniforms, blood dripping from facial wounds, squinted and
aimed and unloaded revolvers and rifles. A striker crested and fell,
shot like a turkey. A  tear-gas salesman, deputized, cheered. The smoke
stank of vomit and gunfire. Airplanes dipped and whined, dropping
messages to police command. Horse hooves thudded; out of the blue
smoke went the charge,  horses snorting and shrieking.
The strikers  were ready with slingshots: two poles stretching a
car tire inner tube hurled a  three-pound stone fast and hard 400 feet,
or less should a policeman agree to catch it with his belly. Back down
the hill went the  horses.
Up went another charge, replied to with another volley. The po-
lice charged again, and this time they took a wall, but the men be-
hind it had gone missing. So it went, charges and stone volleys and
feints and men vanishing like quicksilver.
The police found them. They blocked off  both ends of the street

--- Sayfa 113 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 107
in front of the  union hall. A plainclothesman drove into the crowd,
stepped out of his car, and opened up with a shotgun held at the hip,
and in front of the hall he brought down three men. One pulled him-
self up and looked at the crowd with blood in his mouth, blood in his
eyes, and then his head dropped and his jaw cracked like an egg.
At least  thirty-three more nursed gunshot wounds that night.
They were laid in rows in the union hall or hidden in bedrooms by
wives and mothers and brokenhearted fathers who boiled water and
pried bullets out with thick fingers while their men screamed and the
neighbors cried. Down on the docks a boat landed, and into the city
marched soldiers, the first of 5,000. A sharp wind snapped the fog,
the gas, the smoke up into the atmosphere, but the smell of violence
lingered.
“I walked down Market that night,” wrote the novelist Tillie Ol-
sen, then  twenty-one-year-old Tillie Lerner fresh from Nebraska, in
one of her fi rst pieces of published prose. “All life seemed blown out
of the street; the few people hurrying by looked hunted, tense, ex-
pectant of anything. Cars moved past as if fleeing. And a light, inde-
scribably green and ominous, was cast over everything, in great
shifting shadows. And down the street the trucks rumbled. Drab
colored, with boys sitting on them like corpses sitting and not mov-
ing, holding guns stiffly, staring with wide frightened eyes.”6
That was what Abram didn’t understand: the fear of death and
the fear of sin, real sin, killing a brother or a sister. He was as de-
lighted by the prospect of his death, whatever hour God should ap-
point for it, as Abigail Hutchinson had been. Compassionate in the
abstract, he thought of the masses as just that, blocks to be arranged
neatly. The troops that moved in on San Francisco that night had no
feelings with which Abram would have been concerned; they were
expressing the will of God, which to him was order. After the Strike
of ’34, Abram’s allegiance would be forever given to the men who
commanded soldiers, not the soldiers themselves. As for those de-
fined as the enemy, they were not even human. Their grief never
registered.
A few days later, men and women marched tens of thousands

--- Sayfa 114 ---
108 | J E F F S H A R L E T
strong five miles up Market Street behind two  black-draped flatbed
trucks. The trucks bore coffins and mountains of flowers, like can-
vases by Diego Rivera set in slow motion. A band played Beethoven.
Nobody said a word. “ ‘Life,’ the capitalist papers marveled,” wrote
Tillie Olsen, “ ‘Life stopped and stared.’ ”
It was incomparable drama, simultaneously staged and real. A
ritual, yes, the pro cession of the plain folk, the march of the mar-
tyrs, a script older than Christendom. Bridges, surely aware of the
moment’s theatrical power, nonetheless choked up when his turn to
speak came. Not a  well-timed sob but  wide-eyed,  grief-stricken si-
lence. He off ered no inspiration. None was needed. The funeral was
religion: not just solidarity, workers  arm-in- arm, but communion, a
coming together. The march up Market Street was the embodiment
of faith, not as a metaphor but as a new fact in the American story.
One Big  Union on the move.
The strike went on, but the shippers  were defeated by the time
the coffins went into the ground. Their old beliefs could not com-
pete.  Management—capital—would require a new faith if it was to
survive.
The Idea, Part 2
The strike of 1934 scared Abram into launching the movement that
would become the vanguard of elite fundamentalism, and elite fun-
damentalism took as its first challenge the destruction of militant
labor. Destruction was not the word Christians used, however. They
called it cooperation.
The April after the strike, Harry Bridges traveled to Seattle to
convene a meeting of a new federation of maritime workers, with
“maritime” broadly defined to include pretty much anyone within
driving distance of the ocean. For a brief moment that year, he came
close to turning the old Wobbly dream of One Big  Union into a politi-
cal reality. But it wouldn’t last. Indeed, the revived Wobbly dream
began unraveling right there in Seattle, where Abram finally plucked

--- Sayfa 115 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 109
up the theocratic strand and began pulling it taut into the twentieth
century.
That April, Abram had been having dreams of his own, unpleas-
ant ones. Subversives stalked his sleep, hammers and sickles danced
like sugar plum fairies, a Soviet agent “of Swedish nationality” as-
signed to  Seattle—probably the brawny and bellicose  six-footer from
the Seamen’s Union whom Bridges had tapped to lead the maritime
federation—roared his nightmare defiance of that which was godly.
One night Abram could sleep no longer. He sat up in bed and re-
solved to wait for God. At 1:30 a.m., He appeared: a blinding light
and a voice. Abram listened and took notes. “The plan had been un-
folded and the green light given.”7
A few hours later, Abram dressed and put on his coat and hurried
to downtown Seattle for the morning rush, where he waited for God
to bring him the means to put his plan into action. On a busy street
corner, a local developer of means hailed him. “Hey, Vereide, glad to
see you!”
The developer, a former major named Walter Douglass who still
preferred to be addressed by his military title, cut straight to the
matter on both men’s minds: “Where is this country going to, any-
way?”
“You ought to know,” said Abram.
Indeed, the major did: “The bow-wows,” he harrumphed, “and
the worse of it is you fellows aren’t doing anything about it.”
“What do you mean?”
“Well,” growled Douglass, “here you have your churches and ser-
vices and  merry-go-round of activities, but as far as any actual impact
and strategy for turning the tide is concerned, you’re not making a
dent.”
Abram could not have agreed more. While San Francisco had
boiled, Abram had developed the prototype of the Idea, preaching a
manly Christ to a group of business executives who had no time for
hymnals and sob sisters and soup kitchens and the Jesus of long eye-
lashes beloved by old ladies. Jesus, for such men, “must be disentan-
gled from church organization,” Abram had discovered. In the 1930s,

--- Sayfa 116 ---
110 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the meaning of that was plain: a rejection of the “Social Gospel” of
good works for the poor in favor of an unhindered Christ defined by
his muscles, a  laissez-faire Jesus proclaimed not by spindly necked
clergymen bleating from seminary, but by men like Major Douglass,
officers who commanded troops who brought order to cities.
“You ought to get after fellows like me,” Douglass told Abram.
He was standing in just the right spot for chest  puffi  ng—behind him
towered the city’s Douglass Building.
These  were the words Abram had been waiting for, in the place,
he was certain, to which God had guided him. He revealed the plan
God had given him just hours earlier that morning: the Idea. He kept
secret the bright light, the voice, the automatic writing in the dark
hours. Men like Major Douglass, men of affairs, would not under-
stand. But Major Douglass got the Idea.
“We are where we are,” Abram  said—on the brink of anarchy,
both men thought—“because of what we are.” By that he meant sin-
ful, only his concept of sin was not so much concerned with immo-
rality as with “duty.” “Top men” had a responsibility to do for God
what lesser men  couldn’t. Their failure to take on this burden had led
the nation to its terrible position. “Obedience,” concluded Abram, is
“the way to power.” God wanted his chosen to  rule—to “serve,” as
Abram liked to say. Were men such as Major Douglass ready to re-
port for duty?
Douglass stared at the  silver-haired preacher. A “piercing gaze,”
Abram recalled. “Vereide,” he said, “if you will settle down in this
city and do a job like that, I will back you.”
Abram demanded specifics. Douglass delivered: a suite of offi  ces
in the building behind Abram and a check to get him started.
“That’s tangible,” said Abram.
Then they set off together to see William St. Clair, one of the
wealthiest men in Seattle. There’s a whiff of The Wizard of Oz in
Abram’s later retelling of this story, the major and the minister pop-
ping lightbulbs over their fedoras on the Seattle street corner and
rushing on to the man who would bring it all together, but that is,
apparently, what happened: St. Clair, president of Frederick Nelson,

--- Sayfa 117 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 111
the biggest department store in the Northwest, cleared his offi  ce and
insisted the two men sit down. “We told him the story,” Abram re-
membered. “And he, too, looked searchingly at me and remarked,
‘That’s constructive.’ ”
St. Clair made a list of nineteen businessmen and invited them to
breakfast at one of the city’s finest hotels. St. Clair certainly didn’t
choose on the basis of Christian morality. Of the nineteen, only one
was a churchgoer, and he pointed out at the first meeting that the
other men there knew him mainly as a creature of cocktail lounges
and poker tables. Among the nineteen sat a lumber baron, a gas ex-
ecutive, a railroad executive, a hardware magnate, a candy impresa-
rio, and two future mayors of Seattle. “Management and labor got
together,” Abram would later claim, but there  were no union repre-
sentatives at the meeting, where nineteen businessmen plus Abram
agreed to use the “Bible as blueprint” with which to take back first
the city, then the state, and perhaps the nation from the grip of god-
less or ga nized labor.
Their first success soon followed. “One morning,” remembered
Abram, “a labor leader, who had been a disturbing factor in the com-
munity, was seen at the table.” Abram never fails to provide full
names and corporate titles for the management side of his equation,
but his first convert from labor is known only as “Jimmy.” Jimmy
came back for more meetings, sitting quietly in the corner and lis-
tening as the businessmen testified to one another about the Bible’s
transforming power in their lives. So Abram took Jimmy aside and
had a talk with him about his responsibilities. Jimmy had been a
leader in the “big strike.” There, at the breakfast table, sat many men
in whom Jimmy’s actions had provoked “bitter feelings.” One man,
in fact, had been burdened with leading the industrialists’ committee
that organized management’s fight against the strike. Jimmy had now
taken meals with this man but had done nothing to make amends.
Jimmy remained “unreconciled.”
The next week, before a group of executives that now numbered
seventy-five, Jimmy  rose and spoke for the first time. “You fellows
know me.” He nodded toward one businessman. “I picketed your

--- Sayfa 118 ---
112 | J E F F S H A R L E T
plant.” He looked toward another. “I closed your factory for months.”
He pointed to a third: “I hated you.”
But with Abram’s help, Jimmy had discovered “how absolutely
honest” these men he had hated  were. They were humble. They were
sincere. In fact, Jimmy realized, if they could bring more business-
men in on the Idea, “there would be no need for a labor  union.” This,
understandably, had been a bit of a shock to Jimmy. He had gone to
his knees in his home, he told the men, and begged God’s forgiveness
“for the spirit I had been manifesting.” And now he was ready to ask
their forgiveness. He had been a thorn in capital’s flesh, he said, but
he would prick no more.
Jimmy sat down. The room was silent. Then “the sturdy, rugged
capitalist who had been chairman of the employer’s committee in the
big strike,” Abram  observed—this probably refers to the “Citizens
Emergency Committee,” headed by the aptly named John Prim8—
stood at the head of the table and walked over to Jimmy without a
word. Worker looked up at boss. Boss glared down at worker. The
businessman let drop a heavy hand on Jimmy’s shoulder.
“Jimmy,” he said, “on this basis we go on together.”
In the years to come, Abram would tell polished versions of this
story hundreds of times, in dozens of countries, to CEOs and sena-
tors and dictators, a parable of “cooperation” between management
and labor, the threat to Christ and capital subdued, order restored.
That was where it began, he’d say: Jimmy the agitator confessing his
sins before a room full of businessmen, God’s chosen men. This was
“Unit Number One” of what Abram called his “new world order.”
Abram was a kind of artist, just discovering in 1935 that there
were other men and women with powers like his, feelings like
his—“American,” he would say, “terrified,” we might  translate—with
whom he could join forces. Together they would smooth the dream.
They claimed their religion was very old, “first century Christianity,”
but in their hearts they understood that it was a new faith, a new
politics. Its conservatism was not vestigial; what made it thrilling

--- Sayfa 119 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 113
was that the new religion made conservatism forceful again. It was
not just a veneer for capitalism, nor simply a vehicle for power. It was
a different way of wielding power. It shrugged off old inhibitions. It
scoffed at liberal restraints and ignored traditional conservative res-
ervations. It was Rotary Club dada, surrealism for businessmen from
Seattle. It was the Word made fresh for the industrial age, vital and
strong.
Just like that of Edwards. Just like that of Finney. But Finney had
been followed by Sunday, who’d made the Word muscular yet vul-
gar. In 1935, Abram breathed life into a faith for the elite, an Ameri-
can fundamentalism made up of both Edwards’s “heart” religion and
Finney’s permanent revival. He would write to his comrades with
exhilaration when he thought a “key man” was beginning to “catch”
the Idea. The religion Abram rebelled against was a set of ethics, a
rule book for women. He aspired instead to spread what he would
come to call a contagion, passed from key man to key man, the
avant-garde of American fundamentalism.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
5.
T H E F W O R D
T
he defenders of the status quo,” Henry Kissinger wrote in
his doctoral dissertation, published as A World Betrayed in 1957,
“. . . tend to begin by treating revolutionary power as if its protesta-
tions were merely tactical.” That this comment is suffi  ciently ambig-
uous to be worthy of the slippery career that followed it takes nothing
from the weight of its insight, and, more, its double meaning.
Kissinger himself provides a perfect illustration. Like most brilliant
political players, he became both a defender of the status quo and a
revolutionary, a champion of American hegemony where it already
existed and a clever tactician of revolution on behalf of that power
where it had not yet been achieved. The vast array of actors that com-
prise American fundamentalism do not include any single tactician of
Kissinger’s caliber, and yet they have, as a movement, functioned in
just such a fashion, building on the foundation of American Protes-
tantism’s traditional power to strategize both its expansion and, in
true revolutionary fashion, its transformation.1
In one sense, the men Abram Vereide gathered for bacon and eggs
and Bible were defenders of the status quo. They sought not so much
spiritual sustenance as stability, an end to the Depression’s hurdy-
gurdy years. Men, women, and children dwindled into thin and hope-
less creatures, listless and  dull-witted and  red-eyed. Then would come
a strike or a street fight or a mob that had decided to take vegetables
from a moving train, or to march on city hall, and out came the bulls
like it was Pamplona. And there  were words in the air, and a family

--- Sayfa 121 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 115
cold and huddled around a radio, heads bent toward the voice of a man
such as Father Coughlin, the “radio priest” from Detroit, the Shrine of
the Little Flower, preaching and ranting to more millions than the
president himself some eve nings. What did he want? He was no com-
munist, that was for certain. He called them the “Red Fog.” But he was
no friend of things as they were, either. He was a furious man, his voice
dulcet but his words full of hatred for the capitalists who had lined
their silk pockets. Coughlin, as much as or more than the communists,
seemed like he might call for blood one day, and soon.2 It was against
that threat, as much as communism, that Abram schemed.
Abram’s men did not consider themselves blameless. But they
believed their folly didn’t lie in the economics of do- as-you-will that
had brought the nation and the city to those days of breadlines and
street battles. Their sin was slippage. They had enriched their coffers
at the expense of their souls. Money was like power: Those who had
it should not speak of it, concern themselves with it, acknowledge its
existence as a factor. To do so was worse than bad manners; it was
blasphemy, an attempt to refute God’s ordering of economic affairs.
So they sought a return to that order. To reclaim it, they had to
take steps they had never taken before. One of these was reading the
Bible, a book that for most of them was long in the past, of interest
only to grandmothers; now, they were determined to find in it a
message for men such as themselves. They promised one another that
they would study at least a chapter a day. Understanding was another
matter. The churches had failed. They no longer taught truth but in-
sisted on metaphor. The best pulpits were manned, if that word
could be used, by foppish intellectuals who debated like Jews, sifting
sentences like sand for grains of meaning. A useless endeavor. The
ocean was crashing upon them. They needed rocks to stand on. They
needed marching orders. “Men who did not want to be preached at”
turned to one another for confirmation of their spiritual gleanings,
“teachings practical in business, government, and social life,” wrote
Abram. “We discovered that, as the eye is made for light and the ear
for sound, so the human personality is made for God. We discovered
that sanity and normalcy are to be  Christ-like.”

--- Sayfa 122 ---
116 | J E F F S H A R L E T
That summer Abram took a core of Christ-committed  leaders—
a railroad man and a lumberman and a banker, a car dealer, a cloth-
ier, and a navy commander—on a retreat to the Canyon Creek
Lodge, alongside a river amid the peaks of the Cascades. He gathered
his troops around a tall stone hearth and led them in a “spiritual in-
ventory,” each man taking turns listing aloud that which troubled
their city, their state, their corporation. Hunger, pride, whores,
Harry Bridges, booze, degenerates, sloth, corruption, the Team-
sters. Women with short hair. Communism in the colleges. Sailors, a
dirty, immoral lot. Pessimism. Racy movies. The Soviet Union. The
color red, in general, the “red tide,” the “red menace,” the “red-hued
progeny” of Stalin. Also brown, for Brownshirts, a force so vital, so
strong, so bursting with muscle—could America possibly compete
with the fabulous rising of Italy, Germany, Austria? Round the room
the men went, moaning their fears and their losses and their fail-
ures. They fell to their knees, old men’s joints creaking, overwhelmed
by the godlessness surrounding them, and, yes, they confessed,
within them. “Utter helplessness,” Abram recorded.
They had been reading the Bible for months, and most must have
known its darkest corners, the truth of an angry God not as a bearded
man in heaven shaking an ancient finger but more like the wilderness
growling in the dark at the edge of the city. “He was like a bear wait-
ing for me,” warned Jeremiah, “like a lion in secret places.” To them
the thud of the billy club and the shriek of the gas canister  were the
sounds not of repression but of Christian civilization making its
last stand. The tribes of labor  were whooping. If history taught any
lesson, it was that no Custer could save society from the  coarse-clothed
savages. “Subversive forces had taken over,” observed Abram. “What
could we do?”
It was at this moment on the edge of hysteria when a young law-
yer named Arthur B. Langlie, kneeling among the big men, discov-
ered his calling. A flat-faced,  blue-eyed Scandinavian like Abram,
Langlie was  thirty- five years old that July, known equally for his
wide smile and his zealous religion, a  sharp-nosed teetotaling man
who could work a party with just a glass of water in his hand.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 117
He rose from his knees. “Men, it can be done,” he said. “I am
ready to let God use me.”
Abram’s brotherhood was ready to use him, too. On the spot one
rich man said he would finance Langlie’s crusade, and others followed
with promises of time and connections. Langlie would be their key
man. Abram’s heart must have been pounding. This was what God
had shown him. The brothers gripped hands in a circle before the fire-
place and sang a song in the mountains for the city they meant to
save.
Faith of our fathers, living still
In spite of dungeon, fire, and sword:
Oh, how our hearts beat high with joy . . .
“There,” Abram would declare, “was born a new regime.” It was
the beginning of the movement of elite fundamentalism that would,
in the 1980s, come to be known as “the Family.”
That meeting also marked a turning point in Langlie’s long and
successful political career. Langlie came to the prayer movement as a
representative of a brotherhood of young businessmen across the
state of Washington called the New Order of Cincinnatus. Twelve
hundred strong, the Cincinnatans presented a “New Order” of moral
and economic force in opposition to FDR’s New Deal. Younger than
Abram’s establishment figures, the Order ran candidates for offi  ce
under the banner of the ancient Roman general Cincinnatus, sum-
moned from his farm five centuries before Christ to assume dictato-
rial power over a populace too exhausted by infighting to make
decisions for itself.
When several of Langlie’s Cincinnatans showed up at the city
comptroller’s office to register, they came flanked by men of the
Order wearing identical white shirts, joining a rainbow of like-
minded lovers of discipline and  intimidation—not just Mussolini’s
Blackshirts and Hitler’s Brownshirts but the Greenshirts of the

--- Sayfa 124 ---
118 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Romanian Legion of the Archangel Michael, the Blueshirts of Ire-
land, and, in America, the Silver Shirts, the initials of which, SS,
deliberately chosen, justified the flamboyant color. The men of the
Order gave themselves military ranks and considered adding a sieg
heil–style salute to their public image, but decided that would be “too
fascist.” The Order’s first “National Commander,” an excitable former
Republican operative, saw models for such qualities in the strong
men across the Atlantic and the bureaucrats who made their govern-
ments run like Henry Ford’s assembly lines. The Order craved effi-
ciency. One of its first goals after its formation in 1933 was a Washington
state constitutional convention at which local police forces would
be eliminated and replaced with troopers trained at retooled state
colleges.3
Langlie never offi  cially joined the Order, but he became its chief
candidate. The year of the big strike, the Order took control of Seat-
tle’s city council by invoking  middle-class fears of a Wobbly insurrec-
tion. Poverty, it maintained, was part of the natural way of things.
The Order had two solutions to economic malaise: slash taxes and
attack vice. As councilman, Langlie purged the city’s police depart-
ment, which routinely ignored Sunday liquor sales, Chinese gam-
bling halls, and the prostitution that prospered in a port city like
Seattle. He then turned his ax toward the fire department (poor
moral specimens) and public school teachers (indoctrinating the
youth with godless notions). With his allies in the Order, he suc-
ceeded in passing a bud get so brutal that the city’s conservative Re-
publican mayor, whose first act in office had been to literally lead a
police charge against the previous year’s strikers, vetoed it as con-
temptuous of human suffering. So Langlie decided to depose him.
The Order’s rise won attention as far away as Manhattan, where a
titillated New York Times thrilled to the movement’s youthful fervor.4
In Abram’s telling, Langlie stood, pledged himself, and simply
ascended to public office. Langlie had in fact taken his city council seat
without the trouble of an election; his opponent, wary of a public fight
with the Order, simply stepped down and appointed Langlie to re-
place him. But despite the Order’s  white- shirted military manner and

--- Sayfa 125 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 119
the financial backing of Abram’s brotherhood, his first bid for the
mayoralty failed. The Democrat who’d been ousted in 1934, a flam-
boyantly corrupt opportunist named John Dore, charged Langlie with
running as the candidate of a “secret society.” Dore wound up his
campaign with a  ninety-minute speech denouncing Langlie as a fascist
so dangerous that his own  almost-open corruption was preferable.
The city that had thrown Dore out in a special election only a year
before agreed with that diagnosis: Democrats, radicals, and even Re-
publicans united to return the crook to power.
“The insincerity of [Dore] is almost unquestionable,” the novelist
Mary McCarthy observed.  Double-chinned Dore perched his spec-
tacles on the end of his nose and reveled in his royal belly and, as a
sign of his high regard for the common man, occasionally went down
to the docks and passed out glasses of beer to incoming sailors. As far
as conservatives  were concerned, he might as well have grown a mus-
tache and changed his name to Stalin. But Mary McCarthy under-
stood that the “Soviet of Washington,” as one wag dubbed the state,
was more like a vaudeville routine than a government on the verge of
a worker’s utopia. “The state of Washington is in ferment,” she wrote
in The Nation; “it is wild, comic, theatrical, dishonest, disorganized,
hopeful; but it is not revolutionary.”5
Dubbed “Labor’s Mayor” by the conservative press, Dore was
really the  right-wing Teamster chief Dave Beck’s man. “Dave Beck
runs this town, and I tell you it’s a good thing he does,” Dore de-
clared as he squared off with Langlie again in 1938, a bald confession
of fealty to bossism. The race garnered broad attention, “a mayoralty
election of national significance,” in the words of the New York Times.6
At stake seemed to be the future of organized labor in the North-
west, which, as one of the labor movement’s strongholds, was a
bellwether for the nation. Dore stood for Beck, and Beck stood for
the old,  management-friendly craft  unions of the American Federa-
tion of Labor. His opponent on the Left, Lieutenant Governor Vic
Meyers, championed the newborn Congress of Industrial Organiza-
tions, an alliance of more militant,  pro-worker unions. And out in
right field stood Langlie, so far from friendly to any labor  union that

--- Sayfa 126 ---
120 | J E F F S H A R L E T
even the rabidly right-wing Los Angeles Times tagged him as “ultra-
conservative.”7
Lieutenant Governor Meyers, the most  well-liked man in the
state, should have won. But for once the Left did itself in with a sense
of humor. Meyers had entered public service in 1932 as a joke. A
beaming,  mustache-twirling master of ceremonies at the city’s most
fashionable nightclub, he’d campaigned at the head of an oompah
band, wearing the uniform of a circus drum major. If elected, he’d
promised, he’d put a pretty girl hostess on every streetcar.
Such was the state of the  union in 1932—its disgust with the big
business  do-nothingism of Herbert Hoover—that Meyers and his
trombone campaign marched into office on FDR’s coattails. By 1938,
though, after years of strikes and police violence, Meyers had grown
serious about doing something for working people. Unfortunately,
he still loved a good costume, and he campaigned dressed as Ma-
hatma Gandhi. Even Harry Bridges, Meyers’s chief backer, couldn’t
make the bandleader look like a serious candidate.
So Dore and Meyers canceled each other out, and between them
slipped the winner, Arthur B. Langlie. The verdict was in: neither
the AFL nor the CIO represented the future. “Good government,” as
Langlie called his platform of bud get slashing and punishing moral
rectitude, trumped labor. “Seattle Deals Radicals a Blow,” declared
the Los Angeles Times. “Whole Left Wing Beaten,” amplified the New
York Times.8
What did “good government” really mean? Langlie and his broth-
erhood promised an end to political corruption. (There’s no evidence
that Langlie ever even took a drink, much less a bribe.) The days of
“honest graft” were over, at least for a while. But seen from another
perspective—that of ordinary citizens without access to Langlie and
Abram’s elite  network—Langlie didn’t so much end corruption as
legalize it. Langlie  wasn’t opposed to a government organized around
the interests of the greedy; he just didn’t want to have to break the
law to serve them. His kind of good government meant deals for
your friends but not envelopes full of cash. He didn’t rule through
fear or finesse but through prayer. If Abram and Langlie could help it,

--- Sayfa 127 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 121
there would be no bullets, no bribes. Instead, there would be a circle
of men listening to Jesus by listening to one another’s remarkably
similar views. It was the first fulfillment of Abram’s dream of gov-
ernment by God.
And although no one could see it in 1938, the shape of the Langlie
campaign—the New Order of Cincinnatus as his political comman-
dos, Abram’s  God-picked elites, by then coming to be known as “the
Fellowship,” as his brain trust, and Abram’s old network of housewives
transformed into “prayer group” precincts for  Langlie—was a bell-
wether indeed. Not of labor’s  future—that was already  eroding—but
of prayer breakfast politics in the Christian nation to come.
“We work with power where we can, build new power where we
can’t.” These words belong to Doug Coe, who seized the Fellowship’s
top spot in a succession struggle following Abram’s death in 1969 and
began transforming it into what I eventually encountered as the Family.
His blunt formulation of the Fellowship’s political theology is as much
in play now as it was in 1969, and, indeed, in 1938, when Abram and
his quiet gathering of businessmen staked Langlie to the beginning of
his career. On the face of it, such words seem brutal, a foreshadowing
of revolution—or counterrevolution, as conservatives like to say.
And yet  Langlie- as-mayor, then governor, demonstrated the Fel-
lowship’s subtler ambitions. Theocratic by instinct and fascinated by
fascism according to the fashion of the times, the Fellowship never
molted into  Europe an- style authoritarianism. Its most radical goals
were (and remain)  long-term, its  method—the  man- method, Abram
called  it—painstaking, dependent not on mass conversion but on
individual assimilation into polite fundamentalism. “The more im-
personal our order becomes,” observed Theodor Adorno in a study
of 1930s fundamentalism, “the more important personality becomes
as an ideology.” Abram’s  man-method was a perfect illustration of
this truth, but whereas Adorno, a refugee from Nazi Germany, saw
this trend as leading only to populist demagogues, Abram recognized
that “personality” in place of ideology could also preserve elite power

--- Sayfa 128 ---
122 | J E F F S H A R L E T
in an age of mass movements. Good manners mattered to the immi-
grant preacher; the men he drew to him tended to be discreet, pol-
ished characters. They were fundamentalism’s avant-garde, its most
radical thinkers, but to all appearances they were creatures of the
country club, golf course crusaders.
Langlie epitomized the breed. In 1935, at the Canyon Creek
Lodge, he rose from his knees as a “God-led” politician, literally a
theocrat, and he campaigned as a  modern-day Cincinnatus. As gov-
ernor, he attempted (and failed) to pass a law giving him the power
to suspend the  law—almost all of it—if he desired.
So Langlie accepted the constraints of democracy as he found
them. He did what business asked: purged welfare rolls, abolished
guaranteed wage laws, denounced Democrats as un-American. In
1942, he investigated the possibility of using martial law to suppress
organized labor, but when his advisers told him it would be unconsti-
tutional, he settled for ordinary strikebreaking.9 He governed, in
other words, as a  right-wing Republican.
And yet the Fellowship was attracted to a kind of soft fascism. In
1932, Abram took as a Bible student Henry Ford. By then, the auto-
maker was a wizened old leather strop of a man, wary of controversy.
He had been the American publisher of the notoriously fraudulent
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, an anti-Semitic fantasia concocted in czar-
ist Rus sia to justify pogroms against Jews, and the author of The Inter-
national Jew, a book many Nazis would later credit with awakening
their Aryan  anti-Semitism. During the previous decade, historians
suspect, he’d illegally financed Adolf Hitler. But it was not just na-
tional socialism’s bigotry that Ford supported, nor even mainly that.
What Ford, inventor of the assembly line, loved above all was effi-
ciency. Even his war of words against the Jews had been in the inter-
ests of standardization, the purging of “others” from the American
scene. And yet, in 1932, Ford wanted certain details of his campaign
for American purity to disappear. He wanted to sell cars to Jews. He
was in need of a makeover, a quick bath in the Blood of the Lamb.
Ford’s wife heard Abram speak in Detroit and insisted that he
meet with her husband, no doubt guessing that Abram’s theology of

--- Sayfa 129 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 123
biblical capitalism would sit well with the tycoon, an eccentric reli-
gious thinker who had been raised on populist American fundamen-
talism. Abram and Ford traded Bible verses through a series of meetings
in Ford’s offices, and then Ford invited Abram to his home in Sud-
bury, Massachusetts. “They  were together two days,” rec ords Abram’s
biographer Grubb, “[Ford] unloading about spiritual, intellectual,
and business problems, and Abram seeking to give the answer for
himself and the nation.” Abram thought Ford “befuddled,” full of
half- baked religious notions gathered from partial readings of Hindu
texts and theosophy. “The question was,” Abram thought, “How
could he be untangled?”
Their meetings continued in Michigan. Abram was drawn like a
moth to the great man’s  wealth—to the possibility that Ford might
put his tremendous worldly resources behind a campaign for govern-
ment by God. But he was frustrated by Ford’s failure to settle on one
simple fundamentalist explanation of life and the universe, until, at
their final meeting, Ford finally shouted, “Vereide, I’ve got it! I’ve got
it! I found the release that you spoke of. I’ve made my surrender. The
only thing that matters is God’s will.”
But Ford continued to see divine will best expressed in German
fascism. As Hitler’s power grew, Ford became more comfortable
expressing his admiration. It was mutual; the Führer hung a portrait
of Ford behind his desk and told the industrialist, on a visit Ford paid
to Nazi Germany, that national socialism’s accomplishments were
simply an implementation of Ford’s vision.
That was a perspective that, unlike theosophy, gave Abram no
pause. Such was the nature of Abram’s ecumenicism. For Jews he felt
nothing, one way or the other, but he would no more discriminate
against an anti-Semite than against a Presbyterian. He welcomed the
vigor  anti-Semitism brought to his cause. After the war, another ma-
jor American fascist  sympathizer—Charles  Lindbergh—would pre-
side for a brief period over a prayer cell modeled on Abram’s original.
Lindbergh first came under FBI scrutiny, in fact, for his association
with a man who would become a stalwart of Abram’s inner circle and
a member of the board of the Fellowship, by then incorporated as

--- Sayfa 130 ---
124 | J E F F S H A R L E T
International Christian Leadership. Merwin K. Hart was an “alleged
promoter of the American Fascist movement,” according to FBI files,
and denounced publicly as a Nazi in all but name by Robert H. Jack-
son, the  FDR-era attorney general who went on to serve as a justice
of the Supreme Court and chief prosecutor at Nuremberg.
To Abram, Hart was a dapper habitué of New York’s blue blood
clubs, a crucial node in his network of top men. He was a recruiter;
operating out of the Empire State Building, he organized business
executives bent on breaking the spine of unionism into an organiza-
tion called the National Economic Council, and from those ranks he
selected men for the Fellowship whose devotion to the antilabor
cause was religious in intensity. Hart was Abram through a glass,
darkly: if Abram could not distinguish between men of power and
men of morals, Hart could not tell the difference between commu-
nists and Jews, who through “deceit” and “trickery,” he preached,
threatened the “complete destruction” of the American way of life.10
Then there  were the actual Nazis who would join Abram’s prayer
circles in the postwar years. But that story must wait until the next
chapter. To understand Abram’s weirdly ambivalent relationship with
fascism—to understand the uneasy echoes of the last century’s most
hateful ideology in contemporary American fundamentalism—we
must exhume an unlikely pair of “thinkers”: Frank Buchman and
Bruce Barton, two of the most influential hucksters of early  twentieth-
 century America.
Buchmanism
In 1935, Frank Buchman was at the height of his powers, a small,
well-nourished, and well- tailored man of no natural distinction, who
found himself touring the world in the company of kings and queens
and bright, young,  rosy-cheeked lads from Oxford and Cambridge
and Princeton. True, Buchman was banned from Princeton, where
as a Lutheran minister he had stalked students he thought eligible for
soul surgery, as he would come to call his variation on the  born- again

--- Sayfa 131 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 125
procedure; and Oxford University was contemplating legal measures
to stop him from using its name for his movement. He was then call-
ing his followers the “Oxford Group,” having discarded “First Cen-
tury Christian  Fellowship”—a name Abram would later  consider—as
perhaps boastful, not to mention inaccurate when applied to Buch-
man’s hundreds of thousands of twentieth-century devotees. “Oxford
Group,” though, was no more descriptive of the international circuit
of confessional “house parties” for the  well-to-do inspired by Buch-
man. He had not attended Oxford (or Cambridge, though he would
claim the latter in his Who’s Who biography). He was a graduate of
modest Muhlenberg College in what was then Pennsylvania coal
country.11
“Moral Re-Armament,” coined by Buchman as Europe entered
World War II, was the name that eventually stuck. Not quite an
organization—there were no dues or membership rolls—but less
democratic in spirit than a social movement, Moral  Re-Armament
deployed its military metaphors through Buchman’s  never-ending
lecture tour, propaganda campaigns, and the spiritual warfare prac-
ticed by his disciples in service of an ideology “Not Left, Not Right,
but Straight,” in the words of one of Buchman’s hagiographers.12
Moral  Re-Armament’s aims  were so broadly utopian as to be mean-
ingless, but in practice it served distinctly conservative purposes: the
preservation of caste. “There is tremendous power,” preached Buch-
man, “in a minority guided by God.”13
It is probably most accurate to name Buchman’s innovation as did
the papers of his day: Buchmanism. After all, it was Buchman’s
idea—later adapted and sharpened by Abram—that the mass evan-
gelism practiced by men such as Charles Finney and Billy Sunday
would never appeal to the “best people,” those whom the liquor
salesman’s son from Pennsburg, Pennsylvania, had dreamed of culti-
vating for Christ since his first job, running a home for troubled boys
in Philadelphia, had ended in abrupt dismissal.
The cause of Buchman’s firing is murky, as is the precise nature
of the charges leveled against him at Princeton. In the first case he
seems to have paid too little attention to the children’s needs, and in

--- Sayfa 132 ---
126 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the second, too much to the undergraduates. In particular, the uni-
versity’s president resented Buchman’s fascination with the sex lives
of young Princetonians. Buchman estimated that between 85 and 90
percent of all sin is sexual, and thus to him it was natural to encour-
age young men to confess theirs in detail.14 There is no evidence that
he took advantage of the information. He had kissed a girl once when
he was a boy, but thereafter lived as a sort of eunuch. In college his
nickname was “Kate,” and in the drama society he played mainly fe-
male roles. Many close to him thought it obvious that he inclined to-
ward the  best-looking men of the best universities, but in terms of
Christian conservatism and the anxieties that plague it today, he was
ahead of his time in the fury with which he denounced homosexual-
ity as a threat to civilization. Moreover, he was an exceedingly care-
ful student of the crisis: In a pamphlet titled Remaking Men, he
observed, “there are many who wear suede shoes who are not homo-
sexual, but in Europe and America the majority of homosexuals do.”
Also, Buchman declared, their favorite color is green.15
Buchman’s own eyes  were emerald, and capable of the most pen-
etrating glances. His followers believed he knew their sins before
they confessed them. He wore gold-rimmed spectacles and, though
bald, was more than once described as “shampooed.” He loved to be
clean. Most striking about his appearance was his head; despite gi-
ant, pointed ears, it seemed several sizes too small for his round
body. “Frank,” as he insisted on being called, was the gnome of early
 twentieth- century elite fundamentalism.
In the early 1930s, he and Abram crossed paths. Buchman was in
Ottawa to perform soul surgery on Canadian members of Parlia-
ment, and Abram, fresh from what would prove to be his  short-lived
salvation of Henry Ford (Ford would later require renewal by Buch-
man, for whom he built a retreat in Michigan), was lecturing in
Canada on behalf of Goodwill Industries. The two met, and Abram
suggested to Buchman that he come on with Goodwill as a chaplain,
to infuse the organization with his “life-changing” evangelical fervor.
Buchman answered by proposing a Quiet Time.16
Besides confession of sexual sin, Quiet Time was the core practice

--- Sayfa 133 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 127
of Buchmanism: a  half-hour-long period of silence in which the be-
liever waited for “Guidance” from God. Guidance was more than a
warm feeling. It came in the form of direct orders and touched on
every subject of concern, from the transcendent to the mundane.
“The real question,” Buchman would preach, “is, ‘Will God control
America?’ The country must be ‘governed by men under instructions
from God, as definitely given and understood as if they came by
wire.’ ”17 Guidance meant not just spiritual direction but declaring
one’s own decisions as divinely inspired. “We are not out to tell God,”
Buchman announced to an assembly of twenty- fi ve thousand in 1936.
“We are out to let God tell us. And He will tell us.”18
“What did God say to you?” Buchman asked Abram when their
Quiet Time was completed. Abram believed he had heard God’s
voice several times in his life, and had even considered the possibility
that he might be a prophet, but he had not yet been exposed to the
idea that God spoke to men regularly and in detail. “He didn’t say any-
thing,” Abram confessed, disappointed.
Well, Buchman replied, God had spoken to him. “God told me,
‘Christianize what you have. You have something to share.’ ”
Blander words no Sunday school teacher ever spoke, but to
Abram they seemed like a revelation. God had told Buchman not to
join Goodwill, but that didn’t matter. What was important was the
discovery that God should be consulted not just on broad spiritual
questions but on absolutely everything. This, Abram decided, was
what it meant to die to the self: to turn all responsibility over to
God. That such a transfer meant the abdication of any accountability
for one’s actions, that it provided justification for any ambition, did
not occur to him.
Thereafter he transformed his daily prayer ritual into Buchmanite
Quiet Time. And, soon enough, God filled the silence with instruc-
tions: go forth, he said, and build cells for my cause like Buchman’s.
The cell of spiritual warriors that elected Arthur Langlie was one
result. That cell of men listening to God during their Quiet Time
doubled itself, and the two became four, the four became eight. The
many cells for congressmen and generals and lowly government

--- Sayfa 134 ---
128 | J E F F S H A R L E T
clerks in the Washington, D.C., of the present are the offspring of
that original mitosis, catalyzed by Buchman. But to call them Buch-
manite  wouldn’t be quite right. When Buchman spoke of Christi-
anity’s “new illumination,” “a new social order under the dictatorship
of the Spirit of God” that would transform politics and eradicate the
conflict of capital and labor, Abram took him literally.
Abram never actually attended a Buchman  house party. Had he
done so, he might have veered away from his new enthusiasm. The
most successful events took place at one of the estates around the world
that Buchman used as outreach stations. He had won the allegiance of
a number of wealthy widows and heiresses and neglected wives of
businessmen, and they regularly showered him with riches, including
their great homes, to which Buchman would invite select groups for
a day in the country. There would be tennis and golf and some pray-
ing, and then the group would gather for the party. A fire would be
built, the lights dimmed, and Buchman or a trained confessor might
begin with some minor transgression, a traffic ticket, a youthful
prank. Another Buchman veteran might then up the ante. “Some lad
might now turn evidence against a governess or an upstairs maid,”
observed a New Yorker writer in 1932. And from there it was on to the
weaknesses that afflict not just college boys but also the grand dames
who flocked to Buchman and the big men they dragged in their wake,
all stumbling over one another in elaborate description of their pri-
vate perversions, how they had been blinded to their purpose in life
by sexual desire, and how “Guidance” had saved them. Around the
circle they went, spurring one another on.
And yet Buchmanism was not purely narcissistic. Once one had
been “changed,” as Buchmanites called the experience of coming
through soul surgery successfully, one was ready for political action.
What sort of action? On this, Buchman was vague. Like Abram, he
considered industrial strife an affront to God, to be solved by
“changed” men among the captains of industry. Like Abram, he con-
sidered the sharp elbows of democracy an insult to the “dictatorship
of the Holy Spirit.” And it was from Buchman that Abram surely ab-
sorbed the idea of a leadership of “God-led” men organized into cells,

--- Sayfa 135 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 129
consulting not the unchanged masses but the mandate of Jesus as He
revealed Himself to them behind closed doors. Beyond that, though,
Buchman rarely went. Even more than Abram, he so desired the
company of powerful people that he was loath to align himself too
closely with any one faction. But in 1936, in a sympathetic portrait
published by the New York World- Tele gram, Buchman named names.
“But think what it would mean to the world if Hitler surrendered
to the control of God. Or Mussolini. Or any dictator. Through such
a man, God could control a nation overnight and solve every last,
bewildering problem.” He seemed to think the pro cess had already
started: “I thank heaven for a man like Adolf Hitler, who built a front
line of defence against the  anti-Christ of Communism,” he told the
reporter.19
Buchman had just returned from the Olympic Games in Berlin,
orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels as a visual symphony of black and
red swastikas and ea gles and the long, lean muscle of Aryan athleti-
cism. Most of the world would remember the “Nazi Olympics” for
the African American athlete Jesse Owens, but Goebbels’s spectacle
achieved its desired effect on Buchman, who left Berlin with a surg-
ing admiration for the vigor of the Third Reich. In particular, Hein-
rich Himmler, the chief of the Gestapo, had impressed him as a
“great lad,” a man whom he recommended to his followers in Brit-
ish government. The sentiment, to be fair, was not mutual. After
World War II, Buchman’s followers, eager to “wash out” their lead-
er’s past, would produce Gestapo documents condemning Buchman-
ism, though in terms not exactly reassuring: Himmler, it seems, saw
Buchman’s Moral  Re-Armament as too close of a competitor to na-
tional socialism.
In 1936, fl ush with the excitement of Hitler’s Olympics, Buchman
gathered some American Oxford Group men at a  house party at a
Lenox, Massachusetts, estate. The Oxfordites sat on the floor in their
tweeds as Buchman described the vision he brought back with him.
“Suppose we here  were all  God-controlled and we became the
Cabinet,” he said. Then he designated the World- Tele gram reporter
secretary of agriculture and pointed to a recent Princeton graduate

--- Sayfa 136 ---
130 | J E F F S H A R L E T
(they came to him, since he could not go to them) to replace Cordell
Hull, Roo sevelt’s secretary of state. Around the room he went, re-
ferring not to the talents of his followers but to their willingness to
govern by Guidance.
“Then,” he continued, “in a  God-controlled nation, capital and
labor would discuss their problems peacefully and reach  God-
controlled situations.” The distribution of wealth would remain as it
was, but the workers would be content to be led by employers who
were not greedy but  God-controlled. Echoing the words of U.S.
Steel’s James A. Farrell that had so inspired Abram in 1932, words
which the Fellowship repeats to this day, Buchman declared, “Hu-
man problems aren’t economic. They’re moral, and they can’t be
solved by immoral measures.”
In 1936, when men such as Henry Ford and Charles Lindbergh
openly admired Hitler, it was still safe to name the style of govern-
ment to which these words pointed. Human problems, Buchman told
his little group that night in Lenox, require “a God-controlled de-
mocracy, or perhaps I should say a theocracy.” Just as good, said Buch-
man, would be a “God-controlled Fascist dictatorship.”
He paused. He let his emerald eyes glide over the young man-
hood of Buchmanism, sitting  cross-legged on the floor before him as
if he was a Greek philos opher. Frank smiled and adjusted the red  rose
in his boutonniere.
“There is a book in the store windows in London and New York,”
Buchman told an assembly at the Metropolitan Opera  House in No-
vember of 1935. “The title is It Can’t Happen  Here. Some of you who
read the very important words of the Secretary of State, ‘Our own
country urgently needs a moral and spiritual awakening,’ may have
said the same thing, ‘It  can’t happen  here.’ ”
Buchman had taken the stage that eve ning to tell Manhattan’s
wealthiest that it could. “Think of nations changed,” he told his audi-
ence, urging them to imagine soul surgery on a national scale, or
something even grander: “God-controlled supernationalism.”20

--- Sayfa 137 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 131
Buchman never was one for details. Had he bothered to pick up
the book he considered too pessimistic, he would have discovered
that the It of the volume’s title was fascism. Five years earlier, the
book’s author, Sinclair Lewis, had become the first American to win
the Nobel Prize for Literature, in recognition of novels such as Bab-
bit, Arrowsmith, and Elmer Gantry. It Can’t Happen  Here wasn’t Lewis’s
fi nest work, but it contained some of his scariest writing. Can’t hap-
pen here? Lewis’s novel contended that it already had, in countless
little rooms across the country, at gatherings of Rotarians and the
Daughters of the American Revolution, in hot- blooded church meet-
ings and movie  houses where gunfighters bestrode American dreams
like Mussolinis in spurs. All that was wanting was the right key man
to take up the sword and the cross and move into the oval offi  ce. In
the novel, that man is Senator Buzz Windrip, a folksy southerner
backed by a radio preacher called Bishop Peter Paul Prang and his
“League of Forgotten Men.”
The story opens with the “Ladies Night Dinner” of a small town
Rotary Club, and Mrs. Adelaide Tarr Gimmitch, an expert on “Child
Culture,” lecturing a group of concerned citizens in eve ningwear.
Her sermon could have been lifted directly from Abram: “I tell you,
my friends, the trouble with this whole country is that so many are
selfi sh! Here’s a hundred and twenty million people, with ninety-five
per cent of ’em only thinking of self, instead of turning to and helping
the responsible business men to bring back prosperity! All these cor-
rupt and  self- seeking labor  unions! Money grubbers! Thinking only
of how much wages they can extort out of their unfortunate em-
ployer, with all the responsibilities he has to bear!
“What this country needs is Discipline.”
The novel’s voice of reason is the local newspaper editor, one
Doremus Jessup, into whose mouth Lewis packs a dense but brief ac-
count of the authoritarian strain in American history.
Why, there’s no country in the world that can get more
hysterical—yes, or more obsequious!—than America. Look
how Huey Long became absolute monarch over Louisiana,

--- Sayfa 138 ---
132 | J E F F S H A R L E T
and how the Right Honorable Mr. Senator Berzelius Windrip
owns his State. Listen to Bishop Prang and Father Coughlin
on the radio—divine oracles, to millions. Remember how
casually most Americans have accepted Tammany grafting
and Chicago gangs and the crookedness of so many of Presi-
dent Harding’s appointees? Could Hitler’s bunch, or Wind-
rip’s, be worse? Remember the Ku Klux Klan? Remember
our war hysteria, when we called sauerkraut “Liberty cab-
bage” and somebody actually proposed calling German mea-
sles “Liberty measles”? And wartime censorship of honest
papers? Bad as Rus sia! Remember our kissing  the—well,
the feet of Billy Sunday, the million-dollar evangelist . . .
Remember when the hick legislators in certain states, in obe-
dience to William Jennings Bryan, who learned his biology
from his pious old grandma, set up shop as scientific experts
and made the  whole world laugh itself sick by forbidding the
teaching of evolution? . . . Remember the Kentucky night-
riders? Remember how trainloads of people have gone to en-
joy lynchings? Not happen  here?  Prohibition—shooting down
people just because they might be transporting liquor—no,
that couldn’t happen in America! Why, where in all history has
there ever been a people so ripe for a dictatorship as ours!21
And yet that fruit was never plucked. The United States did not
then—and has not  yet—succumbed to fascism. Nor, for that matter,
does the contemporary Christian Right embrace even a modern strain
of “national socialism.” Many of the ingredients are there: militaristic
patriotism, a blurry identification of church with state, a reverence
for strong men, a tendency to locate such men at the top of corporate
hierarchies, even a hated “other” (for American fundamentalists, Jews
and Catholics gave way to communists, and now the populist front of
the movement is divided over whom to demonize more, Muslims or
gay people).
But other elements of Europe an- style fascism never emerged in
the United States. Despite the nation’s near constant involvement in

--- Sayfa 139 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 133
one war or another for the last sixty years, it has never adopted an
ideology that explicitly celebrates violence. Nor do we have a signifi -
cant secret police force. And it is Christianity itself that has pre-
vented fundamentalists, America’s most authoritarian demographic,
from embracing the cult of personality around which fascist states
are organized. No matter how much the movement may revere Ron-
ald Reagan or George W. Bush or the next political savior to arise,
such men must always accept second billing to  Jesus—The Man No-
body Knows, in the words of Bruce Barton’s 1925 best seller, perhaps
the most infl uential forgotten book of the twentieth century.
Barton’s publisher boasted that the book could be read in two
hours, but most readers could bounce through it in half that time.
Less a narrative than a collage of advertising copy, The Man Nobody
Knows off ered Christ on the cheap as “the most popu lar dinner guest
in Jerusalem!”22
Exclamation points come by the bushel in Barton’s work. “A fail-
ure!” the book  opens—and  here the exclamation point must be read
as an incredulous question mark, a quotation of the supposed liberal
view of Christ as “weak and puny,” an effeminate sadsack who died
on the cross because he could not do better. Barton responds with
the greatest Fortune magazine story ever told: “He picked up twelve
men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an orga-
nization that conquered the world.”
Barton himself was such a man. Shaped like a shoe box, he had a
flat-faced head atop a rectangle of a body but was handsome all the
same in that lock-jawed manner that makes some men look like they
were born to captain industry. Barton’s name lives on as one fourth
of the advertising giant Batten, Barton, Durstine, and Osborne, but
his slim volume on Christ as the ultimate salesman exists now only as
an academic curiosity, evidence to historians of the “secularization”
of religion during the 1920s. Published in the same year as the Scopes
monkey trial took place, The Man Nobody Knows has long looked to
such
observers
like
proof
that
the
chief
concern
of
secularism—business—had subsumed theology. Barton made Jesus
into a management guru, and profit trumped prophet. Even in the

--- Sayfa 140 ---
134 | J E F F S H A R L E T
era of a president who touts as his twin qualifications a business de-
gree and his intimate relationship with Jesus, Fitzgerald’s Great Gatsby
and Lewis’s Babbitt are celebrated as the definitive texts of that earlier
age, the stories that shaped the later course of the nation.
And yet in the 1920s, The Man Nobody Knows outpaced them both.
It was the book read on streetcars and the title punned on by admir-
ers, the volume distributed in bulk at Christmas to friends and em-
ployees. So, too, its themes thrive now, far more so than Fitzgerald’s
despair or Lewis’s contempt for capitalism. Gatsby and Babbitt may
still be debated in high school English classrooms, but Barton’s
entrepreneur-Christ prospers on a broader scale, the “Master,” as
Barton called him, of best sellers such as God Is My CEO: Following
God’s Principles in a  Bottom- Line World, and Jesus CEO: Using Ancient Wis-
dom for Visionary Leadership, and, most influentially, Rick Warren’s
spiritual time- management manual, The  Purpose- Driven  Life—more
than 25 million copies sold since publication in 2002.
In Barton’s own day, Frank Buchman declared The Man Nobody
Knows one of the “three outstanding contributions to [his] life and
work.”22 Abram did not record whether he, too, had read it, but he
wouldn’t have had to; Barton’s business-faith had entered the blood-
stream of American Christianity. Indeed, it’s hard to imagine the
rise of Abram’s elite evangelicalism absent the pre ce dent of “top
man” religion set by The Man Nobody Knows. If the book espoused a
literally fundamentalist  Jesus—a Christ stripped clean of all that
Barton considered feminizing cultural accretion—Barton was not,
himself, a fundamentalist. He was less interested in the doctrinal
battles of separatist religion than in the driving force of Christianity
as the best means for national efficiency. In this sense, he followed
the example set by one of his chief theological advisers, Harry Emer-
son Fosdick, even as he hewed to a morality and politics more akin to
that of Billy Sunday.
In 1922, Fosdick had preached a sermon that drew the battle
lines and became a manifesto of sorts for modernist Christians. “Shall
the Fundamentalists Win?” attempted to prove that they couldn’t.
Ironically, it also established the political and theological vision that

--- Sayfa 141 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 135
would allow more sophisticated fundamentalists such as Abram to
build for the future.
“We must be able to think our modern life clear through in
Christian terms, and to do that we also must be able to think our
Christian faith clear through in modern terms,” Fosdick preached
from the pulpit of New York’s First Presbyterian Church. Remind-
ing his congregation of advances in science and, even more danger-
ously, biblical scholarship—the German “higher criticism” which
held that the Bible could be better grasped with a knowledge of its
historical  context—he declared that “the new knowledge and the old
faith [have] to be blended in a new combination.”
Fosdick imagined that combination to be cosmopolitan and liter-
ary, shaped by a grasp of metaphor and a benign disdain for the liter-
alists of years past. He had no concept of the other meanings future
Christian conservatives would take from his call, shuffl  ing the parts
around not in the service of high-minded liberalism but of sophisti-
cated,  science-fueled fundamentalism. Fosdick’s accommodationist
vision of modernism illuminated the path for a traditionalist crusade
in which later  fundamentalists—influenced, not so indirectly, by
Marx, whom some read with the idea of turning his ideas to conser-
vative ends—realized that they could seize the means of cultural and
political production. They could make better radio than the liberals,
better propaganda, and most of all, they could shape and run and fi-
nance better politicians. Not just morally superior legislators but bet-
ter hacks—men (and, eventually, women) who took from modernism
only its rule book, not its goals, and bested its pure champions at the
game they thought they’d invented.
Fosdick smoothed the way with his powerful denunciation of
denominations, soon to become a bête noire of Christians who de-
fined their faith by the “fact” of spiritual war, in which there are ulti-
mately only two sides, theirs and the enemy’s, Christ’s and Satan’s.
“If,” preached Fosdick, “during [World War I], when the nations
were wrestling upon the very brink of hell and at times all seemed
lost, you chanced to hear two men in an altercation about some mi-
nor matter of sectarian denominationalism, could you restrain your

--- Sayfa 142 ---
136 | J E F F S H A R L E T
indignation? You said, ‘What can we do with folks like this who, in
the face of colossal issues, play with the twiddlywinks and peccadil-
los of religion?’ ”
Of course, those “twiddlywinks” are the intellectual marrow of
Christianity and the convictions that prevent its more ancient pre-
cepts from merging too easily with modern politics. Barton, like
Fosdick, saw no reason not to do so. Upon returning to the United
States from a Europe an tour in 1930, he wondered, “How can we
develop the love of country, the respect for courts and law, the sense
of national obligation, which Mussolini has recreated in the soul of
Italy?”23
He praised Mussolini’s “efficiency and progress” and Hitler’s
mastery of the adman’s science, psychology, after another Europe an
visit in 1934. “Only strong magnetic men inspire great enthusiasm
and build great organizations,” he’d noted in The Man Nobody Knows.
He wasn’t defending the dictators’ disregard for rights, he insisted,
but he had to admire Hitler’s anti-Semitic propaganda, so detailed in
its documentation of Jewish influence in Germany that one could
easily see why Hitler’s rise “was not an unnatural thing to have hap-
pen.”24 Declaring himself of a “generous” frame of mind, he said that
he preferred Roo sevelt, whom he considered an antibusiness “dicta-
tor,” to Hitler. Still, he seemed to see more similarity between them
than difference. “Every new deal has to have some one to blame
when all the promises do not come true. We blame the reactionar-
ies; Hitler blames the Jews.” Four years later, Barton entered Con-
gress as a leading isolationist, opposed not only to war with the Axis
powers but to aid to the Allies as well.
But Barton was not a fascist in the vein of Henry Ford (whom he
quoted as an authority on Christian business in the Man Nobody Knows)
or even  fuzzy-brained Frank Buchman. He was an advertising man, an
optimist. In an editorial for the Wall Street Journal titled “Hard Times,”
Barton quoted the Journal’s publisher on the necessity of poverty:
“What is taking place on this earth is a great experiment in the devel-
opment of human character. The Creator is not interested in money or
markets, but in more enduring men . . . suffering develops them.”25

--- Sayfa 143 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 137
That the subjects of this great experiment were not as interested in
this development as were the captains of industry mildly puzzled Bar-
ton but did not bother him. He felt certain that they could be per-
suaded with a jingle and a catchy slogan, a “juster” peace.
Such newspeak represents the chummy self-satisfaction of a mind
that mistakes the efficiency of short phrases for depth of meaning. In
The Man Nobody Knows Barton tells the story of a newspaperman as-
signed to cover an unnamed great issue of the day in a single column.
When the reporter protested that one column was not enough space,
his editor told him to review the Book of Genesis—all of creation
summed up in a tidy 600 words. Not for Barton the lingering work
of theologians, who find in scripture at least as many questions as
answers. Nor was he a man for the thickets of political theory, a
limitation which, given his stated sympathies for strongmen, may
have saved him from a more frightening path. Mein Kampf ? That
doorstopper weighed in at nearly 1,000 pages. Barton simply lacked
the patience for fascism; Hitler was too deep for him.
But he also took one of fascism’s central premises too seriously to
embrace the ideology’s violence. Fascism, the word itself derived from
the Latin for a bundle of sticks bound together and thus unbreakable,
promised unity. Barton wanted that: unity. As an advertising man, he
believed it could be achieved through persuasion rather than force of
arms. Moreover, he understood that the best way to sell a product was
not fear alone but fear plus desire: to stoke the consumer’s anxiety
that he or she lacked something, and then to press some button in the
brain that led to the conviction that acquiring it would lead to happi-
ness. Consumption, not fascism, was the core of his Christianity.
For Barton, and later Abram, the something was Jesus, the ulti-
mate “personality.” To Barton, one nation under God meant a nation
of consumers, their deepest needs and greatest wants in perfect ac-
cord with the products of BBD& O’s clients, General Electric and
General Motors and, in 1952, General Dwight D. Eisenhower. For
Abram, unity meant the boss with his hand on Jimmy’s shoulder,

--- Sayfa 144 ---
138 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Christ’s masculine love flowing through his CEO key man and into
the workingman’s bones. Not fascism; in the future Barton and
Abram helped forge, God’s love would be hungered for and accepted
gladly. There would be no secret police, no jackboots, no Buzz Win-
drip, no cult of personality.
Rather, a Babbitt cult, as one of Barton’s Christian critics put it, a
cult of many personalities, all of them more or less the same, vessels
filled with His manliness, His will. The “man-method” that Abram
shaped from Buchman’s “Guidance” and Barton’s big business theol-
ogy, the freedom he dreamed of and preached for the next three de-
cades, was that of obedience. In a 1942 pamphlet titled Finding the
Better Way, 26 one of Abram’s lieutenants described the Babbitt cult
Abram had created and then replicated in San Francisco (led by a
former secretary of the navy), Los Angeles (chaired by an oilman),
and Philadelphia (started by Dr. Dan Poling, the  squeaky-clean radio
preacher who would also serve as frontman for the city’s Republican
machine), as well as Chicago, New York, Boston, and some sixty
other cities.27
Washington, D.C. was one of them. That year, with the help of
Senator Ralph Brewster of Maine—a calculating character, both a
Yankee and a Klansman, Brewster evidently recognized Abram’s
more amiable Fellowship as the coming club for backroom dealing—
Abram convinced dozens of congressmen to begin attending his
weekly breakfast prayer meetings at the Hotel Willard. Abram him-
self was staying at the University Club, a clumsy old building next
door to the Soviet embassy. His first meeting at the Willard took
place in the midst of a blizzard in January 1942.  Seventy-four men,
most of them congressmen, gathered to hear addresses by Howard
Coonley, the ultraright president of the National Association of
Manufacturers—and Abram. “The big men and the real leaders in
New York and Chicago look up to me in an embarrassing way,” he
wrote his wife, Mattie.
It was true. The president of Chevrolet requested an afternoon
with Abram, and the president of Quaker Oats insisted on a morning
meeting. In Chicago, he dined with steel magnates and railroad titans

--- Sayfa 145 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 139
and Hughston McBain, the president of Marshall Field. In New York,
Thomas Watson of IBM summoned a group of men to hear Abram
speak at the Banker’s Club, Coonley opened doors for Abram to dis-
cuss God and labor with the president of General Electric, and J. C.
Penney, one of the financial backers of modern fundamentalism,
took Abram to Marble Collegiate Church on Fifth Avenue to meet
Norman Vincent Peale, the apostle of “positive thinking” and possi-
bly the most deliberately banal man in American history. Abram
soon joined Peale as one of “the Twelve,” a council of Christian con-
servative leaders bent on working  behind-the- scenes to rebrand fun-
damentalism in Peale’s  feel-good terminology.
In Washington, Abram was even more popular. “Congressman
Busbey reported how respected, loved, and admired your husband
was there and the contribution he had made to Congress,” he wrote
Mattie. In the eve nings he summoned maids and busboys to his rooms
for  knee-cracking prayer sessions that stretched into the night. Black
people, he liked to boast, loved him, and congressmen, he claimed,
fl ocked to him. Within a year of his arrival, he could stroll freely into
nearly any office in Washington. Senators Alexander Wiley of Wis-
consin, Raymond Willis of Indiana, and H. Alexander Smith of New
Jersey functioned as his lieutenants. Representative Walter Judd, a
former medical missionary from Minnesota, later to become a red
hunter nearly as cruel as McCarthy, became Abram’s man on the
House floor. David Lawrence, publisher of U.S. News (now U.S. News
and World Report), the most influential media conservative in the coun-
try, joined the board of directors of Abram’s newly formed National
Committee for Christian Leadership. Lawrence was Jewish, but with
Abram he prayed to Jesus as the only hope against  communism—
never mind that the Soviets  were American allies at the time.
To further spread the Idea, Abram’s Finding the Better Way ex-
plained that the Breakfast  Groups—the basic unit of the Fellow-
ship, from which some men would be recruited into  cells—were
nonpartisan, open to everyone. But those who chose to attend  were
of a distinct caste. According to the pamphlet, a “typical meeting”
of the Seattle group consisted of prayers, “comments,” and personal

--- Sayfa 146 ---
140 | J E F F S H A R L E T
testimonies by top executives from an array of regional and national
corporations. There was a man from J. C. Penney, and the president
of Seattle Gas. The president of Frederick & Nelson, then the North-
west’s largest department store—and its arbiter of upper-class
tastes—offered “comments,” as did an executive from the Chicago,
Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific Railroad. The Democratic candidate
for governor and the Republican candidate for the Senate made ap-
pearances, but the Republican got the better spot: the closing prayer,
following Abram’s summation. Clearly, “typical” meetings made for
valuable campaign stops.
What of the pamphlet’s promise that “representatives of both
capital and labor find common ground” at such? Of seventeen speak-
ers, only one spoke for labor, James Duncan (possibly the “Jimmy” of
Abram’s first sessions). An officer of the International Association of
Machinists, Duncan helped drive a rift into the West Coast labor
movement with his firm opposition to a popular  rank- and-file initia-
tive to allow African Americans to work for Boeing. His involvement
with the bosses who made up the membership of the Seattle Break-
fast Group provides a portrait of the labor leadership with which
Abram’s Fellowship felt it could stand on common ground: violent,
reactionary, and thick with bigotry.
Abram himself never made an explicitly racist remark in his life,
but he practiced a paternalism that amounted to a quiet declaration
of his views on the matter. Some of Abram’s closest allies would be
Dixiecrats such as South Carolina’s Strom Thurmond, who became a
coleader with Abram of the senate’s weekly prayer breakfast, and
Mississippi senator John Stennis. At the left end of Abram’s spectrum
were men such as Representatives Brooks Hays of Arkansas and John
Sparkman of Alabama, “moderates” who felt that slow and limited
integration was an acceptable option, if not a necessity. Activism on
its behalf bordered on treason.
Duncan evidently felt the same way, only more so. In 1941 at Boe-
ing, Seattle’s biggest employer, Local 751 of the Aero Mechanics
Union voted to allow African Americans to join its membership, al-
ready 9,100 strong and sure to grow as the war demanded more

--- Sayfa 147 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 141
planes. But the local’s parent, Duncan’s International Association of
Machinists, claimed the  union’s constitution barred nonwhites,  union
democracy and the war effort be damned. The International accused
the local’s president of communism and replaced him in a coup with a
red-baiter named Harry Bomber. To validate Bomber’s unelected
leadership, the International rented out Seattle’s Civic Auditorium for
a mass meeting of anti-red—and  anti- black—workers. The city fa-
thers, who by then comprised Abram’s purest “God-led” political
machine, approved; a few days before the meeting, the Seattle Times
declared it “one of the most important in Seattle’s labor history.”28
Most of the members of the local didn’t think so. Out of 9,100,
only 2,000 attended, and just over half of those even bothered to
vote on the International’s slate of rigged issues. Even then, they
cleared a man accused of communism of all charges. After the meet-
ing, goons associated with the  pro-business,  anti- black slate delivered
beatings to those they considered leaders of the  pro-black faction.
The victims filed charges. The district attorney, B. Gray  Warner—a
Fellowship man—took the case so seriously he declared its proper
handling a matter of “national defense.” That is, the victims  were
hindering national defense by complaining instead of buckling down
to work. No cases went to trial.
By 1943, the progressives beaten, jailed, driven out of town, or
cowed into submission, the Machinist leadership of which the Fel-
lowship’s Duncan was an officer produced an edition of their news-
letter, Aero Mechanic, featuring a cartoon of a black man applying for a
job at Boeing. “Stable Lizers,” he says, in response to a question about
airplane stabilizers. “Yas Suh! Ah sho knows ’bout dem.” In an inset,
we see a black man sweeping a stable.29
Such was the underbelly of elite fundamentalism’s labor-management
“reconciliation”—the principles of Moral Re-Armament in practice,
the fruits of Barton’s business theology applied to the real world. In
1938, Barton ran for Congress. Like Abram, he believed economic
depression to be a result of spiritual disobedience, though Barton

--- Sayfa 148 ---
142 | J E F F S H A R L E T
preferred the term distance. The New Deal had moved us away from
Jesus, he thought, by substituting man- made legislation for divine
will, as revealed in the working of Christian businessmen unhin-
dered by regulations. So in 1938 he won a seat in Congress by prom-
ising to “Repeal a Law a Day.” Or, in the slang of today’s
fundamentalism: Let Go, and Let God.
The Wall Street Journal thought it a capital idea. “It is not that one
congressman, more or less, especially a new one, can arrest the hitherto
unstoppable juggernaut” of government, the paper editorialized, “but
that [Barton’s] election can well serve as a beacon to encourage other
reasonable men, who have demonstrated their success in industry . . .
to take action against the web of legislation in which the nation is cur-
rently struggling.”30
Conventional wisdom holds that it was Ronald Reagan who be-
gan the real dismantling of the New Deal, but a closer examination
of the legislative record reveals that the pro cess began as early as
1943, in the midst of the war, when conservative southern Demo-
crats teamed up with Republicans to pass the  anti-union  Smith-
Connally Act, the first step in what would eventually become the
repeal of most of labor’s New Deal gains. In 1948, Representative
Paul B. Dague, then one of Abram’s disciples, wrote in a Fellowship
newsletter that Abram’s weekly meetings for congressmen had pro-
duced in them the “conviction that more of God’s mandates and the
teachings of the Nazarene must be written into current legislation.”
He did not offer examples. It is easy to guess, however, that he had in
mind the previous year’s Taft- Hartley Act, known by even conserva-
tive unions as the “slave labor law” for the ends to which it went to
roll back the New Deal and replace strikes with employer-controlled
“conciliation,” a hallmark of Abram’s vision for “industrial peace.”
The “teachings of the Nazarene” for such politicians amounted to
deregulation, the removal of government intervention from matters
they thought firmly taken in hand by Jesus and His chosen representa-
tives. They were not libertarians; they were authoritarians.
“Our people as a  whole have become the most highly organized
in the world,” declared Abram’s Better Way pamphlet.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 143
All the vital activities of industry, commerce, and govern-
ment are carried on by corporations and other formal orga-
nizations. Such bodies are continually growing in size, and
hence the top leadership is continually growing in power and
infl uence.
We have entered an era when the masses of the people
are dependent upon a rapidly diminishing number of leaders
for the determination of their pattern of life and the defini-
tion of their ultimate goals. It is the age of minority control.
[Emphasis mine.]
Lest anyone mistake Abram’s meaning during wartime, the pam-
phlet went on to point to the Axis powers as examples of what could
go wrong if “minority control” got into the wrong hands. The pam-
phlet had good things to say about Hitler’s “youth work,” but it had
no use for Hitler’s military adventurism, the crudest and ultimately
most ineffective form of evangelism ever invented. But just as a mi-
nority “can wreck a nation,” a “righteous ‘remnant’ ” chosen by God
can redeem it. “Men whose success shows them to have the ability to
lead cannot evade the responsibility for delivering America from its
present curse of spiritual indifference and moral decadence. These
are the men whom others will follow.”
Years later, at the height of American postwar  affl  uence—the
days when millions were questioning the wisdom of “following”—a
German-Jewish refugee named Herbert Marcuse (writing not long
after Kissinger paid his tribute to the subtleties of status quo power)
would capture in his One- Dimensional Man the contradictions of
Abram’s Better Way, his celebration of strongmen and his fetish for
conformity, his belief in providence and his reliance on behind-the-
scenes planning, his love of liberty and his insistence on obedience.31
After the years of fascist pageantry and war, wrote Marcuse in an es-
say titled “The New Forms of Control,” comes the age of “comfort-
able, smooth, reasonable, democratic unfreedom.”

--- Sayfa 150 ---
6.
T H E M I N I S T R Y O F
P R O P E R E N L I G H T E N M E N T
He did not want to be one of those who now pretended that “they had
always been against it,” whereas in fact they had been very eager to do
what they had been told to do. However, times change.
—HANNAH ARENDT, EICHMANN IN JERUSALEM: A REPORT
ON THE BANALITY OF EVIL (1963)
M
anfred Zapp, a native of Düsseldorf by way of Pretoria,
merited a line in the news when he stepped from an ocean
liner onto the docks of New York City on September 22, 1938, a
warm, windy day at the edge of a South Atlantic hurricane. Just a few
words in the New York Times’ “Ocean Travelers” column, a list of trav-
elers of note buried in the back of the paper. By the time he left the
United States, his departure would win headlines.
Zapp quickly established himself, settling first at the Gladstone
Hotel and later in a suite at the  Waldorf-Astoria, surveying his options
for office space before moving on to East  Forty-sixth Street, just off
Fifth Avenue, where a staff of ten soon joined him, Germans and Ger-
man Americans, a  dull-looking lot in whose company Zapp fairly
gleamed.1 He was thirty-fi ve years old with Berlin behind him and the
sea of Manhattan society before him, and when he spoke, the swells
tittered or growled with approval for the Wagnerian vitality they imag-
ined in his German-inflected Americanese. “I regard myself as having
arrived in the place I always wanted to be,” he exulted.2 His chestnut

--- Sayfa 151 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 145
hair was thinning and his cheeks swelled out into jowls, but big bones
beneath and a strong cleft chin kept him handsome. He wore elegantly
tailored pinstripes and shirts of slightly eccentric design. With the arch
of a brow, he made smoking a pipe look more mysterious than
old-fashioned. He was heir to a modest coal fortune, but he did not
consider himself a businessman. He had earned an advanced degree,
but he did not insist on being called “doctor,” in the German fashion.
He thought of himself as a  journalist—“a respectable newspaperman!”
he would spit at interrogators after he’d been captured.
Zapp had been given charge of the American offices of the Trans-
ocean News Agency, ostensibly the creation of a group of unnamed
German financiers. He had recently left a similiar post in South Af-
rica. “It is of paramount importance,” the German chargé d’affaires
in Washington had written Zapp the month before his arrival, “that a
crossing of wires with the work of the  D.N.B.”—Deutschland News
Bureau—“be absolutely avoided.” DNB was transparently the tool of
the Nazi regime and thus under constant scrutiny. Transocean, as an
allegedly independent agency, might operate more freely. “My task
here in America is so big and so difficult,” Zapp wrote the German
ambassador to South Africa a month after he arrived, “that it de-
mands all my energies.”3
What was Zapp’s task? During his American tenure, he flitted in
black tie and tails from Fifth Avenue to Park Avenue enjoying the
hospitality of rich men and beautiful women—the gossip columnist
Walter Winchell wrote of Zapp’s “madcap girlfriend,” a big-spending
society girl who seemed to consume at least as much of Zapp’s atten-
tion as the news. He avoided as much as he could discussions of what
he considered the tedium of politics. His friends knew he had dined
with Cordell Hull, the secretary of state, and Roo sevelt himself, and
some must also have known that he had worked  quietly—and ille-
gally, if one must be  technical—against the president’s reelection.
But one did not ask questions. He traveled, though no one was quite
sure where he went off to. One moment he was hovering over the
teletype in Manhattan; the next he was to be found in Havana, on the
occasion of a meeting of foreign ministers. Some might have called

--- Sayfa 152 ---
146 | J E F F S H A R L E T
him a Nazi agent, there to encourage Cuba’s inclinations—a popular
radio program, transmitted across the Caribbe an, was called the The
Nazi Hour—but Zapp could truthfully reply that he rarely stirred
from the lobby of the Hotel Nacional, where he sat sipping cocktails,
happy to buy drinks for any  man—or, preferably,  lady—who cared
to chat with him.4
The fact was that Zapp was a man with little interest in political
machinations. He thought of himself as an empirical man. He loved
details and  statistics—his idea of news ran toward almost artistic
stacks of data and systemized summaries of man-in-the- street
interviews—and he considered the conclusions he drew from them
not ideological but factual. He was a commonsense man. Consider
his rebuttal to a widely reported speech by Monsignor John A. Ryan,
the “Right Reverend New Dealer” whose Catholic social justice writ-
ings inspired much of Roo sevelt’s program. “The German Reich,”
declared Zapp, irritated by the monsignor’s partisan Catholicism,
“with its new conception of the State, is in the last analysis nothing
more than the national community itself.”5
To Zapp, totalitarianism—the term he preferred to fascism—was,
once pruned of its absurdities, a sensible and lovely idea. The torches
and the “long knives,” the death’s-head and all that red-faced singing
and table pounding, these activities Zapp did not care for. He actu-
ally preferred life in America, the canyons of Manhattan and the  gin-
lit balconies of the city’s best people, conversations that did not begin
and end with barking devotion. “Heil Hitler!” Zapp signed his letters
with this invocation, and a portrait of the Führer hung in his offi  ce,
but Zapp the journalist was too sensitive a recording device to enjoy
all that arm snapping. If only Manhattan and Munich, Washington
and Berlin, could be merged. It was a matter not of warfare but of
harmony, democracy’s bickering and bile giving way to the “new
conception,” in which power and will would be one.
Within a year, however, Zapp found cause to resist returning to
that fine new system. After a series of unsolved murders and per-
plexing explosions and intercepted transmissions led the FBI to raid
Nazi front organizations in Boston, Baltimore, Buffalo, Denver, New

--- Sayfa 153 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 147
Orleans, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Zapp’s spartan offi  ce off Fifth
Avenue, where they found what they believed to be evidence of the
orchestration of it all, Zapp began to reconsider his enthusiasm for
Hitler’s new order. He had failed the Führer. How would his will
judge him? What power would be exerted in the Gestapo “beating
rooms” that Transocean employees had once considered themselves
privileged to tour?
The FBI seized him and his chief deputy and whisked them away
to cold, bare rooms, on Ellis Island, no less, where not long before,
the rabble of Europe had been pro cessed into “mongrel” America,
land of “degenerate democracy,” as Roosevelt himself quoted Zapp in
a speech denouncing Germany’s “strategy of terror.”6
This last phrase as applied to Zapp’s pursuits was perhaps unfair.
“We now know why Nazi sabotage efforts failed,” the Washington Post
would announce after the war. Zapp and his fellow Nazi spies had
been too busy bickering.7
On one side were saboteurs of the “old line,” men who planted
little bombs disguised to look like chewing gum and set giant fires
meant to be understood by Washington as arson, skulking and hulk-
ing figures who photographed munitions factories and murdered
German American informants they suspected of disloyalty to their
dishonest cause.
On the other  were men such as Zapp. Along with a D.C.- based
diplomat named Ulrich von Gienanth (whom he would rejoin after
the war in Abram’s prayer meetings), Zapp considered the coming
conflict between the United States and the Reich one to be resolved
through quiet conversation, between German gentlemen and Ameri-
can “industrialists and State Department men.”
Von Gienanth, a muscular,  sandy-haired man whose dull expres-
sion disguised a chilly intelligence, “seems to be a very agreeable fel-
low,” Zapp wrote his brother, who had studied in Munich with the
baron-to- be. Only second secretary in the embassy, von Gienanth
maintained a frightening grip over his fellow diplomats. He was an
undercover SS man, the ears and eyes of the “Reichsministry of
Proper Enlightenment and Propaganda,” charged with keeping watch

--- Sayfa 154 ---
148 | J E F F S H A R L E T
over its secret American operations. He was, in short, the Gestapo
chief in America. While Zapp worried about his legal prospects in
the Indian Summer of 1940, von Gienanth was likely waiting for
news of a major operation in New Jersey: the detonation of the Her-
cules gunpowder plant, an explosion that on September 12 killed
forty-seven and sent shockwaves so strong that they snapped wind
into the sails of boaters in far-off Long Island Sound.8
Von Gienanth did not approve of such gestures. So fi rmly did he
oppose them as counterproductive, in fact, that he even attempted
to denounce to Berlin the Nazi agents who perpetrated such deeds.
Double agents or worse, his faction suggested, secret Jews bent on
smearing the honor of the Reich.
Von Gienanth’s initiatives  were whimsical by comparison. Once,
for instance, he paid a pilot to dump pro-Nazi antiwar fliers on the
White  House lawn. He devoted himself to changing Goebbels’s gold
into dollars, and those dollars into laundered “donations” to the
America First Committee, where unwitting  isolationists—Abram
allies such as Senator Arthur Vandenberg and America First presi-
dent Robert M. Hanes among  them—stumped for recognition of the
“fact” of Hitler’s inevitability.
Like Zapp, von Gienanth considered himself a commonsense man.
And  Zapp—Zapp simply reported the news and sold it on the
wire. Or gave it away. To the papers of Argentina, Mexico, Brazil,
and to the small-town editors of America’s gullible heartland, Zapp
offered Transocean reports for almost nothing. In some South Amer-
ican countries, 30 percent or more of foreign news—the enthusiastic
welcome given conquering German forces, the Jewish cabal in Wash-
ington, the moral rot of the American people—was produced by or
channeled through Zapp’s offices. On the side, he compiled a report
on Soviet-inspired “Polish atrocities” against the  long- suffering Ger-
man people and distributed it to thousands of leading Americans, the
sort sympathetic to the plight of the persecuted Christian. Zapp’s
sympathetic nature would prove, after the war, to be as genuine as
his distorted sense of history’s victims.
Not long after Zapp’s capture, the Gestapo seized two American

--- Sayfa 155 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 149
reporters in Germany. The United States traded. With a Coast Guard
plane keeping watch overhead, Zapp and von Gienanth sailed with
several hundred other deported fascist agents aboard the USS West
Point, bound for Lisbon.9 When soldiers from the American 89th Di-
vision captured him again in April of 1945—an occasion for national
headlines in the United  States—he pled his failure on behalf of the
Führer as his defense, as if his ultimate incompetence as a German
spy in America before the war proved that he’d always been a secret
enemy of Hitler’s regime.
But Zapp had been heard plying his version of journalism through-
out the war, broadcasting the “new conception” into Vichy France
along with a bittersweet tune about his forsaken love,  America—a
land, he now lamented, thick with gangsters and Jews. A Democratic
congressman from New York demanded that Zapp—along with
“Little Alfie” Krupp, the “munitions king” captured that same week
in his  eight-hundred-room palace—be tried for war crimes immedi-
ately. Like Krupp—who actually was tried and convicted, but re-
turned to high places by the occupation  government—Zapp had a
brighter future to look forward to.
The September 1951 issue of Information Bulletin, the magazine of
the U.S. occupation government, marked Zapp’s next appearance in
the American press. By Zapp’s standards, Information Bulletin was a
publication of crass  obviousness—an article in the previous edition
was headlined “I Hate  Communism”—but he must have appreciated
the irony of a pictorial feature titled “German Newsmen Tour Army
Bases.” In a photo of twenty-two newsmen gathered around an Amer-
ican officer at an ordnance depot, Zapp can be  seen just to the offi-
cer’s right; he looks like he’s rocking back on his heels. His tie is
short, his pants  ill fitting, and he’s wearing  shades—but he still
smiles for the camera, an Aryan Zelig, born again into the Cold
War.10
“There is still a lot of misery in this part of the world,” Zapp wrote
Abram in 1949. “Every day between one thirty and two  o’clock the

--- Sayfa 156 ---
150 | J E F F S H A R L E T
radio is broadcasting the names of lost persons.” What did Zapp do
about it? Nothing. “I say to myself,” Zapp wrote, “carpe diem, enjoy
your life.”
Over the next seven years, Zapp would write Abram tens of
thousands of words, the musings of a man speaking for a nation he
believed to be the war’s true victim. By far the most prolific of what
would grow to be Abram’s deep pool of German correspondents,
Zapp was also the most cogent in his description of Germany’s suf-
fering, and the most plain in his statement of the bargain he believed
Germany still had the power to strike with America: its loyalty in a
united front against  communism—aka “materialism,” radicalism,
and that old byword, degeneracy—in exchange for desperately needed
American dollars.
Abram was hardly alone in thinking this unwritten contract mutu-
ally benefi cial. Such was the deal struck by Harry Truman, the Marshall
Plan the Faustian trade of food for faith made at the hinge between
wars, the one just ended and the Cold War which would stretch across
the next five decades. But in 1949, nobody believed it would last that
long. “Now,” Zapp wrote Abram as North Korean troops massed along
the Thirty-eighth Parallel in 1950, “everybody sees clearly that a great
war between USA and Soviet Rus sia cannot be avoided.”
Zapp understood as well as any Cold Warrior that the battle would
be fought in faraway places. “Now it is Korea, tomorrow it might be
Formosa, or China, or Indochina.” One day, he feared, it would be
Berlin. He was skeptical of America’s chances. Had not the Wermacht
slaughtered 20 million Slavs? And still they had come, the Red Army
growing in numbers even as the ranks of its dead swelled to the size of
a nation. Hitler could not stop them. German civilians thought the
Americans would succeed where the Reich had failed. “Oh, the Rus-
sians can’t do anything,” Zapp summarized his  man-on-the- street in-
terviews. “Because as soon as a war starts the Americans will drop a
chain of Atom bombs from the Baltic to the Black Sea and create a ra-
dioactive curtain right across Western Rus sia.” But Zapp, who under-
stood American propaganda and promises for what they were, knew
better. “This optimistic opinion sounds to me like the whispering

--- Sayfa 157 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 151
campaign Dr. Goebbels started at the end of the war, when he spoke of
new decisive weapons, of which nobody knew anything.”
Abram agreed. The “steel bath” of armaments alone would not
protect them. Only the solution that had saved Seattle in 1935 would
suffice. “The totalitarianism of God is the only answer,” as one of the
Cold War academics routinely trotted about by Abram had lectured a
conference of diplomats in 1948. The gathering was the work of
Donald C. Stone, director of administration for the Marshall Plan, a
man who hardly seemed a likely candidate for fundamentalist cru-
sades. Stone was a blue-blooded bureaucrat inspired by noblesse oblige,
one of the many authors of Europe’s reconstruction who never
made headlines. But in the postwar era he had come to believe that
the West stood for  Christ-like perfection while communism was
“hate” incarnate. Stone’s ambition for the Marshall Plan was to con-
form the Western bloc “politically, economically, psychologically,
and spiritually,” to a “global offensive” of ideas. The idea, for Stone,
was God. “My main use,” he told Abram, “is to try to get the Chris-
tian Spirit into [the Marshall Plan]. I have worked at that constantly.
It is vital.”11 In 1948, the newly formed National Security Council
had issued a secret menu of covert actions to be pursued with Mar-
shall Plan funds, with the only restriction being plausible deniability:
“propaganda, economic warfare; preventive direct action, including
sabotage, anti- sabotage, de mo li tion, and evacuation mea sures; sub-
version against hostile states, including assistance to underground
resis tance movements, guerillas, and refugee liberation groups; and
support of indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened coun-
tries of the free world.”12 The most important battlegrounds, Stone
concluded,  were the souls of the undecided, who must either give
their absolute loyalty or be destroyed.
Stone, Zapp, Abram. Just three small men in the Cold War, they
might be said to stand in for the three branches of America’s ideologi-
cal army. Establishment Cold Warriors of Stone’s ilk dominate the
history books. Zapp, the ally with an ugly past, is his dark shadow. But
Abram and the influence of his fellow fundamentalists would remain
invisible for decades, their influence unmarked by media and academic

--- Sayfa 158 ---
152 | J E F F S H A R L E T
establishments. The role played by fundamentalists in refashioning the
world’s greatest fascist power into a democracy would go unnoticed.
So, too, would the role of fascism—or, rather, that of fascism’s
ghost—in shaping the newly internationalist ambition of evangelical
conservatives in the postwar era.
Between the Cold War establishment and the religious fervor of
Abram and his allies, organizations that came of age in the postwar
era—the National Association of Evangelicals, Campus Crusade, the
Billy Graham Crusade, Youth For Christ, the Navigators, and many
more—one finds the unexplained presence of men such as Zapp,
adaptable men always ready to serve the powers that be. From Amer-
ican Christendom, Zapp and his ilk took the cloak of redemption,
cheap grace, in the words of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, one of their most
famous victims. To it, they offered something harder to defi ne. This
is an investigation of that transmission; the last message from the
Ministry of Proper Enlightenment; the story of American funda-
mentalism’s German connection.
On Christmas Day, 1945, one of Abram’s men wrote him a letter
about the world waiting to be made. “Well, Abram, D-Day is at
hand.” The letter writer, a member of one of Abram’s cells called the
“Lindbergh  Group”—possibly that of Charles  Lindbergh—referred
not to the actual D-Day, eighteen months past, but to the battle for
what Abram would soon take to calling the “new world order.”
“We must move now,” wrote Abram’s correspondent. “You have
been raised up for a job like this.”
And yet the following spring God and Abram’s appendix laid him
low, nearly killing him in the midst of a speaking tour of the Midwest.
Lying on an operating table in Minneapolis, about to go under, he lis-
tened with unfrightened curiosity to the worldly disinterest of his doc-
tors, one of whom thought the  sixty-one-year-old  silver-haired man
would momentarily “shake hands with St. Peter.” He may have. After
the operation, Abram would say that he had spent his time hovering up
near the ceiling of his hospital room, looking down at his body. Then

--- Sayfa 159 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 153
Jesus came and bobbed along next to him, floating on the stale currents
of hospital air. This was not a dream, Abram would insist, but direct
communication. Together they discussed flesh and “personality.” The
body, they concluded, is no more than “our means of contact with the
physical world.” Abram and the Jesus of his hallucination had rein-
vented the Gnostic heresy, the belief that bodies possess no essence of
humanity, that flesh is meat, the suffering of which matters little or not
at all. Such convictions have very worldly ramifications when wielded
by the  powerful—those in positions to make decisions about the suf-
fering of others. Abram, of course, didn’t think about that.13
Abram’s mystical experience marked a transformation in his mis-
sion. Gone were any vestiges of the Social Gospel, any  old-fashioned
Christian notions of feeding the  poor—food, that is, not  scripture—
as a matter of first concern. The Cold War and spiritual war would
be one in his eyes, but this battle would be ideological, fought for
hearts and minds, those of the leaders who could set terms for the
unknowing masses. Thereafter Abram’s religion, the faith of the fun-
damentalist elite, would be global in scope, with Washington, D.C.,
“the world’s Christian capital.” Fundamentalism could no longer
simply defend its own ground; it must, as Finney had done, conquer
new territory.
In 1947, an evangelical theologian named Carl F. H. Henry would
publish a startling book titled The Uneasy Conscience of Modern Funda-
mentalism, since interpreted as a reconciliation of fundamentalism
with the postwar world, a eulogy for William Jennings Bryan and
Billy Sunday and the Bible thumpers of old that allowed fundamental-
ism to bury its dead and move on to an easier relationship with soci-
ety at large. And yet The Uneasy Conscience still “breathes with fire,” an
editor of Christianity Today (the flagship evangelical magazine Henry
started) wrote just a few years ago, “rejecting the failed theology of
liberalism, discredited by the devastation of two wars.”14
That one could view the ruins of Europe and the dead of Aus-
chwitz,  Bergen- Belsen,  Dachau—or, for that matter, Dresden or
Hamburg or Hiroshima—and conclude in 1947, or today, that liber-
alism was the problem, that Locke’s tradition of tolerance had led to

--- Sayfa 160 ---
154 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the slaughter, that what the world needed more of was the gospel of
no compromise, was, whatever else we might make of it morally or
historically, a bold assertion. It was American fundamentalism com-
ing into its own, fulfilling the evangelical promise it claimed to up-
hold, no longer defending itself against modernity’s encroachments
so much as expanding into modernity’s sphere. Henry’s call for “pos-
itive engagement” with politics laid the foundation for a pop u lar front,
to borrow a term from the American Left of the previous decade: an
ideological army of common cause, with “Christianity” the battle cry
rallying the troops well beyond the confines of fundamentalism.
“I believe honestly,” Harry Truman had announced at war’s end,
“that Almighty God intends us to assume the leadership which he
intended us to assume in 1920, and which we refused.” Truman was
a hard-nosed liberal who borrowed heavily from American funda-
mentalism even as he held it at a distance. It took him another two
years to fully blend the two in his 1947 “Truman  Doctrine”—a man-
date for massive military aid around the  world—on behalf of a Greek
government riddled with fascist collaborators, fighting a civil war
against the very same mountain partisans—communists, indeed—
who had been the chief resisters against the Germans.
Before the war, Truman had been such a devotee of Buchmanism
that he had attempted (unsuccessfully) to corner FDR into an im-
plicit endorsement of the Moral  Re-Armament guru. In 1947, Sena-
tor Absalom Willis Robertson, a fiercely conservative Democrat from
Virginia (and Pat Robertson’s father) met with Truman to invite him
to expand his sphere of piety to the Fellowship’s meetings. Robertson
would tell Donald Stone that Truman seemed excited by the idea,
but nothing came of it. By then, Truman was offi  cially distancing
himself from MRA lest he be tainted by its prewar enthusiasm for
fascism. It seems more likely that it was Truman’s hardheadedness
that influenced the Fellowship rather than the other way around,
leading toward a more militant realpolitik than Abram, enamored of
pomp and status, had yet imagined.15
Unlike Abram—who considered King Paul of Greece a messen-
ger from God—Truman wasn’t addled by royalty. The doctrine that

--- Sayfa 161 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 155
began by making client states of Greece and Turkey, the old “impe-
rial interests” as FDR had dismissed them, was too ambitious, too
abstract, to be starstruck by Europe’s quaint nobility. It was at best
and at worst an ontological division of the world into heaven and hell,
with the United States declared to be not only on the side of the an-
gels but responsible for enforcing their dictums. “Worldwide Spiri-
tual Offensive,” Senator Frank Carlson would call this strategy at a
twentieth- anniversary meeting of the prayer breakfast movement.
He meant to summon the unified forces of politics and  religion—
power and will, as Manfred Zapp, a propagandist of a blunter re-
gime, might have phrased the idea. “Moral Doctrine for Free World
Global Planning,” was how another Abram disciple, a Pentagon di-
rector of “information” named John C. Broger, would frame it in the
barely secular terms of midcentury Cold War.16
Such was the language of the times: aggressive but vague. Five
years before Carl F. H. Henry published his Uneasy Conscience, the
denominational leaders of America’s conservative Protestant factions
had come together to form the National Association of Evangelicals.
It was an alliance of orthodox fundamentalists, such as Bob Jones Sr.,
and “free enterprise” apostles, such as Abram’s friend J. Elwin
Wright. The NAE would fi ght “real dangers” threatening America, a
category of menace sufficiently broad that it included both Roo se-
velt’s “managerial revolution” and the separatist fury of fundamental-
ists too pure for politics. The NAE saw socialism and separatism as
opposite ends of the spectrum of the beast known as secularism, which
the NAE considered the unnatural division of believers and Ameri-
can power. “Personal  legalisms”—this church doesn’t approve of
dancing, that one won’t play cards—would thereafter be just that,
personal, not to interfere with the war for a Christian nation. “Christ
for America,” proclaimed the NAE’s president in his second annual
address. Come on in, said the populist front, whether you speak in
tongues and wave your hands on Sunday or sit on them and tsk, tsk at
the sweat and tears of the holy rollers. Its fundamentalism was not
theological; it was American. The totalitarianism of God, unlike that
of man, welcomed all true believers.17

--- Sayfa 162 ---
•
•
•
156 | J E F F S H A R L E T
During the war years, Abram had acquired a new patron, a young-
ish widow named Marian Aymar Johnson, heiress to the fortunes of
both her late stockbroker husband and of her old, Hudson River family.
A lovely if empty-headed beauty raised between Newport, London,
and Manhattan, she was a second cousin to FDR, but her isolationist
politics were far to his right. Before the war, she’d been fond of Buch-
manite  house parties, hosting one herself at her Long Island estate—an
event of sufficient gossip value to rate an article in Time. Tall and
blue-eyed with a broad, open smile, after her husband died she resolved
to develop greater gravitas. She gave up the life of a social butterfl y for
what she called Abram’s “total Christianity.” Her goal was the estab-
lishment of “spiritual beach heads” from which to evangelize leaders.
Only by accepting the same Christ, the “Supreme Leader” she had
come to serve, could they save America from communism.18 With her
help, Abram bought a  four- story mansion on Embassy Row in Wash-
ington at 2324 Massachusetts Avenue. He hoped it would be a head-
quarters for politicians and diplomats of all denominations, a place for
businessmen visiting Washington (by this point, Abram’s inner circle
included the president of the National Association of Manufacturers) to
share their concerns with brothers-in-Christ in spiritual, not material,
terms. A “Christian Embassy.”19
Abram kept offices on the third floor, and there was a reception
hall, a library for small gatherings, a formal dining room, and a din-
ing room for servants on the second floor. There  were guest rooms
above and drawing rooms suitable for soul  surgery—a term Abram
borrowed from Buchman—below. It quickly “became natural” for
ambassadors “looking for a Christian approach and solution” to drop
in for lunch, but Abram delighted even more in “drifters in from a
pagan  legalism”—what nonbelievers call ethics—who, sitting with
Abram on the back porch during a summer meal, might catch the
“contagion” of the Idea.
A magnificent garden in the back grew upon the green ridge of
Rock Creek Park, the narrow gorge that separated the property from

--- Sayfa 163 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 157
the sculpted grounds of Dumbarton Oaks. It was there, in 1944—
the same year that Abram and his wife, Mattie, at last risen from her
sickbed in Seattle, moved to the Christian  Embassy—that Roo sevelt
and his advisers began planning the United Nations.20 Abram at fi rst
interpreted the United Nations as the result of divine intervention
leading the secular world toward international acknowledgment that
the truths of the world’s religions  were best summarized in the per-
sonality of Jesus. He turned his weekly congressional prayer meet-
ings into lobbying sessions on the organization-to-be’s behalf, and
his most conservative prayer disciples—especially the old arch-
isolationist Senator Arthur Vandenberg, converted to Cold War in-
ternationalism before World War II had even  ended—helped quiet
American resis tance to the endeavor.
History, not his Christ, would disappoint Abram. After the war
ended, after it dawned on him that the UN would not become an
international Christian congress, after the atom bombs fell, after
the Red Army boiled up to the edge of Western Europe and did not
stop so much as simmer, waiting, Abram was certain, for Stalin’s
command, for Satan’s  whisper—after he had taken stock of the
war’s victories and defeats, his anxieties and his enthusiasms grew
more warlike than the UN could accommodate. Communism no
longer meant the creed of insufficiently submissive workers; now it
was as great and grand as Lucifer’s kingdom, an evil empire that had
launched “World War III,” Abram decided. “Most of these commu-
nists are in fact rebels and should be treated as rebels,” he said, wav-
ing the black flag of no mercy for those who disobeyed  God—a
sentiment his followers in developing nations would later make real
by murdering hundreds of thousands of leftists. Abram’s fundamen-
talism was polite only within the confines of Washington; projected
onto the world, it thrived on violence and raised up those most ca-
pable of it.
In 1946, Abram undertook a mission to scour the Allied pris-
ons in Germany for men “of the predictable type” ready to turn
their allegiance from Hitler to Christ, and thus, in Abram’s thinking,
America. In later years, Abram would say he had gone at the U.S.

--- Sayfa 164 ---
158 | J E F F S H A R L E T
State Department’s request, and while it’s true that the State De-
partment did send Abram and provide any support he needed, it
was Abram who initiated the trip, writing to Undersecretary of
State Major John H. Hildring that the men of the Senate and  House
prayer groups had insisted that Abram carry “the Idea” to defeated
Germany. Abram sailed on the Queen Mary in June, launched a
prayer cell of Swiss bankers in Zurich, and flew from Frankfurt to
Berlin on the private plane of General Joseph T. McNarney, com-
mander in chief of the U.S. Forces of Occupation, to meet with
General Lucius D. Clay, soon to take over from Eisenhower as
military governor. Everywhere, he met with the “Christian forces
of Germany”—those who saw Germany’s suffering as penance for
its embrace of the totalitarianism of a man rather than that of God.
He found them all weeping, he wrote his wife, crying for their
Führer, for the  thousand-year Reich in the grave at age twelve, for
the dead and the missing and the  blank-eyed boys who had stum-
bled home in retreat from the Rus sians. In the West he wept with
them; in East Berlin, he prayed with “secret cells” of Christians
determined to overthrow communism. Even in the West, he be-
lieved, “atheistic devotees” of subversion—that is, those with strong
anti- Nazi rec ords, concentration camp survivors—had been ele-
vated by an American military government blind to the threat
posed by its eastern ally. “Nominal membership” in the Nazi Party
was being held against good Christians with the necessary experi-
ence to govern. A co alition of leading German churchmen begged
him to intervene, asking only that none but Christians be given
authority.21
In Frankfurt Abram, with the churchmen and the pillars of the
Third Reich to whom they introduced him, “the most intelligent,
honest and reliable people of Germany,” settled on a plan. They
would provide Abram with a list of imprisoned men, “war criminals”
according to the view of a certain un-Christian “element” among the
Allies. Abram’s friends in the military government and back home in
Washington would certify them as “men not only to be released but

--- Sayfa 165 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 159
to be used, according to their ability in the tremendous task of re-
construction.” That September, U.S. secretary of state Jimmy Byrnes,
under the advice of General Clay, delivered in Stuttgart a
world-changing address, “Restatement of Policy on Germany.” The
burden of reparations would be lessened, Germany would be allowed
to keep more of its industrial base, and the purge of National Social-
ism would soon come to an end: “It never was the intention of the
American Government to deny to the German people the right to
manage their own internal affairs as soon as they were able to do so in
a democratic way.”22
In Frankfurt, Abram claimed, God personally revealed to Abram
a key man to quietly help manage the internal affairs of Germany’s
elite: Dr. Otto Fricke, an austere German churchman with an un-
comfortable past. “You are God’s man for this hour in Germany,”
Abram told him.23 Had Abram asked about Fricke’s role in Germa-
ny’s previous hour, Fricke would have begged off explaining his ac-
tivities during the Third Reich. As a radio preacher, he’d been
recruited by Goebbels to propagandize, charged with explaining to
the German people the decadence of jazz. “Terrible disharmonies,”
he warned. He presented as evidence of moral degeneracy the jazz
standard “Dinah.”24
Dinah,
Is there anyone finer
In the state of Carolina?
If there is and you know her,
Show her!
History does not know if the recording Fricke played for a nation
of secretly thrilled Aryans—the German love affair with jazz pre-
dated the nation’s fetish for Hitlerian  opera—was of Ethel Waters,
Louis Armstrong, or a  bare-chested, shimmying Josephine Baker.
Abram would not have asked.
He never asked.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
•
•
•
160 | J E F F S H A R L E T
If we are to understand the ease with which former Nazis and fas-
cist sympathizers  were born again as Christian Cold Warriors, we
must consider for a moment the meaning of memory within the new
religion—Christ at its center, no earthly Führer to  serve—offered
up by the Americans. And we must remember that this religion, a
“spiritual Marshall Plan,” as Wallace E. Haines, Abram’s chief Amer-
ican representative in Europe, called it in a speech delivered at one of
King Paul of Greece’s palaces, was new not just to the former fascists
who received it but to the Americans who gave it, transformed by the
sight of suffering. Not of the Jews, invisible to Abram’s men. Not of
the  Japanese—a missionary wrote Abram dozens of letters from the
radioactive ruins, but he never received a reply. It was to Germany,
the front line of the Cold War, that Abram’s heart turned; Germany
that raised for American fundamentalism the question of theodicy: if
God is both good and  all-powerful, why does he permit the suffering
of innocents? That is a question with which all faiths must  struggle—or
learn to ignore.
Abram’s German brethren chose the latter path. In Germany,
after the war, sleep. Hunger and terrible labor, yes, months and then
years of clearing rubble,  bent- back human chains of men and women
and children carting away pieces of the country in which they once
lived brick by brick. But it was starving,  red-eyed slumbering work,
a dead sleep without dreams. No one could afford dreams. No one
wanted history, the past translated by the  night-mind into a land-
scape of guilt and shame. In Nuremberg, a little girl asked her mother
where the Jews of “Jew Street” are. Hush. There are none, darling,
there never were. In Frankfurt a group of American offi  cers, concen-
tration camp survivors, and the kind of Germans Abram considered
“subversive” gathered in a small theater standing among ruins on a
darkened side street and screened a  twenty-minute film they were
considering showing to the German people. More bodies, many more
bodies, great piles of them, and gold, buckets of gold teeth, and then

--- Sayfa 167 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 161
more bodies, joyful, cheering, marching Germans at torch-lit rallies,
and a  voice-over in German, “You remember, I was there, you  were
there . . .” The lights came up in the theater, and the Americans and
the German subversives promised one another, “This we will show
to every adult German. We will make attendance compulsory.” The
film played in every theater; but in the dark, Germany shut its eyes,
literally, millions squeezing theirs shut until the short film was over
and the main feature came up, a romance, a comedy, a subtitled
Western. Anything but the German past.25
“At times,” a German named Hans Kempe wrote Abram, “there
are hours when I have to lie on the floor, as I can go no further.”
Kempe ran a camp for 500 German men displaced by the war, men
to whom Abram in America was drawn. They were once so strong
and now so broken. Kempe sent Abram stories: one man, a former
government offi  cial—a Nazi official, but what does that mean
anymore?—came to Kempe and told him he could no longer believe
in a God who would allow Germany to suff er.
Their suffering was sweet. They had no fat and no meat, Kempe
reported, but they’d gotten hold of sugar. That was their food. Kempe
worked fourteen hours, eating sugar, and then collapsed. He lay on
the floor, staring at the ceiling. There angels gathered. Angels and
demons, “streams of grace” and a monster he called Hiob, sent by
Satan to talk with him. Kempe  rose. The men needed a mirror for
shaving. This became his mission. He dispatched two to beg for one,
and they returned with one and perhaps the men gathered round and
stared at their reflections, Kempe staring at them staring. “Want,
death, suffering, griefs and cares. Wherever I go, it is always the
same.” He lay on his floor, stared at his ceiling, waited for Hiob. He
heard a storm coming. His men thought it had passed, but he knew it
was coming. They were sleeping, and they must open their eyes, not
to the past, which must be  forgotten—put a mirror between yourself
and  history—but to the future. “Whoever does not already realize
that we are at the midnight hour will awake too late,” he wrote
Abram. “The storm bells ring loudly.”26

--- Sayfa 168 ---
162 | J E F F S H A R L E T
George Kennan heard them in Moscow. In 1946, the American
diplomat padded through the embassy on a cold Rus sian winter night
and sent his “Long Telegram” to Washington, “an eighteenth century
Protestant sermon,” he’d call it, a warning, a prophecy, a prescrip-
tion, the language of diplomacy channeling the spirit of Edwards: we
are as spiders, dangling over the abyss; the fl ames are rising. The So-
viet Union was greater than the men in Washington imagine. They
could not see what Kennan saw, could not imagine what he imag-
ined, when he lay in his bed at night, staring at his ceiling. The storm
bells rang loudly in his ears, and so he rang them for Washington.
“Containment,” he declared, a great clanging word. “Counterforce.”
The bell cracks. This, say the history books, was the beginning of the
Cold War.27
But for Abram it had already started, and Kempe’s demons and
bells  were simply confirmation of the crisis he believed had long been
coming, the notorious “B” of his nightmares now writ large. For
Abram the Cold War began the moment Germany’s defeat was cer-
tain. By the time Kennan published the new creed of containment,
under the pseudonym “X,” the fi rst great public statement of Ameri-
can strategy, the American vision for the coming decades, Abram
had already been gathering his forces.
“The demand for this hour is for America to awake,” declared
one of his many manifestos, a 1945 agenda for a meeting of govern-
ment officials Abram had organized. “Awake”—as if wartime mobi-
lization had been nothing but a  bleary-eyed prayer before morning
coffee. “With faith in God and confidence in the Christian people of
America, the undersigned, representing various national agencies,
believe that the time has come when we should unite our forces in
an effort to promote such an awakening.” They would do so by es-
tablishing prayer cells first in every congressional district in the
country and then overseas.28 Germany, on the front lines, must
awaken, not to its past, to its destiny. Even in 1945, when “destiny”
was dust in the German rubble, Abram believed that Germany still
had one. And Germany’s destiny, he was certain, was in the hands of
the Americans.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
•
•
•
T H E F A M I L Y | 163
Only once, ever so delicately, would Abram raise the subject of
Germany’s recent unpleasantness. In 1948, Fricke wrote to Abram
that he would be sending him a man named  Gustav Adolf Gedat, a
Lutheran pastor who had been a popular writer before World War II.
Gedat was the honorary president of the German YMCA, an enthusi-
ast for “boys’ work,” as it was called. He was a towering man, his
shoulders sharp and so broad that his hairless head looked like a
boiled egg made to stand on its narrow end between them. He be-
lieved as a matter of principle in big grins and bonhomie, but his face
was made for sternness and his soul for discipline; the toothy, lipless
grimace that emerges in photographs from his succession of chins
calls to mind a malevolent giant in a nursery rhyme. At war’s end,
Gedat was a staatsfi end, declared an enemy of the Nazi regime, and on
this basis he built a brilliant postwar career, not to mention a castle in
the Black Forest for his boys’ work, reconstructed with funds from
American backers eager to support “good Germans.”29
Maybe that’s what Gedat had become. But even Abram, deter-
mined to believe in the goodness of all men granted status by Jesus,
wondered otherwise. “We have had some negative reports,” Abram
wrote Fricke about Gedat in a letter marked “CONFIDENTIAL,”
“because of his former Nazi connections and publications.” Abram
did not care to know details one way or the other. Rather, he wanted
to know if Gedat’s past would interfere with his work for the organi-
zation Abram had by then rechristened the International Council for
Christian Leadership.
“Dear Brother Vereide,” responded Fricke, an unusually intimate
greeting for the German pastor. He thanked Abram for arranging the
attendance of John J. McCloy, the high commissioner of the Ameri-
can Military Occupation, at Fricke’s most recent gathering of “really
leading people.” But, he went on, he could not tolerate such an inqui-
sition. Gedat “did what we all tried to do in 1933 and ’34,” he wrote,
“find a synthesis between the new party and Christianity.” For this,
other German churchmen, “willing to be the tools of Satan,” had

--- Sayfa 170 ---
164 | J E F F S H A R L E T
denounced Gedat as a Nazi. Fricke’s “tools of Satan” would have in-
cluded the martyr Dietrich Bonhoeffer had he survived, but such
Christian resis tance to Nazism meant nothing to Fricke. The truth, he
argued, was that Gedat was a  victim—of those unwilling to forget the
past. “Even if Gedat had been a  Nazi—which he has not  been—and if
he saw his failures, let us say only in 1945, and if he repented, would
there not be the way of forgiveness from God and men?”
Is this a clue to the actual date of Gedat’s repentance? In 1935,
apparently still searching for synthesis, Gedat gave a speech in which
he declared that “God ordered hunters to chase Jews to where God
wants them.” Two years previous, he had welcomed the new regime
as the kind of full- strength disinfectant needed to rid Germany of
“materialism,” a concern that plagued him well into his postwar
years. Gedat may have hoped that the Christian wing of National
Socialism would triumph over its pagan mirror image.30 When it did
not—the two strands of fascism remained intertwined throughout
Hitler’s regime—Gedat turned against Hitler as a false prophet, a
man bent on usurping Christ’s rightful place at the head of the na-
tion. Gedat took his totalitarianism seriously, could not stand to see
it reduced in the personality of this uncouth little Austrian. He did
not believe the problem with Jews was racial. It was biblical. He did
not believe in a master race; he believed in a master class of key men
from all nations. For this, Hitler banned him from speaking and even
imprisoned him, and then “materialists” shadowed him with accusa-
tions. Yes, Gedat was a victim.
Would Abram join the materialists? Fricke wanted to know. Was
Abram consumed by the “spirit of vengeance,” the “spirit of Morgen-
thau,” as Germans had taken to calling the tough policies of the Jew-
ish American secretary of the treasury, the strongest advocate of
denazification? Germans like Fricke struck a delicate balance with
such implicit accusations. Allied justice equaled vengeance, they sug-
gested, and vengeance was the stuff of the Old Testament. Putting
their meaning more plainly would have been disastrous; even Abram
would have recoiled, in 1948, from a German who blamed the Jews
for his current troubles. Abram preferred the positive approach, the

--- Sayfa 171 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 165
New Testament, New World, American method: reinvention. He
called it reconciliation. To argue for anything  else, he’d  insist—to de-
mand justice—was  un- Christian.
What did Morgenthau really want? No more than accountabil-
ity. Not every German was a “willing executioner,” as the historian
Daniel Jonah Goldhagen puts it—indeed, many were themselves
executed—but the Third Reich was not something imposed on an
innocent German nation, as Abram and other American fundamen-
talists believed, but something it had brought about.
“It should be brought home to the Germans,” declared a directive
from the Joint Chiefs of Staff delivered to Eisenhower in April 1945,
“that Germany’s ruthless warfare and the fanatical Nazi resis tance has
destroyed the German economy and made chaos and suff ering inevi-
table and that the Germans cannot escape responsibility for what they
have brought upon themselves. Germany will not be occupied for the
purpose of liberation but as a defeated enemy nation.”31
This attitude, believed millions of Germans, was the true
crime against humanity. They had said they were sorry; would the
Americans behave like Bolsheviks and  Slavs—purveyors of “Asi-
atic nihilism,” as one of Fricke’s political allies wrote Abram—and
refuse to forgive? “The world is playing a very dangerous game
with the German people,” wrote Fricke, “if that repentance is not
accepted.”32
Abram replied immediately. The charges against Gedat had come
from the liberal Federal Council of Churches. Not worth a dime. “I
responded by pointing out how natural it would be for a man in Ger-
many to look with hope to any aggressive leadership that could unite
the forces against the Communistic infiltration . . . I am thrilled
with the progress that is being made in Germany.”33
Gedat was among the least tainted of the men that Abram and
Fricke, and later Gedat himself, gathered into prayer cells to help
forge the new West German state. But they were repentant men,
this they testified to at every session. Repentant for what? It was

--- Sayfa 172 ---
166 | J E F F S H A R L E T
hard to say. Every one of them claimed to have suffered during the
war years. Men such as Hermann J. Abs, “Hitler’s banker” and a
vice president of Abram’s International Christian Leadership
(ICL), German division; Gustav Schmelz, a manufacturer of
chemical weapons; Paul Rohrbach, the hypernationalist ideologue
whose conflation of Germany with Christianity, and most of Eu-
rope with Germany, had inspired the Nazis to understand their
war-hunger as divine; and General Hans Speidel, who had ac-
cepted the surrender of Paris on behalf of the Führer in 1940, in-
sisted that he had never believed Hitler, had been forced into his
arms by the Red Menace, had regretted the unfortunate alliance
with such a vulgar fool, a disgrace to God’s true plan for Ger-
many. They had done nothing wrong; they, too, if one gave it some
thought, were victims.
Perhaps some of them were. That is one of the many clever strat-
egies of fascism: persecution belongs to the powerful, according to
its rules, both to dole out and to claim as the honor due martyrs.
Abram did not ask questions; he simply took out his washcloth and
got busy with the blood of the lamb. He scrubbed his “new men”
clean. Did it work? Abs, “Hitler’s banker,” became “Adenauer’s
banker,” a key figure in the West German government’s financial
resurrection. Schmelz kept his factory. Rohrbach wrote on, author-
ing tributes to Abram’s International Christian Leadership in the
Frankfurter Allgemeine.
And Speidel? He was a special case, a coconspirator with Rom-
mel in the attempted assassination of Hitler, the “July Plot” of 1944.
There was something almost American about him; like Buchman,
like Barton, he considered Hitler’s racial policies a distraction from
his really good ideas. For this ambivalence, the Allies rewarded him:
he served as commander in chief of NATO ground forces from 1957
to 1963, when Charles de Gaulle, unpersuaded of his reconstruction,
insisted on his ouster.34
Such men are only a few of those whom Abram helped, and by no
means the worst. There  were Zapp and von Gienanth, there  were

--- Sayfa 173 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 167
“little Nazis” Abram championed for U.S. intelligence positions, and
there  were big ones: Baron Konstantin von Neurath, Hitler’s first
foreign minister, and General Oswald Pohl, the last SS commander
of the concentration camps, among them. For those beyond hope of
blank-slate reinvention, Abram and his web of Christian cells pled
medical mercy (von Neurath, sentenced to fifteen years for crimes
against humanity, was released early in 1953; Abram took up his case
upon learning from von Neurath’s daughter that her father, classifi ed
as a “Major War Criminal,” was receiving less than exemplary dental
care in prison) or expediency (it was unjust, they felt, that Pohl, who
while imprisoned by the Allies wrote a memoir called Credo: My Way
to God—a Christ- besotted path that did not include acknowledging
his role in mass  murder—should be left wondering when he would
be hanged).35
When occupation forces charged Abs with war crimes, he of-
fered a novel defense. He did not deny what he had done for Hitler;
he simply declared that he had done it for money, fascism be damned.
He would gladly do as much for the Allies. And so he did, a task at
which he so excelled that he would come to be known as the wizard
of the “German Miracle.” His past was  forgotten—a phrase that
must be written in passive voice in order to suggest the gentle elision
of history in the postwar years, undertaken by those eager to see a
conservative German state rise from the ashes, a sober son of Hitler’s
fatherland that would inherit the old man’s hatred for one radicalism
but not his love of another.
When, in 1982, the Simon Wiesenthal Center delivered to the
public a massive case detailing Abs’s crimes—among them the loot-
ing of the Third Reich’s riches on behalf of Nazis fleeing to South
America—Abs, not long retired from his spot at the helm of the
Deutsche Bank, must have felt a sense of annoyed déjà vu. Would the
world condemn his financial machinations for the glory of the Reich?
Then it must also reject those on behalf of capitalism’s easternmost
bulwark in Europe, America’s most crucial ally in the Cold War, the
Federal Republic of Germany: a nation in which the past became the

--- Sayfa 174 ---
168 | J E F F S H A R L E T
crass obsession of “materialists,” those who preferred brute “mem-
ory” to more modern, more spiritual affairs.
“Humility begets power,” Congressman Clyde Doyle of California
preached at a prayer meeting convened by Abram to consider the
problem of “reconciliation” as V-Day approached. Let us take the
gentleman from California at his word. Let us suppose that the politi-
cians Abram gathered to dedicate themselves to the “suff ering” of the
German people—men such as Senator Alexander Wiley, the Wiscon-
sin Republican who’d declare even Kennan’s muscular manifesto
“panty-waist diplomacy”; Senator Homer Capehart, the Indianan who
became the most vocal defender of former fascist “rights” after the
war; Representative Walter Judd, the  ex-missionary from Minnesota;
and Representative O. K. Armstrong, a jolly Missourian who thrilled
to the sound of Bavarian oompah bands—were true believers, humble
and powerful and eager to be of service for their suffering brethren.36
Consider Capehart, a Hoosier who’d invented the mass-production
jukebox. “The embodiment of Senator Snort with his vast paunch
and triple chin, a large cigar fixed permanently in his round face,
Senator Homer Earl Capehart was a cartoonist’s dream,” the South
Bend Tribune would later eulogize him. Capehart was no Nazi; he was
a Christian, a spiritual warrior, a red hunter, a vice president of
Abram’s organization, and a member of the Committee on Foreign
Relations. Like Abram, Capehart only wanted to soothe the heart-
ache of the most broken.37 “The fi rst issue” of the postwar situation,
Capehart declared in a 1946 broadside against an unspecified “vicious
clique” within the Truman administration, “has been and continues
to be purely humanitarian.” Capehart spoke of the “tragedy in
Germany”—the rubble of Berlin, the empty stomachs of Hamburg—
with such pathos that one might be forgiven for mistaking which side
he had been on. Subsequent generations of neo-Nazis have done just
that, endlessly recycling his speeches. “Those who have been respon-
sible for this deliberate destruction of the German state”—he meant
not the policies of the Reich itself but Morgenthau’s short-lived plan

--- Sayfa 175 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 169
to “pastoralize” the fatherland into a second infancy—“and this crim-
inal mass starvation of the German people have been so zealous in
their hatred that all other interests and concerns have been subordi-
nated to this one obsession of revenge.”38
To Frankfurt and Berlin, Senator Snort and Abram and the Fel-
lowship of the Senate dining room sent new suits, so that the Ger-
mans could dust themselves off and emerge from the rubble clothed
like gentlemen, and overcoats to protect them from the chill of a na-
tion that burned what was left of its furniture to stay warm. What do
you need? Abram asked Fricke, promising to take up any matter in
the Senate dining room. “Though I hardly like to say it aloud,” Fricke
wrote back, “shoes.” So Abram gathered donations and sent shoes.
And he arranged passports, so that restricted Germans could
travel out of their country. In August 1947, he convened at Lake Ge-
neva a council of nations to befriend the Germans, forgiving French-
men and Dutchmen and Czechs and Poles and Britons and a delegation
of Americans led by Senator Wiley, a member of the Foreign Rela-
tions Committee. “Choose two or three promising leaders,” Abram
had advised Fricke for the German contingent. The Swiss minister of
finance would send the invitations, which the Germans should then
take to a certain American in the occupation government, who would
see to their arrangements for leaving Germany. At the head of the
table Abram placed Alfred Hirs, director general of the Bank of
Switzerland and a key figure in Abram’s Europe an calculations. Hirs
had credentials. His wife was a Bible teacher in Zurich, and his home
was a destination for traveling missionaries. The year previous he
himself had sought out Abram. A Youth for Christ missionary would
recall meeting Hirs at a “Christian businessmen’s” convention in
Washington in 1946, at which Hirs had apparently complained of the
tepid temperature of the religiosity on display. Someone steered Hirs
to the Christian Embassy, where he found Abram and presumably
prayers of a more satisfying fervor.
Hirs was a man in need of consolation. He had come to Washing-
ton not to bask in American Christendom’s good feelings but to fight
over the spoils of war, and it seemed, then, that he was losing. The

--- Sayfa 176 ---
170 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Americans  were demanding that he reveal the secrets of Swiss bank-
ing, and worse, that deposits be returned, not to Nazi depositors—
suicides, Argentine exiles, men who would not ask for their
money—but to Jews.
“Do you want to take 500 million Swiss francs of gold and ruin
my bank?” he screamed at representatives of Morgenthau’s Treasury
Department. This  sum—500 million Swiss francs in Hirs’s bank
alone, 1.25 billion dollars, money to be fought over for the rest of the
century—no one in Washington had imagined that Hitler had ex-
tracted such a rich vein from the bank accounts, jewel boxes, the
jaws of Europe’s Jews.
Back in Zurich, Hirs found more understanding friends. Nathan-
iel Leverone, the  vending-machine king of America, reported on
what he learned in Zurich to American bankers and the National As-
sociation of Manufacturers. The German guests spoke on the need
for solidarity among men of free enterprise if the dollar was to stand
as a bulwark against Stalin’s tanks. Christ or communism was the
choice they offered Leverone. By Christ, the German contingent
meant to imply themselves.
And then there was Senator Wiley, a good friend for a man like
Hirs to have. A Republican from Wisconsin, he was a pleasingly
round-faced man of sixty-three years, dapper in a tux, and skilled in
the use of a hawkish eye and a sly smile. He was, more than anything
else, an opportunist: an isolationist before the war when indignant
cries of dictatorship—FDR’s, not  Hitler’s—could raise a man in the
Republican Party, but an internationalist after it, when fighting com-
munism won more votes than keeping our boys safe at home. He en-
joyed a pulpit, and he didn’t much care what faith it belonged to. “The
Jews and the Arabs,” he once declared, “should settle their dispute in
the spirit of Christian charity.” Such a faith had no trouble absorbing
Hirs and the Germans, since Wiley was a deep believer in the moral
relativism of anticommunism. During the war, he had been an advo-
cate of the Jewish cause, calling for a Jewish “foreign legion” of exiles
and Palestinian Jews. Afterward, Jewish gold was of no concern when
weighted against the strength of the Red Army. That threat, real and

--- Sayfa 177 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 171
imagined, drove Wiley to distraction. The Rus sians would rape the
womanhood of Europa. In Korea Mao’s Chinese would swarm like
ants. In the  union halls of Milwaukee honest Americans would turn
like werewolves into godless monsters. Everywhere, he thought, com-
munism was about to bubble out of its cauldron. He didn’t want to
just put a lid on it; he wanted to blow up the kitchen.
That had already been tried. Europe in 1947, the year of its cold-
est winter in decades, remained a rubble of roofless buildings and
bridges into thin air. “At night,” one German American returnee
wrote in his journal, “you see ever so often the dim sky through the
walls of a building: the filigree of chaos. Then it seems beautiful in a
weird way and you forget that houses are good only when they pro-
tect people from rain and cold.”39 That thin line of indigo was a stron-
ger barrier to hostilities than the “iron curtain” Winston Churchill
had warned of.
Senator Wiley wanted total war. Take the men of Hitler’s old
panzer divisions, bless ’em under Christ, and point ’em toward Mos-
cow. Abram’s German point man, Otto Fricke,  wasn’t so blood-
thirsty; he merely wanted  twenty- five rearmed German divisions to
slow the Rus sian invasion he saw coming. “What Do We Christians
Think of Re-Armament?” was the theme of one of Fricke’s cell meet-
ings in 1950. They were conflicted, tempted to take “malicious joy
that the ‘Allies’ are now forced to empty with spoons the bitter soup
that has been served by the Rus sians.” The judgments at Nuremberg
had dishonored the Wermacht, and the dismantling had insulted and
robbed Germany’s great industrialists, Krupp and Weizäcker and
Bosch—all well represented in Fricke’s cells. By all rights they should
stand down, refuse to rearm, let the Americans defend Christendom
from the Slavs. But there it was: Christendom. They were Christian
men, chosen not by a nation but by Jesus himself to lead their people
into the “Order” God revealed to them in their prayers. “To accom-
plish these tasks,” the Frankfurt cell concluded, “the state needs
power and this powerfulness is indispensable for the sake of love.”40
But the Rus sian blitzkrieg wasn’t actually coming. The Soviet
Union quickly realized its interests  were best served in Western

--- Sayfa 178 ---
172 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Europe by parliamentary democracies, in which communists un-
tainted by collaboration could seize power without a shot fired. Or
so Stalin thought. Across the continent in those cold, hungry days,
middle- and  upper-class conservatives regained the power they’d lost
to the fascist rabble. They were not, however, militarists, at least not
of the operatic breed. The Germans did rearm under Chancellor
Konrad Adenauer, the most pious politician in all of Europe, but
much more than militarization, Germany threw itself into making the
tools of Cold War. It was the nonpolitics of Krupp and Hirs, quiet
men who knew how to hold on to money not properly theirs, that
conquered Western Europe as Hitler never had.
“I am modernizing my factory,” Baron Ulrich von Gienanth,
Zapp’s old Gestapo colleague, boasted to one of Abram’s aides in
1952.41 He had 800 workers in his employ, he went on, men orga-
nized according to Christian principles. And he was opening a new
factory in Switzerland. His ICL  brother-in-Christ, Baron von der
Ropp, a “prophet” according to Abram, provided men such as von
Gienanth with a new Christian management theory. Von der Ropp,
before the war a Prussian propagandist for a “greater” Germany, was a
Christian nationalist who had resented Hitler’s cult of personality—a
vulgar parody, he thought, of the Christian destiny for Germany pro-
claimed by Martin Luther. In a stroke of luck, he had been banned
from public speaking just before the war’s end, and on that thin moral
basis reinvented himself, like Gedat, as an instructor of boys.42
Von der Ropp specialized in young  working-class men, or “the
Stirred,” as he referred to those distracted by “social problems” from
the masculine model of Jesus. On one hand, von der Ropp’s religion
was straightforward American fundamentalism, remarkable only for
the thoroughness with which he transplanted it to German soil. But
he also anticipated the middle-class fundamentalism of the Ameri-
can future, the point at which Abram’s  upper-class religion and the
popular front would converge. A geologist by training, he preached
that “too much science” would lead to “intellectual shallowness,” a
foreshadowing of the claims of today’s fundamentalism, intellectu-
ally critical and  anti-intellectual at the same time. He taught that the

--- Sayfa 179 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 173
poor, with their demands for government services—which he un-
derstood as a failure to trust that God would  provide—were “the
adversaries of the church.” But not through their own doing; rather,
absent some modicum of prosperity, they were too bitter to prop-
erly appreciate Christ’s providence. This, in essence, was the faith
that would thrive in future decades, when both the cell group and
the megachurch became staples of evangelicalism, the microscope
and the telescope of American fundamentalism. It certainly did not
take hold in Germany; but it evidently made an impression on
Abram.
Perhaps, too, on von der Ropp’s fellow aristocrat, Baron von
Gienanth. The two would have met often at Abram’s private conven-
tions of Germans and Americans. The difference was that von der
Ropp, never a Nazi official, could travel and spread his ideas at
Abram’s international meetings. Von Gienanth was bound to the Fa-
therland. This, he complained to Abram, was an impediment to re-
construction. He’d wanted to attend a conference in Atlantic City
with further ideas of expansion in mind. Would the American mili-
tary really say that a man of his stature would blemish the boardwalk?
He was on a list of undesirables, he had learned from certain
connections—probably ICL men within the occupation. This would
be “understandable,” he thought, if he had been a communist. “But I
don’t see any sense in including people of my attitude”—ex-fascists
ready to make common cause with the United States.
Among the many testimonies von Gienanth collected on his own
behalf was a letter from an American diplomat’s wife who insisted
the baron had not been a Nazi so much as an “idealist.” Eventually,
von Gienanth had believed, “the good and conservative element of
the German people would gain control.” Fascism had been like strong
medicine, unpleasant but necessary to what von Gienanth had always
believed would be the reestablishment of rule by elites like himself.
“In the coming years of reconstruction,” his advocate wrote, “such
men will be needed who can be trusted.”43
Abram contacted the Combined Travel Board that decided on
which former Nazis could be allowed to leave the country. The baron

--- Sayfa 180 ---
174 | J E F F S H A R L E T
was needed, Abram insisted. There  were high Christian councils to
be held in The Hague. “Expedite the necessary permit.”
Should that argument prove inadequate, Abram hired von Gien-
anth’s wife, Karein, as a hostess on call for Americans traveling on
Christian missions. She was an American citizen, though she’d spent
the war with her SS officer husband. Now her American passport
was being threatened. Abram saved it. That summer, he sent the
baron and his wife a gift of sorts: a congressman from California, to
be a guest on the baron’s estate. The following winter Senator Frank
Carlson visited. “As you know,” Abram advised Karein, “he is one of
the closest friends and advisors to Eisenhower.”
A “serene confidence has filled me,” she replied, “as to President
Eisenhower’s guidance by God.” That summer, her husband flew
with her to England, his passport evidently restored.
The Castle of the Teutonic Order sits on the eastern edge of a small
island in Lake Constance, a Bavarian gem at the intersection of Ger-
many, Austria, and Switzerland. Shaped like a fish, the waters are
emerald, sapphire, and amber, depending on the time of day. The is-
land itself, called Mainau, is even more dazzling, the “island of flow-
ers,” a botanical garden formed according to the whimsy of the
Swedish princes who have lived within this fortress for generations.
Since the nineteenth century they have been collecting blossoms and
butterflies for their retreat, and, most of all, trees, giant redwoods
and cedars from Lebanon and palms, more palm trees, surely, than in
all the rest of Germany combined, gathered from around the globe.
The crest emblazoned on the castle is a bristle of swords and
spears and gray fl ags that resembles a charging,  heavy-tusked bull el-
ephant with a purple crown between his great ears. But the castle
itself, raised in 1746 on the ruins of older castles, celebrated as an
ideal of the architectural style known as Southern Bavarian baroque,
looks like a giant cake made of pale orange sorbet. Its walls are
smooth and creamy, its windows like the ornamentation of sugar
cookies. “You would have liked the surroundings,” Abram’s chief

--- Sayfa 181 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 175
representative in Europe, Wallace Haines, wrote him in June 1951.
Haines had just presided over an international meeting which Abram’s
health had prevented him from attending. Mainau, he gushed, was a
“fairy island,” and the conference, judging by his letter alone, might
have been something out of a fairy tale: flowers sculpted into the
shapes of strange creatures, great  candle-lit halls, “divine services” in
the chapel, ornate and glittering as a Faberge egg’s interior.44
The first meeting at Castle Mainau had taken place in 1949, the
same year the Allies allowed Germans to begin governing themselves
again. The 1951 meeting was planned to mark what Abram consid-
ered the complete moral  rehabilitation—in just two  years—of Ger-
many. Abram wanted the Americans to go to them, a grand contingent
of senators and representatives. Gedat, now the unoffi  cial leader of
the German organization, was thrilled. But when word came that
official duties in Paris prevented the American delegation from at-
tending, he was furious. There was more bad news. Chancellor Ad-
enauer, Gedat’s keynote speaker, was called away to a crisis. And
Abram himself, slowed down by more bad health, would not be
there. His representatives could take notes.45
“For our God is a consuming  fire”—Hebrews  12:29—was the
conference’s theme. What did this mean? “God is the God of power,”
said one of the first speakers. God is not the God of ethics, of moral-
ity; God is great, God made this order and chose its leaders. Prince
Gottfried Hohenlohe opened the meeting on a Thursday eve ning.
“God gave me my place in the world,” he told 150 assembled wor-
thies, a statement not of pride, in his mind, but of humility, a mod-
esty shared by his audience, men and women now trained for several
years, through weekly cell meetings, in Abram’s religion of key men
and destiny.
General Speidel was there, as was Rohrbach the propagandist:
There  were representatives from the major German banks and from
Krupp and Bosch, and there was the president of Standard Oil’s Ger-
man division. There was at least one German cabinet member, par-
liamentarians, mayors, a dozen or more judges. A U-boat commander,
famed for torpedoing ships off the coast of Virginia, cut a dashing

--- Sayfa 182 ---
176 | J E F F S H A R L E T
figure. A gaggle of aristocrats, minor princes and princesses, barons
and counts and margraves, were intimidated by some of the best
minds of the old regime. There was the fi nancial genius Hermann J.
Abs, and a fascist editor who had once been a comrade of the radical
theorist Walter Benjamin before throwing his lot in with the Nazis.
Wallace Haines spoke for Abram. He stayed up all night before
his lecture, praying for the spirit that spoke aloud to his mentor. The
Americans, God told him to say, were thrilled with the “eagerness”
of the Germans to forget the war. The Americans came to the Ger-
mans humbled, he told them. Haines brought proof of their new-
found wisdom: a letter of repentance for the sins of denazification
signed by more than thirty congressmen including Wiley and Cape-
hart and a young Richard Nixon.
On Saturday night, Theophile Wurm, the former Lutheran bishop
of Württemberg, spoke in the White Hall, a confection of gold gilt
dully shining by the light of candles. First there was music, cembalo
and violin, “old music,” reported one of Abram’s Germans, a former
Nazi propagandist named Margarete Gärtner. Blue darkness fell on the
lake, and Bishop Wurm began to speak. All felt sacred, for  here was a
man of deep character. He’d been an early and enthusiastic supporter
of national socialism, had helped purge the German church of dissent-
ers, had drawn up lists of the weak, the deformed, the degenerate.
This, as Fricke had said, was simply as they “all” had done. But Bishop
Wurm was different; Bishop Wurm did not believe in killing. Not
more than necessary, anyway. This watery conviction, he thought,
made him a “resister.” His identity at the end of the war, when the clock
sprang back to zero in 1945, stunde null, the Germans called it, was his
identity forever. He was the man who wrote Berlin a letter asking the
Reich to spare some Jews. “Not from any predisposition for Jewry,”
he’d written, “whose immense influence on cultural, economic, and
political life was recognized as fatal by Christians alone, at a time when
almost the entire press was philosemitic.” No, Bishop Wurm wrote,
his version of truth to power, “the struggle against Jewry” was correct;
but shouldn’t the Reich first try to convert them?
In the White Hall Bishop Wurm stood before a great window,

--- Sayfa 183 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 177
the  snow-covered Alps glowing purple in the dusk. A thunderstorm
rolling in over the lake split the sky and boomed through the castle,
setting the candles aquiver, silhouetting Wurm when lightning flashed.
He spoke of the mechanization of man and the loss of faith in free
enterprise, God’s delicate weavings, the idea, the promise, that God
helps those who submit totally. The lightning cracked, and Frau
Gärtner, Bishop Wurm, the barons and the generals and the captains
of industry submitted, totally. “We are children of fear,” Prince Ho-
henlohe had proclaimed at the meeting’s beginning, but that night,
fortified by the spirit of Wurm and electrified by lightning glaring off
the lake and over the mountains, their bellies full of warm stories
and good wishes from around the world, the children of fear felt like
children of God, and for this fine sensation, wrote Frau Gärtner and
Wallace Haines and Gedat, they sent their thanks to Abram.
For years, Manfred Zapp had been Abram’s harshest correspon-
dent, constantly warning that the “man on the street” with whom he
seemed to spend a great deal of time had had enough of America’s
empty promises. America had committed “mental cruelty,” he charged,
holding “so-called war criminals” in red  coats—the uniforms of the
Landsberg Prison—awaiting execution indefinitely.
Abram agreed, and sent to the occupation government letters
signed by dozens of congressmen demanding action.
America prevented German industry from feeding the nation,
Zapp argued.
Abram agreed, and intervened time and again on behalf of German
factories. He saved as many as he could, though a steel foundry named
for Herman Göring was beyond even his powers of redemption.
America had put leftists and trade  unionists and Bolsheviks in
power, Zapp complained.
Abram agreed. The cleansing of the American occupation gov-
ernment became an obsession, the subject of his meetings with the
American high commissioner John J. McCloy and his weekly prayer
meetings with congressmen.

--- Sayfa 184 ---
178 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“Idealists”  were prevented from serving their people, said Zapp.
The man on the street was losing faith in the American religion.
“Freedom in their interpretation is the ideal for which we shall fight
and die but the reality is nothing  else but a beautiful word for ser-
vices for Western powers . . . The word freedom is not taken seri-
ously anymore.”
Within a few years, nobody cared. The “Morgenthau Boys”  were
as much a part of the past as the history no German cared to speak of.
“Tabula rasa,” declared Konrad Adenauer when he took power as the
Bonn Republic’s first  post- Hitler ruler.46 Abram met with Adenauer
on several occasions, but the “Old Man of Europe,” a creature of the
Weimar Republic’s forgotten tradition of conservative reformers,
never took to him; Adenauer was a Moral  Re-Armament man, a
great friend of Buchman’s. But by then Buchmanism had diluted its
fundamentalist flavor, had become 100 percent Cold War spirits,
suitable for men and women of any faith who hated Bolshevism.
More, Adenauer was too Roman Catholic to really embrace Abram’s
religion—even, one might say, too Christian. A former mayor of
Cologne, he had been deposed as soon as the Nazis took power in
1933, and had spent most of the next twelve years gardening and
reading theology. At the heart of Europe an politics for two decades
after the war, by inclination he was a monastic, his face disfigured by
an accident in his youth, his old bones subject to chills that led him to
wrap himself in blankets on long journeys. His Christian Democratic
Union (CDU)—the German equivalent of the Republican Party—
was ascetic in its devotion to purging Germany of leftist tendencies
but liberal in its economy. Adenauer did not like to see his Germans
go hungry.
Given Abram’s infl uence in postwar  Germany—if Adenauer kept
his distance, many of his ministers did  not—what kept the nation
from falling into the orbit of American fundamentalism? Why did its
Christian Democratic Union, Germany’s most powerful party, not
become part of a Christian bloc within the Western bloc, the founda-
tion of an evangelical supranationalism beside which the strength of
the contemporary movement would pale?

--- Sayfa 185 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 179
Part of the answer lies in its Christianity, essentially Catholic,
and its Democracy, which was, with occasional hiccups, actually
democratic, in the most pedestrian  sense—that of dull bureaucratic
order. More, it was a political party; in the United States fundamen-
talism grew during the 1950s and ’60s by presenting itself as a greater
force, to which men of either party could pay tribute in return for
divine favors.
But most of all there was old, wrinkled Adenauer himself, more
blatantly Christian in his pronouncements than any American politi-
cian could ever be, but also more cautious. Keine Experimente, “No
Experiments,” was an official campaign slogan. The “values and sense
of justice of Western Christendom”47 was the political plank on which
he plodded forth, but it was the very lack of such a sense that made of
Adenauer’s Germany a secular nation. For it was a nation with no
concept of sin. That had gone into the dustbin right along with his-
tory when Adenauer in his first act as chancellor dropped all charges
 against—privileged was the official term—nearly 800,000 minor
Nazi officials, many of whom would become the functionaries of his
 blank- slate regime.
In place of the very real dangers of German romanticism, the
bloodlust of Wagner, Adenauer off ered modest family values. A depo-
liticized philosophy of inward-looking  house holds, the moral conform-
ism of proper Germans. The  man-on-the- street in the era of Adenauer,
lamented Zapp, nostalgic for the thunder of the “new conception” now
past, wants only “his job, his food, his movie, and his sport.”48
In the end, Abram and the Americans learned more from the
Germans than the other way around. It was after the CDU turned
family into cultural code that American fundamentalism found a way
to make the term both modern and traditional, used to  describe—and
shape—the postwar suburban world as well as that of a mythical
small-town past. Abram finally retired normalcy, the  Harding-era ne-
ologism that for two decades had defined his mission, his Christ, and
his politics. It was a notion to which postwar Americans studiously
subscribed even as they celebrated the myth of themselves as rugged
individuals, but family captured that paradox more neatly, a nation of

--- Sayfa 186 ---
180 | J E F F S H A R L E T
cozy little kingdoms ruled by Father. And the new evangelical alli-
ances, forged along the lines of spiritual war rather than the eradi-
cation of vices traditionally considered  masculine—drinking,
gambling—made sure that Father knew best about not only his little
unit’s material welfare but also its spiritual morale, once the prov-
ince of Mother. “Men must reclaim the Bible from their wives,”
Abram’s “prophet,” Baron von der Ropp, taught the workers of the
Ruhr, a succinct statement of the old  nineteenth-century muscular
Christianity that took on new meaning in the postwar era.
And then there  were the questions of sin and of history, inescap-
able in Europe and thus ignored. But sin and history presented more
nuanced dilemmas to American fundamentalism. Not its prewar mild
sympathy for  fascism—the blood of D-Day had wiped that record
clean as far as most Americans  were concerned—but the drag the
actual, awful past put on the movement’s new global ambitions. What
were they? Nearly the same as those of the nation’s. For a muddled
period after the war, the United States had pretended that it could
shrink back to its prewar isolationist ways, but by 1947, with the
Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan in place, it was firmly com-
mitted to the “new world order” hoped for by Abram and Senator
Wiley and their bipartisan alliance of Christian internationalism.
“The United States has been assigned a destiny comparable to
that of ancient Israel,” Harold Ockenga, the president of the National
Association of Evangelicals, had declared at its inception, reviving
the old notion of manifest destiny and extending it around the globe.49
But manifest destiny, the original westward thrust that erased a con-
tinent of Native souls, burns history like coal and knows no sin but
that of its enemies. So, too, Abram’s dream, in both its religious and
secular manifestations. And in this regard, too, the Americans learned
from the Germans, who understood that mythology makes of the
past a parable, smooth and enigmatic, best understood by those who
ask no questions.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
7.
T H E B L O B
T
he most unexpected early fruit of Abram’s prayer breakfasts
was The Blob, a 1958 B-movie about the creeping horrors of
communism. “Indescribable . . .  Indestructible! Nothing can stop
it!” warned the tagline. It is mindless glop from outer space. The Blob
absorbs the residents of a small town, growing bigger, grosser, and
more ravenous until the townspeople discover they can defeat the
Blob by freezing  it—the Cold War writ small and literal. The Blob
was the result of an unlikely collaboration between a screenwriter
named Kate Phillips and an evangelical minister named Irvin “Shorty”
Yeaworth. The two met at the 1957 Presidential Prayer Breakfast.
Phillips, a former actress who’d appeared in forgotten films such as
Free, Blonde, and 21 and Charlie Chan’s Murder Cruise, wasn’t known for
her faith. She attended the Prayer Breakfast as a guest of a friend
from Islip, Long  Island—probably Abram’s patron, Marian Aymar
Johnson, at whose Islip estate Abram did much of his planning.1 Phil-
lips was accustomed to Hollywood glamour, but she felt lost amid the
crowd of congressmen and business titans gathered for breakfast in a
ballroom of Washington’s Mayflower Hotel. “All of a sudden,” Phil-
lips later told a fan, “a chap came out of the hotel and said that some-
body had suggested he talk to me because I was a writer.”
The chap was Yeaworth, a director of “Christian education” films
looking to subliminally broadcast his message into the mainstream.
Shorty had backing for a  full-length science fiction flick. The catch
was that it had to be “wholesome.” And as if by providence,  here was

--- Sayfa 188 ---
182 | J E F F S H A R L E T
a screenwriter at a prayer breakfast. “I would like to have you be a
part of the picture,” Shorty declared, and a few days later he traveled
up to Phillips’s Long Island home to show off a two-pound coffee can
full of the blob stuff that would come to serve as the Cold War’s most
ridiculous metaphor for communism.
If picturing the Red Army as a carnivorous mass of Jell-O was ab-
surd, the symbolism fit the bigger concept of Cold War, an amorphous
fight that absorbed ideological nuance as it grew bigger, grosser, and
more ravenous for the hearts, minds, and economies of two dueling
empires. Between the rebirth of fundamentalism in the 1930s and ’40s
and its emergence as a visible force during the Reagan years sits the
historical blob of the Cold War, an era as bewildering to modern minds
as any in American history. There is, to begin with, the question of
whether the United States won this war or the Soviet Union lost it. A
third school of thought wonders if both sides  were losers. And then
there is the more vexing question of just what we mean by Cold War.
To today’s conservatives, it was a philosophical stance—better
dead than red—that resulted in “our bloodless victory.”2 For liberals
eager to reclaim a mantle of muscular progressivism, meanwhile,
Cold War refers to an abstract strategy of containment—as if the Cold
War didn’t explode into dozens of “regional” conflicts strategized in
Moscow and Washington, “civil wars,” fought with the empires’
weapons, that killed millions. Most memorably, the dead, American
and otherwise, of Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, but also the
forgotten losses of the Shah’s Iran, Suharto’s Indonesia, Mobutu’s
“Zaire,” Pinochet’s Chile, Papa Doc’s Haiti, the United Fruit Com-
pany’s Guatemala, and many more. One could draw up just as long a
list to lay at the Kremlin’s door or Beijing’s, but it’s our own sins that
most require recollection, that fade to nostalgia in the  sepia-toned
memories of both liberals and conservatives.
Even those  terms—liberal and conservative—befuddle us. Which
was which, for instance, when Eisenhower ran against Adlai Stevenson
in 1952 on a campaign promise of decreasing military spending, while
Stevenson boasted that “the strange alchemy of time has somehow con-
verted the Democrats into the truly conservative party of this country”?3

--- Sayfa 189 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 183
How do we categorize Cold Warriors such as Senator Mark Hatfield—a
Republican from Oregon, vocal opponent of the Vietnam War, and
staunch advocate of evangelical political  power—versus his colleague
to the north, Senator Henry “Scoop” Jackson of Washington, a “god-
less” Democrat whose relentless militarism inspired neoconservative
protégés such as Richard Perle and Paul Wolfowitz, architects of the
Iraq War?
That the ideological spectrum in America more closely resembles
a Mobius strip, left and right twisting into one another, than it does a
radio dial is a basic truth of political history. But what of religious
history?4 What of the role of Christianity, and particularly that branch
of the faith dedicated to “fundamental” principles, whether they’re
those of Christ’s sovereignty over all, or of America’s divine destiny?
How did American fundamentalism intertwine with the new inter-
nationalism to create the DNA of a Cold War in which one of the
nation’s most militant commanders in chief—I am thinking here of
Kennedy, not  Reagan—reduced the issue to one of a belief in God,
“ours,” versus the Soviets’ lack thereof?
The Christianity of American fundamentalism is a faith for futur-
ists, the sort of people who delight in imagining what is to come
next, even if it’s awful. World War II had changed the steady plod of
Christian futurism, quickened it. Christendom had at times raced
toward apocalypse before, but never with such technology at its
disposal—no rockets, no bombers, no nuclear missiles. The stakes
were higher in the new era, the enemy stronger. Fundamentalism
responded with great imagination, not just following the popular
trend of spotting flying saucers and aliens among us, but driving it.
The aliens among us were not green men from Mars; they were red,
at least on the inside, and they could be your neighbors. On the out-
side, they looked just like good Christian Americans. Many of them
were Christians, in fact, or so supposed the conservative mind. By
the end of the decade, FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover would declare that
communist stealth operatives, “schooled in atheistic perversity,” had

--- Sayfa 190 ---
184 | J E F F S H A R L E T
made Christian pulpits a main objective—and  tool—of their propa-
ganda. A “deadly radioactive cloud of Marxism-Leninism,” he preached,
was fogging America’s liberal houses of worship.5
Hoover kept files on liberal churches; Abram kept friendlier files
on Hoover, a man who seemed to naturally speak the language of
holy cause- and-effect Abram had refined before the war. “The crimi-
nal is the product of spiritual starvation,” Hoover was quoted in a
pamphlet Abram saved, The J. Edgar Hoover You Ought to Know. The
pamphlet’s author was an ally of Abram’s, Edward L. R. Elson, a
mainline Presbyterian whose paranoia placed him at the far end of
the religious spectrum. Elson joined another friend of Abram’s,
Charles Wesley Lowry, to create the Foundation for Religious Ac-
tion in the Social and Civil Order, and Lowry, in turn, joined Abram
in behind-the- scenes council of upper-crust Christian conservative
leaders known as “the Twelve.”
Before the war, such initiatives  were the stuff of the fringe, disaf-
fected Babbits, America Firsters. After the war, they were main-
stream. In the 1950s, the soldiers of Christ didn’t wear armor; they
wore cufflinks. Consider this convention of Fellowship worthies,
gathered in a hotel lobby for a group portrait. On the left is Abram in
his customary double- breasted suit, lapels like bat wings, his silk ker-
chief neatly folded in his breast pocket and a slim leather Bible spread
open in his right hand. To his right stands Billy Graham, his famous
blue eyes glowering between his rock jaw and a wave of blond hair,
almost good looking enough to play a gunfi ghter. And rising between
them stands a fascinating character named Kenneth M. Crosby.
Crosby was literally our man in Havana, or at least one of them.
He’d been a spy throughout Latin America during the war. Offi  cially
retired at its end, he took over Merrill Lynch’s Cuban operation in
1946 and stayed until 1959, when Fidel Castro drove out the dictator
Fulgencio Batista, reporting all the while back to U.S. intelligence, a
happy double posting which also allowed him time to set up prayer
cells for Abram. His “Havana Group” consisted of American embassy
personnel, representatives from American banks and the United
Fruit Company. Cuban sugar cartels boasted openly in the Havana

--- Sayfa 191 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 185
Post of the prayer cell’s use as a lobbying tool, noting that one of the
International Christian Leadership offi  cers, Congressman Brooks
Hays, returned home from a spiritual session in Cuba ready to fight
for Cuban sugar in the  House Foreign Affairs Committee. Crosby
was even more loyal to the regime, serving as an intermediary be-
tween Batista’s Palacio Presidencial and American businessmen in
Havana and New Orleans.
At the time, even Christianity Today considered Fidel preferable to
the profoundly corrupt Batista.6 But to Crosby, Castro was “another
Hitler.” It was Crosby, briefing CIA director Allen Dulles, who laid
one of the fi rst bricks in the Cold War construction of the island na-
tion as one of America’s greatest enemies. These  were the days of
citizen soldiers, spooks and “psyops” commandos, and, for the first time
in American history, preachers on the front lines. Front lines of what?
“Total cold war,” Eisenhower would call it, a battle not of bullets—
although plenty of those would  fly—but of ideas, many of which
 wouldn’t.7 Against communism’s promise of “People’s Democracy,”
for instance, Madison Avenue, at the behest of Eisenhower, coined
“People’s Capitalism,” a catchphrase that somehow failed to inspire
even the Americans who practiced it, much less Soviets supposed to
be seduced by it.8
Preachers provided the ammo capitalism  couldn’t manufacture.
“Your government,” one of Abram’s British protégés wrote, “is aware
of the need of much greater propaganda to Rus sia and her satellites if
we are to control the Communist menace.” The Brit hoped to obtain
Abram’s help with a plan to smuggle New Testaments into the East-
ern Bloc under diplomatic cover. The aim was “to place dynamite
just where it is needed.”9 Bible smuggling boomed in the 1950s, but
very few eff orts to sneak Western wisdom into the Soviet bloc made
as much impact on their intended targets as on the West itself, which
reveled in its crusades. Some of the schemes  were truly quixotic: the
use of hot- air balloons to drop leaflets on Albania, for instance, an
effort that probably did more to spread the American love of UFO-
logy than the Cold War double-dogma of God and private property.10
Such is one of the overlooked legacies of the Cold War: the weirding

--- Sayfa 192 ---
186 | J E F F S H A R L E T
of American fundamentalism. Abram’s was a  space- age faith, thrill-
ing to the vibrations of Eisenhower’s “Atoms for Peace” and throb-
bing to the conviction that God would guide our missiles, if only we
could conform our national will to His. That was the stated goal,
repeated over and over: conformity. Conform or die. Nuclear anni-
hilation, should it occur, would be the result of rebellion, the “eff ect
of the tragic choice of disobedience.”
Abram’s religion was sleek and powerful, an aerodynamic update
on the clumsy bombs dropped by fundamentalism’s old angry ranters.
Two of Abram’s “field representatives,” Dr. Bob Pierce and J. Edwin
Orr—both to achieve fame of their own as major  twentieth-century
revivalists—coached young Billy Graham in the mores and manners
of overseas operations and educated society. Harald Bredesen, another
field representative who’d go on to build a powerful ministry of his
own, performed a different service for a youthful Pat Robertson,
teaching the senator’s son a folksy appeal that would complement his
political acumen. One Abram understudy, Dr. Elton Trueblood, made
a career of packaging militant fundamentalism in the language of
country club banal, churning out best sellers that conflated spiritual
war with Cold War; he also drew a paycheck from the United States
Information Agency, for which he headed up the Offi  ce of Religious
Information. On his watch “spiritual roots”—Christian ones, that
is—as the foundation of American democracy became government
policy, channeled through private organizations so that the offi  ce’s
plans would not look like a “propaganda gimmick.”
Abram’s closest ally in the Senate, Frank Carlson, Republican of
Kansas, coined the Fellowship’s slogan, “Worldwide Spiritual Offen-
sive.” Carlson was a farmer from Cloud County, Kansas, who first
made a national name for himself in 1936 when as a young congress-
man he double-crossed his patron, Governor Alf Landon, by ripping
into the New Deal as a subversion of American principles. Landon
had hoped to pitch his policies as a more moderate version of FDR’s
vision, and  here was his protégé, declaring the sitting president un-
American. Not that Landon had a prayer, anyway; he became the
losingest presidential candidate in American history. But Carlson

--- Sayfa 193 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 187
prospered. Over the next decade, he rebuilt the Landon machine
under his own name. He took the governor’s office in 1946, and
when three years later one of Kansas’s senators died in offi  ce, Carl-
son inserted as a placeholder a flunky who then dutifully stepped
aside when Carlson was ready to return to Washington in 1950 as a
member of the nation’s most exclusive club.
In the early days of his career, Carlson cultivated a myth of him-
self as a  modern-day Cincinnatus who entered politics only at the be-
hest of a delegation of small businessmen that found him literally
tilling his fields and begged him to help stop Dictator Roosevelt—the
“destroyer of human rights and freedom,” as Carlson called him. By
then, Carlson was chairman of the Interstate Oil Compact and he had
denounced not only the New Deal but also Hoover’s  business-friendly
policies before it as an “insidious attack” on “free  enterprise”—by
which he meant government subsidies for Big Oil.11
And yet Carlson enjoyed a reputation as a moderate and even, in
the surreal political landscape of the 1950s, a “liberal” Republican. His
face was tanned and leathery, flanked by white wings of hair and
almost-pointed ears, framed by arched eyebrows and a broad, lipless
mouth, all of it centered on a nose the shape of a mushroom; he looked
like a sunburned Bela Lugosi. It was hard to imagine this comically
featured man as an ideologue in the mold of hammerhead Joe McCar-
thy of Wisconsin. Carlson was a backslapper, an arm gripper. A Baptist
teetotaler himself, he presided over the end of “Dry Kansas” and joined
two other Fellowship senators in raising funds for a Republican club in
Washington that would feature the best cigars and the finest Scotch
whiskey. He was a Republican wise man, “sagacious,” according to the
columnist Drew Pearson, “the ‘No Deal’ Dealer,” in the words of an-
other pundit. It was Carlson who in 1951 coined for his friend and fel-
low Kansan Ike the  double-duty slogan of “No Deal.” Eisenhower, then
the electoral underdog even though he was the most popular man in
America, meant that he wouldn’t horse-trade with crooked local GOP
organizations, most of which  were in the back pocket of “Mr. Republi-
can,” Senator Robert Taft of Ohio, the presumed front-runner. But the
slogan also implied a  none-too-subtle rebuke to FDR’s New Deal and

--- Sayfa 194 ---
188 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Truman’s more conservative Fair Deal. No Deal meant more than the
“rollback” of progressivism, as Carlson claimed, a conventional conser-
vative assault on social welfare. By No Deal, Carlson and Eisenhower
meant no politics. That is, they hoped to capitalize on Eisenhower’s
popularity as a victorious general, incorruptible in peacetime, to replay
the Cincinnatus story on a national scale.
Carlson spread the rumor that he and a shadow cabinet of more se-
nior senators led by Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts  were push-
ing Ike for the White  House without Ike’s permission. Eisenhower
privately wondered, meanwhile, whether it would be legal to win the
nominations of both political parties. It wasn’t that Eisenhower tran-
scended  ideology—history has revealed him to be one of the most
masterful politicians of the postwar  era—but rather that he believed
that he could best achieve his goals by pretending not to have any.
Eisenhower was the great literate of midcentury politics, the
man who knew how to parse a moment, to respond to the masses as
if they were all individuals, each unique in his sameness. Eisenhower
was a PR man; he had learned on the battlefi eld the secrets of psyops,
of psychological warfare. “Don’t be afraid of that term,” he advised
the voters. He was a bridge player; he knew how to bluff and win. He
bluffed the Republicans, in whose traditional ranks he did not prop-
erly belong, and the Democrats, who, having lost their chance to
nominate him, dismissed him as an amateur. Eisenhower knew what
Americans  were looking for and he let them see it in him, a hero both
grand and ordinary. “The sort of prince who could be ordered from
a Sears Roebuck catalogue,” as Saul Bellow described him.
In 1952, Carlson and a small group of like-minded Republicans
put in their order, and Ike delivered. The ringleader was ostensibly
Senator Lodge, but Carlson ran Ike’s Washington campaign head-
quarters, and his sidekick and former senatorial substitute, Henry
Darby, ran the nominal HQ on the second floor of the Jayhawk Hotel
back in Topeka. Carlson’s abandoned patron Alf Landon briefl y tried
to swing his state to Taft, but Carlson effectively smeared  Taft—and
Landon, his more moderate former mentor—as reactionaries none-
theless too soft for “total cold war.” Carlson had laid the groundwork

--- Sayfa 195 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 189
for his new  middle-ground reputation the year before. And he did it
with the help of Abram.
In April 1951, Abram enlisted ICL president Ed Cabaniss, a
wealthy manufacturer, to round up some businessmen interested in
the Idea who could help create an advisory prayer cell for every gov-
ernor who wanted one, to be organized by Carlson. Cabaniss, a hold-
over from the  pre–1950s Fellowship, was an Old Guard conservative.
He had a V-shaped head, a tiny jaw, and a giant brow; he looked like
a praying mantis, and his affect was that of one as well, slow and
chilly. For his latest undertaking, Abram wanted more dynamic men.
He specifically requested that two of the most effective red hunters
in his circle be included: Howard Coonley, the former president of
the National Association of Manufacturers who’d helped win him ac-
cess to big business during the 1940s, and Merwin K. Hart, a wealthy
member of his board of directors who recruited businessmen for the
Fellowship through his pet project, the National Economic Council.
The council was little more than letterhead, a desk in the Empire
State Building, and Hart himself, a  goggle-eyed, tuxedoed blue blood
with a fringe of hair around his narrow skull and more than a hint of
fascism around his politics. “If you find any organization containing
the word ‘democracy,’ ” Hart declared, “it is probably directly or in-
directly affiliated with the Communist Party.” Hart wasn’t kidding;
effective in his deregulation crusades, he was never able to achieve
one of his fondest ambitions, the disenfranchisement of the poor,
whom he considered spiritually unfi t for voting.
The war had made Hart toxic for a spell, since unlike Lindbergh,
who’d abandoned his own fascist inclinations to fly for the United
States, Hart never repented for his prewar fascist position. But the
Cold War changed everything, Cabaniss wrote Abram. “It seems to
me there is a growing proportion of the public, particularly in the
political world, who are coming to a realization that Merwin Hart is
not so far ‘off the beam’ in his thinking.” The business world was
coming around, too; Hart counted among the supporters of his Na-
tional Economic Council’s program of God and  laissez-faire capital-
ism top men from Standard Oil, DuPont, and General Motors.

--- Sayfa 196 ---
190 | J E F F S H A R L E T
This theology of the dollar was not quite as cynical as it sounds.
Abram was expanding his Europe an operation into Greece’s upper
crust, an experience that was teaching him to refine the stealth evan-
gelism he’d learned in Germany. First came capitalism; then came
Christ. Capitalism, preached his friend Norman Grubb, was the
wedge. “ICL,” he commented to Abram, “is a bold attempt to reach a
certain unreachable class with Christ, and is therefore not primarily
concerned with presenting itself as sound in a ‘fundamental’ doctri-
nal basis; it is after fish who might refuse the bait if this fundamental
doctrinal basis was flaunted in front of them.”12
Hart, Coonley, and Cabaniss  were to line up financial backers for
the group (who, as it turned out, agreed to raise $100,000 for the proj-
ect); Abram would explain the Idea; and the public face of the initiative
would be two former governors who’d made the leap to the big leagues,
Carlson and Senator Robert Kerr of Oklahoma. Kerr was a Democrat,
thus blunting the growing concern within the Fellowship that it ap-
peared to be simply a subsidiary of the Republican Party, and he was
Carlson’s kind of Democrat—“the chief of the  wheelers- and-dealers,”
according to the journalist Milton Viorst, “a self-made millionaire who
freely and publicly expressed the conviction that any man in the Senate
who didn’t use his position to make money was a sucker.”
Like Carlson, Kerr was an oilman. Or, more precisely, oil’s man.
He knew a good investment when he saw one; he sent Abram a check
for $500. Other senators fell in line: Robertson of Virginia contrib-
uted a  fund-raising letter, Republican Ralph E. Flanders of Vermont
gave $200 and the use of his name, and Pat McCarran of Nevada,
McCarthy’s Democratic mirror, wrote asking what would be most
helpful—money or contacts (or both). That fall, the president of the
ultraright William Volker Fund chipped in $500 from his own
pocket. The Volker Fund had helped Friedrich von Hayek, until
then an obscure Austrian economist, become a national celebrity in
America by subsidizing editions of his Road to Serfdom. First published
in the United States by the University of Chicago Press, the book ap-
peared in shortened versions produced by Reader’s Digest and Look
magazine, which illustrated Hayek’s argument that any attempt at

--- Sayfa 197 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 191
“central planning” (including  FDR-style government regulation of
big business) would send a society down a “road to  serfdom”—and
mass murder along the lines of Hitler and  Stalin—from which there
was no return. Hayek’s economic ideas were considerably more
complex than the uses to which they were put, but as understood by
the American public—and by Abram, who recoiled from serfdom
even as he embraced what he happily termed slavery to God and his
markets—they seemed to lend a scientific imprimatur to the Man-
ichaean worldview of the country’s most rabid red hunters. A decade
later, the Volker Fund would hire Rousas John Rushdoony, a theolo-
gian who was to the far right of fundamentalism what Hayek was to
economic conservatism; it was Rushdoony who helped marry the
two with extensive writings on theonomy, a jargony term for what
Abram’s descendants would come to call biblical capitalism.
Both theonomy and biblical capitalism suggest an equal yoke be-
tween scripture and currency, but there can be little doubt about
which was the driving force behind this new plan to surround gover-
nors with prayer warriors vetted by Abram and his friends in corporate
America. And yet it was Carlson, who disliked even acknowledging
the existence of dollars, who quietly climbed Abram’s chain of com-
mand. The following spring, he took time off from Eisenhower’s
 still- unofficial campaign to travel to The Hague, where Holland’s Queen
Wilhelmina anointed him as the new chair of International Council for
Christian Leadership, the overseas division of Abram’s ICL composed
at that point mainly of Germans who didn’t want to talk about their
pasts and French businessmen just as eager to smooth over history in
the service of profits. Three fellow GOP congressmen, all Abram dis-
ciples, accompanied Carlson. They fl ew on the public tab, and the trip
occasioned sharp questions from the press. Why had the secretary of
defense given the four use of a U.S. military plane for private travel?
The ICLer’s mission, said a spokesman for the secretary, was in “direct
relationship to the national interest.”13
At The Hague, Queen Wilhelmina, a strong monarch famous for
bypassing Holland’s parliamentary system,14 presided over this Amer-
ican interest, and the inner circle of the Fellowship’s trans-Atlantic

--- Sayfa 198 ---
192 | J E F F S H A R L E T
organization elected Carlson their new chairman. Carlson looked
like a  stand-in, though, for the general running the Allied command
in Paris. That seemed to be as Carlson wanted it; he was in Holland
to recruit allies for an American campaign. Besides Abram, there
were industrialists who’d line up behind Eisenhower, including the
automobile titan Paul G. Hoffman, who’d become one of Ike’s eco-
nomic advisers; a pair of ultraright congressmen to shore up Ike’s
conservative fl ank; and, in addition to GOP heavies such as Senators
Wiley and Flanders, a delegation of “Dixiecrats,” Southern Demo-
crats to the right of most Republicans. That summer, Carlson declared
that Eisenhower would contest the traditionally solid-Democratic
South, a quixotic quest that anticipated Nixon’s “Southern Strategy”
by more than a decade.
Far more troublesome to Eisenhower than the Democratic South,
though, was a singular midwestern Republican, the de facto party
boss, Senator Robert Taft of Ohio. To the uninitiated, Taft did not
appear be a formidable obstacle. He was a dull speaker, unmemora-
ble in appearance, indifferent to the public. But no politician could
claim a more perfect pedigree: grandson of a secretary of war, son of
a president, first in his class at Yale and Harvard Law. “The best mind
in Washington,” went a popular Democratic jab, “until he makes it
up.” And yet he played the part of a common man. Not like Roo se-
velt, who’d disingenuously claimed to be a farmer, but rather, in the
name of an ill-defined middle class—in reality, the managerial class,
small businessmen and second bananas who dreamed one day of be-
ing bosses  themselves—that would become a template for conserva-
tive “populism” long after Taft’s name was forgotten.
If Taft was hardly just another  Rotarian-on-the-make, he truly
was in every sense a provincial man, and proud of that fact. A son of
Ohio beholden to neither the New England aristocracy nor the solid
South, wary of Wall Street, contemptuous of Europe and its wars, he
was a conservative at the last time in American life when such views
connoted a kind of pacifism. His enemies murmured of fascist sym-
pathies because he did not want to fight Hitler, but it was war itself
that he loathed. When World War II ended and the Cold War began,

--- Sayfa 199 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 193
he opposed it even more strongly, opposed the draft and opposed
military spending and opposed what he feared, correctly, was the
coming age of American empire, an era in which the United States
would wage the wars the old colonial powers could no longer afford.
In 1952, Taft was known as the champion of the “Old Right,” an
anachronism in the day of the atom. He was the engineer of the New
Deal’s deconstruction, the author of the 1947 Taft- Hartley Act which
spelled the end of labor’s brief reign as the definitive power in American
life. Taft- Hartley reduced labor to an “interest  group”—eliminated the
vision of solidarity as a force that gave people meaning. Maybe Taft
dreamed that with labor rebound, the nation’s economic life would re-
turn to its  pre- Depression condition. But that world was as long gone as
the fantasy of the United States as an island, immune from the troubles
of other nations. A New Right, New Liberalism, New Middle were ris-
ing, shaped by the war and by Europe, by the hunger of an economy that
had grown fat on weaponry, by the idea of totalitarianism. Total Cold
War was coming. Ideology, technology, and—overlooked by the man-
darin historians of the  period—theology  were converging.
Taft had the support of the old GOP local party operations, but
he did not have God and he did not have Frank Carlson. He would
not recruit public piety as a banner for his campaign. His lieutenants
were not wily; they were hedgehogs, nudging Taft’s Old Right views
along, decrying the possibility of a “garrison state” as if the Cold War
hadn’t already led the United States to embrace a permanent military
footing, spiritual warfare thinly secularized as “psyops” and arms
races against a godless enemy. Such was the method of foxes. Carlson
slinked from delegate to delegate behind the scenes, the “ ‘No Deal’
dealer” smiling and speaking of spiritual things, one nation under
God, unity, a general (not a politician!), never speaking ill of old
“Mr. Republican” but promising patronage to those who’d abandon
him. “The Kansan is clearly the man to see if you want an ‘under-
standing,’ ” cooed an admiring reporter.15
At the Republican convention in Chicago, enough delegates “ca-
ressed by personal letters, wined & dined at party shindigs, promised
a secure future by politicos,” reached such “understandings” with the

--- Sayfa 200 ---
194 | J E F F S H A R L E T
general’s lieutenants and sold out their man to the new order.16 To
the populist Right, the activists who’d sent delegates to Chicago to
stop Ike from entangling America in more of Europe’s troubles, the
convention took on “mythic proportions,” a stab in the back of con-
servatism by Ike and his internationalists.17 Carlson, as conservative
as Taft, understood that anger—and how to turn it to his man’s ad-
vantage. Jesus, Carlson believed, had been a “psyops” man like Ike,
and Christ and the general both taught the same lesson: it was the
spirit, not the material, that mattered. Emotions, not facts. Carlson
and Eisenhower did not need to crush the anger in Taft’s supporters;
they only had to redirect it toward international communism.
After Eisenhower routed Adlai  Stevenson—the electoral vote
was 442 to 89, with Ike poaching four states of the Old  Confederacy—
Carlson set about ensuring Taft’s loyalty to the new regime. His
method, though, left some wondering about Eisenhower’s loyalty to
the broad middle ground he’d staked out in his campaign. First,
Carlson brokered a breakfast between his man and Taft, at which
Taft agreed to stand aside while Eisenhower waged Cold War abroad
if the general would commit to a war on the New Deal at home. Taft
had decided that if he could not be president, he would like to be
majority leader; after all, he and Ike shared a distaste for organized
labor, indifference to civil rights, and a firm conviction that capital-
ism constituted a natural law more certain than the physics of nuclear
fission. The next afternoon, Carlson met with Taft after church and
cut a deal.  His—and, implicitly,  Ike’s—backing for Senate majority
leader, a betrayal of promises already offered to Senator Styles Bridges
of New Hampshire. “An amazing political feat,” the columnist Drew
Pearson wrote of the Taft revival. “Carlson sold the idea.”18
The idea Carlson sold was the Idea: Abram’s dream of a big tent
conservatism, a political philosophy that denied the reality of the politi-
cal and disdained “philosophy” as the province of eggheads. In a Sep-
tember 1952 mass mailing, Abram had directed his  two-hundred-plus
prayer cells across the nation to devote themselves to spreading “alert-
ness to the right choice and vote in the November elections.” God, he
wrote, had spoken these words to him: “Your mission is to concentrate

--- Sayfa 201 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 195
on a few men in leadership capacity.” One of his new lieutenants, a
Lithuanian named Karlis Leyasmeyer who claimed to have escaped a
death sentence at the hands of the Soviets (with the help of the Nazis),
added that such men could become a “sixth column,” the secret coun-
terweapon with which the establishment could fight communism. The
sixth column would transcend politics. In a voter’s guide prepared for
the state of Washington by Abram’s  men—a tactic that would be re-
peated decades later by the Christian  Coalition—God tapped both
Democrats and Republicans. His slate, however, was of suffi  cient po-
litical conformity for a bipartisan co alition to raise charges of fascism.
But the ‘f’ word had lost its power. Most of Abram’s candidates won.
“Red” was the new brown, against which all Christian soldiers must
fight together. One God, one nation, one ideology.
During the winter following Eisenhower’s election, the United
States did not even have an ambassador in Moscow. It was in that par-
ticularly cold season that Abram—with the help of Carlson, Billy
Graham, and Eisenhower  himself—made his master move, follow-
ing the president’s inauguration with what would become an annual
political ritual, the Presidential Prayer Breakfast (later to be renamed
the National Prayer Breakfast). Not for Abram the clash of politics
or even the intellectual battle of theology. His ambition for the
breakfast—hosted by Conrad Hilton, presided over by Carlson,
blessed by Graham, and sanctifi ed by Ike’s blandest speech  yet—was
that it serve as a chance to lop off the left end of the political spec-
trum and cauterize the wound. “Their differences,” wrote the Chris-
tian Herald of the several hundred assembled politicians, Democrats
and Republicans, “are fused into a striking similarity.”
Billy Graham had been summoned to the Eisenhower campaign
by Carlson. The senator had concluded that the young preacher
would be an asset, especially given that some Democrats were actu-
ally floating the notion that it was Republicans who  were soft on
communism and cold toward Christ.19 Although Graham himself
was a registered Democrat, he had decided for Eisenhower before

--- Sayfa 202 ---
196 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the general even announced, and had prayed on the matter with one
of his supporters, an oil baron named Sid Richardson. (This period of
Graham’s career might be called his oil phase. In 1953, with backing
from yet another oil baron, he would release a feature film called
Oiltown U.S.A., a tribute to the free market’s ability to foster the vir-
tuous exploitation of God-given resources.) Carlson called Graham
to the Chicago GOP convention for an off-the-record meeting. “Carl-
son had sold Eisenhower on the idea that I could contribute a reli-
gious note to his campaign speeches,” Graham would recall.
“Frankly,” the preacher told the general, “I don’t think the Amer-
ican people would be happy with a president who didn’t belong to
any church or even attend one.” (In fact, there have been several.)
“As soon as the election is over,” Eisenhower promised, “I’ll join
a church.”
Graham wanted more. He’d been talking with Abram about a
Presidential Prayer Breakfast, a parachurch ritual they hoped would
settle the question once and for all of whether the United States was
a Christian nation and the New Testament, not the Constitution, its
ultimate authority. Abram had long dreamed of such an event, a pub-
lic dedication of the governing class to the service of the Christian
God, but no president previous to Eisenhower would cooperate. It
was Graham, according to his own curiously immodest account,
who made it happen. He arranged with Conrad Hilton (to whom
he’d been introduced by Carlson) to sponsor the event, and he gave
the main address—at most of the first fi fteen annual breakfasts. But
Carlson was Abram’s pipeline to the White  House, and Abram’s invi-
tation to the  president-elect went through the No Deal Dealer. Ike
declined. “He did not want to set a pre ce dent,” Graham recalled. But
Graham intervened, and Ike called Carlson over to say that he would
show, after all. There  were debts to be paid. Eisenhower was the first
twentieth-century Republican to come to power in part through an
alliance of populist evangelicals (led by Graham) and of elite funda-
mentalism. Now Graham and Carlson wanted their return.20
“The only one thing,” Ike warned Carlson, “let’s not have any tele-
vision or radio around.” That suited the man to whom Carlson reported

--- Sayfa 203 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 197
this news. Abram did not much care what the masses saw or did not
see. He was playing to an audience of power; “up and out” went his
spiritual broadcast. Eisenhower, meanwhile, was wary of advertising
his foray into the  no-man’s-land between church and state. “You can
tell the Cabinet I’ll be there,” Eisenhower instructed Carlson. “I sup-
pose that’s tantamount to telling them to come.” Come, they did, and
with the exception of those tapped for Abram’s table, they found their
own seating. There  were no arrangements, Abram boasted; all  were
left to fend for themselves, “regardless of rank,” just as in the Kingdom
of God—supposing, that is, that such a kingdom  were inhabited only
by men of high rank, the powerful pretending at egalitarianism within
the confines of the most exclusive breakfast club in the land.
There  were 400 such men at the first Prayer Breakfast. It was
8:00 a.m., Thursday, February 5. The theme was “Government Un-
der God.” Abram wore his trademark bow tie. He was  sixty-seven
that year, and he would soon suffer a heart attack, and soon Stalin
would die, and Kinsey would publish his report on Sexual Behavior in
the Human, and Fortune magazine would crow over a “spiritual awak-
ening” among top businessmen. At the Mayflower, Conrad Hilton
hung above the dais a painting of Uncle Sam on his knees, “not beaten
there by the hammer and sickle” but submitting America to Christ, a
sentiment the Senate’s chaplain admired. “There are signs,” he ob-
served of the  painting-in-lieu of a cross, “that once again, as in the
former days of the Nation’s true glory, America is bending its knees.”21
Printed beneath Uncle Sam was a prayer of Hilton’s own composi-
tion. Hilton was a Catholic, but he thrilled most to the religion of
anticommunism. “Be swift to save us, dear God, before the darkness
falls.” There was no darkness in the Mayflower, only bacon. Abram
presented Eisenhower’s cabinet to God. “Save them from self-
deception, conceit, and the folly of independence of Thee, oh God.”
Eisenhower mumbled up to the podium, the pulpit.
He said, “All free government is firmly founded in a deeply felt
religious faith.” And then, “As long as you feed me grits and sausage,
everything will be all right.” These  were the twin doctrines of a
prosperity doctrine.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
198 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“There is the sound,” observed the Senate chaplain, swept away
by the deep spirituality of these words, “of a going in the tops of the
mulberry trees,” a supernatural sound. He thought it might be Eisen-
hower’s prayers, winging up to heaven like B–52s.
Twenty years later, Abram’s successor, Doug Coe, would explain
his pre deces sor’s calm at the Presidential Prayer Breakfast: “It is only
one-tenth of one percent of the iceberg,” he’d say. “[It] doesn’t give a
true picture of what is going on.”22 The Fellowship’s true work was
always both great and small, an accumulation of symbolic gestures
and actual legislation. Sentiment and policy cohered into a religiously
motivated movement, mostly Republican but also Democratic, that ab-
sorbed politicians and ordinary businessmen into its mass so smoothly
that the townspeople never noticed; never rallied to resist or to even
question the growing blob of political fundamentalism. The Fellow-
ship, wrote one of Abram’s field representatives, “should be primarily
an organism and not an organization.”
“The idea of a Christian lobbyist program might well emanate
through the Breakfast Groups,” one of Abram’s original Seattle broth-
ers wrote him. It’s worth noting that the “Christian” issues of the day
were not pornography or abortion; they were surveillance and weap-
ons, the perceived need for more of both. Abram’s correspondent
wanted “more unity on civil  defense”—read,  anticommunism—“and
foreign policy.” Abram wrote back to say that he’d already moved the
Fellowship beyond anything so crass and limited as a lobby. In the
1960s, it began distributing confidential memos to involved members
of Congress on its progress around the world. The memos stressed
that “the group, as such, never takes any formal action, but individu-
als who participate in the group through their initiative have made
possible the activities mentioned.” The Fellowship was not a con-
spiracy; it was a catechism, its questions asked in the privacy of
Abram’s prayer cells and answered in the public arena.
In 1954, “Under God” was added to the Pledge of Allegiance, an
initiative sponsored in the Senate by Homer Ferguson, a Republican

--- Sayfa 205 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 199
ICL board member, and financed by ICLer Clement Stone, and “In
God We Trust” was added to the nation’s currency by a bill spon-
sored by a Dixiecrat congressman named Charles E. Bennett, also a
member of the Fellowship’s inner circle.23 Bennett, a self-styled eth-
ics crusader, saw himself as a  small-government man; God and the
dollar would redeem the nation, if only Congress would unshackle
them. “Congress  can’t remake the soul of America,” he’d say, a no-
tion he evidently thought justified his opposition to civil rights.24 It
was Bennett who prayed the opening prayers at Abram’s second
Presidential Prayer Breakfast that February, at which Supreme Court
chief justice Earl Warren—then still a  conservative—declared that
separation of church and state was fine, so long as “men of religious
faith” were in charge of a country he described as “a Christian land,
governed by Christian principles.”
That same year, Abram’s old ally Alexander Wiley, now chair of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee as well as the upper  house’s
weekly prayer meeting, decided to extend those principles south-
ward. He declared a democratically elected government in Guate-
mala a front for communist invasion and quietly  green-lighted U.S.
participation in its overthrow, an action that culminated in a ticker-
tape parade in New York City for the dictator installed in its place by
America, and a banquet in his honor at Hilton’s Waldorf-Astoria.25
And that year a Vietnamese Catholic named Ngo Dinh Diem,
“directly and personally aided by God,” by his own account, came to
America to appeal to a nation in the grip of religious revival for its
support in a fight against godless communism. A year later, Eisen-
hower obliged, installing Diem’s Christian—and profoundly corrupt—
regime over a Buddhist nation when the French lost their hold, the
first great step toward the American war in Southeast Asia that Rob-
ert Taft had feared. Wiley, a former Taft- style conservative trans-
formed by Abram’s Christ and Ike’s Cold War into a militant
internationalist, was the president’s point man in the Senate, bully-
ing liberals and conservatives alike into backing “hard and fast mili-
tary commitments” to South Vietnam, no questions asked.26
Nineteen  fifty-four was also the year that several Fellowship

--- Sayfa 206 ---
200 | J E F F S H A R L E T
brothers steered Joe McCarthy off the national stage. It was a matter of
politics, not ideology; Tailgunner Joe—raw, red-nosed,  thick- browed,
uncouth, uncontrolled, hungering Joe—made anticommunism look
 low- class.
McCarthy’s downfall and Ike’s disdain for him have been chronicled
at great length elsewhere. Less noticed was Eisenhower’s careful use of
McCarthy during his campaign. Carlson was the middleman. “I fully
expect that Senator McCarthy will be speaking vigorously for the
ticket,” Carlson told the press in September 1952. McCarthy did so,
lashing out at Ike’s opponent, Adlai Stevenson, as surrounded by com-
munist sympathizers. Weapon deployed. Mission accomplished. “Sen.
Frank Carlson of Kansas,” the press dutifully reported, “commented
that the General did not owe anything to McCarthy for the speech, and
was still a ‘no deal man.’ ”27 After the election, the press assumed that
Carlson would be rewarded for his services with a cabinet post. Instead,
Carlson stayed in the Senate of his own volition, where he chaired a
seemingly obscure subcommittee on civil service employees. It was a
job that allowed him to quietly purge government of far more “security
risks”—most of them guilty of no more heinous a crime than loyalty to
the New Deal—than McCarthy had ever dreamed of, thousands erased
from the rolls through backroom bureaucratic maneuvers.
Carlson also served on the special committee appointed to
consider McCarthy’s censure after he went too far by slinging mud at
other senators. But the man who first wrote the resolution to cen-
sure was Carlson’s pre deces sor as president of the Fellowship, Sena-
tor Ralph E. Flanders of Vermont. Flanders was a genteel Republican,
an engineer, an industrialist, a banker. His wife collected New En-
gland folk songs.  Smooth-domed and whiskered, his spectacles slip-
ping down his nose and his pipe in hand, he looked like a professor
and was sometimes mistaken for a liberal. But his record was as right-
wing as many of the Senate’s more outspoken firebrands. In 1954,
the year he moved to censure McCarthy, he revived an old funda-
mentalist favorite: an amendment to the Constitution that would
have rewritten the United States’ founding document to declare,
“This nation devoutly recognizes the authority and law of Jesus

--- Sayfa 207 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 201
Christ.” And yet, because of his resolution against raving McCarthy,
he is remembered as a sane man in paranoid times, footnoted in his-
tories of the Cold War as one who stood up for common sense.
Only the radical journalist I. F. Stone perceived otherwise. Flan-
ders, he wrote in 1954, did not challenge McCarthy’s paranoia but
rather his effectiveness in its promulgation. “To doubt the power of
the devil, to question the existence of witches,” Stone wrote follow-
ing Flanders’s ostensibly heroic gesture, is
to read oneself out of respectable society, brand oneself a
heretic, to incur suspicion of being oneself in league with the
powers of evil. So all the fighters against McCarthyism are
impelled to adopt its premises . . . The country is in a bad
way indeed when as feeble and hysterical a speech [as Flan-
ders’] is hailed as an attack on McCarthyism. Flanders talked
of “a crisis in the  age-long warfare between God and the
Devil for the souls of men.” He spoke of Italy “as ready to fall
into Communist hands,” of Britain “nibbling at the drugged
bait of trade profits.” There are passages of sheer fantasy, like
this one: “Let us look to the South. In Latin America, there
are . . . spreading infections of communism.  Whole coun-
tries are being taken over.”28
This last, singular point would soon be made true in Guatemala,
albeit the result of a more genteel anticommunism expressed through
a U.S. bombing campaign. Whereas McCarthy used anticommunism
to promote himself, men such as Flanders and Carlson and Eisen-
hower believed it should be reserved for the construction of empire.
The ethos of Abram’s “Worldwide Spiritual Offensive” ran parallel
to and often infused American Cold War tactics. Secretary of Defense
Charles E. Wilson—whose “New Look” policy of nuclear weapons
and air power consolidated the “military-industrial complex” Eisen-
hower himself would lament at the end of his  presidency—embraced
Abram’s Idea of strength through spiritual conformism, allowing
prayer cells to proliferate within the Pentagon and signing off on a

--- Sayfa 208 ---
202 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Fellowship project called “Militant Liberty,” developed by a fundamen-
talist propagandist on Abram’s payroll named John C. Broger. Broger,
also an ill-defined “consultant” on the Pentagon payroll, was promoted
to the Department of Defense’s Office of Information and Education, a
post from which he’d control the Pentagon’s propaganda on more
than 1,000 military radio and television stations and in 2,000 news-
papers for almost three decades. In 1958, Abram made him a vice
president of the Fellowship, bringing Broger’s propaganda to the elites
even the Pentagon couldn’t reach. “The seed,” Broger would say, speak-
ing of his fundamentalist faith, “was dropped thousands of times.”29
A tall, jowled man, balding and mustachioed, a squinter, Broger
learned how to propagandize as an American aide to Filipino guerril-
las in World War II. In December 1945, he turned those talents to-
ward the Gospel, incorporating the Far East Broadcasting Company
to bring the Good News to Asia. In 1948, from a patch of Philippines
jungle littered with the scraps of war, he first sang “All Hail the
Power of Jesus’ Name,” live on KZAS, “Call of the Orient” radio. He
built more stations, scouting them out himself from planes made of
corrugated tin in which he’d fl y over China, Vietnam, Cambodia. In
1950, Admiral Arthur W. Radford, a zealous Presbyterian, asked for
a briefi ng; Broger would now get his chance to combine his passions
for propaganda and evangelism.30
The year before, Radford had been caught circulating a secret
memo tearing down Truman’s defense secretary. That led to exile in
Honolulu, where he met Broger. But in 1952, he caught  President-
Elect Eisenhower’s attention with a plan for battle by proxy, a blue-
print for decades of dirty wars. Let’s use Chiang  Kai-shek’s troops in
Korea, he told Ike on a walking tour of Iwo Jima. Ike liked the idea
enough to go golfing with the admiral and introduce him to General
Motors CEO Charlie Wilson, about to become Ike’s defense secre-
tary.31 In 1953, with Wilson’s sponsorship, Radford came in from
the islands to become chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and a year
later he brought Broger to join him. By then Broger was working for
Abram. The admiral and the preacher bankrolled Broger’s ideologi-
cal crusade.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 203
A statement of its goals can be found in the Fellowship’s archives:
the recruitment of “indoctrinated personnel who will form nucleus
groups for the implementation of . . . the highest concepts of free-
dom, whether socially acceptable or not.”32 By highest concepts of free-
dom, Broger meant the American Jesus, a Christ of strict order;
“Social Order,” “Law and Order,” “Economic Order,” and “Religion”
were among the main topics of indoctrination. But Broger’s own
sense of order was more than a little skewed, as evidenced when he
came under scrutiny for a peculiar Pentagon scheme to recut a movie
called Operation Abolition, itself already a dizzying collage of newsreels
and film clips which, through a series of unconnected images, im-
plied that Abram’s old foe, the  union organiz er Harry Bridges, was
behind a plot to violently assault the  House  Un-American Activities
Committee. Broger wanted to make Operation Abolition into an even
weirder movie, modeled on a theory of his that behind even Harry
Bridges was yet another, more insidious enemy: Japanese commu-
nists bent on taking over the minds of American teenagers.33
Operation Abolition was a bust; even the most ardent red hunters
found it kooky. But throughout much of the 1950s and ’60s, Broger
broadcasted his notions into the hearts and minds of millions of U.S.
troops and an unknowable number of foreign  nationals—“articulate
natives,” as Broger referred to his “targets.” These would be either
Christians or those who  were willing to convert to the faith, located
across Latin America, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East, “traditional
cultures [that] have become unable to furnish an acceptable compre-
hension of existence.”34
If Operation Abolition was aborted, Broger had better luck with his
other film ventures. Early on, he managed to recruit more talented
collaborators. Some of the most talented in America, in fact: the di-
rector John Ford, John Wayne, and Merian Cooper, the producer
who paired Fred Astaire with Ginger Rogers.
Ford had worked as a spy during the war, photographing guer-
rilla warfare in occupied Europe; Cooper had fought Pancho Villa in
Mexico and flown against Germany in World War I; and John Wayne
was John Wayne.35 In 1955, Broger flew to Hollywood for a series of

--- Sayfa 210 ---
204 | J E F F S H A R L E T
daylong meetings with the moviemakers, and Ford asked for eighteen
copies of the Militant Liberty program to distribute to his screen-
writers. He also suggested that Broger insert Militant Liberty into
the movie he was directing at the time, The Wings of Eagles, in which
Wayne played a navy flier battling naive pacifists in Congress for
funding. Broger obliged; thankfully, the movie has disappeared from
fi lm history.
As has Broger’s most successful effort: the  big-screen, epony-
mous adaptation of Militant Liberty, financed by the Fellowship and
shown not just to the military but to schools, church groups, and
prayer cells across the country, and made available to all of Abram’s
disciples. Blunt in his  beliefs—the Constitution, Broger once lec-
tured in the Pentagon’s “Protestant Pulpit” series, was “hewn and
shaped to the spiritual concepts of biblical truths,” a guarantee of
“Christian  freedoms”—he subscribed to Abram’s philosophy when it
came to the exercise of power. Each key man spreads the Idea through
the means available to him: the Senate, the Pentagon, a radio tower
in the Philippines. “Christian Action,” as he and Abram called their
activities, should be behind the scenes, in the air.
That ephemeral sense, along with the legacy of the Cold War to
which it contributed some small portion of fear and misinformation,
appears to be all that remains of Militant Liberty, the movie. A declas-
sified Defense document tells us that it was in color and hints at its
story. Broger was its hero, presenting Militant Liberty to an all-star
panel of brass and political power that included Congressman Charles
Bennett, Frank Carlson, and Abram.36 Beyond that, nothing more. I
have not been able to fi nd a copy of the film; I have only the rec ords
of its existence in Abram’s files, the press reports of the day, and that
picture of Broger with Defense Secretary Charlie Wilson, accepting
the “Spiritual Values” award at the Freedoms Foundation’s headquar-
ters in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Standing with them are Carlson
and the two producers of the film, an assistant to Abram, and a hand-
some, sandy-haired man, visibly proud to be counted among such
august company: Irvin “Shorty” Yeaworth, just months away from
the Prayer Breakfast at which The Blob will be born.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
8.
V I E T N A M I Z A T I O N
Rivals
Saigon, 1966. At the Hotel Caravelle, the swankiest address in the
city, a  middle- aged missionary named Clifton J. Robinson slips out
a page of hotel stationery to write a report on his conquests for
Christ in Vietnam. Robinson is big and broad-chested, dark-browed,
looks good in a suit, at the rooftop bar popular with reporters from
NBC, CBS, and the New York Times, flashing a smile of absolute
certainty. He’s associate secretary general for the Fellowship in
Southeast Asia. That means he’s Abram’s man. He’s writing back
to Abram’s headquarters in Washington—although Abram, his
beautiful voice gone soft and sleepy with age, spends most of his
time in a retirement community called Leisure World. Robinson
is writing to thank Senator Carlson, who’s sent a string of letters of
introduction to precede Robinson on his grand tour of the region’s
friendly regimes. In each country Robinson visits, the American
ambassador stands ready to receive him and pass him along to local
power brokers. Robinson feels as if Jesus himself is opening doors,
a neatly trimmed savior in a linen suit. He knows, however, that
the name of a U.S. senator on the Foreign Relations Committee,
not Christ’s, is the reason the diplomatic corps genuflects before
him. A “capital” notion, thinks Robinson. “Invaluable ‘inside’ help
they’ve been able to be to us,” he scrawls beneath the Hotel Cara-
velle’s logo.1

--- Sayfa 212 ---
206 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Among his most fruitful meetings was time spent with William H.
Sullivan, U.S. ambassador to Laos. As chair of the State Department’s
Vietnam Working Group in 1963, Sullivan had been one of the archi-
tects of the war, a de facto “field marshal,” according to General Wil-
liam Westmoreland.2 Such a man was an unlikely source of inspiration
for Robinson, who called himself a Quaker. But preaching Abram’s
Idea overseas had put him at odds with the Society of Friends. Like
another lapsed Quaker, Richard Nixon, Robinson had no patience for
pacifism. He saw himself as a man of action, a “jungle” missionary on
the move. He spoke with the quick velvety voice of an old-time radio
announcer and used it to dispense axioms and analogies about the need
for key men in the Cold War, Bruce Barton jingles as interpreted by
James Jesus Angleton, top man religion as geopolitical strategy. Sulli-
van provided fodder for Robinson’s commando theology.
“He said the strategy of the VC was the same as International
Christian Leadership’s,” gushed Robinson, “except applied physically
and militarily.” Robinson’s vision of Worldwide Spiritual Offensive
could not yet accommodate Ho Chi Minh’s tactics, but Sullivan con-
vinced him their enemy was a worthy one. “They spend hours, days,
weeks, whatever time is necessary setting up for the LEADERS and
then either by ambush, assassination, or other intrigue, they do away
with them—not the people, the leaders. He said to kill 32 top level
people”—as the Vietcong had done the previous month—“was tan-
tamount to immobilizing thousands.”
The lesson was that the Fellowship should understand itself as a
guerrilla force on the spiritual battlefi eld. Specifi cally, Sullivan, who
directed the CIA’s “secret air war” in Laos and turned its Hmong
minority into cannon fodder against the North Vietnamese, wanted
the Fellowship to recruit Buddhist businessmen to collaboration by
matching them with Jaycees under the guise of a “ ‘brotherhood of
leadership’—or some such slogan.” But Robinson also took Sullivan’s
words as an endorsement of Abram’s key man strategy.
“The strength of the wolf is the pack,” Abram reminded his dis-
ciples that year, retreating into parable as he advanced into his last
days, “but the strength of the pack is the wolf.”3

--- Sayfa 213 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 207
Evangelical steamrollers such as the Billy Graham Crusade might
win millions, but the Fellowship could neutralize the  enemy—“bold
Satanic forces,” as Abram described it, the Vietcong’s “sweep of com-
munism,” America’s “secular cyclone”—by conquering the select few
souls of the strong. “Assassination” was just a figure of speech to Robin-
son; Abram wanted elites to “die to the self,” to submit totally to Jesus
of their own volition even as they held on tightly to the power that
could advance His kingdom. Long after Abram’s  death—and Ho’s to-
tal victory in Vietnam—the Fellowship would distribute a tract pur-
porting to be “ten steps to commitment from a Viet Cong soldier.”4
Robinson was writing not to Abram but to Doug Coe. Abram
was technically retired, although he still maintained top spiritual
authority in the Fellowship. The question of succession was one no-
body discussed, but Robinson was surely thinking of it. He’d recently
opened a wedge for the Idea in India by recruiting the nation’s minis-
ter of defense productivity into a Christian prayer cell. Whether that
led to the kind of results Abram would have called “tangible”—a re-
lationship with a  Fellowship- approved defense contractor, a commit-
ment to pulling India’s  left-leaning government rightward—it at least
provided the Fellowship with the kind of bragging rights that im-
pressed American congressmen: the Fellowship had connections
everywhere, even in non-Christian nations. Robinson may have imag-
ined himself the man for Abram’s job.5 But three years earlier, he’d
angered Abram when he wrote that Indians are “more adept than wet
eels in squirming out” of responsibility. “I feel we need to let the In-
dians know the ‘world’ is our battlefield.” With the stakes so high,
they were “expendable.”6
Abram  agreed—except for the part about letting the Indians know
their place in the Fellowship’s hierarchy. As the Fellowship grew along
the military trade routes of the Cold War, its “field representatives”
learned to ape and polish the politics of flattery by which powerful na-
tions make weak ones feel crucial to the cause. But Robinson was too
hot for the Cold War Christ. He genuinely believed he was spreading
old-time religion revamped for the space age, not a new empire in
democratic disguise. “Is this ICL message a kind of Christian fringe

--- Sayfa 214 ---
208 | J E F F S H A R L E T
benefit, a casual sophistication, a pink tea variety of discussion sub-
ject?” he demanded of the Fellowship. “Or is it a revolution?”
Writing for Abram, a third  would-be heir named Richard Halv-
erson responded sharply. 1. Stop challenging Abram’s vision. 2. You
don’t understand Abram’s vision, anyway. 3. Here’s what it’s really
about: “A revolution can be anarchy, Clif, or it can be tyranny. It can
be noisy and rambunctious and spectacular like a Fourth of July fire-
works celebration, or it can be quiet and penetrating and thorough
like salt, like benevolent subversion.”7
That was the  key—subversion. There was bad subversion, like that
of the Vietcong, and good subversion, also like that of the Vietcong,
only in the name of Jesus, a subtle practice of persuasion. Robinson
took the lesson, committing himself to raising funds directly for the
Indian work so that its costs  wouldn’t be on the Fellowship’s books,
and inviting in Fellowship speakers, such as a British member of Parlia-
ment named John Cordle, who lectured the Indians on “Corruption,”
a subject about which he knew more than he let on. He would later be
exposed as one of Britain’s most flamboyantly crooked politicians.
Another speaker was Halverson, who lectured to a  five-man “core
cell” of U.S. embassy personnel on “Infiltrating Secular Society with
the Spirit of Christ.”8 It wasn’t a matter of proclaiming the gospel
boldly; it was a trick of getting the heathen to fight your battles for you.
Robinson failed in his succession bid; as would Halverson. Robin-
son’s mistake was to take the Fellowship’s internationalism too
literally—far off in Asia, he failed to court Abram’s favor personally.
When he swept in from the field, he’d regale rooms full of Fellowship
men with his adventures, forgetting that his audiences  were composed
of politicians used to being the center of attention themselves. Robin-
son extended the Fellowship’s reach across Asia at a time when Amer-
ican power most wanted  behind-the- scenes men in the Far East, but
never understood that he also needed to be a  behind-the-scenes man
in Washington, too. The details of Doug Coe’s victory are  murky—at
the time, few suspected quiet Coe would be Abram’s  heir—but Coe,

--- Sayfa 215 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 209
alone, seems to have understood that in an organization that denies
being an organization, power goes to the man least visibly concerned
with pomp and circumstance. And yet Robinson and Halverson still
matter to the story of the Fellowship. In part because they remained
significant players, representatives of American fundamentalism to
government around the world. And in part because they illustrate the
different streams feeding into Coe’s vision. Robinson was the public
man, the character you put in the front of the room to tell stories.
Halverson was more complicated.
Halverson’s story, like that of the Family’s, began in 1935, when
he got off a bus in Hollywood fresh from North Dakota, where he’d
grown up with the unlikely ambition of being an actor. Blandly hand-
some by small-town standards, in Los Angeles he hardly looked like
movie star material: his lips  were too full, his cheeks too chubby, his
eyes too deeply set. He  wasn’t bad looking, but he wasn’t Clark Gable,
either. His strength was a certain  gee-whiz sincerity, an earnestness
augmented by intelligence. Dick Halverson  wasn’t a good guy because
he didn’t know any better; he was a good guy because he’d calculated
the angles and concluded that decency was his best bet in this world.9
Thereafter, he pursued it mightily. In later years, Halverson would
help build up one of the world’s largest relief agencies, World Vision,
a Christian outfit that supplies food for the starving and medicine for
the wounded and gospel tracts only to those who ask. Although it has
long been plagued by accusations of serving as a CIA front, World
Vision’s verifiable record is admirable—the sort of Christian eff ort
to which Abram paid lip service and nothing more. But Halverson
also helped build the Fellowship into a network of truly international
scope, introducing the American Christ to any number of nations.
Halverson, in other words, was an imperialist of the old school,
bringing light to the natives and clearing the way for other men to
extract a dollar. He was no hypocrite. He believed with all his heart
he was helping, and he never thought too deeply about whom. Halv-
erson loved public speaking, and he was good at it, too, invited to
preach in pulpits around the world. He wrote popular books and
mailed out newsletters and presided over a conservative Presbyterian

--- Sayfa 216 ---
210 | J E F F S H A R L E T
church outside of Washington that was popular with politicians. In
1981, Ronald Reagan would make him Senate chaplain, the pinnacle
of his career.10
Coe, meanwhile, was all along studying Abram, learning the
methods of self-effacing persuasion. And studying, too, other sources
of authority, strong men of history whose biographies he consumed
and distilled into the leadership lessons he dispensed to his disciples
the same way he cited, always smiling, scripture verses intended to
“break” the powerful men to whom he ministered, the jujitsu of an
alpha male proclaiming his desire to serve. God’s word, not his; so it
was written.
Coe brought to the Fellowship a radically different spirit than
Halverson’s, a darker appeal. Raised in a small town,  middle-class
home in Oregon, he’d gone to college at Willamette in the state
capital of Salem, where he majored in physics and got serious about
God. He’d been something of an Elmer Gantry—a good-looking
flirt, friendly with everyone, close to  none—according to Roy Cook,
his sidekick for the last six decades. It was Cook, then an unsmiling,
bespectacled boy with a crooked pompadour, who led Coe to Jesus.
What kind of Jesus? In a talk to a group of fundamentalist activists
years later, Coe ticked off what he gave up for his new Lord: smoking,
drinking, dancing, and most of his friends. At twenty, he married an
eighteen-year-old girl named Jan. Soon they had the first of six chil-
dren, all born before Coe reached his early thirties. And as the 1950s
opened, that might have been all: a pulpit, maybe, in rural Oregon, a
brood of children, a stern but conventional God.
But Coe had fallen under the “discipleship” of Dawson Trotman,
the founder of a worldwide ministry called the Navigators. Daws was
a square-jawed,  wavy-haired,  bear-hugging man, a cruder version of
Abram. Like Abram, who called him a “very dear friend,” Daws
scorned  old-school fundamentalists who considered themselves “sep-
arate” from the culture, and like Abram, he’d begun his ministry in
the 1930s, in opposition to the economic liberalism of the New Deal.
Both men had little use for denominational distinctions, but Daws,
unlike Abram, didn’t understand them to begin with. He hated ideas;

--- Sayfa 217 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 211
he loved “jokes.” He installed a remote control for his doorbell be-
neath his dining room table so he could send underlings running to
answer it over and over, and he planted firecrackers set to explode in
umbrellas when they opened. He actually wore a squirting flower in
his lapel. And yet he’d publicly rebuke staffers he thought  were “play-
ing games with God,” and he could drive even the manly men with
whom he surrounded himself to tears. In place of a traditional minis-
try, Daws offered a  pared-down concept of “discipleship” by which
an evangelist picks a target and sticks with him until his “disciple”
submits totally to Jesus as the discipler teaches him, the theological
equivalent of hazing. Daws  wasn’t stupid; he was a strategist who
understood that fundamentalism was too intellectual for the men he
wanted to reach, men like him—or, more often, men who wanted
to be like him. He boiled it down to Jesus plus nothing. “Daws really
had only one string on his guitar,” wrote an admiring biographer,
“and he plunked it often and loud.”11
That brute simplicity was what Coe, newly born again, missing his
old habits and his old friends, wanted to hear. He went on a retreat to
Daws’s headquarters in Colorado Springs, a gothic castle called Glen
Eyrie, moated and inhabited by suits of armor and graced by very little
sun; it was deep in a canyon, and the sky above it was narrow. There
Coe prayed to Jesus for a way out of what seemed the small but over-
whelming life of a father and a churchman. How can I do it, God? How
can I finish school and provide for my family and make time for the
Bible and pray every day? Coe thought his faith demanded the memori-
zation of a rule book over a thousand pages long. He  couldn’t do it. He
couldn’t keep Nehemiah and Jeremiah and Esther straight. You don’t
have to, Jesus told him. What then? Coe asked. That was when Coe
discovered, or decided, that all of Christianity, 2,000 years of faith and
ideas and mistakes and miracles and arguments and signs and wonders,
could be reduced to one word: love. And what did love mean? “Obey.”
That’s what Jesus told him. “Obey, then teach.”12
Coe taught. At Willamette, he led one of his professors, a young
political scientist named Mark Hatfield, into evangelicalism. Hatfield,
in turn, led a parade of students singing hymns to file his candidacy for

--- Sayfa 218 ---
212 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the state legislature. Stories would later circulate that it was Hatfield
who, when he moved up to the U.S. Senate, invited Coe to Washing-
ton, but it was the younger Coe who nudged Hatfield onto the national
stage and Coe who went to the capital first. And yet, outside of evan-
gelical circles, he made little impression as a college man; his picture
appears in yearbooks only once, a gangly, unsmiling  dark-haired boy
with big features, posing with the golf team. An odd man out, wearing
hunter’s plaid, a townie among the preps. It was an image of modesty
he’d use to advantage in the years to come as he pledged himself to
older men in the  Fellowship—Halverson, Robinson, Germany’s Gus
Gedat, and most of all  Abram—and then supplanted them.
Coe is, in fact, a striking man in both appearance and personality,
gifted with a force field of charisma far greater than the more conven-
tional appeal of Halverson and Robinson, backslappers both. He is
tall, with strong facial bones and dark skin; he has been mistaken for
an American Indian more than once. He is both ugly and handsome,
in the manner of Lincoln, his features oversized and his entire being
dominated by his broad smile. He dresses in golf shirts—after Jesus,
golf has always been his  passion—or in suits that look like they had to
be pinned together around him, as if he’s some loping, natural crea-
ture not meant to be bound by jacket and tie. He speaks with
slow-motion intensity, his words languid and separated by silences in
which listeners can ponder their meanings. There is something about
his voice, a resonant, solid sound like an old  oak tree talking, that
makes you want to listen even if you disagree with everything he’s
saying. His fascination with the leadership secrets of Hitler extends to
the Führer’s speaking style, made over in Coe’s  loose-limbed manner-
isms. He emphasizes his points by making his right hand into a fist and
shaking it, even as his left hand slips into his pocket, a mixture of ego
and insecurity that suggests an inner conversation the speaker would
like to keep private. It is perhaps a tribute to his magnetism that a
small group of fringe fundamentalists have dedicated themselves to
investigating the question of whether he is the  anti-Christ, believed to
be a charming fellow with international inclinations. Coe would not
be insulted; almost nothing insults him.

--- Sayfa 219 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 213
After college, he moved so quickly into leadership, spiritually
“discipling” not just other recent graduates but business executives,
politicians, even se nior pastors, that it’s hard to believe he needed
much mentoring from Daws or, eventually, Abram. He was a natural
leader: amiable, casual, not intimidated by anyone and interested in
everyone, or so it seemed to those at whom he directed his devotion.
Like Abram, he did not demand theological orthodoxy of his re-
cruits. “Doug hates church,” one of his followers, a former aide to
Hatfield, told me. (Coe considers church irrelevant to the real Jesus
encountered in one’s prayer cell.)13
One of his associates later noted that Coe’s wife, Jan, deserved
much of the credit for her husband’s work; he’d rarely met a woman
“so uncomplaining and one who stayed put and waited patiently.”
Not as much could be said for the evangelical enterprises Coe left
behind when he went to Washington in 1959 to work for Abram.
The communal homes he’d organized, early prototypes of Ivanwald,
were in danger of collapse, their inhabitants lost without Coe’s ef-
fortless authority; churches  were splitting over Coe’s new doctrine;
worst of all, young wives  were in revolt, acting out the fears of all
those who believed that Alfred Kinsey’s 1953 report, Sexual Behavior
in the Human Female, would set in motion chain reactions of feminine
hysteria. “I definitely believe Jewell . . . is demon possessed,” one of
the Oregon brothers wrote Coe. “In fact, I have talked with her (in
Helen’s presence) and the demon coursed through her.” That wasn’t
all. “I have also come to believe that Jim’s wife is in the same boat. In
fact she said she was, but you would have to see and talk to them to
appreciate this. The other night she went into a rage when Jim was
just sitting on the davenport and tore his shirts off of him. Then she
said she was out to get love and had solicited the devil’s help. You can
imagine Jim is having a tough time.”14
Spiritual war had changed since the early days of the Fellow-
ship. Whereas for Abram the fight manifested itself physically be-
tween godless strikers and the forces of law and order, for Coe it
was more personal, a matter of marriages, a battle fought in bed-
rooms. Such was the changing tone of American fundamentalism,

--- Sayfa 220 ---
214 | J E F F S H A R L E T
echoes of Jonathan Edwards’s fascination with Abigail Hutchinson
suddenly amplified as feminism emerged to challenge fundamental-
ism. Coe’s correspondence with his  demon-plagued friend, as with
all his old Salem associates, was at once blandly pious and marked by
a new militant mysticism. Coe regularly received news from Oregon
of individual men, churches,  whole companies tipping over from
“lukewarm” Christianity into  on- fi re faith. “We are still facing some
opposition,” a Baptist pastor wrote Coe, and families  were breaking
off, but “in the main we are all divining the will of God.”15 Coe oc-
casionally responded with advice, but more often he sent his friends
form letters. The Salemites did not complain. “Mr. Douglas Coe, Big
Wheel, City of the Wheels” one man addressed a letter in full ear-
nestness.16 They sent him checks, new suits, shoes in which they
liked to think of him walking the halls of Congress and parliaments
in distant lands. Coe’s response would be a canned account of a
meeting with “top men,” who  were being “used” by God to put him
in touch with more top men. Senator X or Ambassador Y or Mr.
Smith, president of ACME Products, was  here, he’d respond. “Please
pray he will understand the idea of saturating every community and
every state with the gospel of Jesus Christ.” There’d be a word about
golf; he’d ask for their prayers; and then he’d sign off with scripture,
a citation without explanation. “Amos 8:11–12,” he closed one batch
of letters, a passage that reads like a warning: Behold, the days come,
saith the Lord GOD, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the LORD: And they
shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall
run to and fro and seek the word of the LORD, and shall not find it. 17
What did it mean? Coe did not explain. His admirers  were left to
wonder: Would they find it?  Were they exempted from God’s, from
Coe’s, judgment on a secular nation? Who among them would enter
the circle of the saved, the elect, with Coe and his mysterious “top
men” in Washington, in London, in Berlin, and in other more exotic
cities Coe mentioned, Jakarta, Addis Ababa, Brasilia?
Shortly after Coe arrived in Washington, D.C., he wrote home
to his parents to tell them of his immediate success; or, rather, that of

--- Sayfa 221 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 215
Jesus, working through him. “God has gone before us to prepare
hearts,” he wrote, noting that he followed in one of several private
planes that had been put at his disposal.18 One of his first conquests
was Haiti, then just entering a long darkness of dictatorship that still
reverberates today. Winning Catholic Haiti’s acquiescence to U.S.-
style Cold War evangelicalism had been a Fellowship ambition since
1955, when an Abram associate had declared it a “soft spot of com-
munism” that would require the ministrations of “Magnificent Amer-
icans” preaching a new equation of Christ and free markets. “I have
been expecting to hear that you are making this your personal pros-
pect,” joked one of Coe’s Oregon friends, a man who claimed to have
been led by the Lord into building a small trucking parts empire. It
wasn’t God, though, who the trucking boss thought would draw Coe
to the island nation, one of the poorest in the world. “Am told they
have wonderful golf courses.”19
Coe counseled a Haitian senator and then Haiti’s ambassador to
the United States, easing both into commitments to a  Christ-led na-
tion, with the understanding that the Christ Coe preached led not to-
ward the socialism that tempts any bitterly poor people but toward an
economics of “key men” who would share their wealth as God in-
structed them. Senators Frank Carlson and Homer Capehart, both
members of the Foreign Relations Committee, did the  follow-up work,
leading a Fellowship delegation of twelve businessmen to instruct the
Haitian parliament in prayer cell politics. François “Papa Doc” Duva-
lier, who would declare himself not only president for life but also the
nation’s official “Maximum Chief of the Revolution” and “Electrifi er of
Souls”—he was the weirdest and most vicious dictator in the Western
Hemisphere—impressed the senators with his spirituality.
Perhaps he told them, as he was fond of saying, that he literally
personified Haiti, that he was a  stand-in for God. A personality! That
was the Fellowship’s whole theology in a nutshell, so they didn’t
bother to ask questions about his  Vodoun-driven militia, the Tonton
Macoute assassins. Instead, they promised to twist arms in Washing-
ton on Papa Doc’s behalf: foreign aid, exemptions on sugar tariffs. It
wouldn’t be a hard sell. The Cold Warriors in State, under Ike and

--- Sayfa 222 ---
216 | J E F F S H A R L E T
every administration that followed, preferred Papa Doc’s public
proclamations of Christian brotherhood to a free black nation that
might seek support from the Soviet Union.20
And so it went through the 1960s, Coe and Halverson and Robin-
son and dozens of lesser brothers traveling the world for the Fellow-
ship, almost always finding their way through Christ’s leading to the
next hot spot in the Cold War. Not only did South Korea host a prayer
breakfast, but its dictator, General Park Chung Hee, tried to use the
Fellowship to channel illegal funding to congressional candidates of
Nixon’s selection. (Nixon’s representative, a Fellowship man named
John Niedicker, declined.) Coe and Carlson  double-teamed Emperor
Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, a strategic prize in the struggle between the
United States and the Soviet Union. Selassie, who like Papa Doc con-
sidered himself an embodiment of the divine, depended on his Fel-
lowship brethren to represent his interests in the United States.
Those interests  were considerable. For two decades, the United
States provided more aid to Ethiopia than to the entire rest of the
continent. In return, the emperor granted the National Security
Agency basing rights for the largest overseas intelligence facility in
the world, a  high-tech “listening post” from which the United States
could keep tabs on the Middle East. He also deeded the Fellowship a
prime parcel in downtown Addis Ababa from which to proselytize
the rest of Africa. Just like dominoes, Coe wrote home to Salem.
Coe was as much of an elitist as Abram, but differently so. Aris-
tocracy didn’t impress him; more important, he never lied to himself
about the virtues or lack thereof of the top men he was courting. Coe
understood early on that he would be dealing with violent charac-
ters, and that didn’t bother him. Indeed, it seemed to excite him. He
dreamed of their power harnessed to the new American fundamen-
talism, a fascination with strength and influence given clearest voice
in the words of one of his disciples, attempting to grasp Coe’s vision.
“I have had a great and thrilling experience reading the condensed
version of The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich,” a protégé wrote Coe,
following up on reading advice Coe had given him. “Doug, what a
lesson in vision and perspective! Nazism started with 7 guys around

--- Sayfa 223 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 217
a table in the back of an old German Beer Hall. The world has been
shaped so drastically by a few men who really want it such and so.
How we need this same kind of stuff as a Hitler or a Lenin.”21
Abram had thought as much, albeit phrased in stuffi  er terms. “An
epochal opportunity is ours,” one of his tracts had advertised to the
new men of his congressional Fellowship back in 1942, “to control
the future of America by the simple strategy of controlling the char-
acter and ideals of [a] relatively small minority of [college- age] men
and women. Hitler long ago perceived this strategy, and established
his elaborate system of . . . leadership training. The democracies
have been asleep.”22 Indeed—asleep to the Hitler method of disci-
plining youth into a revolutionary cadre, a concept that absent the
Führer’s bloodlust would lead to Abram’s later support for groups
such as the Navigators and Campus Crusade. Neither was fascist any
more than Coe actually subscribed to the philosophies of Hitler or
Lenin. It was the myth of brotherhood that Coe thought such men
exemplified, the “7 guys around a table” that would become a trade-
mark of his teaching. That such a view bore little correspondence
with history—both Hitler and Lenin brutally pitted their supporters
against one  another—was of no concern. What mattered was the
model, the seven or the twelve, circles of access to a power defined
by a personality at the center: Jesus. Contrasting American funda-
mentalism to secularism at a Fellowship meeting in 1962, Bill Bright,
the Fellowship fellow traveler who founded Campus Crusade, one of
the biggest popular fundamentalist groups in the world, put it suc-
cinctly: “We worship a person, they worship ideas.”23 That was
American fundamentalism’s Christ: a person, purged of the ideas
that defined him, as if what mattered most about Jesus was the color
of his eyes and the shape of his beard.
Coe understood the cult of personality better than Clif Robinson
and Dick Halverson. He may even have understood it better than
Abram, who, after all, was moved first and foremost by “the Idea.”
Not Coe. For Coe, it was Jesus plus nothing—a formula into which
he could plug any values. It was a theology of total malleability, per-
fect for American expansion.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
218 | J E F F S H A R L E T
From the start of Coe’s tenure, the Fellowship began turning away
from its old Europe an allies. The German Gus Gedat found Coe im-
petuous; Wallace Haines, Abram’s longtime man in Paris, despaired of
pleasing him. “I have retreated step by step before your desires,” he
wrote the new leader. Not my desires, Coe corrected him; God’s.
Haines accused Coe of tearing down the neat organization of Europe an
aristocrats and  merchant-princes Abram had spent years building.
“Wallace,” Coe replied. “I am not against structure. I am for
structure. I just think it needs to be underground.”
Other men “caught” Coe’s vision of a decentralized web that
would reach not just between Europe and the United States but around
the world. “I regard the program . . . as being the most eff ective for
promoting the basic ideology for which the United States stands,” an-
nounced an enthusiastic supporter of Coe’s new emphasis on nations
Abram had ignored. He didn’t define that ideology, but its broad out-
lines  were known to all in the Fellowship. First and foremost, there
was “free enterprise,” unrestrained capitalism,  property—the foun-
dation, fundamentalists believed, of all other freedoms. Those free-
doms were more undefined. The American ideology was as amorphous
as its empire, defined not by borders but by influence, invisible threads,
transcendent alliances. It was, to Coe, an empire of spirit, and Coe
took Worldwide Spiritual Offensive to mean more than conferences in
The Hague and prayer meetings in Bavarian castles; Jesus must rule
every nation through the vessel of American power.
Robinson and Halverson also saw the importance of smaller
countries, but it was Coe who dispensed with any concern at all for
politics in the Fellowship’s expansion; he would pray with anyone,
and he would bless anyone, so long as they had the strength to submit
their nation to God. That was his greatest virtue in Abram’s eyes: he
never complained, never insisted on honors, never questioned whether
Jesus really cared most for men with power.
What was it they wanted? What drove Coe and his spiritual broth-
ers to conflate the Gospel with the needs of a nation expanding into

--- Sayfa 225 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 219
empire? Over “lamb chops and  hash- browned potatoes and fried ap-
ples and fried tomatoes,” reported the Washington Post in 1966, Billy
Graham followed LBJ to the podium of the National Prayer Breakfast
to preach the fury of Christ down on America’s enemies in Vietnam.
“I am come to send fire on the earth!” he quoted Christ. “Think not
that I am come to send peace but a sword!” “There are those,” Gra-
ham continued, “who have tried to reduce Christ to a genial and in-
nocuous appeaser; but Jesus said, ‘You are  wrong—I have come as a
firesetter and a  sword-wielder.’ ”24
A firesetter—were they revolutionaries after all? Or did they
fantasize a new Holy Roman Empire, recast in the terms of the twen-
tieth century as an empire of influence, not territory? Maybe it was
more trivial, pious posturing as cover for petty crimes.
Sometimes, at least, it was just that. In attendance for Graham’s
thundering warcry were two generals who devoted their free time to
Fellowship work, crisscrossing the nation to lecture prayer cells and
prayer breakfasts on the need for revival. One of them, General Har-
old K. Johnson, chief of staff of the army, ordered the other, General
Carl Turner, to work with Coe, “quietly, and I repeat quietly,” to give
the army’s “substantial” assistance to the production of the Prayer
Breakfast. That in itself may have been a violation of the First Amend-
ment’s establishment clause, but it paled beside General Turner’s real
sideline: reselling mothballed army weapons to Third World gangs, a
crime for which he was sentenced to prison in 1971 after General
Johnson’s attempt to help failed.
Is that all it was? A spiritual alibi for  get-rich-quick schemes? A
Fellowship tract titled Studies for Public Men, 10,000 of which  were
printed up by a Chevron Oil executive, claimed that such abuses are
inevitable, but not attributable to the piety with which such men
cloaked their misdeeds. When pious men committed crimes, went
the thinking, godlessness was to  blame—“secularism in its worst
form!” In a section titled “Accountability,” the tract explained why the
Fellowship should not be held accountable for the actions of its indi-
vidual members, the American generals, General Turner and General
Johnson, the overseas divines on Coe and Carlson’s government gravy

--- Sayfa 226 ---
220 | J E F F S H A R L E T
train, Papa Doc and Emperor Selassie, General Park in Korea, Gen-
eral Suharto in Indonesia, General Medici in Brazil: “Persisting in the
accusation of collective guilt finally immobilizes a society,” advised the
tract. Perhaps, but the Fellowship denied individual guilt as well, de-
nied the very concept of guilt for the powerful. That was a legalistic
notion, an encroachment on God’s sovereignty as expressed in Ro-
mans 13: “The powers that be are ordained of God.” Who was Coe to
question them?
Romans, declared a Fellowship study guide for bankers, is “the Bi-
ble in miniature in a layman’s words.” The layman is Paul, formerly
Saul, who on the road to Damascus saw the light and abandoned the
law, for better and worse. “With the Jew in mind,” declared the study
guide, “not to mention the memory of his own experience, Paul shows
that the purpose of the law was not to save but to reveal sin.”25 Elite
fundamentalists, unlike the moralistic masses of popular crusades, did
not care much about sin; they cared about salvation, a concept they
understood in terms of nations, not souls, embodied by the rulers to
whom God had given power, whether through ballots or bullets.
Senator Carlson, writing to President José Joaquín Trejos Fernán-
dez of Costa Rica in 1967, made that explicit. As a spiritual guide for
the Catholic nation’s National Prayer Breakfast, he wrote, the Fel-
lowship was sending Representative William Jennings Bryan Dorn, a
South Carolina Dixiecrat who advocated extending the Monroe
Doctrine, by which the United States dominated Latin America, to
the entire world. Romans 13, Carlson reminded the Latin American
leader, lest he balk: “For there is no authority except from God, and
those that exist have been instituted by God.”26
In the decade that followed, Costa Rica, the region’s most stable
government, became increasingly a base for Fellowship operations
and increasingly submissive to God’s instituted authority. “The pro-
gram to expand the activities of the Movement have been fulfilled
according to schedule,” the Fellowship’s Costa Rican key man, a
well-connected lawyer named Juan Edgar Picado, wrote Coe in 1976,
assuring him that the leaders of both the nation’s minority and major-
ity parties had been absorbed into prayer cells. “We have achieved the

--- Sayfa 227 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 221
objectives as programmed.” Coe never sent Picado anything but prayer
suggestions, but one of his assistants forwarded Henry Kissinger’s
plan for the protection of U.S. investments in the region, which Pic-
ado promptly made a matter for consideration in his men’s prayers.
Po litical brokers like Picado work in a loop of power. The more he did
for the Fellowship, the more the Fellowship did for him, and the more
powerful he became. “Through [a] private world Christian organiza-
tion,” reported a Costa Rican paper, “Picado [has] had the opportu-
nity to meet in Washington with . . . Dwight Eisenhower, John
Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford.”27
“Why does God look for one man who will listen to Him?” asked
the Fellowship’s Studies for Public Men. “What effect can one man have
in a group, community, city, nation, and world?” Good question.
What effect, for instance, did General Suharto hope for when he
turned his army loose on his own people, a half million civilians
murdered as “communists” in a year? What effect did Coe hope for
when in 1971, he helped Suharto organize his first Indonesian Na-
tional Prayer Breakfast to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the March
11, 1966, decree by which he seized power and commenced slaugh-
tering hundreds of thousands of his own people?
The simple answer would be that it was nothing but cynicism,
war by other means, Cold War conquests for the American way. It
was that, but it was also more. The prize was never Indonesia or
Haiti or Costa Rica. The prize was the Promised Land. Not  Israel—
like Abram, Coe didn’t seem to care about Zionism one way or the
other. The Fellowship’s Promised Land was as it had been for Jona-
than Edwards: the New World. Edwards could hardly have been a
nationalist before the American nation existed, but Coe was no na-
tionalist, either. The Promised Land was America. Not a destination
but a concept to be perfected and spread around the world. His Jeru-
salem, the New Jerusalem, was an idea, not a place. “My Jerusalem,”
one of Coe’s men wrote to him from a businessmen’s revival he’d
sparked in Billings, Montana.28 By that he meant the Kingdom of
Heaven at home:  first-century Christianity reconstructed, restored,
resurrected on whatever ground you claimed as your own. To raise

--- Sayfa 228 ---
222 | J E F F S H A R L E T
that ancient reality from the mythological depths—to seize hold of
Christianity’s platonic shadow—Coe’s Fellowship adopted the strat-
egy with which Edwards ended his days, the strategy with which,
centuries later, a decade after Coe reinvented it, the new Christian
Right would claim power in the public sphere. It was simple: Con-
vert the weak. Encircle the strong.
Edwards dreamed of doing so by leading Native Americans to
Christ, thus shaming the colonials into the piety even “savages” could
attain. One day, hoped Edwards, Boston and New York and the
Northampton that had driven him from his pulpit would wake up to
discover a frontier of saintly natives. In the late 1970s, the Christian
Right wedged its way into Washington not by massive national cam-
paigns but through local elections, PTAs, town councils, precinct
captains. One day the Republican Party woke up to discover its base
was Christian, fundamentally inclined, Edwards’s America achieved
at last. The Fellowship’s strategy was—is—similar, but on a global
scale. To work, though, it must be a surprise. Secularism must be
confronted with overwhelming numbers, a host of believers in every
direction. Unexpected, unimaginable in this modern age.
Coe used the power of the American flag to win submission (if
not fidelity) to the fundamentalist God of key men in little nations
nobody cared about and big nations nobody understood. There was
Somalia’s Siad Barre, a  self- styled “Koranic Marxist” for whose alle-
giance in the 1980s Coe won access to Reagan and a military aid bud-
get nearly doubled in size. There was Jonas Savimbi, the brutal rebel
of Angola cultivated by other key men from the United States and
apartheid South Africa.29 There was Brazil’s General Costa e Silva,
the Catholic dictator who acquiesced to a secret cell of Brazilian leg-
islators organized by Coe and subsequently won the good graces of a far
more powerful group of American congressmen, who helped pour a
billion dollars in aid into Brazil’s long dictatorship of the generals.30
“I never invite them,” Coe said in 2007 of his dictator friends. “They
come to me. And I do what Jesus did: I don’t turn my back to any
one. You know, the Bible is full of mass murderers.”31
Coe has always claimed he’s not a nationalist, and it’s true—unlike

--- Sayfa 229 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 223
immigrant Abram, who cared most for America, Coe, Oregon- born,
cares most for the American Christ, His power spread throughout the
world even as the homeland is denied Him in the secular folly of
church/state separation. One day, Coe  believes—not yet—America
(and Old Europe, too, the Germans and French and Italians who
drifted from Christ once their prosperity was assured) will wake up
and find itself surrounded by a hundred tiny God-led governments:
Fiji, a “model for the nations” under a theocratic regime after 2001, a
Family organiz er boasted to me; and Uganda, made over as an experi-
ment in faith- based initiatives by the Family’s favorite African brother,
the dictator Yoweri Museveni; and Mongolia, where Coe traveled in
the late 1980s to plant the seeds for that country’s postcommunist
 laissez- faire regime.
Nobody notices; nobody cares what happens in small places. This is
what George H. W. Bush praised in 1992 as Coe’s “quiet diplomacy.”
In 1966, with the Christian Right just starting to emerge as a vis-
ible front for fundamentalism, Coe decided to go in the opposite di-
rection. “The time has come,” he instructed the Core, “to submerge.”
Thereafter, the Fellowship would avoid at all turns any appearance of
an organization, even as Coe crafted ever more complex hierarchies
behind-the- scenes. Business would be conducted on the letterhead of
public men, who would testify that Fellowship initiatives  were their
own. Finances would be more “man-to-man,” which is to say, off the
books. The Fellowship was going underground.32
The decision was not so much conspiratorial, as it seemed to
those among Abram’s  old-timers who responded with confusion, as
ascetic, a humbling of powers. Or, rather, of power’s visible expres-
sion. The Fellowship had long been protected from scrutiny by the
fact of its membership’s elite positions; not since the days of the
muckrakers had the press really pressured the country’s “top men” of
affairs. The same principle that forbade photographers to picture
FDR’s shriveled legs prevented reporters from asking for details
about the private devotions of public men. But such protections  were
withering. Assassination, the civil rights movement, and the Vietnam
War demanded tougher questions, and it wasn’t just the press that

--- Sayfa 230 ---
224 | J E F F S H A R L E T
was asking them; ordinary citizens called for answers, marched for
them, fought for them.  Power—political, cultural—appeared to be
democratizing beyond the scope of God’s anointed leaders, just as it
had during the 1930s, when Abram first conceived of his backroom
brotherhood. The decision to “submerge,” to make the Fellowship
“invisible,” was, then, merely a reaffirmation of Abram’s founding
principles, recast in response to a new populism, deepened, even, to
suit the needs of Coe’s new internationalism.
Coe announced the decision in a series of letters to the old guard of
Abram’s Europe an leadership: Pierre Harmel, the foreign minister of
Belgium; Edmond Michelet, a former hero of the French resis tance
who’d gradually sullied his reputation for integrity through a series of
cabinet positions in General de Gaulle’s government; and, in Europe’s
sphere if not its territory, Charles Malik, a Lebanese Christian. To
anyone who is familiar with the United Nations’ Universal Declara-
tion of Human Rights, which Malik helped write, his name may be
the most surprising of all those to emerge from the Fellowship’s ar-
chives. Yet Malik had been party to Abram’s schemes for almost two
decades. In 1949, Abram and a retired U.S. admiral, C. S. Freeman,
waged a secret diplomatic offensive against Israel. Christian Zionism
as a feature of American fundamentalism was still decades away;
Abram and  Freeman—and their strongest ally in the United Nations,
Malik—saw the Jewish state as an obstacle to the “gradual readjust-
ment of political and economic control in the Near East in line with
the divine plan as declared in the Bible,” a plan they believed best
served by U.S. power in Lebanon.33 In Israel’s place they proposed an
ostensibly neutral international zone. Of course, to Abram, neutrality
would only lead to Jesus, the “universal inevitable,” as he called his
God. The plan was a total failure but for one detail: Abram’s acquisi-
tion of Malik’s name for his letterhead, an impressive declaration of
elite fundamentalism’s international connections.
The connection seemed to seduce Malik. By the time Coe joined
the Fellowship in 1959 and began pushing for the evangelization of

--- Sayfa 231 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 225
African, Asian, and Latin American leaders, Malik, then the presi-
dent of the thirteenth session of the United Nations’ General Assem-
bly, had veered from his own sense of “universal human rights” to the
Fellowship’s, declaring that Christians had a responsibility to eradi-
cate “tribal and national deities” in Africa and Asia.34 As Coe’s influ-
ence in the Fellowship grew, so did Malik’s intolerance. Christians,
he declared, “worship a person,” while “they”—everyone  else—
“worship an idea”—words that Campus Crusade’s Bill Bright would
convert into mainstream American fundamentalism. Christians, Ma-
lik went on, worshipped Christ’s “strength,” and in the end, Malik
worshipped strength, indeed, becoming one of the founders of the
Lebanese Front, the right-wing alliance of Christian militias in Leb-
anon’s long and awful civil war. Malik’s old internationalist friends
may have been surprised, but it’s hard to imagine that Coe was.
Through Malik’s involvement with the group, his name became pop-
ular with mainstream American fundamentalists like Bright, happy
to add Malik’s intellectual credentials to their case.
In 1963, Coe collected a group of other people’s speeches he la-
beled “Thoughts on Prayer,” as close to a statement of his beliefs as one
can find from his early years.35 Malik’s ideas  were well represented,
just one clue that Coe’s ideas about what prayer was for  were interna-
tional in scope, despite his own personal mysticism. “Thoughts on
Prayer” began with Senator Strom Thurmond railing against the 1962
Supreme Court decision Engle v. Vitale, which outlawed offi  cial school
prayer. Following Thurmond came the once moderate John Mackay,
president of the Princeton Theological Seminary, declaring that the
nations of the world could now be divided into three categories: the
secular (increasingly, Western Europe), the “demonic” (the Commu-
nist bloc), and the “covenantal,” an echo of the old “City upon a hill”
thinking that understood the United States not so much as a country
as a holy mission. But pride of place in “Thoughts on Prayer” belonged
to a speech by Bill Bright, based on Malik’s ideas and delivered to a
1962 Fellowship prayer breakfast for the governor of Arizona.
Bright, a candy maker before he launched Campus Crusade, was
not a charismatic man. He wore a  pencil-thin black mustache that

--- Sayfa 232 ---
226 | J E F F S H A R L E T
made him look like a cartoon, and he was so stiff  that next to him Pat
Boone, his musical apostle, seemed like a genuine rocker. Bright’s ge-
nius was organi zational discipline. To the world, Campus Crusade was
as simple as Bright’s “Four Spiritual Laws,” a dumbing-down of the
gospel that made even his allies uneasy. Internally, Crusade organizers
were required to adhere to a  book-length set of rules for fundamental-
ists that ranged from evangelism techniques to what kind of socks to
wear (argyle was forbidden) to the proper way to pick up girls.
Bright took the same approach to politics. He publicly declared
that Campus Crusade had none, and since Crusade didn’t donate
money to candidates or lobby for specific legislation, the press ac-
cepted Bright’s contention. Among friends, he told a different story.
“The house is on fire,” he raged to the Arizona governor’s prayer
breakfast, “and there is no time to fix the pictures.” The “house” was
America; the “pictures”  were niceties of the Bill of Rights, such as
the First Amendment’s establishment clause separating church and
state. Citing Malik, Bright declared that only Christians could save
American government from communism. The time had come for
America to embrace 2 Chronicles 6.
What did this mean? That was a question the businessmen and poli-
ticians assembled that spring day in Arizona must have asked, too, for in
the collection of Bible verses bandied about by fundamentalists—as
if scripture was Bartlett’s Quotations—2 Chronicles 6 had little standing.
It was Old Testament, and unlike the prophecies of Isaiah, it could
not, by any stretch of the imagination, be said to foretell Christ. In-
stead, it promised a new political order. It’s the story of Solomon’s
construction of a temple to be the heart of an Israelite nation, to
house the mythic ark of the covenant, “the ark of your might,” as
Solomon called it, that would make his kingdom undefeatable in
battle.
The Jewish temple was destroyed nearly 2,000 years ago, in 70
CE. The ark is now nothing but a story. Within Judaism, 2 Chroni-
cles 6 is both history and mystery, scripture to be studied and pon-
dered and parsed for ancient meanings. To Bright, though, guided by
Malik, 2 Chronicles 6 was a blueprint for a new  God-led nation.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 227
Bright wanted to rebuild the temple, but in Washington, not Jerusa-
lem. The prayer armies he dreamed would be unstoppable were
those of American fundamentalism. To the world, Bright’s Campus
Crusade preached Bible studies for college kids, ice cream socials,
and even Christian dance parties. To the movement, he preached
spiritual war. Like Coe, he anticipated the coming Jesus wave, and
recognized that for the movement to be successful, it would need
men to work the deeper currents. Bright organized the masses; Coe
cultivated the elite. And Coe’s most successful protégé, Charles W.
“Chuck” Colson, would soon do both, combining Bright’s populist
style with Coe’s political sophistication.
At the 1970 National Prayer Breakfast, a Washington lawyer named
James Bell led a seminar for college men who’d been selected by
their institutions’ presidents.36 The men  were told only that they’d
be having breakfast with Richard Nixon, but in Washington, Fellow-
ship brothers handed them from one instructor to the next, alternat-
ing fundamentalist theology with “private” lectures from politicians
and businessmen. Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird explained that
Christ had a special message for elites. The former student body
president of Stanford, just back from Vietnam, spoke of the dedica-
tion of the Viet Minh as a model for evangelizing Washington. Paul
Temple, a Standard Oil executive, explained how the Fellowship had
won him access to key men in General Francisco Franco’s govern-
ment in Spain. “Public events” had two purposes, said Bell: (1) to
declare to the world “the relevancy of God in the Establishment’s
life”; (2) to recruit “the up and outer.” The real work of the Fellow-
ship that the college men had been chosen for took place in small
groups, where, away from publicity, men “attack the basic social
problems of America.” Bell didn’t list those problems, but he gave a
hint of his meaning: “All of us cry over our martinis about law and
order, but very few of us do a blooming thing about it.”37
The Fellowship did. How? Not through proposing laws or cam-
paigning. Its politics were cultural, in the broadest sense; its method

--- Sayfa 234 ---
228 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the capture of leaders’ souls, the eradication of their egos, the replace-
ment of their will with Christ’s. Their goals  were not the rollback of
the 1963 school prayer decision, or antiporn laws, or the “Christian
Amendment,” a perennial proposal to formally dedicate the nation to
Christ. It was bigger, deliberately vague, and so  long-term—think
generations—that the Fellowship would never have to answer for its
successes and failures. Coe made the strategy of deferral into Fellow-
ship doctrine. The distant goal was “a leadership led by God,” said Bell.
“Period.” Few men in the Fellowship expected to see it in their life-
times. But the college boys could get in on it if they felt so  called—by
conscience or career. “If you want some doors opened . . . there are
men in government, there are senators who literally find it their plea-
sure to give any kind of advice, assistance, or counsel.”38
Three years later, Chuck Colson, destined to become one of the
leading theorists of American fundamentalism, would discover as
much as he faced the prospect of prison. Colson was no ordinary
criminal. He was one of Richard Nixon’s closest aides, the smartest,
toughest man on his staff, Nixon’s “hatchet man”: responsible for
Nixon’s “enemies list,” said to be the brains behind schemes to fire-
bomb the Brookings Institution and hire Teamsters to beat up anti-
war protesters. He was, the court would soon rule, a Watergate
felon, the most powerful of the Nixon “dirty tricksters” to be sent to
prison.
He wouldn’t go alone, though; accompanying him would be the
Jesus of the Fellowship, whom he’d discovered was a good friend,
indeed. The Fellowship, he’d write in his 1976 memoir, Born Again,
comprised a “veritable underground of Christ’s men all through gov-
ernment.”39 Colson would later claim that it was news to him, but he
was a man who understood the power of friends and the politics of
religion.
A former marine from Massachusetts, a scholarship student at
Brown, and a Harvard lawyer by dint of brain power and no silver
spoons, Colson was (and is) a beefy, square-headed man with thick
black  square- shaped glasses. He’s always had the jowls of a bulldog
and a natural sneer like that of late- stage  Elvis—the same bloated

--- Sayfa 235 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 229
cockiness but without any sex appeal. His job for Nixon was not to
look pretty but to cut deals with constituencies Republicans had ei-
ther ignored or taken for granted. He brought in the  working-class
vote by playing to poor men’s fears of hippies, feminists, black power,
and, as always, the red tide. And he brought in the religious vote in a
way no American politician had attempted to do until then: he ar-
ranged for Nixon to hold church services directly in the White
House, “quasi- spiritual, quasi-political,” he’d call them. Colson rec-
ognized the political power of religion years before he was born again,
before he joined the Fellowship. He brought in a different religious
leader every Sunday, a photo op every week that put Nixon’s mug in
the pastor’s offices of the nation’s most powerful churches. St. Dick
of the Second Chance, the most enduring man on the American po-
litical scene. Billy Graham’s best political buddy; a friendship, Colson
understood, worth more in a changing America than the waning
power of the old city machines that had stolen the White  House from
Nixon in 1960. The machines  were rusting; their troops  were mov-
ing to the suburbs; and the suburbs  were getting religion. And Col-
son got them, because he understood what they wanted, visible
access. Proof that they mattered. Image was everything, and they
wanted pictures of themselves in the White  House, a new visual nar-
rative about the distribution of power in America.
There was something almost democratic about it. Only, Colson
didn’t let the multitudes in; he simply made room for the bosses, the
men who ran the old machines and the new and improved ones. The
unions, grinding into irrelevance, and the  Jesus-engines, revving,
revving, ready to bring the war home, indeed, and fight it with the
discipline of the Viet Minh, the stealthiness of the Vietcong, and the
revolutionary fervor of rock and roll. What Colson recognized was
that in America the time for sermons was past. A new politics, raw
and emotional, was being born (again), and Colson did what he could
to make it work for the most overcooked, overcalculated president in
history.
So, did this political fixer really not know about Abram and Coe
and the dozens of congressmen networked in prayer cells before he

--- Sayfa 236 ---
230 | J E F F S H A R L E T
faced prison time? Was he unaware of the White  House cell that met
weekly under Nixon’s Federal Reserve chief, Arthur Burns, a Jew for
Jesus before anyone had heard of such a notion? Did he not know that
Gerald Ford, the  House Republican leader, his soul saved by a
preacher named Billy Zeoli, had for years been in a prayer cell with
Melvin Laird, now Nixon’s secretary of defense?
Well, he says so. White  House correspondent Dan Rather found
fishy Colson’s sudden discovery of prayer for himself as well as the
rubes. At a 1973 press conference, Rather demanded to know why,
after Colson had left the White  House in disgrace, he continued to
pop in on a regular basis. For prayer meetings, answered an embar-
rassed press secretary. Come on, Rather replied, we all know what
goes on when politicians get together to talk about their souls. The
press secretary shrugged, Rather gave up, and Colson continued on
his amazing spiritual journey. Later that year, a syndicated columnist
discouraged further inquiries into Colson’s “underground prayer
movement,” lest the press undermine its ability to humbly arrange
for the redemption of “big” men: “they meet in each other’s homes,
they meet at prayer breakfasts, they converse on the phone. . . .
They genuinely avoid publicity. In fact, they shun it.” 40
Colson  wasn’t the only Watergate conspirator to find solace in
the Fellowship as the indictments began. James W. McCord, the  ex-
CIA man who served as “security director” of the Committee to  Re-
Elect the President, CREEP (sentenced to two and a half to eight
years), received “spiritual undergirding” from Halverson; Egil “Bud”
Krogh, the chief of the “plumbers” (sentenced to six months), who
tried to silence Daniel Ellsberg, prayed with a Fellowship prayer cell
right before heading off to prison; and Jeb Magruder (sentenced to
four months to ten years), who blamed his participation in the plot
on the liberal ethics he’d been taught at Williams College by the Rev-
erend William Sloane Coffin, joined a Fellowship cell just as he was
pleading guilty, albeit only to get “the best possible deal.” But Colson
was the one who actually made something real of his new faith—
indeed, he transformed it.41
Colson’s first contact with the Fellowship came through Tom

--- Sayfa 237 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 231
Phillips, the CEO of the missile manufacturer Raytheon. Back in
private practice after leaving the White  House under a black cloud,
waiting to go to trial, Colson was pumping his Republican network
hard for new clients. One such was the International Brotherhood of
Teamsters under Frank “Fitz” Fitzsimmons, the  mafia-friendly suc-
cessor to Jimmy Hoffa and one of Nixon’s staunchest allies. Nixon
was no friend to working people, but with Colson’s help, he managed
to seduce right-wing  union bosses by turning a blind eye toward
their looting of their own treasuries (Nixon ordered the Justice De-
partment to drop its investigations of the Teamsters after Fitz took
over in 1971) in exchange for their muscle at the ballot box and in the
streets, as when Colson asked the Teamsters to crack skulls at an
antiwar rally. (From the Nixon tapes: “Haldeman: Colson’s gonna . . .
do it with the Teamsters. Nixon: They’ve got guys who’ll go in and
knock their heads off. Haldeman: Sure. Murderers . . .  They’re
gonna beat the [expletive deleted] out of some of these people. And,
uh, and hope they really hurt ’em.”)
Fitz would remain a Colson client well into Colson’s “born again”
phase; the dissonance between his newfound piety and “friends” like
Fitz angered liberal Christians, but it wasn’t a problem for the Fel-
lowship. When Phillips raised the subject of Jesus with Colson at
Phillips’s Massachusetts home one summer night in 1973, he didn’t
speak of accountability or Christian ethics; instead, he read Psalms
to Colson and told him that Jesus, alone, could make the frightened
dirty trickster feel whole again. Colson wept all the way home, filled
with repentance for his godlessness but not for his crimes. He denies
them to this day, despite having pled guilty. “Had I fought [the
charges] I would have won,” he boasts to fellow fundamentalists.
“But, no, God had a plan for my life.”42
Soon after Colson’s fit of weeping, Coe paid him a visit in Wash-
ington. Colson had no idea who he was. Coe simply walked into Col-
son’s law office, threw off his raincoat, draped himself sideways over a
leather chair, and informed Colson that Phillips had been sharing his
private, confessional letters about his growing religiosity with Coe. “I
hope you don’t mind,” Coe said. Colson did mind, but “there was such

--- Sayfa 238 ---
232 | J E F F S H A R L E T
kindness in his eyes my resis tance began to melt.” Coe reached across
Colson’s desk, held his hand, and asked him to pray. Thereafter, Col-
son was his brother, a member of the underground, eligible for advice,
assistance, and counsel from all its members, not just Republicans but
Democrats as well—especially a popular liberal senator from Iowa
named Harold Hughes, well known for his opposition to the Vietnam
War in general and Nixon very much in particular.
Hughes was a perfect frontman for Coe, suffi  ciently liberal that
Coe could claim to have transcended politics, but also so kooky that
his actions  were easily manipulated. He was a former truck driver
and a recovered alcoholic who turned to Jesus after spiritualism and
ESP failed him. He was said to have the demeanor of an evangelist
and the eyes of a mystic. In unpublished portions of his memoir,
Hughes wrote that his encounters with UFOs  were the source of his
deep sense of perspective. That “perspective,” combined with Hughes’s
faith—and, perhaps, the diminution of his career after a failed 1972
presidential bid—led Hughes to view Colson, under investigation for
Watergate, as an underdog who needed his help. Hughes vowed to do
all that he could to see that Colson got off lightly; a bout of
on-their-knees prayer the two had undertaken had suffi  ciently re-
deemed Colson in Hughes’s eyes. Hughes lobbied hard for his new
“brother,” as he called Colson, and even broke ranks with Democrats
to keep Watergate pardons in the pipeline under Ford. Once Colson
was in prison, Coe and Hughes worked hard for his early release. It
worked; Colson ended up serving less than seven months of his one-
to three-year sentence for his role in Watergate. It wasn’t hard time.
“If you think what you’ve done was done for the right reasons,” he
boasted shortly before he began his sentence, “then the consequences
are easy to live with.”43
In prison, Colson claims, he gave up politics for God. But in a
June 11, 1974, letter defending his conversion to his parole board,
Colson wrote, “That which I found I could not change or affect in a
political or managerial way, I found could be changed by the force of a
personal relationship that men develop in a common bond to Christ.”44
Doug Coe, in a letter to the board dated one day later, wrote that

--- Sayfa 239 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 233
Colson’s freedom was necessary so that a group of Christian men
could put him to work on a program for “reaching youth” in juvenile
delinquent homes. Upon his release, the two men collaborated on
what would become the model and inspiration for what may well be a
generation or more of “faith- based” governmental activism.
The story of Prison  Fellowship—the largest ministry for prison-
ers in the world, with 50,000 employees and volunteers dedicated to
helping convicts become law  abiders—has been recounted in short,
inspirational bursts many times since Colson founded it with Coe’s
help and the Fellowship’s money shortly after his own release from
prison in 1975. So many times, in fact, that it’s not a story anymore
but a myth, a legend of how a brilliant but bad man got God in prison
and came out a babe in Christ; of how the liberals and the cynics
didn’t believe Colson at first but soon saw the light. Say what you will
about Prison Fellowship’s fundamentalist Jesus, the story goes, but
Colson’s Christ works. He saves souls. And, more important, he trans-
forms rapists, murderers, and thieves into docile “followers of Jesus.”
Even nonbelievers would rather ex-cons thump Bibles than their fel-
low se nior citizens.
And yet Prison  Fellowship—indeed, compassionate conservatism
writ large—is implicitly political. Colson sees it as a bulwark against
“moral decadence,” he told me, and even as an almost governmental
institution. “Government, theologically, has two major roles: to pre-
serve  order—we can only have freedom out of order—and to do jus-
tice, to restrain evil.” The evil that most concerned Colson at the
beginning of his Prison Fellowship days was black radicalism; today it’s
“Islamofascism,” a word that in Colson’s usage functions as a warning
against secularism. “To the extent that we become a decadent society,”
he explained to me, “we feed Islamofascism.” What disturbs Colson
most, though, isn’t “Islamofascism” or black power or any particular
dissident faction; it’s simply the concept of authority being challenged,
Romans  13—a key text for Colson that only begins to outline the
scope of theological and political power, he told me—disobeyed. Dis-
cipline and obedience, Colson writes in Against the Night: Living in the
New Dark Ages, were the foundations of the Roman Empire, just as

--- Sayfa 240 ---
234 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“biblical obedience” should be—must  be—the cornerstone of “the
West’s” stand against the “new barbarians,” whether they come in the
form of Muslims or secular schoolteachers.
Colson’s message breaks with the classic Christian concept of
redemption through humility, argues Paul Apostolidis, a political
scholar who has studied Colson’s extensive archive of radio broad-
casts. In its place, Colson off ers a “fundamentalist logic according to
which salvation is dispensed according to  obedience—and, if neces-
sary, outright  humiliation—before authority.” Colson fragments and
then  co-opts that which could otherwise be a potentially anarchic
class of the disenfranchised. In keeping with the principles of evan-
gelicalism, the same as those of compassionate conservatism, Prison
Fellowship works on a  one- by-one model, transforming adherents of
“radical Islam” and other threats to the  Republic—black power ac-
tivists, white power supremacists, plain old thugs, prisoners who get
an education—into an atomized class of isolated individuals, praying
to be “broken” by God, to be “used” by His Son, to be “nothing” be-
fore the Holy Ghost.45
If this strikes men who’ve already been broken by the state as just
one more humiliation, Colson reminds them that he offers the same
counsel to CEOs and congressmen. Prisoners and senators, he tells
convicts, are equal in God’s  eyes—a nice sentiment that neatly sepa-
rates those who accept it from the realities of a world in which the
power is in somebody  else’s hands. Had Colson directed his new pious
energies at any other segment of society—had he tried to convert
union members, for instance, or joined Bill Bright at Campus
Crusade—he really might have been crucified. But Colson chose the
lowest of the low, men and a few women on whom it has long been
acceptable to experiment. Colson experimented, bludgeoning his way
through bureaucracy with his political skills and his new Fellowship
political allies to set up fundamentalist ministries in prisons around
the country. A great story, according to conventional thinking. Col-
son must mean it; what could he have to gain from prisoners?
Colson knew the answer to that one. First there was a  best-
selling book, and then another one, and now there are literally doz-

--- Sayfa 241 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 235
ens, books spinning out of Prison Fellowship every year. There was a
movie, a comic book, and the secular press, which was not so secular
after all when offered evidence of genuine jailhouse conversions.
Even as the mainstream media fretted about the rising power of the
new Moral Majority and the televangelists so bent on beaming their
message, the mainstream media itself beamed Colson’s message.
What did Colson have to gain from the prisoners? The press didn’t
bother to ask, because it was the press that supplied him with his re-
ward: more power than he’d ever had working for mean old Richard
Nixon. “The kingdom of God will not arrive on Air Force One,” he
has declared, dismissive of his old obsession with party politics.
What he meant by this, he told me, was that he had learned through
fundamentalism to pursue pure power, not partisanship. Now, Colson
boasts of his access to leaders around the world through Prison Fel-
lowship, strongmen who would have looked at him as a diplomatic
challenge in his White  House days. Today, according to the elite
evangelicals who responded to a survey by the sociologist D. Michael
Lindsay, Colson has more political influence than James Dobson or
Richard Land of the Southern Baptist Convention.46 In a 1980 letter
to Coe, Colson puts it as plainly as possible. He’s describing a Fel-
lowship cell in Bonn with which he had met at Coe’s request. “It is a
fabulous group of men. In fact, I’ve never met any group quite like it.
I think we should arrange to use them as a model for leadership
groups around the world. We’d better do it in a hurry, however, be-
fore they lead the next Nazi takeover out of Germany.”47
And yet the Jesus at the heart of Prison Fellowship is not the com-
monplace Christ of mainstream evangelicalism, but a distinct entity
growing out of Colson’s political past and his subsequent philosophi-
cal passions. Colson’s work is shot through with a cagey regard for
Plato’s “noble lie,” by which the elite must govern masses who don’t
know what’s good for them, and a reverence for “leadership” as a
semimystical quality bequeathed to a small elect who already possess
the kind of confidence others might call arrogance. The idealization of
strength that manifests itself even in Colson’s peculiar sense of humor
is the foundation of Colson’s faith. “We should look at our churches

--- Sayfa 242 ---
236 | J E F F S H A R L E T
exactly the way you look at Marine Corps training for combat because
that’s what it is!” he instructs his followers. “That is how we are prepar-
ing today for the spiritual combat in which we live, and we should take
it every bit as seriously as soldiers in the Marines preparing to go to
war.”48 His first literary step as a follower of Christ was not the Bible
but some of the more overlooked pages of C. S. Lewis, in which Lewis
decries “men without chests.” Colson preaches Lewis’s “manly” Christ
with the moral authority of a man who does, after all, dedicate his life
to prisoners, and the political savvy of one who has been in the
trenches of the culture wars since before the battle had a name. That
combination allows Colson to escape the scrutiny aff orded James
Dobson or the Southern Baptist Convention.
It has also resulted in what might be best understood as a powerful
new religious movement. Faith-based initiatives, compassionate conserva-
tism, and servant-leadership, a term popular with evangelical politicians
who insist that they consolidate power the better to help widows and
orphans, can all be traced back to the model of Colson’s Prison Fel-
lowship, a radical revision of the “Social Gospel” of the early twenti-
eth century. Evangelicals have always been at the forefront of aid
work with the poor and the suffering, but they traditionally came
from the left wing of the movement—the branch that seemed to die
with William Jennings Bryan, the “Great Commoner,” back in 1925. In
the years that followed, evangelicals, and especially fundamentalists—
elite and  populist—disdained “good works,” aid to the poor, as ir-
relevant to salvation. The only help the poor needed was Jesus. Colson
thought so, too, but he understood that for people to accept the rule of
Christ, they’d need some prep work. But it wasn’t his idea; it was
Coe’s.
To understand where it came from, we must go back several
years to 1968, the morning of April 4, when an assassin’s bullet
slammed into Martin Luther King Jr. while he stood on a motel bal-
cony in Memphis. King was a Christian like Coe. Like Coe, he be-
lieved in the “beloved community,” the Kingdom of God realized
here on Earth, and like Coe, he was willing to work with those who
didn’t share his beliefs. But that is where the similarities end. Coe

--- Sayfa 243 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 237
preaches a personal, private submission; King fought and died in
public for collective liberation. Coe believes Jesus has a special mes-
sage for the powerful; King believed God has a special message for
everyone. Most important, in 1968, as Coe was constricting the al-
ready narrow vision of the Fellowship, King was doing as he had
done his  whole life: broadening his dream. King died just as he was
raising his voice to speak out not only for racial justice but also for
economic justice. He would pursue it not through private prayer
cells but through public solidarity. And when James Earl Ray mur-
dered him, millions of Americans expressed their solidarity with the
dead not through polite mourning but through fury.
Following King’s murder, the Fellowship’s city on a hill, Wash-
ington, D.C., burned. More than 200 fires roared throughout the
capital. White suburbanites in Arlington and Alexandria looked
across the river and saw a sunrise at midnight, a terrifying new day
dawning. Many white residents of the District had feared it for years.
White fl ight from Washington began not with the civil rights move-
ment but in the 1940s; it actually slowed down in the 1960s, but
only because so many white people had already retreated to the sub-
urbs. Even so, between 1960 and 1970, those suburbs grew in popu-
lation by 61 percent, putting their numbers far higher than those of
Washington proper, which remained static at around 800,000. In
1967, the city got its first black mayor since Reconstruction, the aptly
named Walter Washington; but in 1968, twelve dead in the street
after clashes between the people and the police (and then the Na-
tional Guard),  whole neighborhoods smoldering like they were part
of Hanoi, the city seemed doomed.49
For Coe, this would not do. The Fellowship’s Christian Embassy
remained in the heart of the city. It had to be saved. Perhaps, too,
Coe felt some modicum of guilt; even as he and his underlings
courted the strongmen of Africa, he had paid almost no attention to
African Americans. A letter to Coe during his early days in Washing-
ton suggests that his neglect was a conscious choice: “Are any of your
[converts] Negroes,” wrote a friend from Oregon, “or are you still
discriminatory?”50 Coe did not bother to answer. But in 1968, faced

--- Sayfa 244 ---
238 | J E F F S H A R L E T
with what appeared to be  revolution—Stokely Carmichael, dressed
like a guerrilla commander to promote his book Black Power: The Poli-
tics of Liberation in America, told Howard University, “I’ve come to
Washington to stay, baby . . . this is our  town.”—Coe turned the
Fellowship’s considerable resources toward those closest at hand,
Washington’s African Americans.51
Working with Halverson, a group of wealthy white businessmen,
a black preacher named William Porter, and a former professor of
Carmichael’s, John Staggers, Coe oversaw the recruitment of “street
dudes,” black  ex-cons, to become a paramilitary security force called
the Black  Buffers—the Fellowship’s answer to black power. Like the
Panthers, the Buffers patrolled inner-city streets. They even wore
dashikis, bought in bulk on Coe’s orders. But their African garb and
their  two-way radios  were paid for by white businessmen, and Coe’s
counselors trained them to preach not black power but black capital-
ism. “They called us a spy group,” remembers Reverend Porter, the
first supervisor of the program, “because we’d find out what was
happening”—in terms of black  militance—“and shut it down if it
happened.”52
Drawing funds from the city government and the U.S. Labor
Department (through the intervention of Fellowship brother Con-
gressman Al Quie, who at the time was spearheading the GOP at-
tack on federal aid for schools), the Buffers  were supposed to be
secular. They weren’t. Everything they did—from running after-
school martial arts classes for boys and “charm school” for girls, to
monitoring street corners for militance, to violently enforcing disci-
pline within their own  ranks—was filtered through the fundamen-
talism of Jesus plus nothing.
“The biggest problem that blacks face in this country today hap-
pens to be the black man himself,” Staggers would say. “Racial con-
flicts do exist in our country. Their solutions are not to be found in
the passing of laws and other kinds of legislation, but only when man
accepts God totally in his life.”53
That was the idea the Buffers began with in 1968, the first seeds of
what would become compassionate conservatism. The Buff ers were a

--- Sayfa 245 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 239
fundamentally right-wing organization—authoritarian, violent, and
dedicated to the maintenance of established  power—but they some-
times functioned like  left-wing radicals, acting as literal buffers be-
tween black Washingtonians and the nearly all-white police force.
About the police, they harbored no illusions. “If you ever have a con-
frontation with the police,” Reverend Porter counseled the Buffers,
“make sure there’s five or six of you. Don’t start nothing but defend
yourself. He might kill one of you, but make sure you get him.”
In the end, Coe got them. Not long after they were up and run-
ning, Coe installed a white staffer from the evangelical group Young
Life in authority over the Buffers. Revered Porter realized that the
Buff ers  were losing local control; the goal, he suspected, was to fold
them into Young Life as a diversity program the almost  all-white
or ganization could boast about. He  couldn’t be sure; Coe surrounded
his intentions with secrecy. Secrecy, in fact, was offi  cial policy. Coe
and the white businessmen who financed the Buffers wanted tight
control of the group, but they didn’t want credit. Instead, they
wanted to create the impression of spontaneous outbreaks of black
submission (to Christ) instead of black power. They thought it might
catch on. When it didn’t, the financiers pulled the plug after not
much more than a year, satisfied that order had at least been re-
turned to Washington. Compassionate conservatism, beta version, was
complete.
Staggers went to work for the Republican senator Richard Lugar.
Coe began staking out suburban properties for the Fellowship, and in
keeping with his new Ozzy and Harriet white-flight ethos, began
calling it the Family. The Buffers drifted apart, and some went back
to prison. Porter moved on to a pulpit in Maryland, although he kept
attending Coe’s  inner-city prayer breakfasts until he finally grew
tired of what he heard as Coe’s  broken-record message of “reconcili-
ation” without substance. Porter was a theologically conservative
Christian. He believed in prayer. But he also believed in power, and
he quit the  Fellowship—or the  Family—when he realized that the
men who ran it would never really share any with a brother who had
nothing to trade, not even a whispered threat of revolution.

--- Sayfa 246 ---
240 | J E F F S H A R L E T
And Colson? He was just getting started. At the beginning, he
seemed to enjoy boasting of his new Family connections, the smooth-
est political machine he’d ever encountered. But he soon learned the
art of quiet diplomacy, Coe- style. He Vietnamized. In 1977, he ap-
peared on Pat Robertson’s 700 Club program with his newest brother
in Christ: Eldridge Cleaver, a founder of the Black Panthers. On the
run in revolutionary Algeria, lost and far from home, Cleaver experi-
enced a vision of Jesus that would have been immediately recogniz-
able to the Family. “I was looking up at the moon,” he’d later recount,
“and I saw the man in the moon and it was my face.” Then the face
began to morph, becoming first one of Cleaver’s strongman heroes,
then another. From Cleaver himself to Castro to Mao to the stron-
gest man of all, Jesus Christ, glowering down from the African
night. Cleaver fell to his knees and wept, praying the  Twenty-third
Psalm, committed to memory as a child, and then the tears dried and
Cleaver was ready at last to repent for black  power—to surrender to
American justice and the American Jesus.54
Cleaver, Colson told Pat Robertson, had joined a prayer cell with
him, former senator Harold Hughes—by then working full time for
the  Family—and Tommy Tarrant, a former Klansman in prison for
bombing a Jewish family. Cleaver, declared Colson, was reconciled.
In 1980, Cleaver, Panther no more, endorsed Ronald Reagan.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
9.
J E S U S + 0 = X
I
n 2003, I published a portion of the account of Ivanwald with
which I begin this book in Harper’s magazine. I might have left it at
that,  were it not for a series of phone calls. In June of that year, I re-
ceived an e-mail from a man named Greg Unumb, who wrote that
he’d read my article and wanted to talk to me. “I grew up with the
Coe family, went to school with their sons (that is, from elementary
school to through college), and was a part of the original group at
Ivanwald; however, I had a  falling-out with them a number of years
ago.” Greg thought I was correct in “some of [my] conclusions, but
certainly not on all of them.” He wanted to offer me “insight.”
Greg was finance manager for Pride Foramer’s operation in oil-rich
Angola. Pride Foramer is a division of Pride International, which
drills in or off the coasts of more than thirty nations. The Pride Fo-
ramer division took care of business in five countries besides Angola:
Brazil, Indonesia, India, South Africa, and Ivory Coast. All six, as it
happens, have long been of special interest to the Family. But Greg
didn’t want to talk about any of that. It was hard to tell what he did
want to talk about. When I reached him on the phone in Angola (ask
for “Mr. Greg,” he wrote, “not Mr. Unumb”), he did not seem to re-
call any “falling-out.” In fact, he was more interested in me. Such a
fascinating subject, he said—was I writing a book? Where did I live?
How much had I been paid for the article? How had I gotten in to Ivan-
wald? Who recommended me?
At the time, I lived on top of a hill in rural upstate New York. As

--- Sayfa 248 ---
242 | J E F F S H A R L E T
I talked to Greg, I sat in a lawn chair, looking out across miles of
farmland, shooing bees away from my ankles. Ivanwald, the Family,
its  intrigues—beneath the bright summer sun, it all seemed hard to
take seriously.
Greg wasn’t the only one who got in touch. There was a corpo-
rate lawyer from Seattle, who claimed to have no connection to the
Family but asked the same questions Greg had; I discovered that he
had worked with several of the Family’s visible fronts. End of conver-
sation.
There  were many devout Christians who contacted me. There
was a Presbyterian pastor named Ben Daniel, a former member of
the Family who’d quit after his first National Prayer Breakfast, where
he was horrified to encounter the very same Central American death
squad politicos he’d been reading about in the papers. There was an
old, well-connected Republican lawyer named Clif Gosney, who on
his visits to New York has introduced me to some of the city’s most
beautiful churches. After years of high-level service to the Family as
a liaison to Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi of the Zulu nation, he started
drifting out in the early 1990s. When he asked Coe why almost no
liberal Christian leaders  were included in the National Prayer Break-
fast, Coe raged at him, a rare instance of the sphinx’s anger. Clif re-
members hanging up the phone and realizing he’d just been purged.
When I went to Germany to speak on a panel about fundamen-
talism at the University of Potsdam, my German host told me that
the U.S. embassy, a cosponsor of the lecture series, had refused to
cover my expenses. I was, in the alleged words of Ambassador Dan
Coats, a former Republican senator from Indiana, “an enemy of Je-
sus.” If Coats really did say that, it didn’t faze the German Christians
with whom I shared a delicious meal that night.
And then there was Kate.* She wrote asking to have coffee with
me because she was a fan. When a gorgeous blonde walked into the
restaurant we’d agreed on and immediately said she loved my article,
* After she’d revealed her true purpose in contacting me, the woman I call “Kate” asked that I not
identify her.

--- Sayfa 249 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 243
I thought, journalism has its rewards. But an hour into our conversa-
tion, I started making connections. She’d been living in Annapolis,
Maryland, where the Family has a group of homes much like the
compound in Arlington. She’d recently left a job at the National
Security Agency. She’d been raised fundamentalist, but she’d left it
behind; she wanted a relationship with Jesus untainted by tradi-
tion. So I asked her, “Do you know anyone in the Family?” Silence. I
asked her again. For whatever reason—Christian  conscience?—she
confessed that she did know someone in the Family, David Coe.
“He’s like a father to me.” In fact, she admitted, she’d been sent to
spy on me.
We ended up talking for three more hours and drinking a lot of
wine. I tried to persuade her that the Family was a secretive, undemo-
cratic organization that aided and abetted dictators. She agreed, only
she thought that was a good thing. She said the Family still loved me.
I told her about some of the killers the Family had supported. She
rallied by pointing out that we’re all sinners, and thus shouldn’t judge
those whom God places in authority. “Jeff,” she said, holding my
eyes, twisting her wine stem between her fingers, “in your heart,
have you ever lusted for a woman? Isn’t that just as bad?”
So by the time Greg Unumb called, I  wasn’t too concerned about
Family surveillance, which seemed to lead to nothing but good meals
and bizarre  come-ons. I answered Greg’s questions as if he was the
jittery one, the reporter looking over his shoulder. Relax, I wanted
to say. Eventually, he did. For a moment, our conversation stalled.
Then he said, “You know, I used to run Ivanwald.” And, he
added, other Family houses just like it. That was a long time ago,
before his oil career. He’s since married a Frenchwoman, and he va-
cations in Sicily, and he goes to Washington only on business, the
nature of which he said he’d rather not talk about. He remembered
Ivanwald fondly, but  now—“Generally, I don’t see the Coes unless I
run into them.” He  wouldn’t explain why he’d broken off from them
or why he continued to run into them.
But he still respects them. Their problem, he said, is one merely
of “screening.” They let “con artists” in. Scammers. People who raise

--- Sayfa 250 ---
244 | J E F F S H A R L E T
money and disappear. People who “use an endorsement improperly.”
These are nothing but “relational problems.”
All that other stuff, he said, just talk. Like the Hitler “stuff .” “I
heard those same illustrations used twenty years ago.” The goal wasn’t
emulation but distillation. To look at “what they accomplished for
evil, and turn it to good.” I didn’t say anything. I’d learned not to ask
what a “good” genocide looked like.
He admitted that “sometimes, what they say is not what they do.”
And then there is the question of what they don’t say. “What’s secret
is the top guys working with the leadership. It’s not unlike a busi-
ness. Business is a network. This is a Christian network, with a few
people running it.” Same deal as Pride International, he explained.
There are people responsible for cities, and above them people re-
sponsible for regions, and above them people responsible for coun-
tries. And above them, there is Doug Coe.
“He’s like [St.] Paul,” Greg explained. He wanted me to under-
stand Coe’s famous $500 bet: that if a man prayed for something for
forty days, he’d get it. Belief didn’t matter. Jesus  doesn’t need your
belief; he demands only your prayers, by which Greg seemed to
mean obedience. Legend holds that Coe has never lost the bet. If you
wager with him, he prays for you, so you  can’t lose. “He’s confident
enough in his relationship with Christ that he can ask for things,” said
Greg. And he’ll get them. “Doug talks to Jesus  man-to-man.”
“Jeff,” Greg said, “I advise you to explore that pro cess. The pro-
cess of becoming intimate with God.” I was a smart guy. I could do it.
For a lot of men, that relationship with God, it was nothing but per-
sonal. For a few, though, it meant something greater. “There are two
types of people at Ivanwald. Sharp guys, with leadership potential,
and problem kids. The sharp ones use Ivanwald to build their net-
work. If they do become successful, there’s an emphasis on maintain-
ing contact.
“That,” he said, “is how Doug uses Ivanwald.”
By now I was out of my lawn chair and pacing with the phone in
hand. Was I actually being recruited back to Ivanwald? It seemed
impossible. But I didn’t know how  else to interpret it. Greg thought

--- Sayfa 251 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 245
I might have “leadership potential,” might be someone Doug Coe
could “use.”
For what?
“The leadership work is secretive,” Greg said. “It has to be. There
is the problem of separation of church and state. And you can get so
much more accomplished in secret.” He boasted of the Family’s
behind-the- scenes negotiations with Israel, of Yasir Arafat’s visit to
the  Cedars—an  off-the-record event that had taken place long after
Greg claimed to have broken with the Family. “Or Suharto,” he said.
The fact that Suharto had murdered 500,000 of his countrymen, as
I’d written, was news to him. But so what? “Say he did kill a half mil-
lion people. Let me ask you this: did he kill them before or during his
relationship with Doug?”
Suharto’s killing started before he knew Coe. In fact, it was the
killing that caught the Family’s attention. Since I’d left Ivanwald, I’d
been doing some research on Indonesia; I thought that in the Family’s
relationship with a Muslim dictator there might be a clue to solving
the problem of Jesus plus nothing. This is what I found out.
In September of 1965, a  communist-led rebellion attempted to
topple the aging hero of Indonesian independence, Sukarno, by then
withered into an incompetent dictator. It fell to young General Su-
harto to beat back the rebellion, which he did easily, and to prevent a
recurrence. This he accomplished by leading a nationwide slaughter
of communists. “Communist” schoolchildren, babies, entire villages.
When it was done, Suharto was  untouchable—especially with his
newfound friends, the Americans. LBJ, dominoes on the mind, was
willing to cut deals with any devil God gave him if it meant he could
move at least one Southeast Asian nation permanently out of the
communist column.
American fundamentalists  were even more enthusiastic about
the Muslim dictator. In 1968, Abram declared Suharto’s coup a “spir-
itual revolution,” and Indonesia under his rule an especially promis-
ing nation, hope for the future in Abram’s last years.1 The CIA would

--- Sayfa 252 ---
246 | J E F F S H A R L E T
eventually admit that the Indonesian massacre was “one of the worst
mass murders in the 20th century.” But that wasn’t the mood at the
dawn of Suharto’s reign, as Clif Robinson, the Family’s chief Asian
representative, discovered in 1966, when he visited the American
ambassador to Indonesia, Marshall Green. “The emergency,” as Rob-
inson called it, made demands on the ambassador’s time, but the two
men spent an afternoon together. Robinson wasn’t able to see the
Indonesian diplomat who’d originally introduced him to Jakarta pol-
itics though. He was in prison, one of 750,000 Indonesians jailed or
sent to concentration camps for political crimes.
Robinson didn’t try to intervene on behalf of his friend. But then,
the ambassador would hardly have been the man to ask for help. In
1990, Green acknowledged the  long- suspected fact that the American
embassy had been busy at that time compiling for Suharto what one of
Green’s aides called a “shooting list”: the names of thousands of leftist
political opponents, from leaders identified by the CIA to  village-level
activists, the kind of data only local observers—conservative mission-
aries, classically—could provide. “We had a lot more information
about [them] than the Indonesians themselves,” Green boasted. Green
and his aides followed the results of their gift closely, checking off
names as Suharto’s men killed or imprisoned them. “No one cared, so
long as they were communists, that they were butchered,” said one of
Green’s aides. Another, acknowledging that the list had left “a lot of
blood” on American hands, argued, “But that’s not all bad. There’s a
time when you have to strike hard at a decisive moment.”2
One such moment occurred for Suharto in December 1975,
when Portugal relinquished its claims to the tiny island nation of East
Timor. It declared independence; nine days later Suharto’s army in-
vaded, on the pretext that its neighbor was communist. Two hundred
thousand people—nearly a third of the island’s population—were
killed during the long occupation, to which the United States gave its
blessing. Gerald Ford, the only president to have been a member of
an actual prayer cell (when he was in Congress, with Representatives
John Rhodes, Al Quie, and Melvin Laird, a cell that reconvened in
1974 to pray with Ford about pardoning Nixon),3 told Suharto, “We

--- Sayfa 253 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 247
will understand and will not press you on the issue. We understand
the problem and the intentions you have.” Kissinger, with Ford in
Jakarta, added, “It is important that whatever you do succeeds quickly
[because] the use of U.S.-made arms could create problems.” Suharto
did not succeed  quickly—the killing continued for  decades—but he
never lacked for champions in the U.S. Congress, which saw to it
that American dollars kept his regime in bullets until he was driven
out in 1998.
The massacre of Indonesia preceded Suharto’s friendship with the
Family, but the slaughter and slow strangulation of East Timor coin-
cided with it. A document in the Family’s archives titled “Important
Dates in Indonesian History” notes that in March 1966, the Commu-
nist Party was banned and Campus Crusade arrived in April. Suharto
wasn’t a Christian, but he knew that where missionaries go, investors
follow. He also wanted to use  God—any  God—to pacify the popula-
tion. In 1967, Congressman Ben Reifel sent a memo to other Fellow-
ship members in Congress noting that a special message from Suharto
calling on Indonesians to “seek God, discover His laws, and obey
them” was broadcast at the same time as a Fellowship prayer session in
the Indonesian parliament for  non-Christian politicians. The Fellow-
ship never asked Indonesians to renounce Islam, only to meet around
“the person of Jesus”—considered a prophet in Islam—in private,
under the guidance of the Fellowship’s American brothers.
By 1969, the Fellowship claimed as its man in Jakarta Suharto’s
minister of social affairs, who presided over a group of more than
fifty Muslims and Christians in parliament. Another Fellowship as-
sociate, Darius Marpaung—he’d later claim that God spoke through
him when he told a massive rally that the time had come to “purge
the communists,” an event that helped spark the  massacre—led a
similar group in Indonesia’s Christian community.4 “President Su-
harto is most interested and would like to increase his contact through
this medium with the other men of the world,” wrote Coe’s first fol-
lower, Senator Mark Hatfield, in a memo to Nixon that year. “He has
indicated he would like to meet with the Senate [prayer] group if and
when he comes to the United States.”5

--- Sayfa 254 ---
248 | J E F F S H A R L E T
In the fall of 1970, Suharto did both. Coe often boasted that no-
body but congressmen, himself, and maybe a special guest attended
such meetings, but this time Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird and
Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
joined the Indonesian dictator.6 In October 1970, Coe wrote to the
U.S. ambassador to Chile, Edward Korry. Suharto had just become
the first Muslim to join the Fellowship’s off-the-record Senate prayer
group for a meeting “similar to the one we had with Haile Selassie,”
the emperor of Ethiopia. Korry was too busy to celebrate; October
1970 was the month his plot to overthrow Chile’s democratically
elected president, Salvador Allende, came to a botched end, opening
the door to the more murderous scheme that brought General Au-
gusto Pinochet to power three years later.7 (“The sun is just now be-
ginning to shine again,” the Family’s key man in Chile, the head of a
right-wing civilian faction called the “Officialists,” wrote Coe, prom-
ising to tell him the “real story” of Pinochet’s coup in person.)
In 1971, Coe entertained a small gathering at the Fellowship
House with stories from his most recent round of visits to interna-
tional brothers, “men whom God has touched in an unusual way.”
Among them was General Nguyen Van Thieu, the president of South
Vietnam, who arranged for Coe to tour the war zone in the personal
plane of his top military commander; the foreign minister of Cambo-
dia, “most eager to carry on our concept”; and Suharto. In Clif Rob-
inson’s telling, “Doug and I  were escorted up the steps of the palace,
no attempt to make any secret of it, and the president there so
warmly welcomed us and the first thing he said as I walked into the
room was to express his appreciation for what had been done, and to
say that the momentum that we have seen started in this must not be
allowed to slacken . . . Along toward the end, one of the men sug-
gested it would be good if we had prayer together. And Darius Mar-
paung and Colonel Sombolem were present with us. And Darius
Marpaung suggested that the businessman who was there would lead
us in a prayer. And I think I have seldom been in a meeting where the
prayer was so  God-inspired.”8

--- Sayfa 255 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 249
Coe and Robinson weren’t the only representatives of the Fel-
lowship to seek such inspiration with Suharto. In 1970, a memo to
Fellowship congressmen from Senator B. Everett Jordan, a North
Carolina Dixiecrat, reported that Howard Hardesty, the executive
vice president of Continental Oil, listed as a key man in the Fellow-
ship’s confidential directory, had traveled to Indonesia to spend a day
with the Fellowship prayer cells and join Suharto for dinner.9 The
following year, Senator Jordan himself traveled to Jakarta on the
Family’s behalf, where a special prayer breakfast meeting of forty
parliamentary and military leaders was assembled for him by the vice
president of Pertamina, the state oil and gas company that functioned
like a family business for Suharto. Such corporate/state/church chum-
miness was hardly limited to dictatorial regimes. Jordan may well
have traveled to the meeting on an airplane provided that year for
congressional members of the Family by Harold McClure of Mc-
Clure Oil, and the year previous, he’d boasted in a memo to congres-
sional Family members, oil executives and foreign diplomats had
used the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington to meet for “confi-
dential” prayers.10
By 1972, some of Abram’s old hands  were concerned about the
moral vacuum the Family now called home. Elgin Groseclose, the
American economist who’d helped the Shah run Iran in the 1940s,
worried that Muslims who saw through the facade of the  “brotherhood
of man” would ask, “Down what road am I being taken?” And, per-
haps, decide to take Americans for a  ride instead. “This has been one
of the aspects of the . . . movement that has long troubled me,” con-
cluded Groseclose. “Where does politics end and religion begin?”11
Poor Groseclose. He could not grasp power. Suharto got it. “We
are sharing the deepest experiences of our lives together,” Clif Rob-
inson wrote of his brother the dictator. “It was at this point when I
was with President Suharto of Indonesia that he said, ‘In this way we
are converted, we convert  ourselves—No one converts us!’ ”12
In the spring of 1975, Bruce Sundberg, a Family missionary to
the Filipino government of the dictator Ferdinand Marcos, began

--- Sayfa 256 ---
250 | J E F F S H A R L E T
planning with Marcos’s chief financial backer for a summit in Jakarta.
Included would be Marcos, Suharto, and General Park, the South
Korean dictator. Sundberg called it “The Jakarta Idea,” the “Idea” to
be pondered the same one that had come to Abram forty years earlier
in Seattle. That it had not evolved since 1935 was, to the men of the
Family, proof of its eternal truth: the Idea that God’s method is the
“man-method,” that God chooses His key men according to His con-
cerns, not ours. That conviction enabled Coe to ignore Elgin Grose-
close’s concern about foreign nationals using them for their
connections. People didn’t use people, according to the Idea. People
didn’t do anything. Rather, they were used by God, and their only
two choices  were to struggle against the inevitable, or to allow God
to pull their strings. Was Suharto using them? Only if God wanted
him to. Everything the Family did for  Suharto—the connections,
the prayers, the  blessings—they did for God.
On December 6, 1975, Gerald Ford blessed Suharto’s invasion of
East Timor. Twelve hours after Ford left Jakarta, Suharto’s forces,
armed almost entirely with American weapons, attacked East Timor’s
population of 650,000 on the premise that the island nation was
planning a communist assault on Indonesia, a nation of 140 million
people.
Here are the words of the last broadcast from East Timor’s na-
tional Radio Dili, in the nation’s capital: “Women and children are
being shot in the streets. We are all going to be killed, I repeat, we
are all going to be killed. This is an appeal for international help.
Please help us . . .”
The conservative estimate of Suharto’s death toll, in East Timor
and Indonesia proper, is 602,000, but most scholars of Indonesia be-
lieve it is two or even three times greater, ranking Suharto next to
the Cambodian madman Pol Pot as one of the worst mass murderers
of the twentieth century. What role the Family played, or did not
play—which of their “deepest experiences” they shared—in the long

--- Sayfa 257 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 251
occupation of East Timor that followed the invasion, a period during
which it was transformed into “islands of prisons hidden with is-
lands,” I  can’t say. The Family restricted its archives before I could
follow the story into the next decade. All I know is that in 2002 my
Ivanwald brothers proudly proclaimed that one of Suharto’s succes-
sors, President Megawati, had bent her knee to the Jesus of the
 Cedars.
I shared some of Suharto’s story with Greg. I wanted to make
some kind of connection. Not of politics to religion but between us,
“man-to-man,” as the Family likes to say. I knew almost nothing
about him, but his tone reminded me of Bengt Carlson, one of his
successors as leader of Ivanwald, and that made me think that like
Bengt, Greg was probably a decent sort absorbed into a movement
the awful shape of which he simply didn’t see. It wasn’t that I wanted
to school him. I wanted him to know that I got it. That I understood
good intentions and where they could lead. That I appreciated that
diplomacy requires doing business with bad men. That I knew there
had been honorable Cold Warriors—my father, a Sovietologist who
advised the CIA near the end of Eastern Europe an communism, was
one of them—who believed that the threat of the Soviet Union justi-
fi ed terrible alliances.
But what I wanted him to  say—and I admit it, I wanted him to
answer for Coe, for Carlson, for the  whole goddamn bunch, because,
after all, here he was, apparently asking me to join them—was that
making Suharto a brother, at least, had been a mistake. Why hadn’t
Coe risked his access, risked the Family’s friendships in big oil,
risked even his certainty about the biblically sanctioned authority of
whichever strongman ends up in charge, to tell Suharto—after a
prayer,  maybe—to stop killing his own people? To hold him ac-
countable, as the Family likes to say. For if the Family had not done
so—if they had, in fact, greased Suharto’s economic machine, voted
for weapons, praised him to the world as a champion of freedom—
they were accomplices. Brothers in blood, yes, but not that of the
lamb.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
252 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Greg preferred to look on the bright side. “If not for Doug,” he
said, “maybe Suharto would have killed a million.”
Greg’s math was the calculus used by Stalin when he said that a
single death is a tragedy, but a million is no more than a statistic.
Stalin, monster that he was, spoke not of flesh-and- blood murder but
of politics by narrative, the stories to which even a dictator must re-
sort if he is to wield the power he takes by the gun. As a human be-
ing, Stalin may have been worse than worthless, but as a fabulator, he
was astute. A single death does make a better story. Suharto’s
victims—602,000, 1.2 million, or 1.8  million—may never find a
place in literature. But they deserve a place in history, and to win
them that, one small problem must be solved  here in America, that of
Jesus plus nothing, the logic of faith that allows American politicians
to contribute to the nightmares of other nations, and the rest of us to
vote for them.
Jesus plus nothing. Phrased like that, as Coe puts it, it doesn’t
sound like a problem at all. One who preaches Jesus plus nothing
claims to be in possession of pure Godhead. Not Jesus plus the his-
tory of his believers and what they’ve done in His name, or Jesus plus
the culture through which we view Him now, or Jesus plus the best
eff orts of the minds God, presumably, gave us, or Jesus plus human-
ity itself. Not Jesus plus scripture, since scripture, after all, contains
a great deal besides Jesus. No burning bush, no voice in the whirl-
wind, no Daniel, no lions. Coe and his inner circle do believe in the
trinity; a Washington fundamentalist activist told me, “but they’ll
give the Father and the Holy Ghost the weekend off. Because they
clutter the conversation. Jesus is so easily presented.”13
And what is it about Jesus that Coe presents? Not the teachings of
Christ; simply the fact of His being, “the Person of Christ,” as Coe
called it in a  four-part lecture series he presented to a conference of
evangelical leaders in January 1989, recorded on two videotapes lent
to me by an evangelical scholar distressed by Coe’s peculiar concept
of God. The lectures took place at the Glen Eyrie Castle in Colorado

--- Sayfa 259 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 253
Springs, the Navigators headquarters at which Coe first conceived of
Jesus plus nothing. With a great stone hearth lit by two murky yel-
low lanterns behind him, Coe, in a dark suit and tie, his black hair
slicked across his skull, doesn’t drive toward his points; he ambles up
to them. He tells a story about touring  forty-two small nations in the
Pacific with a member of Reagan’s National Security Council, an
Australian politician, and some American businessmen. On the tar-
mac of each country’s airport, they pray for a key man, a power bro-
ker, and then they go off to meet a top man, the one with the
power.
What am I supposed to say to them? asks the Australian.
“We wanna be your friend,” says Coe.
Okay, says the Australian, but how?
“Tell ’em, ‘By learning to love God, together, centered around
Jesus Christ.’ ”
The Australian, who used to work in the foreign ministry,  doesn’t
think he can say that. He’ll sound crazy. He’ll sound stupid. So Coe
makes him a bet: if it doesn’t work after two countries, they’ll go
back to Australia and play golf. But there’s to be no golf in his near
future, because on every little island they visit, Yap and Truk and
Palau, this delegation of First World power finds prime ministers,
presidents, parliamentarians, strangely receptive to their message.
The NSC man, David Locke, a veteran of a similar trip with Coe,
described it once. “It reminded me of the story in World War II,
where the British sent an OSS type into Borneo . . . And this guy
parachuted out of the sky and they had never seen anything like this
so they looked on him  as—he had blonde hair and white skin and he
was a white god who had come out of the sky to mobilize them. Ob-
viously his side was going to win so they had no trouble aligning
themselves. Well, from the point of view of a lot of these little island
countries, we were something akin to that.”14
“All through these last forty years,” Coe continues, “I’ve had the
privilege of traveling to countries, I’ve been in China, in Vietnam
with the Vietnamese, the Vietcong, Communists in Panama, Com-
munists in Rus sia, the Red Guard in China, Nazis in Germany.”

--- Sayfa 260 ---
254 | J E F F S H A R L E T
(Coe’s first visit to Germany was in 1959. Did he know more about
the past of Abram’s key men in Germany than they liked to acknowl-
edge?) “And you know, I discovered that the same things that they
make people give vows to keep, are the same things that Jesus
said . . . The only thing that was changed was the goal, the only thing
that changed was the purpose. In essence, it was all the things that
Jesus taught in private to the disciples. I began to realize why they were
so successful in human terms.”
Coe cites one of his favorite scripture verses, Matthew 18:20,
“When two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in
the midst of them.” “Hitler, Goebbels, and Himmler  were three men.
Think of the immense power these three men had, these nobodies
from nowhere. Actually, emotional and mental problems. Prisoners.
From the street. But they bound themselves together in an agree-
ment, and they died together. Two years before they moved into Po-
land, these three men had a study done, systematically a plan drawn
out and put on paper to annihilate the entire Polish population and
destroy by numbers every single house”—he bangs the podium, dop,
dop,  dop—“and every single building in Warsaw and then to start on
the rest of Poland.”
It worked, Coe says; they killed 6½ million “Polish people.” (The
actual sum was closer to 5½ million, 3 million of whom were Polish
Jews. But that, as Stalin would say, is just a statistic).
“These three men by their decision alone.” What he’s trying to
explain, Coe says, is the power of friendship: between a man and
Christ, between brothers in Christ. Once, he says, a friend who’d
been France’s foreign minister during its war with Vietnam told him
he should try to meet Ho Chi Minh. “ ‘Even though he was our en-
emy, he was amazing.’ He said, ‘[Ho] knows what it means, to be
brothers.’ ” What does it mean to be brothers? It means, Coe learns
when he finally meets one of Ho’s, a foreign minister Coe says he
happened to bump into in Mauritania, to be willing  to—happy to—
die for your cause.
It’s late; the room is gloomy; Coe’s brothers and sisters are sitting
on hard chairs. He needs to make it very clear for them.

--- Sayfa 261 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 255
“These enemies of ours,” he says, “they have taken the very words
of Jesus Christ and used them for themselves.” What words is Coe
talking about? The ones about “social order.”
“That’s all that matters.” The social order: “Jesus says, ‘You have
to put me before other people, and you have to put me before your-
self.’ Hitler, that was the demand of the Nazi Party.” Coe slaps the
podium, and the Führer creeps into his mannerisms: “You have to put
the Nazi Party and its objectives in front of your own life and ahead
of other people!” Now he’s Coe again. “I’ve seen pictures of young
men in the Red Guard of China,” he says. “A table laid out like a
butcher table, they would bring in this young man’s mother and fa-
ther, lay her on the table with a basket on the end, he would take an
axe and cut her head off.” Now he’s Mao, punctuating his words by
slapping his pulpit: “They have to put the purposes of the Red Guard
ahead of the  mother-father- brother- sister—their own life!”
He pauses, makes the fist. “That was a covenant. A pledge. That
was what Jesus said.” Now he’s Jesus: “If you do not put me, before
your father”—bang—“your mother”—bang—“your brother”—
bang—“your sister”—bang—“you cannot be my disciple.” Now as
Coe: “If you’re gonna have any movement that moves men and move-
ments, that’s”—he clenches his fist again at the end of the
phrase—“you have to have that kind of commitment. Jesus knew
that. That’s the way the social order is run.”
In America, Coe says, “Today. In this country. This very day”—
that vision of social order is lost.
The next morning, Coe explains to the crowd how it can be re-
gained. Remember, he says, he is talking about love. A necessary re-
minder, perhaps, since he continues to use Hitler and Lenin, and,
today, Stalin, to illustrate the shape of the love he pursues. Why such
monsters? Why not speak of the church? Coe removes a pair of eye-
glasses from a pocket, but instead of putting them on, he twirls them
on one finger. “There is nothing in the Bible about the Christian
church. That isn’t the name of it. The name of it is the body.” The
Body of Christ, of which all believers are cells. “His body functions
invisibly.” Coe draws an analogy to a tree. All you see are the leaves;

--- Sayfa 262 ---
256 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“you don’t know what’s going on underground.” But look at the
churches, he says, with all their pomp and circumstance, all their ti-
tles, every  full-time church worker stuck in a hierarchy. It depresses
people, Coe explains, when they can see who their master is. A
movement that is visible is weak, vulnerable. It’s an organization, not
love. But the Body of Christ—“The Family,” Coe  says—“we are
bound by the strongest power in the  world”—love, I think, but I’ve
lost hold of the  connections—“and the  whole world is afraid of it.”
Let’s return to our problem. Let J stand for Jesus. J + 0 = X. Is X a
body of cells, or a social order, or a vision? Yes. All three. X = a vision.
The vision isn’t the Sermon on the Mount; it’s not the beatitudes; it’s
so simple it hurts (remember the Red Guard’s axe): the vision is total
loyalty. Loyalty to what? To the idea of loyalty. It’s another M. C.
Escher drawing, the one of a hand drawing the hand that is drawing
itself. The Communist Party, plus Jesus. The Nazi Party, plus Jesus.
The Red Guard, plus Jesus. What is the common denominator? Je-
sus? Or power? Jesus plus nothing equals power, “invisible” power,
the long, slow, building power of a few brothers and sisters. J + 0 = P.
We have our formula. Now let’s run the equation for the  twenty- first
century. J + 0 = P divided by the many permutations of the Family’s
present, its latest incarnation.

--- Sayfa 263 ---
10.
I N T E R E S T I N G B L O O D
T
he Reverend Rob Schenck, the founder of a ministry called
Faith and Action in the Nation’s Capital—a knockoff of the
Family, the theological equivalent of fake Gucci—is one of the most
unusual fundamentalist activists in Washington. He has the glad,
plastic face and quick wit of a Borscht Belt comedian and the big
brown eyes of a pitbull puppy. There’s an echo of Brooklyn in his
voice, which he amplified on my behalf. We had two things in com-
mon, we discovered when we met one day for sauerbraten at Schenck’s
favorite restaurant: a fascination with Jonathan Edwards and Charles
Finney, and the fact that we’re both “half-Jews,” born of gentile
mothers and Jewish fathers. “Makes for very interesting blood!” said
Schenck. This realization was an occasion for Schenck to dust off  his
Yinglish, the mix of Yiddish and English usually reserved for bar
mitzvahs, funerals, and Fiddler on the Roof revivals. It was probably the
only time Jonathan Edwards has been described as a luftmensch and
Finney as a schmoozer. (Between us, MOT, we agreed that Billy
Graham is a theological schlimazel.) Schenck was that rarest of crea-
tures: an ironic true believer.
Where I’d made sense of my half-Jew, half-Christian self by
writing about those without doubts or divisions, Schenck, seventeen
years old at the tail end of the hippie “Jesus People” movement in the
early 1970s, decided to become one. With his twin brother, Paul, in
tow, he began attending  late-night stoner  prayer- and-gospel guitar
sessions. But that wasn’t enough. It’s a strange truth of American

--- Sayfa 264 ---
258 | J E F F S H A R L E T
fundamentalism that several of its public ideologues—Marvin Olasky,
the former communist who converted and coined the phrase compas-
sionate conservatism, and Howard Phillips, a  Yiddish- speaker who
converted and recruited Jerry Falwell to create a “Moral Majority,”
and Jay Sekulow, the converted legal genius behind many of the
movement’s courtroom victories—came up in the deradicalized
world of postwar American Jewry. It’s as if, casting about for the
political passion of their immigrant fathers and mothers, they settled
on Christian fundamentalism as the closest approximation of that
vanished world, its socialist  unions and communist cells.
Schenck took it further than most: he helped or ganize Operation
Rescue, the militant anti- abortion crusade that specialized in gro-
tesque protests—the twin Schencks waved aborted fetuses like
flags—and “direct action,” such as a  full-throated prayer vigil outside
the home of a Buffalo abortion provider, Dr. Barnett Slepian, in
1997. A year later, an Operation Rescue volunteer named James
Kopp shot Slepian to death. “My brother and I felt very badly about
the shooting,” Schenck told a reporter.1
It was  true—by then Schenck had realized that there was a
quicker path to power. He had begun praying in Washington with a
rising star in the Senate from Missouri, John Ashcroft. He took to
riding what he called the “vertical  chapel”—the elevators of congres-
sional office  buildings—hoping to bump into more catches like
Ashcroft. Instead, he kept running into members of the Family, on
their way to meetings not just with fundamentalist fellow travelers
such as Ashcroft but the entire spectrum of the political elite. “The
mystique of the Fellowship,” Schenck observed, “has allowed it to
gain entrée into almost impossible places in the capital.”
Schenck found a donor to buy him a town house across from the
Supreme Court, where he began practicing a  Coe- style ministry to
judiciary staffers. In 2000, he prayed with Justice Antonin Scalia a
day after the Supreme Court decision that made Bush president, and
since 2001, Schenck has been able to penetrate the White  House with
ease, counseling staffers on their spiritual responsibilities. He does

--- Sayfa 265 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 259
the same for congressmen in the quiet garden behind his town house,
and fundamentalist activists from the provinces make Schenck’s HQ
a regular stop on their pilgrimages to power. But he’s still, by his own
admission, third tier. He remains an outsider with inside connections.
As such, he has become a sharp study of how the power he wants
actually flows. In the first rank of fundamentalist influence, there are
the old lions: James Dobson and Focus on the Family; Pat Robertson,
batty but too rich to ignore; Chuck Colson, the “scholar in residence”
in the  house of fundamentalism. “Then you have the B list,” which is
comprised of dozens of mid-sized organizations with big membership
rolls but little name recognition outside activist circles: American
Values, led by Gary Bauer, a former top Reagan aide who worked
with the Family in the 1980s; and the Traditional Values Coalition,
led by Louis P. Sheldon, a longtime Family ally who uses their C
Street House for “faith- based diplomacy” in the fi ght against what he
calls the “Marxist/Leftist/Homosexual/Islamic coalition”—a clumsy
coinage that marks him as too crass for the Family’s inner circle.
“Where does the Family fi t on this scale?” I asked.
Off the charts, said Schenck. Not more powerful; differently
powerful. The big Christian lobbying groups push and shout; the
Family simply surrounds politicians with prayer cells. They don’t try
to convert anyone. They don’t ask for anything. They’re as patient as
a glacier. “It works. It works extremely well. Inside the beltway, if
you’re going to enjoy the platform of the National Prayer Breakfast—I
mean, really enjoy it, not be invited courteously to show up, if you’re
going to have the force of that thing behind you, Coe’s approval is a
big deal. It’s the kosher seal.”
Coe  doesn’t demand doctrinal loyalty, only a willingness to do
business behind the scenes, and liberals are free to join him in the
back room. Testifying before Congress about global warming in
2007, Al Gore came under angry assault from Senator James Inhofe,
a longtime member of the Family. Gore blunted the attack by invok-
ing their “mutual friend, Doug Coe,” with whom, he suggested, he
and Inhofe ought to meet away from the cameras. “You know what

--- Sayfa 266 ---
260 | J E F F S H A R L E T
I think of when I think of Doug Coe?” Schenck asked, his voice thick
with admiration and laced with envy. “I think literally of the guy in
the smoky back room, you  can’t even see his face. He sits in the cor-
ner, and you see the cigar, and you see the flame, and you hear his
voice—but you never see his face. He’s that shadowy figure. Nobody
ever sees him. At the Prayer Breakfast, he’s never on the dais, but he
puts the  whole thing together. Nobody speaks from that podium,
including the president, without Doug’s nod of approval. It’s a deli-
cate play: He brings everyone together.”
For instance, says Schenck, Senators Sam Brownback and Hillary
Clinton, partners in prayer at Coe’s weekly Senate Prayer Breakfast.
The Family is dedicated to spiritual war, not the intramural combat
of party politics, Schenck explained. Coe  doesn’t have a systematic
theology, he has a vision of power. Not just to come, but as it exists.
“They’re into living with what is,” said Schenck. “But you don’t want
to alienate them, you don’t want to antagonize them. You need them
as your friends. Even Hillary will need them. They keep a sort of
cultural homeostasis in Washington. Washington right now is a town
where if you’re going to be powerful, you need religion. That’s just
the way it’s done.”
Sam
The senator looks taller than he is, looks broader than he is. He is
slight, but you notice the narrow cut of his suits, the weightlessness
of the man, only after you have been with him for a while. His face is
wide and flat and smooth across the cheekbones. His skin is
Washington-pale but thick, like leather, etched by windburn and sun
from years of working on his father’s farm in Parker, Kansas (popula-
tion 281 and falling). You can hear it in his voice: slow, distant but
warm, almost a baritone, spoken out of the left side of his mouth in
half sentences with very few hard consonants. It sounds like the voice
of someone who has learned how to wait for rain.
As a freshman in the  House, part of the Republican revolution of

--- Sayfa 267 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 261
1994, he spoke with approval of his supporters’ feelings about Con-
gress: “blow it up,” they demanded. He refused at first to sign the
“Contract With America,” Newt Gingrich’s right-wing manifesto,
not because it was too radical but because it wasn’t fast enough.
Don’t just reform government, he insisted; erase it. He wanted to
start by abolishing the departments of Education, Energy, Com-
merce, and the IRS. He wanted to do these things, he said, for the
poor. He topped the National Review’s list of rising stars. Less than
two years later, he was a senator. He grabbed his seat out from under
Bob Dole’s anointed successor.
He calls himself a “faith-journey man.” He considers human
rights his forte. He has been to Darfur and Iraq. He welcomes “pro-
American” refugees. (Those who don’t speak English, he has said,
“would not work well in Kansas.”) He worries a great deal about
sexual slavery. He’d like to censor violent videos, but he’s steadfast
against making gay bashing a hate crime. “Religious freedom” is a top
priority, and it may require force. He has suggested Iran, Syria, Saudi
Arabia, and Sudan as military targets, and proposed sending troops
to the Philippines, where rebels killed two American missionaries.
“There’s probably a higher level of Christians [being persecuted] dur-
ing the last ten, twenty years than . . . throughout human history,”
he told Chuck Colson’s radio program. He takes solace from scrip-
ture. “Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness,”
reads Matthew 5:10, “for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” He be-
lieves he can feel it when people are praying for him.
Brownback’s staff often seem puzzled by the intensity of his
religion. They worry when the only thing he eats for lunch is a
wafer, the Body of Christ, at the noontime mass he tries to attend
daily since his conversion to Catholicism. On weekends he gets up
early so he could catch a mass before meeting his family at Topeka
Bible, the city’s biggest evangelical church. He calls this routine a
“great mixture of the feeding.” One Sunday morning I joined him.
His preferred seat was in the back row of the balcony. A guest

--- Sayfa 268 ---
262 | J E F F S H A R L E T
preacher from Promise Keepers, a revival of nineteenth-century
“muscular Christianity,” had arranged for two men to perform a
melodrama about golf and fatherhood. The senator chuckled when he
was supposed to, sang every song, nodded seriously when the preacher
warned against “Judaizers” who would “poison” the New Testament.
After the service, Brownback introduced me to a  white-haired
man with a yellow Viking mustache. “This is the man who wrote
‘Dust in the Wind,’ ” the senator announced proudly. It was Kerry
Livgren, of the band Kansas, born again. Brownback likes to take
Livgren on fact- finding missions. He wants to take him to Israel,
because he thinks songwriters are very spiritual, and he thinks Jews
are also very spiritual. “Carry on, my wayward son . . . ,” the sena-
tor warbled, trying to remember the words to the other big hit by
Kansas.
When he ran for the  House, Brownback was a Methodist, simple
and proper. When he ran for the Senate, he was an evangelical, filled
with Holy Ghost power. Now he’s a Catholic, baptized not in a
church but in the “Catholic Information Center,” a chapel tucked in
between lobbyists’ offices on K Street in Washington, run by Opus
Dei, a secretive lay order founded by a saint who saw in Generalis-
simo Franco, the late dictator of Spain, an ideal of worldly power.
Brownback prefers Mother Teresa. He studies Torah with an ortho-
dox rabbi. “Deep,” says the rabbi. His daughter once told him that
different churches have different aromas, and that there is a scent for
everyone. Brownback wants to huff them all. “I am a seeker,” he told
me, an understatement of grand proportion. Brownback’s faith is
complicated, like American fundamentalism in the twenty-fi rst cen-
tury. The movement’s two great  strands—the populist,  pulpit-
pounding tradition of its masses and the mannered evasions of its
elite—are coming together, intertwining to become the mutant
DNA of men such as Sam Brownback, the next generation of spiri-
tual warriors.
“Politics is a false god,” Brownback once wrote. What he meant,
he explained to me, is that God  doesn’t require brilliant leaders, eru-
dite lawmakers. All he wants is those who submit. It’s as simple as

--- Sayfa 269 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 263
the love between father and child. Love, not the  sharp-edged coexis-
tence made possible by tolerance, is the fundamentalist covenant
with America. Love, not the  never-ending arguments of democracy.
When Brownback was growing up, he was more concerned with
the weight of his hogs than the wages of sin. His parents still live in
the dusty white  one- story farmhouse in which he was raised, on a dirt
road outside of Parker. Brownback likes to say that he fights for tradi-
tional family values, but his father, Bob, was more concerned with
the price of grain, and his mother, Nancy, had no qualms about hav-
ing a gay friend. Back then, moral values  were simple. “Your word
was your word. Don’t cheat,” his mother told me. “I can’t think of
anything  else.” Her son played football (“quarterback” she said, “never
very good”) and was elected class president and “Mr. Spirit.” Like
most kids in Parker, he just wanted to be a farmer. But that life was
already gone by the time he graduated from high school. If he couldn’t
be a farmer, Brownback decided, he’d be a politician. In 1975, he
went off to Kansas State University. There he joined a chapter of the
Navigators, a fundamentalist ministry for young men and women
founded by Doug Coe’s first mentor, Dawson Trotman. The summer
before his se nior year, Brownback worked in Washington as an in-
tern for Bob Dole. “The Prayer Breakfast folks had rented a sorority
house for the summer, for people who  were working on the Hill. I
made contact.” That was Brownback’s fi rst introduction to the Fam-
ily, and to Coe. That fall, Brownback returned to K State with a new
sense of the potential synergy between politics and religion.
In 1983, Brownback was fresh out of law school and considering
a career in politics. He searched through Kansas history for a role
model and settled on the forgotten Republican senator Frank Carl-
son. “He stood at the center of power when the U.S. had no peer,”
Brownback remembers thinking. In 1968, the last year of Carlson’s
Senate  career—long before the term culture war was  invented—he
wrote an article for U.S. News calling for a “man to stand” against
what Brownback now terms de cadence. Brownback wondered, Could

--- Sayfa 270 ---
264 | J E F F S H A R L E T
I be the one? Carlson was still alive, so Brownback drove out to Con-
cordia, Kansas, and as the light died one summer eve ning he sat on
Carlson’s porch, listening to stories. Tales from the Senate, legends
of spiritual war, Carlson’s  now-ancient Worldwide Spiritual Offen-
sive. Brownback thought he’d found a mentor. “He became a model
to me.”
In the years that followed, he stayed in touch with Carlson, and
the Family stayed in touch with him, but Coe didn’t invite Brown-
back to join a prayer cell until he went to Washington as a congress-
man in 1994. “I had been working with them for a number of years,
so when I went into Congress I knew I wanted to get back into that,”
he says. The group was all Republican and all male. Conversation
tended toward the personal. Or, according to the old feminist
maxim, the personal as political. “Personal transformation will in-
evitably have cultural and ultimately, political implications,” Brown-
back has said. He still meets with the prayer cell every Tuesday
eve ning. The rules forbid Brownback to reveal the names of his fel-
low members, but those in the cell likely include some of the men
with whom he lived in the Family’s C Street House for congressmen:
Representative Zach Wamp of Tennessee, former representative
Steve Largent of Oklahoma, and Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma,
then a representative and a medical doctor who took the personal as
political to new depths when he shanghaied Hill staffers into a base-
ment office for a slide show of genitals mutilated by sexually trans-
mitted diseases, a warning against sex outside of marriage that
Coburn underlined by advocating the death penalty for abortion pro-
viders.
Coe must have seemed like a voice of reason next to Brownback’s
new friends. He pointed out scripture verses to the congressman,
mailed him poems, gave him books to study. In a nation under Jesus
plus nothing, Coe explained, Brownback would ultimately have to
answer to only one authority. Everything—sex and taxes, war and
the price of oil—would be decided upon not according to democ-
racy or the church or even, strictly speaking, scripture. In a prayer
cell, Christ speaks directly to his anointed. “Typically,” Brownback

--- Sayfa 271 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 265
explained, “one person grows desirous of pursuing an action”—a
piece of legislation, a diplomatic strategy—“and the others pull in
behind.”
In 1999, Brownback teamed up with two other Family
associates—former senator Don Nickles and the late senator Strom
Thurmond—to demand a criminal investigation of Americans
United for Separation of Church and State. In 2005, Senator Coburn
joined Brownback in stumping for the  Houses of Worship Act, to al-
low  tax-exempt churches to endorse politicians. Brownback’s most
infl uential eff ort is as chair of the Senate Values Action Team, a cau-
cus that gathers on Tuesdays, before his Family cell meeting. Every-
thing that is said is strictly off the record, and even the groups
themselves are forbidden from discussing the proceedings. It’s a little
“cloak- and-dagger,” says Brownback’s press secretary. The VAT, as
it’s called, is a war council, and the enemy, says one participant, is
“secularism.”
The Senate VAT grew out of a  House version chaired by Repre-
sentative Joe Pitts, a burly, white-haired conservative from Pennsyl-
vania Amish country who’s a regular at the Family’s Arlington
mansion. The VAT was then-Representative Tom DeLay’s creation, but
as far back as 1980, Pitts had been one of the regional activists who’d
helped push a relatively new concern for  evangelicals—abortion—to
its place at the center of American politics. In 2002, Brownback,
whose concern with what he refers to as a “holocaust” against a
womb- bound nation of fetal citizens, was the logical man for the job
of leading the VAT’s Senate version. The VAT demands a bridge
builder’s sensibility, the ability to convince fundamentalism’s popu-
lar front, which demanded its creation, that it’s taken seriously by
more elite conservatives.
The VAT unifies their message and arms congressional staffers
with the data and language they need to pass legislation. Working
almost entirely in secret, the group has directed the fights against
gay marriage and for school vouchers, against  hate-crime legislation
and for “abstinence only” sex education, against diplomacy with
North Korea, and for war with Iran. The VAT is like a closed circuit

--- Sayfa 272 ---
266 | J E F F S H A R L E T
between elite and popular fundamentalism, with Brownback at the
switch.
Every Wednesday at noon, he trots upstairs from his offi  ce to a
radio studio maintained by the Republican leadership to rally support
from Christian America for the VAT’s agenda. One participant in the
broadcast, Salem Radio Network News, reaches more than 1,500
Christian stations nationwide, and Dobson’s Focus on the Family of-
fers access to an audience of 1.5 million. During the broadcast I sat in
on, Brownback explained that with the help of the VAT he hoped to
defeat a measure that would stiffen penalties for violent attacks on gays
and lesbians. Members of the VAT mobilized their flocks: An e-mail
sent out by the Family Research Council warned that the  hate-crime
bill would lead, inexorably, to the criminalization of Christ. When it
comes to “impacting policy,” Tony Perkins, president of the Family
Research Council, told me, “day to day, the VAT is instrumental.”
The VAT’s efforts often go beyond strictly spiritual matters, rally-
ing fundamentalism’s popular front around laissez-faire policies—tax
cuts,  deregulation—in line with elite fundamentalism’s long- standing
dream of not just a nation but an economy under God. At its best, that
makes for a paternalistic capitalism where bosses placed in authority
by God, according to Romans 13, treat their employees with respect
and compassion, to which the employees respond with devotion, lead-
ing to big profits, high wages, and smiles in every cubicle. More
often—well, the world we live in is the “more often,” an economy in
which employers treat their employees as commodities and employees
respond with fear and boredom. Only the big profits are the same.
In 1999, Brownback worked with Pitts to pass the Silk Road
Strategy Act, designed, Brownback told me, to block the growth of
Islam in Central Asian nations, essentially buying their oil and natu-
ral gas resources for American corporations through lucrative trade
deals, granted with little concern for the abysmal human rights rec-
ords of the region’s dictatorships. Brownback also sits on the board
of trustees of the U.S. Azerbaijan Chamber of Commerce, an organi-
zation created by the Azeri government with funds from eight oil

--- Sayfa 273 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 267
companies, including Exxon, Mobil, and Chevron. Current and for-
mer members include Henry Kissinger, Dick Cheney, Iraq War ar-
chitect Richard  Perle—a neoconservative trinity too cynical for
prayer cells—and two of Brownback’s Family brothers: Pitts and
former attorney general Ed Meese. One of the Silk Road Act’s provi-
sions, which Brownback fought for, lifted U.S. sanctions on Azerbai-
jan, imposed in response to the Azeri blockade against neighboring
Armenia. Azerbaijan is 94 percent Muslim; Armenia is predomi-
nantly Christian. Brownback apparently issues indulgences where oil
is concerned.
Brownback’s biggest financial backer is Koch Industries—the
largest privately held company in the United States, with extensive
oil and gas interests around the world. “The Koch folks,” as they’re
known around the senator’s office, are headquartered in Wichita, but
the company is one of the worst polluters across the country. In
2000, the company was slapped with the largest environmental civil
penalty in U.S. history for illegally discharging 3 million gallons of
crude oil in six states. That same year, Koch was indicted for lying
about its emissions of benzene, a chemical linked to leukemia, and
dodged criminal charges in return for a $20 million settlement with
the federal government, an inexplicably cheap price to pay. Brown-
back has received nearly $121,000 from Koch and its employees.
During his  neck- and-neck race in 1996, a shell company called Triad
Management provided $410,000 for  last-minute advertising on
Brownback’s behalf. A Senate investigative committee later deter-
mined that the money came from the two brothers who run Koch
Industries.
With Brownback, it’s nearly impossible to draw the line be-
tween the interests of his corporate backers and his own moral pas-
sions. Everyone applauds his fight to keep the murder of hundreds
of thousands of Sudanese refugees prioritized in U.S. foreign pol-
icy. And by standing up to the regime in Sudan, he’s also sending a
warning to China, which has been willing to overlook the Sudanese
government’s murderous campaign in exchange for access to the

--- Sayfa 274 ---
268 | J E F F S H A R L E T
country’s oil. Of course, Koch Industries might be interested in
that, too.
Is that all there is to Brownback? Cash in an envelope?  No—there
is not even that. A Kansas businessman who calls Brownback his
friend and has known him for years told me that the de facto price of
doing business with the  senator—the cost of admission for a single
meeting—was, last he checked, $2,000. In that, Brownback is unex-
ceptional. Many congressmen expect just as much from those who
want face time. It’s not illegal, just slimy. The difference with Brown-
back, said the businessman, is that he never touches the money. The
businessman is used to putting a check directly into the hands of the
politician whose help he needs. But whenever he visited Brownback’s
offi  ces, a staffer always quietly intervened, relieving the businessman
of the check beyond the senator’s sight lines. “Sam,” the businessman
told me, “doesn’t talk money.”
One afternoon, I met Brownback in his corner office to talk Bi-
ble. On his desk, there was a New Testament open to the Gospel of
John. I sat on a sofa beneath a portrait of Mother Teresa. There was
also a painting of a little blond girl in a field of sunflowers. “What can
I help you with?” Brownback asked, smiling. Two scripture passages,
I said. Leviticus 20:13, and Romans 1, the proof texts on which most
Christian conservatives base their opposition to homosexuality. Brown-
back frowned. He  wasn’t aware of the passages. His hatred of homo-
sexuality derived not from an engagement with scripture—which
academic Bible scholars say is not actually clear on the  matter—but
on what he considered direct revelation. “It’s pretty clear,” he said,
his fingers folded into a temple beneath his chin, “what we know in
our hearts.” Brownback calls this knowledge “natural law.” To legis-
late against it or any other practice his heart tells him is sin is not
theocratic, it’s “natural.”
“There’s a sacredness to it,” he said. He meant heterosexuality.
“You look at the social impact the countries that have engaged in ho-
mosexual marriage.” He shook his head in sorrow, thinking of Swe-
den. “You’ll know ’em by their fruits.” He paused, and an awkward
silence filled the room. We both knew he was citing scripture—

--- Sayfa 275 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 269
Matthew  7:16—but he’d just declared gay Swedes “fruits.” He re-
gretted that. Hate the sinner, love the sin, Brownback believes. In
the Family, he’d learned to love everybody.
Although Brownback’s 2002 Catholic conversion was through
Opus Dei, an ultra-orthodox order that, like the Family, specializes
in cultivating the rich and powerful, the source of much of his reli-
gious and political thinking is Chuck Colson. “When I came to the
Senate,” Brownback remembers, “I sought him out. I had been listen-
ing to his thoughts for years, and wanted to get to know him some.”
The admiration was mutual. Colson spotted Brownback’s potential
not long after Brownback joined a Family prayer cell. At the time,
Colson was holding classes on “biblical worldview” for leaders on
Capitol Hill. Colson taught that abortion is a “threshold” issue, a
wedge with which to introduce fundamentalism into every question.
Brownback, who’d been quietly pro- choice before he went to Wash-
ington, recognized the political utility of the  anti- abortion fight and
developed what is now a genuine hatred for the very idea that a wom-
an’s body is her own. It is not, he learned from Colson; it belongs to
God, just like that of a man, a line of reasoning by which Colson
claims that his fundamentalist faith is more egalitarian than femi-
nism, an analysis he extends beyond the womb into an implicit cri-
tique of democracy itself. The two men began coordinating their
efforts: Colson provided the philosophy, and Brownback translated it
into legislative action.
For all his talk of moral values, much of Brownback’s real work
as a senator revolves around the same kind of “quiet diplomacy” prac-
ticed by his forebears in the Family, the art of backroom dealing
perfected by Senator Frank Carlson. Liberals dismiss him as a prud-
ish hayseed from Kansas, but to do so is to underestimate both the
man and the place. Brownback, like Carlson before him, is yet an-
other  wheeler-dealer from the plains, possessed of a savvy in interna-
tional affairs that is faith-based and rooted in the cornfields of
Kansas.

--- Sayfa 276 ---
270 | J E F F S H A R L E T
In 2002, Brownback followed his pastor onto the stage of Topeka
Bible—the minister had just told a joke about Muslim terrorists and
virgins—to talk about a recent trip to Israel and Jordan. Jordan,
Brownback explained, matters not just spiritually but strategically.
The “person of Jesus” is a key diplomatic tool in winning its coopera-
tion with the United States. Brownback said he’d met with King
Abdullah about starting a fellowship group, a fellowship group around
the person of Jesus. It wasn’t a casual suggestion. Brownback gave
Abdullah the name and number of a Christian brother with whom he
wanted the king to meet. Before Brownback left Jordan, Abdullah let
him know that he’d made contact with the senator’s man and agreed
to “fellowship” with him on a regular basis. “His father, King Hus-
sein,” mused Brownback, “was really quite interested in Jesus, and
attended the National Prayer Breakfast several times.” Since then, so
has Abdullah. In 2005, he came to the prayer breakfast to conduct
diplomacy, so he said, with American evangelicals.
Brownback  doesn’t demand that everyone believe in his  God—only
that they bow down before Him. The senator is part holy warrior,
party holy fool. The faith he wields in the public square is blunt and
heavy, brass knuckles of the spirit. But his intentions are only to set
people free. He is utterly sincere in his belief that his particular idea of
God is as universal as his faith in the free market. The religion of his
heart is that of the woman whose story led him deep into his unearthly
devotion, Mother Teresa; it is a kiss for the dying. He sees no tension
between his intolerance and tenderness. Indeed, their successful recon-
ciliation in his political self is the miracle, the cold fusion, at the heart
of the new fundamentalism, of Hallmark and hellfire. “I have seen him
weep,” says Colson, his own voice thick with admiration. There can be
no higher praise for a man of power who proclaims his own humility.
The ﬁ rst day I met Brownback, I was to bear witness to him among
his interns at a luncheon in the Senate dining room. But when his
press secretary and I arrived, there  were no interns. Brownback saw
me, though, and led me into the Senate dining room, where the

--- Sayfa 277 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 271
maître d’ seated the three of us at a table set for eight. Brownback began
speaking about his faith. Only, he called it his cancer. This  wasn’t a
metaphor; it was a melanoma on his side he discovered in 1995.
Brownback’s  green- black eyes opened wide. He took his jacket off .
His shoulders slumped. He began to talk about “solitude,” about
“meditation,” about the dark night of the soul.
Once, he said, he was a bad man, just any other politician, in it for
himself. And then came cancer, like a message from heaven. Only at
first it brought not certainty but doubt. Brownback found himself
wondering, What does anything mean?
For a short spell in his youth, Brownback was a radio broadcaster.
It’s easy to imagine his voice on the radio dial, deep in the darkness
on a Kansas highway, not preaching so much as whispering to itself
across the airwaves, creating a cocoon around the listener. The Sen-
ate dining room faded into silence. I saw Hillary Clinton, but I
couldn’t hear her. I saw John McCain slapping backs, but he seemed
very far away. The powerful and the ugly swam past us like fish in the
ocean, and Brownback kept talking, completely lost in the strangely
serene recollection of his former fear. The doctors scooped out a
piece of his flesh, a minor procedure, but in his mind, he had lost
hold of everything. He asked himself, “What have I done with my
life?” The answer seemed to be nothing.
“I went in search of things,” he said. “I went in search of things
that are eternal,” he murmured.
One night, he got up while his family was sleeping. “I remember
going over my résumé.” Sitting in his silent house, in the middle of
the night, a scar beneath his ribs where death had, for the time being,
been carved out of his body, he looked down at that piece of paper
and thought, “This must be who I am.” And then he thought, “What
is this paper?” And then, “It’s not going to last.”
Brownback turned, held my gaze. “So,” he said, “I burned it.”
He paused. He was waiting to see if I understood. He had cleansed
himself with fire. He had made himself pure.
“I’m a child of the living God,” he said.
I nodded.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
272 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“You are, too,” he said.
He pursed his lips as he searched the other tables. “Look.” He
pointed to a man across the room, a Democratic senator from Minne-
sota. “He’s a liberal.” But you know what else he is? “A beautiful child of
the living God.” He continued. Ted Kennedy? “A beautiful child of the
living God.” Hillary? Yes. Even Hillary. Especially Hillary.
Once, Brownback said, he hated Hillary Clinton. Hated her so
much it hurt him. But he reached in and scooped that hate out like a
cancer. Now, he loved her. She, too, is a beautiful child of the living God.
Hillary
Hillary may well be God’s beautiful child, but she’s not a member of
Coe’s Family. Rather, I’d been told at Ivanwald, she’s a “friend,” less
elect then a member, but more chosen than the rest of us. A fellow
traveler but not a sister. Her goals are not their goals; but when on
occasion they coincide, Hillary and the Family can work together.
Such collaborations, as much as the endeavors of true believers such
as Brownback, are a measure of the mainstreaming of American fun-
damentalism. The theology of Jesus plus nothing is totalitarian in
scope, but diplomatic in practice. It doesn’t conquer; it “infects,” as
Abram used to preach. Within the body politic, it doesn’t confront
ideas, it coexists with them, its cells multiplying by absorbing ene-
mies rather than destroying them. It’s not cancerous, it’s loving. In
place of conflict, love. In place of debate, love. In place of tolerance,
love. In place of democracy, loudmouthed, simmering mad and crazy
hopeful democracy—love,  all- encompassing.
In her memoir Living History, Hillary describes her first encounter
with the Family. It was at a lunch organized on her behalf in February
1993 at the Cedars, “an estate on the Potomac that serves as the
headquarters for the National Prayer Breakfast and the prayer groups
it has spawned around the world. Doug Coe, the longtime National
Prayer Breakfast organiz er, is a unique presence in Washington: a
genuinely loving spiritual mentor and guide to anyone, regardless of

--- Sayfa 279 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 273
party or faith, who wants to deepen his or her relationship with
God.”2 Or with the kind of politically useful friends one might not
make otherwise. For the eight years she lived in the White  House,
Clinton met regularly with a gathering of political ladies who lunch:
wives of powerful men from both parties, women who put aside po-
litical differences to  seek—for themselves, for their husbands’
careers—an even greater power. Among Clinton’s prayer partners
were Susan Baker, the wife of Bush consigliere James and a board
member of James Dobson’s Focus on the Family; Joanne Kemp, the
wife of conservative icon Jack, responsible for introducing the politi-
cal theology of fundamentalist guru Francis Schaeffer to Washing-
ton; Eileen Bakke, an activist for charter schools based on “character”
and the wife of Dennis Bakke, then the CEO of AES, one of the
world’s largest power companies; and Grace Nelson, the wife of
Senator Bill Nelson, a conservative Florida Democrat. The women
sent her daily scripture verses to study, and Baker, the wife of one of
the Republican Party’s most cutthroat strategists, provided Hillary
with spiritual counsel during “political storms.”
Hillary’s Godtalk is more sincere than it sounds, grounded in the
influence of a Methodist minister named Don Jones whom she met
when he was a  twenty-eight-year-old youth pastor in Park Ridge, Il-
linois. Jones continues to counsel Hillary to this day. He calls the
theological worldview behind her politics a third way, a reaction
against both old-fashioned separatist fundamentalism and the New
Deal’s  labor-based liberalism. He describes the theology he taught as
in the tradition of “Burkean conservatism,” after the  eighteenth-
century reactionary philos opher’s belief that change should be slow
and come without the sort of “social leveling” that offends class hier-
archy. Elites rule because they rule; tradition is its own justification,
a tautology of power neither left nor right but circular.
Under Jones’s mentorship, Clinton learned about theologians
such as Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich. Liberals may consider
Niebuhr their own, but the Niebuhr whom Hillary Rodham studied
with Jones and later at Wellesley College was a Cold Warrior, dis-
missive of the progressive politics of his earlier writing. “He’d thought

--- Sayfa 280 ---
274 | J E F F S H A R L E T
that once we were unionized, the kingdom of God would be ushered
in,” Jones says, explaining Niebuhr as he and Hillary came to see
him. “But the effect of those two world wars and the violence that
they produced shook [his] faith in liberal theology.” The late Niebuhr
replaced his devotion to messianic  unionism with a darker view of
humanity and replaced his emphasis on domestic social justice with a
global realpolitik, easily hijacked by liberal hawks in rhetorical need
of a justifi cation for aggressive American power.
Tillich also enjoys a following among conservative Christian in-
tellectuals for arguments on behalf of revising the  once-radical Social
Gospel to favor individual redemption, the heart of conservative
evangelicalism. Hillary once said she regretted that her denomina-
tion, the Methodists, had focused too much on Social Gospel
concerns—that is, the rights of the  poor—“to the exclusion of per-
sonal faith and growth.” Abram, once a Methodist himself, had made
the very same observation a half century before. The spirit, conser-
vative Christians believe, matters more than the flesh, and the salva-
tion of the former should be a higher priority than that of the latter.
In worldly terms, religious freedom trumps political freedom, moral
values matter more than food on the table, and if might  doesn’t make
right, it sure makes right, or wrong, easier. Taken together, Niebuhr
and Tillich as Hillary encountered them represent the most reaction-
ary elements of her “worldview”: a militantly aggressive approach to
foreign affairs and a domestic policy of narrow horizons. Under the
spiritual tutelage of the Family, Hillary moved further rightward,
drifting from traditional liberalism toward the kind of privatized so-
cial welfare the Family has favored ever since Abram reacted in hor-
ror to the New Deal.
The Reverend Rob Schenck’s favorite example? Clinton’s collab-
oration with Brownback on anti–sex traffi  cking legislation con-
demned by the very activists it should have helped. Brownback and
Chuck Colson, one of the leading thinkers behind the law, were
more interested in extracting pledges of purity than in helping the
already fallen. That resulted in the  de-funding of longtime federal
partners that, for instance, provide health care for prostitutes, and

--- Sayfa 281 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 275
increased funding for  faith- based groups that simply preach Christ
and abstinence to foreign sex slaves. And it’s not just those who are
trapped in involuntary sex work who are ill served by the switch;
epidemics of sexually transmitted diseases, notoriously resistant to
sermonizing, ripple out into the general population. It’s bad law for
everyone. But Clinton was willing to lend her name, and her funda-
mentalist friends noticed. “I welcome that,” says Colson.
Hillary fights side- by- side with Brownback and others for legisla-
tion dedicated less to overturning the wall between church and state
than to tunneling beneath it. Practically speaking, such work ap-
peased evangelical elites without drawing the notice of liberals who
thought Hillary stood for separation, but such tunnels genuinely un-
dermine the foundations.
For instance, a law she backed to ensure “religious freedom” in
the workplace that so distorts the meaning of the words that it makes
even Republicans such as Senator Arlen Specter uneasy about its en-
croachments on First Amendment freedoms. It’s a sort of Bartleby
option for those “who prefer not to”: pharmacists who refuse to fill
birth-control prescriptions, nurses who refuse to treat gay or lesbian
patients, police officers who refuse to guard abortion clinics. And
then there was the passage, during Bill’s presidency, of the Interna-
tional Religious Freedom Act, a move supported by Hillary. Like the
workplace bill, it seemed sensible. Who’s opposed to religious free-
dom? But in reality it shifted the monitoring of religion in other
countries from the State Department to an independent,  evangelical-
dominated agency that drew much of its leadership from the Chris-
tian Legal Society, creating a platform for U.S. evangelicals to use
religious freedom ratings as leverage for a sort of shadow foreign
policy. Hillary’s stance toward Iran, more hawkish than that of many
Republicans, is just one example of a position long held by elite fun-
damentalists mainstreamed through the work of an ostensibly liberal
ally.
Liberals, says Clinton’s prayer partner Grace Nelson, are wel-
come in the Family as long as they submit to “the person of Jesus.”
Jesus, not ideology, “is what gives us power.” But the Jesus preached

--- Sayfa 282 ---
276 | J E F F S H A R L E T
by the Family is ideology personified. For all of the Family’s talk of
Jesus as a person, he remains oddly abstract in the teachings they
derive from him, a mix of “free market” economics, aggressive
American internationalism, and “leadership” as a fetishized term for
power, a good in itself regardless of its ends. By eschewing the poli-
tics of the  moment—party loyalties and culture  wars—Family cells
cultivate an ethos of elite unity that allows  long-term political trans-
formation, whereby political rivals aren’t fl ipped but won over grad-
ually through fellowship with former enemies, as in the case of
former Representative Tony Hall.
Hall, one of the few Democrats appointed by Bush in his first
term (he was made ambassador to the UN for hunger issues, a posi-
tion he used to push the Monsanto corporation’s genetically modified
crops onto African nations) was brought into the Family in the 1980s
by Jerry Regier, an ultra-right Reagan administration offi  cial in the
Department of Health and Human Services who went on to work
with James Dobson. Upon his conversion, Hall abandoned his liberal
social views and became a vocal opponent of abortion and, eventu-
ally,  same- sex marriage. He also championed a bill establishing a
National Day of Prayer with an event at the White  House organized
by Dobson’s wife, Shirley. But he didn’t switch parties, and the Fam-
ily would never ask him to. Hall isn’t a Republican; he’s a Democrat
who called on his fellow party members to follow President Bush’s
example by injecting more religion into their rhetoric. Hillary did
just that in 2007, boasting of the “prayer warriors” who carried her
through Bill’s infidelities, a bit of spiritual warfare jargon instantly
recognizable to evangelicals who worried about her feminism.3
The Family wants to “transcend” left and right with a faith that
consumes politics, replacing fundamental differences with the unity
to be found in submission to religious authority. Conservatives sit
pretty in prayer and wait for liberals looking for “common ground”
to come to them in search of compromise. Hillary, Rob Schenck
noted, became a regular visitor to the Family’s C Street House in
2005. “She needs that nucleus of energy that the Coe camp produces.”
That summer, she appeared as part of a threesome that shocked old

--- Sayfa 283 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 277
school fundamentalists: Bill, Hillary, and Billy, live in New York for
Graham’s last crusade. Before tens of thousands, the patriarch of
Christian conservatism said Bill “ought to let his wife run the coun-
try.” Bonhomie and cheap blessing, maybe, but it was the kind of en-
dorsement that Bill never won, despite Graham’s custom of speaking
sweet nothings to power.
A Thing and Its Shadow
How much power can a movement have if it’s sufficiently vague in its
principles to encompass both Sam Brownback and Hillary Clinton? If
measured only according to the advocates of domestic “moral values”
who choose fights in part for the clarity of their “sides”—abortion,
yes or no? homosexuality, yes or no?—it would seem like the Family
doesn’t have much influence at all. Neither abortion nor sex will be
legislated away soon. But the fact that fundamentalism, a faith that by
definition aims to address the totality of human experience, is mea-
sured according to a handful of issues decided by a yea or a nay is,
itself, evidence of the broad success of Abram’s Idea.
Following the Scopes trial of 1925, American fundamentalism
split in two. One branch busied itself with the creation of new insti-
tutions, Bible colleges, and “parachurch” ministries, the foundation
for a populist faith that could stand on its own in the face of secular
ridicule—often enough, a real problem—and fight for control of
the public sphere. The second, elite branch concerned itself with
what believers saw as threats to the nation itself. That was a move
that conflated the nation with the faith. This new civil religion was
what enabled Cold Warriors, liberal as well as conservative, to pro-
ject the shadow of American freedom around the globe.
But a thing and its shadow are not the same. Even as American
power fueled nightmares in Vietnam, in Indonesia, in Haiti, in dozens
of other nations whose histories disappeared into the blob of the Cold
War, real freedom has endured and even prospered within the borders
of the United States. It’s the relatively bright prospects of domestic

--- Sayfa 284 ---
278 | J E F F S H A R L E T
democracy—even at its most endangered moments—that have
blinded us to the shadow it casts. “Freedom,” more than one general
has declared from the pulpit of the National Prayer Breakfast, comes
at a cost. Liberals scoff at such an apparent oxymoron, but the lesson
of elite fundamentalism is that it’s true; for that matter, the last sev-
enty years of history prove even the Christian doctrine of blood atone-
ment. Only, the blood is not Christ’s, and despite the very notable
exception of tens of thousands of American soldiers killed overseas,
it’s not ours, either. It’s the rest of the world that pays for American
fundamentalism’s sins, and for the failure of American liberalism to
even recognize the fundamentalist faith with which it has all too
often—in Vietnam, in Indonesia, in Haiti—made common cause.
We might quibble that point. We might ask, Which came first,
American fundamentalism or the Cold War? Is American fundamen-
talism the essence of the economic policies by which we unraveled
the New Deal, or is it simply a coincidental phenomenon of the Rea-
gan Revolution and then “globalization”? Don’t the good intentions
with which America gives billions in foreign aid for food for the
starving and medicine for the sick and, yes, weapons for govern-
ments that actually use them in defense  mitigate—outweigh,  even—
the trillions spent on weapons for governments that put them to
other ends, and the uncountable sums reaped by corporations depen-
dent on the American global order? Then again, how different are
such questions from that of Greg Unumb, the Family oilman who
thought Doug Coe’s culpability in the crimes of the killers for whom
he served as a matchmaker depended entirely on whether they killed
before or during their fellowship with Coe? Such a strange concern. As
if one might be excused for giving a gun to a mass murderer be-
cause his first victims  were already buried; as if Christ’s injunction to
forgive demanded also that we forget. That is, in fact, exactly what
the Family believes, the complexities of “reconciliation” reduced to a
gross equivalence of sins. The center slouches rightward, and the
faithful forget that anyone ever dreamed otherwise.
Dick Halverson preached as much once during his tenure as Sen-
ate chaplain. He framed it as a story relayed to him by Coe and  Senator

--- Sayfa 285 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 279
Harold Hughes after a visit to the Philippines, during which he,
in turn, heard the story from the Philippines’ Archbishop Jaime Car-
dinal Sin.4 Archbishop Sin was a moderate with a mixed record in
relation to the Marcos regime; at its end, he helped lead the “People
Power” revolution, but for years before that he preached obedience
to dictatorship. “He told Harold and Doug this true story,” Halver-
son sermonized. One of Sin’s nuns said to him that Jesus was coming
to her bed at night. Sin decided to test the apparition. “Ask  Him”—
Halverson, the old actor, pretended to be the Filipino clergyman—
“What sins did the archbishop commit before he became an
archbishop?” The nun did so and reported back to Sin. Christ’s an-
swer? “I can’t remember.”
Did this suggest to Sin or Halverson that the nun had simply been
dreaming? Just the opposite. Their Christ did not just forgive the sins
of Archbishop Sin; he couldn’t remember them. That, Halverson
thought, was as it should be, Christ’s mercy not a balance to justice
but a gift for the powerful. The church loves the down and out, but
who loves the up and out? Jesus of the Family, the Christ of Coe’s
“social order.”
“Love,” preached Halverson, “forgets. That’s what God does with
your sin and mine when it’s under the Blood. He forgets all about it.”
Here’s one last Family story love forgot, from a country so
blighted by misfortune and misrule that it’s not really a country any-
more. Somalia, lost in the shadow of American fundamentalism’s
freedom.  Somalia—one of the last cases I found in the Family’s ar-
chives before they began closing  them—is, in the correspondence I
retrieved, nothing more than a web of “facts” that I’m  hard-pressed
to make sense of. What they add up to is too bleak, too broken. The
dead who haunt the name of Siad Barre, the dictator Coe called
“brother,” seem uncountable. All I can be sure about is the answer to
the question Greg Unumb asked me when I told him about Coe’s
support for another dictator guilty of murder: before or during? Be-
fore, during, after. I will relate the facts as briefl y as I can.5

--- Sayfa 286 ---
280 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Somalia, shaped like an upside-down musical note, wraps around
the Horn of Africa, across from the Arabian Peninsula. Granted inde-
pendence in 1960, it should have been a success story; its people
were linguistically unified and, while poor, were heirs to a tradition
of pastoral democracy that had survived colonialism roughly intact.
Then General Siad Barre seized power in 1969, and the Soviet Union
poured money into Siad’s regime to make it a counterweight to Ethio-
pia, which under Emperor Selassie was the major beneficiary of Amer-
ican military aid in Africa. When a Marxist coup overthrew the
Ethiopian emperor, Siad saw a chance to distract his own discon-
tented people by seizing part of Ethiopia in its moment of weakness,
using his  Soviet- armed military. But the Soviets backed  now-
communist Ethiopia, deeming its new regime more useful than du-
plicitous Siad, who announced that he was in the market for a new
patron. After the Iranian Revolution overthrew the Shah, the U.S.
puppet just across the water from Somalia, the United States put its
money on Siad and his ports, which would become essential if Aya-
tollah Khomeini cut off the oil supply. By late 1980, the United
States and the USSR had switched proxies: once-red Somalia had
become an American outpost, while Ethiopia had turned into a So-
viet satellite.
It would have been absurd if it hadn’t been so bloody. Siad, freed
from even his veneer of socialism, devolved from an autocrat into the
worst thing that had ever happened to Somalia. His heroes, he de-
clared, were Kim Jong Il and the Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceau-
s¸escu. He decided to allow  American- style democracy, then killed his
opposition as well as those he suspected of opposing him, and those
who might grow up to be opponents. His secret police developed
techniques to spy even on nomads. He sent his troops to machine-
gun their herds. He poisoned their wells. For his urban enemies, he
developed torture chambers he considered  world-class, and his men
concluded that rape proved especially productive of useful informa-
tion.
To his neighbors, he preached the virtues of the United States,
but his creed was “Koranic Marxism,” illustrated by a triptych of

--- Sayfa 287 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 281
portraits hung throughout the nation depicting Marx, Lenin, and
Siad as the new Muhammad. His official portrait shows him as a
young general in a khaki uniform and a mustache he seems to have
copied from Hitler. He bombed more civilians than rebels, reduced
an entire city to rubble, and directed his air force to strafe refugees.
He turned his country into a garden of land mines that continue to
blossom to this day.
Before Coe found Siad through a West German Bundestag mem-
ber, Siad waged war on Ethiopia. After they met, he waged war on his
own nation. For the past seventeen years, there has been no nation,
only war. If Coe ever said a word about the killings, it was not re-
corded in the documents I found. “I don’t wish to embarrass people,”
Coe said of his relationships with dictators in 2007. “I don’t take po-
sitions. The only thing I do is bring people together.”
In 1981, Family members made contact with Siad on behalf of
his then-enemy, Kenyan dictator Daniel arap Moi—a brutal Ameri-
can  ally—whom Siad agreed to meet. The Family took this news to
General David Jones, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (and a
Family member), who in thanks invited Siad to the Pentagon, a visit
that resulted in a special breakfast in America for the dictator, with
General Jones, members of congress, and Department of Defense
officials. In 1983, Coe arranged for the dictator his own interna-
tional prayer cell, which included the Bundestag member, Rudolf
Decker; a defense contractor, William K. Brehm; and the outgoing
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . A year later Coe strengthened
Siad’s hand by proposing Mogadishu as the site for a “fellowship
meeting” with two other anti-Soviet dictators, arap Moi and Gaafar
Nimeiry of Sudan.
From America, Coe sent Siad Senator Chuck Grassley, ultraright
Iowa Republican (still serving as of 2008). But Coe was distracted;
his  twenty- seven-year-old son, Jonathan, was fighting lymphoma. He
rallied, though—Doug, that is—when he put Christ’s social order
before his father, his mother, his brother, his sister, and even his own
grief to use what must have been one of the saddest days of his life to
reach out to the general: “You are much in my thoughts today,” wrote

--- Sayfa 288 ---
282 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Coe. “Jonathan my son to whom you were so kind died this morning.
You infl uenced his life for God and he never forgot you.”
“I did not have the occasion to meet him,” Siad wrote by way of
condolences.
A document titled “Siad Barre’s Somalia and the USA,” prepared
for the Family and marked “Very Confidential,” is one of the rare
Family documents to move beyond what Elgin Groseclose called “the
facade of brotherhood.” It is undated but appears to have been writ-
ten near the beginning of the relationship. Siad, it begins, is the only
head of state to have expelled the Soviets, and the only regional
leader to offer “full military, air, and naval bases.” He pledges, too,
to provide for a  pro-American successor, and to purge his govern-
ment of all officials linked to Somalia’s former patron, excepting
himself, presumably. Then he notes that he has already supplied the
Pentagon with a list of armaments he needed to fight the Cubans.
Received.
In 1983, Somalia’s minister of defense went to Washington at
Coe’s invitation to meet with the new chairman of the joint chiefs,
General John J. Vessey. The United States nearly doubled military
aid to the regime, pouring guns into a country that before the decade
was out would achieve a moment of unity it has not seen since, when
nearly everyone—politicians, warlords,  children—united in opposi-
tion to Siad. He fled in 1991, taking refuge in Kenya with arap Moi.
One of his last acts as Somalia’s key man was to scorch as much of his
enemy’s land as he could, a biblical punishment for a nation that had
resisted God’s appointed authority. Three hundred thousand died in
the famine that followed. It’s considered Siad’s legacy. It was also the
Family’s gift to Somalia.
On one of my last days at Ivanwald, a group of brothers returned
from a trip to the movies. They’d gone to see Black Hawk Down, the
story of nineteen American soldiers killed in 1993 in a battle with
one of the Somali militias that have terrorized the country for most
of the seventeen years since Siad’s downfall. The movie had made such

--- Sayfa 289 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 283
an impression on the brothers that Jeff C., one of the  house leaders,
decided to convene the boys to talk about the responsibilities of fol-
lowers of Christ. Some of the men took a hard lesson from the fi lm:
you  can’t help savages. But Jeff  C. corrected them. There was an in-
ternational crew there at the  time—men from Ecua dor, Paraguay,
the Czech Republic,  Benin—but this, Jeff C. knew, was an Ameri-
can affair. “We help people,” he said. “That’s what we do. Even if
they’re, I don’t know, ‘savages.’ We’ll just keep loving on ’em.”
Doug Coe did not pull any triggers in Somalia, did not poison any
wells, and the Family was not one of the warring clans that obliter-
ated what was left of the nation’s infrastructure. For all the Family’s
talk of the “man-method,” of “relationships,” its members did not
know Somalia very well. They treated it as a piece on a playing board.
This Somalia wanted friends in Washington, so the Family became
Somalia’s friend. This Somalia wanted guns, so the Family helped it
get guns. This Somalia wanted to be called “brother,” so the Family
called Siad Barre “brother.” Families, as Coe would be the first to
point out, are about love. Not accountability, ultimately, and there
does not seem to have been any for Brother Siad.
Jesus plus nothing, remember, does not depend on scripture, its
nuances, its hard lessons. Jesus plus nothing does not include, for
instance, the ninth verse of the fourth chapter of the Book of Gene-
sis. God asks Cain, who has just murdered Abel, where his brother
is. “I do not know,” replies Cain. “Am I my brother’s keeper?” It’s a
genuinely difficult question. God never answers it directly, instead
responding with what sounds like divine distress: “What have you
done?” To Cain’s existentialism, God answers with a demand for his-
tory. That’s a more straightforward query, one I’ve attempted to an-
swer with regard to the  Family. But Cain’s question, that one’s too
hard for me. To one who proclaims fellowship, as do the members of
the Family, the answer is simple: “Yes, I am my brother’s keeper.”
That was Jeff C.’s answer. But the Family has more often served as an
accomplice, not a keeper. Where does that leave the rest of us? The

--- Sayfa 290 ---
284 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Family works through the men and women we put in power. Sam
Brownback. Hillary Clinton. Pick your poison. In the calculus of party
politics, these two do occupy distant coordinates, but in the geom-
etry of power politics, the Family knows, they are on the same plane,
and the distance between them is shrinking. They mean well, both of
them, and I’m more partial to the views of one of them, but I  can’t
help looking at that narrowing spectrum and thinking, This is an aw-
ful tight space into which to fi t a democracy.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
III.
The Pop u lar
Front

--- Sayfa 293 ---
I N T E R L U D E
Every revolutionary class must wage war on the cultural front.
—LEWIS COREY, THE DECLINE OF AMERICAN CAPITALISM (1934)
L
ewis Corey, a journalist and radical political theorist who
helped fight just such a battle, saw the shape, if not the tone, of
the future. I first learned about Corey in a history of the United
States’ original cultural front, an alliance of radical workers, artists,
and intellectuals that briefly flourished in the 1930s, guided by Stal-
in’s invisible hand, and then was thought to have disappeared. Or so
held conventional wisdom, until Yale scholar Michael Denning dis-
covered that the cultural politics of those years  were an unstable mix
of totalitarian influence and wild diversity that didn’t dead-end with
the close of the decade. Rather, the cultural front of the 1930s flowed
into postwar American life in diluted but more widespread form.
The cultural front—the spirit of a more tightly defined “Popular
Front” of antifascist political parties, sects, and  factions—transformed
class politics in America: it gave classes a sense of themselves as
struggling over not just wages but also ideas, aesthetics, rituals, cus-
toms, the imagination of things to come.1
The idea of “classes” disappeared from America following World
War II, absorbed into the great blob of the Cold War. And yet a cul-
tural front survived. The evidence? The  so-called culture war fought
to this day between fundamentalism and secularism.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
288 | J E F F S H A R L E T
That American fundamentalism contains within it a multitude of
beliefs, impulses, traditions,  politics—just a few of which have been
explored  here—must lead us to question the other side of the battle.
Secularism, of course, conceives of itself as rational and thus open to
all empirical data. And yet it, too, is subject to the broad brush with
which it’s easiest to paint social conditions. Culture war was a label
created by conservative elites who wanted to demand of the public
the old question of union battles: which side are you on? But the les-
son of elite fundamentalism is that the sides are not just blurry;
they’re interwoven.
The Cold War liberalism that led to American wars and proxy
wars, for example, ran parallel with elite fundamentalism’s sense of
its own divine universalism. The Family’s Worldwide Spiritual Of-
fensive infused America’s global mission—the economic reconstruc-
tion of Western Europe and the militaristic destruction of Southeast
Asia  alike—and that imperial project in turn sparked the imagina-
tions of elite fundamentalists, providing them with an alternative to
traditional fundamentalist separatism. Domestically, the establish-
ment practice of containing political argument within such narrow
confines that most Americans could barely conceive of the radical-
isms, left and right, that shape politics throughout the rest of the
world sat comfortably with the desire of elite fundamentalists for a
politics of no politics. The results include elections based on “charac-
ter” rather than ideas, debates as rituals meant to result in reconcili-
ation, the consensus of the powerful represented as a reasonable
pro cess in which everyone gets some small piece of the action. We
call this “compromise,” and consider our democracy healthy.
During the 1960s and early 1970s, it was the Left that recognized
that American democracy was drifting toward empire, and that the
democratic project had never been anywhere near complete to begin
with. Since then, it has been the Right that discerned the cracks in
democracy’s veneer and the hollowness behind it. From that percep-
tion arose the conservative movement that declared culture war. Cul-
ture war as a slogan may be relatively new, but we can easily identify
its antecedents on the San Francisco docks in 1934, or with Jonathan

--- Sayfa 295 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 289
Edwards sitting beside Abigail Hutchinson’s bed in Northampton in
1735. In both cases—and now—culture war revolves around an im-
plicit critique of what Abram called “materialism.”
Edwards saw as his enemy the unwitting banality of the Ameri-
can business society, fools who did not realize that they dangled over
an abyss. Harry Bridges and the men and women whom he fought
beside in San Francisco  were all too aware of the abyss; they saw as
their enemy the economic system that held them precariously
suspended above it. The populist fundamentalism that in the late
1970s marched into the public square railed against the same familiar
enemy, but now defined entirely as secularism. What does secularism
do, according to this fundamentalist front? It cheapens life, it sells
sex, it puts a price tag on the human soul. It makes people into com-
modities. And who will oppose this godless deviltry? “Followers of
Christ,” a term that requires quotes to distinguish it from the much
broader category of those who believe in or are born into one of the
many Christian traditions no longer considered valid by the new fun-
damentalists. Followers of Christ—those who cleave to a unique
American fundamentalism—define themselves more sharply. They
are a class, a revolutionary one, no less, dedicated, in theory at least,
to the transformation of American life and thus the world.
But they’re vague on the details. They’d like to abolish abortion,
and they’d like to pray in school and do away with pornography, and
drive queer people back into the closet (or “cure” them, say the opti-
mists among them). And then what? What about hunger, poverty,
the greed and blindness that drives global warming? All important
concerns, concede American fundamentalism’s elites and populist
champions. Would the steps they’ve proposed bring an end to the
commodification of bodies, the pricing of souls, a culture in which
dollars pass for ideas? Hardly. But the believers, the fundamentalists,
those who would reshape society along lines of their idea of Christ’s
order, have no further solutions. They are a cultural front without a
politics. Where once there was a critique of what some might call
godlessness and others might call capitalism, there is a vacuum. And
in that empty space, the status quo remains unthreatened. Secular

--- Sayfa 296 ---
290 | J E F F S H A R L E T
democracy, such as it is, faces no serious challenge. Nor, for that
matter, does the elite fundamentalism that for the last seventy years
has coexisted alongside it, ensuring that the United States was never
fully secular, nor democratic.
The story so far has been about how elite fundamentalism has
shaped domestic and foreign politics, how a theocratic strand ran
through the “American century” and remains taut in the new one.
Now the story turns inward, into the lives of ordinary Americans,
toward the cultural front of fundamentalism. It’s this cultural front,
converging with the political project of elite fundamentalism, that
justifies the label of “Popular Front.” In the United States in the
twenty- first century, the Popular Front is that of fundamentalism,
the faith that promises that you can be born again, that miracles still
occur, that we might yet revive the nation. This Popular Front will
no more rebuild the economic and structural foundations of America
or its soft empire than did that of the 1930s, but it has already trans-
formed the way we think, the way we live, the way we feel, the way
we know ourselves and the world.
Culture war, then, is a misleading term for such a metamorphosis.
What the elite and populist movements of American fundamentalism
have together wrought is not a culture war but a cultural evolution,
one that is adapting to the  twenty- first century much faster than
secularism. This religion isn’t an opiate of the masses; it’s the Ameri-
can Christ on methamphetamine.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
11.
W H A T E V E R Y B O D Y W A N T S
T
hey are drawn as if by magnetic forces; they speak of Colo-
rado Springs, home to the greatest concentration of fundamen-
talist activist groups in American history, both as a last stand and as a
kind of utopia in the making. They say it is new and unique and pre-
cious, embattled by enemies, and also that it is “traditional,” a blue-
print for what everybody wants, and envied by enemies. The city
itself is unspectacular, a grid of wide western avenues lined with
squat, gray and beige box buildings, only a handful of them taller
than a dozen stories. Local cynics point out that if you put Colorado
Springs on a truck and carted it to Nebraska, it would make Omaha
look lovely. But the architecture is not what draws Christians looking
for clean living. The mountains help, but there are other mountain
towns. What Colorado Springs offers, finally, is a story.
Lori Rose is from Minnesota and heard rumors about this holy
city when she lived on an air force base near Washington, D.C. Her
husband isn’t a Christian, refuses Jesus, looks at things he shouldn’t;
but she has found a church to attend without him. “I want a rela-
tionship like my relationship with God,” she says. “It’s almost like
an affair.” Ron Poelstra came from Los Angeles. Now he volunteers
at his church, selling his pastor’s books on “free-market theology”
after services. His two teenage boys stand behind him, display
models for the benefits of faith. They fold their hands in front of
themselves and both smile whenever Ron glances their way. L.A.,
Ron says, would have eaten them up: the gangs. Adam Taylor grew

--- Sayfa 298 ---
292 | J E F F S H A R L E T
up in Westchester County, an heir to the Bergdorf Goodman for-
tune, the son of artists and writers, a prince of the city. He lived
the life of Augustine, and it nearly killed him. He came to Colo-
rado Springs to learn the Bible the hard way, each word a nail
pounded into sin. Now he’s a pastor, and the Bible doesn’t hurt
anymore.1
The story they found in Colorado Springs is about newness: new
houses, new roads, new stores. And about oldness, imagined: what is
thought to be the traditional way of life, families as they were after
the world wars, before the culture wars, which is to say, during the
brief, Cold War moment when America was a nation of single-
breadwinner nuclear families.
Crime, of course, looms over this story. Not the actual facts of
it—the burglary rate in and around Colorado Springs exceeds that
in New York City and Los  Angeles—but the idea of it: a faith in the
absence of crime. And of politics, too: Colorado Springs’ funda-
mentalists believe they live in a  politics-free zone, a  carved-out
space for civility and for  like-minded dedication to commonsense
principles. Even pollution plays a part: Christian conservatives
there believe that they breathe cleaner air, despite the smog that
collects against the foothills of the Rockies and the cyanide, from a
century of mining, that is leaching into the aquifers and mountain
streams.
But those are facts, and Colorado Springs is a city of faith. A
shining city at the foot of a hill. No one there believes it is perfect.
And no one is so  self-centered as to claim the perfection of Colorado
Springs as his or her ambition. The shared vision is more modest, and
more grandiose. It is a city of people who have fl ed the cities, people
who have fought a spiritual war for the ground they are on, for an
interior frontier on which they have built new temples to the Lord.
From these temples they will retake their forsaken promised lands,
remake them in the likeness of a dream. They call the dream Chris-
tian, but in its particulars it is American, populated by cowboys and
Indians, monsters and prayer warriors to slay them, and ladies to

--- Sayfa 299 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 293
reward the warriors with chaste kisses. Colorado Springs is a city of
moral fabulousness. It is a city of fables.
The city’s mightiest megachurch crests silver and blue atop a gentle
slope of pale yellow prairie grass on the outskirts of town. Silver and
blue, as it happens, are the air force colors. New Life Church was
built far north of town in part so it could be seen from the Air Force
Academy. New Life wanted that kind of character in its congrega-
tion.2
Church is insufficient to describe the complex. There is a perma-
nent structure called the Tent, which regularly fills with hundreds or
thousands of teens and twentysomethings for New Life’s various
youth gatherings. Next to the Tent stands the old sanctuary, a gray
box capable of seating 1,500; this juts out into the new sanctuary,
capacity 7,500, already too small. At the complex’s western edge is
the World Prayer Center, which looks like a great iron wedge driven
into the plains. The true architectural wonder of New Life, however,
isn’t a physical structure but the pyramid of authority into which it
orders its roughly 12,000 members. At the base are 1,300 cell groups,
whose leaders answer to section leaders, who answer to zone, who
answer to district, who used to answer to Pastor Ted Haggard, New
Life’s founder.
In late 2006, Pastor Ted achieved a notoriety that surpassed the
fame he had won as a preacher, when a  middle- aged prostitute named
Mike Jones played for the press answering machine messages from a
regular client of his, “Art,” whom Jones had just learned was Ted
Haggard, one of the most powerful fundamentalist leaders in the
country. That wasn’t all. It turned out that Pastor Ted had been using
methamphetamine—speed—as well. At first, Ted denied every-
thing; but there was too much evidence, and he soon resigned. Since
then, Ted, married and a father, has been “healed,” according to a
panel of fundamentalist leaders charged with his cure; he is now “100
percent heterosexual.” But he is not back in his pulpit. And yet the

--- Sayfa 300 ---
294 | J E F F S H A R L E T
pulpit itself—the fundamentalist experiment known as New Life—
endures. Pastor Ted’s ideas survive, even prosper, for Ted’s downfall
was taken by many within his congregation as evidence of the great
works he had been doing. So great, that is, that the Enemy, Satan
himself, targeted Ted above all others. The two antigay initiatives on
the 2006 ballot, which Jones hoped to defeat by outing Ted’s hypoc-
risy, passed with greater support than their  backers—including
Ted—had imagined possible.
When I met him, Pastor Ted was a handsome forty-eight-year-
old Indianan transplanted to Colorado, a casual man most comfort-
able in denim. He insisted he was an ordinary man, in an ordinary
church, in an ordinary city. On the other hand, he also wanted me to
know that he talked to George W. Bush in a conference call every
Monday. He liked to say that his only disagreement with the presi-
dent was automotive; Bush drove a Ford pickup, whereas Pastor Ted
loved his Chevy. At the time, Pastor Ted presided over the National
Association of Evangelicals, whose 45,000 churches and 30 million
believers make up the nation’s most powerful religious lobbying
group. The NAE had come a long way since its creation in 1942,
when its leaders had to ask Abram for help in making contact with
U.S. government officials. Under Pastor Ted, the NAE was a force
unto itself, no longer in need of favors from anyone.
Under Ted, the NAE made its headquarters in Colorado Springs.
Some believers call the city the “Wheaton of the West,” in honor of
Wheaton, Illinois, once the headquarters of a more genteel Christian
conservatism. Others call Colorado Springs the “evangelical Vati-
can,” a nickname that says much both about the city and about the
easeful orthodoxy with which the movement now views itself. Cer-
tainly the gathering there has no parallel in this country, not in
Lynchburg, Virginia, nor Tulsa, nor Pasadena, nor Orlando, nor any
other city that has aspired to be the capital of evangelical America.
Fundamentalist activist groups and parachurch ministries in Colo-
rado Springs number in the hundreds. Groups migrate there and
multiply. They produce missionary guides, “family resources,” school
curricula, financial advice, athletic training programs, Bibles for

--- Sayfa 301 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 295
every occasion. The city is home to Young Life, to the Navigators, to
Compassion International; to Every Home for Christ and Global
Ethnic Missions (Youth Ablaze). Most prominent among the minis-
tries is Dr. James Dobson’s Focus on the Family, whose radio pro-
grams (the most extensive in the world, religious or secular),
magazines, videos, and books reach more than 200 million people
worldwide. It was Pastor Ted who persuaded Dobson to relocate
from Pasadena to Colorado Springs, where his operation is so vast it
earned its own zip code.
Whereas Dobson plays the part of national scold, promising to
destroy politicians who defy the Bible, Pastor Ted quietly guided
those politicians through the ritual of acquiescence required to save
face. He didn’t strut, like Dobson; he gushed. When Bush invited
him to the Oval Office to discuss policy with seven other chieftains
of the Christian Right in late 2003, Pastor Ted regaled his congrega-
tion with the story via e-mail. “Well, on Monday I was in the World
Prayer Center”—New Life’s high-tech, twenty-four-hour-a-day prayer
chapel—“and my cell phone rang.” It was a presidential aide. The
president, said Pastor Ted, wanted him on hand for the signing of the
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. Pastor Ted was on a plane the next
morning and in the president’s office the following afternoon. “It was
incredible,” wrote Pastor Ted. He left it to the press to note that
Dobson wasn’t there.3
Moreover, it was Pastor Ted, not  Dobson—a child psychologist
with a  Ph.D.—who proved most comfortable in the secular atmo-
sphere of Washington politics, where he was as likely to lobby for his
views on international trade negotiations as on sexual morality. In Ted,
the populist and elite strands of American fundamentalism had merged.
At the height of his power, no pastor in America held more sway over
the political direction of fundamentalism than did Pastor Ted, and no
church more than New Life. It was by no means the largest mega-
church, but New Life was a crucible for the ideas that inspire the move-
ment. Fundamentalism is as much an intellectual as an emotional
movement; and what Pastor Ted built in Colorado Springs was not just
a battalion of spiritual warriors but a factory for ideas to arm them.

--- Sayfa 302 ---
296 | J E F F S H A R L E T
New Life began with a prophecy. In November 1984, a mission-
ary friend of Pastor Ted’s named Danny  Ost—known for his gifts of
discernment—asked Ted to pull over on a bend of Highway 83 as
they were driving, somewhat aimlessly, in the open spaces north of
the city. Pastor Ted—then twenty-eight, married, father to Christy
and Marcus, given to fasting and oddly pragmatic visions (he believes
he foresaw Internet prayer networks before the Internet existed)—
had been wondering why God had called him to this bleak city, then
known as a “pastor’s graveyard.” Ost got out of the car and squinted.
“This,” said the missionary, “this will be your church. Build  here.”4
So Pastor Ted did. First, he started a church in his basement. The
pulpit was three  five-gallon buckets stacked one atop the other, and
the pews  were lawn chairs. A man who lived in a trailer came round
if he remembered it was Sunday and played guitar. Another man got
the Spirit and filled a  fi ve-gallon garden sprayer with cooking oil and
began anointing nearby intersections, then streets and buildings all
over town. Pastor Ted told his flock to focus their prayers on houses
with For Sale signs so that more Christians would come and join
them.
He was always on the lookout for spies. At the time, Colorado
Springs was a small city split between the air force and the New Age,
and the latter, Pastor Ted believed, worked for the devil. Pastor Ted
soon began upsetting the devil’s plans. He staked out gay bars, invit-
ing men to come to his church;5 his  whole congregation pitched itself
into invisible battles with demonic forces, sometimes in front of pub-
lic buildings. One day, while Pastor Ted was working in his garage, a
woman who said she’d been sent by a witches’ coven tried to stab
him with a  five-inch knife she pulled from a leg sheath; Pastor Ted
wrestled the blade out of her hand. He let that story get around. He
called the evil forces that dominated Colorado  Springs—and every
other metropolitan area in the  country—Control.
Sometimes, he says, Control would call him late on Saturday
night, threatening to kill him. “Any more impertinence out of you,
Ted Haggard,” he claims Control once told him, “and there will be
unrelenting pandemonium in this city.” No kidding! Pastor Ted

--- Sayfa 303 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 297
hadn’t come to Colorado Springs for his health; he had come to wage
“spiritual war.”6
He moved the church to a strip mall. There was a bar, a liquor
store, New Life Church, a massage parlor. His congregation spilled
out and blocked the other businesses. He set up chairs in the alley. He
strung up a banner: SIEGE THIS CITY FOR ME, signed  JESUS.7
He assigned everyone in the church names, taken from the phone
book, they were to pray for. He sent teams to pray in front of the
homes of supposed  witches—in one month, ten out of fifteen of his
targets put their  houses on the market.8 His congregation “prayer-
walked” nearly every street of the city.
Population boomed, crime dipped; Pastor Ted believed that New
Life helped chase the bad out of town. His church grew so fast there
were times when no one knew how many members to claim. So they
stopped talking about “members.” There was just New Life. “Are you
New Life?” a person might ask. New Life moved into some corporate
office space. Soon it bought the land that had been prophesied,
thirty- five acres, and began to build what Pastor Ted promised would
be a new Jerusalem.
JERUSALEM, COLORADO. To the east is sky, empty land, Kan-
sas. To the west, Pike’s Peak, 14,110 feet above sea level, king of a
jagged skyline of the lower  forty-eight states’ tallest mountains. The
old city core of Colorado Springs withers into irrelevance thirteen
miles south; New Life leads the charge north, toward fusion with
Denver and Boulder and a future of one giant  front-range suburb, a
muddy wave of big-box stores and beige tract  houses eddying along
roads so new they had yet to be added to the  gas- station map I bought.
Sunday mornings, traffic backs up from the church half a mile in all
four directions. When parents finally pull into a space amid the thou-
sands of cars packed into a gray ocean of lot, their kids tumble out
and dash toward the five silver pillars of the entrance to New Life,
eager to slide across the expanse of tiled floor, run circles around The
Defender, a massive bronze of a glowering angel, its muscular wings in

--- Sayfa 304 ---
298 | J E F F S H A R L E T
full fl ex, and bound up the stairs to “Fort Victory,” whose rooms are
designed to look like an Old West cavalry outpost where soldiers
once battled real live Indians, back when Colorado still had Indians
to conquer and convert.
There  were no kids in Fort Victory on my first Sunday at New
Life, the first Sunday of the year. It was a special day, “Dedication,”
the spiritual anointing of the church’s new sanctuary. Metallic and
modern, laced with steel girders and catwalks, the sanctuary is built
like two great satellite dishes clapped belly to belly. It was designed,
I was told, to “beam” prayer across the land. (New Lifers always turn
to metaphors to describe their church and their city, between which
they make little distinction. It is like a “training camp” in that its
young men and women go forth on “missions.” It is like a “bomb” in
that it “explodes,” “gifting” the rest of us with its fallout: revival,
which is to say, “values,” which is to say, “the Word,” which is to say,
as so many there do, “a better way of life.”)
At the heart of the sanctuary rises a  four- sided stage, on either
side of which are two giant  cross- shaped swimming pools with me-
chanical covers. Above the stage a great assemblage of machinery
hovers, wrapped in six massive video screens. A woman near me
compared it to Ezekiel’s vision of a metallic angel, circular and “full
of eyes all around.” When the lights went down and the screens
buzzed to life, the sanctuary turned a soft, silvery blue. Then the six
screens filled with faces of tribute, paying homage to New Life and
Pastor Ted: a senator, a congressman, Colorado’s lieutenant gover-
nor, the city’s mayor, and Tony Perkins, Dobson’s enforcer on Capi-
tol Hill; denominational chieftains, such as Thomas E. Trask, “general
superintendent” of the 51 million worldwide members of the Assem-
blies of God; and a succession of minor nobles from the nation’s
megachurches. These I know now by numbers: Church of the High-
lands, in Alabama—pastored by a New Life alumnus—that has
grown from 34 to 2,500 souls in the last four years; a New Life
look- alike in Biddeford, Maine, that has multiplied to 5,000; Rocky
Mountain Calvary, the New Life neighbor that has swelled in a de-
cade from a handful to 6,000.

--- Sayfa 305 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 299
Kyle Fisk, then the executive administrator of the National As-
sociation of Evangelicals, had guided me to a seat in the front row,
which meant I had to crane my neck back ninety degrees to follow
the video screen above me. The worship band, dressed in black, goa-
teed or soul-patched or shag-headed, lay flat on their backs, staring
straight up. To my right sat a  middle- aged woman in a  floor-length
flower-print dress with shades of orange and brown. Her hair was
thick, chestnut, wavy, her face  big-boned and raw and beautiful, her
eyelids electric blue with eyeshadow when she closed them in prayer,
her eyes dark and wide as she tilted her head back to watch the trib-
utes roll past. Her mouth hung open.
The band stood. A skinny, chinless man with a big, tenor voice,
Ross Parsley, directed the musicians and the crowd, leading us and
them and the choir as the guitarists kicked on the fuzz and the drum-
mer pounded the music toward  arena-rock frenzy. Two fog machines
on each side of the stage filled the sanctuary with white clouds.  Pod-
shaped projectors cast a light show across the ceiling, giant spinning
white snowflakes and cartwheeling yellow flowers and a shimmering
blue water-effect. “Prepare the way!” shouted Worship Pastor Ross.
“Prepare the way! The King is coming!” A man in a suit in the east-
ern front row shuddered and shot his right foot forward and fell into
a kickboxing match with the air, keeping time with the rhythm.
Across the stage teens began leaping straight up, a dance that swept
across the arena: kids hopped; old men hopped;  middle- aged women
hopped. Spinners wheeled out from the ranks and danced like der-
vishes around the stage. The  dark-eyed woman next to me swayed,
her hips filling one side of her dress, then the other, her hands wav-
ing like sea grass. The light pods dilated and blasted the sanctuary
with red. Worship Pastor Ross roared, “Let the King of Glory enter in!”
The woman beside me screamed, fell down to her knees, rocked
back and forth until her arms slid out before her and her forehead
tapped the carpeted floor. The guitars thickened the fuzz, and ushers
rushed through the crowds throwing out rainbow glow strings, glow
necklaces, glow crowns. The arena went dark, and 8,000 New Lifers
danced with their glow strings, like a giant bowl of rainbow sorbet.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
300 | J E F F S H A R L E T
White light flared, blinding us, and then disappeared, leaving us
in darkness again. Fog pumped out  double-time. We would have
been lost had it not been for the blue video glow of the six big screens.
All heads tilted upward again. Watching the screens, we moved in
slow motion through prairie grass. A voiceover announced, “The
heart of God, beating in our hearts.” Then the music and video
quickened as the camera  rose to meet the new sanctuary. The woman
beside me gasped. Images spliced and jumped over one another:
thousands of New Lifers holding candles, and dozens skydiving, and
Pastor Ted, Bible in hand, blond head thrust forward above the Good
Book, smiling, finger-shaking, singing, more smiling, filling half of
his face with perfect white teeth. His nose is snubby and his brow
overhung, lending him an impishness crucial to the smile’s success;
without that edge he would look not happy but stoned. Now Pastor
Ted, wearing a puffy ski jacket in red, white, and blue, took us to the
suburban ranch  house where he stayed on his fateful visit to Colorado
Springs; then on to another suburban ranch  house, nearly indistin-
guishable, where he made plans for the church. Then to a long suc-
cession of one- story corporate office spaces and  strip-mall storefronts,
the “sanctuaries” Pastor Ted rented as his congregation grew, each
identical to the last but for the greater fl oor space.
The lights came up. Pastor Ted, now before us in the flesh, intro-
duced a guest speaker, one of his mentors, Jack Hayford, founding
pastor of the  ten-thousand- strong Church On The Way, in Van Nuys,
California. Hayford is a legend among evangelicals, one of the men
responsible for the revival that made Bible- believing churches—what
the rest of the world refers to as fundamentalist—safe for suburbia.
He is a white-haired, balding,  ea gle- beaked man, a preacher of the
old school, which is to say that he delivers his sermons with an actual
Bible in hand. (Pastor Ted uses a PalmPilot.) Pastor Hayford wanted
to “wedge” an idea in our minds. The idea was “Order.” The illustra-
tion was the Book of Revelation’s description of four creatures sur-
rounding Christ’s throne. “The first . . . was like a lion, the second
was like an ox, the third had a face like a man, the fourth was like a
flying angel.” Look! said Pastor Hayford, his voice sonorous and

--- Sayfa 307 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 301
dignifi ed. “All wonderful, all angels.” The angels  were merely differ-
ent from one another. Just, he said, as we have different “ethnicities.”
And just as we have, in politics, a “hierarchy.” And just as we have, in
business, “different responsibilities,” employer and employees. An-
gels, ethnicities, hierarchy, employers and  employees—each cate-
gory must follow a natural order.
Next came Pastor Larry Stockstill, from Ted’s old church in Ba-
ton Rouge, presenting yet another variation of preacher. He took the
stage with his wife, Melanie, who wore a pink pantsuit. Pastor Larry
wore a brown pinstripe suit over a striped brown shirt and a golden
tie. His voice was Louisiana; the word pulpit came out as pull- peet.
“There’s a world,” he preached, pacing across the stage. “I call it
the Underworld.” The Underworld, he explained, is similar to what
he sees when he goes skin diving; only instead of strange fishes, there
are strange people. Too many churches, he said, focus on the Over-
world. “That’s where the nice people are. The successful people. But
the Lord said, ‘I’m not sending you to the Overworld, I’m sending
you to the Underworld.’ Where the creatures are. The critters! The
people who are out of it. People you see in Colorado Springs, even.
You got an Underworld of people. The tattoo crowd, the people into
drugs, the people into sex. You find ’em . . . in the Underworld.”
After church, I crossed the parking lot to the World Prayer Cen-
ter, where I watched prayers scroll over two giant  flat- screen televi-
sions while a young man played piano. The Prayer Center—a joint
eff ort of several fundamentalist organizations but located at and pre-
sided over by New  Life—houses a bookstore as well as “corporate”
prayer rooms, personal “prayer closets,” hotel rooms, and the head-
quarters of Global Harvest, a ministry dedicated to “spiritual war-
fare.” The atrium is a soaring hall adorned with the flags of the
nations and guarded by another bronze warrior angel, a scowling,
bearded type with massive biceps and, again, a sword. The angel’s
pedestal stands at the center of a great,  eight-pointed compass laid
out in muted red, white, and  blue- black stone. Each point directs the

--- Sayfa 308 ---
302 | J E F F S H A R L E T
eye to a contemporary painting, most depicting gorgeous, muscular
men—one is a blacksmith, another is bound, fetish-style, in chains—in
various states of undress. My favorite is The Vessel, by Thomas Black-
shear, a major fi gure in the  evangelical-art world.  Here in the World
Prayer Center is a print of The Vessel, a tall, vertical panel of two
nude,  ample- breasted, white female angels pouring an urn of honey
onto the shaved head of a naked, olive- skinned man below. The
honey drips down over his slablike pecs and his  six-pack abs and over-
flows the eponymous vessel, which he holds in front of his crotch,
oozing over the edges and spilling down yet another level, presumably
onto our heads, drenching us in golden, godly love. Part of what
makes Blackshear’s work so compelling is precisely its unabashed
eroticism; it aims to turn you on, and then to turn that passion to-
ward Jesus.
In the chapel are several computer terminals, where one can sign
on to the World Prayer Team and enter a prayer. Eventually one’s
words will scroll across the large flat screens, as well as across screens
around the world, which as many as 70,000 other Prayer Team
members are watching in their homes or churches at any moment.
Prayers range from the mundane (real-estate deals and job situations
demand frequent attention) to the urgent, such as this prayer request
from “Rachel” of Colorado: Danielle. 15 months old. Temperature just shy
of 105 degrees. Lethargic. Won’t eat.
Or this one from “Lauralee” of Vermont: If you never pray for any-
one else, please choose this one! I’m in such pain I think I’m going to die; pray
a healing MIRACLE for me for kidney problems (disease? failure?); I’m so
alone; no insurance!
One might be tempted to see an implicit class politics in that last
point, but to join the Prayer Team one must promise to refrain from
explicitly political prayer. That is reserved for the professionals. The
Prayer Team screen, whether viewed at the center or on a monitor at
home, is split between “Individual Focus Requests,” such as the
above, and “Worldwide Focus” requests, which are composed by the
staff of the World Prayer Center. Sometimes these are  domestic—USA:
Pray for the Arlington Group, pastors working with White house to renew Mar-

--- Sayfa 309 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 303
riage Amendm. Pray for appts. of new justices. Pray for Pastor meetings with
Amb. of Israel, and President Bush. Lord, let them speak only your words,
represent YOU! Bless! But more often they are  international—N. KO-
REA: Pray God will crush demonic stronghold and communist regime of Kim
Jung Il.
The Iraqis come up often, particularly with regard to their con-
version: Despite the efforts of the news media, believing soldiers and others
testify to the eff ective preaching of the Gospel, and the openness of so many to
hear of Jesus. Pray for continued success!
Another prayer request puts numbers to that news: 900,000 Bi-
bles in the Arabic language distributed by Christians in Iraq. And one ex-
plicitly aligns the quest for democracy in Iraq with the quest for more
Christians in Iraq: May the people stand for their rights, and open to the
idea of making choices, such as studying the Bible.
The most common Iraq-related prayer requests, however, are
strategic in the most worldly sense, such as this one: Baghdad—God,
press back the enemy.
Behind the piano player in the main hall of the World Prayer
Center, the front range of the Rocky Mountains stretched across a
floor-to-ceiling, semicircular window with a 270-degree view. Above
him, a globe fifteen feet in diameter rotated on a metal spindle. He
played songs that sounded familiar but unnamable, the soundtrack to
a sentimental movie I hadn’t seen. When he took a break, I sat with
him in the front row. His name was Jayson Tice, he was  twenty- fi ve,
and he worked at Red Lobster. He  wasn’t from Colorado Springs,
and he knew very few people who  were. He’d grown up in San Di-
ego, and once, he said, he’d been good enough to play Division I col-
lege basketball. But he broke his ankle, and because the marines
promised him court time, he joined. There didn’t turn out to be
much basketball for him in the marines, just what he described as
“making bombs and missiles,” so he didn’t re-up. Instead, he decided
to start over in a new city. His mother had moved to Colorado
Springs, so Jayson and his girlfriend did, too; his mother left after
three months, but Jayson had already decided that God, not his
mother, had called him to the mountains. He discovered that a lot of

--- Sayfa 310 ---
304 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the people he knew, working as waiters or store clerks or at one of
the air force bases, felt the same way.
“Colorado Springs,” Jayson told me, “this particular city, this one
city, is a  battleground”—he paused—“between good and evil. This
is spiritual Gettysburg.” Why  here? I asked. He thought about it and
rephrased his answer. “This place is just a watering hole for Chris-
tians. For God’s people. Something extra powerful’s about to pour
out of this city. I hope not to stay in Colorado Springs, because I want
to spread what’s going on here. I’m a warrior, dude. I’m a warrior for
God. Colorado Springs is my training ground.”
“There was,” Pastor Ted said one afternoon in his offi  ce, “a signifi-
cant influence exerted on the [2004] election by Colorado Springs.”
He was meeting with me and another reporter, an Australian from a
fi nancial paper.
“You mean,” the Australian asked, “almost like a force going out
from Colorado Springs?”
A force—Pastor Ted liked that. He smiled and offered other ex-
amples. His favorite was the Ukraine, where, he claimed, a sister
church to New Life had led the protests that helped sweep a  pro-
Western candidate into power. Kiev is, in fact, home to Europe’s
largest evangelical church, and over the last dozen years the Ukrai-
nian evangelical population has grown more than tenfold, from
250,000 to 3 million. According to Ted, it was this army of Chris-
tian capitalists that took to the streets. “They’re pro–free markets,
they’re pro–private property,” he said. “That’s what evangelical
stands for.”
In Pastor Ted’s book Dog Training, Fly Fishing, & Sharing Christ in
the 21st Century, he describes the church he thinks Christians want. “I
want my finances in order, my kids trained, and my wife to love life.
I want good friends who are a delight and who provide protection for
my family and me should life become difficult someday . . .  I don’t
want surprises, scandals, or secrets . . .  I want stability and, at the
same time, steady, forward movement. I want the church to help me

--- Sayfa 311 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 305
live life well, not exhaust me with endless ‘worthwhile’ projects.” By
worthwhile projects Ted means new building funds and soup kitchens
alike. It’s not that he opposes these; it’s just that he is sick of hearing
about them and believes that other Christians are, too. He knows
that for Christianity to prosper in the free market, it needs more
than “moral values”; it needs customer value.8
New Lifers, Pastor Ted writes with evident pride, “like the ben-
efi ts, risks, and maybe above all, the excitement of a  free-market so-
ciety.” They like the stimulation of a new brand. “Have you ever
switched your toothpaste brand, just for the fun of it?” Pastor Ted
asks. Admit it, he insists. All the way home, you felt a “secret little
thrill,” as excited questions ran through your mind: “Will it make my
teeth whiter? My breath fresher?” This is the sensation Ted wants
pastors to bring to the Christian experience. He believes it is time
“to harness the forces of free-market capitalism in our ministry.”
Once a pastor does that, his flock can start organizing itself accord-
ing to each member’s abilities and tastes.9
Which brings us back to “Order.” Key to the growth of evangeli-
calism during the last twenty years has been a social structure of cell
groups that allows churches to grow endlessly while maintaining or-
thodoxy in their ranks. Outsiders to evangelicalism often note the
seemingly anonymous experience of the megachurch and conclude
that such institutions prosper because they make so few demands,
moral or intellectual, on their congregants. But a strong network of
cells makes megachurch membership more all-encompassing than
traditional Sunday congregations. That was why Abram developed
the system for businessmen in 1935; he dreamed of a faith that would
address every aspect of a believer’s life, all the time. But Abram
didn’t imagine that such commitment could extend beyond his small
circle of elites. Ordinary people, he thought, had too little power
over the circumstances of their  days—or too many distractions in
the form of a consumer society’s pleasures—to make such an inti-
mate involvement feasible. He may have been correct at the time.10
Pastor Ted’s insight was that the very growth of consumer soci-
ety itself had conditioned ordinary Americans to perceive themselves

--- Sayfa 312 ---
306 | J E F F S H A R L E T
as decision makers. “Free-market globalization” has made Americans
so free, he concluded, that a populist  cell-group system could func-
tion just like a market. One of Pastor Ted’s favorite books is Thomas
Friedman’s The Lexus and the Olive Tree, which he made required read-
ing for the hundreds of pastors under Ted’s spiritual authority across
the country. From Friedman, Pastor Ted says he learned that every-
thing, including spirituality, can be understood as a commodity.
Friedman may have been the transmitter, but it was elite funda-
mentalism’s belief that international capitalism is at the heart of the
Gospel that migrated from Abram’s cells into the seminaries and ser-
mons of populist fundamentalism. Ted grew up in a faith that began
and ended with moral control, but as he grew in power, so did the
complexity of his beliefs. Unregulated trade, he concluded, was the
key to achieving both worldly and spiritual freedom. His real chal-
lenge became one not of policing individual morality but of persuad-
ing his  working- and  middle-class congregation that the deregulated
market that had driven so many of them to Colorado Springs in
search of fresh starts was both biblical and in their interest. The for-
mer was the easier task, as the Family has long known; followers
with an uneven knowledge of scripture but a reverence for authority
are easily sold the idea of “biblical capitalism.” That’s all it takes for
the Family, since such laissez-faire economics really are in the inter-
est of its elite members, but Ted faced a more diffi  cult challenge,
since the economics of globalization have not so much increased
competition and opportunity as squashed it, ushering in an age of
unpre ce dented corporate consolidation. The cell-group system, which
functions much like consumer capitalism—offering the semblance of
“choice” even as it forecloses genuine  alternatives—proved the per-
fect means of persuasion.
The irony of both Ted’s and Abram’s embrace of the cell group,
an idea originally borrowed from communist revolutionaries, is that
both settled on the “truth” of laissez-faire economics by obsessing
over communism. In 1935, Abram saw communism as a menace
within his city; forty years later, Ted had to go looking for it. His first
job in professional Christendom was smuggling Bibles into Eastern

--- Sayfa 313 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 307
Europe—a project with which the Family had been involved since
the 1950s. As it had been to Abram, it was important to Ted not to
confuse America with Jesus, so instead of declaring the U.S. holier
than other nations, he blended Jesus’ teachings with American politi-
cal aims and then convinced himself that the hybrid was objective
truth, much like what Abram had once called the universal inevitable,
much like Sam Brownback’s conviction that free trade is foretold in
the Bible. The pro cess of economic globalization, Ted believed, is a
vehicle for the spread of Christ’s power.
By that, he meant Protestantism; Catholics, he believed, “con-
stantly look back. And the nations dominated by Catholicism look
back. They don’t tend to create our greatest entrepreneurs, inven-
tors, research and development. Typically, Catholic nations aren’t
shooting people into space. Protestantism, though, always looks to
the future. A typical kid raised in Protestantism dreams about the
future. A typical kid raised in Catholicism values and relishes the
past, the saints, the history. That is one of the changes that is happen-
ing in America. In America the descendants of the Protestants, the
Puritan descendants, we want to create a better future, and our
speakers say that sort of thing.”
For Ted, though, the battle boils down to evangelicals versus Is-
lam. “My fear,” he said, “is that my children will grow up in an Is-
lamic state.” That is why he believed spiritual war requires a virile,
worldly counterpart. “I teach a strong ideology of the use of power,”
he said, “of military might as a public service.” He was for preemptive
war, because he believed the Bible’s exhortations against sin set for us
a preemptive paradigm, and he was for ferocious war, because “the
Bible’s bloody. There’s a lot about blood.”
Linda Burton, the woman next to whom I’d sat at the dedication
of New Life’s sanctuary, told me she’d been “specifically called by
God” to Colorado Springs seventeen years ago. Linda was not a
Christian back then. She had married young and moved west from
Buffalo so her husband could work for Martin Marietta, a defense

--- Sayfa 314 ---
308 | J E F F S H A R L E T
contractor. He  wouldn’t let her go to church because he was deter-
mined to forget his Baptist past, and she was a Catholic, which he
considered simply “Roman” and bad. That was fine with Linda.
Church didn’t feel middle-class. Linda never did find out what
middle-class felt like, though, because her marriage fell apart. When
her husband left, he took their two daughters with him. After that
there  were many men, and there was an abortion. With the man who
beat her she bore a son, whom she named Aaron Michael, the “strong
right hand of God.” Linda took the baby and fled to Colorado Springs,
which she remembered from a vacation she and her ex-husband had
taken with their daughters. They’d ridden one of those Old West
trains almost to the top of Pike’s Peak, a climb of more than two
miles. In her mind she drew a straight line from Buffalo to this point
high up in the Rockies, and there, for the first time, she had felt close
to God. Years later, when she had to run, she went where she re-
membered God had been.
At first, she and Aaron Michael lived in a shelter, and she got a
job at a Popeye’s Fried Chicken. She worked every hour they gave
her, but the money she made was barely enough to eat on. She took
another job, waiting tables at the best hotel in town, and another at
Red Lobster. She was working seventy hours a week, and she was
still broke. A friend at the hotel invited her to New Life. She didn’t
want to be around all these people weeping and babbling and shak-
ing. But then Pastor Ted started talking, and he sounded so ordinary
he made Linda feel ordinary, too:  middle-class.
One day, Pastor Ted preached that all she had to do was pray for
what she needed, as specifi cally as possible. She went right home and
got down on her knees in the kitchen and said, Lord, I need $2,500.
The next day, a check came. Her wages had been docked for  child-
care payments to her  ex- husband, but he had waived the payments
without telling her. The check was for $2,495. She wept.
Now Linda is an insurance agent, and she and Aaron Michael live
in a suburban home. Aaron Michael is sixteen. He wears his black
hair long, and his denim jacket is dirty. He likes violent movies—
“anything with blood,” he tells  me—and video games and fantasy

--- Sayfa 315 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 309
novels. But he’s a good church boy: he loves most of all his youth cell,
and reading the Bible, and talking with his mom about how to be a
follower of Christ. His mom has grown strong in her faith. She hears
voices, but they do not disturb her. “The Holy Spirit is a gentleman,”
she told me over a basket of cinnamon muffins she’d baked for my
visit, still warm from the oven. Sitting across from me in her kitchen,
she closed her big brown eyes and shushed herself. “I’m listening,”
she said quietly.
“To the TV?” I asked. In the next room, Aaron Michael was
watching an action movie; the  house was filled with the sound of
explosions.
“No,” said Linda. “To my Spirit.” She opened her eyes and ex-
plained the pro cess she had undergone to reach her refined state. She
called it spiritual restoration. Anyone can do it, she promised, “even a
gay activist.” Linda had seen with her own eyes the sex demons that
make homosexuals rebel against God, and she said they were grue-
some; but she did not name them, for she would not “give demons
glory.” They are all the same, she said. “It’s radicalism.”
She reached across the table and touched my hand. “I have to tell
you, the spiritual battle is very real.” We are surrounded by demons,
she explained, reciting the lessons she had learned in her small-group
studies at New Life. The demons are cold; they need bodies; they
long to come inside. People let them in in two different ways. One is
to be sinned against. “Molested,” suggested Linda. The other is to be
in the wrong place at the wrong time. You could walk by a  sin—a
murder, a homosexual  act—and a demon might leap onto your bones.
Cities, therefore, are especially dangerous.
It is not so much the large populations, with their uneasy mix of
sinner and saved, that make Christian conservatives leery of urban
areas. Even downtown Colorado Springs, presumably as godly as any
big town in America, struck the New Lifers I met as unclean. When-
ever I asked where to eat, they would warn me away from down-
town’s neat little grid of cafés and ethnic joints. Stick to Academy,

--- Sayfa 316 ---
310 | J E F F S H A R L E T
they’d tell me, referring to the vein of superstores and prepackaged
eateries—P. F. Chang’s, California Pizza Kitchen,  Chili’s—that by-
passes the city. Downtown, they said, is “confusing.”
Part of their antipathy is literally biblical: the Hebrew Bible is the
scripture of a provincial desert people, suspicious of the cosmopoli-
tan powers that threatened to destroy them, and fundamentalists
read the New Testament as a catalog of urban ills: sophistication,
cynicism, lust. But the  anti-urban sentiments of modern fundamen-
talists are also more specific to the moment in which they find them-
selves.
In the 2002 election, fundamentalists swept Georgia’s elected
offices. They toppled an incumbent Democratic governor, a  war-
hero Democratic senator, the Speaker of the state  house, the Demo-
cratic leader of the state senate, and his son, the Democratic candidate
for Congress in a  majority- black district that state Democrats had
drawn up especially for him. The new Republican senator, Saxby
Chambliss, and the new governor, Sonny Perdue, both conservatives
and Christian, won not on “moral values” but on an exurban plat-
form. The mastermind behind the coup was Ralph Reed, once of the
Christian Coalition, who had been reborn as Georgia’s Republican
chairman. Reed remains a fundamentalist, the same man who once
tested employees’ commitment to “Christian values” by asking them
if they supported the death penalty for adultery, but he was too canny
to talk like that in public. The term Christian, he’d learned, is a “di-
vider,” not a “unifier,” so he had left overt faith behind. He backed
candidates who ran under the mantra of the exurbs: “Shorter com-
mutes. More time with family. Lower mortgages.”
This troika of exurban ambition worked on multiple levels. Just
as Nixon used marijuana and heroin in the 1960s as code for hippies
and blacks, Reed devised a platform that conflated ordinary personal
goals with fundamentalist values. Shorter commutes is a ploy that any
old-time ward heeler would recognize. It means “Let’s move the
good jobs out of the city.” Atlanta, like Colorado Springs, has an ur-
ban core that conservatives would just as soon see wither. More time
with family extends that promise of exurban jobs but also speaks in

--- Sayfa 317 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 311
code to the fundamentalist preoccupation with “family”—that is,
with defining it, with excluding not just gay couples but any combi-
nation not organized around “biblical” principles of “male headship.”
As for lower mortgages, they are lower in exurbs because cities sub-
sidize them. The city pays the taxes that build the sewers and the
roads for the exurbs. The city provides the organization that makes
them possible. Exurbs are parasites. And what else does lower mort-
gages mean? More land. More space between you and your neighbors.
And this, too, is necessary for fundamentalism, which depends on
the absence of conflict—the Family’s reconciliation—as one of its
main selling points. For all its talk of community, it is wary of com-
munity’s main asset: the conflict, and the resulting cultural innova-
tion, born of proximity. Such cultural innovation is death to today’s
populist fundamentalism, which tosses a gauzy veil of tradition over
the  big-box consumerism of its megachurches, much as the Family’s
elite fundamentalism once cast  big-business conservatism as “first-
 century” Christianity.
As contemporary fundamentalism, populist and elite, has be-
come an exurban movement, it has reframed the question of
theodicy—if God is good, then why does He allow  suffering?—as a
matter of geography. Some places are simply more blessed than oth-
ers. Cities equal more fallen souls equal more demons equal more
temptation, which leads to more fallen souls. The threats that suffuse
urban centers have forced Christian conservatives to  flee—to Cobb
County, Georgia, to Colorado Springs. Hounded by the sins they see
as rampant in the cities (homosexuality, atheistic schoolteaching,
ungodly imagery), they imagine themselves to be outcasts in their
own land. They are the “persecuted  church”—just as Jesus prom-
ised, and just as their  cell-group leaders teach them.
This exurban exile is not an escape to easy living, to barbecue
and lawn care. “We [Christians] have lost every major city in North
America,” Pastor Ted writes in his 1995 book Primary Purpose, but he
believes they can be reclaimed through  prayer—“violent, confron-
tive prayer.”11 He encourages believers to obtain maps of cities and to
identify “power points” that “strengthen the demonic activities.” He

--- Sayfa 318 ---
312 | J E F F S H A R L E T
suggests especially popular bars, as well as “cult-type” churches.
“Sometimes,” he writes, “particular government buildings . . . are
power points.” The exurban position is one of strategic retreat, where
believers are to “plant” their churches as strategic outposts encircling
the enemy.
I returned to the World Prayer Center for a church staff meeting.
More than one hundred employees began with “worship”—which
means they started with a band, one of New Life’s many “worship
teams” of musicians. This one was composed of students in New
Life’s Worship and Praise School, a  one-year college-credit program
created to train and staff  churches around the country. The students
were all young and attractive, dressed in the kind of quality-cotton
punk clothing one buys at the Gap. “Lift up your hands, open the door,”
crooned the lead singer, an inoffensive tenor. Male singers at New
Life and other megachurches are almost always tenors, their voices
clean and indistinguishable, R&B-inflected one moment, New Coun-
try the next, with a little bit of early 1990s grunge at the beginning
and the end.
The worship style was a kind of musical correlate to Pastor Ted’s
free-market theology: designed for total accessibility, with the illu-
sion of choice between strikingly similar brands. (Pastor Ted pre-
ferred the term fl avors and often used  Baskin- Robbins, the chain of
ice cream stores, as a metaphor when explaining his views.) The
drummers all stuck to soft cymbals and beats anyone could handle.
Lyrics tended to be rhythmic and perfectly pronounced, the better
to sing along with when the words  were projected onto movie
screens. There are no sad songs in a megachurch, and there are no
angry songs. There are songs about desperation but none about de-
spair; songs convey longing only if it has already been fulfilled.
The idea of applying market economics to church originated not
within fundamentalism or evangelicalism, nor even in the petri
dishes of the  laissez-faire think tanks in D.C., but with a sociologist
from the University of Washington named Rodney Stark, whose

--- Sayfa 319 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 313
work has won a broad readership beyond his discipline. Stark (who
now teaches at Baylor, a Baptist university in Texas) and various col-
laborators began interpreting  religious- affiliation data through the
lens of neoliberal market theory in the 1980s.12 The very best sort of
religious economy, insists Stark, is one unregulated by either the
state or large denominations. Left to form, change, and die organi-
cally, Stark believes, churches will naturally come to meet the popu-
lace’s diverse spiritual needs, which he divides into a spectrum of six
“niches” akin to a left/right political scheme. He argues that the law
of the market spurs new religious movements, which start out small,
in “high tension” with the society around them, at the “ultraconser-
vative” end of the spectrum. As these sects grow, their tension usu-
ally decreases—that is, writes Stark, they dilute the “seriousness” of
their  faith—until they eventually drift to the “ultraliberal” end. Im-
plicit is that there is a natural and fairly steady demand for religion
that needs only to find expression in a properly varied supply.13
Despite its academic prose, Stark’s work has won a wide reader-
ship among local pastors, who have propagated his ideas through the
cell-group structure. On the surface, at least, the evangelical enthu-
siasm for Stark’s work might seem somewhat puzzling. Certainly
Stark does celebrate the entrepreneurial, “ultraconservative” church
as the engine of religious vigor. And yet he also seems to promise
fundamentalists that their eventual fate will be moderation, or plu-
ralistic irrelevance, or both.
In fact, the analogy with free-market economics holds up quite
neatly. Stark is an economist of religion; his theory tells him that
unfettered markets will lead to competition, diversity, pluralism.
His fundamentalist adherents, by contrast, are like businessmen,
who understand and approve of where the theory leads in practice:
toward consolidation, control, manufacture of demand. What the
most farsighted are doing is fostering something like Stark’s spec-
trum of “niches,” but all within the confines of their individual mega-
churches. They are building aisles and aisles in which everyone can
find something, but behind it all a single corporate entity persists,
and with it an ideology.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
314 | J E F F S H A R L E T
In devising New Life’s small-group system (Pastor Ted preferred
small- group to cell, but he considered the terms interchangeable), Ted
asked himself and his staff a simple question: “Do you like your
neighbors?” And, for that matter, “Do you even know your neigh-
bors?” The answers he got—the golden rule to the  contrary—were
“Not really” and “No.”14 Okay, said Pastor Ted, so why would you
want to be in a small group with them? Ted deduced a few “rules.”
One was, “I Want to Meet with People I Like.” That is, he didn’t want
to be forced into fellowship with people who  weren’t his type. That
wasn’t un-Christian, he decided; it was biblical. God loves everyone,
Ted decided, but God likes some people more than others. And so
did he. Another rule was, “I Don’t Want to Study Something I’m Not
Interested In.” Ted, for instance, got mad when he thought of all the
dull Bible studies he’d sat through that had ignored his passion,  free-
 market economics.15 His point was that arbitrary small groups would
make less sense than self- selected groups organized around common
interests. Hence New Life members can choose among small groups
dedicated to motorcycles, or rock climbing, or homeschooling, or
protesting outside abortion clinics. There are even stealth small
groups, such as a film club created to draw in people unaware that
they’ve joined a Christian group, much less a New Life evangelical
effort. The New Lifers involved simply “choose movies with subtle
Christian themes [and] gently nudge the conversation toward spiri-
tual themes.” An ostensibly secular group created to help young
couples with their finances teaches that the primary cause of poverty
is divorce; from there it’s a short leap to Christian “family values”
such as male authority.16
Pastor Ted’s true genius lay in his organizational hierarchy, which
ensured ideological rigidity even as it allowed for individual expres-
sion. For all his talk about “free markets,” Pastor Ted was oddly de-
terministic. Not just in his assumption that social networks should
remain entrenched along class lines, but in his belief that social sci-
ence provides the tools with which to quantify the condition of the
soul and to direct it—some might say “engineer” it—accordingly.
Absent the societal vetting of the elites gathered in the Family’s

--- Sayfa 321 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 315
prayer cells, the aspiring group leaders of populist fundamentalism
must undergo a battery of personality and spiritual tests, as well as an
official background check. Once chosen, they meet regularly with
their own leaders in the chain of command, and members are en-
couraged to jump the chain and speak to a higher level if they think
their leader is straying into “false teachings”: moral relativism, ecu-
menism, or even “Satanism,” in the form of New Age notions such as
crystal healing.
Whether the system is common sense or heresy  itself—the Body
of Christ  atomized—is beside the point; New Lifers found it power-
fully persuasive. Pastor Ted instituted a semester system, so that no
one needed to be locked into a group he or she didn’t like for too
long. And since New Life’s cell groups didn’t limit themselves to Bi-
ble study, they functioned as covert evangelizing engines. In return,
what Pastor Ted gave his fl ock, and American fundamentalism,  were
lifestyle choices.
Commander Tom Parker and his family live a long way from New
Life, far south in a neighborhood of postage- stamp yards and  houses
without foundations and streets without sidewalks. Not because
they’re suburban but because nobody bothered to pour concrete.
Commander Tom used to make computer chips; his wife is a maid.
Their living room set is comprised of two couches a  leg-stretch apart,
with Commander Tom’s recliner between. An upright piano, painted
red-and-white, is backed against one wall; a TV, no longer much
used, squats against the other. When I visited, Commander Tom’s
wife stayed in the kitchen, but his son, Junior Commander TJ, joined
us in the living room. The two  men—TJ is only fifteen, but he’s been
bar mitzvahed, about which more in a  moment—owe their offi  cer’s
ranks to the Royal Rangers, a Christian alternative to the Boy
Scouts.17 The largest “outpost” of the Rangers in the country, 475
boys and men, rallies at New Life.
Royal Rangers wear khaki military uniforms and black ties.
They study rope craft and smallbore shooting and “American

--- Sayfa 322 ---
316 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Cultures.” There is a badge for “Atomic Energy,” which boys can
earn by making scale models of a nuclear reactor. Mainly, though,
Rangers earn merit badges for reading the Bible. Most boys go book
by book, which earns them a special vest stitched over entirely in
badges, but truly dedicated Rangers take it all in one giant swallow,
a feat of reading for which they earn a single Golden Achievement
Badge. TJ, who traveled to Los Angeles last year to claim second
place in the regional Ranger of the Year competition, has such a
Golden Achievement Badge. He is a sturdy boy, with a swimmer’s
shoulders and an honest, rectangular face, baby fat all gone but for
plump roses over his cheekbones. His blue eyes have more focus
than that of most boys his age, and his smile is shy but sweet and
wide. In another setting, he’d be a teen dream, but TJ doesn’t meet
many girls. He is homeschooled, and most of his out-of-the-house
hours are dedicated to the Rangers, an all-male organization. TJ’s
purity ring, which he wears on a delicate silver chain, is a symbol
of his commitment to virginity until marriage. It was given to him
two years ago by Commander Tom on the occasion of TJ’s bar
mitzvah.
The bar mitzvah was Tom’s idea. A heavier, darker-haired ver-
sion of TJ plus glasses and a mustache, Tom decided his son deserved
a ritual to mark his entrance into manhood, just like the Jewish peo-
ple have. TJ took as his text not a portion of Torah but the song
“Shine,” by a Christian rock band called the Newsboys.
The Kind of Light
That might persuade
A strict dictator to retire
Fire the army
Teach the poor origami.
TJ and Commander Tom are both members of an elite Ranger
cadre known as the Frontier Christian Fellowship, in which boys and
men regress to pioneer life in pursuit of ultimate Christian manhood.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 317
Father and son are still Frontiersmen, which is the lowest level, but
they dream of becoming Buckskin Men. “The problem,” said TJ, “is
that it takes time and money. Because you have to make an outfit.
And it has to be out of leather.”
“If you’re a Frontiersman, you  can’t wear regular clothes,” Tom
explained.
“You don’t have to catch the deer yourself,” said TJ. “You can just
buy the leather at a store. But you gotta learn how to sew it.”
“And you gotta make up something you can live off .”
“A trade.”
“Like making candles,” said Tom.
You also have to choose a special name. TJ was thinking about
“White Flame,” to follow up on his bar mitzvah theme of “Shine.”
Tom had chosen “Rain Bolt.” Rain came from his favorite contempo-
rary Christian song. “Word of God speak,” he sings gently, “Let it fall
down like rain, open my eyes to see His majesty.” Bolt, he adds, “is
just the awesome power of God.”
Tom thought that power was misunderstood, even by his fellow
Christians. It’s about being in the Father, he said. In the sabbath,
too, but he couldn’t really explain this  in-ness. “At the end of Hebrews
4, it has this  verse”—he looked to TJ, who recited from memory:
“The Word of God is living and active, sharper than any  double-edged
sword, cutting until it divides soul from spirit, joints from mar-
row.”
TJ is the kind of boy who always has a book with him. Dickens’s
Old Curiosity Shop sat on the couch in case the conversation grew
boring, and on the coffee table between TJ and his father was a pile of
Christian thrillers Tom was reading on TJ’s recommendation. Mostly,
Tom read the Bible, and The Lord of the Rings, over and over. He
would have liked to have joined the Riders of Rohan, a New Life cell
of suburban bikers that took its name from Tolkien’s noble  horsemen,
but he couldn’t aff ord a motorcycle. He  couldn’t aff ord much of any-
thing but religion itself. Tom’s favorite book of the Bible is the Gospel
of John. “It’s dying to yourself, so you can be with Jesus, going into

--- Sayfa 324 ---
318 | J E F F S H A R L E T
the throne of God. It says don’t be ashamed, going into the throne of
God. But how can you not be ashamed?”
One day the previous August, Tom had been at work, making
computer chips, when for no apparent reason his mind said good- bye
to his body and left it standing there with no power to move. He told
it to turn, but it wouldn’t turn. Blink, but it wouldn’t blink. When
he regained control, the first thing he did was take himself to the
doctor for an MRI. But the moment the nurse turned on the ma-
chine, his eyeballs felt as if they were popping; his hands clenched
into claws. All he could do was whisper, “Turn . . . it . . . off.”
Electronics seemed to exacerbate the condition. “I’m allergic,” he said.
He believed that years of working with powerful magnets have bro-
ken his “polars.” His company moved him to a desk job, but the com-
puter made his eyes wobble. He  can’t talk on a cell phone, and TV
causes a meltdown. His company pays him a modest sum for disabil-
ity. He  wouldn’t dream of suing. New Life helps out when his fi-
nances get close to nothing. “God keeps saying to me, ‘Tom, this is
not about you. It’s about Me,’ ” he told me. “There’s something going
on. And God is just trying to get me ready.”
In December, Tom received a vision. It is not unheard of for or-
dinary New Lifers to experience visions, but most are wary about
their provenance; what a secularist would call psychological they call
satanic. But Tom thought that this one was real. He told two New Life
pastors about it, and he told his mother, because, he said, “it was so
threatening to me.” His voice trembled with the recollection, and
grew quieter, shy and childish, and he seemed close to tears. This is
what he had seen: “Complete darkness over all of America. But there
was a light coming down to the center of America,” that is, Colorado
Springs. “And it was just a circle. And in it there  were angels, and the
angels were battling. And they were fighting hard as they could”—
here Tom’s voice  broke—“but they couldn’t hold back the dark, and
the Lord said to me, ‘America has to repent, or this hole will
close.’ ”
Tom returned to the moment. “I’m not even saying I know what
to do with it. It’s just—that’s what I see. And I pray. There’s some-

--- Sayfa 325 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 319
thing going on here, and God’s gonna explode it. There’s gonna be an
explosion from here bigger than anyone’s ever seen.”
New Life, he believed, would marshal the shock waves. “I think
Pastor Ted is Gandalf,” the wizard of The Lord of the Rings, he said.
Tom had received a few minivisions, just glimpses really, and in them
he saw a pastor kneeling, praying, in spiritual battle with a demon
trying to pull him into a flaming abyss.
I grew up reading Tolkien, too. “Who’s the Balrog?” I asked, re-
ferring to a demon that nearly kills Gandalf. I expected Commander
Tom to reply with the usual enemies: “the culture” and the homo-
sexuals and the humanists. But the Balrog, he said, is inside Pastor
Ted, inside New Life, inside every follower of Christ.
On any night of the week in Colorado Springs, if one knows where
to look, one can join a conversation about God that will stretch late
into the eve ning. Some of these are cell groups,  spin-offs from New
Life or from the city’s other churches, but others are more free-form.
On a Thursday, I joined one as the guest of a friend of a friend named
Lisa Anderson. Lisa is an editor at the International Bible Society. A
few nights earlier, after I bought her several rounds of mojitos, she
had promised to send me Our City, God’s Word, a glossy New Testa-
ment produced by the IBS and included not long before as an insert in
the local paper. “Colorado Springs is a special place,” declares the in-
troduction. “The Bible is a special book.”18
Lisa’s Thursday-night group met in a town house owned by a
young couple with two children, Alethea (Greek for Truth), age
three, and Justus (Justice), age one and a half. The father is assistant
to the president of the Navigators, a conservative parachurch minis-
try, and the mother works for Head Start. Also in attendance  were
two graduates of the Moody Bible Institute and Lisa’s boyfriend, a
graduate student and a writer for Summit Ministries, a parachurch
organization that creates curricula on America’s “Christian heritage”
for homeschoolers and private academies. There was also a gourmet
chef.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
320 | J E F F S H A R L E T
When I walked in, an hour late, they were talking about Chris-
tian film criticism—whether such a thing could, or should, exist.
Then they talked about the tsunami that had just hit South Asia and
wondered with concern whether any of the city’s preachers would
try to score points off it. When I mentioned that Pastor Ted already
had, they cringed. I told them that at the previous Sunday’s full-
immersion baptism service, Pastor Ted had noted that the waves hit
the “number-one exporter of radical Islam,” Indonesia. “That’s not a
judgment,” he’d announced. “It’s an opportunity.” I told them of
similar analyses from Pastor Ted’s congregation: one man said that
he wished he could “get in there” among the survivors, since their
souls  were “ripe,” and another told me he was “psyched” about what
God was “doing with His ocean.”
“That’s not funny,” one woman said, and the room fell silent.
James, an aspiring film critic with oval glasses and a red goatee,
spoke up from the floor, where he’d been sitting  cross-legged. “You
know that Bruce Springsteen song on Nebraska, about the highway
cop?” he asked. He was referring to a song called “Highway Patrol-
man,” in which the patrolman’s brother has left “a kid lyin’ on the
floor, lookin’ bad,” and the patrolman sets out to chase him down.
Instead, he pulls over and watches his brother’s “taillights disappear,”
thinking of “how nothin’ feels better than blood on blood.”
“He  can’t arrest his brother,” James said, and quoted the song: “a
man turns his back on family, well, he just ain’t no good.”
“I think that’s how it is,” James continued. “That’s how I feel
about Dobson, or Haggard. They’re family. We have loyalties, even if
we disagree.”
I told James about a little man I had met in the hallway at New
Life who, when I said I was from New York City, said, simply, “Ka-
boom!” I told him also about Joseph Torrez, a New Lifer I had eaten
dinner with, who, when describing the evangelical gathering under
way in Colorado Springs, compared it to “Shaquille O’Neal driving
the lane, dunking on you.” Torrez had said, “It’s time to choose sides,”
a refrain I had heard over and over again during my time in Colorado
Springs.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 321
“So which is it?” I asked. “Which side are you on? Theirs? Are you
ready to declare war on me, on my city?”
“No—”
“Then choose.”
“I—”
“We  can’t,” Lisa interrupted, from the corner.
“We can,” said John, another Bible Society editor. “We do. Just by
being here.”

--- Sayfa 328 ---
12.
T H E R O M A N C E O F A M E R I C A N
F U N D A M E N T A L I S M
A
fter New Life banished Pastor Ted from his pulpit in late
2006, the press wondered if this glaring evidence of hypoc-
risy would spell the end of fundamentalism’s broad appeal. The
press had asked the same question many times during the televange-
list sex scandals of the 1980s and ’90s—Jimmy Swaggart’s motel
rendezvous, Jim Bakker’s hush money for his  secretary—and, long
forgotten now, another decade earlier when Time reported that two
students at the evangelist Billy James Hargis’s American Christian
College, married by Reverend Hargis himself, had discovered on
their honeymoon that neither was a virgin; Hargis not only had mar-
ried the pair but had deflowered both husband and wife.1 Hargis’s
reputation never recovered, but his cause survived; so did the col-
lege vice president to whom the students confessed, David Noebel,
who used Hargis’s downfall to consolidate his own power. Today,
Noebel is president of Summit Ministries, headquartered just west
of New Life, where he oversees the education of 2,000 students a
year and the distribution of fundamentalist homeschooling materials
to thousands more. His most influential book is The Homosexual Revo-
lution.
Scandal does not destroy American fundamentalism. Rather, like
a natural fire that purges the forest of overgrowth, it makes the move-
ment stronger. And fiercer. Such was the case in the aftermath of the
Hargis affair, when Noebel managed to convince millions that Har-
gis’s fall was not an occasion for a reconsideration of fundamentalism’s

--- Sayfa 329 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 323
concept of sexuality but rather a call to action. Noebel’s subsequent
antigay manifesto, The Homosexual Revolution, helped make sex one of
the movement’s most potent political causes.
Something similar happened after Ted Haggard’s disgrace. The
Reverend Mel White, a former ghostwriter for Jerry Falwell who has
since come out and now leads Soulforce, a  pro-gay evangelical minis-
try, told me that Ted’s ordeal would serve only to drive more gay
fundamentalists into the closet. Nobody would want to face the pub-
lic shaming Ted endured, while the fact that fundamentalist leaders
embraced Ted and promised to cure him would offer queer funda-
mentalists hope that they, too, could be made pure again by one of
the many “ex-gay” ministries that have arisen in recent years.
Following the end of the Cold War, during which anticommu-
nism was the organizing principle of American fundamentalism, sex
provided a new battleground. No longer would fundamentalism pre-
sent itself primarily as against an enemy, godless communism; after
the fall of the Berlin Wall, fundamentalism looked to sex as the new
frontier of its empire, and “purity” as the promise of its campaign.
Sexual purity also lends to the movement a radical tenor that’s thrill-
ing to young believers eager to distance themselves from the clumsy
politics of the old Christian Right. It is, one virgin told me, a rebel-
lion against materialism, consumerism, and “the idea that anything
can be bought and sold.” It is a spiritual war against the world, against
“sensuality.” This elevation of sexual  purity—especially for  men—as
a way of understanding yourself and your place in the world is new.
It’s also very old. First-century Christians took the idea so seriously
that many left their wives for “house monasteries,” threatening the
very structure of the family. The early church responded by institu-
tionalizing virginity through a priestly caste set apart from the world,
a condition that continues to this day within Roman Catholicism.
Now, though, the Protestants of American fundamentalism are re-
claiming that system, making every young man and woman within
their sphere of influence part of a new virgin army.
Real sex is no more endangered by such an ambition than the
political  corruption—or, for that matter,  radicalism—that Abram

--- Sayfa 330 ---
324 | J E F F S H A R L E T
once dreamed he could abolish through the patient construction of a
voluntary theocracy. The chaste spiritual warriors of populist funda-
mentalism continue to experience all the same desires as the rest of
us, a fact they readily admit. The sexual purity they’re pursuing isn’t
so much a static condition as a perpetual transformation, Charles
Finney’s revival machine rebuilt within one’s own soul. Purity lends
to populist fundamentalism the intensity of Jonathan Edwards’s Great
Awakening, the intimacy of Abram’s prayer cells. To be pure is to be
elite, or so chaste believers, looking at a world suffused with sex,
may easily tell themselves.
Matt Dunbar was a short and  ruddy- faced  twenty- three- year- old,
a little shy, a man who kept his hands in his pockets. He was also
funny and smart and possessed of excellent conversational timing. He
had grown a small brown soul patch beneath his lower lip, and his
voice was smooth. When he talked to you, he held your eyes as if he
trusted you, which he did; Dunbar, wary of the world since he was a
boy, had decided to trust people. He studied religion through an an-
thropological lens as a graduate student at New York University,
where his friends called him Mr. Dunbar. He said in a  matter-of-fact
manner that women liked him, and it was true. Mr. Dunbar was a
gentleman.
He lived in Brooklyn with his childhood best friend, Robin
Power. Sometimes Robin had a thick brown beard, and sometimes
he shaved himself clean and dyed his hair black and spiked it up, like
Johnny Rotten. He usually worked a gutterpunk look—a ratty, lay-
ered look of sweatshirts and buttons advertising obscure bands.
Sometimes, he wore eyeliner. He taught ninth-grade English at Mar-
tin Luther King High, in Manhattan, and he liked the fact that some
of his students thought he was gay.
Robin, like Dunbar, was a conservative Christian, but he wasn’t
allowed to talk about that at school. He was permitted to talk about
“values,” though, and to him, loving everyone, even gay  men—his
students called them “faggots,” but he considered them sinners, and

--- Sayfa 331 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 325
to him this was the difference between secularism and  Christianity—
was a value he wanted to share with his pupils. Once, he went to
school in drag to teach them a lesson, about judging a soul based on
appearances.
When I first met Dunbar and Robin at their  church—“The Jour-
ney,” a fundamentalist congregation of actors, dancers, and young
professionals who want to know actors and  dancers—Robin got
most of the glances, the smiles, the cute little laughs that said, “Call
me.” But Robin was engaged. Dunbar didn’t do badly himself; the
women who knew Robin was taken gravitated toward him, and dur-
ing the time I knew him, he met a church girl, an actress named
Anna, blonde,  broad-faced, and beautiful, quiet like Dunbar. He
thought she was a godly woman. He had been “waiting” for a long
time—“saving himself,” as an older generation might have said—and
now he had someone to wait for.
Dunbar and Robin grew up together in Visalia, California, a hard
little agricultural town far from the coast. They were not part of the
megachurch nation; Dunbar was raised by a single mother, who took
him to a traditional Episcopal church, and Robin’s parents and sib-
lings  were all musicians. They had their own little recording studio,
and they rocked, more Ramones than Partridge Family. Dunbar al-
ways wanted to be in their band. He and Robin went to the same
conservative, Christian college and moved to Manhattan afterward
with two other childhood friends, also Christians. They came be-
cause one of the men had a girlfriend here—the two are now
engaged—but the city has proven to be a sort of calling. “New York,”
said Dunbar, “is a great town for virgins.”
We were sitting on a bench after church, watching Sunday traffic
stream up and down Broadway. “Cleavage everywhere,” noted Dun-
bar. He had learned to look without desire. Robin held up his right
hand. Wrapped around his wrist, in a figure eight, was a black plastic
bracelet. “This,” he said, “is a ‘masturband.’ ” One of their friends at
college came up with the idea. As long as you stayed  pure—resisted
masturbating—you could wear your masturband. Give in, and off  it
went, like a scarlet letter in reverse. No masturband? Then no one

--- Sayfa 332 ---
326 | J E F F S H A R L E T
wanted to shake your hand. “It started with just four of us,” said
Dunbar. “Then there  were, like, twenty guys wearing them. And
girls too. The more people that wore them, the more people knew,
the more reason you had to refrain.” Dunbar even told his mother.
He lasted the longest. “Eight and a half months,” he said. I notice he’s
not wearing one now. He  wasn’t embarrassed. Sexuality, he believed,
is not a private matter.
The other night, he said, he’s out drinking, with “secular friends.”
They were all a little drunk—Dunbar was fond of Bible verses about
wine—and they’re talking about sex.
“Dunbar,” volunteers one of the secular guys, “is a virgin.” The
jerk is laughing. “By choice,” he says.
Huge mistake. All female eyes leave the man who wants their at-
tention and rotate Dunbar’s way. “Four girls surround me. They
want to know everything.”
Is he embarrassed? (“I’d only be embarrassed if I was trying to get
some.”) Is oral okay? Anal? (He  doesn’t like to be “legalistic,” caught
up in rules, and he has friends who enjoyed anal sex and still called
themselves virgins, but—no.) Has he always been a virgin? (“Uh,
yeah. That’s what ‘virgin’ means.”) Why? (Jesus, “romance,” it all
blends together . . .  )
One of Dunbar’s roommates had recently found himself in the
same situation: young man from the sticks in a  big-city bar, sur-
rounded by women who genuinely want to know if anything can
tempt him. They were tempting him, of course, which was the
point. He was in trouble. One woman gave him the kind of look usu-
ally used only by teen movie seductresses. “Sex,” she said, “is just
something I do.” Lucifer himself could not have whispered more
sweetly. And  then—the material world ruined it all. Satan’s angel
took a chip off a plate of cheesy nachos. “Like eating,” she said. “It’s
easy.”
Dunbar’s virgin comrade took a big breath of virtue and girded
his loins for continuing chastity. “The whole sex/nacho thing?” Dun-
bar said. “It just  doesn’t make sense to a virgin.”
Food, after all, belongs to the mundane realm. Sex, on the other

--- Sayfa 333 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 327
hand, is supernatural. Dunbar read the biblical Song of Solomon—lovers
rhapsodizing over each other, he obsessed with her breasts like “two
fawns” and her “rounded thighs like jewels”; she with his legs like “ala-
baster columns” and his lips like lilies, “dripping  sweet- smelling
myrrh”—not as erotica but as a metaphor for the love between man
and God. Sex that is just two bodies in motion struck him as empty,
even if love was involved. Every encounter must be a kind of three-
some: man, wife, and God. Without Him, it’s just fucking.
“Suckers for romance,” Leslee Unruh, the founder of Abstinence
Clearing house, described men like Dunbar and Robin. She meant it
as praise, since she considers them the vanguard of a desexed revolu-
tion. “We want authenticity,” she told me. “We want what’s real.” It’s
“safe sex,” she explained, that requires faith, since there is “no evi-
dence” that safe sex “works.” Unruh is a  youthful-looking grand-
mother from South Dakota with a big mouth,  literally—outlined
in fire-engine red for public performances—and dyed blonde hair.
Since her early days as one of the most fervent antiabortion crusad-
ers of the 1980s, she’s made over her politics, too. She still fights
abortion—she was one of the activists behind South Dakota’s ban
on all abortions, revoked by referendum in 2006—but she’s discov-
ered that she can win more converts by going to the root cause, sex
itself.
So, in 1997, she launched Abstinence Clearing house in Sioux
Falls. She’d been a  self-declared “chastity” educator since the early
1980s, but it wasn’t until the Clinton years that American fundamen-
talism fully discovered sex as a weapon in the culture wars. In 1994,
a Southern Baptist celibacy program, True Love Waits, brought
200,000 virginity pledge cards to Washington, D.C. In 2004, the
group brought a million to the Olympics in Athens. Now, Abstinence
Clearing house acts as a nexus for activists and as their voice in Wash-
ington, claiming as “friends” a slew of offi  cials with unrecognizable
names, abstinence crusaders in the Departments of Health and Hu-
man Services, Education, and even State. Family members like

--- Sayfa 334 ---
328 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Brownback and Representative Joe Pitts used their Value Action
Teams to insert chastity into foreign affairs.
Uganda, which following the collapse of Siad Barre’s Somalia
became the focus of the Family’s interests in the African Horn, has
been the most tragic victim of this projection of American sexual
anxieties. Following implementation of one of the continent’s only
successful anti-AIDS program, President Yoweri Museveni, the
Family’s key man in Africa, came under pressure from the United
States to emphasize abstinence instead of condoms. Congressman
Pitts wrote that pressure into law, redirecting millions of dollars
from effective sex-ed programs to projects such as Unruh’s. This
pressure achieved the desired result: an evangelical revival in Uganda,
and a stigmatization of condoms and those who use them so severe
that some college campuses held condom bonfires. Meanwhile, Ugan-
dan souls may be more “pure,” but their bodies are suffering; follow-
ing the American intervention, the Ugandan AIDS rate, once
dropping, nearly doubled. This fact goes unmentioned by activists
such as Unruh and politicians such as Pitts, who continue to promote
Uganda as an abstinence success story.
The actual fate of Ugandan citizens was never their concern.
Pitts, in the Family tradition, may have had geopolitics on the mind:
with Ethiopia limping along following decades of civil war and dicta-
torship and Somalia veering toward a Taliban state, tiny, Anglophone
Uganda has become an American wedge into Islamic Africa. But the
American uses and abuses of Uganda are still more cynical: Christian
Africa has been appropriated for a story with which American funda-
mentalists argue for domestic policy, a parable detached from Afri-
can realities, preached for the benefit of Americans. In Unruh’s
telling, the ostensible “success” of Uganda’s abstinence program jus-
tifi es the miseducation of American schoolchildren.
Under the Bush administration, Abstinence Clearing house helped
the federal Centers for Disease Control establish a “gold standard” for
abstinence-only sex education programs. A student in one of these
programs may hear that sex outside of marriage can lead to suicide;
that condoms don’t prevent AIDS; that abortion often results in

--- Sayfa 335 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 329
sterility; and that men’s and women’s gender roles are biologically
determined as “knights” and “princesses,” which, if violated, cause
depression. And the Clearing house continues to lobby for more,
bringing politicians together with activists at conferences intended to
win support not just for abstinence curricula but for the privatization
of public schooling altogether: vouchers for Christian academies,
“character” charter schools such as those promoted by the Family’s
Eileen Bakke (who has become a Family prayer partner of Janet Mu-
seveni, Uganda’s first lady), and homeschooling. The Clearing house
hosts “purity balls” and abstinence teas. It sponsors “power virgins”
around the country,  good-looking young men and women who work
the fundamentalist lecture circuit spreading the  no- sex gospel. It also
operates as a one-stop shop for abstinence paraphernalia, much of it
fundamentalist despite the group’s allegedly secular orientation: 14-
karat gold “What Would Jesus Do” rings; books such as Single Chris-
tian Female;  ready- to- go abstinence  PowerPoint pre sen ta tions. There’s
abstinence chewing gum, abstinence stickers in batches of 1,000,
abstinence balloons in batches of 5,000. There’s even an abstinence
pencil.
Unruh considered herself broad-minded enough for the demands
of an ostensibly secular society. If religion is to be kept out of the
schools, she said, “shame and conscience are important tools” in its
place. But “romance,” more than anything else, guided her under-
standing of sexuality. This is what she found romantic: a father who
gives his teenage daughter a purity ring only to take it back on her
wedding day and hand it over to his daughter’s new husband, her vir-
ginity passed from man to man like a baton.
Therein lies the paradox of the purity movement. It’s at once an
attempt to transcend cultural influences through the timelessness of
scripture, and a painfully specific response to the sexual revolution.
Populist fundamentalism grew into a political force in almost direct
proportion to the mainstreaming (and subsequent weakening) of
various sexual liberation movements, and as it did so it led the elites
of American fundamentalism, so closely aligned with the secular
conservatives as to be nearly invisible, out of the establishment

--- Sayfa 336 ---
330 | J E F F S H A R L E T
co alition. Absent the sexual revolution, populist fundamentalism
might still thrive only in enclaves, and elite fundamentalism still
coexist easily with secular politics, as it did during the early days of
the Cold War.
But the sexual revolution hardly invented sex or the anxieties it
results in when mixed with conservative Christianity. The com-
plaints of today’s purity crusaders echo those of Abram’s men in the
1930s when they resolved to meet in all-male cells rather than sub-
mit to the authority of churches in which women comprised the clear
majority, if not the leadership. “Christianity, as it currently exists,
has done some terrible things to men,” writes John Eldredge, the
author of a  best- selling manhood guide called Wild at Heart. He
thinks that church life in America has made Christian men weak.
Women who are frustrated with their  girlie-man husbands and boy-
friends seize power, and the men retreat to the safe haven of porn
instead of whipping the ladies back into line. What women really
want, he says, is to “be fought for.” And men, he claims, are “hard-
wired” by God for battle; Jesus wants them to be warriors in the vein
of Braveheart and Gladiator.
Wild at Heart and Eldredge’s other best sellers, The Journey of De-
sire and The Sacred Romance (as well as “field manual” workbooks that
can be purchased separately), address sexual “purity” as part of the
fabric of Christian manliness. Other books, such as God’s Gift to
Women: Discovering the Lost Greatness of Masculinity and Every Man’s Bat-
tle, by Stephen Arterburn and Fred Stoeker, make sex their central
concern. Every Man’s Battle has become almost a genre unto itself,
with dozens of Every Man spin- off titles: Every Young Man’s Battle, Every
Woman’s Battle, Every Man’s Challenge, Preparing Your Son For Every Man’s
Battle, and on and on. The Every Man premise is that men are sexual
beasts, so sinful by nature that, without God in their lives, they don’t
stand a chance of resisting temptation. But the temptation they most
fear is not the  age-old seduction of the flesh but the image of the
flesh. They are not opposed to modernity, but to postmodernity and
what they perceive as its  free- floating symbols. The books are  anti-
media manifestos, warning that we are prey to any media we look at;

--- Sayfa 337 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 331
images, they preach, are forever. One author confesses to being
plagued by a picture of the sitcom actress Suzanne Somers, nude in a
“surging mountain stream,” that he had seen twenty years earlier. For
the authors, the solution is simply not to look, an anti-iconographic
stance that belongs more to the Old Testament than the New.
I first heard about the Every Man books from a volunteer at Dun-
bar and Robin’s church, a  twenty- five-year-old man who said he’d
slept with forty women before he “revirgined” with the help of the
series. I was more surprised to learn that Robin had been reading
Every Man’s Battle in preparation for marriage, and planned to lead a
Bible study for men in the fall using Every Man as exegetical reading.
Robin seemed too smart for these books. But then, what he wanted
from them was not subtle thinking but clarity, a law of black and
white.
“You’re sexually pure,” write Arterburn and Stoeker, “when sex-
ual gratification only comes from your wife . . . [and] sexual purity
has the same definition whether you’re married or single.” To achieve
this, they argue, men must go to a kind of war. “Your life is under a
withering barrage of machine-gun sexuality that rakes the landscape
mercilessly,” they report in their volume for single men. They en-
courage making lists of “areas of weakness” and seem particularly
concerned with shorts: “nubile  sweat- soaked girls in tight nylon
shorts,” “female joggers in tight nylon shorts,” “young mothers in
shorts,” and “volleyball shorts,” which are apparently so erotic that
they require no bodies to fi ll them. To avoid these temptations, men
must train themselves to “bounce” their eyes off female curves. Older
men can help, too; the coauthors urge young men to find mentors
who will check in with them by phone about their masturbation fan-
tasies. This may be embarrassing for a young Christian, so the au-
thors suggest a code. Homosexuality is relegated to a short afterword
in which they list the number of Exodus International, a ministry
dedicated to “freeing” people from homosexual desires.
What’s really strange about all this is that it works. Not in the
sense of de-eroticizing the world but in the sense of reinvigorating
American fundamentalism with a new generation of foot soldiers,

--- Sayfa 338 ---
332 | J E F F S H A R L E T
men and women who respond to a hypersexual consumer culture by
making sex, in its absence, a top priority of their religion. “Absti-
nence,” Dunbar told me, “is countercultural,” a kind of rebellion, he
said, against materialism, consumerism, and “the idea that anything
can be bought and sold.”
Every Man operates a hotline, 1–800 NEW LIFE, for men who’ve
“threatened” their relationships with women through their use of
pornography. When I called to confess that reading about tight- shorted
women in Every Young Man’s Battle struck me as weirdly erotic, a pro-
fessional masturbation counselor named Jason told me that I needed
to be more like a woman. Women, he said, don’t like porn. In fact, if
I asked any woman I knew, she’d tell me that for her to “use” porn,
she’d have to fall out of love. Women are just that pure.
What if I became so womanly that I developed a desire for men?
I asked. Perfectly normal, he assured me; many men passed through
that dark corridor on their way to purity. The end result, he prom-
ised, would be total manhood. To get there, Jason suggested I sign up
for a  five-day, $1,800 Every Man’s Battle workshop (held monthly in
hotels around the country), in which I would take classes on shame,
“false intimacy,” and “temptation cycles” and work with other “men
of purity” toward “recovery.”
Every Man’s Battle also offered a  two-day “outpatient program” for
women, Every Heart Restored, to help them deal with their husbands’
depravity, which is another one of the paradoxes of the purity move-
ment. Men’s sexuality, according to the movement, is on the one
hand all-encompassing, capable of eroticizing nearly anything, and at
the same time so simple and dumb that the best they can hope for is
to adjust themselves to their wives’ slow simmer. Women, mean-
while, are inherently purer than men and thus simpler, and yet their
sexuality is complicated and subtle, a story in which husband and
wife must play carefully scripted roles. Books such as Wait For Me, a
tie-in to a Christian pop hit of the same name by the Christian singer
Rebecca St. James, What Every Woman Wants in a Man, by Diana Ha-
gee, and When God Writes Your Love Story, by Eric and Leslie Ludy—not
to mention the numerous Every Woman’s Battle titles and countless

--- Sayfa 339 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 333
Christian romance  novels—peddle a  soft-focus vision of female de-
sire drawn not from scripture but from fairy tales. Wait For Me opens
with the claim that God has planted in every man and woman a
dream in which women long to be rescued by a “champion warrior”
with a “double-edged sword” from the towers in which they’ve been
imprisoned by the “Dark Lord.” All women, writes Lisa Bevere in
Kissed the Girls and Made Them Cry: Why Women Lose When They Give
In, “long to be rescued by a knight in shining armor.”
And yet Kissed the Girls and Made Them Cry goes deeper than chiv-
alrous clichés. Bevere’s description of the love of Christ isn’t filled
with the inadvertent innuendos that plague the men’s guides (“true
manhood,” promises one Christian manhood guide, gets “polished by
the hand of God”) but rather an eroticism, studiously gentle and
mysterious, that is revealing of chastity’s allure. Riffing on the scene
from the Gospel of John in which Jesus refuses to condemn an adul-
teress, Bevere writes, “At fi rst, He is not willing to look at her or to
answer them. He bends down and writes in the dust. The finger of
God  etches in dust letters that are not recorded for our knowledge.”
Jesus, Bevere supposes, is thinking about man’s fi rst love, Eve. “Per-
haps, in His memory He is seeing another who attempted to cover
her nakedness in a Garden long ago.” She imagines every woman in
the crowd waiting to hear what Jesus will say; she hears in Christ’s
rebuke to the men a secret message for women. “Let He who is with-
out sin cast the first stone,” Jesus preaches. For most people, the
story ends there, but Bevere lingers until the frustrated accusers have
left, and there is just Jesus and this naked woman, and finally “she
lifts her head and meets His gaze,” and Jesus tells her He does not
condemn her, and tells her to go, and sin no more.
It’s a beautiful scene, depicting Jesus as romantic hero. And it re-
ally is “countercultural,” an alternative not just to the sexualized
world but also to the unforgiving fundamentalists of generations
past. But then Bevere writes—and this is really the crux of the
whole virginity  movement—that the problem arose not because the
woman sinned, which goes without saying for Christian conservatives,
but because “a treacherous enemy has dragged the women of this

--- Sayfa 340 ---
334 | J E F F S H A R L E T
generation”—us,  now—“naked and guilty before a holy God.”
God forgives; that’s why “revirgining” is always an option. “The
enemy” is the problem. Who is it? In the Gospel of John, the enemy,
as Bevere puts it,  were Jews, those whom the gospel writer called
“the children of Satan”; but in the Gospel of Lisa Bevere, the enemy
is more abstract and more powerful. It’s sex. Not “real sex,” the kind
she enjoys with her husband, but everything  else—every fantasy that
doesn’t conform to wedded bliss, every thrill that doesn’t belong in
church, the lust that spoils the romance of Christianity.
Before Robin became fully  Christian—back when he cared as
much about his guitar as he did about God—he dated a  non-Christian
girl. His voice grew husky as he remembered: “There  were times,
when we were naked, and my tongue was inside her, and she’s whis-
pering for me to go further.” Dunbar stared at him. He knew this
story, but he didn’t mind hearing it again. It wasn’t prurient for
them; it was bonding. “There  were times,” continued Robin, “when I
had to ask myself, ‘What do I believe?’ ”
“But you  weren’t alone with her,” Dunbar said.
“No.”
Dunbar turned to me. “He had responsibility to us.” His brothers.
But Robin kept letting them down. After high school, he stayed at
home for a year while Dunbar and the rest of his friends went on to
college. He joined a Christian punk band, Straight Forward. He
started slipping. At college, he continued to slide. He began dating a
woman only recently born again, still immature in her faith. She was
thrilled by Robin’s attention; he was a man known to be on fire for
God. The  girl—a “baby Christian,” in the  lingo—wanted to get closer
to that warmth. She did so the only way she knew how. “A blow job,”
said Robin.
It had been one thing to go down on his girlfriend when he wasn’t
sure what he believed. It was another to let a girlfriend go down on
him after he’d committed himself to God. But then, he said, that’s
how it works all too often when a man looks like he’s devoted to

--- Sayfa 341 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 335
Jesus. “It becomes more about giving than receiving”—an implicit
recognition of the sexism he knew permeated the best intentions.
Even among Christians, the girls “will go down on you, but you don’t
have to go down on them.” The experience, he said, broke his heart.
What it did for the girl who sucked him off and got dumped for her
impurity, he couldn’t even imagine.
That summer, Robin and his fiancée  were to marry back home in
Visalia, where Dunbar would be his best man. Power felt like he had
waited a long time. He didn’t want to marry for sex, so he’d re-
strained himself from proposing until it did not even enter his mind.
Soon he would experience his reward. A “sexual payoff,” according
to the authors of Every Man’s Battle, that will “explode off  any known
scale.”
Like the fundamentalists of old, today’s Christian conservatives
define themselves as apart from the world, and yet the modern move-
ment aims to enjoy its fruits. To the biblical austerity of chastity, they
add the promise of mind- blowing sex, using the very terms of the
sexual revolution they rally against. And that’s just the beginning.
Sexual regulation is a means, not an end. To believers, the movement
offers a vision grander even than the loveliness of a virgin: a fairy tale
in which every man will be a spiritual warrior, a knight in the service
of the king of kings, promised the hand and the heart and, yes, the
sexual services of a “lady.” That is the erotic dream of American fun-
damentalism: a restoration of chivalry, a cleansing of impurity, a na-
tion without sin, an empire of the personal as political.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
13.
U N S C H O O L I N G
W
e keep trying to explain away American fundamentalism.
That is, those of us not engaged personally or emotionally in
the biggest political and cultural movement of our  times—those on
the sidelines of history—keep trying to come up with theories to
discredit the evident allure of this punishing yet oddly comforting
idea of a deity, this strange god. His invisible hand is everywhere, say
His  citizen-theologians, caressing and fixing every outcome: Little
League games, job searches, test scores, the spread of sexually trans-
mitted diseases, the success or failure of terrorists, victory or defeat
in battle, at the ballot box, in bed. Those unable to feel His soothing
touch at moments such as these snort at the notion of a God with the
patience or the prurience to monitor every tick and twitch of desire,
a supreme being able to make a lion and a lamb cuddle but unable to
abide two men kissing. A divine love that speaks through hurricanes.
Who would worship such a god? His followers, we try to reassure
ourselves, must be dupes, or saps, or fools, their faith illiterate, in-
sane, or misinformed, their strength fl eeting, hollow, an aberration.
We don’t like to consider the possibility that they are not new-
comers to power but returnees, that the revivals that have been
sweeping the nation with generational regularity since its inception
are not  flare-ups but the natural temperature fluctuations of Ameri-
can empire. We can’t accept the possibility that those we dismiss as
dupes, or saps, or fools—the  believers—have been with us from the
very beginning, that their story about what America once was and

--- Sayfa 343 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 337
should be seems to some great portion of the population more com-
pelling, more just, and more beautiful than the perfunctory pro-
cesses of secular democracy. Thus we are at a loss to account for this
recurring American mood. The classic means of explaining it away—
class envy, sexual  anxiety—do not suffice. We cannot, like H. L.
Mencken writing from the Scopes “monkey” trial of 1925, dismiss
the Christian Right as a carnival of backward buffoons resentful of
modernity’s privileges. We cannot, like the Washington Post in 1993,
explain away the movement as “largely poor, uneducated, and easy to
command.” We cannot, like the writer Theodor Adorno, a refugee
from Nazi Germany, attribute America’s radical religion—nascent
fascism?—to Freudian yearning for a father figure.
No, God isn’t dead; Freud and Marx are. The old theories have
failed. The new Christ, fifty years ago no more than a corollary to
American power, twenty- fi ve years ago at its vanguard, is now at the
very center. His followers are not anxiously awaiting his return at the
rapture; he’s here right now. They’re not envious of the middle class,
they are the middle class. They’re not looking for a hero to lead
them; they’re building biblical house holds, every man endowed with
“headship” over his own family. They don’t silence sex; they promise
sacred sex to those who couple properly—orgasms, according to a
bit of fundamentalist folklore passed between young singles, “600
percent” more intense for those who wait than those experienced by
secular lovers.
Intensity! That’s what one finds within the ranks of the Ameri-
can believers. “This thing is real!” declare our nation’s fundamental-
ist pastors. It’s all coming together: the sacred and the profane,
God’s time and straight time, what theologians and graduates of the
new fundamentalist prep schools might call kairos and chronos, the mys-
tical and the mundane. American fundamentalism—not a political
party, not a denomination, not a uniform ideology but a manifold
movement—is moving in every direction all at once, claiming the
earth for God’s kingdom, “in the world but not of it” and yet just
loving it to death, anyway. It feels fabulous, this faith, it tingles in all
the right places.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
338 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Those of us who find ourselves suddenly (or so it seems) at the
dried-out margins keep telling ourselves that this country is still a
democracy, and that democracy still means “moderation,” private
religion and a public square safe for “civil society.” The fundamental-
ist Christ is not, we tell ourselves, the real Christ. He’s an imposter,
a faker, a fraud recently perpetrated on the  good-hearted but gullible
American masses by cynical men, manipulators, profiteers, a cabal of
televangelists. Why? Greed. Anger. Fundamentalists are bitter, an
eminent divine of academe opined at a gathering of worthies con-
vened in 2005 by Boston’s PBS affiliate, because they feel neglected
by the Ivies. Perhaps more dialogue between Cambridge and Lynch-
burg, Virginia, home of Jerry Falwell’s Liberty University, will heal
us all.
Rationalism itself has been colonized by fundamentalism, re-
made in the image of the seductive but strict logic of a prime mover
that sets things in motion, not just at the beginning but always. The
cause behind every effect, says fundamentalist science, is God. Even
the inexorable facts of math are subject to his decree, as explained in
homeschooling texts such as Mathematics: Is God Silent? Two plus two
is four because God says so. If he chose, it could just as easily be
fi ve.
It would be cliché to quote George Orwell here  were it not for
the fact that fundamentalist intellectuals do so with even greater fre-
quency than those of the Left. At a rally to expose the “myth” of
church/state separation in the spring of 2006, Orwell was quoted at
me four times, most emphatically by William J. Federer, a compiler
of quotations whose America’s God and  Country—a collection of seem-
ingly theocratic bon mots distilled from the founders and other great
men “for use in speeches, papers, [and] debates”—has sold half a mil-
lion copies. “Those who control the past,” Federer quoted Orwell’s
1984, “control the future.”
Federer, a tall, lean,  oaken-voiced man, loved talking about his-
tory as revelation, nodding along gently to his own lectures. He wore
a gray suit, a red tie marred by a stain, and an American flag pin in
his lapel. He looked like a congressman. He’d twice run for former

--- Sayfa 345 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 339
House minority leader Dick Gephardt’s St. Louis seat. He lost both
times, but the movement considers him a  winner—in 2000, he
faced Gephardt in the nation’s third most expensive congressional
race, forcing him to spend down his war chest and default on prom-
ises to fellow Democrats, a move that led to Gephardt’s fall.
Federer and I  were riding together in a white school bus full of
Christians from around the country to pray at the site on which the
Danbury, Connecticut, First Baptist Church once stood. It was in an
1802 letter to this church that Thomas Jefferson coined the phrase
“wall of separation,” three words upon which the battle over whether
the United States is to be a Christian nation turns. Federer, leaning
over the back of his seat as several pastors bent their ears toward his
story, wanted me to understand that what Jefferson—notorious deist
and author of the Virginia Statute for Religious  Freedom—had really
meant to promote was a “one-way wall,” designed to protect the
church from the state, not the other way around. Jefferson, Federer
told me, was a believer; like all the Founders, he knew that there
could be no government without God. Why hadn’t I been taught
this? Because I was a victim of godless public schools.
“Those who control the present,” Federer continued darkly,
“control the past.” He paused and stared at me to make sure I under-
stood the equation. “Orson Welles wrote that,” he said.
Welles, Orwell, who cares? Federer wasn’t talking tactics or, for
that matter, even history; he was talking revolution, past, present,
and future.
The ﬁ rst pillar of American fundamentalism is Jesus Christ; the
second is history, and in the fundamentalist mind the two are con-
verging. Fundamentalism considers itself a faith of basic truths unal-
tered (if not always acknowledged) since their transmission from
heaven, first through the Bible and second through what they see as
American scripture, divinely inspired, devoutly intended: the Decla-
ration of Independence, the Constitution, and the often overlooked
Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which declared “religion” necessary

--- Sayfa 346 ---
340 | J E F F S H A R L E T
to “good government” and thus to be encouraged through schools.
Well into the nineteenth century, most American schoolchildren
learned their ABCs from The  New- En gland Primer, which begins with
“In Adam’s Fall, we sinned all” and continues on to “Spiritual Milk
for American Babes, Drawn out of the Breasts of Both Testaments.”
In 1836, McGuffey’s Eclectic Readers began to displace the Primer, selling
some 122 million copies of lessons such as “The Bible the Best of
Classics” and “Religion the Only Basis of Society” during the follow-
ing century.
It wasn’t until the 1930s, the most irreligious decade in Ameri-
can history, that public education veered away from biblical indoctri-
nation so thoroughly that within a few decades most Americans
wrongly believed that nationalistic manifest  destiny—itself thinly
veiled Calvinism—rather than open piety was the American educa-
tional tradition. The fundamentalist movement sees that to reclaim
America for God, it must first reclaim that tradition, and so it is pro-
ducing a flood of educational texts with which to wash away the
stains of secular history.
Such chronicles are written primarily for the homeschoolers and
the fundamentalist academies that as of this writing together account
for as much as 10 percent or more of the nation’s children, an ex-
panding population that buys a billion dollars’ worth of educational
materials annually. These pupils are known by many within the
movement as “Generation Joshua,” in honor of the biblical hero who
marched seven times around Jericho before slaughtering “every liv-
ing thing in it.” The Home School Legal Defense Association has
lately been attempting to organize Generation Joshua into “GenJ” po-
litical action clubs for teens modeled, claims the association, on a
scheme for Christian governance conceived of by Alexander Hamil-
ton shortly before Aaron Burr shot him dead in a duel. Set up by
congressional district, the clubs study “America’s Godly heritage,”
write letters to the editor, and register older siblings as voters. They
adopt thrilling names such as Joshua’s Arrows of Nashville, Tennes-
see, or Operation Impact of Los Gatos, California, or the GenJ Hot
Rockin’ Awesomes of Purcellville, Virginia.

--- Sayfa 347 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 341
“Who, knowing the facts of our history,” asks the epigraph to
the 2000 edition of The American Republic for Christian Schools, a ju-
nior high–level textbook, “can doubt that the United States of
America has been a thought in the mind of God from all eternity?”1
So that I would know the facts, I undertook my own course of home-
schooling: in addition to The American Republic, I read the two-
volume teacher’s edition of United States History for Christian Schools,
appropriate for  eleventh-graders, and the accompanying Economics
for Christian Schools,* and I walked the streets of Brooklyn listen-
ing to an eighteen-tape lecture series on America up to 1865
created for a Christian college by the late Rousas John Rushdoony,
the theologian who helped launch Christian homeschooling and re-
vived the idea of reading American history through a providential
lens.† I was down by the waterfront, pausing to scribble a note on
Alexis de Tocqueville—Rushdoony argues that de Tocqueville was
really a fundamentalist Christian disguised as a  Frenchman—when
a white and blue police van rolled up behind me and squawked its
siren. There  were four offi  cers inside.
“What are you writing?” the driver asked. The other three leaned
toward the window.
“Notes,” I said, tapping my headphones.
“Okay. What are you listening to?”
I said I didn’t think I had to tell him.
“This is a  high- security area,” he said. On the other side of a
barbed-wire fence, he said, was a Coast Guard storage facility for
deadly chemicals. “Somebody blow that up and boom, bye-bye
Brooklyn.” Note taking in the vicinity might be a problem. “So, I
gotta ask again, what are you listening to?”
How to  explain—to the cop who had just clued me in on the
*Sample lesson: “Above all, one must never come to see the propagation of the free market as an
end in itself. The free market merely sets the stage for an unhindered propagation of the gospel of
Jesus Christ.”
†For instance: the “Protestant Wind” with which, according to an eleventh-grade text, God
helped the British defeat the Spanish Armada so that the New World would not be overly settled
by agents of the Vatican.

--- Sayfa 348 ---
342 | J E F F S H A R L E T
ripest terrorist target in Brooklyn—that I was listening to a Chris-
tian jihadi lecture on how democracy as practiced in America was
defiance of God’s intentions, how God gave to the United States the
“irresistible blessings” of biblical capitalism unknown to Europe, and
how we have vandalized this with vulgar regulations, how God loves
the righteous who fight in His name?
Like this: “American history.”
Providence would have been a better word. I was “unschooling”
myself, Bill Apelian, the director of Bob Jones University Press, ex-
plained. What seemed to me a  self-directed course of study was, in
fact, the replacement of my secular assumptions with a curriculum
guided by God. When BJU Press, one of the biggest fundamentalist
educational publishers, started out thirty years ago, science was its
most popular subject, and it could be summed up in one word: cre-
ated. Now, American history is on the rise. “We call it Heritage Stud-
ies,” Apelian said, and explained its growing centrality: “History is
God’s working in man.”
My unschooling continued. I read Rushdoony’s most influential
contemporary, the late Francis Schaeffer, an American whose Swiss
mountain retreat, L’Abri (The Shelter), served as a Christian ma-
drassa at which a generation of fundamentalist intellectuals studied a
reenchanted American past, “Christian at least in memory.” And I
read Schaeff er’s disciples. Tim LaHaye, who besides coauthoring the
hugely pop u lar Left Behind series of novels has published an equally
fantastical work of history called Mind Siege. (“The leading authorities
of Secular Humanism may be pictured as a baseball team,” writes
LaHaye, with John Dewey as pitcher, Margaret Sanger in centerfield,
Bertrand Russell at third, and Isaac Asimov at first). And David Bar-
ton, the president of a history ministry called WallBuilders (as in, to
keep the heathen out); and Chuck Colson, who searches from the
Greeks to the American founders to fellow Watergate felon G. Gor-
don Liddy for the essence of the Christian worldview, a vision of an
American future so entirely Christ- filtered that beside it theocracy—
the clumsy governance of priestly bureaucrats, disdained by Schaef-
fer and  Colson—seems a modest ambition. Theocentric is the preferred

--- Sayfa 349 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 343
term, Randall Terry, the Schaeffer disciple who went on to found
Operation Rescue, one of the galvanizing forces of the  anti- abortion
movement, told me. “That means you view the world in His terms.
Theocentrists, we don’t believe man can create law. Man can only
embrace or reject law.” The study of history for fundamentalists is a
pro cess of divining that law, and to that end the theocentric world-
view collapses the past into one great parable—Colson, for instance,
studies the Roman Empire for insight into the expansion of
America’s—applicable at all stages of learning.
It is character, in the nineteenth-century, British Empire sense
of the word, that drives American fundamentalism’s engagement
with the past. History matters not for its progression of “fact,
fact, fact,” Michael McHugh, one of the pioneers of modern funda-
mentalist education told me, but for “key personalities.” In Francis
Schaeffer’s telling of U.S. history, for instance, John Witherspoon—
the only pastor to have signed the Declaration of Independence—
looms as large as Thomas Jefferson, because it was Witherspoon who
infused the founding with the idea of Lex Rex, “law is king” (divine law,
that is), derived from the fiercest Protestant reformers of the seven-
teenth century, men who considered John Calvin’s Geneva too gentle
for God. In the movement’s history, key men are often those such as
Witherspoon or Schaeffer himself, intellectuals and activists who
shape ideas. But in the movement’s telling of American history, key
personalities are often soldiers, such as General Douglas MacArthur.
After the war, McHugh explained, MacArthur ruled Japan “accord-
ing to Christian principles” for fi ve years. “To what end?” I asked. Ja-
pan is hardly any more Christian for this divine intervention. “The
Japanese people did capture a vision,” McHugh said. Not the  whole
Christian deal but one of its essential foundations: “MacArthur set
the stage for free enterprise,” he explained. With Japan committed
to capitalism, the United States was free to turn its attention toward
the Soviet Union. The general’s providential fl anking maneuver, you
might say, helped America win the Cold War.2
But one needn’t be a flag officer to be used by God. Another
favorite of Christian history is Sergeant Alvin York, a farmer from

--- Sayfa 350 ---
344 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Pall Mall, Tennessee, who in World War I turned his trigger finger
over to God and became perhaps the greatest Christian sniper of the
twentieth century.
“God uses ordinary people,” McHugh explained. Anyone might
be a key personality. The proper study of history includes the student
as a main character, an approach he described as relational, a buzz-
word in contemporary fundamentalism that denotes a sort of pulsing
circuit of energy between, say, pleasant Betty Johnson, your churchy
neighbor, and the awesome realm of supernatural events in which
her real life occurs. There, Jesus is as real to Betty as she is to you,
and so are Sergeant York, General MacArthur, and even George
Washington, who, as “father of our nation,” is almost a fourth mem-
ber of the Holy Trinity, a mind bender made possible through God’s
math.
You may have seen his ghostly form, along with that of Abraham
Lincoln, flanking an image of George W. Bush deep in prayer in a
lithograph widely distributed by the Presidential Prayer Team, a five-
year-old outfit that claims to have organized nearly 3 million prayer
warriors on the president’s behalf. The Prayer Team claims to tran-
scend ideology because it will pray for the president whether he or
she is a Republican or a Democrat. That is, it will always pray for
authority. Its reverence built upon American fundamentalism’s imag-
ined history, the Prayer Team has neatly rewritten not only America’s
democratic tradition but also traditional Christianity, replacing both
with an amalgamation of elite and populist fundamentalism. The
legacy of Abram Vereide echoes in the Prayer Team’s belief that the
right relationship of citizen to leader is both spiritual and submissive,
an idea it has dilated from the prayer cells of elites to its 3-million-
strong “small group” approach to authoritarian religion. The populist
twist is the promise that the citizen is not the victim of such dis-
guised politics but, potentially, their star. In a similar image pasted
onto five hundred billboards around the country, an ethereal Wash-
ington kneels in prayer with an anonymous soldier in desert
fatigues—just another everyday hero. That could be you, the key
man theory of fundamentalist history proposes. It’s like the

--- Sayfa 351 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 345
Rapture, when the saved shall rise together, but it’s happening
right now: George Washington and Betty Johnson and you, float-
ing up toward victory with arms entwined, key personalities in
Christian history.
One afternoon in 2005, I found in my mail an unsolicited copy of
the “Vision Forum Family Catalog,” a glossy, handsomely produced,
eighty-eight-page publication featuring an array of books, videos, and
toys for “The Biblical Family Now and Forever.” Considered the in-
tellectual vanguard of the homeschooling movement by the other
fundamentalist publishers with whom I’d spoken, Vision Forum is
nonetheless just one of any number of providers for the fundamental-
ist lifestyle and hardly the largest. But its catalog is as perfect and
polished a distillation as I’ve found of the romance of American fun-
damentalism, the almost sexual tension of its contradictions: its rev-
erence for both rebellion and authority, democracy and theocracy,
blood and innocence. The edition I received was titled “A Line in the
Sand,” in tribute to the Alamo. There, in 1836, faced with near-certain
annihilation at the hands of the Mexican army, the Anglo rebel Lieu-
tenant Colonel William Barret Travis rallied his doomed men by
drawing said line with his sword and challenging them to cross it. All
who did so, he said, would prove their preparedness “to give their
lives in freedom’s cause.”
A boy of about eight enacts the scene on the catalog’s cover. He is
dark-eyed,  big-eared, and  dimple-chinned, and he’s dressed in an
idyllic costume only a romantic could imagine Colonel Travis wear-
ing so close to his apocalyptic end: a white straw planter’s hat, a
Confederate gray,  double- breasted shell jacket, a bow tie of black
ribbon, a red sash, khaki jodhpurs, and shiny black fetish boots,
spread wide. The young rebel seems to have been photoshopped in
front of the Alamo at unlikely scale: he towers over a dark wooden
door, as big as an eight-year-old boy’s imagination.
Much of the catalog is given over to educational materials for
Christian homeschoolers, but the back of the book is dedicated to

--- Sayfa 352 ---
346 | J E F F S H A R L E T
equipping one’s son with the sort of toys that will allow him to “re-
build a culture of courageous boyhood.” Hats, for  instance—leather
Civil War kepis, coonskin caps, and a  ninety-five-dollar life- size rep-
lica of a fifteenth-century knight’s helmet among them. An
 eigh teen- dollar video titled Putting on the  Whole Armor of God asks,
“Boys, are you ready for warfare?” Young Christian soldiers may
choose from a variety of actual weapons, ranging from a  scaled-down
version of the blade wielded by William Wallace, of Braveheart fame
(which at four and a quarter feet long is still a lot of knife for a kid) to
a thirty- two- and- a-half- inch Confederate officer’s saber. It is history
at knifepoint; a theology of arms.
Not all of the toys are made for literal battle. For thirty dollars
you can buy your boy an “Estwing Professional Rock Hammer,” iden-
tical to those used by creationist paleontologists to prove that dino-
saurs coexisted with Adam and Eve. For  thirty-eight dollars you can
acquire a “stellarscope” that functions as a  pocket- sized planetarium
for understanding God’s heavens. I was tempted to buy my nephew
an “Ancient Roman Coin Kit,” which includes “ten genuine ancient
Roman coins with accumulated dirt” and tools and instructions for
cleaning and identifying them. “They will captivate you,” “Line in
the Sand” promises. “Were they held by a  third-century Christian? A
martyr?”
Martyrdom, real and metaphorical, is something of a family con-
cern at Vision Forum. Founder Douglas W. Phillips’s father, How-
ard, is a Harvard graduate, a veteran of the Nixon administration,
and a Jewish convert to evangelicalism, all marks of a fine pedigree
within elite Christian conservative culture. Moreover, Phillips was
one of the small group that “discovered” Jerry Falwell, recruiting the
Virginian to lead the Moral Majority in 1979. And yet Phillips’s com-
mitment to the intellectually dense ideas of Rousas John Rushdoony,
considered too difficult and too extreme by many within the move-
ment, led to internal exile within the populist front of American
fundamentalism.
In the past few years, though, Phillips has regained a measure of
his former influence. Ideas once considered too heady for a  movement

--- Sayfa 353 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 347
that defined itself through televangelists are now taught in elite
colleges and universities such as Patrick Henry, Liberty, and
Regent—institutions funded by the millions those TV preachers
raised from the  masses—as well as in the most august of Bible
schools and Christian colleges, Wheaton, Westmont, Moody, and
Biola, invigorated by a new generation of book-hungry homeschool-
ers. The  anti-intellectualism that shaped the fundamentalism of the
twentieth century has been replaced by a feverish thirst for intellec-
tual legitimacy—to be achieved, however, not on terms set by secu-
larism but by the Christian Right’s very own eggheads, come in from
the cold.
They’ve brought with them the anxiety of a besieged minority.
They’ve lent to the angry mob ethos of the Moral  Majority—now
defunct, displaced by countless divisions and battalions, a united
front in place of a single army—the cachet of an avant-garde, with all
the attendant wounded pride of a misunderstood genius.
The chief candidate for that label within fundamentalism’s intel-
lectual revival is the late Rushdoony, whose eighteen-tape American
history lectures I had obtained from Vision Forum. Rushdoony is best
known as the founder of Christian Reconstructionism, a politically
defunct but subtly influential school of thought that drifted so far to
the right that it dropped off the edge of the world, disavowed as
“scary” even by Jerry Falwell. Most notably, Rushdoony proposed the
death penalty for an ever-expanding subset of sinners, starting with
gay men and growing to include blasphemers and badly behaved chil-
dren. Such sentiments have made him a bogeyman of the Left but
also a convenient scapegoat for fundamentalist apologists. Ralph
Reed, for instance, the former head of the Christian Coalition, made
a great show of attacking the ideas of Reconstructionism as mis-
guided, not to mention bad public relations. More recently, First
Things, a journal for academically pedigreed Christian conservatives,
published an oddly skeptical antimanifesto titled “Theocracy! Theoc-
racy! Theocracy!” in which a young journalist, Ross Douthat, eyes
rolling, dismisses the fears of the “antitheocrat” Left by propping up
Rushdoony as a fringe lunatic only to knock him down along with the

--- Sayfa 354 ---
348 | J E F F S H A R L E T
liberal critiques that focus on his angriest notions. (Douthat was evi-
dently unaware of First Things’s lengthy tribute to Rushdoony upon
his death in 2001.) That reading of Rushdoony—by liberal critics and
conservative apologists—misses what matters about his revival of
providential history.3
Rushdoony was a monster, but he wasn’t insane. His most vio-
lent positions  were the result of fundamentalism’s requisite literalist
reading of scripture, an approach that one senses rather bored him.
A natural ideologue, he seemed drawn most emotionally not to the
strict legal code of Leviticus but to the “strange fire” of its tenth
chapter, the blasphemous tribute paid to God by priests lost in the
aesthetics of devotion. Rushdoony would have had them killed for
their presumption, which is exactly what God did. But I imagine
Rushdoony sympathized with their misguided sentiments. His Re-
constructionist movement fell apart when his  son-in-law, an even
more bloodthirsty theologian named Gary North, split with Rush-
doony over what he saw as his  father-in-law’s romantic insistence that
the Constitution was an entirely God-breathed document, perverted
by politicians, no doubt, but purely of heaven at its inception. North,
who may actually be a  psychopath—he favors stoning as a method of
execution because it would double as a “community project”—was
right on this one occasion.
Rushdoony was to the study of history what a holy warrior is to
jihad, submitting his mind completely to God. He derived from the
past not just a quaint hero worship but also a deep knowledge of his-
tory’s losers, forgotten  Americans—minor political figures like John
Witherspoon and major revivalists like Charles Grandison Finney and
all the soldiers who fought first for God, then country, the rugged
men of the past who carried the theocratic strand through from the
beginning. The Christian conservatives of his day, Rushdoony be-
lieved, had let themselves be bound by secularism. They railed against
its tyranny but addressed themselves only to issues set aside by secu-
larism as “moral”; the best minds of a fundamentalist generation
burned themselves to furious cinders battling nothing more than
naughty movies and heavy petting. Rushdoony did not believe in such

--- Sayfa 355 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 349
skirmishes. He wanted a war, and he summoned the spirits of history
to the struggle at hand.
Two central Rushdoony ideas, disassociated from his name, have
since been assimilated into the mainstream of Christian conservative
thinking. One is Christian education: homeschooling and private
Protestant academies, both of which he was among the first to advo-
cate during the early 1960s. Among the chief champions of that edu-
cational movement today are John W. Whitehead, a constitutional
lawyer who counts Rushdoony as one of his greatest influences, and the
founders of two fundamentalist colleges, Patrick Henry and New St.
Andrews, explicitly dedicated to training culture warriors according
to the tenets of Rushdoony’s other major contribution to postwar
fundamentalism: the revival of the American providential history
that had been rusting since the nineteenth century, when no less a
hero of the secular past than Daniel Webster declared history “a
study of secondary causes that God uses and permits in order to ful-
fill his inscrutable decree.” During the intervening years, elite funda-
mentalists studied at elite universities (Rushdoony attended Berkeley),
and the rest of the faithful went to public schools and perhaps a Bible
college. Elites learned secular history; the rest rarely learned much
history at all, a state of affairs that kept the movement divided. It was
Rushdoony’s disdain for all things secular that cleared the course for
the convergence in the last few decades of the two streams of funda-
mentalist culture, united across classes behind a vision of a “God-
 led” society.
A strict Calvinist influenced by his upbringing in the Armenian
Presbyterian Church, Rushdoony found his way to the
turn-of-the-century Dutch theologian Abraham Kuyper and his idea
of presuppositionalism, which maintains that (a) everybody approaches
the world with assumptions, thus ruling out the possibility of neu-
trality and a classically liberal state; and (b) that since Christian pre-
suppositions acknowledge themselves as such (unlike liberalism’s,
which are deliberately ahistorical), every aspect of governance should
be conducted in the light of its revealed truths. “There is not a square
inch in the  whole domain of our human experience,” declared Kuyper,

--- Sayfa 356 ---
350 | J E F F S H A R L E T
“over which Christ, who is Sovereign over all, does not cry
‘Mine!’ ”4
And yet Kuyper’s Christ—more the product of nineteenth-
century imperialism than of scripture—is, in a sense, an afterthought
to Kuyper’s fi rst assertion, which anticipated postmodernism and its
distrust of modernity’s claim that we can know “facts” absent the
interference of values. Kuyper turned instead to divine love as the
foundation of what Rushdoony—and now the majority of the Chris-
tian conservative intellectuals—called a biblical worldview, a refine-
ment of theology into political ideology.
Kuyper was both a democrat and a theologian who as Dutch
prime minister tried to conform all aspects of his country to his vi-
sion of God. For much of the twentieth century, he was remembered
fondly only by progressive Social Gospel Christians, who saw in his
Europe an project of state health care and free education and even a
market conformed to biblical law, to the detriment of raw capital-
ism, a foreshadowing of the “city upon a hill” prophesied for America
by John Winthrop in 1630.5
Rushdoony agreed, and he thought most Americans would as
well, once they understood that scripture was the source of the na-
tion’s idealism. He spoke often of his fondness for John F. Kennedy’s
rhetoric, for instance, in which he heard echoes of America as a re-
deemer nation. “God’s work must be our own,” declared Kennedy,
and Rushdoony smiled sadly. “They’ve lost the theology,” Rushdoony
would lecture ten years after Kennedy’s death, “but they haven’t lost
the faith.”
Restoring the former was a matter not of grace but of education.
New generations would have to be raised up who understood the
ancestry of language such as Kennedy’s, who would seek to fulfill the
vision not through social  programs—unlike Kuyper, Rushdoony
scorned governmental attempts to ameliorate suffering that he took
to be God’s “inscrutable decree”—but through the intellectual as
well as spiritual embrace of true religion. Telling kids to stay clear of
bad influences would not do the job. Bible camps and radio preachers
and all the various campus crusades and college clubs for the mildest

--- Sayfa 357 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 351
of young  people—no redeemers, they—had failed. Rushdoony de-
cided to start from the beginning, to claim the future by reclaiming
the past.
Amid a pantheon now celebrated by fundamentalist historians, the
most surprising hero is Stonewall Jackson of the Confederacy, per-
haps the most brilliant general in American history and certainly the
most pious. United States History for Christian Schools devotes more
space to Jackson, “Soldier of the Cross,” and the revivals he led
among his troops in the midst of the Civil War, than to either Robert
E. Lee or U. S. Grant; Practical Homeschooling magazine offers in-
structions for making Stonewall costumes out of gray sweatsuits
with which to celebrate his birthday, declared a homeschooling “fun
day.” Fundamentalists even celebrate him as an early civil rights vi-
sionary, dedicated to teaching slaves to read so that they could learn
their Bible lessons. For fundamentalist admirers, that is enough, as
evidenced by the 2006 publication of Stonewall Jackson: The Black Man’s
Friend, by Richard G. Williams, a regular contributor to the conser-
vative Washington Times.
Jackson’s popularity with fundamentalists represents the triumph
of the Christian history Rushdoony dreamed of when he discovered,
during the early 1960s, a forgotten volume titled The Life and Cam-
paigns of Lieutenant General Thomas J. Stonewall Jackson. Its author, Rob-
ert Lewis Dabney, had served under Jackson, but more important he
was a Calvinist theologian who believed deeply in a God who worked
through chosen individuals, and he wrote the general’s life in biblical
terms. To Rushdoony, the story transcended its Confederate origins,
and he helped make it a founding text of the nascent homeschooling
movement. It’s not the Confederacy fundamentalists love but mar-
tyrdom. Jackson fought first for God and only second for Virginia,
and, as every fundamentalist fan knows, no Yankee bullet could
touch him. He was shot accidentally by his own men and nonetheless
died happy on a Sunday, content that he had arrived at God’s chosen
hour.

--- Sayfa 358 ---
352 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Born in the mountains of what later became West Virginia, Jack-
son was orphaned by the time he was seven. His stepfather shipped
the boy off to one uncle who beat him and then another who gambled
and counterfeited and drank but also let him read. Against all expec-
tations and two years later than most, he became a cadet at West
Point. He began at the bottom of his class.6
Four years later, he had climbed close to the top, and without the
help of charisma. His frame and his face had broadened, but his eyes,
pale irises of cornflower ringed in dead-of-night blue, seemed dis-
tant. His nose was long, wavering, and it ended in what looked like a
permanent drip. His bright red lips curled inward, as if hiding. Even
as an army officer, he felt so out of place in “society” that he was
deathly afraid of public speaking. Absent enemy fire, he did not know
how to take a stand. Before the war he watched John Brown hang
with his own eyes and marveled at the strength of the man’s Chris-
tian conviction and wondered, perhaps, what he would have done
had it been his neck in the noose. And yet when his own time to fight
came, he proved just as ferociously devoted to his cause. In All Things
for the Good: The Steadfast Fidelity of Stonewall Jackson, the fundamental-
ist historian J. Steven Wilkins opens a chapter on Jackson’s belief in
the “black flag” of no quarter for the enemy with a quotation of
Jackson’s view of mercy toward  Union soldiers: “Shoot them all, I do
not wish them to be brave.”
Earlier, in the Mexican War, Lieutenant Jackson defied an order
to retreat, fought the Mexican cavalry alone with one artillery piece,
and won. General Winfield Scott, commander of the U.S. forces,
commended him for “the way [he] slaughtered those poor Mexi-
cans.” Many of the poor Mexicans slaughtered by Jackson  were
civilians. His small victory helped clear the way for the American
advance, and Jackson was ordered to turn his guns on Mexico City
residents attempting to flee the oncoming U.S. Army. He did so
without hesitation—mowing them down even as they sought to
surrender.
What are we to make of this murder? Fundamentalists see in that
willingness to kill innocents confirmation of Romans 13:1. This

--- Sayfa 359 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 353
snippet of Paul’s best-known epistle is a key verse for the Christian
Right: “For there is no power but of God; the powers that be are or-
dained of God.” Obeying one’s superiors, according to this logic, is
an act of devotion to the God above them.
But wait. Fundamentalists also praise the heroism that resulted
from Jackson’s defiance of orders to retreat, his rout of the Mexican
cavalry so  miraculous—it’s said that a cannonball bounced between
his legs as he stood  fast—that it seems to fundamentalist biographers
proof that he was anointed by God. Is this hypocrisy on the part of
his fans? Not exactly.
Key men always obey orders, but they follow the command of
the highest authority. Jackson’s amazing victory is taken as evidence
that God was with him—that God overrode the orders of his earthly
commanders. The civilians dead as a result of Jackson’s subsequent
obedience to those same earthly commanders are also signs of God’s
guiding hand. The providential God sees everything; that such a
tragedy was allowed to occur must therefore be evidence of a greater
plan. One of fundamentalist history’s favorite proofs comes not from
scripture itself but from Ben Franklin’s paraphrase at the Constitu-
tional Convention: “If a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without
His notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid?”
Put in political terms, the contradictory legend of Stonewall
Jackson—rebellion and reverence, rage and order—results in the
synthesis of self-destructive patriotism embraced by contemporary
fundamentalism. A striking example is a short video on faith and
diplomacy made in the aftermath of September 11, 2001, by Chris-
tian Embassy, a behind-the-scenes ministry for government and
military elites created in 1974 as a sister ministry to the Family,
with which it coordinates its efforts.7 Its found ers, Bill Bright of
Campus Crusade and Congressman John Conlan, considered them-
selves America’s saviors. For Bright, the threat was always commu-
nism, but for Conlan, it was a Jewish congressional opponent who,
lacking “a clear testimony for Jesus Christ,” would not be able to
fulfill his responsibilities.8
And yet, Christian Embassy’s self-promotional video almost seems

--- Sayfa 360 ---
354 | J E F F S H A R L E T
to endorse deliberate negligence of duty. Dan Cooper, then an under-
secretary of defense, grins for the camera as he announces that his
evangelizing activities are “more important than doing the job.” Major
General Jack Catton, testifying in uniform at the  Pentagon—an appar-
ent violation of military regulations intended to keep the armed forces
neutral on religious questions—says he sees his position as an adviser
to the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a “wonderful opportunity” to evangelize
men and women setting defense policy. “My first priority is my faith,”
he tells them; God before country. “I think it’s a huge impact,” he says.
“You have many men and women who are seeking God’s counsel and
wisdom as they advise the chairman [of the Joint Chiefs] and the secre-
tary of defense.” Christian Embassy also sends congressional delega-
tions to Africa and Eastern Europe. “We  were congressmen goin’ over
there to represent the Lord,” says Representative John Carter of Texas.
“We are  here to tell you about Jesus . . . and that’s it.”
The Embassy encourages its prayer-cell members in the State
Department to do the same; their first priority is not to explain U.S.
positions but to send the diplomats home “with a personal relation-
ship with the King of Kings, Jesus Christ.”9 Brigadier General Bob
Caslen, promoted since the making of the video to commandant of
West Point, puts it in sensual terms: “We are the aroma of Jesus.”
There’s a joyous disregard for democracy in these sentiments, its
demands and its compromises, that in its darkest manifestation
becomes the overlooked piety at the heart of the old logic of Viet-
nam, lately applied to Iraq: in order to save the village, we must
destroy it.10
But that story is older than Vietnam. Here’s the village life, mod-
est and hard but sustained by tender mercies, that Jackson wanted to
save: Between the Mexican War and the Civil War, he moved to tiny
Lexington, Virginia, to become a teacher. He married a minister’s
daughter, gardened, took long strolls, meditated often on peaceful
portions of scripture. The bloody hero of the Mexican War disap-
peared, replaced by a shy, painfully polite man, obsessed with “tak-
ing the waters” for his frail constitution. When the minister’s
daughter died bearing their stillborn child, he married again, his “be-

--- Sayfa 361 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 355
loved esposa,” Anna Jackson, who, after his death, revealed that
whenever they were alone together the publicly awkward, nervous
man would grab her, kiss her, and twirl her round. They danced se-
cret polkas. He taught Sunday school.
This is the myth of the quiet man, a noble soul of no outward
distinction. “When it came to learning,” writes the Christian biogra-
pher J. Steven Wilkins, assessing his hero’s visible assets in All Things
for the Good, “everything was a challenge.” Wilkins continues: “He did
not have striking characteristics . . . He was gangly, uncoordinated,
and spoke in a  high-pitched voice . . .  He did not have a great per-
sonality.” Slow, homely, and squeaky; also, peculiar in his  posture—he
sat ramrod straight, he said, because he was afraid of squishing his
organs—and known by what friends he had for smiling lamely when
he guessed that someone was saying something funny. Then came the
war.
Jackson didn’t want it. Didn’t want slavery (but accepted it as
ordained of God and kept five slaves), didn’t want secession (but ac-
cepted it as the will of Virginia, “to which [his] sword belongs”),
didn’t want anything but quiet in which to consider his diet (a source
of deep fascination and increasing asceticism as the war grew closer)
and Scripture (he wished he’d been called by God to the ministry).
Instead, he was called to killing. “Draw the sword,” he told his stu-
dents, “and throw away the scabbard.”
Anxious about praying aloud in front of others, in battle, Jackson
would abandon the reins of his  horse to lift up his hands toward
heaven. In camp he led revivals and stumbled about as if blind, his
eyes shut as he talked to God. Under fire he shouted his prayers, im-
ploring God not for mercy but for the blood of his enemies. “He lives
by the New Testament and fights by the Old,” wrote a contemporary,
a standard to which the movement now aspires. “He had none of the
things held to be essential for leadership,” writes biographer Wilkins.
“All he had was a sincere fear of God.”
This, too, is the American myth of the quiet man, transformed
by crisis into a hero. This is the model for spiritual warfare American
fundamentalism wants to implement in every  house hold, each family

--- Sayfa 362 ---
356 | J E F F S H A R L E T
and every living room Bible study group discovering within itself
unexpected reserves of leadership and, as need arises, ferocity. Jack-
son’s troops thought he was literally invulnerable. His presence
among his men inspired them to fearlessness in battle. And yet Jack-
son was killed in 1863 by his own men, who mistook his return from
an unannounced scouting sortie as a  Union charge. This, too, is an
old story: felled within the walls. Our heroes are too great to be
killed by the enemy; only our own weaknesses can undo us. South-
ern dreamers say the Confederacy would have won, abolished slavery
peacefully, and established a true Christian nation had Jackson, “the
greatest Christian general in the history of this nation,” lived to con-
tinue outflanking the  Union army.
Of course, we would have won in Vietnam, too, if only we hadn’t
tied our own hands, and we’d win in Iraq, if only Democrats would
stop whining. Most of all, we—the believers—could finally build
that city upon a hill God promised the as-yet- unformed nation nearly
four centuries ago, if only we could submit to God. Jackson, note his
Christian biographers, saw this problem even before the war. “We
call ourselves a Christian people,” Jackson once wrote, but what he
considered the “extreme” doctrine of separation prevented the United
States from fulfilling its destiny.
Look at his wisdom! say his Christian biographers. “A gift from
God,” he would have demurred. Oh, the humility of this fallen hero,
cries American fundamentalism, always deep in conversation with its
mythic past, the model for a new struggle.
When William Federer and I reached the overgrown foundation
stones of Danbury Baptist, which sit on a grassy hill sprinkled with
pale violets, we gathered in a circle with an invitation-only crowd
of pastors and activists from around the country. The event’s orga-
niz er was Dave Daubenmire, a former high school football coach
from Ohio who’d done battle with the ACLU over his insistence on
praying with his players. Since then he’d launched a fundamentalist
ministry called Minutemen United, with which he was climbing

--- Sayfa 363 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 357
the ladder of the activist hierarchy.* Still a minor league outfi t, the
Minutemen had managed to wrangle some respectable B-list activ-
ists. Besides Federer, there was the Reverend Rob Schenck. Schenck
brought greetings from the Library of Congress’s chief of manu-
scripts, who, he said, had used “FBI classified technology” to dis-
cover previously unknown margin notes in Jefferson’s 1802 letter
proving his Christian intentions. There was the Patriot Pastor, a
giant man from New Hampshire who travels the country in a tri-
corne hat, black vest, frilly shirt, and leggings, lecturing on the
“Black Regiment,” the fighting pastors of the Revolutionary War.
“This is the manifest destiny of my life,” he told me. There was the
Reverend Flip Benham, head of Operation Save America, also
known as Operation Rescue. He was the man who baptized Norma
 McCorvey—Jane  Roe of Roe v. Wade—into fundamentalism. For
the rally, he was wearing vintage  white- and-brown wingtips, sym-
bols of his commitment to  pre-1947 America—1947 being the year
when the Supreme Court ruled according to Jefferson’s “wall of
separation” for the first time, in a case concerning government
funds for parochial schools.
Providential historians are divided on the question of whether it
was this decision, Everson v. Board of Education, or FDR’s socialistic
New Deal that led God to withdraw his protection from the nation.
Operation Save America’s number two, Pastor Rusty Thomas of
Waco, Texas, favors the less controversial New Deal school of
thought. God, Rusty told me, “always gave us a left hook of judg-
ment, then he gave us a right cross of revival.” But when the left
hook of the Great Depression came, goes the economic theory of
fundamentalism, Americans turned to government as their savior
instead of God. “So we got another left hook.” Kennedy’s assassina-
tion, he explained. Then another left hook: Vietnam. Still we didn’t
learn. So God kept throwing punches, said Rusty: crack, AIDS,
*The Minutemen United should not be confused with the  anti- immigrant Minutemen militias.
Coach Dave’s outfit is every bit as militaristic in its  rhetoric—one related ministry is called Pol-
ished  Shaft—but educational in its operations, offering, for instance, instruction in America’s
“godly heritage” for schoolteachers.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
358 | J E F F S H A R L E T
global warming, September 11, thousands of flag-draped coffi  ns
shipped home from Iraq and more on the way.
Rusty began the day’s preaching, pacing back and forth between
Danbury Baptist’s foundation stones. He looked like an exclamation
point—tiny feet in thin-soled black leather shoes, almost dwarfish
legs, and a powerful torso barely contained by a jacket of double-
breasted gray houndstooth. But he had one of the most nuanced
preaching voices I’ve ever heard, a soft rasp that seemed to come
straight from a broken heart. “We are  here to start a gentle revolu-
tion,” he whispered, “to reclaim the godly heritage.” He sounded sad,
for his sin and mine. We were all guilty of turning our backs on the
lessons of history. But then he growled up to a volume that made
even the  fl axen-haired pastor beside me literally blink before leaning
forward into Rusty’s thunder.
“And when you go to war in your land,” Rusty recited from the
Book of Numbers, “—and make no mistake about it, we are in a
war—”
Amen! hollered Reverend Flip.
“And when you go to war in your land,” continued Rusty, “against
an adversary who oppresses you”—and here he interrupted himself:
“How many besides me are vexed by what is happening in the United
States of America today?”
The crowd, shedding jackets and coats beneath a wan but warm
spring sun, murmured amen.
“Your soul is vexed,” Rusty moaned. Then he cried out, “We are
under oppression!”
“AMEN!” responded the crowd, amping up to match Rusty’s in-
creased volume. The bill of grievances was hard: “Are we not in
mourning?” Rusty asked, repeating the question and drawing it out
as the women among us closed their eyes and said, plain and simple,
yes. “Are we not in mournnnning?” he moaned. “As terrorism strikes
us from without, corruptions from within?” Yes, said the women, the
men seemingly shamed into silence. “How many know we’re losing
our children?” Yes. “Our marriages are failing!” YES.
Pastor Rusty, in fact, was a single father of ten, the youngest of

--- Sayfa 365 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 359
whom is named Torah. Liz, his wife of twenty years, had died a year
past from lymphoma, on the verge of what seemed like recovery.
Reverend Flip had chronicled online her long fight, a roller coaster of
remission and relapse, so that the family’s prayer partners—activists
and Christian radio listeners across the  country—could help fight for
her survival. “Good night for now, sweet sister,” Flip wrote when
they failed. “We’ll see you in the morning.”
Grief, not arrogance, translates the promise of salvation—“whoso-
ever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it”—into a battle cry. For
believers fortified by the providential past, all of history’s lessons
curdle into the tragedy of one’s own awful losses, and the anguish
that emerges is not singular but like that of a vast choir, a Christian
nation punished for sin and yet promised ultimate victory. Later that
afternoon, on the Danbury village green, Rusty would grip my arm
and pull me close, tears streaming from jay-blue eyes as he confessed
that he had betrayed God. He had neglected the twin sins fundamen-
talists believe to be the collective responsibility of the entire society
in which they occur. “Child sacrifice”—by which he meant
abortion—“and homosexual sodomy. Any nation that condoned
those behaviors? That did not challenge them, that did not prevent
them from happening? It will be reduced to rubble.”
He shook his head, eyes squeezed shut. The church had allowed
women to murder their children and men through sodomy to damn
themselves and all their brothers. It was his fault more than theirs
because he knew the “blueprint of God’s Word.” He had pored over
the Bible and the Constitution and the Mayflower Compact, had
memorized choice words from John Adams and John Witherspoon
and Patrick Henry, Jeremiah and Nehemiah and John the Revelator.
Scripture and American history are in agreement, he had found: be-
neath God, family, and church is the state, with only one simple re-
sponsibility: “The symbol of the state is a sword. Not a spoon, feeding
the poor, not a teaching instrument to educate our young.” Rusty
stepped back, fists clenching. “And the sword is an instrument of
death!” he yelled. He twitched his Italian loafers in a preacher two-
step. He shook out his neck like a boxer. Then sorrow slumped his

--- Sayfa 366 ---
360 | J E F F S H A R L E T
shoulders. He had failed to wield the sword. He had failed the wid-
ows and orphans. He had failed his brothers lost to sodomy. “There’s
nobody clean in this,” he whispered.
There is a mother church, Rusty preaches, and a father church, sepa-
rate but equal aspects of God. The mother church nurtures and holds
a child when he’s done wrong; the father church is the church of dis-
cipline. The mother church feeds the poor, comforts the dying, at-
tempting to remind nations of righteous behavior. But to Rusty the
lesson of American history, the lesson of Valley Forge and Shiloh,
Khe Sanh and Baghdad, Dallas 1963, Roe v. Wade 1973, Manhattan
2001, is clear: this nation is too far gone to be redeemed by mercy
alone. It is the father church’s turn.
“Then shall you sound an alarm with a trumpet that you may be
remembered before the Lord your God,” he preached on the hill at
Danbury, again quoting from the Book of Numbers, “and you
SHOUT”—he replaced the future tense of the biblical shall with his
own  present-tense  bellow—“to be saved from your enemy!” He
turned to the man standing behind him, a wiry, goateed musician in
a brown bomber jacket. “So, brother,” Rusty called, his voice now
joyful, “let it rip, potato chip!” At which the slender man blew his
horn.
The day’s appointed  born- again ba’al tokea, the “master of the blast,”
was named Lane Medcalf, and his instrument was a shofar, a Jewish
trumpet, a  three-foot-long spiral horn hewn from the head of a ram,
boiled clean of cartilage, polished to a high gleam. Generally reserved
for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, once upon a time its blast sig-
naled Joshua’s assault on Jericho, the first battle for the Promised
Land.
Medcalf had borrowed his shofar from his boss’s wife, also a
Christian. He was an artificial flavor compounder, less than a chem-
ist but more than a factory worker. He had been saved since he was a
teenager, but lately he had become engrossed in Jewish history. He
was slender and slight in the shoulders, cautious but earnest about

--- Sayfa 367 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 361
his words. Except for his pale blue eyes, he could have passed for a
rabbinical student on the lam from his studies, despite the fact that he
was fifty-three. If he’d grown up in Brooklyn instead of Minnesota,
he might have been called a luftmensch, Yiddish for a sweet soul who
seems a little lost.
But Medcalf wasn’t interested in Yiddish; he wanted to know
Hebrew. And he wasn’t contemplating conversion; he was simply go-
ing deeper into the past, in search of a truer Christianity, a faith
more raw. “We’ve lost our Judeo side,” he told me later. By this, he
meant fighting spirit. “The shofar was for warfare,” he explained.
“You know, alarm, in a battle situation. It’s still a weapon of warfare,
but for fighting demonic influence.” Medcalf ’s shofar blasts that day,
for instance,  were intended to travel through time and slay the invis-
ible demons that had once surrounded Supreme Court justice Hugo
Black, the author of the Everson v. Board of Education decision, in
1947.
“Hugo got a little skewed,” he told me. Black himself had not
been evil, Medcalf explained, just overwhelmed by Satan, who whis-
pered in his ear. “I was  told”—here Medcalf ’s voice dropped a
note—“that he was a former Ku Klux Klan member.” (This is true.
He was also a Protestant, and his decision was in keeping with that
period’s fundamentalist animus toward Catholic schools.) Medcalf
had also been told, he continued, that in the  mid-1950s there had
been another Supreme Court decision, he couldn’t remember the
name, that forced children to go to school where they didn’t want to
go. This also is technically true. Medcalf may have been referring to
Brown v. Board of Education, the 1954 decision that overturned offi  cial
school segregation, leading to busing and the formation of private,
 all- white evangelical academies.
It was Brown, along with two decisions in the early 1960s striking
down school prayer, that led to fundamentalism’s embrace of history
as a redeeming creed. They had a right to educate their children reli-
giously. Catholics already had a system for doing so. Fundamentalists
began to build one, and the bricks of its construction were the proof-
texts of an alternate Christian nation: the letters of John Jay, the first

--- Sayfa 368 ---
362 | J E F F S H A R L E T
chief justice of the Supreme Court, on the biblical justifications for
America’s wars; President James Garfield’s Gilded Age plea for more
Christians in high offices; even, eventually, the speeches of Martin
Luther King Jr., claimed now from megachurch pulpits across the
country as a martyr of fundamentalism. “All it takes is a  God-
intoxicated people,” they quote King, inaccurately and indiff erent to
context, “one generation, to alter the course of history from
then on.”11
Medcalf was part of the generation for whom King was a hero
rather than a villain. When he was a kid, his older brother joined a
Christian rock band, and when he played his guitar kids prayed out
loud, free form, with their hands in the air and their  whole bodies
swaying, and girls fl ocked to him. “I had never seen Christianity like
that before,” Medcalf remembered. He wanted to join the band. He
learned keyboards and the drums. “Suddenly, I could understand the
Bible. The Holy Spirit got up on me. Man!” “Church” was no longer
a place you went to; it was an experience you consumed, and you
wanted as much as you could get. You wore your jeans to worship
and grew your hair long. You called yourself a Jesus freak and you
called Jesus a revolutionary. You listened to groups like The Way and
Love Song and the All Saved Freak Band, and you read rags like Right
On! and The Fish and Hollywood Free Paper. “ ‘Truckin’ for Jesus,’ ”
Medcalf remembered. “Solid stuff , man.”
In 1972, he went to Dallas, for Campus Crusade’s “Explo”—
“Godstock” for the Jesus People.12 Eighty- five thousand Jesus freaks
packed the Cotton Bowl for a week straight of Christian rock and
preaching. When Billy Graham took the stage, all he could do was
smile with a hand outstretched in salute as the crowd screamed their
love for ten minutes solid. “It was awesome,” Medcalf said. “We
knew what he had done for us. He gave us the pure gospel.”
Medcalf suddenly looked sad. He blinked, as if holding back
tears. What had gone wrong?
“We sold ourselves,” he said, his voice nearly a whisper. He meant
it literally: albums and t-shirts, “bumper stickers.” Commercialism
killed Christian rock n’ roll. “We lost our teeth.” One year after

--- Sayfa 369 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 363
Explo, the Supreme Court handed down Roe v. Wade. “It happened on
our watch, man,” Medcalf said. The Jesus freaks had failed. They had
lived for today and forgotten tomorrow, and then it had slipped away
from them. To get it back, Medcalf said, the movement must go
backward. Not to the 1960s but to “before.” It needs a foundation, he
explained, eternal truths. These  were to be found in two places: the
Bible and the Constitution.
While we were talking, Reverend Flip had begun to preach. He told
the crowd about a recent victory he’d scored near Charlotte, North
Carolina, where he’d led seven hundred prayer warriors to a school
board meeting to protest the formation of a  Gay-Straight Alliance
club in a local high school. “The preachers preached, the singers
sang, the  pray-ers prayed, and the theology of the church became
biography in the streets!” Flip said. The school board shut down the
club—a deliberate bid, it had declared, to bring the issue before
the courts and get  gay-straight clubs outlawed everywhere. Flip said
this was what Jesus wanted. He even did an impression: “Cry to me,”
he said in his best bass God voice; the prayers of the righteous will be
answered.
Medcalf smiled and applauded gently. He told me how his prayers
had changed when he started studying history and blowing the sho-
far. “I was praying for God to restore America back to its roots one
day when I had what I guess you would call a supernatural experi-
ence. The Holy Spirit caused me to weep and cry, enabling me to
have a broken heart. ‘Please come back,’ I prayed. It was just so in-
tense.” It worked: “Things have started changing.” He said the ap-
pointments of Samuel Alito and John Roberts to the Supreme Court
were probably the result of God’s intervention. They may be the men
God was waiting for, the right tools for the job of restoration. They
may be under an anointing.
That’s the secret of Christian history. It doesn’t require great
men—Medcalf considered Bush’s 2000 election an “answer to prayer,”
but he was under no illusions about the president’s natural abilities—only
willing men, ready to be anointed. Bush was one; Medcalf was an-
other. Medcalf submitted to Bush’s authority according to

--- Sayfa 370 ---
364 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Romans 13—“the powers that be are ordained of God”—but both
submitted equally to God’s guiding hand. To Medcalf this resulted in a
democracy more radical than any dreamed of in the 1960s. In the flow
of secular time, Medcalf was a nebbish from Connecticut, mixing
beakers full of artificial flavors. But in Christian time, he was a herald,
blowing his shofar back to 1947, calling the key men of our Christian
nation’s history to battle.
After the rally in Danbury, I joined a group of about twenty pas-
tors, activists, and a few wives for a victory dinner. It really had felt
victorious; Pastor Rusty had worked the crowd into a high fever of
hallelujahs, and then all the pastors had joined hands in a circle at the
center for round robin prayer. The Reverend Jim Lilly, a white
hip-hop Assemblies of God preacher from a nearby town, led the
way, his neck heavy with cruciform bling and bobbing up and down
to the beat of his own exhortations, his smooth tenor gone gravelly:
“YES, LORD! PULL IT DOWN, LORD! PULL DOWN THAT
LIE!” He meant history as told absent the anointing of God. “KING
OF GLORY! COME IN! KING OF GLORY! MIGHTY IN BAT-
TLE! MANIFEST YOURSELF ON THIS LAND!” A pastor from a
Latino fundamentalist church in the Midwest grabbed the reins:
“Lord God, we pray for the restoration of the land!” Reverend Lilly
was overtaken by a fi t of what’s called holy laughter, a gift of the spirit
that’s like speaking in tongues. Medcalf got busy on his shofar, and
the  whole crowd decided to march seven times around the founda-
tion, just like Jericho, singing in unison an old gospel hymn, “Power in
the Blood,” There is pow’r, pow’r, wonder-workin’ pow’r, in—the—prec—
ious—blood—of—the—lamb!
Everyone was feeling pretty high at the dinner later that eve ning.
They dragged four long tables into a giant square on the second fl oor
of the restaurant, an Italian joint that doubled as the kind of comedy
club that brings in sidekicks from Howard Stern’s radio show. I sat
between the Patriot Pastor, still in costume, and Bill Federer, an ac-
cidental place of honor that seemed to make some of the event’s local

--- Sayfa 371 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 365
field organizers a little jealous. Across the table sat Pastor Rusty and
Reverend Flip. Flip threw his tie over his shoulder and leaned back in
his chair. The waitress, a handsome middle- aged woman named
Anna, looked crushed when she learned that the  whole group, out of
respect for the nondrinkers among them, would be sticking to iced
tea. Several of the men asked her where her accent was from. She
said she was  Polish- Rus sian, but when she came around to Flip, he
said, “Hola, Señorita,” and asked her where she was from. Anna
rolled her eyes. We ordered, most of us the buffet. Anna came back
to refi ll our iced tea. She tried to tally the orders, which the pastors
kept changing. “You ordered the buffet?” she asked Flip.
Flip took a toothpick from his mouth, fi xed her with a stare. He
owned the room. “I think I already had a buff et,” he said, pronounc-
ing the word as Buff y. “Now I’d like to try an Anna.”
Nobody missed a beat. The party went on.
I thought,  Here’s where it would be easiest to unravel the  whole
tapestry of fundamentalism. To dismiss it as rank hypocrisy, a bunch
of bullies cloaking their lusts, for sex or money or power, in piety.
But to do so would be to ignore the anointing. Flip doesn’t command
whatever small following he has in the movement because he’s a good
man but because he’s God’s chosen man. “God uses who he chooses,”
a North Carolina preacher once told me, the essence of John Calvin’s
dense theology of election boiled down to an advertising slogan. Flip
obeyed orders, and that made him a key man.
“Obedience is my greatest weapon,” Coach Dave told me after
dinner. He took off the ball cap he’d had made, blue black with a red
cross, and ran his hand through his white hair. In obedience, he said,
he found strength. Coach Dave was built like an old can of beans,
squat and solid with muscle except for a bulge in the middle. I imag-
ined him lecturing his former football team. Obedience, he contin-
ued, was a gift from God; but you needed the Holy Spirit to open it.
“The Holy Spirit is like the software,” he said.
He tried to explain. “We may need another 9/11,” he declared
slowly, a teacher reciting a lesson, “to bring about a full spiritual re-
vival.” He must have seen my surprise. “Now, you don’t get that, do

--- Sayfa 372 ---
366 | J E F F S H A R L E T
you?” I admitted that I did not. Well, he continued, history’s horrors
are just like God spanking a child. “That’s a perfect example of where
you need the software to understand what I just said, or else you’re
gonna say, ‘Coach, you mean he spanks us by killing people?’ You
need the software. What’s the software? Well, it’s history. You gotta
understand what history is. It’s collective. Are you getting the soft-
ware? Collective. History.”
Now I got it. Fundamentalism blends the concept of a God in-
volved in our daily affairs with the Enlightenment’s rationalization of
that deity as a broader, more vague “common good.” The fundamen-
talist God is first and foremost  all-powerful, his divinity defined by
his authority; the “common good” is  all-inclusive, its legitimacy es-
tablished by democracy. Fundamentalism, as a theology, as a “world-
view,” wants both: the power and the legitimacy, divine will and
democracy, one and the same. As theology, such confusion may be
resolved with resort to miracles, but as politics, it is broken logic, a
story that defeats itself. Why, then, does it prosper?
Secularists like to point out that many of the Founders  were not,
in fact, Christian but rather Deists or downright unbelievers. Funda-
mentalists respond by trotting out the Founders’ most pious words,
of which there are many (Franklin proposing prayer at the Constitu-
tional Convention; Washington thanking God for His direct hand in
revolutionary victories; etc.,  etc.). Secularists shoot back with the
founders’ Enlightenment writings and note their dependence on John
Locke; fundamentalists respond that Locke helped South Carolina
write a baldly theocratic constitution. Round and round it goes, a
lucrative subgenre of popular history, “founder porn,” that results in
spasms of righteous ecstasy—secular as well as fundamentalist—
over the mystical authority of origins.
But fundamentalist historians can also point, accurately, to the
subsequent instances of overlooked religious influence in American
history: not just Sergeant York’s Christian trigger finger and Stone-
wall Jackson’s tragic example, but also the religious roots of aboli-
tionism, the divine justification used to convert or kill Native
Americans, the violent pietism of presidents: not just Bush and

--- Sayfa 373 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 367
Reagan, but also Lincoln and McKinley and Wilson and even sweet
Jimmy Carter, the first  born- again president, led by God and Zbig-
niew Brzezinski to funnel anticommunist dollars to El Salvador, the
most murderous regime in the hemi sphere. Historians enmeshed in
the assumptions of Enlightenment rationalism naturally seek rational
explanations for events, and in so doing tend to deemphasize the
religious beliefs of historical actors. Fundamentalist historians go
straight to those beliefs; as a result, they really do see a history
missed by most secular observers.
Fundamentalism embraces its mythic past; secular liberalism de-
clares its own myth simply a matter of record. Liberalism proposes
in place of nationalist epic a “demystified” state based on reason. And
yet the imagination with which we, the levelheaded masses, view the
“demigod” Founders and the Civil War, the Good Fight against Hit-
ler, and the American tragedy of Vietnam (the tragedy is always ours
alone) is almost as deeply mystical as that of fundamentalism’s, thick-
ened by “destiny,” blind to all that which does not square with the
story we tell ourselves about who we are as a nation. There are oc-
casional attempts at recovering these  near-invisible pieces, “people’s
history” and national apologies and HBO specials about embarrassing
missteps in the march of progress, usually related to race and inevita-
bly restored to forward motion by the courage of some “key man” of
liberalism, Jackie Robinson at first base, 1947, Rosa Parks on the
bus, 1955, Muhammad Ali refusing to fight in Vietnam, 1966. But
such interventions are not so different from fundamentalism’s addi-
tion of Martin Luther King to its pantheon; they are attempts to
convince ourselves that the big We of nationalism was better than the
little people of history actually were.
Likewise our attempts to shunt fundamentalists into the outer
circle of kooks and haters and losers and  left- behinds, undemocratic
dimwits who do not understand the story the rest of us have agreed
to live by. Our refusal to recognize the theocratic strand running
throughout American history is as self-deceiving as fundamentalism’s
insistence that the United States was created a Christian nation.
The actual past no more serves the secular imagination than that

--- Sayfa 374 ---
368 | J E F F S H A R L E T
of fundamentalism. While fundamentalism projects providence onto
the past, secularism seeks to account for history with tools of ratio-
nalism. But history cannot be demystified; it is dependent as much on
mystery—that which we recognize we cannot know about the
past—as on the rationally understood. If we believe the aphorisms of
literature—“The past isn’t dead, it’s not even past,” and “The past is
a foreign  country”—then we believe in mystic history. We are not so
secular after all. Fundamentalism knows this, and that is why, for
now at least, those  we’ve misunderstood as the dupes, the saps, and
the  fools—the  believers—prefer its reenchanted past, alive to the
dark magic with which all histories are constructed, to the demysti-
fi ed state’s blind certainty that it is history’s victor.
Most of us outside the influence of fundamentalism ask, when
confronted with its burgeoning power, “What do these people want?
What are they going to do?” But the more relevant question is, “What
have they already done?” Consider the accomplishments of the move-
ment, its populist and its elite branches combined: foreign policy on
a near-constant footing of Manichean urgency for the last hundred
years; “free markets” imprinted on the American mind as some sort
of natural law; a  manic-depressive sexuality that puzzles both prudes
and libertines throughout the rest of the world; and a schizophrenic
sense of democracy as founded on individual rights and yet indebted
to a higher authority that trumps personal liberties.
Run that through Coach’s software; look through a glass darkly.
This, then, is what American fundamentalism understands democ-
racy to mean, this is what it understands as “freedom of religion”: the
freedom to conform, to submit, to become one with the “biblical
worldview,” the “theocentric” parable, the story that swallows all
others like a black hole. Within it time loops around, past becomes
present, and the future is nothing but a matter of return. Not to the
Garden but to the Mayfl ower, the Constitution, or Stonewall Jackson’s
last battle, moments of American purity, glimpses of the Camelot
that haunts every nationalist imagination, fundamentalist or secular.
History is God’s love, its meanings revealed to his key men, presi-
dents and generals, preachers and a schlemiel with a shofar. As for

--- Sayfa 375 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 369
the rest of us, we are simply not part of the dream. Fundamentalism
is writing us out of history.
“What is to be done?” the unbelievers ask. Oh, it’s simple: think
up a better story, a creation myth that is as rich as American funda-
mentalism’s. We cannot just counter fundamentalism’s key men
with our own; nor can we simply switch out the celebratory model
of history for an entirely grim chronicle of horrors. Rather, we must
continue to revisit the history of American fundamentalism—which
is to say, we must reconsider the story we speak of when we say
“America.”

--- Sayfa 376 ---
14.
T H I S I S N O T T H E E N D
1. Suffering
She was as pretty as any  nineteen-year-old girl thinned down to near
nothing. Hair smooth and blonde, eyes big and blue, and her lips,
pale red on white skin,  were quivering. She stood between me and
the door to the bar in which she’d just struck out at begging change
from the last round of drinkers. She carried a piece of cardboard, the
sum of her life to date scrawled with black marker in a hand too
shaky to read. So she put it to a sort of song, a practiced routine she
chanted with artificial sadness while something real inside actually
broke down. “Mister, I just got to Portland, I got nowhere to go.
They won’t give me my TB card and, you know, so . . . I need
money for a shelter, I slept under a bridge. Mister, I just got to Port-
land, I’m scared, I need somewhere to go.”
I scrounged in my pocket and came up with a thin wad of twen-
ties and small bills; I peeled off two singles and gave them to her.
“Thank you, Mister,” she said.
I said, “Good luck.” She began weeping. “Good luck,” I said again.
“Thank you.”
“I have to go,” I said.
“Thank you.” She turned and went out the door; as it swung shut
behind her, she doubled over, sobbing.
I gave her a minute to gain some ground, and then I left, too. She

--- Sayfa 377 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 371
was halfway up the block. I went to my rental car and took my bags
out of the trunk. I was staying in a room above the bar, in Portland
searching out the Family’s early days in archives and at addresses long
since given over to purposes other than Abram Vereide’s or Doug
Coe’s. I hadn’t found a trace. I was killing time.
The girl spotted me rolling my suitcase across the parking lot.
She approached as if I might hit her. The yellow streetlight made her
face look as if it had color; she was even prettier than she’d been in-
side. “Mister,” she said, “I just got to Portland, I got nowhere to
go . . .” Word for word the same song.
I stared at her. “I’m sorry. I just helped you inside.”
“Oh,” she said. “I’m sorry, too.”
“I wish I could help more.”
“Uh- huh.”
“What’s a TB card?”
“For a test,” she said. “They got no reason not to give it to me.”
She began crying again, her tears leaving trails of streetlight
glimmer on her cheeks.
“Good luck,” I said.
If I was a believer, I would have said, “God bless you.” If I  wasn’t a
believer, I should have said, “God bless you.” Either way, it would
have cost me nothing and would have been so much less hopeless than
wishing “good luck” to a woman who was not likely to have any. Such
is the dilemma of the American city upon a hill with which I began
this book, and the problem of fundamentalism’s myths versus those
of liberalism with which I closed the last chapter. Both are systems of
knowing, of believing, of absorbing citizens into what Doug Coe
calls the “social order.” They are not means of “changing the world”
but of reconciling  us—the believers and the  unbelievers—to its or-
dinary suffering.
If I was a believer, I might think my blessing would matter; if I
wasn’t, I’d know it would sound good and that it would not matter.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
372 | J E F F S H A R L E T
But I said, “Good luck,” and the woman bent over crying again, and I
left her like that, weeping on the street, and I went up to my room
thinking of Christians and of “followers of Christ,” of the Family’s
“heart for the poor.” I was thinking, too, that I should go back and
offer the woman a place to stay; of giving her a bed to sleep in, and
how I  wouldn’t put any moves on her, and she would appreciate that,
and she’d make me some kind of off er, and I’d decline, and I’d be a
real hero. I was thinking, too, of tuberculosis, and of the cramped,
airless rooms above the bar, and the germs swirling around me as I
drifted off, her microscopic gratitude serving as a different kind of
communion.
And I thought of the morning, of waking up with no money.
How would she get it? She  couldn’t sneak away without waking
me. Maybe she had a knife. I imagined bringing her to the room and
her big eyes turning mean and her lips and teeth snarling like she was
a raccoon in a corner, her  bone- and-skin hand swiping my money and
her backing away with her knife ready for my gut should I make a
wrong gesture.
That wouldn’t have happened. There would have been no knife,
and, for that matter, I’m guessing  here, she would have said no if I’d
offered to share my room with her. She needed something, but it
wasn’t a bed. I don’t know what it was, whether it came in a pill or a
pipe or a needle.
I asked myself, What would a believer do?
I was thinking about some believers whom I’d met earlier in the
eve ning, a  house church of a half dozen young families and a few
single men and women who met every Sunday night in the living
room of a couple named Adam and Christie Parent. I’d joined them
because a false lead had suggested that theirs was a church that func-
tions as a feeder to  Ivanwald—I’d come across several around the
country—but the connection turned out to be no deeper than one
young man nobody knew well. Still, I stuck around, because what
the Parents  were doing—church in their living room, “small groups,”
discussions of “accountability” that denied personal responsibility—
seemed to merge the methods of elite fundamentalism with the

--- Sayfa 379 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 373
passions of the populists. I told them I was writing a book about reli-
gion in America; they welcomed me, I think, because they know
they’re its future.
Adam and Christie have three kids, two little boys and a girl, and
they live in a handsome old box of a  house with a real yard, in east
Portland, just off the campus of Multnomah Bible College. Adam is
starting his fourth year there. He is  twenty- seven, tall, wide, and
square in the shoulders. He grew up in San Diego and as a teenager
wandered up to rural Washington, where he worked as a youth pas-
tor until he decided to go back to school. He wears a small brown soul
patch just beneath his lip and dresses like the frat boy he never was—
loose plaid shirt, matching light blue ball cap—and he talks like a
former surfer who has left the waves behind. He cracks smiles like
they were flip tops on a  six-pack, but he has developed a habit com-
mon to preachers and salesmen, of holding your eyes with his and
transmitting sincerity. That it is real makes it no less disconcerting.
His wife, Christie, is short and strawberry blonde, all buttery
cheeks and bouncy energy. But at twenty-nine she’s one of the oldest
in the group, and she talks with the authority befitting a young mother
with more kids than any other couple in the “home community” has
managed. When it came time to take all the children upstairs, Chris-
tie summoned a helper and herded them past Adam’s golf clubs and
his acoustic guitar, leaving the rest of us sitting on couches and
cross-legged on the floor, in a big circle, waiting for Adam to tell us
what we’ll be discussing. First, a prayer: studded with justs: “I just
want to thank You”; “I just, just really love You”; “I just pray and hope
You show up tonight.”
When I first heard the many justs of prayer at Ivanwald, I thought
it was a southern thing. But  here was a room of northwesterners and
transplanted midwesterners and one Californian, and when I peeked
during the prayer, I saw their heads nodding on the just like they
were counting rhythm. Shirley Mullen, a religious historian and pro-
vost at Westmont College when I spoke with her in 2004, told me
she had noticed the rise of just in evangelical prayer over the last
twenty years. “It is a claim to innocence,” she said. “A disqualifier.”

--- Sayfa 380 ---
374 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Just is, in its ubiquity, a word central to the  self-effacing desire for
influence that has driven those evangelicals who stud their prayers
with it out of their churches and into “the culture,” a word they use
to refer to something that is to be wrestled with and defeated. It’s a
word that hides its own hunger.
“Just use us, Lord, just use us, please,” Adam concluded his
prayer. They’d been brought together by a shared belief in the awe-
some power of God, “awesome” the way a skater might say it, “power”
as an absolute, a totality. They wanted and believed they were called
to be in the presence of that power, but to approach it in pride would
be meaningless, and they were very keen on meaning. So they pref-
aced speculation about God and the nature of His power with just,
as if by claiming their needs  were simple they could slip beneath the
radar God used to detect unseemly want. All they wanted, after all,
was just to be used.
At Adam’s direction, the group broke up into smaller groups
of three and four and proceeded to work through a series of ques-
tions devised by Adam and the leaders of eleven other like-minded
home churches, all part of something called the Imago Dei Commu-
nity. Imago Dei is an odd mix of progressive evangelicalism and fun-
damentalism, a church that rejects the idea of “church”; its “vision”
promises, instead, community and Jesus, stripped not so much of cul-
tural accretion as of everything boring and  less-than-intense about
traditional church services. They do hold a Sunday morning service,
but at the pulpit an artist, who paints or draws or sculpts the Gospel
as directed by God, accompanies the preacher. They believe God is
present, as in here, now. “Interventionist,” as some theologians would
describe their conception of the deity, is too wonky a word for the
Jesus they believe is simultaneously sitting right next to them and pos-
sessing them, guiding every breath, every thought, every flicker of
their eyes. They believe in sin but don’t much care; they prefer love
and discuss it often. Love is the word they use most frequently to evoke
how completely in the control of Jesus they find themselves. Adam’s
home church group had instituted a collective prayer journal, a black
hardcover notebook in which each member was to write, on one side

--- Sayfa 381 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 375
of the page, his or her prayer requests; and, on the other, the date and
time Jesus answered them. “We forget what God does in our lives,”
Adam explained. “We need to remind each other.”
In the small groups, they planned to spend that eve ning remind-
ing each other of what Truth is. The Truth they were talking about
was the kind that comes with a capital T, and it was essential, Adam
had written on the top of the worksheet, to “set us free from the de-
structive nature of life and the world.”
Then followed the chief question: What is Truth?
I joined a group of three sitting on the carpet beside the stairs:
Matt, a reedy Multnomah Bible philosophy student with presence
greater than his age, who acted as group leader; Sara, a  long-legged,
long- armed, long-necked woman, given to elaborate stretching, who
worked in standardized testing; and Ben, a resident at a nearby hos-
pital. Ben lay down in front of the screen door. Across the street be-
hind him an orange and blue sign grew in the garden of each yard,
declaring: one man / one woman. vote YES on Prop 36—a
state initiative to ban even the possibility of proposing gay marriage.
“What is Truth?” Matt asked.
Sara jumped right in. “A lot of people say there is no Truth, but
my problem with that is that it’s an absolute itself.”
“Right,” said Ben. “It’s  self-contradictory.”
“But we’re here,” Sara continued. “So there has to be some
Truth.”
Matt volunteered that one of his Multnomah Bible professors had
brought in a woman who didn’t believe in Truth. The class had chal-
lenged her by demanding that she admit that the attacks of Septem-
ber 11 had been wrong. But she  wouldn’t give. Right and wrong, she
said,  weren’t categories she found useful; she was more interested in
learning about what she, we, anyone could do better. It was as con-
cise a definition of liberalism’s strengths—and central weaknesses—as
she could have given them.
Sara put a hand over her right eye, holding her head and shaking it
at the same time. “I wonder how her opinion would change if some-
one near to her was martyred. Or raped!”

--- Sayfa 382 ---
376 | J E F F S H A R L E T
Matt said he had heard such people believe in what they call
“pragmatism,” which means, he explained, that you believe whatever
happens to be useful at the moment.
“But some things never change!” Sara said.
“I know,” Matt agreed. “But they deny that.” He had learned
about pragmatism, he added, in an education class; pragmatism, he’d
been told, was infecting public schools. Matt hadn’t heard of John
Dewey, the early  twentieth-century reformer who’d introduced the
philosophical school of pragmatism into American education in the
form of an emphasis on critical thinking rather than memorization.
But the ideas of Tim LaHaye, who writes that Dewey was part of a
prideful conspiracy to undermine Truth, had infused his lessons at
Multnomah Bible College.
Sara wove her fingers together and twisted her hands backward
and stretched them out in front of her, then arched her back and
leaned forward, her shirt riding up her spine; Ben and Matt,  red-faced,
averted their eyes. “What Truth does,” Sara said, “is: Truth names
things.” She  rose up out of her stretch and pointed between Matt and
Ben. “Truth puts a value on things. The culture tries to portray a
Truth, like with women.” She didn’t like the pressure put on women to
be thin and beautiful, she explained. Either you are or you aren’t, she
felt, and the culture shouldn’t tell you differently. “That’s the culture
trying to name us,” she said. “We want God to name us.”
“Yeah,” agreed Ben. “Science”—it seemed to be his word for
what Sara called “the culture”—“gives you at best fragmentary truth.
It doesn’t try to unify things.”
They concluded the small group with a scripture study, looking
for evidence of Truth, and then everyone reassembled in the living
room, where Adam asked each group to announce their results. He
reminded everyone to stay centered on Jesus and scripture. “Don’t
get too caught up in the huge concepts.”
Truth did a lot of things, the groups had discovered: sets you
free, protects you from lies, exposes deception, gives you a solid
foundation. Truth’s solidity was key to Adam’s closing sermon. He

--- Sayfa 383 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 377
sat in a chair in the corner and punctuated his remarks with both
hands curled like commas and slicing downward.
“The postmodern culture, they lay aside Truth. It can be hard
to interact with them. They say, ‘I don’t care about the Bible; it’s
just a book of words.’ ” Adam shook his head. “But I don’t want a
shifty foundation. God gave us His Word! I am so thankful I have
that, because it’s easy to get sucked in by the culture. We want a
solid foundation. Christ is a solid foundation. I was looking at my
Bible today. Christ says  seventy-eight times, ‘I tell you the Truth.’
That is a lot of times. The culture then was similar to ours now;
they were questioning the Truth.” Adam didn’t mean good question-
ing. “So Christ told them ‘I tell you the Truth.’ That’s awesome.
He did that for them so they’d know he wasn’t just some guy. No
way. He said, ‘I tell you the truth.’ I was getting stoked looking at
that because I have a solid foundation. I’m protected. Unbelievers
think there is no absolute Truth. They trust feelings and experi-
ence. The power of Truth is lost to them. But we don’t have to
change our conception of Truth for the culture, because it’s abso-
lute. Its power is absolute.”
I thought of a book by Art Lindsley, a fundamentalist writer who
would stop in at Ivanwald from time to time to teach the young men
about “character” and politics. A slim volume called True Truth: De-
fending Absolute Truth in a Relativistic World was Lindsley’s most popular
work among the brothers, who took its tautological butchery of lan-
guage for a closed circuit of power and wisdom. This ultrarigid intel-
lectualization of “Truth” is the doctrine that merges elite and populist
fundamentalism. The elite fundamentalism of the Family preaches
its unbending concept of “Truth” as a defense of privilege; populist
fundamentalism embraces these philosophical underpinnings as a
response to suffering. Many of the men and women in the Parents’
living room, in fact,  were employed as social workers or nurses; sev-
eral were former activists, some of them even once radical leftists.
They were good-hearted folk. They wanted to help the poor, the sick,
the weak, and on small, everyday levels, they did so more than most

--- Sayfa 384 ---
378 | J E F F S H A R L E T
do; and yet nothing seemed to get better. Their commitment to this
stern Truth enabled them to let go of the feelings of powerlessness
that often afflict those whose hearts are largest. Indeed, many of
them had so let go of power that they’d lost their politics, too. For-
mer liberals had stopped voting; conservatives trusted giant evan-
gelical organizations to make the best use of their small donations, a
form of “big government” by another name. Their Truth had proven
itself relative, emboldening the powerful and tranquilizing the pow-
erless.
Adam continued. They all knew, he said, that a couple of weeks
ago the mentor of Imago Dei’s pastor had been shot. The details
didn’t matter; he had been shot. “Well, if you don’t believe in absolute
Truth, what do you do with that? What’s your foundation?” True
Truth makes such losses bearable. It absolves you of the need to ask
more questions. True Truth is God’s will, Coe’s “social order.” It’s
the power and solace of submission.
We bowed our heads in prayer. We prayed for friends and rela-
tives with cancer, just that they might know God, and that if God
wanted to heal them that he would, but just, please God, let them
know you. And we prayed for me, for my book, that it just be a good
book, a True book, one by which I’d come to know what I had been
created for.
And—just—amen.
Later that night, I thought about Truth and the junkie, what she
wanted and what she needed, and what a believer might have done. I
couldn’t come up with answers, and I knew it wouldn’t help to ask
Adam. Because even if there is a Truth, what we would have done in a
given situation is always subjective. But I’m pretty sure Adam would
have prayed for her salvation, and I  wouldn’t have been surprised if he
had taken her by the arm and guided her to a shelter. Nor would I
have been shocked if he had given her a blessing and a sad,  half-mouthed
smile and sent her packing. In either case, what would be the Truth
of the matter?

--- Sayfa 385 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 379
I checked into my room, a tiny box with a window looking out
on an air shaft and a skylight above the bed revealing the dark purple
night. The room was stuffy, so I turned on its rotating table fan and lay
on top of the covers. “Everything is connected,” Ben the doctor had
told me at the  house church. “Everything is Jesus. It’s like a web, and
He’s at the  center”—where otherwise you’d find a spider.
2. Salvation
In 2007, as this book neared completion, I met with a former special
assistant to President Bush the younger named David Kuo, in a quiet
office he’d rented outside of Washington to write his memoirs. He’d
published a book called Tempting Faith: The Inside Story of a Political
Seduction, in which he recounts his own journey from liberalism to
fundamentalism and, after a fashion, back again. Kuo is a tall,  big-
boned man with spiky black hair and a pleasantly padded face given
to loose smiles. His demeanor is naive, but by his own account he can
be calculating; yet he doesn’t seem to want to deceive.
As a student at Tufts University in the 1980s, Kuo found the
Family. Or rather, they found him. He was bright, political, and
moving rightward, from a girlfriend’s abortion to antiabortion activ-
ism. A man named Kevin, who “worked with” student Christians on
elite campuses, fed him books by conservative Christian writers and
took him to go hear Chuck Colson speak. “I was dazzled,” writes Kuo.
“If I followed Jesus, helped others follow Jesus, and did it all publicly,
I’d be fighting back against the secularizing forces that were sweep-
ing God into the corner.” Kuo has always been a  service-minded soul.
He wanted to  help—as a young man, he didn’t think too much about
what he wanted to  help—and he wanted to do so on a grand scale.
Before he graduated, Kevin gave him a “political gift”: an invita-
tion to the National Prayer Breakfast, where he’d be one of “150
student leaders” initiated into “the mysterious—some thought
secretive—group behind the prayer breakfast.” It was, he’d learn,
“the most powerful group in Washington that nobody knows.” At a

--- Sayfa 386 ---
380 | J E F F S H A R L E T
session with Doug Coe after the official event, he learned that “Jesus
the man” is more important than politics, that faith must be individ-
ual, that Jesus chose certain individuals to whom to reveal greater
secrets. “The three within the twelve,” Coe called them—Peter,
James, and John, the three disciples who, according to Coe’s teach-
ing, Jesus took aside for “glimpses of his power” and “special instruc-
tion.” That was a “model,” Coe taught, “of intimate relationships”
followed by only a few very clever leaders. “[Coe] pointed to Hitler,
to Stalin, to Mao, to Castro.” Evil men, said Coe, but wise. “Do you
want to prove your worth?” Coe asked Kuo and the other students
selected for special instruction. “Then pursue Jesus, pursue real rela-
tionships. Forget about power.”
It was like the note Abram wrote to himself in 1935, his scrib-
bled list of delegated authority for his new movement: To this man
went responsibility for organization, to that one finances. And beside
his own name, he’d written “power”—and then crossed himself out,
erasing the evidence of his desire.
Kuo began to rise in politics. An intern for Ted Kennedy in col-
lege, he became a Republican, working in the orbit of Family men
such as Jack Kemp and John Ashcroft. He tried to strike out on his
own—and failed. Coe took him up as a project. “Without my real-
izing it, the  Fellowship”—as he prefers to call the  Family—“began
subverting my ideas of power, and, more specifically, of Christian
power.” Coe took Kuo fi shing in Montana, with Supreme Court Jus-
tice Sandra Day O’Connor. He introduced him to Billy Graham and
Bill Bright of Campus Crusade, to Democrats and Republicans.
Through the Family, he met former vice president Dan Quayle. In
1996, Quayle arranged for his conservative backers to support a non-
profit Kuo had created to evaluate groups doing “effective” poverty
work and channel more money their  way—an experience Kuo would
draw on when the grand experiment in “faith- based initiatives” to
which he’d been contributing went federal in 2001.
In the first months of the new Bush administration, John DiIulio,
the Democrat Bush had tapped to sell his  faith- based program, called
to invite Kuo to move into the West Wing. “Karen Hughes is on

--- Sayfa 387 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 381
board, Karl Rove is on board,” he told Kuo. “When can you start?”
Faith- Based and Community Initiatives merged DiIulio’s old-
school urban politics, rooted in Catholic social justice teachings,
with the ideas long championed by the Family. Its chief advocates in
Congress during the late 1990s  were two Family members, Senator
Dan Coats of Indiana and Ashcroft, who as a senator from Missouri
inserted the concept of “charitable choice”—allowing religious
groups to win government funding without separating out their reli-
gious  agenda—into the 1996 welfare-reform bill. The theory behind
faith- based initiatives grew out of the work of scholars and theolo-
gians schooled in traditions that could hardly be considered funda-
mentalist, or even conservative. But its implementation was in many
senses the logical result of the Family’s decades of ministry to Wash-
ington’s elite combined with the increasingly established power of
populist fundamentalism: a mix of sophisticated policy maneuvers
and the kind of sentimentalism that blinded many supporters to the
fact that faith- based initiatives, no matter how well intended, are
nothing less than “the privatization of welfare,” as the  faith- based
theorist Marvin Olasky put it in a 1996 report commissioned by
then-Governor Bush. Such an outcome satisfied elite fundamental-
ism’s long- standing belief in the relationship between  laissez-faire
economics and God’s invisible, interventionist hand, and populist
fundamentalism’s desire for public expressions of faith, preferably
heartwarming ones. The goal, Senator Coats declared, was the “trans-
fer of resources and authority . . . to those private and religious in-
stitutions that shape, direct, and reclaim individual lives.”1
Coats, a bulb so dim he considers Dan Quayle a mentor, isn’t
much of a thinker on his own, but he couldn’t have summed up
Abram’s original Idea any more succinctly. The Family’s interests
have always tended toward foreign affairs, but  faith- based initiatives
embody a core philosophy of governance fundamentalists have long
sought on every front. During the 1980s, Attorney General Ed
Meese and Gary Bauer, Reagan’s domestic policy adviser, corre-
sponded with Coe about creating a federal, faith- based response to
poverty—a broad application of the methods Coe had experimented

--- Sayfa 388 ---
382 | J E F F S H A R L E T
with a decade earlier by backing the Black Buffers as an alternative
to black power. Meese’s plans never came to fruition, but the out-
lines of compassionate conservatism, as Olasky would describe the
trickle-down approach to helping the poor, began to cohere in those
letters.
What is the cause of poverty? they asked themselves. Their an-
swer was simple: “disobedience,” according to a special report com-
missioned by the Family. At the right end of the Family spectrum, this
was interpreted according to the logic of just deserts (Bauer, for in-
stance, seemed to believe AIDS was a punishment from God) or plain
denial (in 1983, Meese said he had a hard time believing there actually
were any hungry children in the United States). But both those posi-
tions eroded as the Family’s international realpolitik asserted itself
domestically: the poor existed, and they had to be helped. Or recon-
ciled, in the Family’s words. The goal was not the eradication of pov-
erty; it was the maintenance of a social order through the salvation of
souls. That’s always been the main agenda of populist fundamental-
ism; now, elite fundamentalism began to embrace it as well.
But that’s not what Kuo cared about when he went to work in
the West Wing. Kuo’s religion was as infused with liberal Christi-
anity as it was with the  obedience- based theology of the Family.
For that matter,  faith- based initiatives are as liberal as they are
fundamentalist, their privatization of social services an exercise
of the unstated conviction of classical liberalism that the free market
is absolute and yet requires government subsidy. They are to religion
what Clinton-era “free trade” deals  were to labor: a “rationalization”
in the name of “effi  ciency.” Both turn on a contradiction: a belief in
a universal  principle—faith, free  markets—put into practice by de-
nying the importance of universal principles. “That we hoped every-
one would one day know Jesus was simply a private goal,” writes
Kuo, even as he insists that one’s “worldview” informs one’s every
action.
That’s why supporters of faith-based governance can’t comprehend
the critics who accuse them of theocratic inclinations. They think
they’re going in just the opposite direction, secularizing  salvation,

--- Sayfa 389 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 383
 reconciling theology into law. Theocracy is a collective endeavor,
they point out; American fundamentalism reveres the individual.
So, too, the mystic liberalism of free markets, more similar to
fundamentalism in function than secularists believe. Classical
liberalism fetishizes the rational actor; fundamentalism savors the
individual soul. Both deny possessing any ideology; both inevitably
become vehicles for the kind of power that possesses and consumes
the best intentions of true believers.
When Kuo discovered that Bush’s faith- based rhetoric was for
the most part just that—lost in the shadow of the Iraq War, the pro-
gram never received anywhere near the $8 billion Bush had once
spoken  of—he resolved to prove its value to the money men. Tempt-
ing Faith is, most damningly, the story of how he and a few others
transformed the Office of Faith- Based Initiatives into the very Re-
publican vote-getting machine its critics had accused it of being from
the beginning. “We laid out a plan whereby we would hold ‘roundtable
events’ for threatened incumbents with faith and community lead-
ers,” he writes. In 2002, those roundtables contributed to nineteen
out of twenty victories in targeted races. In 2004, the Offi  ce of
Faith- Based Initiatives repeated the trick on the presidential scale.
But by that time, Kuo was gone. He had quit. “We  were good people
forced to run a sad charade, to provide political cover to a White
House that needed compassion and religion as political tools.”
It was a startlingly honest admission. The media celebrated Kuo
as a truth teller and his book as the first big crack in the Christian
Right’s alliance with the Republican Party. By 2007, the press was
declaring the Christian Right dead and evangelicalism a waning force
in American life, despite the fact that by Kuo’s own confession, the
machine he helped build will likely continue to lurch along after
Bush is gone. Bush never provided it the funds he had promised in
idealistic speeches aimed at evangelical voters, but he did something
more significant: through administrative changes made by executive
order, he transformed Clinton’s 1996 welfare reforms into a wedge
with which to drive irreparable cracks into the wall of separation
between church and state. Suddenly, there  were faith- based offi  ces

--- Sayfa 390 ---
384 | J E F F S H A R L E T
not just in the Department of Health and Human Services but also in
the Department of Justice, not only in the Department of Education but
also in the Department of Commerce. The Small Business Adminis-
tration gained a  faith- based office; so, too, did the Agency for Inter-
national Development, through which the United States distributes
its imperial largesse, the diplomacy of foreign aid. None of these of-
fices had much money, but then, they didn’t need to. Their bud gets
didn’t matter so much as the bud gets of the departments and agencies
in which they were housed, huge portions of which could now be
tapped for  faith- based ends even if the money didn’t flow directly
through the  faith- based office. The real achievement of faith- based
initiatives was not to launch fl ashy programs or even to buy votes for
Republicans; it was to open the door for religious groups to the  whole
trea sure house of federal  social-services funding, tens of billions of
dollars.
But that, too, was only a means to an end: Abram’s Idea written
into the DNA of the government of a world power, Chuck Colson’s
“worldview” fused with constitutional tradition. The dream, harden-
ing now not into politics but the very structures in which politics
happen, is the sanctification and privatization of power as one and
the same pro cess, proclaimed as “service” by the powerful and ac-
cepted as God’s will by the powerless.
This is no more nor less than a theological restatement of
globalization—a transfer of wealth and power embraced by most
Democrats as well as Republicans as a natural “fact,” as if divinely
ordained. The difference between the two parties, economically,
theologically, is one of degrees, not principles. “The United States is
also a one-party state,” Julius Nyerere, the first president of Tanzania,
once observed in defending his own  one-party system. “But with
typical American extravagance, they have two of them.” That was a
truth Abram grasped seven decades ago. The first law of the Family’s
elite fundamentalism is that power does not require partisanship.
“True Truth,” transcending traditional left and right, is a doctrine of
obedience, not a bill of particulars.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 385
Bush’s mistake—the misapplication of power that cost him the
loyalty of men such as Kuo and even John Ashcroft, who emerged as
a late critic of the  administration—was to bend the “True Truth” of
American fundamentalism to the needs of the electoral cycle. The
slow convergence of the elite and populist fundamentalism separated
at the Scopes trial in 1925 doesn’t promise the permanent victory of
a political party but of a social order, served with greater or lesser
devotion by Republicans and Democrats bound together in prayer
cells.
After Kuo and I had been talking for several hours, I mentioned
that I’d written about the Family for Harper’s. Kuo seemed surprised.
“I think I remember your article,” he said. He tapped a couple of his
keys on his computer. Not a Google search; a couple of keys. “This is
how they pray,” he began reading, and then shot me a goofy grin.
Was I supposed to think he’d had the story on his screen before I
arrived? “You should call Doug Coe,” he said, and gave me a number.
(I did, as I had before; no response.) Coe, he said, had entered
semiretirement. Stepping up to replace him was a man named Dick
Foth, a longtime adviser to John Ashcroft. I’d listened to a recorded
sermon by Foth; it’d struck me as unremarkable stuff, platitudes and
tautologies. Kuo  wasn’t offended. This, he said, is proof that the
Family is not political. Politics are specific, Kuo said; the Family’s
faith is universal.
In a sense, this was true. The cell structure that defined Abram’s
movement in 1935 has since become the model for populist funda-
mentalism and more, one of the common denominators of evangeli-
calism. Both elite and populist cells look upward, their concept of
faith drawn along the vertical axis. Elected elites look up to their
greatest constituent, God; the people who elect them pray that their
leaders listen to God. Both call this gaze “love,” and in exchange both
demand “salvation.”
The popular front promises the salvation of individuals, a chance
to buy into “purpose,” “meaning,” a movement: to feel like a part of
the big picture. Elite fundamentalism pursues the literal salvation of

--- Sayfa 392 ---
386 | J E F F S H A R L E T
that big picture: the preservation of power, even as those who serve
it change churches, or parties, or particular political whims. Power
is what remains. The popular front rises and falls in an ebb and tide
of “revivals,” spontaneous and cultivated, each, so far, stronger than
the last, each surging just as secularism says that this time that bad old
religion, the superstitious kind, the political kind, the powerful kind,
is a thing of the past. The key men endure. Indeed, they prosper.
3. Deliverance
The numbing authority of American fundamentalism resides in its
language, “love” as an expression of obedience, “just” as a disclaimer
for desire, “Jesus plus nothing” as a description not of a brilliant di-
vine but of blunt authority. Such banalities do not disguise evil, as
Hannah Arendt argued in her famous study of traditional fascism, but
rather subvert what is essentially generous about fundamentalism, its
dream of a community in which every member is free to approach
the divine as he or she feels guided, its desire for a city upon a hill in
which hunger and regret are unknown. At their roots, evangelical-
ism and its child, American fundamentalism—both driven by the
democratic feeling of individual belief toward faith in authority—arise
in response to the central dilemma of nearly all religion: suffering,
from that of Abigail Hutchinson to that of lonesome immigrant
Abram to that, even, of Ted Haggard. Fundamentalism wants to ease
the pain, to banish fear, forget loneliness; to erase desire. Populist
fundamentalism does so by offering certainty, a fixed story about the
relationship between this world and the world to come; elite funda-
mentalism, certain in its entitlement, responds in this world with a
politics of noblesse oblige, the missionary impulse married to mili-
tary and economic power. The result is empire. Not the old imperial-
ism of Rome or the Ottomans or the British navy, that of a central
power forcing weaker groups to pay tribute. Rather, the soft empire
of America that across the span of the twentieth century recruited

--- Sayfa 393 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 387
fundamentalism to its cause even as it seduced liberalism to its ser-
vice “presents itself,” in the useful formulation of the political theo-
rists Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, “not as a historical regime
originating in conquest, but rather as an order that effectively sus-
pends history and thereby fixes the existing state of affairs for
eternity.”2
Eternity! There’s a word that the subjects of this book understand
better than Hardt and Negri and the entire establishment of political
theorists, political scientists, policy wonks, and newspaper editorial
boards. Eternity, says fundamentalism, is the only real response to
the basic fact of suffering, the constant of human existence that com-
pels us to seek knowledge, or understanding, or faith, or grace. Fun-
damentalism frames that response as a story with a neat beginning,
middle, and, most of all, an end that can be known. The better story
we—believers and unbelievers alike, all of us who love our neigh-
bors more than we love power or empire or even the solace of
certainty—must tell is not simply a different answer, secular myths
opposed to fundamentalism’s, but a question. Maybe it’s about that
city upon a hill. Maybe it’s about how we get there, and what we
must walk away from. Such a question isn’t to be found in revelation,
but in exodus, the act of stepping into the unknown. I suspect it has
something to do with the difference between salvation, as imagined
by fundamentalism, and deliverance. Salvation ends in heaven; deliv-
erance begins in the desert. Salvation is the last word of a story; de-
liverance is the first. Salvation is the certainty of empire; deliverance
is the hope of democracy. It’s not humble, because hope isn’t humble,
it’s impertinent. It’s a question, always another question, always leav-
ing Egypt behind.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
Acknow ledg ments
This book is the product of many years, during which I have been the
beneficiary of the efforts and generosity of many friends and col-
leagues. First among them is my editor at Harper’s, Bill Wasik,
without whose early encouragement this book would not exist. I’m
grateful, too, for the insights of several other magazine editors who
helped me develop my ideas, sharpen my prose, and get my facts
straight along the way, including but not limited to: Ben Austen,
Naomi Kirsten, Lewis Lapham, Miriam Markowitz, and Ben Metcalf
at Harper’s; Will Dana, Sean Woods, Eric Bates, Eric Magnuson, and
Coco MacPherson at Rolling Stone; Bob Moser at The Nation; and
Monika Bauerlein at Mother Jones. Claire Wachtel at HarperCollins
saw the  whole thing through with patience, wit, and wisdom. Her
assistant, Julia Novitch, shepherded it along with care, for which I’m
grateful. Vicki Haire saved me from capitalizing heaven. Special
thanks to Kathy Anderson, who helped me understand what this
book should be, found the right publisher, and made sure I actually
finished it. Giulia Melucci, vice president of public relations at Harp-
er’s, advised me on launching it.
My most critical and trustworthy readers  were Julie Rabig,
Robert Sharlet, JoAnn Wypijewski, Kathryn Joyce, and Peter Manseau.
Thank you.
Kim Nauer and Joe Conason at The Nation Institute provided
support, as did the incomparable MacDowell Colony, at which sev-
eral of these chapters  were written and revised during three visits.

--- Sayfa 396 ---
390 | A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
I’m especially grateful for MacDowell’s Michelle Aldredge, without
whose account of her secondary education this book would not have
its thirteenth chapter. Hampshire College, a strange and wonderful
school unlike any other, is present in everything I write. I’m also
grateful to the KGB Bar, which has given me a forum to test out
much of this book piece by piece. The results are incalculably better
than they would have been otherwise for the influence of New York
University’s Center for Religion and Media, where I have been an as-
sociate research scholar for the last four years—which is to say, a
sponge soaking up the ideas and insights of some very smart people. I
am particularly indebted to Angela Zito, Faye Ginsburg, Barbara
Abrash, Adam H. Becker, and Omri Elisha. Scholars at other institu-
tions to whom I’m indebted include Diane Winston, Michael Janson,
Kenneth Osgood, Ron Enroth, and Jamie K. A. Smith.
I’m likewise indebted to a number of journalists and researchers
who shared their knowledge of Christian conservatism with me, in-
cluding Chip Berlet, Max Blumenthal, Frederick Clarkson, Doug
Ireland, Scott McLemee, Suzanne Pharr, Michael Reynolds, and
Bruce Wilson.
Several former members, associates, and neighbors of the Fam-
ily, as well as a few current ones, spoke with me. Many of them pre-
ferred to remain on background; among those I’m able to thank
publicly are Cliff Gosney, Ben Daniel, Carl von Bernewitz, Steve
Bauer, Mary McCutcheon, and David Kuo. I’m also very grateful to
the hundreds of evangelical conservatives and other Christians who’ve
agreed to speak with me about their faith and their politics over the
years, especially Matt Dunbar and Lisa Anderson. Several evangelical
journalists have kept talking to me even when my work infuriated
them, and it’s the better for those conversations. Among them are
Bob Smietana, Patton Dodd, Ted Olsen, and Tony Carnes.
Then there are the friends, family, and fellow travelers who pro-
vided the kind of crucial  support—responding to chapters on short
notice, providing me with housing, sharing  ideas—without which
the book would have fizzled. Which is to say, for better or worse, the
accomplices. I’ve been working on this book for a long time, which

--- Sayfa 397 ---
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S | 391
means there are more than I can list, but among those who spent
time on the front lines of this book’s production were Gretchen Agu-
iar, Jeff Allred, Laura Brahm, Fiona Burde, Colleen Clancy, Stellar
Kim, Michael Lesy, Victoria McKernan, Paul Morris, David Rabig,
Don Rabig, Jude Rabig, Irina Reyn, Gwen Seznec, Jocelyn Sharlet,
Darcey Steinke, Baki Tezcan, and Tom Windish. And the research-
ers: Martha Lincoln, Sherally Munshi, Meera Subramanian, Jaime
Pensado, and Seonaid Valiant.
Most of all, Julie Rabig, wise as serpents and innocent as doves,
and also as funny as a sea otter, brave as a buffalo, and more beautiful
than a great blue heron. Thank you for enduring, provoking, and in-
spiring.

--- Sayfa 399 ---
Notes
THE  AVANT- GARDE OF AMERICAN FUNDAMENTALISM
1. I was loaned a copy of “Thoughts on a Core Group” in 2002 by one of the
men with whom I lived at Ivanwald. I cited this document in an article titled
“Jesus Plus Nothing” in the March 2003 Harper’s, the fact checkers of which
gave Ivanwald full opportunity to respond. They have never publicly con-
tested the document. You can now find a similar text on the Web site of a
conservative evangelical named Glenn Murray. Murray has added some and
subtracted some, including this peculiar reference, but he leaves the spirit in-
tact: “The mafia,” his “Thoughts” read, “operates like this,” and so too should
the community of believers. Accessed 2006 at http://www.glennmurray.
nccn .net/ thoughts _on _a _core _group .htm. The very ideological promiscu-
ity of the  document—Hitler, Lenin, and the  mafia—proves that it is the
principle of organization admired, not the essence of Hitler’s or Lenin’s be-
liefs. Cold comfort.
2.
Nancy T. Ammerman, “A Brief Introduction and Definition,” in Martin E.
Marty and Scott Appleby, Fundamentalisms Observed (University of Chicago
Press, 1994), p. 2. This is one volume in the University of Chicago Press’s com-
prehensive five-volume “Fundamentalism Project,” in many ways the first and
last word on fundamentalism. George M. Marsden’s Fundamentalism and Ameri-
can Culture: The Shaping of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism (Oxford University
Press, 1980), updated in a new edition in 2006, is another authoritative text on
Christian fundamentalism as a specific idea and movement in American his-
tory. “A fundamentalist is an evangelical who is angry about something,” Mars-
den simplified his definition in a  follow-up collection of essays, Understanding

--- Sayfa 400 ---
394 |  N O T E S
Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism (William B. Eerdmans, 1991), a pithy sum-
mation from a scholar sympathetic to evangelicalism. It suffices so long as we
remember that anger takes many forms, and that the “something” a fundamen-
talist is opposed to is not, in his or her mind at least, necessarily modernity, but
sin, whether defined as sex outside of marriage or the disobedience to God
many fundamentalists believe is implicit in managed economies.
1. IVANWALD
1. In this chapter, I use the full names of men who held leadership positions
at Ivanwald. Such men are activists, and some, such as Gannon Sims, built on
their Ivanwald experiences to develop careers in government. (Gannon be-
came a spokesman for the Department of State’s Office to Monitor and Com-
bat Human Trafficking.) Men who  were not in leadership or government
positions I identify only by their first names. “Zeke” is a pseudonym for a man
who I fear might face repercussions for his role in introducing me to the Fam-
ily. In the years since then, several former members have contacted me with
accounts of ostracization and even retaliation for various actions, and while
I’ve no way of confirming these stories, there’s no need to unduly expose
Zeke to the possibility of similar responses.
2. A note on notes: In this chapter and throughout The Family, I use endnotes
to identify archival sources and to provide sources for historical events that
may not be well known. Chapters 4–9, which depend largely on historical
research, are extensively endnoted, but where I rely on personal experience
(chapters 1, 9, 14) or directly reference interviews (chapters 10–14), or on
publicly available sources identifi ed within the text (chapters 12–14), I gener-
ally refrain from notes. As for this account of Ivanwald: like several of the
brothers, I openly kept a journal. When writing about a conversation that had
occurred earlier, I often asked individual brothers for their recollections. This
was not “undercover.” Although I had no inkling of a book about the Family or
fundamentalism at the time, I told the brothers I was a writer, the publications
I’d written for, and that I was working on a book about unusual religious com-
munities (Killing the Buddha: A Heretic’s Bible, with Peter Manseau [Free Press,
2004]). A few documentary notes in chapters 4–10 identify the only general
collection in which the relevant documents can be found. I made my first,
brief archival research trip in late 2002, after I had decided to write about
Ivanwald but before I had even imagined this book. Since magazine fact checkers

--- Sayfa 401 ---
N O T E S | 395
are more interested in actual evidence than my assurances that memo x can be
found in folder y in an archive, I made Xerox copies instead of notes for future
researchers. When I returned to the main archive of the Family at the Billy
Graham Center at Wheaton College with a book in mind, I made note of ap-
propriate filing numbers. In total I or my research assistants reviewed well
over 60,000 pages of primary-source documents, and made copies of around
5,000 pages; I lack folder numbers for a very few pages, and those I have cop-
ies of.
3. Senator Brownback, Senator Pryor, and Representative Wolf told me of
their involvement in interviews. I met Senator Ensign while he was living in
the C Street House, a former convent maintained as a group home for con-
gressmen by a  Family- affiliated organization, and Senators Grassley and Nel-
son and Representative Pitts are well represented in the Family’s archives.
Senator Coburn told the reporter Tom Hess of his residence in C Street House
and his participation in a Family cell for a feature in James Dobson’s Citizen
magazine, “ ‘There’s No One I’m Afraid to Challenge,’ ” accessed at http://
www .family .org/ cforum/ citizenmag/ coverstory/ a0012717 .cfm on October
10, 2004. Senator Thune cited the Family’s leader, Doug Coe, and a  house the
Family maintains on Capitol Hill in a Christianity Today interview with Collin
Hansen ( http:// www .christianitytoday .com/ ct/ 2005/ februaryweb-only/ 42
.0a.html, accessed January 7, 2007). Most of the rest of these men  were spo-
ken of as members by Ivanwalders and se nior men in the  Family—for in-
stance, Steve South, former se nior counsel for Senator Don Nickles, told me
of Senator Domenici’s involvement, confirmed in the Family’s archives (file
15, box 354, collection 459, Papers of the Fellowship Foundation, Billy Gra-
ham Center Archives [hereafter cited as BGCA]). I’ve no reason to doubt
these claims; members of the Family are scrupulous about distinguishing be-
tween members, those who have joined a prayer cell or made some other com-
mitment to the work, and friends, those with whom they’re comfortable
working. Representative Eric Cantor, for instance, a Jewish Republican from
Virginia, is just a friend. Representative McIntyre, who joined Representative
Wolf ’s prayer cell, is a member. This is only a partial list. The Family believes
in a concentric model of holiness, with a few key men close to Christ at the
center (Representative Pitts, for instance), another circle of active supporters
farther out (Senator Grassley), followed by one of casual allies (such as Senator
Pryor) who are mostly unaware of the group’s inner workings.
Thurmond: Interview, Cliford B. Gosney, former Family member. Thur-
mond’s association was among the Family’s most  long- standing, stretching
4

--- Sayfa 402 ---
396 |  N O T E S
across the decades. On October 30, 1987, Family leader Doug Coe sent to
Representative Tony Hall, a Democrat from Ohio who moved rightward un-
der the Family’s guidance, a sermon preached by Thurmond to a meeting of
the weekly Senate Prayer Breakfast. The subject was “integrity” and “the un-
raveling of the fabric of our society,” to which  Thurmond—a segregationist
who refused to publicly acknowledge his African-American daughter—
responded with four suggestions on becoming “men and women of integrity.”
Folder 3, box 166, collection 459, BGCA. Talmadge and Robertson: Annual Re-
port of the Fellowship Foundation, 1962, folder 2, box 563, collection 459,
BGCA. Ford: Paul Wilkes, “Prayer: The Search for a Spiritual Life in Washing-
ton and Elsewhere: A Country on Its Knees?” New York Times, December 22,
1974. Besides Laird and Ford, the other two members of the cell were Repub-
lican congressmen John Rhodes, a Barry Goldwater protégé from Arizona,
and Al Quie of Minnesota, an early opponent of affirmative action. The four
had been organized into a Family prayer group during the late 1960s. Rehn-
quist: Doug Coe to Panayiotis Touzmazis, April 24, 1974, folder 11, box 200,
collection 459, BGCA. And then there are the jocks: Buff alo Bills legend and
vice presidential candidate Jack Kemp; Seattle Seahawks NFL Hall of Famer
Steve Largent, one of the fiercest ideologues of the Republican Revolution
of 1994; and Oklahoma Sooners Orange Bowl champ J. C. Watts, the
highest-ranking black Republican in congressional history. According to Bob
Jones IV, Watts preferred Campus Crusade’s related effort, Christian Em-
bassy (“The Church Inside the State,” World, October 12, 1996), but when I
interviewed him in 2003, he told me he prayed with “the Prayer Breakfast
people” as well.
5. NCCL News Letter, April 1948. Christian Leadership News, October 1950.
Collection 459, BGCA.
6. On July 15, 1965, the Family’s founder, Abraham Vereide, boasted in an
address to a prayer meeting that in Generalissimo Franco’s Spain, initially
hostile to the Protestant Family, “there are secret cells, such as the American
embassy, the Standard Oil office, allowing [our men] to move practically any-
where.” No box number, collection 459, BGCA. 350: D. Michael Lindsay, “Is
the National Prayer Breakfast Surrounded by a ‘Christian Mafia’? Religious
Publicity and Secrecy Within the Corridors of Power,” Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 74, no. 2 (June 2006): 390–419.
7. Quoted in Stephen Scott, “Jesus’ Name Has Drawing Power for Prayer
Breakfast,” St. Paul Pioneer Press, April 14, 2001.
8. The Fellowship Foundation’s 2005 990 tax form showed offi  cial income of

--- Sayfa 403 ---
N O T E S | 397
nearly $17 million and program expenses of nearly $14 million. Among the
expenses, $900,000 went to the National Prayer Breakfast, a  Fellowship-
produced event that appears to the world to be an official function of the fed-
eral government. (When I attended in 2003, I got my press credentials through
the White  House.) In 2005, the Fellowship actually turned a profit on the
Breakfast, taking in $47,000 more than it cost. In “Showing Faith in Discre-
tion,” Los Angeles Times, September 27, 2002, the journalist Lisa Getter noted
that the Family has paid for overseas congressional junkets and even loaned
congressmen money.
9. Bakke’s deal is documented in Deepak Gopinath, “The Divine Power of
Profi t,” Institutional Investor, March 1, 2001. Bakke isn’t conservative in the
conventional sense—he’s a major Democratic donor—but he has made a ca-
reer out of deregulation and  anti-union management, and he’s used his wealth
to create the Harvey Fellows Program, which aims to train an “expanding
beachhead of evangelicals in the American elite” and “the corridors of power”
through funds for graduate students who agree to sign a statement of faith. D.
Michael Lindsay, Faith in the Halls of Power: How Evangelicals Joined the American
Elite (Oxford University Press, 2007), p. 80.
10. Getter, “Showing Faith in Discretion.”
11. Lindsay, “Is the National Prayer Breakfast Surrounded by a ‘Christian Ma-
fia’?” Lindsay, a fellow at Princeton University’s Department of Sociology dur-
ing the period of this study and now on the faculty at Rice University, enjoyed
tremendous access to what he refers to as the “backstage” of Family leadership of
his study of the “Christian Mafia,” in which he asserts that the Family is not se-
cret but private. Secrecy, he notes, “often protects the interests of the power-
ful.” Of course, so may privacy when maintained by elites who use it to shield
networks of influence from public transparency. The difference between  secrecy
and privacy, Lindsay argues, is that those who are not in on  secrets—especially
secrets about power—resent them, whereas those excluded from a private as-
sociation of elites don’t mind, since such “privacy” appeals to traditions of defer-
ence to the elite. Thus, the “privacy” used by the Family to protect the privilege
of its members, Lindsay argues, is “legitimated” by the public status of the Fam-
ily’s members. Such are the justifications for power by the ivory tower so often
derided as too leftist by conservative pundits.
12. Monday Associates Meeting, January 23, 1995, Burnett Thompson pre-
siding.
13. David Kuo, Tempting Faith: An Inside Story of Political Seduction (Free
Press, 2006), pp. 21–24.

--- Sayfa 404 ---
398 |  N O T E S
14.
Doug Coe and General Vessey: Minutes of a luncheon held at the Cedars, the
Family’s Arlington, Virginia headquarters, October 19, 1983, collection 459,
BGCA; no box number. The luncheon was organized by Aquilino E. Boyd,
the Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega’s ambassador to the United States.
Also in attendance was an inner-circle member of the Family named Herb El-
lingwood, a longtime Reagan aide who had been responsible for “psychologi-
cal warfare” against student protestors in California. In 1970, Ellingwood was
one of the small circle of men who laid hands on Reagan and heard a voice,
allegedly God’s, promising Reagan the White  House. Paul Kengor, God and
Ronald Reagan: A Spiritual Life (Regan Books, 2004), pp. 135–36. When Rea-
gan ascended to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, he took Ellingwood with him as a
deputy counsel. Ellingwood’s advice? “Economic salvation and spiritual salva-
tion go side by side.” John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, The Right
Nation: Conservative Power in America (Penguin Press, 2004), pp. 331–32. Lugar
et al.: Telegram to General Manual Antonio Noriega, January 25, 1984, col-
lection 459, BGCA. Casanova and Martinez: Getter, “Showing Faith in Discre-
tion.” Military aid to Honduras: Elaine Sciolino, “U.S. Said to Link Latin Aid to
Support for Contras,” New York Times, May 18, 1987.
15. Quoted in Lindsay, Faith in the Halls of Power, p. 36.
16 Ibid., p. 35.
17. Paul N. Temple to James F. Bell, October 7, 1976, collection 459, BGCA;
no box number. Phillips gave $30,000 toward the cost of the Cedars; Stone, a
self-help author of get-rich-quick books who was also famous for having given
$2 million to Nixon’s 1968 and 1972 campaigns, donated $100,000. Temple,
a former Standard Oil executive, gave $150,000, while the oilman Harold
McClure gave $100,000. Other financing for the Cedars came from: William
Loflin, $150,000; James Millen, $150,000; Mike Myers (not the actor),
$150,000; Otto Zerbe, $100,000; the PGA pro Jim Hiskey, $100,000; and
Ken Olsen, the founder of Digital, $83,000. The president of a local bank
who was also a member of a Family prayer group arranged for a loan up to
$400,000 (Temple to Bell, January. 6, 1977).
18.
Thomas: Kuo, Tempting Faith, p. 92; Durenberger: Edward Walsh, “Sena-
tor Goes Public with Private Life,” Washington Post, March 2, 1986, and Tony
Bouza, The Decline and Fall of the American Empire: Corruption, Decadence, and the
American Dream (Da Capo, 1996), p. 102; Watt: Lindsay, Faith in the Halls of
Power, “Is the National Prayer Breakfast Surrounded by a ‘Christian Mafia’?”
19.
New chosen and throwaway religion are ordinary phrases in the daily ver-
nacular of the Family, no more than variations on contemporary evangelical

--- Sayfa 405 ---
N O T E S | 399
rhetoric, but the din of the vox  populi—the voice of the  people—I found as far
back as an account of the first National Prayer Breakfast (then known as the
Presidential Prayer Breakfast) held shortly after Eisenhower’s inauguration in
1953, by the  then-Senate chaplain Dr. Frederick Brown Harris. Dr. Harris is
quoted at length in a hagiography of the Family’s founder by the Family evan-
gelist Norman Grubb: Modern Viking: The Story of Abraham Vereide, Pioneer in
Christian Leadership (Zondervan, 1961), p. 131. The existence of a published
biography may seem like a paradox for a group so bent on invisibility, but the
early Family leaders assumed a lack of public scrutiny as the due of their elite
status. It  wasn’t until the antiestablishment revolt of the late 1960s that Ver-
eide’s successor, Coe, led the group “underground.”
20. Lynette Clemetson, “Meese’s Influence Looms Large in Today’s Judicial
Wars,” New York Times, August 17, 2005. Meese is credited with moving into
the mainstream the idea of a jurisprudence of original intention—the basis for a
conservative judicial philosophy that rejects worker protections, the right to
privacy, women’s reproductive rights, and queer rights.
21. Ben Daniel, a minister in the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) and a former
member of the Family, interviewed former residents of Potomac Point for a
study of what he views as the Family’s “spiritual abuse”: “A former resident of
Potomac Point told me about her nine months there. Having been encouraged
to share her every thought and to expose her secrets and sins, she found her
confessions and confidences used against her when she would ask questions or
resist Fellowship authority. As the Fellowship exerted control over every as-
pect of her life she became angry and bitter. Something broke inside her.
‘When I came to Potomac Point I struggled with self-esteem issues,’ she told
me. ‘While I was there my low  self-esteem moved from a personal to a spiri-
tual level.’ When, at last, she expressed a desire to leave, she was told that,
without the teaching and company of the Fellowship, her  well- being would
disintegrate. She became terrified of life on the outside.” The wife of a Fel-
lowship member describes her role in the Family: “I’m always third. The Fel-
lowship comes first in my husband’s life. Then our children. Then me.”
“Dysfunction in the Fellowship Family,” http:// bendaniel .org/?p= 110 ac-
cessed November 27, 2007.
22. Congressmen who have lived there include former representatives Steve
Largent (R., Oklahoma), Ed Bryant (R., Tennessee), and John Elias Baldacci
(D., Maine). The  house’s eight  congressman-tenants each paid $600 per
month in rent for use of a town house that includes nine bathrooms and five
living rooms. Lara Jakes Jordan, “Religious Group Helps Lawmakers With

--- Sayfa 406 ---
400 |  N O T E S
Rent,” Associated Press, April 20, 2003. When the Los Angeles Times asked
then-resident Representative Bart Stupak, a pro-life Democrat from Michi-
gan, about the property, he replied, “We sort of don’t talk to the press about
the  house.” Getter, “Showing Faith in Discretion.”
23. On October 29, 2007, a reporter for the Norwegian daily Dagbladet, Tore
Gjerstad, who was following up on Norwegian conservatives’ connections to
the Family, managed to confront Coe with some of the language about Hitler
I’ve quoted. Coe, Gjerstad told me, responded, “No one who really knows me
would think I admire Lenin, Hitler, Stalin. They were evil men. But they were
successful when it came to power . . .  All power is with Jesus. You can choose
to go against him, but you can never have more power than what he gives you.”
24. Carter’s contacts with Doug Coe, whom he told the sociologist D. Mi-
chael Lindsay (“Is the National Prayer Breakfast Surrounded by a ‘Christian
Mafia’?”) had been a “very important person” in his life, predated his presi-
dency. In a 1972 briefing to the Family’s leadership, Coe wrote that Carter was
involved with the Family’s mission to Brazil’s dictatorial government. Folder 1,
box 362, collection 459, BGCA. That same year, the Family’s chief Central
American associate, a Costa Rican lawyer named Juan Edgar Picado, hosted
Carter in Costa Rica; in 1976, Picado boasted to his Central American allies
that Carter would increase aid to the region, which he did. It was Carter, not
Ronald Reagan, who began the United States’ support for El Salvador’s brutal
regime. (Howard Siner, “Attorney Knows Carter as Smart, Kind Friend,” San
Jose News, March 4, 1977.) Nixon kept his personal distance from the Family
until after his presidency, when, according to Lindsay, he “ministered” Rea-
gan’s national security adviser, Robert “Bud” McFarlane, into a Family prayer
cell in the wake of McFarlane’s disgrace as an Iran-Contra conspirator.
25. Folder 1, box 166, collection 459, BGCA.
2. EXPERIMENTAL RELIGION
1. Doug Coe, “The Person of Christ, Pt. 4,” videotape of an address given to
a conference of presidents of evangelical organizations, Navigators Great Hall
Productions, January 15, 1989.
2. There are many great biographies of Edwards, but my method of research
for this account of his life was to rely primarily on original sources, which I tried
to read through the filter of my own  half- secular mind and as I imagine a Family
man might, attuned to power and relationships. I depended on the  two-volume

--- Sayfa 407 ---
N O T E S | 401
Works of Jonathan Edwards, with a Memoir by Sereno E. Dwight, ed. Edward Hickman
(F. Westley and A. H. Davis, Stationers Court, 1834); Works of Jonathan Edwards,
particularly vol. 2, Religious Affections, ed. John E. Smith (Yale University
Press, 1959); vol. 7, The Life of David Brainerd, ed. Norman Pettit (ibid., 1985);
and vol. 16, Letters and Personal Writings, ed. George S. Claghorn (ibid., 1998);
Samuel Hopkins, The Life and Character of the Late Reverend Mr. Jonathan Edwards,
first published in 1765 and  collected—along with a useful portrait by Peter
Gay, “Jonathan Edwards: An American Tragedy,” and two fine poems about
Edwards by Robert  Lowell—in David Levin, ed., Jonathan Edwards: A Profile
(Hill and Wang, 1969). For a full account by a sympathetic biographer, I rec-
ommend George Marsden’s authoritative Jonathan Edwards (Yale University
Press, 2003). I also found useful portions of Philip J. Gura’s brief biography,
Jonathan Edwards: America’s Evangelical (Hill and Wang, 2005); Perry Miller’s
classic portrait of the Puritan mood, The New England Mind: The Seventeenth
 Century (Macmillan, 1939); Jon Butler’s investigation of the eccentricities of
American religion, Awash In A Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American People
(Harvard University Press, 1990); Ann Taves’s history of religious enthusi-
asm, Fits, Trances, and Visions: Experiencing Religion and Explaining Experience from
Wesley to James (Princeton University Press, 1999); Nancy Carlisle, “Pursuing
Refinement in Rural New England, 1750–1850: An Exhibition Review,” Win-
terthur Portfolio 34, no. 4 (1999): 239–49; Ava Chamberlain, “Bad Books and
Bad Boys: The Transformation of Gender in Eighteenth-Century Northamp-
ton, Massachusetts,” New England Quarterly 75, no. 2 (2002): 179–203; Cham-
berlain, “The Immaculate Ovum: Jonathan Edwards and the Construction of
the Female Body,” William and Mary Quarterly 57, no. 2 (2000): 289–322; San-
dra Gustafson, “Jonathan Edwards and the Reconstruction of ‘Feminine’
Speech,” American Literary History 6, no. 2 (Summer 1994): 185–212; and
“Jonathan Edwards in 2003,” a special issue of Theology Matters, “A Publication
of Presbyterians for Faith, Family, and Ministry” published in November/
December of 2003 and edited by, among others, Richard Lovelace, a mentor
of sorts to Doug Coe’s son Jonathan, and the inspiration for Jonathan House,
an Ivanwald-like residence for young men on Capitol Hill in Washington.
3. THE REVIVAL MACHINE
1. Timothy L. Smith, Revivalism and Social Reform: American Protestantism on
the Eve of the Civil War (Harper and Row, 1965), p. 79.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
402 | N O T E S
2. Charles G., Finney, The Original Memoirs of Charles G. Finney, ed. Garth M.
Rosell and Richard A. G. Dupuis (Zondervan, 1989), p. 66. The first edition
of Finney’s memoirs was published in 1876; the edition I rely on most is pub-
lished by one of the biggest evangelical publishers of today but is a scholarly
work in the sense that it reflects the text as Finney intended it, not as his
nineteenth-century publishers presented it. Finney, who in his old age dic-
tated these memoirs to a former student, is one of the great underappreciated
memoirists of American letters. His memoirs are not high art, but they are
storytelling in a distinct American vein, and I make extensive use of them in
this chapter. Biographical details are taken from the memoirs unless other-
wise indicated.
3. Ibid., jacket blurb.
4. William C. Cochran, “Charles Grandison Finney Memorial Address” (J.
B. Lippincott, 1908).
5. Richard Hofstadter, Anti- Intellectualism in American Life (Alfred A. Knopf,
1963), p. 92.
6. Marianne Perciaccante, Calling Down Fire: Charles Grandison Finney and
Revivalism in Jefferson County, New York, 1800–1840 (State University of New
York Press, 2003), p. 38.
7. I don’t mean to suggest that the arguments of Finney scholars such as Wil-
liam G. McLoughlin, Keith J. Hardman, Allen C. Guelzo, John L. Hammond,
and others miss the point. Indeed, from their close readings of
nineteenth-century theological disputes they derive great insights into the
evolution of American religion and politics. (Of particular interest in the lat-
ter regard are Paul E. Johnson’s A Shop keeper’s Millennium: Society and Revivals in
Rochester, New York, 1815–1837 [Hill and Wang, 1978], and “God and Mam-
mon,” chapter 7 of Charles Sellers’s The Market Revolution: Jacksonian America,
1815–1846 [Oxford University Press, 1991], both of which are among the rare
works of academic specialization that are also splendid reading.) Rather, I
mean to simply single out the strand of Finney’s life that I believe is most rel-
evant to the genealogy of American fundamentalism as it has appeared in re-
cent times.
8. For a discussion of the “machinery” of revival and its critics, see “The
Businessmen’s Revival,” chapter 1 of John Corrigan’s Business of the Heart: Reli-
gion and Emotion in the Nineteenth Century (University of California Press,
2002). Mark A. Noll provides a succinct description of Finney’s “new mea-
sures” in A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada (William B.
Eerdmans, 1992; reprint edition, 2003), pp. 176–77.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
N O T E S | 403
9. Charles Chauncey, Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in
 New- En gland (Rogers and Fowle, 1743), p. 218, cited in Eric Leigh Schmidt,
Hearing Things: Religion, Illusion, and the American Enlightenment (Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2000), p. 71.
10. Finney, “Human Government,” in Finney’s Systematic Theology (Bethany
 House, 1994).
4. UNIT NUMBER ONE
1. My account of Abram’s early life is shaped by his own reminiscences in
letters and notes for a biography, stored in collection 459 of the Billy Graham
Center Archives, but the major details and quotations are for the most part
from the two  full-length,  English-language biographies (there is a third, by an
evangelical admirer, in Norwegian) written about Abram: Modern Viking: The
Story of Abraham Vereide, Pioneer in Christian Leadership (Zondervan,1961), writ-
ten by a revivalist named Norman Grubb mainly for private distribution to
Abram’s followers; and Abraham, Abraham, by Abram’s son, Warren Vereide,
and Claudia Minden Weisz, a privately published book (I received my copy
from a former member of the Fellowship). The Abram story would be retold
over the years in the literature produced by his various organizations; where I
rely on such material in future chapters, I’ll provide additional notes.
2. James C. Hefley and Edward E. Plowman, Washington: Christians in the
Corridors of Power (Tyndale House, 1975), p. 100.
3. Mauritz A. Hallgren, “Panic in the Steel Towns,” The Nation, March 30,
1932.
4. Richard C. Berner, Seattle in the 20th Century, vol. 2, Seattle, 1921–1940:
From Boom to Bust (Charles Press, 1992). For Seattle history, I rely on Abram’s
memoir, documents from the Washington State archives, and most of all the
incomparable and epic multivolume Seattle in the 20th Century, by Richard
C. Berner, who presents pieces of nearly every significant primary source on
the city’s politics and culture during the period he covers. In this chapter and
in chapter 5, I draw especially on volume 2, Seattle, 1921–1940: From Boom to
Bust (Philadelphia: Charles Press, 1992) and volume 3, Seattle Transformed:
World War II to the Cold War (1999).
5. Except where particular sources are indicated, my account of Abram’s
nightmare nemesis, Harry Bridges, the strike of 1934, and the factors that fed
into it is based on the following: Charles P. Larrowe, Harry Bridges: The Rise

--- Sayfa 410 ---
404 | N O T E S
and Fall of Radical Labor in the United States (Lawrence Hill and Coe, 1972);
David F. Selvin, A Terrible Anger: The 1934 Waterfront and General Strikes in San
Francisco (Wayne State University Press, 1996); Mike Quin, The Big Strike
(Olema, 1949); Paul Eliel, The Waterfront and General Strikes, San Francisco, 1934
(Hooper, 1934); Warren Hinckle, The Big Strike: A Pictorial History of the 1934
San Francisco General Strike (Silver Dollar Books, 1985); J. Anthony Lukas, Big
Trouble: A Murder in a Small Western Town Sets Off  a Struggle for the Soul of America
(Simon and Schuster, 1997), Louis Adamic, Dynamite: The Story of Class Violence
in America (Viking, 1934).
6. Tillie Lerner, “The Strike,” Partisan Review, September–October, 1934.
7. Abraham Vereide, notes prepared for Grubb, Modern Viking, from collec-
tion 459 of the BGCA, no box number.
8. Evelyn Seeley, “Our Number One Fascists,” The Nation, April 15, 1936.
5. THE F WORD
1. Kissinger’s graduate work was recently brought to public attention by the
economist Paul Krugman in The Great Unraveling: Losing Our Way in the New
Century (W. W. Norton, 2003). Unfortunately, Krugman reads Kissinger too
literally, settling for the either/or dichotomy established at first glance and
then translating it to the present political situation as us (the secular state)
versus them (the “right-wing movement” as “revolutionary power”). Krugman
falls for this intellectual trap despite the fact that he acknowledges that the
right-wing movement controls much or most of the state (depending on the
electoral moment). The us and the them, status quo and revolutionary power,
are not so different after all. As Pogo famously put it, “We have met the en-
emy, and it is us.”
2. Alan Brinkley, Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the Great
Depression (Alfred A. Knopf, 1982), pp. 83–95.
3. Robert O. Paxton writes on the fascist penchant for colored shirts and its
relationship to the appearance of perfect unity in The Anatomy of Fascism (Al-
fred A. Knopf, 2004).
4. “Cincinattus Drive Is Sped in Seattle,” New York Times, March 1, 1936.
5. Mary McCarthy, “Circus Politics in Washington State,” The Nation, Oc-
tober 17, 1936.
6. Richard L. Neuberger, “State of the Slapstick in Politics,” New York Times,
February 20, 1938.

--- Sayfa 411 ---
N O T E S | 405
7. “Seattle Deals Radicals a Blow,” Los Angeles Times, March 10, 1938.
8. Los Angeles Times, March 9, 1938; New York Times, March 10, 1938.
9. Michael Janson, “A Christian Century: Liberal Protestantism, the New
Deal, and the Origins of Post-War American Politics” (dissertation, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, 2007), pp. 163–70.
10.
Hart’s involvement with ICL; Edward Cabannis to Abram, July 24, 1951.
Folder 6, box 166, collection 459, BGCA. FBI on Hart and Lindbergh, and
Hart on the Jews: Max Wallace, The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lind-
bergh, and the Rise of the Third Reich (St. Martin’s Press, 2003), p. 252. Robert
H. Jackson on Hart: “Democracy Under Fire,” delivered to a meeting of the
Law Society of Massachusetts, Boston City Club, Boston, Massachusetts,
October 16, 1940.
11. For biographical details in this sketch of Buchman, I am indebted to the
popular press of the era, which found Buchman a subject for admiration or a
source of amusement, and especially to Tom Driberg’s The Mystery of Moral
Re- Armament: A Study of Frank Buchman and His Movement (Alfred A. Knopf,
1965). Driberg was the first British journalist to investigate Buchman in the
late 1920s. By the time he published his  book-length study, however, he was a
member of Parliament for Labour, and Buchmanites had long sought to dis-
credit him as a communist and homosexual. Driberg had, indeed, joined the
British Communist Party as a young man, but as his biographer Francis Wheen
writes in The Soul of Indiscretion: Tom  Driberg—Poet, Philanderer, Legislator, and
Outlaw (Fourth Estate, 2002), he had been expelled when it was discovered
that he was reporting to M15. His homosexuality was hardly a secret; he was
famous for it, and in case there was any confusion he outed himself once again
in The Mystery of Moral  Re- Armament. He died a British peer, Baron Bradwell, in
1975 and was charged with having been a KGB spy in 1999 by the  ex-KGB
archivist Vasili Mitrokhin, who claimed that the Soviets blackmailed Driberg
on threat of exposure of his sexuality. This seems a rather dubious assertion,
given the fact that Driberg was out, and Driberg’s defenders say that their man
had once again played double agent. Such facts are hard to ascertain, but for
certainty’s sake in my reliance on his account of Buchman, I’ve used only in-
formation that Driberg clearly sourced; flamboyant in politics and romance,
he was a moderate writer who made his case with care.
12. Peter Howard, Frank Buchman’s Secret (Heinemann, 1961), p. 28. How-
ard’s short book is an exercise in distortion. The most egregious of its
misrepresentations is Howard’s celebration of the Moral  Re- Armament men
who fought for the Allies in World War II. While many MRA followers no

--- Sayfa 412 ---
406 |  N O T E S
doubt did fight, MRA went to such ends in seeking to obtain exemptions for
military service for British and American followers that Colo nel Arthur V.
McDermott, New York City’s draft director, declared that MRA was “reeking
with hypocrisy and bad faith.” Quoted in Driberg, The Mystery of Moral
 Re- Armament, p. 75.
13. Frank Buchman, “Guidance or Guns,” speech delivered at Interlaken on
September 6, 1938, in Remaking the World: The Speeches of Frank Buchman (Bland-
ford Press, 1961), p. 63.
14. This fact, and the following description of a typical Buchmanite  house
party, are derived from “Soul Surgeon,” a profile of Buchman by Alva Johnson
in the April 23, 1932, New Yorker, pp. 22–25.
15. Buchman, Remaking the World.
16. Grubb, Modern Viking, p. 51.
17. Buchman, “Will God Control America?” broadcast from Philadelphia,
June 19, 1936, in Remaking the World, p. 33.
18. Buchman, “How to Listen,” speech delivered in Birmingham, England,
July 26, 1936, in Remaking the World, p. 35.
19. William A. H. Birnie, “Hitler or Any Fascist Leader Controlled By God
Could Cure All Ills of World, Buchman Believes,” New York World- Tele gram,
August 26, 1936. Buchman’s high opinion of Hitler so addled his senses,
writes Driberg in The Mystery of Moral  Re- Armament (pp. 66–67), that before a
trip to Germany he had one of his followers, a U.S. assistant attorney general,
request a meeting with FDR for Buchman on the grounds that “Herr Hitler”
had himself requested a meeting with Buchman, and Buchman would be em-
barrassed to report to Hitler that his own president would not receive him.
It’s not known whether or not Buchman did, in fact, meet Hitler, but if so,
he must have been red-faced; Roosevelt wanted no truck with Moral
 Re- Armament’s gnome.
20. Buchman, “Miracles in the North,” speech delivered in New York City,
November 20, 1935, in Remaking the World, pp. 19, 23.
21. Sinclair Lewis, It Can’t Happen  Here (Doubleday, Doran, 1935), p. 21.
22. Richard M. Fried, The Man Everybody Knew: Bruce Barton and the Making of
Modern America (Ivan R. Dee, 2005), p. 97.
23. American magazine, June 1930, p. 202, quoted in Barton in Blunderland, a
1937 campaign pamphlet for the American Labor Party.
24. “Dollar’s Eagle Is a Sparrow, Barton Finds,” Washington Post, June 10,
1934.
25. Bruce Barton, “Hard Times,” Wall Street Journal, March 30, 1926.

--- Sayfa 413 ---
N O T E S | 407
26. Finding the Better Way, periodicals, collection 459, Records of the Fel-
lowship Foundation, BGCA.
27. Grubb, Modern Viking, p. 66. Poling’s relationship to the Philadelphia
machine is discussed in “Ring Job Ordered,” Time, August 6, 1951.
28. Richard C. Berner, Seattle in the 20th Century, volume 3, Seattle Trans-
formed: World War II to the Cold War (Philadelphia: Charles Press, 1999), p. 52.
29. Ibid., p. 54.
30. “Barton Breaks a Lance,” Wall Street Journal, October 26, 1937.
31. Herbert Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced
Industrial Society, 2nd edition (Beacon Press, 1991), p. 1.
6. THE MINISTRY OF PROPER ENLIGHTENMENT
1. “Nazi Envoy Silent on Agency Ouster,” New York Times, January 17, 1941.
2. Quoted in “D.C. Trial Bares German Secrets,” Washington Post, July 24,
1941.
3. “It is of paramount . . .”: Hans Thomsen to Zapp, August 30, 1938, repro-
duced in full in “Excerpts from White Paper on Nazi Activities Here Re-
leased,” New York Times, November 22, 1940. “My task here . . .”: Zapp to Rudolf
Leitner, then the German ambassador to South Africa, November 25, 1938,
in ibid.
4. “You can easily recognize Manfred Zapp, the Nazi agent, his madcap girl-
friend, and . . . John Edgar Hoover,” Walter Winchell wrote in a blurb for
High Stakes (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1942), a thinly fictionalized account of the
FBI’s investigation of Zapp by the journalist Curt Riess, a German émigré
considered an authority on Nazi espionage. For Zapp in Havana, see Willard
Edwards, “Find 200 Agents in Havana Push Cause of Hitler,” Chicago Tribune,
July 27, 1940.
5. Zapp’s antagonism toward Ryan was all the more remarkable for the fact
that Ryan occasionally struck a friendly note for fascism, as in his 1937 de-
fense of Generalissimo Franco’s fascist rebellion in Spain. Wilson D. Mis-
camble, “The Limits of American Catholic Anti-Fascism: The Case of John A.
Ryan,” Church History, 59, no. 4 (December 1990): 523–38. Zapp’s rebuttal:
Winifred Mallon, “Asks Public to Rise on Neutrality Act,” New York Times,
July 14, 1939.
6. “Roo sevelt’s Attack Comes as G-Men Order Probe of Nazi Press Ser-
vice,” Washington Post, October 25, 1940.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
408 |  N O T E S
7. Drew Pearson, “Merry-Go-Round,” Washington Post, October 25, 1946.
8. “Huge Area Shaken, But City Escapes,” New York Times, September 13,
1940.
9. “West Point Sails With Axis Agents Ousted from the U.S.,” New York
Times, July 16, 1941.
10. “German Newsmen Tour Army Bases,” Information Bulletin, September
1951 (U.S. High Commissioner’s Office), p. 72. University of Wisconsin
Digital Collections, http:// digital .library .wisc .edu/ 1711 .dl/ History .
11. Correspondence between Donald C. Stone and Hoff man, “Re attached
report by Donald C. Stone: Implications of Mutual Security Act and Require-
ments for Action, October 4, 1951,” correspondence, 1951, Economic Coop-
eration Administration File, Paul G. Hoffman Papers, Truman Presidential
Museum and Library. “My main use . . .”: Stone to Abram, undated, circa 1948,
folder 21, box 474, collection 459, BGCA.
12. National Security Council directive 10/2, quoted in Kenneth Osgood,
Total Cold War: Eisenhower’s Secret Propaganda Battle at Home and Abroad (Univer-
sity of Kansas Press, 2006), p. 39.
13. Letter to Abram, from unknown correspondent, December 25, 1945,
folder 4, box 168, collection 459, BGCA; and Grubb, Modern Viking, pp.
101–2.
14. Timothy George, “Inventing Evangelicalism,” Christianity Today, March
2004.
15.
“I believe honestly . . .”: Dianne Kirby, “Harry Truman’s Religious Legacy:
The Holy Alliance, Containment and the Cold War,” in Religion and the Cold
War, ed. Diane Kirby (Palgrave, 2003), p. 86. Truman and MRA.: Driberg, The
Mystery of Moral  Re- Armament, p. 92. Truman’s meeting with Robertson: Donald C.
Stone to John R. Steelman, the first man to hold the office later known as
White  House chief of staff, January 23, 1948, folder 21, box 474, collection
459, BGCA.
16.
“Imperial interests”: Gregor Dallas, 1945: The War That Never Ended (Yale
University Press, 2005), p. 581. Carlson: The phrase had popped up in Fellow-
ship correspondence the year previous, but it seems that Carlson debuted it
publicly and may well have coined it. In an undated memo he wrote in appar-
ent preparation for the conference, he declares Worldwide Spiritual Offensive
as the “theme” that unites church and state into a force strong enough to con-
front the “Red Hordes.” Worldwide Spiritual Offensive in his view was dis-
tinctly American, since only the “new race” of Americans, “conscious of its
dependence on divine providence,” could confront the “alien way of life” prac-

--- Sayfa 415 ---
N O T E S | 409
ticed by leftists and foreigners (memo and speech). Folder 1, box 505, collec-
tion 459, BGCA. Broger: “Moral Doctrine for Free World Global Planning”
was a presentation Broger made to a Fellowship group on June 14, 1954. No
box number, collection 459, BGCA. The doctrine consisted of a study of
communism and Broger’s plan for reforming society after a “global war” using
Fellowship- style networking, using “indoctrinated personnel who will form
nucleus groups” to implement “the highest concepts of freedom, whether so-
cially acceptable or not.”
17. This brief account of the NAE is derived from (and with apologies to)
Joel A. Carpenter’s more sympathetic but very insightful account in “An
Evangelical United Front,” chapter 8 of his excellent Revive Us Again: The Re-
awakening of American Fundamentalism (Oxford University Press, 1997).
18. Harriet French, “To Make Christians Leaders, and Leaders Christians,”
in unidentified newspaper, box 411, folder 4, collection 459, BGCA.
19. An undated brochure produced by the Fellowship shows on its front
page just such a conversation between two men walking down the stone
steps of the mansion. The man on the right, dressed in light gray and a dark
tie, seems to be trying to persuade his companion, an older fellow with gray
hair and black brows and an impatient air. The persuader, we learn in the
caption, is Commissioner Sigurd Anderson of the Federal Trade Commis-
sion; the skeptic, Howard Blanchard of Union Pacific  Railroad—two men
with more than Christ in common. “The Bible,” declares the brochure,
“contains inexhaustible resources for the businessman fighting the economic
battle in a  two-fisted business world,” like a vein of coal or a pool of oil
“deposited” by God, awaiting refinement into a spiritual offensive against
“materialism.”
20. FDR has long been a problematic fi gure for American fundamentalism,
and not just because of his  impossible-to-ignore leadership in World War II.
On one hand, the New Deal benefited too many in both the populist rank and
file of fundamentalism and at the elite level of Dixiecrat politicians for the
movement to condemn FDR altogether. On the other hand, the  avant- garde
of fundamentalism was born in 1935 in response to FDR’s perceived godless
socialism. What is to be done with this historical paradox? William J. Fe-
derer, an accountant-turned- historian who has become a  best- selling funda-
mentalist historian, attempts to resolve the dilemma with The Faith of F.D.R.
(Amerisearch, 2006), a compilation of every banal piety Roo sevelt ever
uttered. Federer hopes the book will cement FDR, war- president, into the
fundamentalist pantheon.

--- Sayfa 416 ---
410 |  N O T E S
21. Grubb, Modern Viking, p. 105. “Nominal membership”: Otto Fricke, J. W.
E. Sommer, Georg Reichel, Professor Landon Bender, Paul Orlamunder,
Friedreich Wunderlich, to Abram, August 26, 1946, folder 4, box 218, col-
lection 459, BGCA.
22. J. F. Byrnes, “Restatement of Policy on Germany, Stuttgart,” September
6, 1946.  http:// usa .usembassy .de/ etexts/ ga4–460906 .htm accessed August
20, 2006.
23. “You are God’s man”: Abram to Fricke, August 29, 1947, folder 4, box
218, collection 459, BGCA.
24. Michael H. Kater, Different Drummers: Jazz in the Culture of Nazi Germany
(Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 49.
25. Hans Spier, From the Ashes of Disgrace: A Journal from Germany, 1945–1955
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1985), pp. 31–32.
26. Hans Kempe to Abram, February 5, 1948, folder 5, box 218, collection
459, BGCA.
27. Peter Grose, Operation Rollback: America’s Secret War Behind the Iron Curtain
(Houghton Mifflin, 2000), pp. 2–6.
28. “Meeting Agenda,” in folders 46–50, box 585, collection 459, BGCA.
29. Most of this money came in individual donations raised by Abram’s
prayer cells (see Gedat to Abram, January 14, 1951; Abram to Gedat, April
18, 1951, folder 7, box 218, collection 459, BGCA), but some apparently came
from the Mellon Foundation, as well. Gedat to Abram, March 26, 1950,
folder 5, box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
30. In The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919–1945 (Cambridge
University Press, 2003), the historian Richard  Steigmann-Gall delivers con-
clusive evidence that settles the debate over whether or not Nazism conceived
of itself as anti-Christian: not at all. In fact, much of the top leadership,
Steigmann-Gall documents, considered the cross and the swastika two differ-
ent symbols for one great idea.
31. “Directive to Commander-in- Chief of United States Forces of Occupa-
tion Regarding the Military Government of Germany,” April 1945 (JCS
1067). Available online from the U.S. Embassy to Germany at http://usa .
usembassy .de/ etexts/ ga3–450426 .pdf .
32. “Asiatic nihilism”: Dr. H. O. Ahrens to Abram, November 10, 1949,
folder 5, box 218, collection 459, BGCA. Ahrens was a vocal and effective
lobbyist for German industrialists determined to avoid the dismantling of
factories used for military production. At the time of this letter, he was taking

--- Sayfa 417 ---
N O T E S | 411
one of Abram’s American operatives, William Frary von Bromberg (who
claimed the title of baron, perhaps falsely) on a tour of such properties.
33. Abram to Fricke, September 21, 1949; Fricke to Abram, October 17,
1949; Abram to Fricke, November 2, 1949; folder 4, box 218, collection 459,
BGCA. Gedat quoted in Inge Deutschkron, Mein Leben nach dem Überleben
(Dtv, 2000), p. 130.
34. The involvement of Abs, Schmelz, Rohrbach, and Speidel is reported in
“The Highlights of the ICL Conference at Castle Mainau, Germany, June
14–17, 1951,” an account by the ICL employee Wallace Haines, and an un-
dated, untitled report on the same conference by a German ICL employee,
Margarete Gärtner (herself a former prewar propagandist for German expan-
sion), folders 10 and 11, respectively, of box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
35. Hans von Eicken, a leader with Gedat and Fricke of the German division
of the Fellowship, wrote to Abram on July 11, 1951, to tell Abram that the
German Fellowship’s advocacy on behalf of Pohl and another war criminal,
Otto  Ohlendorf—an influential economist who’d boasted at his trial of hav-
ing overseen the murder of 90,000 Jews and other  non- Aryans—had helped
soothe the concerns of those in “important circles” who felt that the German
Fellowship was the “cleverly engineered product of an American power
group.” Folder 7, box 218, collection 459, BGCA. On October 12, 1951, von
Neurath’s daughter had written Abram a letter begging for help with the case
of her father. He’d been treated well by his American guards, she wrote, but
persecuted by the Soviets who ran the prison in tandem with the United
States. She was outraged that her father, one of the seven “Major War Crimi-
nals,” suffered from bad dentistry. “It was difficult for him to talk,” during her
last visit to him in prison, “as his artificial set of teeth—put in about a year ago
at Spandau—was fitting very badly.” Abram opened a file on the case. “Can
we do anything about this?” he wrote in a note to one of his aides. “Maybe
[Congressman O. K.] Armstrong should see this.” Von Neurath won his re-
lease as a medical parolee in 1953 (Arieh J. Kochavi, Prelude to Nuremberg: Allied
War Crimes Policy and the Question of Punishment [University of North Carolina
Press, 1998], p. 245), but besides this letter, the file Abram opened is lost,
leaving us uncertain whether Abram’s intervention played a part in von Neur-
ath’s good fortune. Winifred von Mackensen (née von Neurath) to Abram,
folder 1, box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
36. “Church Group Votes, Elects 17 from Congress,” Washington Post, January
14, 17, 1945. “Panty- waist diplomacy”: Grose, Operation Rollback, p. 6.

--- Sayfa 418 ---
412 |  N O T E S
37. Lance Morrow, The Best Year of their Lives: Kennedy, Nixon, and Johnson in
1948: Learning the Secrets of Power (Basic Books, 2005), p. 128. Jack Powers,
South Bend Tribune, February 24, 1991.
38. Address to the United States Senate, February 5, 1946. One can find
extensive excerpts from the speech on a number of Holocaust revisionist Web
sites, including, as of 2006, http:// www .sweetliberty .org/ issues/ wars/ wit
ness2history/ 21 .html .
39. Spier, From the Ashes of Disgrace, p. 27.
40. Lecture to the Frankfurt chapter of International Christian Leadership,
August 9, 1950, folder 11, box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
41. Von Gienanth to Wallace Haines, ICL “Field Director for Europe,”
March 29, 1952, folder 1, box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
42. Abram to Ropp, October 6, 1953, folder 3, box 218, collection 459,
BGCA. Ropp was himself an admirer of Merwin K. Hart, the  anti-Semitic
American fascist whom Abram had welcomed into the Fellowship’s inner cir-
cle. Ropp to Wallace Haines, August 12, 1952, folder 1, box 218, collection
459, BGCA.
43. Frances Hepp, April 23, 1947, folder 4, box 218, collection 459,
BGCA.
44. Haines to Abram, June 23, 1951, folder 8, box 218, collection 459, BGCA.
45. This account of the meeting at Mainau is drawn from K. C. Liddel,
“Notes on Mainau Conference,” June 28, 1951, folder 8, box 218, collection
459, BGCA; Wallace Haines, “The Highlights of ICL Conference at Castle
Mainau, Germany,” folder 10, box 218, collection 459; Christian Leadership
News, September 1951, collection 459; Margarete Gärtner, “Newsletter,” July
30, 1951, folder 10, box 218, collection 459; undated reports for Abram by
Margarete Gärtner in folders 10 and 11, box 218, collection 459. Gärtner’s
past as a propagandist is referred to in John Hiden and Thomas Lane, eds., The
Baltic and the Outbreak of the Second World War (Cambridge University Press,
1992), p. 126. The U-boat commander was Reinhard Hardegen. The fascist
editor was Benno Mascher. Bishop Wurm’s anti-Semitic remarks can be found
in Wolfgang Erlich, And the Witnesses Were Silent: The Confessing Church and the
Persecution of the Jews (University of Nebraska Press, 2000), p. 201.
46. Tony Judt, Postwar: A History of Europe Since 1945 (Penguin Press, 2005), p. 61.
47. Dallas, 1945, p. 615.
48. Zapp to Abram, September 16, 1950, folder 6, box 218, collection 459,
BGCA.
49. Carpenter, Revive Us Again, p. 149.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
N O T E S | 413
7. THE BLOB
1. Interview with Kate Phillips in Tom Weaver, Science Fiction Confidential:
Interviews With Monster Stars and Filmmakers (McFarland, 2002), pp. 234–46.
2. Joshua Muravchik, “Losing the Peace,” Commentary, July 1992.
3. Quoted in Richard Hofstadter’s 1955 essay “The Pseudo- Conservative Re-
volt,” in The Radical Right ed., Daniel Bell (Anchor Books, 1964), p. 76.
4. A revealing statistic overlooked by conventional historians of the Cold
War: between 1935, the year Abram and his fundamentalist elite came in
from the cold of domestic exile, and 1980, the commencement of the Reagan
era, the average number of American evangelical missionaries overseas grew
from 5,000, many of them engaged in small projects close to home, to 32,000
spread all over the globe. Carpenter, Revive Us Again, p. 184. The anthropolo-
gist David Stoll explores the  interconnections—ideological and actual—
between the U.S. covert operations and the network of evangelical
missionaries connected to what was then the largest missionary organization
in the world in Fishers of Men or Found ers of Empire?: The Wycliffe Bible Translators
in America (Zed Press, 1982). Stoll takes pains to explain that such intercon-
nections did not constitute a conspiracy, but rather, an overlapping worldview
in which spiritual and imperial interests  were not easily distinguished. As re-
cently as 2006, when Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez expelled a group of
evangelical missionaries he claimed  were U.S. spies, Christianity Today felt
compelled to condemn “The CIA Myth,” apparently persuasive enough to se-
duce even some of the magazine’s conservative evangelical readers. Deann
Alford, January 2006.
5. Quoted in Sara Diamond, Roads to Dominion: Right-Wing Movements and Po-
litical Power in the United States (Guilford Press, 1995), p. 101.
6. “Our press,” reads a memo in Abram’s files on Cuba and the American
media’s ambivalence toward Castro, “is infested with crypto-Communists
[and] intellectual prostitutes in their hire.” Whether the Fellowship would
extend that charge to even the evangelical press is unclear, but there can be no
doubt on their position with regard to détente with Castro.
7. Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Annual Message to Congress on the State of the
Union,” 1958. Eisenhower accused the Soviets of waging “total cold war,” to
which, he said, the United States must respond with “total peace” in which
“every asset of our personal and national lives,” particularly religion, would be
dedicated to the fight. Ike also believed in “progress” as defined by the Atlas,
Titan, Thor, Jupiter, and Polaris missile programs. The fact that such literally

--- Sayfa 420 ---
414 |  N O T E S
totalitarian ambitions were considered calming is an indicator of the fear and
loathing that infused the ostensibly bland 1950s.
8. Kenneth Osgood, Total Cold War: Eisenhower’s Secret Propaganda Battle at
Home and Abroad (Kansas State University Press, 2006), pp. 270–75.
9. Reverend John Collins, chairman of Christian Action, to Abram, Sep-
tember 8, 1950, folder 2, box 202, collection 459, BGCA.
10. Osgood, Total Cold War, p. 40.
11. “Government Curbs Scored,” New York Times, May 11, 1949.
12. Grubb to Abram, August 21, 1953, folder 2, box 202, collection 459,
BGCA.
13. Perhaps they carried with them reprints of a Look magazine article
Abram had had made, his chief piece of literature that year. The lead story
was by Norman Vincent Peale, Abram’s colleague in the Twelve. Why was
America experiencing a spiritual revival? Simple, said Peale: “for the first
time in the country’s history, we are filled with fear.” Peale’s solution: “It is
now widely recognized that prayer is a skill, that it is an actual power.” The
demand of the hour, wrote Peale, was organizing such power into action, a
“vital spiritual force.” His inspiration? “The Vereide Organization,” which
inculcated “the country’s lawmakers” in “the importance of divine guid-
ance.” Abram’s reprint of Peale’s May 22, 1951, Look article, “The Place of
Prayer in America,” was titled “These Scandalous Years in Washington,” a
reference to widespread suspicion that the Truman administration was rid-
dled with red agents. Folder 51, box 585, collection 459, BGCA. “Direct re-
lationship . . .”: Associated Press, “Wiley Trip Declared in U.S. Interest,”
Washington Post, May 21, 1952. Particularly controversial was Wiley’s deci-
sion to bring his much younger new bride for a vacation, a practice that un-
der Eisenhower would become unofficial policy, the chumminess of power
couples meeting their peers used to cement “relationships” with foreign na-
tions, as David F. Schmitz writes in Thank God They’re On Our Side: The United
States &  Right-Wing Dictatorships (University of North Carolina Press, 1999),
p. 183.
14. Wilhelmina was at that point technically “princess,” having passed
her throne to her daughter, Juliana, but she was still referred to as queen,
and both women  were strong supporters of the Fellowship, though
whether out of religious sentiment or other  motives—the royal family
was responsible for the interests of Royal  Dutch-Shell  Oil—is unclear in
Abram’s papers.

--- Sayfa 421 ---
N O T E S | 415
15. Robert C. Albright, “Ike Can’t Find Titles for All His Talented Help,”
Washington Post, June 22, 1952.
16. “The June Brides,” Time, June 23, 1952.
17. In Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conservatism: A Woman’s Crusade (Princeton
University Press, 2005), the historian Donald T. Crichtlow argues that this
sense of betrayal led to the formation of the New Right that would propel
Barry Goldwater to the GOP nomination twelve years later. See pp. 46–47.
18. Drew Pearson, “Merry-Go-Round: Taft Talks Way Back to the Top,”
Washington Post, December 22, 1952.
19. Two of the Democratic candidates for the nomination, Senator Estes
Kefauver of Tennessee and Senator Robert Kerr of Oklahoma,  were Breakfast
Groupers. The eventual nominee, Illinois governor Adlai Stevenson, was de-
cidedly not, but his hawkish liberalism would lead him into even more mili-
tant expressions of faith. The “one supreme difference” between the United
States and the USSR, Stevenson told a “Washington Pilgrimage” of Christian
nationalists, “is that America and its leaders believe in God; the rulers of Rus-
sia have turned their back on God and deny His very existence.” “Presidential
Candidates Speak Out For Religion,” Washington Post, May 3, 1952. Steven-
son’s surprising piety may be understood as a sign of the times; the 1952 elec-
tion was, according to the Washington Post, the first time all presidential
candidates had publicly paid tribute to America’s ostensible religious—read,
“Christian”—heritage.
20. Graham’s account of his role can be found in “The General Who Be-
came President,” chapter 12 of his autobiography, Just As I Am (HarperSan-
Franciso/Zondervan, 1997), in which he says he met Abram during his
Northwest Crusades. He does not mention the fact that Abram had been re-
cruited by his own former Seattle  cell—doubling as the sponsoring commit-
tee for the Graham Crusade’s  visit—to seek federal funds for a cover for the
city’s Memorial Stadium to ensure the Crusade’s success. “Graham wants
this,” wrote Abram’s Seattle lieutenant, a wealthy lawyer named Warren
Dew ar. “Langlie and  Devin”—the governor and the mayor of Seattle, both
men whose careers had been made by Breakfast Group  connections—“want it
too.” Dewar suggests that $18,000, possibly federal funds, had already been
directed toward Graham’s appearance. Dewar to Abram, May 16, 1951, folder
7, box 168, collection 459, BGCA. Reference to Oiltown U.S.A. may be found
in the BGEA’s collection 214, the records of World Wide Pictures, Graham’s
film production company.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
416 |  N O T E S
21. Dr. Frederick Brown Harris, quoted in Grubb, Modern Viking, pp.
130–32.
22. Nick Thimmesch, “Politicians and the Underground Prayer Movement,”
Los Angeles Times, January 13, 1974. Thimmesch, who admired the Fellow-
ship, described it thusly: “They are secretive and guarded in discussing their
experiences or activities . . . They genuinely avoid publicity. In fact, they
shun it.”
23. Ferguson: Ferguson was a longtime inner circle member who regularly
appeared in the Fellowship’s brochures for new prospects. Bennett: Bennett’s
membership in ICL was reported in the July 1959 issue of Moody Monthly, the
magazine of the fundamentalist Moody Institute in Chicago, in “Christians in
Your Congress,” by Donald H. Gill. Other members cited included Strom
Thurmond, James B. Utt—the Orange County congressman who believed
that the United Nations was training Africans to conquer the United  States—
and Representative Bruce Alger, the Dallas Republican who would lead a
“mink coat mob” made up of his wealthy female supporters in a spitting attack
on Ladybird Johnson. Bennett, a signer of the infamous Southern Manifesto,
remained close to the Fellowship for decades. “I ask too much of you already,”
he wrote Doug Coe on January 27, 1987, “and therefore am not pressing for a
particular appointment, but anytime that suits you I would certainly like to
see you.” Folder 4, box 166, collection 459, BGCA.
24. Hefley and Plowman, Washington: Christians in the Corridors of Power,
pp. 120–21.
25. Associated Press, “Eisenhower Joins in a Breakfast Prayer Meeting,” New
York Times, February 5, 1954. Eisenhower didn’t speak at the second breakfast,
but Vice President Nixon did, initiating a tradition Nixon maintained for the
rest of the decade. Personally indifferent to Abram’s piety, he recognized the
value of the Prayer Breakfast’s pulpit and made it his own. Guatemala: Van
Gosse, Where the Boys Are: Cuba, Cold War America and the Making of a New Left
(Verso, 1993), pp. 26–29.
26. Seth Jacobs, America’s Miracle Man in Vietnam: Ngo Dinh Diem, Religion,
Race, and U.S. Intervention in Southeast Asia (Duke University Press, 2005),
pp. 60–62. “Wiley Would End Attack on Dulles,” New York Times, July 25,
1954.
27. “McCarthy to be Asked to Aid Ike,” Washington Post, September 18, 1952.
Ferdinand Kuhn, “McCarthy’s Charges in Speech Stir Angry Denials, Pro-
tests,” Washington Post, October 29, 1952.

--- Sayfa 423 ---
N O T E S | 417
28. I. F. Stone, “The First Welts on Joe McCarthy,” I. F. Stone’s Weekly, March
15, 1954, reproduced in The Best of I. F. Stone, ed. Peter Osnos (Public Affairs,
2006).
29. “For God and Country,” Vanguard University Magazine, the alumni journal
of the former Southern California Bible College, Spring 2002.
30. Osgood, Total Cold War, p. 315.
31. Drew Pearson, “The New  JCS—and the Old,” Washington Post, August
13, 1953.
32. John Broger, “Moral Doctrine for Free World Global Planning,” a pre-
sentation to Abram’s ICL, June 14, 1954, folder 1, box 505, collection 459,
BGCA.
33. Marquis Childs, “A Strange Film Shown to Soldiers,” Washington Post,
January 27, 1961.
34. “Militant Liberty Outline Plan,” November 5, 1954, Operations Coor-
dinating Board Central Files, box 70, OCB 091, from the collection of Ken-
neth Osgood, Florida Atlantic University.
35. Wayne’s USC football teammate Ward Bond joined forces with Broger as
well, but although Bond appeared in some of the best movies Hollywood ever
made, including Gone With the Wind, It’s a Wonderful Life, and Ford’s brilliant
John Wayne vehicle, The Searchers, it wouldn’t be fair to include him in the
same category as those two tremendously talented reactionaries. Of course,
Ford would have disagreed with me. Sort of: “Let’s face it,” he once said of
Bond’s anticommunist snitching, “Ward Bond is a shit. But he’s our favorite
shit.” Frances Stonor Saunders, The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of
Arts and Letters (New Press, 2000), pp. 284–87.
36. Broger, “Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense,” July 26, 1957,
no box number, collection 459, BGCA.
8. VIETNAMIZATION
1. Clifton J. Robinson to Doug Coe, April 28, 1966, folder 2, box 372, col-
lection 459, BGCA.
2. “Carter Appoints ‘Field Marshall’ Sullivan Ambassador to Shah,” MERIP
Report, no. 59, August 1977, pp. 24–25. Sullivan went on to become the last
American ambassador to Iran, an appointment of great controversy. Sullivan
“is  well-fitted to run secret presidential wars and lie to Congress about

--- Sayfa 424 ---
418 | N O T E S
them,” editorialized The Nation, an assessment borne out in more admiring
terms by a study conducted for the CIA: “The secret war in Laos, author Charles
Stevenson has emphasized, was ‘William Sullivan’s war.’ . . . Sullivan im-
posed two conditions upon his subordinates. First, the thin fiction of the
Geneva accords had to be maintained . . .  ; military operations, therefore,
had to be carried out in relative secrecy. Second, no regular US ground
troops were to become involved.” Instead, Sullivan resorted to one of the
most destructive bombing campaigns of the Vietnam War. William M.
Leary, “CIA Air Operations in Laos, 1955–1974,” Studies in Intelligence (pub-
lished by the CIA), Winter 1999–2000.
3. Abram, “Memorandum to the Board,” circa 1966, folder 2, box 563, col-
lection 459, BGCA.
4.
Bold Satanic forces: Ibid. Cyclone: Frank McLaughlin to Abram, December
15, 1966, folder 1, box 168, collection 459, BGCA. “Ten steps . . .”: Coe to Jim
Anderson of Young Life, November 18, 1981, folder 5, box 168, collection
459, BGCA.
5. Robinson had won for the Fellowship’s muscular Christ the ostensibly
Ghandian Hindu A. M. Thomas, responsible for India’s armed forces during
some of the worst fighting with Pakistan. Robinson to Ford Mason, Novem-
ber 30, 1964, folder 2, box 232, collection 459, BGCA.
6. Robinson to Halverson, April 13, 1963, ibid.
7. Halverson to Robinson, May 22, 1963, ibid.
8. Cordle, Halverson: Robinson to Mason, November 30, 1964, ibid.
9. V. Raymond Edman, They Found the Secret: Twenty Lives That Reveal A Touch
of Eternity (Zondervan, 1984), pp. 78–87.
10
 Halverson’s responsibility to a pluralistic nation did not mellow his reli-
gious convictions. Upon his death in 1995, Senator Dan Coats (R., Indiana)
would eulogize him by expressing his admiration for a man who would
preach thusly on the Senate floor: “God of our fathers, if we separate moral-
ity from politics, we imperil our Nation and threaten  self-destruction. Impe-
rial Rome was not defeated by an enemy from without; it was destroyed by
moral decay from within. Mighty God, over and over again you warned your
people, Israel, that righteousness is essential to national health.” Halverson
also preached in the Senate against investigative reporting. Cal Thomas, “The
Most Powerful Man in Washington Retires,” York Daily Record, November 9,
1994.
11. Robert D. Foster, The Navigator (Challenge Books, 1983), p. 61.

--- Sayfa 425 ---
N O T E S | 419
12. Doug Coe, “The Person of Christ,” a videotaped address to the Presi-
dent’s Meeting, a gathering of evangelical leaders, January 15, 1989.
13. “Washington Welcomes Doug Coe,” in Christian Leadership, October
1959, collection 459, BGCA.
14.
“a woman so uncomplaining”: Wallace Haines quoted in “A Key Man in
Every Country,” July 1973, folder 20, box 383, collection 459, BGCA. Sharp-
nack to Coe, December 28, 1959, folder 10, box 135, collection 459, BGCA.
15. Cal Ludeman to Coe, April 27, 1960, folder 11, box 135, collection
459, BGCA.
16. Kent Hotaling to Coe, January 18, 1960, folder 10, box 135, collection
459, BGCA.
17. One of Coe’s standard closings on letters written in 1960, folder 11, box
135, collection 459, BGCA.
18. Haines is quoted back to himself in a letter from Coe to Haines dated
December 27, 1967, folder 4, box 204, collection 459, BGCA. Coe to par-
ents, November 4, 1959, folder 11, box 368, collection 459, BGCA.
19. Frank Laubach, “A Pentagon of World Friendship,” October 19, 1955,
folder 1, box 505, collection 459, BGCA. Chuck Hull to Coe, January 15,
1960, folder 10, box 135, collection 459, BGCA.
20. Traveling on Fellowship behalf: Christian Leadership, December 1959, collec-
tion 459, BGCA.  “Capehart and Carlson Meet Duvalier; U.S. Senators Pledge
Assistance to Haiti, New Pittsburgh Courier, December 5, 1959.
21. Doug Barram to Coe, June 12, 1962, folder 5, box 168, collection 459,
BGCA.
22. “Finding the Better Way,” January 15, 1942, pamphlet, collection 459,
BGCA.
23. March 1962 remarks to a prayer breakfast for the governor of Arizona,
filed under “Thoughts on Prayer,” file 16, box 449, collection 459, BGCA.
24. “LBJ, Billy Graham Eloquent at Breakfast,” Washington Post, February
18, 1966.
25. March 8, 1962, folder 5, box 361, collection 459, BGCA.
26. Carlson to José Joaquín Trejos Fernández, November 27, 1967, folder
17, box 365, collection 459, BGCA. Dorn was of no relation to the first W. J.
Bryan, for whom he was named not in deference to Bryan’s fundamentalism,
ironically, but in honor of Bryan’s  anti-imperialism.
27.
Howard Siner, “Attorney Knows Carter as Smart, Kind Friend,” San Jose
News, March 4, 1977.

--- Sayfa 426 ---
420 | N O T E S
28. Bill Green to Coe, August 4, 1960, folder 11, box 135, collection 459,
BGCA.
29. Savimbi, a black African leader who enjoyed support from the apartheid
state as well as American Christian conservatives, is harder to pin down than
Barre, who gambled his  whole relationship with the United States on the
Family. Interviews with and correspondence of Clif Gosney, a former Family
liaison to the South African Zulu chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, reveal that
Savimbi was also within the Family’s circle, his spiritual  well- being tended by
Gosney, a sincere Christian, and Piet Koornhof, a cabinet minister in the
South African government of F. W. de Klerk.
30. There are at least two nearly full boxes of documents at the Billy Graham
Center Archives detailing the Family’s relationship with Brazilian regimes.
Boxes 184–85, collection 459, BGCA.
31. Interview with Coe by Tore Gjerstad, October 29, 2007.
32. Notes on reorganization folders 1–2, box 563, collection 459, BGCA.
33. Abram to Admiral C. S. Freeman, November 23, 1949, folder 2, box 348,
collection 459, BGCA. Abram never put an explicitly anti-Semitic word on
record, and while Malik may have been holding out hope for a Christian Pal-
estinian state to the south of Lebanon, he was likely motivated more by his
understanding of scripture, which did not include  anti-Semitism. Freeman,
however, the point man on the project, was an old-fashioned Jew hater and a
frequent collaborator with Merwin K. Hart, the American fascist organizer.
34. Quoted in the December 1959/January 1960 issue of Christian Leadership,
a members-only newsletter of the International Christian  Leadership—the
Fellowship. Located in the periodicals section of collection 459 at the
BGCA.
35. June 28, 1963, “Thoughts on Prayer,” folder 16, box 449, collection
459, BGCA.
36. Bell made clear to the students that they’d been selected not for their
good standing as Christians—some  were not  religious—or good grades, but
solely for their status as big men on campus. February 5, 1970, “Young Men’s
Seminar,” tape 107, collection 459, BGCA. “During the seminar, when I
voiced my objection to the assumption that we were all devoted Christians,”
Joe Persico, the student body president of San Francisco State, had complained
to Lyndon Johnson after a similar event in 1965, “we  were told by Roger
Staubach . . . from the U.S. Naval Academy, ‘I feel sorry for all of you who
are not Christians, because you have no chance of an after-life.’ General
Silverthorn”—one of Abram’s chief aides, an ancient officer who’d held a

--- Sayfa 427 ---
N O T E S | 421
Kurtz-like post in the U.S. occupation of Haiti during the  1920s—“told us
that, ‘of course, Christ said a few oddball things, too, like the Sermon on the
Mount.’ ” Andrew Kopkind, “The Power of Prayer,” New Republic, March 6,
1965.
37. February 5, 1970, “Young Men’s Seminar,” tape 107, collection 459,
BGCA.
38. Ibid.
39. For basic biographical details about Colson, I relied on his first two mem-
oirs, Born Again (Spire, 1977) and Life Sentence (Chosen Books, 1979), and
John Perry’s admiring biography, Charles Colson: A Story of Power, Corruption, and
Redemption (Broadman and Holman, 2003). Colson’s output, augmented by
numerous ghostwriters, is enormous. Texts I found particularly useful to un-
derstanding his thinking include Against the Night: Living in the New Dark Ages
(Servant Publications, 1989); How Now Shall We Live? (Tyndale, 1999); and
Kingdoms in Conflict (William Morrow, 1987).
40. Thimmesch, “Politicians and the Underground Prayer Movement,” Los
Angeles Times, January 13, 1974.
41. Hefley and Plowman, Washington: Christians in the Corridors of Power, pp.
38–55.
42. Paul Apostolidis, Stations of the Cross: Adorno and Christian Right Radio
(Duke University Press, 2000), p. 151.
43. Kandy Stroud, “Chuck Colson: Reflections Before Prison,” Women’s Wear
Daily, July 1, 1974.
44. Collection 275, BGCA.
45. Apostolidis, Stations of the Cross, p. 151.
46. Lindsay, Faith in the Halls of Power, p. 59.
47. Colson to Coe, November 20, 1980, folder 8, box 368, collection 459,
BGCA.
48. Apostolidis, Stations of the Cross, p. 150.
49. Howard Gillette, Jr., Between Beauty and Justice: Race, Planning and the
Failure of Urban Policy in Washington, D.C. (Johns Hopkins University Press,
1995), p. 153.
50. No signature to Coe, April 1, 1960, folder 10, box 135, collection 459,
BGCA.
51. Julia Rabig, “ ‘Black Buffers’: Evangelical Entrepreneurship Meets Black
Power on the Streets of Washington, D.C.,” unpublished paper presented at
the 2004 University of Pennsylvania Graduate Humanities Forum.
52. Ibid., p. 19.

--- Sayfa 428 ---
422 |  N O T E S
53. Interview with John Staggers, “How to Eat an Elephant,” HIS, November
1981. HIS was a men’s magazine published by the  Inter-Varsity Christian
Leadership.
54. Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, Snapping: America’s Epidemic of Sudden
Personality Changes (Stillpoint Press, 2005), p. 32.
9. JESUS + 0 = X
1. Abram to Frank McLaughlin, February 14, 1968, folder 1, box 168, col-
lection 459, BGCA.
2. Kathy Kadane, “U.S. Officials’ Lists Aided Indonesian Bloodbath in ’60s,”
Washington Post, May 21, 1990.
3. Wilkes, “Prayer,” New York Times, December 22, 1974.
4. Senator B. Everett Jordan, “Personal and Confidential Memo” to members
of Congress on Family assets around the globe, April 1969, folder 2, box 363,
collection 459, BGCA. Marpaung’s contribution to the murderous crackdown
is even celebrated by some evangelicals. “The story of Indonesian revival is an
illustration of God’s sovereignty,” reads the subheading over an account of
Marpaung’s speech on an evangelical website,  http://members.aol.com/the
waycm/revival/asia .html, accessed July 20, 2007.
5. Hatfield to Nixon, November 11, 1969, folder 5, box 584, collection 459,
BGCA.
6. Shortly after that meeting, Moorer, convinced that Nixon was soft on com-
munism, began an espionage operation against the president’s civilian advis-
ers, “a hanging offense,” in the words of the Pentagon investigator who
uncovered the plot. “Don’t tell Laird,” Nixon instructed his attorney general
as he considered prosecuting Moorer. James Rosen, “Nixon and the Chiefs,”
Atlantic, April 2002.
7. Coe to Korry, October 10, 1970, folder 36, box 194, collection 459,
BGCA. Korry and the October 1970 Plot: Gregory Palast, “A Marxist Threat to
Cola Sales? Pepsi Demands a U.S. Coup. Goodbye Allende. Hello Pinochet,”
Observer (UK), November 8, 1998. Korry, to his very minor credit, opposed a
military coup because he did not think it would work. The  CIA- backed mur-
der of Allende’s defense minister that month seemed to bear out his point.
The Chilean people rallied round Allende. But in 1973, Kissinger and Gen-
eral Pinochet, to Chile’s lasting sorrow, proved him wrong. I could find no

--- Sayfa 429 ---
T H E F A M I L Y | 423
record of Fellowship contact with Pinochet. They had long been allied with a
right-wing civilian faction called the “Officialists,” headed by Hector Valen-
zue la Valderrama, a conservative Catholic politician whom Coe and Korry
shopped around in Washington in 1969 as an Allende alternative. “The Major-
ity Leader of the Congress, with whom you visited, called me the other day,”
Coe wrote Valderrama. “He again expressed an interest in the ideas that you
and he discussed. I think in the months to come such ideas can be pursued in
private discussions and someday perhaps come to pass.” Correspondence,
Coe, Korry, and Valderrama, February–June 1969, folder 35, box 194, col-
lection 459, BGCA. “The sun is just now beginning to shine again”: Valder-
rama to Coe, December 21, 1973, box 194, BGCA.
8. Tape 109, January 4, 1971, titled “Family Night at Fellowship House during
which “Sam Cram,” Douglas Coe, and Clif Robinson gave reports on their
recent trip to Japan, South Korea, South Vietnam, India, Hong Kong, Philip-
pines, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Turkey, and the Soviet Union to visit
leaders in those countries,” collection 459, BGCA.
9. B. Everett Jordan to members of the U.S. Senate and  House of Represen-
tatives involved with the Presidential and Congressional Prayer Breakfasts,
October 1970. “Mr. Howard Hardesty, Executive Vice President of Conti-
nental Oil company, recently traveled to Indonesia where he met for a day
with men in the leadership groups there. He also had dinner with President
Suharto and Members of the Indonesian Cabinet. The sense of spiritual rela-
tionship which was formed caused Mr. Hardesty to comment, ‘This is one of
the greatest days of my life.’ ” Folder 8, box 548, collection 459, BGCA.
10. McClure: Jordan to members of Congress involved with the Prayer Break-
fasts, 1970, folder 2, box 362, collection 459, BGCA. “Confi dential” prayer:
Jordan to members of Congress, undated, in reference to 1970 National
Prayer Breakfast, folder 5, box 584, collection 459, BGCA.
11. Elgin Groseclose to Clifton J. Robinson, November 28, 1972, folder 6,
box 383, collection 459, BGCA.
12. Clifton J. Robinson to Elgin Groseclose, December 1, 1972, ibid.
13. From a 2005 interview with the Reverend Rob Schenck, president of
Faith and Action, a small,  Coe-style ministry with headquarters across from
the U.S. Supreme Court.
14. Locke’s remarks are found on p. 19 of “Trip to the [illegible] and Sermon
by Doug Coe,” circa 1988, National Prayer Breakfast, no box number, collec-
tion 459, BGCA.

--- Sayfa 430 ---
424 |  N O T E S
10. INTERESTING BLOOD
1. Max Blumenthal, “God’s Country,” Washington Monthly, October 2003.
Eyal Press’s Absolute Convictions: My Father, a City, and the Conflict that Divided
America (Henry Holt, 2006) is the definitive account of the Buffalo abortion
wars and the murder of Barnett Slepian.
2. Hillary Clinton, Living History (Simon and Schuster, 2003), p. 168.
3. Interview with Tony Hall, August 30, 2006, by Meera Subramnian.
Hall recently published a book (coauthored by Tom Price) with the evangeli-
cal publisher Thomas Nelson titled Changing the Face of Hunger: One Man’s Story
of How Liberals, Conservatives, Demo crats, Republicans, and People of Faith are Join-
ing Forces to Help the Hungry, the Poor, the Oppressed (2006). In it, Hall repeat-
edly refers to a figure who connects him with Republican members of the
Family as “our mutual friend.” Hall puts the connections to good effect,
genuinely pursuing a foreign policy more oriented toward the problem of
hunger. But his emphasis on religious  freedom—and his disinterest in sys-
temic economic critiques—persistently guides him toward worthy but senti-
mental projects of limited effect, or worse, actively depoliticizing local
organizations.
4. As Marcos “disappeared” his opponents in the mid–1970s, the Family
moved a  full-time operative to Manila. In 1975, Marcos hosted his first Presi-
dential Prayer Breakfast, with Coe and Senator Hughes as guests. The event’s
organizer, Bruce Sundberg, was blunt about his interest in the worst elements
of Filipino politics: “that is where the wealth is,” he wrote to his financial sup-
porters in America. Sundberg didn’t want it for himself, but he believed in a
trickle-down fundamentalism. Win a “top man” for the faith, and the lesser
people—those without money, those without  power—will fall into line.
Sundberg, general letter, October 17, 1975. Sundberg’s salary was paid in
part by such a top man, Filipino senator Gil Puyat, one of Marcos’s financiers,
who put $14,285 in a trust for Sundberg, according to a letter to Sundberg
from Coe dated June 10, 1975, ibid. Puyat’s fi nancial support for the Marcos
regime is documented in John T. Sidel’s Capital, Coercion and Crime: Bossism in
the Philippines (Stanford University Press, 1999), p. 74. Another top man cul-
tivated by Sundberg was Butch Aquino, the son of Benigno Aquino, the op-
position hero murdered by Marcos. The younger Aquino, Sundberg wrote to
Coe on September 25, 1976, was “moving more and more to the ‘left’ ” until
Sundberg gave him a copy of Chuck Colson’s Born Again, which persuaded him

--- Sayfa 431 ---
N O T E S | 425
not to join the  anti-Marcos rebels. All Sundberg correspondence is located in
folder 13, box 475, collection 459, BGCA.
5. The Family’s role in U.S.-Somali relations is documented in extensive
correspondence in folders 18–24, box 254, collection 459, BGCA.
INTERLUDE
1. Michael Denning, The Cultural Front: The Laboring of American Culture in the
Twentieth Century (Verso, 1997).
11. WHAT EVERYBODY WANTS
1. The stories of individual believers related in this chapter  were gathered
during two reporting trips to New Life Church, the first in January 2005, and
the second in April 2005. Between these visits I corresponded with some of
the members of the church. Where I draw from sources other than interviews
conducted during this period, I’ll provide additional notes.
2. Pastor Ted Haggard, the former leader of New Life, has since disputed
that the location of the Air Force Academy was a consideration, in contradic-
tion of information provided me by church representatives.
3. Cara Degette, “All the President’s Men,” Colorado Springs In de pen dent, No-
vember 13, 2003.
4. This account of Pastor Ted’s founding of New Life is drawn from per-
sonal interviews and Pastor Ted’s Primary Purpose: Making It Hard for People to Go
to Hell From Your City (Charisma  House, 1995). The missionary in question,
Danny Ost, is the son of Joseph Ost, a longtime collaborator of the Fellow-
ship’s on African work. In 1965, Joseph Ost went to work  full-time for the
Fellowship “behind the scenes” in West Africa. Ost introduced Doug Coe and
Gustav Adolf Gedat, then in the late stages of his West German political
career, to se nior Ivory Coast and Liberia government officials. (Coe to Vittoria
Vaccari, December 1965, folder 1, box 362, collection 459, BGCA. Coe to
Gedat, December 30, 1965, folder 11, box 219, collection 459.) Coe included
short reports of Ost’s  involvement—including his meetings with African
heads of state—in November/December 1965, and April/May 1966 “confi-
dential” briefings he prepared for congressional members of the Fellowship.

--- Sayfa 432 ---
426 |  N O T E S
(Folder 2, box 362, and folder 19, box 449, collection 459, BGCA.) This is, of
course, not evidence of any organizational connection between Haggard and
the Family; rather, it is simply an illustration of the small world of American
fundamentalism’s elites.
5. In Primary Purpose, Haggard writes of confronting men outside a gay bar
he’d discovered with one of his associate pastors. “Two days later, I had a
meeting scheduled with one of the men in the church. On my way there, I
had to go near the intersection where the bar was located and wondered
how many cars would be in the parking lot of that bar in the middle of the
day.” After observing for a while, Ted spotted a member of his church. Ted
jumped out of his car. “ ‘Jesus sent me here to rescue you,’ ” he called. His
friend got into Ted’s car and cried while Ted ministered to him. See pp.
107–8.
6. Ibid., p. 26.
7. Ibid., p. 33.
8. Ted Haggard, Dog Training, Fly Fishing, and Sharing Christ in the 21st Century
(Nelson Books, 2002), p. 9.
9. Ibid., p. 48.
10. The first populist church to successfully adopt the cell structure was
not American, but South Korean, the work of Pastor Paul Cho, who built a
congregation of nearly eight hundred thousand, the largest single church in
the world, using a  cell- group structure that thrived under that nation’s Cold
War authoritarianism. Steve Brouwer, Paul Gifford, and Susan D. Rose,
Exporting the American Gospel: Global Christian Fundamentalism (Routledge,
1996), p. 2.
11. Haggard, Primary Purpose, p. 160. Pastor Ted is aware that his martial
plans alarm some outsiders; in Primary Purpose he also writes that when he
began his campaign for Colorado Springs, “spiritual warfare was not a pop-
ular subject . . . I didn’t speak publicly about my own experiences” (p.
32). Even in his more mainstream position atop the NAE, Ted’s belief in
less than full disclosure persisted. When the evangelical journalist Ayelish
McGarvey asked Pastor Ted in 2004 why President Bush, as a Christian,
had not apologized for the false assertions used to justify the Iraq War, or
for the dishonest smears marshaled on his campaign’s behalf, Ted said: “I
think if you asked the President these questions once he’s out of offi  ce, he’d
say, ‘You’re right. We shouldn’t have done it.’ But right now if he said
something like that, well, the world would spin out of control! . . .

--- Sayfa 433 ---
N O T E S | 427
Listen, I think [we Christian believers] are responsible not to lie, but I
don’t think we’re responsible to say everything we know.” (McGarvey, “As
God Is His Witness,” American Prospect online edition, October 19, 2004,
http:// www .prospect .org/ web/ page .ww ?section= root & name= ViewWeb
& articleId = 8790 .
12. William Sims Bainbridge and Rodney Stark, A Theory of Religion (Lang,
1987); Roger Finke and Rodney Stark, The Churching of America, 1776–1990:
Winners and Losers in Our Religious Economy (Rutgers University Press, 1992);
Rodney Stark and Roger Finke, Acts of Faith: Explaining the Human Side of Reli-
gion (University of California Press, 2000). Since I wrote this chapter, Stark
has published a new book that signals his shift from scholarship into  wholesale
Christian triumphalism of a variety barely distinguishable from Pastor Ted’s:
The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism, and Western Suc-
cess (Random  House, 2005).
13. Stark and Finke, Chapter 8, “A Theoretical Model of Religious Econo-
mies,” in Acts of Faith.
14. Haggard, Dog Training, p. 12.
15. Ibid., pp. 35–39.
16. Ibid., p. 24.
17. Both organizations have their roots in the dubious late- nineteenth-century
science of boyology, practiced by mostly Protestant,  upper-class men con-
cerned about the degenerative effects of “city rot,” immigrants, and profes-
sional female educators on future generations of men. The Boy Scouts was the
most militant of many groups that started up, but over the years, it grew
soft—or maybe Christian fundamentalists grew harder in spirit. (Clifford
Putney, Muscular Christianity: Manhood and Sports in Protestant America, 1880–
1920 [Harvard University Press, 2001].) An Assemblies of God preacher
named Johnny Barnes founded the Royal Rangers in 1962, blatantly copying
the Scouts and adding an extra dose of scripture. It has since prospered on the
conservative fringe. New Life’s success with the program, though, has been a
big factor in moving it toward the mainstream. The Scouts still offer a “God
and Country Program,” but that can’t compare with the Rangers’ emphasis on
foreign missions, adventures that appeal to kids and fundamentalist parents
alike. http:// royalrangers .ag .org/ .
18.
Our City, God’s Word (International Bible Society, 2004). “Who is the
‘Our’ in ‘Our City, God’s Word’ that the International Bible Society refers
to?” asked Colorado Springs resident Susan Hindman in a letter published in

--- Sayfa 434 ---
428 |  N O T E S
the November 7, 2004, Colorado Springs Gazette. The IBS proceeded to produce
editions for two more cities, further confusing the issue.
12. THE ROMANCE OF AMERICAN FUNDAMENTALISM
1. Anne Constable, Richard Walker, and Tom Carter, “The Sins of Billy
James,” Time, February 16, 1976.
13. UNSCHOOLING
1.
The American Republic for Christian Schools, second edition, by Rachel C.
Larson, Pamela B. Creason, and Michael D. Matthews, is published by Bob
Jones University Press (2000). Bob Jones University, perhaps the most tradi-
tional school in Christian higher education, is too elite to be representative of
populist fundamentalism but too separatist and intolerant even within the
faith to be part of elite fundamentalism. And yet its publishing arm, one of the
biggest suppliers of evangelical textbooks, reaches far beyond the university’s
sphere of influence. I first learned of the press and its offerings in 2005 at Mac-
Dowell, an artists’ colony in New Hampshire, as a group of writers and artists
were discussing the texts they’d read as schoolchildren. One, Michelle
Aldredge, had us all beat, with quick recall of an impressive sample of
eighteenth- and  nineteenth-century American literature, from Jonathan Ed-
wards to Walt Whitman. What kind of amazing school had she attended? An
evangelical academy, where she’d studied Dr. Raymond St. John’s two-volume
American Literature for Christian Schools. I ordered Bob Jones University Press’s
2003 teachers’ edition of the text and soon realized that my secular public
school education had failed to provide me an adequate grounding in American
literature. Dr. St. John’s text offered excerpts from writers I didn’t encounter
until college or behind. On the other hand, students were advised to ponder
how much better the  already-great Melville could have been had he not been a
pagan.
2. MacArthur did more than that, according to the historian Lawrence
S. Wittnew: “Despite the official policy of religious freedom and separation of
church and state in occupied Japan . . . General Douglas MacArthur openly
and actively assisted the propagation of the Christian faith . . . Christianity

--- Sayfa 435 ---
N O T E S | 429
and democracy  were closely tied in MacArthur’s opinion, and during the
Cold War period he looked to Christianity as a major weapon against Com-
munism in Japan.” That weapon took the form of a campaign to bring thou-
sands of missionaries into Japan and distribute 10 million Bibles. Christianity
didn’t take, but it’s possible that it did help blunt the powerful postwar appeal
of Japanese leftism. “MacArthur and the Missionaries: God and Man in Oc-
cupied Japan,” Pacific Historical Review 40, no. 1 (1971): 77–98.
3. Douthat’s article, published to mild fanfare in the August/September
2006 issue of First Things, missed the lengthy and admiring obituary published
by the magazine just five years previous, William Edgar’s August/September
2001 tribute, “The Passing of R. J. Rushdoony,” in which Edgar eulogized
him as “a man of extraordinary brilliance possessing an almost encyclopedic
knowledge of human affairs,” and recalled with fondness his early study of
Rushdoony at Francis Schaeffer’s L’Abri. Schaeffer, we are told by the respect-
able Right, took only Rushdoony’s most civilized ideas. Which is to say, he
narrowed Rushdoony’s rage down to abortionists, writing in the early 1970s
of abortion as symbolic of all of secularism and thus the front line in a battle
between good and evil that justified breaking laws. Some fans took action,
burning and bombing hundreds of abortion clinics and shooting several doc-
tors. See Press, Absolute Convictions (Henry Holt, 2006).
4. Quoted in John Bolt, A Free Church, A Holy Nation: Abraham Kuyper’s Ameri-
can Public Theology (William B. Eerdmans, 2001), p. 21. Bolt, a fellow with the
fundamentalist Family Research Council, is at the forefront of a broad attempt
to claim Kuyper as a forebear of radical Christian conservatism, part of the
long-term project of constructing an intellectual history for a religious tradi-
tion that has long eschewed intellectualism.
5. The historian James D. Bratt argues for the progressive interpretation of
Kuyper in his edited Abraham Kuyper: A Centennial Reader (William B. Eerd-
mans, 1998). “Kuyper was and was not a Protestant ‘fundamentalist,’ ” writes
Bratt. “He was in a manner: a militant in all things, including his
anti-Modernism . . . He did not try to eradicate history, but grow from it”
(p. 3). In responding to an early draft of this chapter, Bratt noted that while
Rushdoony and other contemporary fundamentalists—notably Chuck
Colson—may have thought they were Kuyperians, their rejection of Kuyper’s
pluralism and socialist inclinations puts them directly at odds not only with
Kuyper’s writing, which is open to interpretation, but with the historical
evidence, in the Dutch state, of Kuyper’s intentions. Kuyper, he argues,

--- Sayfa 436 ---
430 | N O T E S
would have rejected the flattened perspective implied by a fundamentalist
biblical worldview.
6. James I. Robertson, Jr., Stonewall Jackson: The Man, the Soldier, the Legend
(Macmillan, 1997), p. xiii. This is by far the best of the Stonewall biogra-
phies, of interest even if the reader has no Confederate sympathies. I used it as
verification for the claims made by less responsible fundamentalist Stonewal-
liana.
7. Like the Family, Christian Embassy prefers to keep a low profile, but on
November 2, 2005, I obtained an interview with Christian Embassy’s chief of
staff, Sam McCullough. McCullough’s main business is explaining the Bible’s
position on contemporary concerns to congressmen—Brownback among
them, as well as Family members Senator James Inhofe and Senator John
Thune; and former representative Tom DeLay, “about 80 members of Con-
gress . . . in our rotation,” McCullough told me. Christian Embassy also
believes it has a special calling in the Pentagon, explaining the Bible’s view on
war, for  example—it’s “all throughout the Bible,” points outs McCullough—to
a group of forty se nior offi  cers.
8. Diamond, Roads to Dominion, 1995, p. 173.
9. It works: An elegant booklet that accompanies the DVD is fi lled not just
with the testimonies of generals and congressmen, but also with those of for-
eign diplomats declaring Washington a sort of holy city. “The most important
thing since coming to Washington from my communist-dominated society is
that I have discovered God,” writes a “European ambassador,” thanking Chris-
tian Embassy. Fijian ambassador Pita Nacuva, reports the booklet, following
his “years of spiritual training in Washington, D.C.,” reconfigured his coun-
try’s schools “on the model of Jesus Christ” using an American Christian cur-
riculum designed for developing nations, currently exported to around forty
countries.
10. After I first wrote about Christian Embassy in 2006, Mikey Weinstein, a
former air force lawyer and Reagan White  House counsel, reviewed its video
and saw not just bad theology but also a potential violation of military regula-
tions regarding separation of church and state. Moreover, with his  son—a
recent graduate of the Air Force  Academy—headed for Iraq, Weinstein wor-
ried that the video functioned as almost  made-to-order Al Qaeda propaganda.
After all, how hard would it be to convince a potential Al Qaeda recruit that
the United States is fighting a Christian crusade when U.S. generals and De-
partment of Defense officials say so in so many words? A similar concern

--- Sayfa 437 ---
N O T E S | 431
arose around one of the Christian witnesses in the video, Major General Peter
U. Sutton at the Offi  ce of Defense Cooperation in Turkey. When news of his
participation in the video hit the Turkish press following my article (one Turk-
ish paper characterized Sutton as a member of a “radical fundamentalist sect”),
his Turkish counterpart demanded to know why he had appeared in the video,
undermining their trust in him.
Weinstein’s organization, the Military Religious Freedom Foundation,
pressed the Pentagon for an investigation, and on July 20, 2007, the Depart-
ment of Defense Inspector General issued Report. H06L102270308, “Alleged
Misconduct by DOD Officials Concerning Christian Embassy,” which found
that seven top officers had violated military ethics by participating in the video
in uniform, that the Pentagon chaplain had obtained approval by “mischarac-
terizing the purpose and proponent of the video,” and that his offi  ce had au-
thorized contractor badge status to Christian Embassy employees, allowing
them access to restricted areas. Most disturbing of all was the defense offered
by one officer: Christian Embassy, he believed, was a “quasi-federal entity.”
The full text of the report is available at the Military Religious Freedom Foun-
dation’s website, http:// militaryreligiousfreedom .org .
11. Ted Haggard appropriated King’s words at the August 14, 2005, “Justice
Sunday II” televised forum organized by the fundamentalist Family Research
Council. Haggard invoked King, alongside famed civil rights champions Tom
DeLay and Phyllis Schlafly, as part of a call for the kind of right-wing judges
who’d undo Brown v. Board. And in Tempting Faith: An Inside Story of Political Se-
duction (Free Press, 2007), former Bush faith- based official David Kuo tells of
drawing on King as he wrote a pivotal speech for the former Christian Coali-
tion leader Ralph Reed, in which Reed claimed that the Christian Right was a
victim of discrimination. “I was fighting my own little civil rights battle,”
writes Kuo (p. 67).
12. There are an increasing number of scholarly sources on the Jesus peo-
ple movement, but far more entertaining and revealing are two memoirs by
participants. Charles Marsh, a historian, contextualizes the Jesus people in
the strife of southern race relations in The Last Days: A Son’s Story of Sin and
Segregation in the New South (Basic Books, 2001), while the music writer Mark
Curtis Anderson evokes the strange mix of rock and roll and piety that
thrilled him as a child in Jesus Sound Explosion (University of Georgia Press,
2003).

--- Sayfa 438 ---
432 | N O T E S
14. THIS IS NOT THE END
1. Quoted in Lew Daly, God and the Welfare State (Boston Review/MIT
Press, 2006), p. 33.
2. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (Harvard University Press,
2000), p. xiv.

--- Sayfa 439 ---
Index
abortion issue, 6, 198, 258, 264, 265,
269, 275, 276, 295, 314, 327–28,
357–60, 429n
Abs, Hermann J., 166–68, 175
Abstinence Clearing house, 327–29
abstinence-only sex education pro-
grams, 328–29. See also sexual
purity movement
accountability. See also ethics
Family/Fellowship tract on,
219–20
Jesus plus nothing theology and,
282–83
personal responsibility and, 372–79
postwar Nazi, 165
selflessness and abdication of, 127
Suharto’s Indonesian massacres and,
251
Adamic, Louis, 99
Adenauer, Konrad, 172, 178–80
Adorno, Theodore, 121, 337
African Americans, 139–41, 233,
236–40
AIDS, 328, 357, 382
Albania, 25, 185
Allende, Salvador, 248
America. See United States
American fascism, 114–43. See also Ger-
man fascism
Bruce Barton’s book The Man Nobody
Knows and, 133–37
Frank Buchman and, 124–33
Euro pean fascism and, 121, 130–33
Merwin Hart and, 189–90
Arthur Langlie and, 114–21
New Deal reversal and, 141–43
theocracy and, 121–24 (see also
theocracy)
Abram Vereide’s labor- management
reconciliation and, 137–41
American fundamentalism
Cold War anticommunism and (see
Cold War anticommunism)
defined, 3–4, 393n
Jonathan Edwards and (see Edwards,
Jonathan)
elite vs. populist, 7–9 (see also elite
fundamentalism; populist
fundamentalism)
Family/Fellowship as the avantgarde
of, 2–5 (see also Family/Fellow-
ship)
fascism and (see American fascism;
German fascism)

--- Sayfa 440 ---
434 | I N D E X
American fundamentalism (continued)
Charles Grandison Finney and (see
Finney, Charles Grandison)
Jesus Christs of, 5 (see also Jesus
Christ)
myths of liberalism vs., 371, 386–87
politics and (see democracy; politics;
theocracy)
Popular Front culture war of,
287–90 (see also Christian
educational movement; New Life
Church; sexual purity movement)
suffering, salvation, deliverance, and,
370–87
Abram Vereide and (see Vereide,
Abraham [Abram])
Americans United for Separation of
Church and State, 265
American Values, 259
Anderson, Lisa, 319–21
Angleton, James Jesus, 206
Angola, 222
anti- abortion crusade. See abortion
issue
anticommunism. See Cold War
anticommunism
anti- intellectualism, 172–73, 347
anti- Semitism. See also German fascism;
Jewish people
Bruce Barton on Hitler’s, 136
Christian Embassy and, 353
Gustav Adolf Gedat’s, 164
Merwin Hart’s, 124, 412n
Abram Vereide and Henry Ford’s,
122–24
anti- sex traffi  cking legislation, 274–75
anxious bench, 80–83
Apelian, Bill, 342
Apostolidis, Paul, 234, 421n
Arafat, Yasir, 245
arap Moi, Daniel, 281–82
Arendt, Hannah, 144, 386
Armenia, 267
Armstrong, O. K., 168, 411n
Arterburn, Stephen, 330–31
Ashcroft, John, 21, 258, 380–81, 385
authoritarianism, American. See
American fascism
avant- garde, 3, 122
Azerbaijan, 266–67
Baker, James, 25, 46, 58
Baker, Susan, 273
Bakke, Dennis, 23, 273, 397n
Bakke, Eileen, 273, 329
Bakker, Jim, 322
Barre, Siad, 222, 279–84
Barton, Bruce, 133–37, 141–42
Barton, David, 342
Batista, Fulgencio, 184–85
Bauer, Gary, 259, 381–82
Beck, Dave, 99–100, 119
Begin, Menachem, 24
Bell, James F., 21, 227–28
Benham, Flip, 357–58, 363–65
Benin, 28
Bennett, Charles E., 199, 204
Bermuda retreat, 32
Bevere, Lisa, 333–34
Bible
biblical scholarship and, 135
biblical worldview and, 350
Sam Brownback and, 267–68
murderers in, 222
smuggling, 185–86, 306–7
biblical capitalism. See also capitalism
Doug Coe and, 217
faith-based initiatives, 382–83
Henry Ford and, 122–23
Ted Haggard and, 304–7

--- Sayfa 441 ---
I N D E X | 435
religious market economics and,
312–15
theonomy as, 191
Abram Vereide and, 104–5
Billy Graham Center Archives, 60–61
Billy Graham Crusade, 152
Black, Hugo, 361
Black Buffers, 238–39
Blob, The (film), 181–83, 204
Bob Jones University Press, 342, 428n
Body of Christ, 21, 255–56
Bratt, James D., 429n
Brazil, 24, 222
breakfast meetings. See National Prayer
Breakfast; prayer breakfast
meetings
Bredesen, Harald, 186
Brewster, Ralph, 138
Bridges, Harry, 99–109, 120, 203, 289
Bright, Bill, 216, 225–27, 353, 380
Broger, John C., 155, 202–4
brotherhood, 40–41, 216, 254
Brownback, Sam, 260–72
career of, and Values Action Team,
263–69
Catholicism of, 261–63
Hillary Clinton’s collaboration with,
274–75
diplomacy of, 269–70
Family/Fellowship and, 18, 20
Republican revolution and, 260–61
sexual purity movement and, 328
Brown v. Board of Education case, 361
Bryan, William Jennings, 5, 236
Buchman, Frank, 124–30, 134, 154,
178, 405n, 406n
Burns, Arthur, 230
Burton, Linda and Aaron Michael,
307–9
Bush, George H. W., 25–26, 58, 223
Bush, George W., 22, 58–59, 294–95,
379–86
business, 122, 133–37. See also capital-
ism; management
Buthelezi, Mangosuthu, 24, 242
Byrnes, Jimmy, 159
Cabaniss, Ed, 189–90
Campus Crusade, 152, 216, 225–27,
247, 353, 362, 380 396n
Capehart, Homer, 168–69, 176, 215
capitalism. See also management
biblical (see biblical capitalism)
Dwight Eisenhower and, 185
Ted Haggard and, 304–7
labor  unions and, 99–108
religious market economics and,
312–15
theocracy and, 382–83
Abram Vereide on, 190
Carlson, Bengt, 2, 17, 30–32, 36, 47–51
Carlson, Frank, 155, 174, 186–98, 200,
204–5, 215, 219–20, 263–64,
408n
Carmichael, Stokely, 238
Carter, Jimmy, 24, 367, 400n
Carter, John, 354
Casanova, Carlos Eugenios Vides, 25
Caslen, Bob, 354
Castle Mainau conference, 174–77
Castro, Fidel, 184–85, 380, 413n
Catholicism, 97, 261–62, 269, 307,
323, 381
Catton, Jack, 354
Cedars
author’s prayer meeting at, 32–33
Hillary Clinton at, 272–73
Doug Coe and, 26
Ivanwald and, 6, 15–16 (see also
Ivanwald)

--- Sayfa 442 ---
436 | I N D E X
Cedars (continued)
prayer meetings at, 27–29, 53, 245,
251, 398n (see also prayer breakfast
meetings)
theology of, 45
celibacy. See sexual purity movement
cells (core groups). See also prayer
groups
Frank Buchman, Abram Vereide, and
inspiration for, 127–29
Family/Fellowship and, 19–20,
44–47
foreign politics and, 162
New Life Church and, 305–7,
313–15
nonpartisan politics of, 385
Chambliss, Saxby, 310
charitable choice concept, 381
chastity. See sexual purity movement
Chavez, Hugo, 413n
Chile, 248, 422–23n
China, 28, 267–68
Christ. See Jesus Christ
Christian (term), 2, 13–14, 19, 29–30,
51, 83, 310
Christian Democratic Union (CDU),
178–80
Christian educational movement,
336–69
author’s prayer meeting experience
and, 339, 356–69
church/state separation issue and,
336–39, 356–60
home schooling, unschooling,
providential history and, 339–45,
428n
Stonewall Jackson and, 351–56
Jewish history and, 360–64
religious influences in American
history, 364–69
Rousas John Rushdoony’s Christian
Reconstructionism and, 347–51
Vision Forum educational materials
and, 345–47
Christian Embassy, 156–57, 353–54,
430–31n
Christianity, 5, 16, 50, 134, 179. See
also American fundamentalism;
Catholicism; Protestantism;
religion
Christian Legal Society, 275
Christian Reconstructionism, 347
Christian Right, 44, 132, 222–23, 295,
337, 347, 383, 431n
church (term), 4, 213, 255, 374
churches, 15, 73, 83. See also church/
state separation issue; New Life
Church
church/state separation issue
Christian educational movement and,
336–39, 356–60
Dwight Eisenhower and, 199–200
Hillary Clinton and, 275
faith- based initiatives and, 379–86
Family/Fellowship secrecy and, 245
providential history and, 356–57
Earl Warren on, 199
Clay, Lucius D., 158
Cleaver, Eldridge, 240
Clinton, Bill, 276–77, 392–93
Clinton, Hillary, 260, 272–77
Coats, Dan, 242, 381, 418n
Coburn, Tom, 18, 264–65, 404n
Coe, David, 35–38, 243
Coe, Doug
African Americans and, 237–40
authoritarianism and, 30, 216–17,
254–55
James Baker and, 25
Sam Brownback and, 264–65

--- Sayfa 443 ---
I N D E X | 437
Hillary Clinton and, 272–73
Charles Colson and, 231–33, 235
on churches, 213
on covenants, 29–30
on domestic politics, 198
education of, 210–11
as Family/Fellowship leader, 8,
21–22, 208–18 (see also Family/
Fellowship)
Mark Hatfield and, 211–212
internationalism of, 218–24 (see also
foreign politics)
on Jesus plus nothing theology, 30,
42, 58, 121, 252–56, 380 (see also
Jesus plus nothing theology)
David Kuo’s meeting with, 380
National Prayer Breakfast and, 22–26
(see also National Prayer Breakfast)
power of, 21–26, 214, 259–60
prayer bet of, 244
on social order, 371
Somalia case and, 281–82
spiritual warfare and, 213–14
as stealth persuader, 92
submergence strategy of, 223–24
Dawson Trotman and, 210–11
visit to Ivanwald by, 51–55
Coe, Jan, 213
Coe, Jonathan, 281–82
Cold War anticommunism. See also
communism
The Blob film and, 181–83
containment policy and, 162
missionaries and, 413n
Robert Taft and, 192–94
Abram Vereide, German fascism, and,
150–52 (see also German fascism)
Abram Vereide’s vision of interna-
tional spiritual war as, 152–55 (see
also foreign politics)
Colson, Charles W.
Born Again memoir of, 7, 228,
424–25n
Sam Brownback and, 269–70
career and conversion of, 227–33
Christian worldview and, 342–43,
384, 429n
Hillary Clinton and, 274–75
on Family/Fellowship numbers, 20
influence of, 240, 259, 379
Prison Fellowship of, 22, 233–36
communism. See also Cold War
anticommunism
Harry Bridges and, 102
Frank Buchman and, 129
cells and, 19–20, 45, 306–7
Suharto slaughter of Indonesian
communists, 221, 245–52
Abram Vereide and, 99, 139, 157
Community Bible Study, 22
compassionate conservatism, 233,
236–40, 258
Compassion International, 295
Congress, U. S. See also politics
anti- union legislation and, 141–43
Sam Brownback in (see Brownback,
Sam)
Frank Carlson and, 186–95 (see also
Carlson, Frank)
Family/Fellowship members in, 6,
15–16, 18–19, 138–40, 142, 148,
168–70, 185, 198–99, 247, 264,
276, 395, 396, 399–400n, 416n
Hillary Clinton in, 260, 272–77
postwar Nazi reconciliation and,
168–74, 177–78
Prayer Breakfast meetings with
members of, 138–41 (see also
National Prayer Breakfast; Prayer
Breakfast meetings)

--- Sayfa 444 ---
438 | I N D E X
Conlan, John, 353
Connally, Jeff, 17–18, 30, 33–35,
38–42, 282–83
conservatism. See also Republicans
compassionate, 233, 236–40, 258
liberalism vs., 182 (see also liberalism)
neoconservatism, 183, 267
Abram Vereide’s elite fundamental-
ism and, 112–13
Constitution, U. S., 339, 348
containment policy, 162, 182. See also
Cold War anticommunism
Cook, Roy, 33, 210
Coonley, Howard, 138–39, 189–90
Cooper, Dan, 354
Cooper, Merian, 203–4
core groups. See cells (core groups)
Corey, Lewis, 287
Costa Rica, 220–21
covenants, 29–30, 44, 54–55, 255
Crocker, Chester A., 54
Cromartie, Michael, 23
Crosby, Kenneth M., 184–85
C Street  House, 29–30, 259,
276–77
Cuba, 184–85, 413n
culture war, 227–28, 236, 287–90. See
also Christian educational
movement; New Life Church;
Popular Front; sexual purity
movement
Curtis, Carl, 18
Dague, Paul B., 142
Daubenmire, Dave, 356–57
Declaration of Inde pen dence, U. S.,
339, 343
Deism, 366
DeLay, Tom, 265, 430, 431
DeMint, Jim, 18
democracy
Konrad Adenauer and, 179
Frank Buchman and, 128–29
deliverance and, 387
history of American secular, 337–39
Ivanwald brothers and, 40
Arthur Langlie and, 122
theocracy vs., 6–7, 277–78, 366–69
(see also theocracy)
Demo crats. See also liberalism
Family/Fellowship and, 18–19, 190
Arthur Langlie and, 122
Denning, Michael, 287
deregulation, 142
desire, 50–51, 373–74, 386
de Tocqueville, Alexis, 341
Dewey, John, 376
dictators, Doug Coe and, 222
Diem, Ngo Dinh, 199
DiIulio, John, 380–81
disobedience. See obedience
Dobson, James, 259, 295
Domenici, Pete, 18
domestic politics, 181–204, 257–84
The Blob film and, 181–83
Bill Bright, Campus Crusade, and,
225–27
Sam Brownback and, 260–72
Frank Carlson and Dwight Eisenhow-
er’s presidential election, 183–95
Hillary Clinton and, 272–77
Charles Colson, cultural politics,
and, 227–36
electoral politics of George W. Bush
and, 383, 385
elite fundamentalism and, 277–79
faith- based initiatives and, 274–75,
379–86
Family/Fellowship influence in,
198–204, 257–60

--- Sayfa 445 ---
I N D E X | 439
first Presidential Prayer Breakfast,
195–98 (see also National Prayer
Breakfast)
Jesus plus nothing theology and,
29–30, 283–84
nonpartisan Prayer Breakfast
meetings and, 139–40 (see also
Prayer Breakfast meetings)
dominionism, 44
Dore, John, 118–20
Dorn, William Jennings Bryan, 220
doubt, absence of, 48–51
Douglass, Walter, 109–11
Douthat, Ross, 347–48, 429n
Doyle, Clyde, 168
Dunbar, Matt, 324–27, 332, 334–35
Duncan, James, 140–41
Durenberger, David, 26
Duvalier, François “Papa Doc,” 215–16
East Timor, Suharto and, 246–52
Edwards, Jonathan, 56–72, 401n
American fundamentalism and, 7–9,
58–61
culture war and, 289
experimental religion of, 68–71
Charles Grandison Finney vs., 77,
79–81
Abigail Hutchinson’s conversion to
true religion of, 61–68
Jesus Christ of, 5
Jesus plus nothing theology and,
56–58
Abram Vereide vs., 87, 113
Eisenhower, Dwight, 185, 187–89,
192–98, 413–14n, 416n
Eldredge, John, 330
electoral politics, 119, 145, 192–95,
383, 385. See also domestic
politics
elite fundamentalism. See also American
fundamentalism
American fascism and, 121–24 (see
also American fascism)
of Frank Buchman, 124–30, 405–6n
of Charles Colson, 235–36
of Family/Fellowship, 43–44, 57–58
(see also Family/Fellowship)
international capitalism and, 306 (see
also biblical capitalism)
internationalist ambitions of, 152–53
(see also Cold War anticommu-
nism; foreign politics; German
fascism)
Jesus Christ of, 5
merging of populist fundamentalism
and, 262, 372–73, 377, 381,
385–86
National Prayer Breakfast and,
195–98 (see also National Prayer
Breakfast)
Popular Front culture war and,
287–90 (see also Christian
educational movement; New Life
Church; sexual purity movement)
populist fundamentalism vs., 7–8,
277 (see also populist fundamental-
ism)
suffering, salvation, deliverance, and,
370–87
of Abram Vereide (see Vereide,
Abraham [Abram])
El Salvador, 25, 367, 400
Ellingwood, Herb, 398n
Elson, Edward L. R., 184
empire, 3–4, 57, 69, 183, 191, 228,
233, 288–90, 336, 343, 386
Engle v. Vitale case, 225
Enlightenment rationalism, 338,
366–67

--- Sayfa 446 ---
440 | I N D E X
Ensign, John, 18
Enzi, Mike, 18
ethics, 44, 113, 130, 156, 230. See also
accountability
Ethiopia, 25, 215, 248, 280–81
Eu ro pe an fascism, 121–23, 129–33. See
also German fascism
evangelicalism, 43, 73, 173, 386
evangelism
American history of, 336–39
Frank Buchman on, 125
defi ned, 7
Jonathan Edwards and, 62–68,
70–71
Jonathan Edwards vs. Charles
Grandison Finney on, 77
Charles Grandison Finney and,
73–74, 77–83
stealth, 190
Abram Vereide and, 97–98
Everson v. Board of Education case, 357,
361
Every Home for Christ, 295
Every Man’s Battle (book series), 330–33
Exodus International, 331
exurban movement, 309–12
Faith and Action in the Nation’s Capital,
257
faith- based initiatives, 233, 236,
274–75, 379–86
Falwell, Jerry, 7–8, 258, 346–47
Family/Fellowship
as avant- garde of American funda-
mentalism, 2–5, 122 (see also
American fundamentalism; elite
fundamentalism)
Doug Coe as leader of (see Coe,
Doug)
documents and history of, 60–61
fascism and (see American fascism;
German fascism)
financial principles of, 45
financial support and, 16, 22
Dick Foth as leader of, 21, 385
International Christian Leadership
(ICL) and, 8, 21, 123–24, 163,
166, 191
Ivanwald and, 1–2, 18–27 (see also
Ivanwald)
Jesus plus nothing theology of (see
Jesus plus nothing theology)
David Kuo and salvation theology of,
379–86
mission statement of, 19
National Prayer Breakfast of, 22–26
(see also National Prayer Breakfast;
Prayer Breakfast meetings)
politics of, 6–7 (see also domestic
politics; foreign politics; politics;
theocracy)
Popular Front culture war and,
287–90 (see also Christian
educational movement; New Life
Church; sexual purity movement)
power of, 257–60 (see also power)
renaming of Fellowship as Family,
239
Abram Vereide as found er of (see
Vereide, Abraham)
Farrell, James Augustine, 96–97, 130
fascism, 130, 137. See also American
fascism; Eu ro pe an fascism;
German fascism; theocracy
Federer, William J., 338–39, 356, 364
Fellowship. See Family/Fellowship
Fellowship Foundation, 22
feminism, 20, 213–14, 269. See also
women
Ferguson, Homer, 198–99

--- Sayfa 447 ---
I N D E X | 441
Fernández, José Joaquín Trejos, 220
films, 181–83, 196, 203–4, 320
Finding the Better Way (Fellowship
pamphlet), 138–40, 142
Finney, Charles Grandison, 73–83
anxious bench innovation of, 80–83
conversion of, 74–77
Jonathan Edwards vs., 77, 79–81
evangelism of, 7–8, 73–74
Jesus Christ of, 5, 87
Abram Vereide vs., 113
Fisk, Kyle, 299
Fitzsimmons, Frank “Fitz,” 231
Flanders, Ralph E., 190, 200–201
Focus on the Family, 259, 273, 295
Folger, James A., 105
follower of Christ (terminology), 2, 372
Ford, Gerald, 19, 230, 246–47, 250
Ford, Henry, 122–23, 126, 130
Ford, John, 203–4
foreign affairs, 205–40. See also
Worldwide Spiritual Offensive
abstinence programs and, 328–29
Doug Coe’s succession to Family/
Fellowship leadership and,
210–18
compassionate conservatism and,
236–40
faith- based initiatives and, 236, 384
Richard Halverson and, 208–10
international subversion strategy and,
218–24
Charles Malik, United Nations’
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and, 224–25
Clifton Robinson and, 205–8
Somalia case and, 279–84
submersion strategy and, 223–24
Abram Vereide’s vision of interna-
tional spiritual war and, 143,
152–55 (see also Cold War
anticommunism; German fascism)
Fosdick, Harry Emerson, 134–36
Foth, Dick, 21, 385
Foundation for Religious Action in the
Social and Civil Order, 184
Found ers, United States, 366
Franco, Francisco, 227, 262, 396n,
407n
Franklin, Benjamin, 59–60, 353, 366
freedom of religion, 368–69
free enterprise, 155, 187, 217, 343. See
also capitalism
Freeman, C. S., 224
Fricke, Otto, 159, 163–65, 169, 171
Frontier Christian Fellowship, 316–17
fundamentalism, American. See
American fundamentalism
futurism, 183–84
Garfield, James, 362
Gärtner, Margarete, 176–77, 411n
Gedat, Gustav Adolf, 163–65, 175, 177,
218 425n
German fascism, 144–80. See also
Eu ro pe an fascism; Hitler, Adolf
Konrad Adenauer’s Christian
Democratic Union and, 177–80
American fascism and, 122–24, 129,
132, 143 (see also American
fascism)
Castle Mainau conference on Nazi
moral rehabilitation, 174–77
Doug Coe and, 215–16, 254–55
Cold War anticommunism and,
149–52, 168–74
Nazi espionage in U. S., 144–49
theodicy, postwar Nazi suffering,
and Cold War containment policy,
160–62

--- Sayfa 448 ---
442 | I N D E X
German fascism (continued)
Abram Vereide’s Christian Embassy
and postwar Nazi reconciliation,
156–59, 163–68
Abram Vereide’s vision of interna-
tional spiritual war and, 152–55
Glen Eyrie Castle retreat, 211, 252–56
Global Ethnic Missions (Youth Ablaze),
295
Global Harvest, 301
globalization, 306–7, 384
God- controlled government. See
theocracy
God’s will, 107, 123, 141– 42, 378. See
also Jesus Christ
Goebbels, Joseph, 129, 254
Goldhagen, Daniel Jonah, 165
Gore, Al, 259–60
Graham, Billy, 24, 74, 184, 186,
195–98, 219, 229, 257, 276–77,
362, 380, 415n
Grassley, Chuck, 18, 54, 281
Great Awakenings. See Edwards,
Jonathan; Finney, Charles
Grandison
Greece, 154–55, 190
Green, Marshall, 246
Groseclose, Elgin, 249
Grubb, Norman, 98–99, 101, 123, 190,
399n, 403n
Guatemala, 199, 201
guidance and Frank Buchman, 127–30,
138
Gunther, John, 99
Haggard, Ted, 293–97, 300, 304–7,
314–15, 323, 426n, 431n. See also
New Life Church
Haines, Wallace E., 160, 175–77,
217–18
Haiti, 215–16, 421n
Hall, Tony, 276, 396n, 424n
Halverson, Richard, 208–10, 216, 230,
238, 278–79, 418n
Hamilton, Alexander, 340
Hanes, Robert M., 148
Hardesty, Howard, 249
Hardt, Michael, 387
Hargis, Billy James, 322
Harmel, Pierre, 224
Hart, Merwin K., 124, 189–90, 412n,
420n
Hata, Tsutomu, 46
hate-crime legislation, 265–66. See also
homosexuality
Hatfield, Mark, 25, 183, 211–12, 247
Hawley, Joseph, 70–71
Hayek, Friedrich von, 190–91
Hayford, Jack, 300–301
Hays, Brooks, 140, 185
heart as a theological concept, 6, 7, 39,
40, 42, 58–59, 77
Henry, Carl F. H., 153–55
Hildring, John H., 158
Hilton, Conrad, 195–98
Himmler, Heinrich, 129, 254
Hirs, Alfred, 169–70
history, providential, 2–3, 339–56,
364–69. See also Christian
educational movement
Hitler, Adolf. See also German fascism
Hermann J. Abs and, 166–67
American fascism and, 98
America First and, 148
Bruce Barton on, 136
Frank Buchman on, 129–30
Doug Coe on, 30, 54, 212, 217, 244,
254–55, 380
Family/Fellowship on, 3, 45, 217
Henry Ford and, 122–23

--- Sayfa 449 ---
I N D E X | 443
Gedat, Gustav Adolf on, 164
German Christians and, 164, 172
Hans Speidel and, 166
Abram Vereide on, 143, 157
Manfred Zapp and, 146–47, 149
Ho Chi Minh, 30, 254
Hoffman, Paul G., 192
Hofstadter, Richard, 74
Hohenlohe, Gottfried, 175, 177
holy laughter, 364
homeschooling, 340–46, 349. See also
Christian educational movement
homosexuality
Sam Brownback and, 265–66,
268–69
Frank Buchman and, 126, 405n
culture war and, 57, 132, 259, 277,
294, 311
Ted Haggard and, 293–94, 296,
322–23, 426n
Homosexual Revolution, The (book),
322–23
Ivanwald and, 2, 40,
Operation Rescue (Operation Save
America) and, 359, 363
Rushdoony, Rousas John and, 347
same–sex marriage, 375
sexual purity movement and, 324,
331
spiritual warfare and, 309
Workplace Religious Freedom Act
and, 275
Honduras, 25
Hoover, J. Edgar, 183–84
Houses of Worship Act, 265
Hughes, Harold, 232, 240, 278–79
Hull, Cordell, 145
human rights, 224–25, 266–67
Hunter, Bob, 53–54
Hutchinson, Abigail, 62–68
Idea, Abram Vereide’s, 89–92. See also
key man theory; Vereide,
Abraham (Abram)
Imago Dei Community, 374–79
Indonesia, 24, 221, 245–52, 320, 422n
Industrial Workers of the World, 101–8
“In God We Trust,” 199
Inhofe, James, 6, 18, 259–60, 430n
International Bible Society, 319–21
International Christian Leadership
(ICL), 8, 21, 123–24, 163, 166,
172–73, 189–91, 199, 207–8. See
also Family/Fellowship
International Council for Christian
Leadership, 163, 191
International Foundation, 22
internationalism. See Cold War
anticommunism; foreign politics;
Worldwide Spiritual Offensive
International Religious Freedom Act,
275
Iraq, 26, 303
Islam, 13, 29–30, 132, 233–34, 259,
266–67, 307, 320
Israel, 224, 245, 262, 270, 303
It Can’t Happen Here (book), 130–31
Ivanwald, 13–55
author’s encounter with brother of,
13–16
author’s encounter with house leader
at, 38–40
author’s entry into, 1–2, 16–18
author’s initiation at  house meeting
at, 32–35
brotherhood at, 40–42
Cedars retreat, Potomac Point, C
Street  House and, 27–30
cell and Youth Corps instructions at,
44–47
daily regimen at, 30–32

--- Sayfa 450 ---
444 | I N D E X
Ivanwald (continued)
faith and practice at, 47–51
relationship of Family/Fellowship to,
18–27
responses to author’s article about,
241–45, 385, 394n
Somalia film and, 282–83
theology of, 42–44
visit of David Coe to, 35–38
visit of Doug Coe to, 26, 51–55
Jackson, Henry “Scoop,” 183
Jackson, Robert H., 124
Jackson, Thomas J. “Stonewall,” 351–56
Japan, 46, 343
Jay, John, 361–62
Jefferson, Thomas, 339
Jesus Christ. See also Jesus plus nothing
theology; theocracy
Bruce Barton’s book on, 133–37
Frank Buchman’s Quiet Time and,
126–28
chosen ones of, David Coe on,
35–38
Eldridge Cleaver and, 240
Doug Coe on, 29–30, 216, 380
Charles Colson’s Prison Fellowship
and, 235–36
Family/Fellowship and, 4, 27,
275–76
Charles Grandison Finney on, 77, 83
God’s will, 107, 123, 141–42, 378
as interventionist, 374
Ivanwald brothers and, 1–2, 14–15,
27, 31–32, 39–40, 45
Ed Meese and, 28–29
as mood, 5, 60, 72
as personality (see personality)
as psyops man, 194
Billy Sunday’s, 87
Abram Vereide and, 94–96, 109–10,
152–53
Jesus plus nothing theology, 241–56,
272, 283, 386. See also account-
ability; Jesus Christ; personality
Black Buffers and, 238
George W. Bush and, 58–69
Doug Coe and, 30, 217, 252–56,
264–65
mainstreaming of, 272
responses to author’s article about
Ivanwald and, 241–45, 394n
Social Gospel vs., 370–79 (see also
Social Gospel)
Suharto’s Indonesian massacres and,
245–52
Dawson Trotman and, 211
Jewish people. See also anti- Semitism
American fundamentalism and,
257–58, 334, 346, 353
author and, 15, 257
Bruce Barton on, 136
Family/Fellowship and, 27, 139,
220, 230, 254, 395n, 420n
Henry Ford and, 122–24
Gustav Adolf Gedat and, 164
history of, 360–61
Israel, 224, 245, 262, 270, 303
philo-Semitism, 262, 316, 36–61
postwar Nazi suffering and, 160–61,
164–65, 411n
Swiss bankers and money stolen
from, 169–70
Abram Vereide and, 123
Theophile Wurm’s desire to convert,
176
Manfred Zapp and, 148–49
Johnson, Harold K., 219–20
Johnson, Marian Aymar, 156
Jones, Bob, Sr., 155

--- Sayfa 451 ---
I N D E X | 445
Jones, Bob, IV, 396n
Jones, David, 281
Jones, Don, 273–74
Jones, Mike, 293–94
Jordan, 270
Jordan, B. Everett, 249, 423n
Judd, Walter, 139, 168
just (term), 373–74, 386
Kemp, Jack, 58, 380, 406n
Kemp, Joanne, 273
Kennan, George, 162
Kennedy, Ted, 380
Kenya, 281–82
Kerr, Robert, 190
key man theory
American fundamentalism and,
364–65, 368, 386
Chile and, 248
Doug Coe and, 215–16, 254
foreign connections and, 250
Otto Fricke and, 159
Stonewall Jackson and, 353
Arthur Langlie and, 117
liberalism and, 367
management and, 137–38
Popular Front and, 385–86
providential history and, 343–45,
363–64
Somalia and, 282
Spain and, 227
U.S. Congress and, 395n
Abram Vereide and, 89–92, 113
Vietnam War and, 206–8
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 236–37, 362,
431n
Kingsbury, Kenneth, 105
Kissinger, Henry, 114, 247
Korry, Edward, 248
Krogh, Egil “Bud,” 230
Kuo, David, 24–25, 379–86
Kuyper, Abraham, 349–50, 429n
labor unions
anti- union legislation and, 141– 43,
193, 382
Frank Buchman and reconciliation of
management and, 129–30
Hillary Clinton and, 273
Charles Colson and, 231
It Can’t Happen Here book and, 131
Arthur Langlie and, 122
prayer breakfast meetings and, 140–41
San Francisco strike by, 99–113
Seattle mayoral race and, 119–20
Abram Vereide’s reconciliation of
management and, 108–13
LaHaye, Tim, 342, 376
Laird, Melvin, 19, 227, 230, 246, 248,
396n, 422n
Landon, Alf, 186–88
Langlie, Arthur B., 116–22
language, American fundamentalism
and, 42, 373–74, 386–87
Largent, Steve, 18, 264, 396n, 399n
Lawrence, David, 139
leadership, 3, 133–37, 235. See also
Congress, U. S.; key man theory;
obedience
Lebanon, 224–25
Left Behind (book series), 342
legislation. See Congress, U. S.;
domestic politics
Lenin, Vladimir, 3, 30, 45, 194, 216,
255, 393n, 400n
Leverone, Nathaniel, 170
Lewis, Sinclair, 130–31, 134
liberalism
conservativism vs., 182 (see also
conservatism)

--- Sayfa 452 ---
446 | I N D E X
liberalism (continued)
Family/Fellowship and, 275–76
key men of, 367
myths of American fundamentalism
vs., 371, 386–87
New Deal (see New Deal)
strengths and weaknesses of,
153–55, 278, 375
Lieberman, Joe, 24
Lilly, Jim, 364
Lindbergh, Charles, 123–24, 130
Lindsay, D. Michael, 25, 235, 396–98n
Lindsley, Art, 377
Locke, David, 253
love as theological concept
Doug Coe on, 255–56
Jonathan Edwards and, 61
Richard Halverson on, 279
Imago Dei Community and, 374–75
Ivanwald brothers and, 27, 34–35,
42, 282–83
obedience and, 211, 386 (see also
obedience)
Lowry, Charles Wesley, 184
Lugar, Richard, 25, 239
MacArthur, Douglas, 343–44, 428–29n
MacBride, Neil, 43
Mackay, John, 225
Magruder, Jeb, 230
Main, Ross, 21
Malik, Charles, 224–26
management. See also business
Frank Buchman and reconciliation of
labor and, 129–30
Jesus and, 133–37
prayer breakfast meetings and, 140
Abram Vereide and reconciliation of
labor and, 108–13
Mandela, Nelson, 24
man- method, Abram Vereide’s, 121,
138, 250
Man Nobody Knows, The (book), 133–37
Marcos, Ferdinand, 249–50, 424–25n
Marcuse, Herbert, 143
market economics, religious, 312–15.
See also biblical capitalism
Marpaung, Darius, 247–48, 422n
marriage
same- sex, 375
sexual purity movement and, 324–35
spiritual war and, 213–14
Marsden, George, 59–60, 393n
Marshall Plan, 150–51
Martin, William, 44
Martinez, Gustavo Alvarez, 25
martyrdom, 346, 351
masculinity, 109–10, 138, 172, 214,
235–36, 316–17, 330, 345–46
Mather, Cotton, 5, 66
maximalism, 4
McCarran, Pat, 190
McCarthy, Joe, 200–201
McClure, Harold, 249
McCord, James W., 230
McHugh, Michael, 343
McIntyre, Mike, 19
McNarney, Joseph T., 158
Medcalf, Lane, 360–64
Meese, Ed, 27–29, 267, 381–82, 399n
megachurches, 7–8, 73. See also New
Life Church
Meyers, Vic, 119–20
Michelet, Edmond, 224
“Militant Liberty” project, 202–4
military- industrial complex, 201
Miller, Perry, 5
Minutemen United, 356–57
Moorer, Thomas H., 248
Moral Majority, 258, 346

--- Sayfa 453 ---
I N D E X | 447
Moral  Re- Armament, 125, 141, 154,
178, 405–6n
Mullen, Shirley, 373–74
murderers, Doug Coe on, 222
Museveni, Yoweri, 23, 46, 52–54, 223,
328
Muslims, 13, 29–30, 266–67, 307
Mussolini, Benito, 129, 136
National Association of Evangelicals,
152, 155, 180–83, 185, 294, 299,
426n
National Association of Manufacturers,
138, 156, 170, 189
National Committee for Christian
Leadership, 21, 139
National Day of Prayer bill, 276
National Economic Council, 124, 189
National Leadership Council, 21–22
National Prayer Breakfast. See also
Prayer Breakfast meetings
Costa Rican, 220
Family/Fellowship, Ivanwald, and,
22–26
Indonesian, 221
David Kuo and, 379–80
power of, 91, 259–60, 270
Presidential Prayer Breakfast as first,
195–98
National Security Council, 151, 243, 253
national socialists (Nazis). See German
fascism
Navigators, 22, 152, 210–11, 216, 253,
263, 295
Nazi fascism. See German fascism
Negri, Antonio, 387
Nelson, Bill, 18
Nelson, Grace, 273, 275
neoconservatism, 183, 267. See also
conservatism
neo- evangelicals, 43–44
New Deal, 98, 117–18, 141–43,
187–88, 194, 200, 210–11, 357
New Life Church, 291–321
author’s experience at, 293–97
Linda Burton’s experience at, 304–7
Christian groups in Colorado Springs
and, 319–21
Colorado Springs as fundamentalist
city, 291–93
exurban movement and, 309–12
Ted Haggard and, 293–97
Ted Haggard on  free- market
capitalism and, 304–7
market economics and  small-group
or ga ni za tion of, 312–15
Royal Rangers, Frontier Christian
Fellowship, and Christian
manhood at, 315–19
World Prayer Center at, 301–4
New York City, 13, 320–21, 324–27
Nickles, Don, 6, 60, 265
Niedicker, John, 215
Nimeiry, Gaafar, 281
Nixon, Richard, 19, 33, 176, 216, 221,
227–31, 246, 310, 398n, 400n,
416n, 422n
Noebel, David, 322–23
North, Gary, 348
Northwest Ordinance of 1787, 339
Nyerere, Julius, 384
obedience
Bruce Barton on, 141–42
Doug Coe on, 211
Charles Colson on, 233–34
Ivanwald brothers and, 2, 17, 38
Stonewall Jackson’s, 352–53
love and, 211, 386 (see also love)
poverty and, 382

--- Sayfa 454 ---
448 | I N D E X
obedience (continued)
providential history and, 365–66
Suharto on, 247
Abram Vereide’s concept of, 110, 143
Ockenga, Harold, 180
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 380
Office of  Faith-Based Initiatives, 381–83
Ohlendorf, Otto, 411n
Olasky, Marvin, 258, 381
Olsen, Tillie Lerner, 107–8
Operation Abolition (film), 203
Operation Rescue (Operation Save
America), 258, 343, 357
Opus Dei, 262, 269
or ga nized labor. See labor unions
Orr, J. Edwin, 186
Orwell, George, 338
Pakistan, 23, 26, 46, 418n
Parent, Adam and Christie, 372–79
Park Chung Hee, 24, 215, 250
Parker, Tom and TJ, 315–19
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, 295
paternalism, 103, 140, 266
Patriot Pastor, 357, 364
Peale, Norman Vincent, 139, 414n
Pentagon prayer cells, 201–2
Perdue, Sonny, 310
Perkins, Tony, 266, 298
personality as theological concept,
121–22, 137–41, 152, 215–16,
252–56, 343–45
Philippines, 202, 204, 249–50, 261,
279, 424n
Phillips, Douglas W., 346–47
Phillips, Howard, 258, 346
Phillips, Kate, 181–83
Phillips, Tom, 26, 230–31, 398n
Picardo, Juan Edgar, 220–21
Pierce, Bob, 186
Pinochet, Augusto, 248, 422–23n
Pitts, Joe, 6, 18, 26, 265–67, 328,
405n
Pledge of Allegiance, U.S., 26, 198–99
Pohl, Oswald, 167, 411n
Poling, Dan, 138
politics. See also Congress, U.S.; power
Frank Buchman and, 128–29
domestic (see domestic politics)
Jonathan Edwards and, 69, 71–72
Family/Fellowship and, 5–6, 15–16
Charles Grandison Finney and,
80–83
foreign (see foreign affairs)
history of American religion and,
2–3
Arthur Langlie and, 117–21
Abram Vereide and, 108–13
Pop u lar Front. See also Christian
educational movement; New Life
Church; sexual purity movement
culture war and, 287–90
Carl F. H. Henry on, 154–55
merging of elite and populist
fundamentalism in, 385–86
populist fundamentalism. See also
American fundamentalism
elite fundamentalism vs., 7–8, 262,
277 (see also elite fundamentalism)
Family/Fellowship and, 20, 43–44
Jesus Christ of, 5
merging of elite fundamentalism and,
372–73, 377, 381, 385–86
National Prayer Breakfast and,
195–98 (see also National Prayer
Breakfast)
Popular Front culture war and,
287–90 (see also Christian
educational movement; New Life
Church; sexual purity movement)

--- Sayfa 455 ---
I N D E X | 449
suffering, salvation, deliverance, and,
370–87
pornography, 70, 332
Porter, William, 238–39
Potomac Point, 28, 30, 40, 42–43
poverty, 118, 136–37, 172–73, 380–83.
See also suffering
power. See also politics
American fundamentalism and, 16,
366
Frank Buchman on, 125
Doug Coe on, 25, 121
Jonathan Edwards and, 61, 68–69
Family/Fellowship and, 51
Charles Grandison Finney and, 83
international spiritual war and, 155
Rob Schenck on, 257–60
Truth and, 377–79
Abram Vereide and, 96, 110, 114–17
Power, Robin, 324–27, 334–35
pragmatism, 376
prayer
Doug Coe and, 52–54, 225
Jonathan Edwards and, 61–62
Charles Grandison Finney and,
75–76
Ted Haggard and, 307–9, 312
Ivanwald brothers and, 1–2, 15, 30,
42–43, 47–51
“just” in, 373–74
school, 225, 361
Abram Vereide and, 87–89, 104–5
World Prayer Center and, 301– 4
Benjamin Wright and, 79–80
Prayer Breakfast meetings. See also
National Prayer Breakfast
international spiritual war and, 155
Abram Vereide’s first, 109–12,
114–15, 121
Abram Vereide’s spread of, 137–41
prayer groups. See also cells (core
groups)
Sam Brownback and, 264–65
Hillary Clinton and, 272–73
Costa Rican, 220–21
Family/Fellowship and, 19
international, 24–25
international spiritual war and, 281
Pentagon, 201–2
Suharto and, 247–49
White  House, 230
premillennialism, 43–44
Presidential Prayer Breakfast, 195–98.
See also National Prayer Breakfast
Presidential Prayer Team, 344
presuppositionalism, 349–50
Prison Fellowship, 22, 233–40. See also
Colson, Charles W.
Promise Keepers, 262
prosperity gospel, 87, 197–98
Protestantism, 43, 307, 343
providential history, 2–3, 339–56,
364–69, 408n. See also Christian
educational movement
Pryor, Mark, 18
Quayle, Dan, 58, 380–81
Quie, Al, 238, 246, 396n
quiet man myth, 355
Quiet Time, Frank Buchman’s, 126–28
Radford, Arthur W., 202
radicalism, 104, 309
rationalism, 59, 338, 366–67, 383
Reagan, Ronald, 2, 19, 25, 43, 54,
58–59, 142, 210, 240, 398n,
413n
reconciliation as theological concept
Doug Coe and, 239, 278
exurban movement and, 311

--- Sayfa 456 ---
450 | I N D E X
reconciliation as theological (continued)
labor- management, 103, 108–13,
142
postwar Nazi, 164–65, 168–77
poverty and, 382
suffering and, 371 (see also suffering)
Reed, Ralph, 310, 347, 431n
Regier, Jerry, 276
Rehnquist, William, 19
Reifel, Ben, 247
religion, 2–3, 15, 29–30, 61–62,
368–69. See also American
fundamentalism; Catholicism;
Christianity; Islam; Protestantism
Republicans. See also conservatism
Christian Right, 44, 132, 222–23,
383
Dwight Eisenhower vs. Robert Taft,
192–94
faith- based initiatives and, 379–86
Family/Fellowship and, 190
revirgining, 334
revivalism. See evangelism
Rhodes, John, 246, 396n
Robertson, Absalom Willis, 19, 154, 190
Robertson, Pat, 8, 19, 154, 186, 240, 259
Robinson, Clifton J., 205–8, 246,
248–49
Rohrbach, Paul, 166, 175
Roo sevelt, Franklin, 96, 98, 136, 154,
157, 406n, 409n. See also New
Deal
Royal Rangers, 315–19
Rushdoony, Rousas John, 191, 341,
346–51, 429n
Rwanda, 28
sabotage
labor  union, 101–2
Nazi, 147–48
Sadat, Anwar, 24
St. Clair, William, 110–11
salvation
deliverance vs., 386–87
Jonathan Edwards on, 71
elite fundamentalism and, 220,
379–86
Savimbi, Jonas, 222
Scalia, Antonin, 258
scandals, sex, 293–94, 322–23
Schaeffer, Francis, 273, 342–43, 429n
Schenck, Rob, 257–60, 274, 276, 343,
357
Schmelz, Gustav, 166
school prayer, 225, 361
school segregation, 361
science
American fundamentalism and, 135
Jonathan Edwards and, 61, 68–69
homeschooling curricula and, 342,
346
Truth and, 376
Scopes trial, 277, 337
Scott, Winfield, 352
secrecy, Family/Fellowship, 19–21, 46,
223–24, 239, 243–45
secularism, 133, 155, 219, 265,
287–90, 349
Sekulow, Jay, 258
Selassie, Haile, 215, 248, 280
selflessness, 50–51, 58–59, 70–71, 127,
207. See also Jesus plus nothing
theology; key man theory
sexual purity movement, 322–35
author’s meetings with New York
City men and, 324–27
Frank Buchman and confessions of
sexual sins, 126, 128
foreign policy,  abstinence-only sex
education programs, and

--- Sayfa 457 ---
I N D E X | 451
Abstinence Clearing house books
on, 327–34
Ivanwald brothers and, 40–41
sex scandals and, 293–94, 322–24
sexual payoff for, 334–35, 337
Sezibera, Richard, 28–29
Sheldon, Louis P., 259
Silk Road Strategy Act, 266–67
Silva, Costa e, 24, 222
Simon Wiesenthal Center, 167–68
Sims, Gannon, 5–6, 17, 31–32, 52
sin
Frank Buchman and sexual, 126, 128
Jonathan Edwards and, 70
elite fundamentalism and, 220
forgetting of, 278–79
Abram Vereide and, 107, 110
Smith, H. Alexander, 139
Smith-Connally Act, 142
Social Gospel
Catholic, and  faith- based initiatives,
381
Hillary Clinton and, 274
Charles Colson’s Prison Fellowship
and, 236–40
Jesus plus nothing theology vs.,
370–79 (see also Jesus plus nothing
theology)
Abraham Kuyper and, 350
Abram Vereide’s rejection of, 110,
153
social order, 255, 371, 378, 385
socialism, 155, 215, 280, 409n, 429n
Somalia, 25, 222, 279–84
Soulforce  pro- gay ministry, 323
soul surgery, 124–26, 128, 130–31,
156
South Korea, 24, 215, 250
South Vietnam, 199, 205–8, 248
Soviet Union, 150–51, 162, 171–72,
280. See also Cold War anticom-
munism; communism
Spain, 227, 396n, 407n
Sparkman, John, 140
Speidel, Hans, 166, 175
spiritual war
Harry Emerson Fosdick on, 135–36
Ted Haggard, New Life Church, and,
297, 301, 304
international, 155, 217, 281 (see also
foreign politics; Worldwide
Spiritual Offensive)
Ivanwald brothers and, 1, 29, 39, 42
Stonewall Jackson as model for,
355–56
sports, 15, 30, 41
Staggers, John, 238–39
Stalin, Joseph, 252, 255, 380, 400n
Stark, Rodney, 312–13, 427n
stealthiness, 19–20, 91–92, 190. See
also secrecy, Family/Fellowship
Stennis, John, 25, 140
Stockstill, Larry and Melanie, 301
Stoddard, Solomon, 65
Stoeker, Fred, 330–31
Stone, Clement, 26, 199
Stone, Donald C., 151–52, 154
Stone, I. F., 201
strikes, labor  union, 104–8, 122. See
also labor unions
Stoll, David, 413n
submersion strategy, 223–24. See also
secrecy, Family/Fellowship
submission, 70–71, 262–63, 344. See
also obedience
subversion strategy, 208, 218–24
Sudan, 267–68
suff ering
Bruce Barton on, 136–37
deliverance and, 386–87

--- Sayfa 458 ---
452 | I N D E X
suff ering (continued)
labor  unions and, 102
Social Gospel vs. Jesus plus nothing
theology on, 370–79
theodicy and, 93, 160–62, 311
Truth and, 377–79
Suharto, 24, 221, 245–52, 423n
Sullivan, William H., 206, 417–18n
Summit Ministries, 322
Sunday, Billy, 87, 113
Sundberg, Bruce, 249–50, 424n
Swaggart, Jimmy, 322
Taft, Robert, 187–89, 192–94, 199
Taft- Hartley Act, 142, 193
Talmadge, Herman, 19
Tanzania, 384
Tarrant, Tommy, 240
Teamsters Union, 99–100, 104, 231
televangelists, 43, 293–94, 322–23
Temple, Paul, 227, 398n
Tempting Faith: The Inside Story of a
Po liti cal Seduction (book), 379,
383, 431n
Terry, Randall, 343
theocracy
American fascism and, 121–24 (see
also American fascism)
American history of, 8, 336–39
Frank Buchman on, 130
Doug Coe on, 223
democracy vs., 6–7, 277–78,
366–69
Jonathan Edwards and, 59–60
faith- based initiatives as, 379–86
of Family/Fellowship, 56–58
Arthur Langlie and, 121
Rousas Rushdoony on, 347–48
theocentric worldview vs., 342–43
as totalitarianism of God, 151–52, 155
Abram Vereide’s Idea about (see
Vereide, Abraham [Abram])
theodicy, 93, 160–62, 311. See also
suff ering
theology. See American fundamental-
ism; Jesus plus nothing theology;
religion
theonomy, 191. See also biblical
capitalism
Thieu, Nguyen Van, 248
Thomas, Clarence, 26
Thomas, Rusty, 357–60, 364–66
Thune, John, 18
Thurmond, Strom, 19, 140, 225, 265,
395–96n
Tiahrt, Todd, 29–30
Tice, Jayson, 303–4
totalitarianism. See American fascism;
Eu ro pe an fascism; fascism;
German fascism; theocracy
Traditional Values Coali tion, 259
Trask, Thomas E., 298
Travis, William Barret, 345
Trotman, Dawson, 210–11
Trueblood, Elton, 186
True Love Waits, 327
Truman, Harry, 150, 154–55
Truth, 374–79
Turner, Carl, 219–20
Uganda, 23, 46, 52–54, 223, 328–29
Ukraine, 304
“under God,” U. S. Pledge of Allegiance
and, 26, 198–99
 unions. See labor unions
United Nations, 157, 224–25
United States. See also American
fascism; American fundamental-
ism; Congress, U. S.; domestic
politics; foreign politics; politics

--- Sayfa 459 ---
I N D E X | 453
as Promised Land, 221–22
providential history, 2–3, 339–56,
364–69 (see also Christian
educational movement)
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
224–25
Unruh, Leslee, 327–29
unschooling, 342. See also Christian
educational movement
Unumb, Greg, 241–45, 251–52, 278
Values Action Team (VAT), 18,
265–66, 328
Vandenberg, Arthur, 148, 157
Vereide, Abraham (Abram), 87–113
Frank Buchman and, 124–30
conversion, immigration, and
ministry of, 92–101
death of, 121
Jonathan Edwards and Charles
Grandison Finney vs., 87, 113
elite fundamentalist key man Idea of,
89–92 (see also elite fundamental-
ism; key man theory)
fascism and, 122–23, 150–52,
156–74 (see also American
fascism; German fascism)
Finding a Better Way pamphlet and
spread of prayer breakfasts by,
137–41
first National Prayer Breakfast of,
197 (see also National Prayer
Breakfast)
as found er of Family/Fellowship, 8,
21 (see also Family/Fellowship)
labor- management reconciliation
by, 99–113 (see also reconcilia-
tion)
Arthur Langlie and, 114–21
retirement of, 205
on Suharto’s coup in Indonesia,
245–46
Billy Sunday vs., 87–89
vision of international spiritual war
by, 152–55 (see also foreign
politics; spiritual war)
Vereide, Warren, 88–89, 91
Vessey, John, 25, 282
Vietnam War, 199, 205–8
virginity, 40–41, 316, 323. See also
sexual purity movement
Vision Forum, 345–47
von der Ropp, Baron, 172, 180
von Gienanth, Ulrich, 147–49, 172–74
von Neurath, Konstantin, 167, 411n
WallBuilders, 342
“wall of separation,” Thomas Jefferson
and, 339. See also church/state
separation issue
Wamp, Zach, 19, 264
war criminals, Nazi, 158–59, 165–68.
See also German fascism
Warren, Earl, 199
Washington, George, 366
Washington, Walter, 237
Watt, James, 26
Wayne, John, 203–4
Webster, Daniel, 349
welfare, privatization of, 381
White, Mel, 323
Whitehead, John W., 349
White  House prayer cell, 230
Wilberforce Foundation, 22
Wiley, Alexander, 139, 168–71, 176,
180, 199
Willis, Raymond, 139
Willowbank retreat, 32
Wilson, Charles E., 201–2, 204
Wings of Eagles, The (film), 204

--- Sayfa 460 ---
454 | I N D E X
Wolf, Frank, 19
Wright, Benjamin, 77–80
women
Wright, Christian, 23
culture and, 376
Wright, J. Elwin, 155
feminism, 20, 213–14, 269
Wurm, Theophile, 176–77
Potomac Point  house for, 28, 30, 40,
42– 43
Yeaworth, Irvin “Shorty,” 181–83
sexual purity movement and, 332–34
York, Alvin, 343–44
World Prayer Center, 293, 301–4, 312
Young Life, 22, 239, 295
World Vision agency, 209
Youth Corps, 46– 47
Worldwide Spiritual Offensive, 155,
Youth For Christ, 152
206, 217, 264, 288. See also
foreign affairs
Zapp, Manfred, 144–52, 177–79, 417n

--- Sayfa 461 ---
J E F F S H A R L E T
J E F F S H A R L E T is a contributing editor
for Harper’s and Rolling Stone, and an associate research
scholar at New York University’s Center for Religion
and Media, where he has taught journalism and religious
studies. He is the coauthor, with Peter Manseau, of Killing
the Buddha, and the editor of TheRevealer.org. He lives
in Brooklyn, New York.
About the Author
on your favorite HarperCollins author.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information

--- Sayfa 462 ---
A L S O B Y J E F F S H A R L E T
Killing the Buddha: A Heretic’s Bible (with Peter Manseau)

--- Sayfa 463 ---
Credits
Designed by Ellen Cipriano
Jacket photograph of Antique Holy Bible © Istockphoto
Jacket esign y Jarrod Taylor
d
b

--- Sayfa 464 ---
Copyright
THE FAMILY. Copyright © 2008 by Jeff Sharlet. All rights reserved under
International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, nontransferable right
to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may
be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or
stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in
any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader April 2008
ISBN 978-0-06-165006-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- Sayfa 465 ---
Australia
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
Auckland, New Zealand
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
About the Publisher
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
P.O. Box 1
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com