--- Sayfa 1 ---
The Hidden Power
Behind Freemasonry

By
Lt. Col. Gordon "Jack" Mohr,
Page 2
"Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
"For God shall bring every work into judgment, with ever secret thing,
whether it be good
or whether it be evil." - Ecciesiastes 12:13, 14

2nd Edition ----1993
Published by
Weisman Pubilcations
11751 W. River Hills Dr. #107D . Burnsville, MN 55337

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Page 3
- TABLE OF CONTENTS -
Acknowledgments - Page 4
1 - What is Freemasonry? (A Grand Chaplain Explains) - Page 5
2 - What about the Youth Orders of Freemasonry? - Page 11
3 - Introduction to the Masonic Problem - Page 17
4 - From the Horse's Mouth - Page 24
5 - A Former High Ranking Mason Looks at Masonic Symbolism - Page
29
6 - Freemasonry: Satan's Door to America? - Page 49
7 - The Talmudic and Masonic Zoo - Page - Page 61
8 - Jewish Influence on Freemasonry - Page 79
9 - Jewish Influence on Masonry Demonstrated - Page 81
10 - Modern Judaism - Page 83
11 - Early Records of Jewish Infiltration - Page 90
12 - A Closer Look at Freemasonry - Page 101
13 - Oaths - The Binding Force in Masonry - Page 113
14 - The Effects of Masonry on England and the Continent - Page 114
15 - Freemasonry Today - Page 120
16 - The Real Jewish Peril! - Page 122
17 - Zionist Capital and Masonic Influence Generate Genocide! - Page
137
18 - Important Points of Connection Between Zionism and Freemasonry -
Page 147

--- Sayfa 3 ---
19 - Jewish and Masonic Control of the Media - Page 156
20 - The Ethics of Freemasonry - Page 160
21 - Truth From the Masonic Standpoint - Page 165
22 - Masonry's Ideas Concerning Chastity - Page 173
23 - What Masonry Permits! - Page 177
24 - What does the Masonic Covenant Assume? - Page 179
25 - Masonry's Relation to Marriage - Page 183
26 - The Penal Features of Freemasonry - Page 184
Conclusion

Page 4
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book could never have been written without the help of these students
of FREEMASONRY, some of whom were high ranking Masons
themselves: Martin L. Wagner and his FREEMASONRY - An
Interpretation; Samuel Roth - JEWS MUST LIVE; Msgr. George Dillon -
GRAND ORIENT FREEMASONRY UNMASKED; Nesta Webster -
SECRET SOCIETIES AND SUBVERSIVE MOVEMENTS; Rev. E. Cahill -
FREEMASONRYAND THE ANTI-CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT Dr.
Shepherd, a former high ranking Mason; Rev. Jim Shaw of Silver Springs,
Florida, a former high ranking Mason; Ed Decker, from FREE THE
MASONS MINISTRIES, and my good friend and critic, Harry E. Werner,
Jr., who has been a tremendous help and blessing to me.
This book is not original thought as far as I'm concerned. It is merely the
compilation of many facts and documents dealing with FREEMASONRY
which have been put into book form to help my readers understand the
subversive forces behind FREEMASONRY which are seeking to enslave
and destroy the white Christian world. If in writing this, the facts
contained herein set some Mason free from the satanic influence of the
Lodge, we will give God the credit and glory.
[signed]

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Jack Mohr
Lt. Col. AUS Ret Author

Page 5
1 - WHAT IS FREEMASONRY?
(A Grand Chaplain Speaks Out.)
The following letter was written November 25, 1984 by Rev. Harmon R.
Taylor, Grand Chaplain of the GRAND LODGE Free and Accepted
Masons of the State of New York (1983-1984).
Dear Servant of God:
Knowing that you desire to serve the Lord with all your heart, I share this
letter with you. Perhaps you have been struggling with the same situation.
On Nov. 22nd, I sent the facts contained in this letter to all masonic bodies
of which I am a member. I invite you to prayerfully read it. It will explain
why I, as a Grand Chaplain of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted
Masons of the State of New York, am requesting a demit from all bodies
of the masonic fraternity. There is much more that I could share with you.
I would be happy to share more if it will help you in the Lord's service.
Many have asked me if FREEMASONRY is a religion. I have always
responded, "No." Others have told me it is a religion. Study has revealed
the fact that learned writers in the fraternity say MASONRY IS A
RELIGION. The Lord Jesus Christ said: "hi the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word is established" (Matt. 18:16). In order to be brief, I
will quote only four masonic authorities that masonry is a religion.
ALBERT MACKEY, one of the best known masonic authorities, wrote in
A LEXICON OF FREEMASONRY (pg. 402): "The religion, then,
masonry, is pure theism .
ALBERT PIKE, the most important of all American masonic authorities,
wrote in MORALS AND DOGMA (pg. 213-214): "Every masonic lodge is
a temple of religion, and its teachings are instructions in religion ... this is
true religion

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Page 6
revealed to the ancient patriarchs,' which masonry has taught for
centuries, and which it will continue to teach as long as time endures."
J. S. M. WARD, a masonic authority who has written several important
books on masonry, wrote in his book: FREEMASONRY: IT'S AIMS &
IDEALS. (pg. 185): "I consider freemasonry is a significant organized
school of mysticism to be entitled to be called a religion." He continues on
page 187: "Freemasonry ... taught that each man can, by himself, work out
his own conception of god and thereby achieve salvation." It holds that
there are many paths that lead to the throne of the all-loving Father which
all start from a common source. Freemasonry believes, according to Ward,
"that though these paths appear to branch off in various directions, yet
they all reach the same ultimate goal, and that to some men one path is
better and to others, another."
FRANK C. HIGGINS, a high mason, wrote in ANCIENT
FREEMASONRY. (pg. 10): "fit is true the freemasonry is the parent of all
religion."
These masonic witnesses all agree in their doctrine that masonry is,
indeed, a religion. It is necessary now to ascertain whether masonry is a
true religion or a false religion. In an article entitled, How to Recognize a
False Religion (Faith for the Family, Nov/Dec 1974), a prominent
Christian leader wrote:
"All false religions, however, have some things in common. Here are the
three simplest tests by which any religion should be judged; FIRST, what
is its attitude towards the Bible? SECOND, any religious teaching should
be judged by this question: 'What is its attitude towards Jesus Christ?'
FINALLY, in judging any religious system, we should ask: 'What is its
attitude toward the blood of Jesus Christ.'"

Page 7
According to these three tests, masonry is a false religion manifesting a
satanic attitude towards the Bible, the Deity of Jesus Christ, and the blood
atonement of Jesus Christ. In order to establish this charge, keep in mind
the word of Christ, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
shall be established." Please consider now the testimony of masonic
authorities which reveals masonry's satanic attitude towards the Bible, the

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Deity of Jesus Christ, and the vicarious atonement for the sins of mankind
by the shedding of Christ's blood on the cross.
JOSEPH FORD NEWTON, a famous masonic authority and writer, in
an article entitled: THE BIBLE AND FREEMASONRY, wrote: "The Bible
so rich in symbolism is itself a symbol ... thus, by the very honor which
masonry pays the Bible, it teaches us to revere every book of faith in
which men find help for today and hope for tomorrow, joining hands with
the Hindu, as he makes covenant with God upon the book that he loves
best."
ALBERT PIKE, in MORALS & DOGMA, (pg. 718) wrote: "Masonry
propagates no creed except it's own simple sublime one,' that of universal
religion, taught by nature and reason.
One who has been truly "born-again" (born from above), can see that the
above statement from masonry totally rejects the crucial doctrine of an
infallible, God-breathed, inerrant Bible.
According to the SECOND TEST, masonry is a false religion because it
totally rejects the crucial doctrine of the Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ.
J. D. BUCK, M.D., another masonic writer of importance, in his book
SYMBOLISM OF MYSTIC MASONRY, wrote (pg. 57): "In the early
church as in the secret doctrine, there was not one Christ for the world but
a potential Christ in every man. Theologians first made a fetish of the
impersonal, omnipresent divinity,' and then tore the 'Christ

Page 8
is God' from the hearts of all humanity in order to Deify Jesus; that they
might have a God-Man particularly their own."
According to the THIRD TEST, masonry is a false religion because
masonry dogmatically refuses the doctrine of salvation from the penalty of
sin by faith in the vicarious atonement of Christ's shed blood on the cross.
THOMAS MILTON STEWART, another masonic author, in his book
SYMBOLIC TEACHING ON MASONRY AND ITS MESSAGE to support
his doctrine, quoted favorably an apostate Episcopal minister on pg. 177:
'Did Jesus count Himself conceive of Himself as a proprietary sacrifice
and of His work an expiation? The only answer possible is clearly, He did
not... He does not call Himself the world's priest, or the world's victim."

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Salvation by faith in the vicarious atonement are not "ignorant perversions
of the original doctrines" as masonry teaches, but are vital ingredients of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation to
everyone who believes. THEREFORE, masonry fails all three tests! It
manifests a satanic attitude towards the Bible, the Deity of Christ, and the
vicarious atonement. In addition to failing these tests, there is much more
proof that masonry is a false religion
For instance, HENRY C. CLAUSEN, 33 o, Sovereign Grand Commander
of the Supreme Council 33 o, Mother Council of the World, in the NEW
AGE, November, 1970 (pg. 4) wrote regarding masonry: "It is dedicated
to bringing about the Fatherhood of God, the Brotherhood of Man, and
making better men in a better world."
The doctrine of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man is not
found in the Bible. It is a doctrine taught consistently by apostates. Also,
the Bible makes it crystal clear that no organization, masonry included,
can make better men. ONLY GOD CAN MAKE BETTER MEN!

Page 9
According to a masonic creed, found in the Masonic bible, masonry
teaches that "character determines destiny."
The teaching that character determines destiny is a false doctrine of the
Arch Deceiver of men's souls. The Bible says: "There is none that doeth
good, "and "For by grace are ye saved through faith and that not of your
selves; it is a gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast" (Eph.
2:8).
Masonry is anti-Christian in its teachings. For example, J. M. WARD, in
FREEMASONRY - ITS AIMS AND IDEALS, wrote on (pg. 187): "I boldly
aver that freemasonry is a religion, yet it no way conflicts with any other
religion, unless that religion holds that no one outside its portals can be
saved." Ward in his statement, reveals the fact that masonry has no
conflict with any apostate religion on the face of the earth, but that it is in
conflict with Christianity. The Bible says: 'Neither is there salvation in
any other, for there is none other name under heaven, given among men,
whereby we MUST be saved" (Acts 4:12). The Bible makes it clear that
there is no other way to salvation except through Jesus Christ.
A prominent college president said of masonry: "It is a Luciferean
religion. We are fully aware of its diabolical origin and purpose. I believe

--- Sayfa 8 ---
that any born-again Christian, when the facts from the lips of masonic
writers themselves are presented showing that masonry is a religion and is
the worship of Satan, will immediately withdraw." To this I must add my
hearty agreement!
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, the only True and Living
God, has clearly commanded Christians: "Be ye not unequally yoked
together with unbelievers, and swear not at all, and have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them" (2 Cor.
6:14).
CHARLES FINNEY, the famed evangelist who God used to bring
revival to America in the 1930's, in his book, FREEMASONRY (pg. 115)
wrote: "Surely, if masons really

Page 10
understood what Masonry is, as it is delineated in these books, no
Christian Mason would think himself to remain at liberty another day as a
member of the fraternity. It is as plain as possible that a man knowing
what it is, and embracing it in his heart, cannot be a Christian man. To
say he is is to disbelieve the very nature of Christianity."
For me, the signs of the time compared with prophetic Scripture, make it
apparent that we are living in the last days prior to the Rapture of the
Church. (Here is another apparently sincere man, who has been taken in
by Jewish propaganda concerning the Rapture - ED). Satan is hard at work
trying to hinder believer's spiritual growth, as well as trying to keep the
unsaved from entering God's family. Freemasonry, I have come to believe,
is one of Satan's master deceptions. Many ministers, elders, deacons,
trustees, and Sunday School teachers belong to this cult. Today, my
membership ends! Today a new ministry begins! There is a tremendous
need to scrutinize the cultic nature of Freemasonry in view of the massive
infiltration of its effects on the working body of the church. It should be
exposed to the True Light - Jesus Christ.
Love in Christ,
SIGNED - Howard R. Taylor.
For anyone interested in contacting Brother Taylor, his address is:
P.O. Box 12, Newtonville, N.Y. 12128, or write:

--- Sayfa 9 ---
FREE THE MASONS MINISTRIES, P.O. Box 1077, Issaquah, WA
98027.

Page 11
2 - WHAT ABOUT THE YOUTH
ORDERS OF FREEMASONRY?
The following information comes from an article titled: THROUGH THE
FIRES OF MOLECH, by WILLIAM J. SCHNOEBELEN. For further
information contact: FREE THE MASONS MINISTRIES, P.O. Box 1077,
Issaquah, WA 98027.
An earnest question is asked of us who minister to the Masons. "So if
Masonry is un-Christian, what about the youth orders of Masonry? Are
they so bad?" In this increasingly carnal world order, are there good places
one can send their son or daughter for fun and fellowship with the
assurance that they will only be exposed to wholesome influences?
What about the Masonic orders for youth - the ORDER OF DEMOLAY?
THE RAINBOW GIRLS? JOB'S DAUGHTERS? Are these innocent
enough? This assumption neglects central principles found in the Holy
Bible - the very Bible which is found reposing on the. alters of Masonry.
The first question is one of spiritual authority. Surely no Christian parents
needs to be reminded of the responsibility they have for the precious
young souls God has entrusted to them. The Bible is full of admonitions to
carefully train one's child.
"And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou
sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when though
liest down, and when thou riseth up" (Deut. 11:19).
And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord" (Eph. 6:4).
Conversely, there are dire spiritual warnings for those who either fail to
teach their children or who lead them in error-filled teachings:

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Page 12
"But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me
(Christ), it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he be drowned in the depths of the sea" (Matt. 18:6).
Thus God has given Christian parents ultimate spiritual authority, or
headship over their children. Even if the child has not yet received eternal
life, he or she is protected under the covenant of the parent's commitment
to Jesus Christ to an incredible extent. The Lord has placed a strong hedge
of protection around Christian families.
"Hast thou (God) not made a hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land" (Job 1:10).
What does all this have to do with Masonic youth orders? It is the same
question of leadership. Masonry is a false religious system, and its god is
not the Biblical God. Therefore, temples of Freemasonry are temples of a
false god; and Freemasons are, knowingly or not, priests of a false,
Baalish system.
Please bear in mind that this is a spiritual principle and that it has little to
do with the appearances or even the philosophies of these youth groups.
None of these groups are allowed to meet without the presence of a
MASTER MASON. They function solely under the charter of Masonic
authority! They are also designed to draw young people into the adult
orders, which means that upon being initiated the young man or woman is
spirithe ly "adopted" into the Masonic family, even though they are not
actually Masons.
Even the Christian youth, who has been adopted into God's family (Rom.
8:15-17) comes under this spiritual authority of Masonry as well when he
joins the order. This cannot help but make them "double-minded" (James
1:5-8) at an already difficult phase of their lives.
No matter how apparently "innocent" the ceremonies and teachings of
these youth orders are, they function under

Page 13

--- Sayfa 11 ---
the shadow of an anti-Christian spiritual power which the Master Mason
brings with him.
No parent would knowingly permit their son or daughter to attend a coven
of witches; and yet the same spiritual principality (Eph. 6:12) which
presides over witchcraft, ALSO presides over Masonic ceremonies - the
false god of magic and ancient pagan fertility cults from which Masonry
proudly claims descent!1

FUELING THE FIRES?
Thus the youth is walking innocently into a spiritual minefield, without
warning, when they enter a Masonic youth order. They stand in Satan's
territory and have opened a doorway in their lives to him to begin to
corrode their very souls. They have broken down the hedge which God
has placed around them! (Eccl. 19:8).
Not only that! At the very age when powerful emotional drives are
running at peak, they are surrendering themselves to a spiritual power
which is engineered to provoke lust! The very elements and symbols of
Masonry, even as in witchcraft, are sexual in spiritual content. A young
person who is receiving sound instruction at home would be having it
subtly undermined by submitting to the headship of Masonic authority!
Masonry exalts human sexuality in a disguised way. The square and
compass symbols actually represent the male and female reproductive
organs. The "point within the circle" and the twin pillars are disguised
forms of ancient talismans of paganism designed to invoke lust.2

Notes:-
1 (See Albert Pike's Morals And Dogma, pp. 730-732;
Albert Mackey's 33 o, Encyclopedia Of Freemasonry, pp.
560, 573
2 Albert Mackey 33 o, Encyclopedia Of Freemasonry, pp.
560, 573; and Symbolism In Freemasonry, pp. 352-53).

Page 14

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Thus, while teaching pious principles on the surface, these orders only
serve to pour fuel on the already smoldering fires of adolescent emotion,
and the God-given rights of the Christian parents are diluted by the very
real authority of a strange god who appeals to all that is carnal in a young
person.

WHERE IS CHRIST?
The desire to be "something special," and to "Lord it over others" is
enhanced by these groups, which bestows impressive, high sounding titles
upon the officers ("Honored Queen," etc.,) and dress them up in all the
pomp of royalty! Crowns and scepters, satin robes and chains of office:
these all serve to glorify the egos of the young people instead of
conforming them to the humble image of Christ (See Phil. 2:5-9; Rom.
12:1,2).
Certainly these orders make a show of teaching "religion," but religion is
not what our youth need. They need the Gospel of Grace! Subtly but
completely, a doctrine of salvation by works and labor is taught in these
orders, contrary to Scripture. The secrecy and elitism of these groups is
both uncharitable and forbidden by Jesus Christ Himself, who forbade the
taking of oaths (Matt. 5:34-37). True Christian love does not exclude, but
rather embraces "whosoever will may come."

THERE ARE DEEPER CONCERNS!
Listen to the Prophet Jeremiah: "And they built the high places of Baal,
which are the valley of the son of Himnon, to cause their sons and
daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech; which I commanded them
not, neither came it into my mind that they should do this abomination, to
cause Judah to sin" (Jer. 32:35).

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Page 15
Elsewhere God specifically commands: "Thou shalt not let any of thy seed
pass through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy
God. I lam the Lord" (Lev. 18:22; 20:1-5).
Now what is being spoken of was a particularly vile form of child
sacrifice. Molech was a god of the Ammorites, an idol made of metal and
heated up by flames from within. The child was placed in the idol's red-
hot arms and one hesitates to even imagine the results.3The Hebrews were
forbidden by God to do this.
Yet, unthinkable as it sounds, the Israelites persistently fell into this
precise sort of idolatry. They were so beguiled by the exquisite sounding
promises of the priests of Baal and Molech that they willingly passed their
sweet children through the fires; in spite of the repeated warnings of the
prophets. Even the wise Solomon, one of the patron saints of Masonry,
built an altar to this god (1 Kings 11:1-8).

Horrifying as this may seem, in Masonry the same thing is happening to
the young person on a spiritual level! The fires of Molech only consumed
the bodies of those innocent children; the spiritual fires of the Masonic
order corrodes the very souls of our

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Notes:-
3. Eerdman's Handbook of the Bible, p.178.

Page 16
youth! The "intention rites" which they put these young people through
are unhallowed conflagrations which sear their consciences with a red-hot
iron.
In our society today, there are enough "fires" through which our children
must walk: drugs, sex, occult movies, and heavy metal music. Most of
these the child chooses for himself, however, unknowingly.
But in the Masonic youth orders, the young person is often urged to join
with the blessings of the parents. The very virtuous appearance of these
Orders is what makes them the more dangerous. These teens are drinking
spiritual poison in unlabled bottles! They are coming under an un-
Christian spiritual power which conflicts with the power of God and can
only cause confusion to the teen.
Solomon wrote that "He that troubleth his own house, shall in inherit the
wind" (Prov. 11:29); and his life was tragic proof of that. His idolatry
fractured the kingdom of Israel, and he did indeed "inherit the wind."
We are troubling our own house when we offer our children these pagan
societies. We are creating subtle discord in their young hearts when we let
them sit, week after week, under the shadow of Masonry, and yet expect
them to be upright.

WHAT CAN BE DONE?
Let us remember the "curse of the millstone," which Jesus said in
Matthew 18:6, should be tied around the necks of those who lead children
astray and try to pass our adolescents through more fires than our culture
already subjects them to.
It is the unseen trap which is the most deadly, and their very souls are at
stake. If you are allowing your young people to partake in these societies,
you need to get them out immediately! If you, yourself, are involved, you
need

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Page 17
to renounce them and repent before God! Only then will you have full
victory which Jesus can bring.
It is important to remember, that as you draw your children from these
"fires," they will also need to repent in prayer for their involvement. They
can do this by asking a loving Savior to wash them clean with His blood
and take the spiritual debris out of their lives! He is indeed 'faithful and
just to forgive us and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness" (1 John
1:19).

3 - INTRODUCTION TO THE MASONIC
PROBLEM
In John 7:4 we read: "For there is no man that doeth anything in secret,
and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If though doest these things,
show thyself to the world."
In Luke 8:17 we read: "For nothing is secret, that shall not be made
manifest (rendered apparent or made known); neither anything hid, that
shall not be known and come abroad."
The subject which we are about to discuss in detail is one which I have
avoided for a long time. But because of the seriousness of its nature and
the profound danger it presents to white Christians in particular, it is
something I MUST face even though its revelation may bring personal
danger and many may be offended.
I am praying that this book will engender more "light" than it does "heat."
I do not ask that you agree with my conclusions, some of which will be
rather startling in nature. I do ask that you are fair enough with yourself, to

Page 18
read this book to the end, before you consign it to the waste basket. Please
do not be one of those smug persons who say by their actions: "Don't

--- Sayfa 16 ---
bother me with the truth, I have already made up my mind!" It is very
possible, that before I have finished with this subject 0f FREEMASONRY,
I will have to say with the Apostle Paul: "Am I to become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth?" (Gal. 4:16).
What is this "super-sensitive" issue we will discuss, that might cause this
adverse reaction? No, we will not be discussing JUDAISM, although this
has also become a "No! No!" in modern life. In the pages which follow, I
will attempt to describe a dangerous phenomenon known as
FREEMASONRY! We will look into what it is, how it began, discuss its
major purposes and then see the startling story of who is behind it!
To gain these answers, we will go to a number of sources, including
writers who have been high ranking Masons who, when they learned the
truth and found out the nature of the organization they had joined, had the
courage to get out and expose it!
We will examine statements made by both the Lodge and its opponents. I
ask that God will give us enlightenment, through His Word, the Bible, so
that we may learn the truth, not what men would like to believe.
In Ecclesiastes 12:1, we read: "For God shall bring every work into
judgment, with EVERY SECRET THING, whether it be good or evil."
A great American educator of an earlier day once said: "It must be a bad
issue which cannot bear discussion. Truth always seeks the light."
Jesus said in John 3:19 - "And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, BECAUSE
THEIR DEEDS ARE EVIL."

Page 19
There you have it!
It would seem from this, that most things which are done in secret are evil.
In Ephesians 5:12 we read: "For it is a shame to speak of those things
which are done of them in secret."
We are going to probe deeply into one of the most secret of all secrets - a
secret which has and still does involve millions of men and which exerts
untold control over the lives of all Americans.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
What is this hidden force called FREEMASONRY?
To millions of members, in what is sometimes called the Blue Lodge,
which makes up the lower ranks of FREEMASONRY, Freemasonry is a
philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal order of men, who have banded
together under the Christian banner of "world-brotherhood" for a common
cause.
Often, however, hidden orders in society, have had ulterior motives, not
known to the "rank and file" members. Only the "elite" in the "upper
echelons" are allowed to see the secret plans.
It may interest you to know that most of the lower orders of Freemasonry,
do not realize their is a close connection between Masonry and anti-Christ
Zionism, but this is an established fact of history which I will seek to
prove to you.
The Talmudic (Jewish holy book) formulas employed by Freemasonry;
the Jewish traditions which run through masonic ceremonies, all point to a
Jewish origin, or to the work of Jewish connivers in the lodge. Behind the
Zionists urge to rebuild Solomon's temple, lies a virulent hatred of Christ
and all things Christian and is found in the depths of Jewish secret
societies.
We should remember, that the people of the Bible, in both the Old and
New Testament eras, those who most

Page 20
translations of the Bible call JEWS, should actually be called JUDEANS,
since there were no people in the world known as JEWS, until about 742
B.C., nearly 1200 years after the time of Abraham, where we find them
fighting against Israel.
Since the term JEW, in the Bible, has no religious connotation and simply
refers to those people who were living in the area of Palestine called
JUDEA and which were made up of many races, and religions, therefore
they should be properly referred to as JUDAHITES or JUDEANS, rather
than JEWS.
The religion of the modern people we call JEWS, was not the Hebrewism
of Moses and the Old Testament prophets, but was a new, Cabalistic
(occult) religion the Judeans brought back with them when a few returned

--- Sayfa 18 ---
from Babylonian captivity about 536 B.C. Today, this religion is more
accurately known as TALMUDIC JUDAISM. At the time of Christ, the
Talmudic scholars were called PHARISEES. Many of these were
Edomites who were related to Abraham through his grandson Esau (see
John 8:33). While these sat in "Moses' seat" of authority (Matt. 23:2), they
had already overthrown the true Hebrew religion, by what Jesus called
"the traditions of men " (Matt. 15:6, 9).
These were the enemies of God and God's true Israel and were the ones
with whom our Lord had a constant running battle while He was here on
earth. These were the ones who ultimately persuaded the Israelite people
to kill their own Messiah (John 1:11).
One of the tenets of their plot was to return to Jerusalem from Babylon,
rebuild Solomon's temple and from there establish control of the world.
The above was taken from a discourse by Msg. George Dillion, given in
Edinburgh, Scotland, in October 1884. The object of his message was

Page 21
to give a clear outline of the secret, atheistic organization, that was to aid
the JUDEANS in their worldwide plot.
In spite of the fact that God had given repeated warnings to the Hebrew
people through His prophets, they constantly refuse to follow His plans.
God permitted them to kill His Son, Jesus Christ, and thus restore the hope
of salvation to mankind "For by His (Christ's) stripes are we healed" (Isa.
53:5). When the JUDAHITES turned their backs on God, the Kingdom
was taken away from them and given to another nation (Israel), (see Matt.
21:43).
On account of their racial pride, the people who called themselves JEWS,
refused to accept the idea of a kingdom higher than their national life and
refused to believe that anyone but they could enter this kingdom. When
Christ was murdered on Mt. Calvary, at the instigation of the national
leadersfailey determined to work against God and His purpose and impose
their rule on all peoples everywhere. This has been their purpose ever
since and they make very little attempt to hide it.
Following the narrow, national outlook dictated by national pride, the
modern people who call themselves JEWS have continued on this road for
centuries (Read Malachi 1:2-4, to get a better picture of what is
happening now and what will be the end result.)

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Over and over again, since Christ's atoning death on the cross, the
Christian church has faced the persistent opposition of those who "say
they are Jews and are not; but are of the synagogue of Satan" (Rev. 2:9;
3:9. Not my words but those of the risen Christ).
That the Jews eventually plan to rule the world is made adequately by
their national leaders down through history! A letter from the Chief Rabbi
of Palestine, appeared in THE IRISH INDEPENDENT newspaper, Dublin,
Ireland, Jan. 6, 1948, in which Rabbi Hertszob stated concerning the
establishment of the Israeli nation in Palestine:

Page 22
"Eventually it will lead to the inauguration of the true union of nations
through which will be fulfilled the eternal messages to mankind of our
immortal prophets."
The thinking of these NEW AGE MESSIANIC JEWS, contains a two-fold
corruption of all Christian nations. First by opposing the coming of our
Lord, they oppose the only means by which mankind can come into a right
relationship with God. Jesus said: "No man cometh to the Father, but by
me" (John 14:6). 1 John 2:23 says: "He that denieth the Son, the same
hath not the Father."
Secondly, Judaism seeks to impose their national ideals on all other
nations. Thus the people whose religion is found in TALMUDISM place
themselves in direct opposition to the world order proclaimed by Jesus
Christ.
In his book, FREEMASONRY IN THE 16TH CENTURY, William Walsh
states:
"It is no longer debatable that, if the false leaders of the
Jews did not originate the secret societies to cover their
own anti-Christian activities, they had a great deal to do
with the business. The degrees and rites of Freemasonry are
shot through with Jewish symbolism. The candidate goes
towards the east, towards Jerusalem, he is going to rebuild
the temple (destroyed in fulfillment of Jesus' prophecy)...
The Grand Orient and Scottish Rites, sources of so many
revolutions, are more militant and open and apparently
more virulent than some of the others whom they are

--- Sayfa 20 ---
leading into a single, one-world organization by gradual
steps.
"It is certain there were Jews at the cradle of Freemasonry
Cabalistic Jews, as proven by some of the rites they have
preserved.1 According to Rabbi Stephen Wise, a leading
ZIONIST of a generation ago: "When the Jews returned
from Babylon, that was the end of Hebrewism and the
beginning of JUDAISM."'

Notes:-
1. The Cabal, or Kabbal, is an occult philosophy of the
JUDAHITES who returned to Jerusalem after seventy years
of captivity in Babylon. They returned with the
BABYLONIAN TALMUD as the basis of their religion,
replacing and superseding the TORAH of Moses.

Page 23
Walsh goes on to state that Jews were in the confidence of Adam
Weishaupt, the Bavarian Jew who organized the ILLUMINATI
CONSPIRACY in 1776, AND WHO RECRUITED MANY MEMBERS
FROM FREEMASONRY. The lodges organized by Martinez de
Pasqualis, a Jew of Portuguese origin, were "mystical," while others of
FREEMASONRY were "naturalistic." (Rationalist - the doctrine that
knowledge comes only from pure reason, without any aid from the senses.
It is pure intellectualism, the doctrine which rejects all revelation and the
supernatural.)
The Apostle Paul, speaking of men such as these said: "Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools" (Romans 1:22).
FREEMASONRY was in operation in Europe as early as 1527, where it
was set up by JUDAISM as a secret society, or group of societies, in
which its naturalism and anti-supernaturalism was kept secret and
camouflaged. This contrasted with JUDAISM which openly proclaimed
its hostility towards Christianity.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Both the "naturalists," and the FREEMASONS do not accept by faith,
those truths which are made known to man through revelation. The
fundamental error of FREEMASONRY can be found in its "naturalism."
In his book, THE X-RAYS IN FREEMASONRY Jewish author A. Cowen,
writes on page 6:
The Jews swarmed into it (Freemasonry) from the earliest
times and controlled it through the higher grades and
councils. They have controlled the ancient and accepted
Scottish Rite since the beginning of the Nineteenth
Century."
4 - FROM THE HORSE'S MOUTH
This chapter appeared as a pamphlet titled FREEMASONRY - WHAT IS
IT? It appeared in print in November 1980, and was authorized by the
Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of A.F. & A.M. of the Commonwealth of
Virginia. It has subsequent printings in 1982, 1984, and 1986 and was
accepted by the Supreme Council, 33 o Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, USA (Mother Supreme Council of the World).
On other words, what you are about to read, comes right "from the horse's
mouth." In this chapter, you will discover what Masons say about
themselves. In following chapters, we will discover what MASONRY is
really all about.

FREEMASONRY - WHAT IS IT?
Freemasonry means many things to many people. This is true not only of
the person who is not a Mason, but applies to Masons themselves. Some
of those who have been members of the Masonic Craft for many years are
afraid to mention even the things which almost everyone knows about the
fraternity. Others among us are convinced that FREEMASONRY is a
secret society and that they, as members, are forbidden to talk about it to
others whom they do not know to be Masons. Most of this is far from the
truth and a word of explanation concerning this Fraternal organization
may not be amiss. FREEMASONRY IS A FRATERNITY. (Keep in mind
that this is what FREEMASONIC LEADERS SAY Masonry is all about).
FREEMASONRY is the oldest, and by far, the largest fraternal order in
the world. Its lodges stretch around the globe and, like the British Empire,
it might well be said that the sun never sets on the Masonic Lodge.
Fraternity means an association of friends and brothers, and that is exactly

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Page 25
what Freemasonry is - a society of friends and brothers. It is not a benefit
society in the sense that one becomes a member of it because of the
insurance benefits which he may receive or which may insure to his family
at his death. It is not an eleemosynary institution (a charitable institution),
founded to collect and disburse charity or founded on the giving of alms.
It is not a secret society in that its Temples are openly marked and almost
everyone in the community knows where they are located. The Grand
Lodge publishes a list of the members of every lodge in Virginia. Many of
the lodges have individual bulletins which carry the names of officers and
of members as well. Thus it is, ii' the strictest sense of the world, a society
with secrets and these are limited to its obligation, its modes of
recognition, and is the Tiller which guards the Lodge from intrusion.

FREEMASONRY'S MEMBERSHIP
Membership, because it is a fraternity, is limited to men. He who would
become a member must meet certain recognized requirements - high
standards of character and reputation. It does not require that its members
subscribe to any particular creed, or belong to any particular church.
Church membership does not keep one out of or secure him admission into
any Masonic Lodge. The profession of a belief in God and in a future life
are the sole religious requirements.
No one is excluded because of his membership in a particular church.
There are, however, a few denominations which do not allow their
members to become Masons, in some instances the mistaken impression
had gone abroad that Freemasonry refuses admission to those who are
members of certain denominations. It is the the church, rather than
Freemasonry, that denies that membership.

Page 26
HOW DOES ONE BECOME A FREEMASON?
Many men do not understand the process of acquiring membership in a
Masonic Lodge. No one is ever invited to become a Mason or to join a
Lodge. Though all morally good men would be welcomed in any Masonic
Lodge, the man himself must first ask some Mason about becoming a

--- Sayfa 23 ---
member. Once he has done so, the requested Mason will secure an
application blank, called by our Lodges a petition, and he has taken the
first step. He must have two Masons who know him to sign his petition,
vouching for his character and his qualifications. He must also receive the
unanimous ballot of the members of the Lodge to which he applies for the
degrees, who are present when his petition is voted on.
Having passed this ballot, the candidate receives his first of three degrees
which make up the symbolism of the Craft Lodge. This is designated The
Degrees of Entered Apprentice. The second degree is designated The
Degree of Fellow Craft, and the third degree is the Degree of Master
Mason. Each degree is a separate entity and one is always an Entered
Apprentice when he sits in a lodge on the First Degree of Masonry, no
matter what his Masonic status may be. Each of these degrees has certain
rights and privileges but all of the rights and privileges are attained only
after the degree is received.
After he has received each of the degrees, the candidate must commit to
memory a catechism covering the degree received. He must be examined
in open Lodge and prove his right to be advanced thereby. This serves a
useful purpose,t for it assures the Fraternity that each will know himself to
be a Mason and be able to recognize others of the Craft by their manner of
speaking. He will be enabled by such knowledge to visit other Lodges
where he is not known and must be examined to prove his right to be
admitted.

Page 27
FREEMASONRY'S ORIGIN
Freemasonry is ancient, having existed in some form for so long that many
serious students have differed as to the time and place of its origin. There
is evidence of a basic type of craft association which antedate the
Christian era. It survived various transitions which took place. during the
Middle Ages. It was during this period that the word FREE was prefixed
to the word MASON, because these builders were one of the very few
classes of persons allowed to travel from country to country and to
practice the builder's art wheresoever they went. It was these companies of
Masons who constructed the beautiful cathedrals and other stately
structures which dot the plains of Europe and the English countryside.
These men differed in the main from others of the working crafts because
they, possessing knowledge and skills not found elsewhere, were free men
rather than bond servants.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Until the Sixteenth Century Masons were strictly an operative craft, bound
together by the close ties found in the constructive guilds of the day. Early
in the Seventeenth Century, men of prominence were admitted, not as
craftsmen, for they were not skilled in the builders art, but rather as
patrons. Gradually these men came to be known as "ACCEPTED
MASONS." Thus, by the time the Seventeenth Century came to its end
these ACCEPTED or SPECULATIVE MASONS were predominate in
many of the older Lodges of Freemasonry. Today the Masonic Lodge is
termed SPECULATIVE because its emphasis is on the moral philosophy
which is its foundation, rather than the operative art of the Sixteenth and
earlier centuries. The tools of the stonemason are used to symbolize moral
virtues rather than build cathedrals.
THE GRAND LODGE SYSTEM
On June 24, 1717, St. John the Baptist Day, the members of four old
Lodges in London, met together in Grand

Page 28
ASSEMBLY TO FORM THE GRAND LODGE of England. That this
was a SPECULATIVE LODGE is evidenced by the election of one styled
ANTHONY SAYER, GENTLEMAN as Grand Master. All modern
Freemasonry traces its beginning under the Grand Lodge system of
Government.
FREEMASONS came to America about the third decade of the Eighteenth
Century when Lodges were established in New York, Pennsylvania,
Massachusetts, Virginia, South Carolina and Georgia. American
Freemasons can take pride in the part which members of this Fraternity
have played in the history of this country.
Many of the signers of the Declaration of Independence were Masons and
the same statement is true of those who signed the Constitution of the
United States. Famous men such as George Washington, Benjamin
Franklin, Paul Revere, Lafayette, James Monroe and others whose names
awaken memories of the founders of our country. Since our country's
beginning, thirteen Presidents have been Masons.
Masons have also won laurels in other fields of endeavor and we find
them prominent in government, in science, in sports, in entertainment, and
finally in man's newest field, that of space exploration with Wally Schirra,
Gordon Cooper, Virgil Grissom, and "Buz" Aidrin, all bound by the

--- Sayfa 25 ---
mystic tie of Freemasonry.

FREEMASONRY - WHAT IS IT
It has a different connotation in different situations. Someone has written
that Freemasonry is honesty in business; that it is fairness in work;
courtesy in society; compassion for the sick and unfortunate; forgiveness
for the penitent; love for our fellow man and reverence for God.
Yes it is all of these, but it is more, for Freemasonry is a philosophy to live
by, the shadow of a mighty rock in a weary land.

Page 29
WE HAVE SEEN WHAT FREEMASONIC LEADERS SAY ABOUT
FREEMASONRY, NOW LET'S TAKE A CLOSE LOOK AT WHAT IT
REALLY IS. THEN YOU BE THE JUDGE AS TO WHETHER IT IS
GOOD FOR AMERICA OR NOT!

5 - A FORMER HIGH RANKING MASON
LOOKS AT
FREEMASONIC SYMBOLISM
From here on, we will get into the heart of FREEMASONRY, and there
will be many of the Masonic members of the lower orders who will be
furious by what they will believe to be a senseless expose of their Lodge
and a revelation of its secrets. But the high ranking Mason who reads this,
although he will be furious over it, will recognize the truth, even though
he refuses to admit it. If I reach only one member of FREEMASONRY
with the truth, the effort taken to write this book will be worth it. It is not
written as a means of hurting any good person, but to expose a very
present danger to those of us who are White Christians who love our
country. This chapter will come from a brochure I received from J.
Edward Decker, Jr., who works with an organization called FREE THE
MASONS MINISTRIES. You can contact him at P.O. Box 1077,
Issaquah, WA 98027. He would be most interested in corresponding with
members of the Masonic Lodge, who may be concerned with what they
have seen happen within their Lodge.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
The question of the Christian stand regarding Freemasonry seems to
confront our ministry at every turn

Page 30
lately, because I have seen the exact parallels of the Masonic legends and
rituals carried throughout the "mysteries" of Mormonism and have studied
deeply into Masonic origins, purposes and doctrines.
In doing so, I have had to come to grips with the sad fact that the esoteric
doctrines of Freemasonry separate it, just as unequivocally as do those of
Mormonism, from the Christian theology. This holds true of every branch
of Masonry, from the Shriners to the Blue Lodge, the Eastern Star, the
Demolay, Job's Daughters and the Rainbow Girls! It holds true for the
Scottish rite or the York rite!
I realize this will cause offense to many Masons, and for that I am truly
sorry. But I would rather that the Masons be offended at me and then be
resorted to true fellowship with Jesus Christ than to remain silent any
longer.
This word of warning is not to the Masonic Fraternity at large, but to those
Masons who claim to be both Masons and Christians.
A recent newspaper insert, called FREEMASONRY - A WAY OF LIFE!
appeared in many metropolitan areas. It pictured Freemasonry as a family-
centered, fraternal, benevolent organization, as "American as apple pie!"
Not only does this article demonstrate the strength of Freemasonry among
our political leaders (Both past and present), but makes much of its use of
the Holy Bible and its foundational belief in God. Masonry has a strong
representation in Christian denominations throughout the world. In many
churches we visit, we find Masons involved as deacons, elders, board
members, and even pastors.
Their claim and the claim of every Mason to the outside world is that
Masonry and Christianity are totally compatible. They tell me that religion
is the experience of relating to God, and Masonry the experience of
relating to

Page 31

--- Sayfa 27 ---
mankind. While separate, they can and do naturally coexist.
The article mentioned above explains its "religious" position this way.
Masonry is NOT a religion in any sense of the word, yet it is religious.
Church membership is not a requirement, yet membership in ANY is no
bar to admission. There is nothing in the requirements of Masonry to
prevent a Catholic, a Mohammedan, a Jew, a Buddhist, a Protestant, a
Mormon, or any member of any religion from becoming a member.
On the surface, this might seem quite reasonable. I find no offense in
being involved in social, civic and benevolent activities with people of
other religious backgrounds
But when it comes to my own personal worship of God, and His revelation
to me of His Word, there are some very clear guidelines.
If Freemasonry is truly what it professes publicly, then "Bravo!" It is a
welcomed 'fellowship! If it is being deceptive, then it should be exposed.
It is that simple.
Let's see what Masonry TRULY teaches within its closed doors, through
its own published documents. No "anti-Masonic" publications will be
cited in explaining the TRUE Masonic theological position.
The key document from which I quote is the most readily available and
universally approved doctrinal book of Freemasonry, MORALS AND
DOGMA OF THE ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED SCOTTISH RITE OF
FREEMASONRY, by Albert Pike, Grand Commander (1859-1891). Its
title page states that it was prepared for the "Supreme Council of the 33 o
and Published by its Authority." Originally published in 1871, I will use
the 1966 edition. Except where other sources are noted, I cite page
numbers only when using this work. Emphasis within parenthesis are my
own.

Page 32
- MASONRY DESCRIBED -
CUSTODIAN OF TRUTH
(Masonry) . "The custodial and depository (since Enoch) of the great
philosophical and religious truths, unknown to the world at large, and
handed down from age to age by an unbroken current of tradition,

--- Sayfa 28 ---
embodied in symbols, emblems and allegories" (pg. 210). (This seems
almost identical to what TALMUDIC JUDAISM teaches and what Jesus
criti-cized the Pharisees of when He accused them of "Making the
commandments of God of none effect by their traditions" [Matt. 15:6] -
ED).
"Masonry is, in every sense of the word, except one, and that its least
philosophical, an eminently religious institution - that it is indebted solely
to the religious element which it contains for its origin and for its
continued existence and that without this religious element it would
scarcely be worth cultivation by the wise and good.
"Freemasonry is NOT Christianity nor a substitute for it ... But the religion
of Masonry is not sectarian. It admits men of every creed within its
hospitable bosom, rejecting none and approving none for his particular
faith... Masonry, then, is, indeed, a religious institution; and on this ground
mainly, if not alone, should the religious Mason defend it."1

THE FOUNDATION OF RELIGION
"It (Masonry) is the universal, eternal, immutable religion, such as God
planted in the heart of universal humanity. No creed has ever been long-
lived that was not built on this foundation. It is the base and they are the
superstructure" (pg. 219).

TEMPLE OF RELIGION
"Every Masonic Temple is a Temple of Religion, and its teachings are
instruction in religion" (pg. 213).

Notes:-
1. Albert G. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry,
Revised Edition (1921) pp. 618-619.

Page 33
BUDDHA THE FIRST LEGISLATURE

--- Sayfa 29 ---
"The first Masonic legislator whose memory is preserved for us by
history, was Buddha, who, about a thousand years before the Christian era,
reformed the religion of Manous" (pg. 277).

REVERENCES ALL REFORMERS
"It (Masonry) reverences all the great reformers. It sees in Moses, the
lawgiver of the Jews (there were no people called Jews until 750 years
after the time of Moses, see 2 Kings 16:6), where they first appeared in
Scripture - ED.), in Confucius and Zoroaster, in Jesus of Nazareth, and in
the Arabian Iconoclast, great teachers of morality and eminent reformers if
no more; and allows every brother of the order to assign to each such
higher and even divine characteristics as his creed and truth requires" (pg.
525).

NOT CREED - BOUND
"The true Mason is not creed-bound. He realizes with the divine
illumination of his lodge that as a Mason his religion must be universal:
Christ, Buddha, or Mohammed, the name means little, for he recognizes
only the light and not the bearer. ("No man cometh unto the Father but by
me," Jesus said, and we read in 1 John 2:23 - "Whosoever denieth the Son
(Jesus) hath not the Father..." -ED.) He worships at every shrine, bows
before every altar, whether in temple, mosque or cathedral, realizing with
his truer understanding the oneness of all spiritual truth."2

THE BAALIM
"Masonry, around whose altars the Christian, Hebrew, the Moslem, the
Brahmin, the followers of Confucius and Zoroaster, can assemble as
brethren and unite in prayer to one God who is above ALL the Baalim,
leaves it to each of

Notes:-
2. Manly P. Hall, 33o, The Lost Keys of Freemasonry, p.65.

Page 34

--- Sayfa 30 ---
its initiates to look for the foundation of his faith and hope to the written
scriptures of his own religion" (pg. 226).
The word "Baalim" is simply defined as "false god or idol." The Masonic
author has included the God of the Christian in this category.

THE SURFACE OF ALL GOOD
"Everything good in nature comes from OSIRIS -order, harmony, and the
favorable temperature of the seasons and celestial periods" (pg. 476).
Osiris was the ancient Egyptian god whose annual death and resurrection
personified the self-renewing vitality and fertility of nature. "The All
Seeing Eye" is a Masonic representation of Osiris.
MASONRY CONCEALS ITS TRUTHS
"Masonry, like all the religions, all the Mysteries, hermeticism and
Alchemy, CONCEALS its secrets from all except the Adepts and Sages,
or the Elect, and uses false explanations and misrepresentations of its
symbols to mislead those who deserve to be misled; to conceal Truth,
which it call Light, from them, and to draw them away from it. (Compare
this statement, with the one made previearey by the Masonic authority
who stated, "Masonry is not secret - ED)

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Truth is not for those who are unworthy, or unable to receive it, or would
pervert it" (pp. 105-106).

THE BLUE LODGE TO BE DECEIVED!
"The Blue Lodge Degrees are but the outer court of the Temple. Part of
the symbols are displayed to the Initiate, but

Page 35
he is intentionally misled by false interpretations. It is not intended that he
shall understand them, but it is intended that he shall imagine he
understands them" (pg. 819).
(Remember now, this information comes from one of the most famous
Masonic Leaders of modern times and is a plain admission that the Lodge
deliberately misleads the men who are in the lower orders - ED.)

WORSHIPFUL MASTER - THE SOURCE OF LIGHT
"Worshipful Master: The Head and Chief ofled" Lodge, the Source of
Light, of Knowledge and the instruction in Masonry. He personifies the
Sublime Art of Masonry and is the Spokesman thereof."3

OBEDIENCE THE FIRST RULE
"The first duty of every Mason is to obey the Mandate of the Master ...
The order must at once be obeyed; its character and its consequences may
be matters of subsequent inquiry. The Masonic rule of obedience is like
the nautical, imperative 'Obey order, even if you break owners."'4

THE INCOMPREHENSIBLE BIBLE!
"The teachers, even of Christianity, are, in general, the most ignorant of
the true meaning of that which they teach. There is no book of which so
little is known as the Bible. To most who read it, it is as incomprehensible
as the Sohar" (pg. 105).

--- Sayfa 32 ---
THE INCOMPLETE BIBLE
"All truly dogmatic religions have issued from the Kabalah and return to
it.
(Jewish occult books found in the

Notes:-
3. Arthur Waite, A New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry
(1970) p. xxiv.
4. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, p.525.

Page 36
Talmud - ED.) Everything scientific and grand in the religious dreams of
the Illumaniti, Jacob Boehme, Swedenborg, Saint-Martin, and others, is
borrowed from the Kabalah; all the Masonic associations owe to it their
secrets and their symbols.
"The Kabahal alone consecrates the Alliance of the Universal Reason and
the Divine Word.
"The Bible with all the allegories it contains, expresses, in an incomplete
and veiled manner only, the religious science of the Hebrews. The
doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, identical at bottom with that of the
ancient Egyptians, also had its outward meaning and veils.
"The Hebrew books were written only to recall to memory the traditions;
and they were written in symbols unintelligent to the profane ... thus was a
second Bible born, unknown to, or rather uncomprehended by, the
Christians; a collection, they say, of monstrous absurdities.
"One is filled with admiration, on penetrating into the Sanctuary of the
Kabalah, at seeing the doctrine so logical, so simple and at the same time
so absolute" (pp. 744 -745). (The "KABALAH" is a book of ancient
Jewish mysticism and magic.)

DEITIES OF MASONRY (THE ENERGIES OF LUCIFER)

--- Sayfa 33 ---
"When the Mason learns that the Key to the warrior on the block is the
proper application of the dynamo of living power, he has learned the
Mystery of his Craft. The seething energies of LUCIFER are in his hands
and before he may step onward and upward, he must prove his ability to
properly apply (this) energy.5

LUCIFER IS GOD!
"That which we must say to the crowd is - We worship a god, but it is the
god that one adores without superstition.

Notes:
5. Manly P. Hall, Lost Keys of Freemasonry, p.48.

Page 37
"To you, Sovereign Grand Inspectors General, we say this, that you may
repeat it to the Brethren of the 32nd, 31st, and 30tho - The Masonic
Religion should be, by all of us initiates of the high degrees, maintained in
the purity of the LUCIFERIAN DOCTRINE

"If Lucifer were not God, would Adonay (the God of the Christians)
whose deeds prove his cruelty, perfidy and hatred of man, barbarism and
repulsion of science, would Adonay and His priests, calumniate him?
"Yes, LUCIFER IS GOD, and unfortunately, ADONAY is also God. For
the eternal law is that there is no light without shade, no beauty without
ugliness, no white without black, for the absolute can only exist as two

--- Sayfa 34 ---
gods:. darkness is necessary for light to serve as its foil as the pedestal is
necessary to the statute, and the brake to the locomotive.
"Thus, the doctrine of SATANISM is heresy; and the true and pure
philosophical religion is the belief in LUCIFER, the equal of ADONAY
(Christ); but LUCIFER, GOD OF LIGHT and GOD OF GOOD, is
struggling for humanity against ADONAY, the God of Darkness and
Evil."6
The Word of God, the Bible, clearly puts LUCIFER in his proper place
and gives God's reasons:

Notes:-
6. Instructions to tor="3 Supreme Councils of the World,
Albert Pike, Grand Commander, Sovereign Pontiff of
Universal Freemasonry, July 14, 1889. Recorded by A. C.
De LaRive, La Femme et l'Enfant dans la Franc-
Maconnerie Universelle, p.588.

Page 38
Isaiah 14:12 - 15
12 "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the
morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, which did
weaken the nations!
13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the
congregation, in the sides of the north;
14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be
like the most High.
15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of
the pit."

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Masonic ritual is connected with the recovery of the "Lost Word,"
presumed to be the name of God - supposedly lost through the murder of
the architect, Hiram Abiff, during the building of Solomon's Temple. This
quest is attained during the ritual of the ROYAL ARCH DEGREE. It is
here that the SACRED NAME of the DEITY OF MASONRY is revealed.
That name is JAOBULON, JAO is the Greek word for JEHOVAH, BUL
is a rendering of the name, BAAL, ON is the term used in the Babylonian
mysteries to call upon the deity OSIRIS.
The secret ritual of the craft prints the letters J.B.O. It states: "We three do
meet and agree-in peace, love and unity-the Sacred Word to keep-and
never to divulge the same-until we three, or three such as we, do meet and
agree." Thus, no Royal Arch Mason can pronounce the whole sacred name
by himself!
What you see represented, then as the god of Freemasonry, is a three-
headed monster so remote from the Christian Trinity and so blasphemous
as to damn the eternal soul of anyone who would dare to pronounce its
name in a ritual of worship!

Page 39
Illustration of the Royal Arch
GOD OF THE MYSTIC SHRINE
The candidates for this ritual kneel at the alter of obligation with arms
bound, leaning upon the top, heads bowed. There they are required to
"assume a most powerful and binding oath, inseparably uniting yourself
with us, and once taken, it can never be retracted or departed from."
This oath is curse enough, being four pagethe length. Its penalty includes
"Having my eyeball pierced in the center with a three-edged blade."

--- Sayfa 36 ---
The revelation of truth is in the candidates sealing of the oath, revealing
the true nature of the masonic god of the Mystic Shrine. "...and may
ALLAH the god of Arab, Moslem and Mohammedan, the GOD OF OUR
FATHERS, support me to the entire fulfillment of the same, Amen, Amen,
Amen. "7

Notes:-
7. The Ancient Arabic Order, Nobles of the Mystic Shrine,
pp. 35-39.

Page 40
I AM THAT I AM
During the ceremonies of the ritual for the Royal Arch degree, the
candidate is asked: "Brother Inspector, what are you?" and he replies: "I
AM THAT I AM." Can you imagine that? When Moses asked God to
name Himself, God said, "I AM THAT I AM" and He said, "Thus shalt
thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you" (Exodus
3:14).
Tell me how a Christian can take to himself the Biblical name of God of
Israel? The God of the Christian faith said:
Isaiah 44:
8 "Ye are even my witnesses! Is there a God beside me?
Yea, I know not any!
9 They that make a graven image are ALL of them vanity;
and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are
their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may
be ashamed."

THE MASTER MASON - A GOD IN THE MAKING
"Man, is a god in the making, and as in the mystic myths of Egypt, on the
potter's wheel he is being molded. When His light shines out to lift and
preserve all things, he receives the triple crown of godhood and joins that

--- Sayfa 37 ---
throng of MASTER MASONS who, in their robes of blue and gold, are
seeking to dispel the darkness of night with the triple light of the Masonic
Lodge.

"The glorious privileges of a Master Mason are in keeping with his greater
knowledge and wisdom ... For him the heavens have opened and the Great
Light has bathed him in its radiance.

Page 41
The Prodigal Son, so long a wanderer in the regions of darkness, has
returned to his Father's house. The voice speaks from the Heavens, its
power thrilling the Master until his own being seems filled with its
divinity, saying, 'This is my beloved Son, (the Master Mason) in truth
becomes the spokesman of the Most High. He stands between the glowing
fire of light and the world. Through him passes HYDRA, the great snake,
and from its mouth pours to man the light of God."8

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Friend, there is only One for whom the Father uttered those words and He
wasn't a Master Mason ... nor in whom I am well pleased.' He will it ever
be so. Jesus Christ is God's only mediator for me and you. Do not let any
MAN ever tell you that he is, or that you may become, the spokesman for
the Most High. Further, if you believe that God speaks through HYDRA,
the great snake, then your god comes right out of the pit itself!
OTHER TEACHINGS AND PRACTICES. MASONS
USURP THE PRIESTHOOD OF JESUS CHRIST.
In the 19th level of the Scottish Rite Freemasonry, the initiate receives the
degree of GRAND PONTIFF. It is during this ritual that the candidate
swears an oath of secrecy and an oath of total obedience "to any Chapter
of

Notes:-
8 Manly P. Hall, The Lost Keys of Freemasonry, pp. 54, 55.

Page 42

--- Sayfa 39 ---
this degree to which I may belong; and the edicts, laws and mandates of
the Grand Consistory of Sublime Princes and Commanders of the Royal
Secret, as well as to those of the Supreme Council of the 33rdo ...."
At this time the "Thrice Puissant" anoints him with oil on the crown of his
head and says: "Be thou a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek."
AFTER RECEIVING THE PASSWORD (Emmanuel) and the sacred
word (Alleluia), he is dressed in a robe of white linen and given ahcordon
(ribbon or sash of honor worn across the breast) of crimson color, with 12
stars representing the 12 gates of the "new city," and the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, the twelve fruits of the tree of life, the twelve tribes of Israel,
and the twelve Apostles." 9
It must be pointed out that what has taken place here, is the Masonic
priesthood taking upon itself the Holy Priesthood of Jesus Christ. That is a
Priesthood that can be held by only One person and that one person is
clearly defined in Scripture as Jesus Christ.
In chapters seven and eight of the book of Hebrews, we are told that it was
ANOTHER Priest who would be raised up, not a group of priests! This
Priest would be our HIGH PRIEST and would be able to save to the
uttermost! He would have "endless life!" The holder of this Priesthood
would be "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher than the heavens" (Heb. 7:26). This is Jesus Christ, our Holy Lord
and God!
This Masonic ritual takes Christ's Holy Priesthood from Him, and the
Grand Pontiff boldly puts it upon his own breast. Even the use of Biblical
words fails to cover up the adding in of the "signs of the Zodiac," a direct
alliance with

Notes:-
9. Scottish Rite Masonry Illustrated, "The Complete
Ritual," Vol. 2, pp. 26, 27.

Page 43
the powers of darkness and a demonstration of disobedience to God's
Word. (See Deut. 18:19-12). Here it says that he who "useth divination"

--- Sayfa 40 ---
(consulting the signs of the Zodiac to tell the future), or is an observer of
times (which is an ancient description of the astrologer who deals with the
Zodiac) "is an abomination unto the Lord."
Here again we see the image of biblical truth. The Priesthood of Jesus
Christ is given to the deceiver, Lucifer, the true god of Masonry, who
hides behind its mystery, ritual and allegory to snare its prey.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
WASHED IN THEIR OWN BLOOD
In the seventeenth degree, or KNIGHTS OF THE EAST AND WEST, after
the candidates have completed the initiation and after revealing the
password (JUBULUM) and the Sacred Word (Abaddon), the Senior
Warden conducts the candidate to the elevated vacant canopy at the right
of the "ALL PUSSIANT."
This is suppose to represent the end of the world when all good Masons
receive their reward by being conducted to a throne at the right hand of the
ALL PUSSIANT, having been purified by washing their robes in their
own blood.
In the lecture which follows between the ALL PUSSIANT and the Senior
Warden, the Book with Seven Seals -which none but one can open (Rev.
5:5) - is twisted to represent "A Lodge or Council of Masons which the
ALL PUSSIANT alone has the right to convene or open."
The Fourth Seal is represented by a skull or "death's head," and Masons
are told it "is the image of a brother

Page 44
A MASONIC APRON WITH SYMBOLIC FIGURES
(From an early hand-painted Masonic apron.)
who is excluded from a Lodge or Council." The Fifth Seal is represented
by a "cloth stained with blood." The ALL PUSSIANT identifies this as a
symbol "that we should not hesitate to spill ours for the good of
Masonry."10
What a gross misrepresentation of God's Holy Word. First and foremost, it
is Christ and He alone who "Hath prevailed to open the book and loose
the seven seals thereof" (Rev. 5:5). To presume that honor and power is to
deny Christ, or yet in deeper perversity, to replace His power and authority
with that of the "ALL PUSSIANT," even in the representation of the
power to save and to enthrone. This is the very spirit of "anti-Christ!"
Again, another clue to the true identity of the Masonic Deity is revealed in
the Sacred Word of the ritual,

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Notes:-
10. From: Scottish Rite Masonry Illustrated, "The
Complete Ritual," Vol. 1, pp. 453, 456, 457.

Page 45
ABADDON. In Rev. 9:11 we learn that "they (the demons and workers
from hell) had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit,
whose name in the Hebrew tongue is ABADDON."

MASONIC BLOOD OATHS ARE NOT OF CHRIST!
Throughout rituals of the BLUELODGES, and through the 33o 's of
FREEMASONRY the candidates are sworn to secrecy by blood oaths.
Such as is the oath sworn by the Entered Apprentice or First Degree:
"... binding myself under no less penalty than that of
having my throat cut across, my tongue torn out by its
roots, and my body buried in the rough sands of the sea at
low-water mark"
The Master Mason swears:
"... under no less penalty than that of having my body
severed in two, my bowels taken from thence and burned to
ashes, the ashes scattered before the four winds of heaven.
"11
RAISING THE DEAD
It is in this final BLUE LODGE degree that the candidate is laid out "in
death" and is raised from the dead by the Worshipful Master of the Lodge,
who represents King Solomon and using the "strong grip" (or Lion's paw)
of the Master Mason.
Let no Mason deceive you! We are facing again this replacement of our
Savior by the power and authority of Lucifer. Paul said that if anyone
should preach any other gospel "than that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed" (Gal. 1:8, 9).

--- Sayfa 43 ---
The simplicity of the Gospel is this:
1 "Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I have
preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand;

Notes:-
11 From: Duncan's Ritual of Freemasonry.

Page 46
2 By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I have preached
unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.
3 For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures;
4 And that He was buried, and that He rose again the third day according
to the Scriptures."'12
The infinite power of Jesus Christ was confirmed by Him when he said:
"ALL power is given unto ME in heaven and in earth" (Matt. 28:28). This
power belongs to Him alone! "For if by one man's offense death reigned
by one; much more they that received abundance of grace and the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ" (Rom. 5:17).
Jesus Christ was the one who rose from the dead. Jesus Christ is the only
One who has the power to raise from the dead. Jesus Christ is the only
One who can free us from the sting of death!
How can a Mason who calls himself Christian, allow himself to partake of
a ritual resurrection by the power of Lucifer? This is Satanic! He stands,
having been born again and raised from the dead as a Master Mason,
through the power of the Masonic god, whom the God of Israel cast into
the pit!
MASONIC OATHS ABOVE THE LAW
On the "five points of fellowship," he and his "savior" pass the sacred
word: MAH-HAH-BONE!

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Also, while in this position, the new Master Mason solemnly vows: "3rd,
Breast to Breast: that you will ever keep in your breast a brother's secrets,
when communicated to you and receive such, murder and treason
excepted."13

Notes:-
12. 1 Corinthians 15:1-5.
13. Duncan's Rituals, Revised and Complete, pp. 35, 96.

Page 47
PAGAN COMMUNION - EATING THE DEAD!
"Question: What is to us (Masons) the chief symbol of man's ultimate
redemption and regeneration?"
"Answer: The fraternal supper, of bread which nourishes, and of wine
which refreshes and exhilarates, symbolic of the time which is to come,
when all mankind shall be one great harmonious brotherhood; and
teaching us these great lessons: that as matter changes ever, but no single
atom is annihilated, it is not rational to suppose that the far nobler soul
does not continue to exist beyond the grave: that many thousands who
have died might claim to be joint owners with ourselves of the particles
which compose our physical bodies; for matter ever forms new
combinations; and the bodies of the ancient dead, the patriarchs before and
since the flood, the kings and the common people of all ages, resolve into
their constituent elements, are carried upon the wind over all continents,
and continually enter into and form part of the habitation of new souls,
creating new bonds of sympathy and brotherhood between each man that
lives and all his race. AND THUS, IN THE BREAD WE EAT, AND THE
WINE WE DRINK TONIGHT MAY WE ENTER INTO AND FROM
OF US PART OF US THE IDENTICAL PARTICLES OF MATTER
THAT ONCE FORMED THE MATERIAL BODIES CALLED Moses,
Confucius, Plato, Socrates, and Jesus of Nazareth. In the truest sense, we
eat and drink the bodies of the dead; and cannot say that there is a single
atom of our blood or body, the ownership of which some other soul might
not dispute with us."14

COME OUT FROM AMONG THEM!

--- Sayfa 45 ---
If you are a Christian and a Mason, I exhort you in the name of your
Savior, Jesus Christ, to:

Notes:-
14 Albert Pike, Dogma and Doctrine, p.539.

Page 48
"Come out from among them and be ye separate, saith the LORD, and
touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you" (2 Cor. 6:17).
"This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is
become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved" (Acts 4:11, 12).
"According to the peace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation and another buildeth thereon. But
let every man take heed how he buildeth thereon. For other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (1 Cor. 3:10-11).
"Whereupon God also hath highly exalted Him (Jesus Christ) and given
him a name which is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under
the earth; and that ever tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is LORD,
to the glory of God the Father" (Phil. 2:9-11).

CHOOSE ONE OR THE OTHER
As Elijah called out to Israel in 1 Kings 18:18, 21:
"Ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord and thou
hast followed Baal. How long will ye halt between two
opinions? if the Lord be God, then follow Him. But if Baal,
then follow him."
There is no other choice for you my Masonic friend. If you are a Mason
and profess Christ as Savior, either renounce your Christian faith and

--- Sayfa 46 ---
follow Lucifer or renounce Masonry. There is no way you can cling to
both!
Every BLUELODGE member who reads this book and especially this
chapter, can no longer maintain his defense by claiming ignorance. Today,
Masonry stands revealed in all its Satanic deceitfulness. Today, you must
make your choice.

Page 49

6 - FREEMASONRY: SATAN'S DOOR TO
AMERICA
This chapter, like Chapter Four, was written by J Edward Decker, of the
FREE THE MASON MINISTRIES. I believe you will find it an eye-
opener.
When the average American thinks of Masonry, the thoughts are of
Children's Burn Centers and Hospitals, and the Shrine Circus, where
handicapped children are often carried to the front row seats in the strong
arms of weeping men who are wearing the red Fezes of their fraternity.
Rarely do we see a parade without these same Shriners driving up and
down the parade route in their little cars and motorcycles, dressed in
clothes out of the Arabian nights, bringing laughter to the children lined
up along the way.
On more serious occasions, such as the laying of public building
cornerstones, or at a funeral service of a Lodge members, these same men,
dressed in somber attire, wearing their ornate sashes, medallioned chains
of office and ceremonial aprons, will perform with solemn dignity the rites

--- Sayfa 47 ---
handed down through the centuries of their secret ritual -"Good men," they
say, "becoming better!"
Yet, once you get past the good-old-boy fraternal act, the funny hats of the
Shriners and the sheltered reputation of the local Blue Lodge Masonic
groups, there is something beyond the colorful mask, an aura of mystery,
power and intrigue, complete with under oaths of false gods, blood oaths,
conspiracy and back room politics.
The Fez itself, is an example of the double meaning behind most of
Freemasonry's facade. Worn and even carried to the grave with pompous
dignity, the history of the Fez is barbaric and anti-Christian. In the early
8th Century,

Page 50
Muslim hordes overran the Moroccan city of Fez, shouting: "There is no
God but Allah and Mohammed is his prophet. There they butchered almost
50,000 Christian men, women and children, all in the name of Allah, the
same demon god to whom the Shriners bow in worship (and proclaim him
the god of their fathers) in the Shrine initiation ceremony.
The Shriner's blood oath and confession of Allah as God is found in the
secret ritual book, THE MYSTIC SHRINE An Illustrated Ritual of the
Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Shrine (pp. 20-22).
One must realize that ALLAH is not just another name for God. Allah is
the name of another god and in usual occult fashion, the initiate swears
that he will be inseparably obligated to this "most powerful and binding
oath," in advance, and that he may never retract or depart from it.
During the butchering of the people of Fez, the streets literally ran red
with blood of the martyred Christians. The Muslim murderers dipped their
caps in the blood of their victims as testimony to Allah. These blood
stained caps eventually were called Fezes and became the Muslim badge
of honor. The Shriners wear that same Fez today. The greatest tragedy is
that the Fez is often worn by men who profess to be Christians themselves.
It must cause God to weep.
A curious piece of the Masonic conspiracy puzzle in the founding of
America is the actual layout for the Capital City of Washington, D.C.
Actually it's as much the audacity of the thing as the conspiratorial nature
of it. You see, the city was laid out in the form of key Masonic symbols,
the "Square," the "Compass," the "Rule," and the "Pentagram."

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Take any good street map of downtown Washington and find the Capital
Building. Facing the Capital from the Mall and using the Capital as the
head or top of the compass, the left leg is represented by Pennsylvania
Avenue and the right

Page 51
leg by Maryland Avenue. The square is found in the usual Masonic
position with the intersection of Canal Street and Louisiana Avenue. The
left leg of the et aass stands on the White House and the right leg stands on
the Jefferson Memorial. The circle drive and short streets behind the
Capital form the head and ears of what Satanists call the GOAT OF
MENDES, or the GOAT'S HEAD!
Map of Washington D.C. Showing Masonic Symbols
On top of the White House is an inverted 5 pointed star, or
PENTAGRAM. The point is facing south in true occult

Page 52
fashion. It sits within the intersections of Connecticut and Vermont
Avenues, north to Dupont and Logan Circles, with Rhode Island and
Massachusetts going to Washington Circle to the West and Mt. Vernon
Square to the East.
The center of the pentagram is 16th Street where, thirteen blocks due north
of the very center of the White House, one finds the Masonic HOUSE OF
THE TEMPLE, which sits at the top of this occult iceberg.
The Washington Monument stands in perfect line to the intersecting point
of the form of the Masonic Square, stretching from the House of the
Temple to the Capital Building. Within the hypotenuse of that right
triangle sit many of the headquarter buildings for the most powerful
departments of government, such as the Justice Department, U.S. Senate,
and the Internal Revenue Service.
It would be great to know that your nation's Capital is bathed in continual
prayer and to believe that its building and monuments have been dedicated
in prayer, but do you realize that every key Federal building from the
White House to the Capital has had a cornerstone laid in a Masonic ritual
and has specific Masonic paraphernalia placed in each one. Again,

--- Sayfa 49 ---
wonderful if we were talking about our one true God in all this, but such is
not the case. The cornerstone of all these buildings have been laid in
Masonic ritual, dedicated to the demonic god of Freemasonry, JAO-BUL-
ON That is the secret name of the Masonic god, the LOST WORD in the
rite of the Royal Arch Degree. JAO is the Greek name for the god of the
Gnostics "ladabaoth or lao;" BUL is a rendering of the name "Ba'al" and
ON is the Babylonian name for the Egyptian god "OSIRIS."
What we see represented in this name of the Masonic deity is a three-
headed pagan deity so remote from the

Page 53
Christian faith as to damn the eternal soul of anyone who would dare to
pronounce its name in worship.1
The Washington Monument actually represents the PHALLIC
PRINCIPLE upon which SPECULATIVE Masonry is based. From above,
the monument and its circular drive, form the esoteric Masonic "Point
within a circle." The Reflecting Pool bears its shadow image, with the
illusion duplicated in the Lincoln Memorial.
Strange? Not if you understand the occult principles involved. The
respected Masonic author and authority, Albert Mackey, states in
MACKEY'S MASONIC RITUALIST; (pp. 62-63):
"The point within a circle is an interesting and important
symbol in Freemasonry ... The symbol is a beautiful but
somewhat obtuse allusion to ... sun-worship and introduces
us for the first time to that modification among the ancients
as the worship of the PHALLUS. The Phallus was an
imitation of the male generative organ. It was represented
usually by a column, which was surrounded by a circle at
its base, intended for the cteis, or female generative orge
39This union of the Phallus and the Cteis, which is well
represented by the point within the circle, was intended by
the ancients as a type of the prolific powers of nature,
which they worshipped under the united form of the
activity or male principle and the passive or female
principle."
Winding about the streets of Washington, D.C. are hundreds of such
applications of THE PRINCIPLE. They are there by design and we can

--- Sayfa 50 ---
barely touch the simplest. Our nation and leaders have been deeply
effected by this occult power.
The news rocked the Nation, when ASTROLOGY IN THE WHITE
HOUSE, ran in People's Magazine, May 23, 1988. Nancy Reagan was
manipulating the President's schedule based on astrological charts drawn
up by a San Francisco

Notes:-
1. The full explanation for this is found in -Duncan's
Masonic Ritual and Monitor, Third Ed. pp. 224-226, 249-
251.

Page 54
soothsayer named Joan Quigley. It wasn't the first time the resident of the
White House was doing a balancing act with stargazers. Teddy Roosevelt
kept his own astrological chart, but it was usually the women in the White
House who consulted the mediums. First ladies Florence Harding and
Edith Wilson, regularly consulted one Madame Marcia Champney and
Mary Lincoln held seances in the White House. Those are just the ones
who openly practiced the art of divination.
Whatever the reasons, we do know that the Bible strongly speaks about
the fall of any nation whose leader defies the Word of God and consults
mediums. The Satanic pentagram under which the White House sits is an
open door through which Satan has access to the White House.
The Pentagram, or five-pointed star is, of course, both a Masonic symbol
and an ancient symbol of witchcraft. With its point facing down (or south),
it is especially found in Satanism. Satanists can be seen wearing the
inverted pentagram; and it appears in many black magic books, including
THE SATANIC BIBLE. It is also the signet of the EASTERN STAR, the
lady's Masonic organization.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
You can see on the map, the pentagram is inverted and facing south, and
its lowest point does rest upon the White House! What would this mean to
someone with a Masonic or magical frame of mind? Bill Schnoebelen, a
former

Page 55
Mason and Satanist, is now a Christian worker on the Staff of Saints
Alive. He pointed out that such a deidth is a spiritual door to the occult, a
planned invasion by the powers of darkness against this Christian nation.
"We have been under siege from the first day our President walked into
the Oval Office," he said.
Bill added that Albert Pike, the giant of Masonic philosophy who is
entombed just 13 blocks from the White House in the HOUSE OF THE
TEMPLE, has identified the pentagram (or PENTALPHA) as the blazing
star which is at the heart of every Masonic lodge and which represents the
star SIRIUS.2 SIRIUS has been known for 5,000 years as the great evil.3
Bill emphasized that to the magician, the inverted pentagram has one use
only, and that is to call up the power of Satan and bring the Kingdom of
the Devil into manifestation on earth.4 Yet this very symbol straddles the
corridors of our nation's power and is aimed right at the White House.
This pentagram is found constantly at sites of ritual murders; and in the
notebooks of teens who have become involved in Satanism and have
ended up killing themselves. In the ARIZONA REPUBLIC, 11/27/88;
Section B, an article by Bill Donovan and Mark Shaffer, talks about three
teenage suicides. The authors quote a school administrator: "All you have
to do to know we have a large problem on our hands is drive down the

--- Sayfa 52 ---
street. There are pentagrams everywhere, on stop signs, buildings, trash
dumpsters, even one that's on the post office. Pentagrams are five pointed
stars used as a symbol by practicing Satanists."

Notes:-
2. Pike, Morals and Dogma, pp. 14, 15.
3. Kenneth Grant, Aleister Crowley and the Hidden God,
p.12.
4. Schnoebelen, Man, Myth and Magic, p.2159.

Page 56
It is evident that death, destruction and carnage follow this symbol
everywhere. It is a key that opens the door to hell; at least according to
sorcerers. What does the Bible say about it?
This star, which has been identified in the Bible as the accursed
"tabernacle of Molech, and the STAR of your god, REMPHAN, figures
which ye made to worship them ... (Acts 7:43, cf. Amos 5:25-27). This
"star" is an idolatrous image sullied by untold centuries of debauched
worship; and yet it is carefully placed right upon our nations capital.
Every bit as staggering is the fact that the central symbol of the
CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR, this nation's highest
military award for bravery, is the pentagram. The five pointed inverted
star, within a circle is the highest form of Satanic expression, representing
BAPHOMET, THE GOAT OF MENDES, or the embodiment of
LUCIFER as god!

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Of course, nearby the main part of Washington, D.C. is one of the famous
and distinctly shaped buildings in America, the PENTAGON. Although
most recognize the Pentagon as the nerve center of our nation's defense
establishment; few realize that the Pentagon itself is a geometric design
used in magic and witchcraft as well.
The Pentagon, through its use of the number 5 is associated profoundly
with the planet Mars and the ancient

Page 57
god of war, called variously ARIES, HORUS, or MARS.5 This is because
Mars is the fifth planet on the magical diagram, the Tree of Life; among
other reasons.
The Pentagon is also one of the two secret symbols of the highest levels of
Freemasonry, the ANCIENT AND ILLUMINATED SEERS OF
BAVARIA (aka the Illuminati) - the other being the Pentagram. It may be
observed that every pentagram has a pentagon within it; and that every
proper pentagram can fit perfectly point-to-point within a pentagon.
Thus, the magician sees the Pentagon as a gigantic talisman of war or
battle. Bill Schnoebelen points out that throughout the witchcraft
underground in the U.S. there has been circulated a rumor that a demonic
war-god is imprisoned inside the Pentagon and that he is what keeps
causing wars. During the anti-war movement of the Vietnam era, in the

--- Sayfa 54 ---
midst of a demonstration at the Pentagon, some "witches for peace" were
actually present and actually attempted to levitate the Pentagon and
"exorcise" the demon god YOG SOTHOTH from within. Needless to say,
the building remained unlevitated.
Freemasonry boasts 16 Presidents, including Ronald Reagan, 41 Federal
Judges, 60 Congressmen, 14 members of the Judiciary Committee and 18
Senators. One can only guess at the numbers involved within the many
governmental departments. There is no doubt that Masonic conspirators
plotted against this nation from its very inception to the present hour.
Thank God that there have been that many real Christians praying for this
country and its leaders, to keep a righteous God from bringing deserved
judgment against this nation.

Notes:-
5. See: A Practical Guide To Kabalistic Symbolism, by
Gareth Knight, p. 124ff.

Page 58
Is it any wonder that the battle seems so difficult? How have such evils
like greed and conspiracy within our nation's leadership been able to rock
this nation? How has the Federal Judicial system become such a power
cult that it is able to violate our inalienable rights with total freedom? How
have such Biblical opposed acts as abortion and homosexuality become
accepted and even welcomed practices? When did our people give up the
right of freedom OF (and not FROM) Religion? When did we say it was
OK for the practice of Witchcraft and Satanism in our government and
schools. When did humanism and the New Age philosophies replace
Christianity as the Rock upon which this nation was built?
It began, when we allowed the soothsayers and worshipers of JAO-BUL-
ON to lay out the National Capital as a giant, Satanic Talisman, an open
door to the demonic world of darkness. IT'S TIME WE TOOK THIS
NATION BACK!
Christian brothers and sisters, WE have the authority and power of the
believer. WE have the Biblical promise and examples of the power of
prayer, the miracle of intercession. WE have the need and the right to go
to our knees in private and in our congregations to break the power of

--- Sayfa 55 ---
these demonic abominations in our Nation, Church, and families. LET US
DO BATTLE IN SPIRITUAL PLACES (Eph. 6). LET'S CLOSE THAT
NO-LONGER-SECRET door of the enemy in our NATIONAL
CAPITAL!
To those of you may read this and make light of this urgent message, the
Bible speaks directly of this national sin:
2 Corinthians 6:14, 15.
14 "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers;
for what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion hath light with
darkness?
15 And what concord (agreement) hath Christ with Belial?
Or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?

Page 59
Then verse 17 says:
2 Corinthians 6:17
17 "Come out from among them and be ye separate, saith
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I (God) will
receive you."
Even Elijah called out to his ancient people:
1 Kings 18:18
18 "Ye have forsaken the commandments of the LORD and
thou hast followed Baal!
1 Kings 18:21
21 I cry out, How long halt ye between two opinions? If the
LORD be God, follow Him: But if Baal (be your god), then
follow Him.
If you are a member of a Masonic Lodge, I charge you to choose Jesus
Christ and the church, or the Lodge and Lucifer, but stop playing games
with God, your family and your own soul. There is a good reason why
Masons do not allow Lodge prayers to include the name of Jesus. It's not
His temple you worship in, but that of JABULON, or Lucifer! You are not
bound by these blood oaths! RENOUNCE JAO-BUL-ON AND HIS
OATHS AND BE SET FREE!

--- Sayfa 56 ---
I pray that you will choose Jesus Christ, repent and be set free from this
wicked power unto whom you have submitted your soul. If this is your
desire, remember we have this promise in 1 John 1:9 -"If we CONFESS
or sins, He (Jesus Christ) is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
cleanse us from ALL UNRIGHTEOUSNESS."
This is something your Lodge and your Lodge affiliations can never and
will never do. If you have a desire to know more about this true freedom
in Jesus Christ, write to: FREE THE MASONS MINISTRY, P.O. Box 1077,
Issaquah, WA 98027.
* * * * * * *
It has been truthfully said that aliens control our country by controlling
Congress. We have not had a truly American Government in Washington,
D.C. for well over fifty years, no matter whether Republicans or
Democrats have been in

Page 60
power. This alien control is seen when we take into account that there is
very little change in government policies, when we see a change of
Administration from one major party to the other. They are all controlled
from the same international sources. Strangely enough, the majority of this
pressure comes from a group of people we know as Ashkenazi Jews. This
group, working with the Esau-Edom population of the United States,
makes up about 95% of the present world Jewish population. We have
been led to believe by Jewish statistics that this number is around 15
million, although, personally, I have reason to believe it is much higher.
The Esau-Edomite Jews have been a parasitic people who have never been
able to exist on their own, so we find them inter-breeding with anyone
who will help them. They have made tremendous inroads into the royal
families of Europe and have contaminated the royal blood line of King
David until it is difficult to tell the difference between the Jew and the
Israelite.
On pg. 76, of Rabbi Jack Moline's book GROWING UP JEWISH, we read:
"For years, anti-Semites have accused Jews of controlling
Congress, and for years it has been denied. Ironically, as of
1984, the Jews do control Congress. A recent survey of the
435 representatives, shows that for all practical purposes,
219 are practicing Jews. Interestingly, twelve members of
the Black Congressional Caucus are Ethiopian Jews. On the

--- Sayfa 57 ---
Senate side, an astounding 62 out of 100 Senators identify
themselves as Jews." (What he means by this I am not sure;
possibly that they are Christian Zionists who vote the
straight Zionist ticket every time - ED).
Appropriations to the State of Israeli are so high, because all 62 Senators
have responded to the United Jewish Appeals with the cliche: "I gave at
the office." Then suddenly they realize it was a matter of public record.
What we are going to seek to ascertain in the remainder of this book, is
how this Talmudic Jewish influence has permeated Freemasonry and
further increased the dictatorial control over the Christian world.

Page 61
7 - THE TALMUDIC AND MASONIC ZOO
Before we get into our in-depth discussion of the Masonic Lodge and its
connection with Zionist Talmudism, I believe it would be beneficial for us
to look at some of the multitude of symbols which are used in worldwide
FREEMASONRY and discuss their implication.
A great deal of the information in this chapter comes from Dr. Shepherd, a
Mason for many years, who rose to a high degree before he became a
Christian and saw the desperate need of exposing the Lodge. Dr. Shepherd
is one of those rare, brave men, to whom God and country mean more than
populof ty and personal safety. He has literally put his life on the line in
order to expose this evil which has crept into our midst, in the "guise of
sheep's clothing."
What I will share with you in this chapter, is a series of letters he wrote to
me regarding FREEMASONRY and their ZIONIST CONNECTIONS.
These letters may seem to be somewhat disconnected, but if you read them
all, I believe you will see the underlying message.
Both TALMUDISM and FREEMASONRY are awash in animal
symbolism. Each has its place in the ritual worship of the Talmudic and
Masonic god.
First Letter: "The Masonic Lodge is the Jew-lodge and every lodge is -
no matter what name they use, Masonic or Jew. The fact which deceives
so many, is that various names, titles, and lodges are given, but when you
get to their roots you will see; First that a Jew started it; second, a Jew will

--- Sayfa 58 ---
be its Supreme Commander, or Grand Dragon as the Jews call them.
Jacobites, Rosicrucians, Knights Templer, Knights of Columbus, Elks,
Moose,

Page 62
NOTE. The lion figure below adorned the wall of the throne-room in the
palace of Nebuchadnezzar at Babylon (pg. 86). It is made of glazed brick
in the brightest colors, which produced a gorgeous effect as architectural
adornment. This art arose in Egypt, passed thence to Assyria and
Babylonia, and was then adopted by the Persians.

Eastern Star, Shriners, are for all intents and purposes all FREEMASONS.
These have fought my attempts to expose them and four attempts have
been made against my life. Why? Because I know too much about them
and try and alert others. In this first letter, I intend to show you who the
Great Beast of Revelation 13 is and when I point this out, you will
probably say: "Why didn't I see this. before?"
Revelation 13:1 and 2
"And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise
up out of the sea ... and the beast which I saw was like unto
a leopard, and his feet were the feet of a bear, and his
mouth the mouth of a lion."
The word CUSH is used many times in the Bible to represent peoples
from Africa and means LEOPARD to many people. When Jacob
prophesied concerning his family in Genesis 49:9, he said of Judah:

--- Sayfa 59 ---
"Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son thou art
gone up; he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an
old lion; who shall rouse him up?"
The modern Ethiopians called themselves CUSHITES, or LEOPARDS In
Revelation 11:8, we read about "that great city, which spiritually is called
Sodom and EGYPT." The Great image of the SPHINX is found in Egypt,
near Cairo

Page 63
and is known in that part of the world as THE GREAT CAT! In the
Egyptian BOOK OF THE DEAD the great god Toth says: "I am RE, the
MAUMAU" MAU and LEOPARD have the same meaning!

In Genesis 4:7, when God spoke to Cain, after Cain became angry
because God did not accept his offering, God said: "... sin lieth at the
door." The Jews who translated this deliberately changed the meaning of
this verse, for the Chaldean word for SIN, as used here is CHATTAH or
CHEETAH or LEOPARD. The word "lieth" should be "couches," and is
the act of the female cat as she prepares to breed. In other words, this
verse should have read: "The leopardess couches before you."

Page 64

--- Sayfa 60 ---
When the question arises as to who was Cain's wife, the answer of course
was she was the LEOPARDESS, NOT THE ANIMAL CAT, BUT A
HUMAN WITCH.
Not how closely the HOLYCAT (CATholic)is bound up in these verses.
Don't say: "That's Rome," since Rome is only a small part of it. All seven
churches in the book of Revelation claim to be catholic. The Apostle's
Creed in its original form read: "I believe in the holy catholic (universal)
church." CATHOLIC goes back to the Garden of Eden and Genesis 3. In
Numbers 26:44, we read about the JESUITS Have you ever heard that
name before? Of course you have! The JESUITS are the HOLY-CATS
(CATholics) Old Cain was a CATholic who sacrificed the EU-CHRIST.

In the above picture of Herod's coin, 37 - 4 B.C., it had no connection with
Rome
but was of Jewish origin. A close perusal of Albert Pike's monumental
work on
MASONRY, MORALS AND DOGAM, take the MASONIC LODGE back
to Cain.
Second Letter: Surprising enough, I begin my discussion of
FREEMASONRY with Genesis 3:1. This serpent was not a snake. The
Hebrew word under here is NAHASH The Navajo Indians still use this
word today, it is pronounced NAH-GAH-OSHEE and means: "witch
doctor; guru; voodoo; sorcerer." That's what Cain was!
In Genesis 3, the Creator said to the "serpent," "on thy belly you shall go."
But the word "BELLY," should have

Page 65
read: "On all fours shall you go." A cat travels on all fours doesn't it?
Since NAHASH IS A WITCH, AND A CAT IS ALWAYS
ASSOCIATED WITH WITCHES AND WITCHCRAFT, I believe the
serpent was a CAT.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
For further proof - What did Adam and Eve do when they disobeyed God
by eating of the forbidden fruit? The Bible says they hid themselves
among the trees of the garden, this is a characteristic of the CAT.
The LEOPARD, LEO (Lion), PAN (PANther) all come from the same
word. Here are words with a similar meaning: PARD; panther; panthera;
(PANTHERA is "female); MAU; PUMA; CHATTAH; CHEETAH;
CUSH; NIMROD. Each of these were HOLY CATS and were worshiped
in their area and today, the cat is worshiped worldwide. In Central and
South America it is the JAGUAR. But note carefully that the CAT is
named after CUS H. This is what the Jews call "transmigration of the
soul." The cat, according to them, is actually CUSH living in the CAT.
This is why many Africans call themselves CUSHITES.
(When I was a Game Warden in Ethiopia, 1958-62, I was
impressed by the reverence the animist [worshipers of the
spirits of nature] natives had for the Hyena, called "fisi,"
which is one of the most horrible of the animals God
created. In this part of the country, when a man or woman
becomes too old to work, or benefit the family, they are
often left outside the village fence and become living prey
for the hyenas. The natives themselves, will not kill these
horrible animals, although they prey on both human and
cattle, because they believe the spirits of their ancestors,
who the hyenas have devoured, live on in the animal - ED.)
The big CAT is the LION. The mouth of the LION is its most dangerous
part and the MOUTH of the ancient family was called the PATRIARCH.
This opens a fact which has been hidden for thousands of years. We know
that Catholics literally worship ST. PETER, he his called PATRA-arch,
which means ANCIENT STONE.

Page 66
It is interesting to note that the word HAM is HA'MER or STONE. The
PATRA-arch of the family is the ANCIENT STONE of the family. Since
the head of the family, HAM was called the LION, therefore the church
calls itself CATholic.
If you will look closely at any picture of the Great CAThedral of Babylon,
some call it the TEMPLE you will notice on each side of the entrance, a
large stone lion with a man's head. The word "HEDRA," from which the
last part of the word CAT-HEDRAL comes, means "head," orin most

--- Sayfa 62 ---
cases "cat's head." This does not refer to leopards or cheetah's but to the
King of Beasts, the LION. Thus the head of the ROMAN CATHOLIC
CHURCH, St. Peter, is known in Egypt as PTAH, which means "Ancient
Stone."
In the Egyptian BOOK OF THE DEAD, the word mouth is the LION.
PTAH was Egypt's great god. The Bible tells us that Egypt is the land of
HAM. You make the connection.
In CHALDEAN the Word BAB also means "mouth." Thus again "the
LION'S MOUTH." The LEOPARD also has a mouth like a LION and the
native word for him is PARD. What is a PARD? It is a PANTHER
LION-LEOPARD the mouth or religion. In the U.S. the religion of the
Beast is LIONISM or HAMISM or more commonly known as
BABYLONIANISM Revelation 11:8 refers to "That great city Babylon
in Egypt." It is symbolic, since there was no great city in Egypt called
BABYLON
It is interesting to note, that when you travel to Egypt and see the great
SPHINX, you see a cat body with a human head, the same as in the
doorway of the BABYLONIAN TEMPLE.
Many Jews carry a "cat's paw." Twelve LIONS stood on the six steps
leading to Solomon's throne and Jacob said that JUDAH, representative of
the JEWS was a "crouching lion," (Gen. 49:9).

Page 67
The cat represents a witch, witchcraft and the word "cat" in the ancient
tongue meant "whore." This is where the term "cat house" came from. The
cat is also called a "Pussy," which is the vulgar term used for a woman's
sexual parts. These things, unknown to most Christians, had their
beginnings from the time of Cain.
Third Letter: (I am only printing those things which pertain to
FREEMASONRY. Dr. Shepherd has sent me much more, dealing with the
Seedline theory and other matters, which we will not be covering in this
book. This will be the concluding remarks from Dr. Shepherd. If any of
my readers would like to contact him, please write me for his address -
ED.)
Eve's penalty for eating the "forbidden fruit" was "death." (Gen. 2:17).
When Cain offered his sacrifice to God, it was refused, not because it was

--- Sayfa 63 ---
a vegetable sacrifice, as some preachers say, but because it was "devil's
bread."
The root word for CAIN, or CANA, is "black" and this takes us to the
root of FREEMASONRY The MASONIC password is TU-BAL-CAIN
(See Gen. 4:20-22). It is CAIN, or the devil himself who admits one into
the Masonic Lodge. If you don't want to take my word for it, then take the
word of a strict Jew-Mason, who was converted to Christianity and had his
life completely changed, the Apostle Paul. In Philippians 3:2 he says:
"beware of DOGS, beware of EVIL WORKERS, BEWARE OF THE
CONCISION." (The Greek word for "concision" is "karatome" which
means: "to mutilate." Like in ''circumcision.'') Masons call themselves
DOGS.
In Isaiah 56:10 we read about "...dumb dogs that cannot (or will not)
bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy DOGS
which can never have enough (are never satisfied) ..." In John 8:44 they
are called: "Of their father the devil," an apt description for Masons and
Jews alike.

Page 68
The MAFIA, KGB, CIA, MOSSAD, the spies of MASONRY are the
DOGS or DEVILS of FREEMASONRY. There is not a place on earth
which is free from their spies. On every continent, in every country, city
and town, these spies are present.
Albert Pike, the chief "guru" of MASONRY, says that Masons call their
god THE GREAT ARCHITECT. If you read Genesis 4:17, you will find
the name of the first Mason, CAIN, the builder, the architect.
Archaeologists do not know who built the Great Pyramids of Egypt, the
greatest building project the world has ever known. They do not know
who erected the mammoth images on Easter Island or the monoliths of
Stonehenge, or the pyramids in Mexico on this continent.
Could CAIN have been called THE GREAT ARCHITECT, because he
built the first recorded city? Could the builder of the Egyptian pyramids
have been called THE GREAT ARCHITECT? Do you doubt that Masons
are builders? Jesus hints at this when He spoke to the JEW-MASON Sin
Matthew 21:42 and told them: "... The stone which the builders (masons)
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
If Masons worship Lucifer, as Albert Pike affirms, then THE GREAT
ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE must of necessity be the devil - the
BLACKDOG.
No one has ever been able to figure how the mammoth stones of the Great
Pyramid, many weighing a hundred tons or more, were lifted 490 feet to
be fitted in place. We have no modern machinery that can accomplish this.
Could it have been done by demonic power?
(When I was in Ethiopia, I became acquainted with a
Coptic priest who was a graduate of Cambridge University.
He showed me the massive obelisk at Axum, the ancient
capital of the Queen of Sheba's Empire. This huge stone is
97 feet tall, by 24 feet at the base and is estimated to weigh
about

Page 69
2700 tons. It is hewn from a solid piece of black granite,
the closest quarries of which are in Yemen, across 400
miles of land and the Red Sea. This monument, which is
over 5,000 years old, was erected on a mountain plateau,
about 7,000 feet elevation, which means this huge stone
would have had to be moved up an almost perpendicular
cliff, some 2,000 feet from the valley below. Again,
modern engineers marvel at how this was done. This Coptic
priest told me that the ancients had the power of
"levitation." They were able to overcome gravity, he told
me, through "spirit power." Is this how the Great Pyramid
at Giza, Egypt was erected? - ED)
Could it have been demonic power that made these feats possible? The
Apostle Paul tells us in 2 Thes. 2:9 about one whose coming would be
"after the working of Satan, with ALL POWER ... " Does Satan have the
power to move huge stones?
There is an authentic account of a scientist who was in the Amazon in
1987 and watched as natives erected a pyramid, moving huge stones into
position through "spirit power." No, my skeptical friends, there is little
doubt that Satan can lift huge stones and that the builder of the Great
Pyramid was the GREAT ARCHITECT.
Fourth Letter: THE CITY OF DEVILS

--- Sayfa 65 ---
1 - In Arabic, the word CAIN, or CANA means "devil." In Revelation
18:2, we are told that great BABYLON has "become the habitation
(dwelling place) of devils, and the hold (cage) of every foul spirit ... " The
first city, built by CAIN, was a "city of devils."
2 - ENOS, or ENOCH, after whom this first city was named, was the son
of CAIN. This city was utterly depraved.
3 - LAMECH - the great-great-great (I think I have this right) grandson of
CAIN married a woman whose name was ADAH. It is interesting to note
that in India today, ADA or ADAH, is one of their most feared goddesses.
She

Page 70
can cast deadly diseases on persons, they believe, on animals and even fish
and crops and has been known to have her adherents burn the houses of
those who refuse to sacrifice to her. ZILLAH, LAMECH'S second wife,
means "shade," "ghost," or "demon." The question might be asked: "Is it
possible for a man to live with a demon in a woman's form?" I believe it is
and that demons can take any form they desire. There are documented
reports of men who had lived with demons in human form.
(Unfortunately, Dr. Shepherd does not give us this documentation -ED.)
4 - GIANTS - Genesis 6:4. The word used here for GIANTS is
GIGANTE which does not refer to men of great size but to "demon
possessed men." Could this be the meaning of verse 5 which says:
"And God saw the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually."
In other words, these men were "devils; witches; swamies; Masons."
5 - HAM was the founder of the city of SODOM after the Flood. Would
you call this a "city of devils?"
6 - The TOWER OF BABEL (Gen. 11:1-5) was built by CUSH the
"Great Cat," and NIMROD, the "hunter of men." Would you call this
tower an evil place? All these places mentioned, were built by the
Masonic god, THE GREAT ARCHITECT.
7 - The PYRAMIDS were probably built by the same god.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
8 - SOLOMON'S TEMPLE, which many people believe was built for
the glory of God, was a "temple of the devil.." It was erected for the
worship of Lucifer, the Masonic god and this is why it is so important in
Masonry.

Page 71
9 - JEZEBEL -this evil woman, who led her husband, the king of Israel
and the Israel people into idolatry, was a witch. We see her mentioned in
the "end times" as seducing the church at Thyatira (see Rev. 2:20).
10 - JERUSALEM - Many false religious prophets have taught that this
was the "holy city." Not so! There is no letter "3" in the Hebrew language,
so the name of this city in Palestine is GURU-SALEM "OU" means
"black," "RU" means "stones." Why do the Jews and Masons want that
place in Palestine? Because it was and is the BABYLONIAN SYSTEM.
In Isaiah 57:3, 6 we read:
"But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorcerers (witches)
among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion ..."
The "smooth stones" represent the high gurus, witches, sorcerers, and
officials of JUDAISM and FREEMASONRY.
11- MYSTERY BABYLON - Called in Revelation 18:2 "the home of
devils ..."
Masonry, my dear brothers, is of the devil. It is the city of the devil. It is:
a. -The "great hypocrisy."
b. -The "great conspiracy."
c. -The "great beast."
d. -The "great whore."
e. -The "great sorceress."
LETTER #5 - When Adam and Eve sinned, God made them coats of
skin. Our pastors have told us these were sheep skins. I believe they were
the skins of the lion and leopard and this is the reason why heathen high
priests still use these skins as a sign of their high office.
In their KABALLAH, the Jewish TALMUD-MISHNA, the Jewish
rabbis say: "Ham smuggled and hid the coat of

--- Sayfa 67 ---
Page 72
Adam in the ark and used it after the Flood to gain power." Could this
have been the same garment that Achan took at Jericho (Joshua 7:21),
some believe it was. The TALMUD says that NIMROD had received this
garment which gave him great power and that this was stolen by ESAU,
when he assassinated NIMROD. This is the reason, they claim, that Esau
was so exhausted the day he sold his birthright to his brother Jacob (see
Gen. 25:30-32). The story goes that he had been fleeing from NIMROD'S
MEN, after he had killed their king.
The NEW AGE of FREEMASONRY is nothing new. It is the same old
demonism, Satanism and voodooism which has been practiced worldwide
since the Garden of Eden.
The god that Masons demand their "proselytes," or initiates" worship is
Satan or Lucifer (see Matt. 23:15). This is confirmed by Albert Pike in
his MORALS AND DOGAM. Masons believe there are two gods -
brothers, if you will. There is LUCIFER, the "good guy," whom they
worship, and ADONAY-JESUS Christ, who is the "bad guy." A constant
warfare is going on between these forces of "good" and "evil." But of this
you can be sure, THE GREAT ARCHITECT OF MASONRY is not the
God of the Bible, or Christianity. Their symbol worldwide is that of the
CAT.
It is interesting also to note that God calls PHARAOH, the king of Egypt,
"the great dragon," (Ezek. 29:3). This is the same term used in Rev. 12:9.
It does not refer to a man. You no doubt have heard Egypt called the "land
of the PHARAOHS?" But in all actuality, it should be called "the land of
the devil."
Ignorance of facts is the destruction of our white, Christian people. Hosea
4:6 tells us that "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge." Not
"lack of education," but "lack of knowledge." -THE END-

Page 73
I would like to thank Dr, Shepherd for his contribution. Many of you, no
doubt will not agree with him and if you would like to contact him, please
let me know.
* * * * * * *

--- Sayfa 68 ---
In the next few pages, we will look at some of the occult symbols and
advertisements which appear daily in American newspapers and
magazines. Our country has literally been taken over by Satanism and the
occult and both JUDAISM and FREEMASONRY has given their consent.

Illustration for Bottom of Page 73

--- Sayfa 69 ---
Illustration for Page 74

--- Sayfa 70 ---
Illustration for Page 75

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Illustration for Page 76

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Illustration for Page 77

--- Sayfa 74 ---
Illustration for Page 78

Page 79
8 - JEWISH INFLUENCE ON
FREEMASONRY
Beginning with this chapter we will get into an in-depth discussion of
FREEMASONRY and the "Hidden Power" which makes it operate and
successful.
Much has been said about the Jewish, or maybe it would be more accurate
to say the Zionist, interests which influence Freemasonry. Few members
of the lower orders know the significance of this, or its importance to
them, This is especially true if they are Christians.
There is no doubt that the Zionist question MUST be linked with the
MASONIC question. At present, as in the past, Zionist world leaders, and
men in high positions with the Masonic organization, have worked "hand
in glove" for a universal world revolution, which will bring in the One-
World Church and a One-World Government. Many Masonic Lodges are
exclusively Jewish, as are the B'nai B'rith Lodges, the mother of the
infamous and very dangerous Anti-Defamation League, which is an
unregistered agent of a foreign government (Israeli) which has been
allowed by our government to operate unhindered on American soil.
Although this Jewish organization is totally illegal, such is the strength of
both the Masonic and Zionist Lobby in Washington, D.C., that the
Government refuses to do anything to curb their power or control their
operations on American soil, often at the expense of American citizens.
Wherever you look, you will find Freemasonry upholding and defending
Zionist interests, even to the detriment of the safety of this country. This in
itself should give you a good idea of the entwining interests of the two
which can be seen in the seventy U.S. Senators who are

Page 80
Zionist controlled and vote a "straight Zionist ticket" when the interests of
Zionism come to the fore. These men in Washington, who have taken an

--- Sayfa 75 ---
oath to defend this country and its Constitution from all enemies, both
foreign and domestic, will vote for Israeli interests, even when they are
contrary to the well being of this country. For all intents and purposes,
these men are TRAITORS. in the Constitution, ARTICLE III, Section 3,
gives a definition of TREASON, which is so clear that even a Fifth Grader
can understand it. It says: "Treason shall consist only in levying war
against them (the US.) adhering to their enemies; giving them aid and
comfort." If what has been done for the Israelis in recent years, has not
been "giving aid and comfort to our enemies," then I fail to understand the
meaning of the English language.
For all intents and purposes, the A.D.L. has become an unofficial part of
the U.S. Justice Department, giving them periodic biased reports on
"terrorism and anti-Semitism" in the U.S., which is "extremely
prejudicial" to Christian patriots. Every effort to investigate the power of
the A.D.L. has been thwarted by establishment lawyers in high places,
almost all of whom are either Jews and/or Masons.
There are two theories regarding the TALMUDIC influence in
Freemasonry:
1.- That the Jewish leadership, worldwide, created Masonry in order to
corrupt the nations of Christendom and propagate the final world
domination for Zionism. In other words, this idea says that Freemasonry is
merely a tool of world Jewry.
This idea is supported by an article written by Dr. Isaac M. Wise, a Jew,
and published in THE ISRAELITE OF AMERICA, Aug. 3, 1866. He said:
"Masonry is a Jewish institution, whose history, degrees, charges,
passwords and explanations are Jewish from end to end."

Page 81
One can easily believe this, if they compare the oaths of Freemasonry with
those of the TALMUD, which is the "life blood" of modern Judaism.
2.- Second, is the idea that Freemasonry was a good, sound institution in
principle, but that revolutionary agitators, principally Jewish, took
advantage of its organization as a secret society and penetrated it little by
little until they gained control of it. These Zionists, they say, corrupted
Masonry and turned it from its moral and philanthropic aim, to employ it
for revolutionary purposes.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
In support of this contention, we have the writings of such men as the Jew
Bernard Lazare in his book L 'ANTISEMITISME, in which he states:
"What were the relations between the Jews and the secret
societies? That is not easy to elucidate, for we lack reliable
evidence . . . they are not necessarily in the head, the soul,
the Grand Masters of Masonry. It is certain, however, that
there were Jews at the very cradle of Masonry, kabalistic
Jews, as some of their rites prove."

9 - JEWISH INFLUENCE ON MASONRY
DEMONSTRATED
BY REASON: These arguments can be summed up as:
a.- Freemasonry is a secret society
b.- Freemasonry is directed by an international minority,
and,
c. -Freemasonry has sworn implacable hatred for
Christianity.
These are some of the same characteristics which can be found in
international Judaism and which could prove Jewish influence in the
Lodge. Jews have more to gain from Freemasonry than anyone else.

Page 82
NOTE CAREFULLY:
1.- Many of the external trappings of Freemasonry, such as
its ritual, symbols, terminology, legends, etc., are of Jewish
origin.
2.- The philosophy or religion of esoteric Freemasonry
(that understood only by the inner circle) is practically
identical to that of the Jewish Cabala.
3.- Certain small groups of Jews, of immense influence and
wealth, are leading Freemasons, and;
4.- A larger group of very influential Jews, pursue the same
goals as Freemasonry, using similar means and are in close
alliance with them.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
I believe it would only be honest to say here, that although the Jewish
element in Freemasonry is of greatest importance, and that Jewish
Masonic leaders often exploit the Lodge for their own nefarious purposes,
it is unjust to accuse all Jews, or all Masons of being involved in this
scheme for world control. Many of the "Lesser Jews," the ones which you
and I are most apt to rub shoulders with, just as many members of the
Masonic Blue Lodge, know very little about this international scheme for
world control, and are innocent dupes of a power that is over them. Many
of these people are against One-World government, without realizing that
their leaders are pushing them into it. These are the ones who must be
reached with the truth. We know that it will be next to impossible to reach
those in high positions, as their mind is already "set in cement," but we
hope to reach those who have been "hoodwinked" into a society they
really know very little about and which many of them would repudiate if
they knew the truth.
The Jewish people have suffered, are suffering, and will suffer severely in
the future, because of wicked, unscrupulous atrocities committed by the
ruling Jewish-Masonic junta.

Page 83
10 - MODERN JUDAISM
It is necessary for you to have at least a "nodding acquaintance" with the
Babylonian Talmud, which is the heart blood of modern Judaism, in order
for you to understand the influence it exerts on Freemasonry.
Modern Judaism, according to Jewish sources, is modern Pharisaism.
Rabbi Louis Finkeistein, head of the Jewish Theological Seminary of
America, in the foreword to his first edition of THE PHARISEES, THE
SOCIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF THEIR FAITH, says on p.21:
"... Judaism ... Pharisaism ... Talmudism became Medieval
Rabbinism; Medieval Rabbinism became Modern
Rabbinism. But throughout all the changes in name; the
spirit of the ancient Pharisees survives unaltered."
Rabbi Michael Rondkinson, in his book THE HISTORY OF THE
TALMUD, writes:
"The source from which Jesus of Nazareth drew His
teachings, which enabled Him to revolutionize the world ...

--- Sayfa 78 ---
is the Talmud ... the written form of that which, in the times
of Jesus, was called the 'Traditions of the Elders."'
The falsity of this statement can easily be seen, when one does some
research into this religious book of the Jews and then looks at the
statements made by Jesus Christ in regard to them in both Matt. 15:9 and
Mark 7:7, 13. In this latter Scripture, speaking directly to the Pharisees,
He said:
"You make the word of God of none effect through your
tradition, which ye have delivered; and many such things
do ye."
The TALMUD is so filthy and absurd, that it is blasphemy to say that
Jesus drew the teachings of Christianity from this religious cesspool.
The second major source of Judaism is the Cabala, sometimes spelled
Kabbala. This is the mystic, corrupt,

Page 84
occult teachings that apostate Judeans brought home with them when they
returned from seventy years of Babylonian captivity. The TALMUD was
begun about 500 B.C. and was finally completed, in its written form, about
500 A.D. at the great Jewish center in Alexanderia, Egypt. It contains the
arguments of leading Jewish Rabbis as they argue over points in the
Jewish religion. Today, the vast majority of religious Jews look to the
TALMUD as their guide in religious and civil matters and it has rightly
been called by them, the "heart blood of modern Judaism." In the minds of
most Jews, it has replaced the ancient TORAH. Even in the time of Jesus,
the Pharisees bragged about how they followed the teachings of Moses
and were repudiated by Christ when He told them: "Had you believed
Moses, you would have believed me; for he wrote of me." (John 5:46). In
another place (Matt. 23:2) -
"The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat (in other
words they had usurped the authority of Moses); All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do; but do not do after their works; for they say, and do
not."
In other plainer words, they were "hypocrites" and this is what He called
them to their face (See Matt. 23:15) -"Woe, unto you, scribes and

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Pharisees, hypocrites! for you compass (go over) sea and land to make one
proselyte (convert), and when he is made, you make him two-fold more a
child of hell than yourself."
Pretty plain talk, isn't it?
The Jewish apologist, Bernard Lazare refers to the TALMUD as "the
creator of the Jewish nation, and the mould of the Jewish soul" (L
'ANTISEMITISME, p.293).
The TALMUD is impregnated with hatred for Jesus Christ and the
Christian church, although some of the more virulent passages have been
removed from the English translations and are unknown to many liberal
and non-religious Jews. They are still taught in the Jewish seminaries.

Page 85
The Cabala was originally used to indicate that portion of the Mosaic law
which was handed down by tradition. Since about the Thirteenth Century,
however, it has come to refer to the esoteric (understood only by the upper
elite) and occult doctrines of Judaism, which were learned in Babylon and
are woven into the tapestry of Freemasonry. The most authoritative work
on the Jewish Cabala can be found in the ZOHAR or SEPHERLA-
ZOHAR, WHICH IS PART OF THE 63 VOLUME TALMUD.
These books contain the mystical, occult teachings of modern Judaism and
Freemasonry and are often tied in closely with mystic occult teachings
from the Far East. This system of occultism is sometimes called
"hermeticism, "named after the god Hermes, who was the Greek god of
wisdom, corresponding to the Roman god Mercury. (We see his symbol in
many areas of modern life, such as the telegraph service.)
This belief takes in "Theosophism," which means the "physical
appearance of God to man." Christian Science, Neo-Platonism, Judaism
and Jewish heathen Cabalism. It is actually part of the revival of the
Gnostic heresies which played such havoc in the First century Christian
church and which provided the Christian world of Constantine, with an
acceptable substitute for Christianity. Their adherents are still attempting
to do this in Freemasonry.
The major connection between Judaism and Freemasonry can be seen in
the Cabala, where there is a very close association between the secret
teachings and doctrines of Judaism and Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
One school of thought is that Freemasonry was brought into existence by
the Jews, for the destruction of Christianity. This view, of course, is
accepted by acknowledged anti-Jewish writers. However, it does not come
into accord with established facts, since the Jews were

Page 86
excluded from many of the early English and French Lodges of the 18th
Century.
The second school of thought is that Jewish Cabalistic tradition is one of
the principle means through which Eastern occultism has been transmitted
to the Christian world. This can be seen most clearly in the NEW AGE
MOVEMENT, which has swept like wildfire through the Christian world
in recent months. When men begin to lean on their own understanding,
rather than the Word of God, and seek to "do their own thing," instead of
obeying His law, they are easy prey for philosophies such as the NEW
AGE.
Most of the leaders in Illuminism and Communism were initiated into the
secrets by Jewish cabalists, as were early Masonic leaders such as Albert
Pike. They drew their inspiration from secret Jewish writings. This can be
clearly seen by an honest perusal of Pike's MORALS AND DOGMA. (It
can also be seen by reading Nesta Webster's SECRET SOCIETIES AND
SUBVERSIVE MOVEMENTS, Chapters 7, 8 and 9.
Many of the Jewish cabalists were MARRANOS a name given to them in
Spain, where they supposedly converted to Catholicism in order to avoid
the persecution of the Inquisition. During the day, they were Catholics,
sometimes even priests and Cardinals, but at night they would revert back
to Judaism and in their secret enclaves, they followed the occult practices
of ancient Babylon, even including human sacrifices. When war between
England and Spain became a reality, many of these Marannos threw off
their protective cloak of Christianity and openly reverted to Judaism and
were welcomed by the English.
To see how these secret Jews operate, it is only necessary to look at the
controversial book The Protocols Of The Learned Elders Of Zion. (Many
who have read this far, will state: "But those have been proven to be
counterfeit."

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Page 87
This was disapproved in a Swiss court of law. But be that as it may, I
would use the same argument used by Henry Ford, Sr., in 1926, when he
said concerning the PROTOCOLS words to the effect that whether they
are counterfeit or not, didn't really matter, because it was an established
fact that world Jewry was using them as a "blueprint" and were following
them to the letter.)
I do not have time here to go into a discussion of this much maligned
document, except to say that it follows very closely a much simpler
blueprint of a similar document which printed in 1889, by James de
Rothschild and was a copy of a document which was sent out to European
Jews in 1289, by Rabbi Chemor, head Rabbi of France.
Chemor wrote to the Grand Sanhedrin of France: "The advice of the
Grand Satraps (world governors of the Jews) and Rabbis is as follows:
1.- Make your sons merchants, that little by little they may
despoil Christians of their possessions.
2.- Make of your sons doctors and apothecaries, that they
may take away Christian lives.
3.- Make of your sons, canons and clerics (clergies), that
they may destroy Christianity from within. (There is hardly
a Christian Seminary in America, which is not infiltrated by
Jewish professors on their faculty).
4.- Arrange for your sons to become advocates and
lawyers, and see that they mix themselves up with the
affairs of the State, in order that by putting Christians under
your yoke, you may dominate the world and be avenged on
them
- SIGNED: V. S. S. V. F. F. Prince of the Jews.
It is not difficult to see how international Judaism, especially Zionism, has
followed this Protocol and how they have been helped into positions of
world power by FREEMASONRY.

Page 88
There is no question, among those who have studied the Illuminati and
their plan for world conquest, that their leadership was composed almost

--- Sayfa 82 ---
entirely of Jewish Masons. Mirabeau, a French Jew, in his MEMOIRS DE
MIRABEAU, vol.III, p.60, stated that the program of the Illuminati which
involved him, came about because of his intimate involvement in the inner
circle of Freemasonry. He was a member of the Lodge of St. Theodore, to
which Adam Weishaupt, the founder of the Illuminati, belonged.
There is much evidence available that the program for revolution which
was carried out in France, was formulated in the Lodges of German
Freemasons, who formed the nucleus of the Illuminati in 1776.
(Although Weishaupt used Freemasonry as a step towards more power, he
hated it and was its enemy.)
Arthur Pruess, an American author, in his book A STUDY IN
FREEMASONRY, shows the close connection between Masonry and the
Jewish Cabal. He sums up his arguments from the celebrated Masonic
leader, Albert Pike:
"All true dogmatic (stating an opinion without proof) religions come from
the Kabbala and lead back to it; all that is scientific and great in the
religious dream Of all the illuminated such as Bachme, Swedenborg, St.
Martin, and others similar, is borrowed from the Kabbalah. All the
Masonic associations owe their secrets and symbols to it."1
In 1901, a German Mason by the name of Findel wrote:
"It is less a question of a struggle for the interests of
humanity, than a struggle for the interests and domination
of Judaism. In this struggle, Judaism reveals itself as the
dominant power to which Freemasonry must submit.
Indeed, we should not be astonished by this, for in a hidden
and carefully disguised manner, Judaism is already the
dominate power in many lodges in Europe.

Notes:-
1. Taken from Pike's Morals and Dogma, pp. 744-745.

Page 89

--- Sayfa 83 ---
"So far as Germany is concerned, it must not be forgotten that it (Judaism)
is the master of the financial and commercial markets, master of the press,
both political and Masonic, and that millions of Germans are financially
its (Judaism's) debtors."2
It might be of interest to note that at this time, International Judaism was
preparing the takeover of the world by the destruction of two great
Christian nations in Europe. They knew that both Russia and Germany
stood in their path of world aggression, so as early as 1900, the Jewish
Cabal had a war chest of some $2-billion, laid aside specifically for the
destruction of Christian Germany. This was long before a little Austrian
"paperhanger" by the name of Adolf Hitler came on the scene.
The International Jewish Cabal, planned in its long range scheme of
things, the ultimate destruction of Canada and the United States, in order
to control the Western Hemisphere. Those of us who have been a student
of the Jewish question, have seen this assault in operation in this country
for over fifty years. (For those who would like more information on this
phase of the conspiracy, I would suggest you write for my book THE
GREAT CONSPIRACY).
The Cabala and the Talmud
Nahmanides, Solomon ibn Adret, Joseph Caro,
Moses Isserles, and Elijah b. Solomon of Wilna were
not only supporters of the Cabala, but even
contributed largely to its development. As these men
were the actual representatives of true Talmudic
Judaism, there must have been somethingiblythe
Cabala that attracted them. It can not have been its
and the metaphysics; for Talmudic Judaism was not
greatly interested in such speculations. It must be,
then, that the psychology of the Cabala, in which a
very high position is assigned to man, appealed to
tile Jewish mind. - from: The Jewish Encyclopedia,
Vol. III, "CABALA" pg. 478 (1903).

Notes:-
2. J. G. Findel, Die Als Freimaurer, 1901.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
Page 90
11 - THE EARLY RECORD OF JEWISH
INFILTRATION
The leaders of Freemasonry love to boast about their leadership in the
French Revolution. So do the Jews! "When the Bastile fell," said Bonnet,
the speaker at the Grand Orient Assembly in 1904, "Freemasonry had the
supreme honor of giving humanity the chart which it had lovingly
elaborated."
On August 15, 1789, the Constitutional Assembly of France, of which
more than 300 members were Masons, adopted almost word for word, the
form determined in the Lodges, which became known as the 'Declaration
of the Rights of Man." It was a simple denunciation of the Kingship of
Jesus Christ, and membership in His body, the church. The French State
openly declared in this Masonic prepared document, that they no longer
acknowledged any duty towards God or Jesus Christ and that they no
longer recognized the dignity of membership in the Christian church. It
organized a vicious attack against Jesus Christ and His Kingdom, which
has been carried on relentlessly until the present day.
That was their first step. The subservience of Freemasonry to Judaism
soon showed itself. When the question of Jewish emancipation came up in
the Constitutional Assembly (1789-1791), it was Masonic deputy
Mirabeau, who linked up with the Jews of Berlin and A. DuPont, who
rendered the first secret service of Judaism by Freemasonry. There were
many more such acts to follow
By 1789, the French State had completely ostracized Christianity, while
admitting Jews to full membership. This accounted for the domination of
state after state in Europe by the Jews. During successive Masonic

Page 91
revolutions from 1789 to the Spanish Revolution in 1931, the world had
heard of the enlightening reforms which separated church from state.
With these reforms came a proliferation of divorce, secularization of
education, the suppression of Christianity, the neutralization of private

--- Sayfa 85 ---
property and the unrestrained license of the press for the glorification of
world Zionism and Masonry.
As early as 1922, the Assembly of the Grand Lodge of France began to
work towards the formation of a United States of Europe, as the
forerunner of their Federation of the World.
In North America - Canada and the United States - Masonry and Zionism
worked hand in hand, as they invited these two Christian nations to give
up their sovereignty and enter a world Federation which would be
controlled by Masonic Jews. But we had enough patriotic Congressmen in
Washington at that time, that their dream was disrupted and our entrance
into the League of Nations was voted down.
In April of 1919, Mr. Outerdyke, the Dutch minister to Russia at St.
Petersburg, wrote in a British "white paper:"
"Unless Bolshevism is nipped in the bud immediately, it is
bound to spread in one form or another over Europe and the
whole world. It is organized and worked by Jews who have
no nationality, and whose one object is to destroy for their
own ends, the existing order of things."
His warning went unheeded, in England particular
In G. K. WEEKLY, Feb. 4, 1937, renowned writer Hilliare Belloc wrote:
"As for any who does not know that the present
revolutionary movement in Russia is Jewish, I can only say
that he must be a man who is taken in by the suppression of
our deplorable press."

Page 92
All branches of Freemasonry at their highest levels are essentially opposed
to Christianity. As a rule, Freemasons admit the existence of God, but they
themselves openly confess that they do not adhere to this truth. They allow
their members the greatest license on this point, as they are at liberty to
believe that God exists, or that He does not.
The recognition by the Grand Lodges of the article relating to the GRAND
ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE, does not signify that this branch of
Freemasonry accepts the supremacy of Jesus Christ. Like all sections of

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Masonry, which put Buddha and Confucius on the same level as Jesus
Christ, they deny Christ's role as mediator between God and man. Many of
the English Lodges are made up completely of Jews, who of course deny
the divinity of Jesus Christ.
The formation of Masonic "toleration of all religions," is actually a
positive hatred of the Divine plan for man's salvation, through the death
and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Some Masons believe that their association goes back to Adam and we
have seen in Dr. Shepherd's explanation, that he believes it goes back to
CAIN at least. Other Masons try and trace its foundation back to
Abraham, Moses, or David and Solomon.
The modern version of Freemasonry had its roots in Europe during the
rapid rise of atheism and anti-Christianity. By the beginning of the
Nineteenth Century, the Reformation Movement had about run its course.
The principles of the Reformation, which had allowed private
interpretation of the Scriptures and which had been introduced with the
best of intentions as the pure worship of Jesus Christ, had ended, as men's
efforts often do, by leaving no part of Christ's teaching unchallenged. Men
began to attack His divinity, His resurrection and His very existence.
These were men who called themselves Christian.

Page 93
It was during this time, about 150 years ago, that a German Jewish
philosopher named Ludwig Feurbach declaimed: "Man will finally be
truly free, when he realizes there is no god of man, but man himself" This
idea became so deeply implanted in the diseased brain of a young Jewish
radical named Karl Mordecal Marx, that it became the foundation of
both Illuminism and Communism.
A LEAGUE was begun in Germany by a man named Socinus, which
bound groups of Polish and German Protestants into a League, or Lodge,
if you will, where the only requirement was an undying hatred and
opposition to the Roman Catholic Church.
A man by the name of Boyle threw doubt on everything which had been
taught by Christianity, while Spinoza destroyed what little respect was left
for the Deity. Both deists and pantheists (the doctrine that God is not a
personality but that all forces are t, wnifestation of the self-existing

--- Sayfa 87 ---
universe and are therefore gods). This theory made so much headway in
Europe and England in the early 1800's as to almost destroy Christianity.
What had once been Protestantism, often turned into what was popular
called "Free Thinking." France owed its evil pre-eminence in a great
degree to a man named Voltaire. He was an extraordinary man and was
possibly the greatest disciple of atheism and "Free Thinking" the world
has ever known. Abetted and aided by Judaism, he set out to destroy the
Christian world. He once bragged that what Christ and His disciples had
taken almost 2,000 years to develop, he would destroy in one generation.
He was the son of ardent Roman Catholic parents, with excellent
schooling and had been trained by the Jesuits. (It may be of interest to note
here that the Jesuits were controlled by Jews who had infiltrated the order
begun by Fr. Ignatis Loyola in 1534).
Voltaire had been trained to be a lawyer and apparently learned all the
guile and trickery for which the Jesuits were

Page 94
noted. At this time, the courts of Europe were rotten to the core. Many of
their leaders, often professing to be Christian, were libertarians of the
worst sort, showing very little Christian fruit in their lives.
The court of Catherine the Great, in Russia, for instance, was noted for its
unabashed lewdness, while the court of Frederick the Great of Prussia was
so corrupt that it cannot even be
ribed by decent language. The Regent of Orleans and Louis XV of France,
had carried sexual license to such an extent that the Court at Versailles
was in utter confusion. Vice became the order of the day and as a
consequence, the libertines hated anyone who took exception to their
excesses.
Voltaire, appearing in the midst of this scene was a witty, sarcastic,
vicarious fellow who found himself at home with the voluptuaries who
filled Paris.
His conduct was so bad however, and his habit of ridiculing royalty so
open, that he landed in the Bastille at the age of 27. He was liberated in
1727, on the condition that he leave France and never return. He crossed
the English Channel and lived in England for half a century in what was

--- Sayfa 88 ---
described as: "the most perfect incarnation of Satan the world had ever
seen."
At this time, the society of Freemasonry was just beginning to gain a
foothold in London, and Voltaire became an enthusiastic member of one
of the Lodges. He returned to the continent during the years 1726-1728,
where he became an adept, not only for Freemasonry, but also of
infidelity. His hatred of the monarchial government of France, which had
imprisoned him, was almost beyond human understanding.
He was a master of French prose and his writings against morality and
Christianity were received with great favor by the corrupt, reading public
of his day. He was adept at the

Page 95
use of ridicule and blasphemy, which he used against anything that
smacked of Christianity.
Nothing was sacred to him and he viciously attacked Joan D'Arc, the
"Maid of Orleans," with as little scruples as he attacked Christianity. His
teaching was that a reign of terror would spread over the world and that it
would continue as long as there was a vestige of Christianity left. His
teaching was actually the forerunner of Communist terror today.
He was an adept liar and wrote to his disciple Theriot: "lying is a vice
when it does evil. It is a great virtue when it does good. Be therefore more
virtuous than ever. It is necessary to lie like a devil, not timidly, and for a
time, but boldly and forever."
He was a profound hypocrite who used religion when it became necessary
for his evil purposes. Writing to a man named Damilaville, he said: "The
Christian religion is an infamous religion, an abominable hydra which
must be destroyed by a hundred invisible hands. It is necessary that
philosophers course through the streets to destroy it. Let us crush the
wretch!"
At one point in his life when he had an accident and broke a blood vessel,
he thought he was about to die and called a priest to whom he made
confession and even signed a written confession in which he decried his
evil life and asked God to forgive him. He went so far as to have this
retraction printed in the newspapers. But as soon as he had recovered, he

--- Sayfa 89 ---
commenced his war against God with a new fury and died screaming
imprecations against God and Christianity.
Freemasonry spread the ideas taught by Voltaire. The first Lodge
established in France was in 1727 under English obedience. Its founder
was a celebrated Jacobite named Lord Derwentwater. It was accepted
almost immediately by the degenerate nobility who clamored for
membership. In a short time, Freemasons had lodges in every city of size

Page 96
in Europe and England. Noted Christian leaders of the Eighteenth century
realized that the real secret of Freemasonry was their disbelief in the
divinity of Jesus Christ and a determination to replace this truth with the
doctrine of "Naturalism" and "rationalism." There are some authorities
who believe that Oliver Cromwell was a follower of Socinus and that he
introduced Masonry into England, calling them FREEMASONS for the
first time and inventing the allegory of Solomon's Temple, now so much
used by Freemasons everywhere. This temple, which was destroyed by the
Roman General Titus, in 70 A.D., in fulfillment of Christ's prophecy in
Matt. 24:2 and Luke 19:43, 44 and in the Old Testament in Jeremiah
26:18 and Micah 3:12, was to be rebuilt by Freemasons.
Freemasons planned to restore this temple after Christianity had been
obliterated by the conspiratorial revolution. The statue of Nature, was the
Hiram, whose murder Freemasonry was supposed to avenge, and which
previously, having removed Christ, was to resurrect Hiram by rebuilding
the temple as it was before.
The Talmudic-Cabalistic mind for centuries previous to the Reformation,
had formed secret societies for their own protection and for the destruction
of Christianity.
As early as 1290, Edward I of England had banished the Jews, not
because of their religion itself, but because of the grave offenses on the
part of the Jews, which endangered his realm. These acts were enacted
against the Jews by His Parliament in 1290, with the House of Commons
playing a prominent role.
In 1255, about 40 years after the Magna Charta was signed, Henry III
ordered a trial in the murder of St. Hugh of Lincoln, who had been killed
by "Jewish ritualistic murder." Eighteen Jews were executed by the crown,
after being proven guilty of this heinous crime.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Page 97
In 1275, Parliament passed the "Statute of Jewry," which confined the
Jews to certain areas of the country, forbid them from practicing usury, or
to own land, and requirud, hem to wear yellow identification badges.
In 1290, Edward I, banished all Jews from England. The Baptist evangelist
and author Hal Lindsay says this was done because the Jews "were God's
Chosen people and Satan hated them." This seems to contradict the words
of Jesus Himself, when He said to their leaders in John 8:44 -
"Ye are of your father the devil and the lusts of your father
ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him ."
Then in John 10:26, He told these same leaders: "Ye believe not,
BECAUSE YE ARE NOT OF MY SHEEP..."
(Emphasis mine). This statement seems mighty clear to me! Even
"brainwashed" Judeo-Christians should be able to understand the
significance of these words.
Without the Jewish conspiracy gnawing at their vitals, England prospered
for a time. Then in 1657, Oliver Cromwell, financed by the Jew Moses
Caraja, came into power and the Jewish parasites were allowed to return.
It has been "downhill" for England ever since.
In 1689, Amsterdam Jews financed the rebellion against James II. The
chief of these was Solomon Medina, who was also a high ranking member
of Freemasonry.
In 1694, the Bank of England was set up under International Jewish
control and the National Debt was instituted, securing for Jewish money
lenders a first chance on the taxes of the English people, who paid for the
interest on their loans. Sometimes this interest reached the exorbitant rate
of 250%. The right of the Crown to print money was transferred to the
Bank of England, in much the same manner that this right was taken away
from the American Congress and given to the Jewish owned Federal
Reserve System in 1913.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Page 98
In 1707, economic and political union was forced on Scotland, against the
vote of the Scottish people in every borough of the land and the National
Debt of England became the National Debt of Scotland also. It was during
this same period that the Jews took over economic control of Europe and
Freemasonry began to thrive under their leadership.
M. Gaugenot-Demousseaux, in his book, THE JEW. JUDAISM. AND THE
JUDAIZATION OF THE CHRISTIAN PEOPLE (Paris, 1896) wrote:
"Masonry, that immense association, the rare initiates of
which, that is to say, the real chiefs of which, whom we
must be careful not to confound with the nominal chiefs of
the Blue Lodge, live in a strict and intimate alliance with
the militant members of Judaism ... For that elite of the
order - these real chiefs whom so few of the initiated know,
are employed in the profitable and secret dependence of the
cabalistic Jews. This phenomenon is accomplished, thanks
to the habits of rigorous discretion to which they subject
themselves by oaths and terrible menaces, thanks also to
the majority of Jewish members which the mysterious
constitution of Freemasonry seats in its sovereign council."
What we are actually seeing in Freemasonry, is something like what has
happened in the governments of England, Canada and the United States,
and other nations of Christendom. In these countries, due to the "terrible
power of the purse," International Jewry now controls the economic life
and politics of most of the Israelite nations. (These, I believe, are the
Anglo-Saxon, Germanic, Scandinavian and related peoples who make up
that part of the world we call Christendom).
It has been estimated by respected members of the U.S. Senate, that at
least 70 members of that august body vote "Zionist first and America
second" vote. In spite of the fact many claim to be Christians, they are to
all intents and purposes a "bastard combination" called Christian-Zionists
or Judeo-Christians, which is like saying something can be

Page 99

--- Sayfa 92 ---
"hot-cold" or "wet-dry." A great majority of them, by their actions, have
proven to be "duel loyalists," and strangely enough, most of them are
members of the Masonic Lodge.
Voltarie learned that Masonry, which he had joined while living in
London, was a capital means of spreading his doctrines among courtiers,
men of letters, and the general public of both England and France. His
major successes were in France. Operating under the guise of philanthropy
and religion, few of the lower order members of Freemasonry knew that it
was anything more than a fraternal organization which helped them in
business and where they could obtain fellowship.
A man named Ashmale, introduced the Bible into Freemasonry along with
the "square and compass." These became important accouterments of
Masonry, which witnessed to the world that Masons believed in a god,
whom they called THE GREAT ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE. This
insignia featured an "open eye," which they were told represented the "all
seeing eye of Providence. This eye, they were told, made it impossible for
a Mason to escape his fate, if he ever revealed any secrets of the society or
failed to obey orders he was selected to carry out. (It was on this basis
alone, that I refused membership. I could not bring myself to pledge such
allegiance to any man, or group of men.)
In its secret conclaves and ascending degrees, it had means to tell the
victim that the ARCHITECT meant a "circle of nothing!" That the open
Bible represented the "universe;" that the "Square and compass" were
simply the fitness of things - the means to make all men, "fraternal, equal
and free!" But like Orson Wells' ANIMAL FARM they were not told that in
Masonry, "some pigs were more equal than others," and that the top
Masons "lord it over" the Blue Lodge members and control not only their
thinking, but their actions.

Page 100
In the recesses of the Lodge, the political conspirators found men and the
means to carry out their nefarious purposes in relative secrecy and
security. Those who were interested in public office, found in the lodges,
the means for their advancement. The ribald humor of the Seventeenth
Century "libertarians," was master in their lodges, as banquets, ribald jests,
song, reveling and sin, constituted a leading part of Masonic life. Things
haven't changed all that much in the Twentieth Century Lodge.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
These attractive centers of protected sin, spread over Europe with great
rapidity. The scoundrels of society found employment in them and within
a few years, the lodges of the Freemasons had become a formidable power
throughout the civilized world.
Freemasonry, in particular, spread rapidly among the higher class of
society. It soon began to capitalize on the power of union and propaganda.
A brother in one, was a brother in all.
A Portuguese Jew named Martinez Pasqualis, introduced ILLUMINISM
into the French lodges and his system was noted for its immorality,
anarchy, atheism and blood shed!
Adam Weishaupt, the founder of ILLUMINISM in 1776, told his initiates
in Freemasonry:

"If in the order to destroy all Christianity and religion,
remember that the end justifies the means. (This was a
special axiom of the Jesuit Order of the Roman Catholic
church, which were also closely tied in with Judaism).
Those we have taken to deliver the human race from
religion, are nothing else but a pious fraud which we will
some day unveil."1
Now that you have learned a brief background of Freemasonry and it's
Jewish connections, we need to take a closer look at the "beast" itself.

Notes:-
1. From: Segur Le Secret De La Frane-Maconnierie, p.49.

Page 101

--- Sayfa 94 ---
12 - A CLOSER LOOK AT FREEMASONRY
In the preface of his book FREEMASONRY - An Interpretation, Pastor
Martin Wagner, Pastor of the St. John's Evangelical Lutheran church in
Dayton, Ohio (1912) says:
"Real Freemasonry is something beside and beneath the
ritualistic forms and monitorial lectures. It is something
which comparatively few Masons understand. Modern
Masonry has never possessed the true key for the
interpretation of the secret doctrines. This institution is
esoteric. (Which means that its "secrets" are intended to be
understood only by a few at the top). "Masonic authorities,
as well as the Masonic ritual, declares that secret doctrine
which constitutes the very essence of Freemasonry and
which is veiled under terms and imagery of the builder's
craft.
"The essence of Freemasonry is that it's peculiar religious
ideas and doctrines, have survived from the periods of
remotest antiquity, until the present time ... crushed in one
form, it will rise in another. Outlawed, or exposed in one
institution, it evades detection by taking refuge under a
different name, ritual, or symbolism."
In its modern form and organization, Freemasonry has had a checkered
career. So long as there is an unregenerate human nature on this earth, so
long will organizations such as the Freemasons find fertile ground in
which to take root. Exposure may check it for a while and induce its
adherents to repudiate it for a time. This was the case in 1826, when
William Morgan, a Master Mason, published his exposure of the Masonic
Lodge. For this he was condemned by a Masonic enclave and sentenced to
death. When his murder was exposed by police investigation, over 45,000
Masons in the United States left the Lodge, because they believed what
Morgan had written, on the basis of what happened to him. But Morgan
had only divulged the form, the clothing if you will, the cloak under

Page 102
which the real doctrine was concealed and veiled. Freemasonry on the
European continent was scarcely effected by the Morgan affair.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
Exposure means little, unless one understands the key to Freemasonry.
Most exposures by seceding Masons, exhibit only the trappings, the
veneer, under which the true essence of Freemasonry is concealed. Not
one Mason in ten thousand ever suspects what lies under the cloak of
secrecy in which his lodge operates, for the real secrets of the Lodge are
not taught in the Lodge.
The majority of Masons see only the outward trappings of the Lodge and
the less the Mason knows about them, the more he admires and believes.
The same is true with the Judeo-Christian church, where the vast majority
of its members seldom if ever study the Scriptures on their own, preferring
to be guided instead, by a pastor who has been as "brainwashed" as they.
The same is true with Freemasonry, for when broken down to its common
denominator, it is a religion. Religion is its mystical tie! Religion has been
from time immemorial, one of the most powerful factors in the activities
of mankind. It has been the "motor" which has controlled vast armies and
founded world empires. It has been the force behind bloody revolutions
and despotic governments. It has established despotic "priestcrafts" and
enforced obedience through fear generated by its teachings.
Many times you will hear "atheists" and "humanists" accuse Christianity
of being responsible for the bloody deaths of millions of people. This is
not the case! True Christianity has never murdered innocent men, women
and children! Religion has -churchianity has -but not true Christianity. A
good example is the present conflict which has been going on for years in
Lebanon, where so-called Christian forces have been battling the
Moslems. Yet these are Christian in name only and show none of the
"fruits of

Page 103
the Spirit," which Scripture tells us are the mark of true Christians.
In the name of religion, men have been enslaved to build lavish, costly
monuments to its power; call these churches or cathedrals. These are
shrines for the gods of religion. Not to God Almighty! Religion has never
changed any man or woman into a better human being. When the
Communist leader Lenin stated that "Religion is the opiate of the people,"
he knew whereof he was speaking, for religion controls people and makes
them slaves of the religious leaders.
On the other hand, true Christianity has been responsible for our finest art;
our sweetest music. It has transformed human perverts from harden slave
drivers to writers of Christian songs who could say: "Just as I am, without

--- Sayfa 96 ---
one plea, but that Thy blood was shed for me." It has turned human devils
of lust, fury and crime, into saints fit for the Kingdom of God.
Christianity has given timid women and children the courage to face fear
of being torn to bits by wild animals in a Roman arena. It has caused
gentle women to withstand terrible torture for the sake of their beliefs. It
has caused men to sing praises to God, as they were burned to death at the
stake. (Read Fox's BOOK OF MARTYRS, and the 11th Chapter of
Hebrews for an account of what Christianity has done for men and
women).
Religion, on the other hand, has been the power behind political
corruption; the power behind armies of evil kings and popes to destroy.
Religion is the most powerful motor in mankind and religion is the driving
engine in Freemasonry. We can see the modern application of the power
of religion, in the upsurge of Moslem Fundamentalism, which could well
sweep this world into World War III, as it comes up against the "secular
religion" of the Zionists in Palestine.

Page 104
The vital and essential elements in the religion of Freemasonry are not the
spiritual facts and the spiritual mysteries. They are carnal and physical,
what some would call "the facts of life." These are the "mysteries"
involved in "generation" and "reproduction," which Masons worship. The
same "regenerative power" which has been worshipped for millennia by
heathen people around the world. Because of heir "earthy" nature, they
appeal to the lustful spirit of unregenerate men.
These "mysteries" relate to the dominate passion of man to "procreate."
They excite his passion, awaken his emotions, take first place in his mind
and energize his deepest thoughts.
It is difficult to conceive of anything more exquisitely fitted to appeal to
the "natural," the "animalistic" man of the evolutionists, than the teachings
of Freemasonry. It is a religion which makes the mystery of procreation,
the hidden force on which it rests.
Masonry conceives of the divine nature as residing in man, and this nature
is best expressed through sexual passion. The gratification of this passion,
therefore, is pleasing to the Masonic god and becomes his duty. Although
he may claim to be a Christian - and many of its members do -he has given

--- Sayfa 97 ---
his allegiance to "another false Christ" who repudiates the New Testament
teachings regarding "unlawful lust" and "illicit passion."
Our Lord's admonition to men in Matthew 5:28 - "But I say unto you,
That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath already
committed adultery with her in his heart ...is looked on by the Mason as
the height of utter stupidity!
Christians are further admonished in Galatians 5:16 - Walk in the Spirit
and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh." Again in James 1:14 - "But
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of HIS OWN LUST, and

Page 105
enticed. Then when LUST has conceived, it bringeth forth sin
(transgression of God's law, according to 1 John 3:4), and sin, when it is
finished bringeth forth death." (Both physical and spiritual.) And finally in
James 4:1 - From whence come wars and fightings among you? come
they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?"
But the god of Freemasonry contradicts the Scriptural account and shouts:
"NOT SO! It is your sacred duty to seek self-gratification! It is your moral
and religious duty to fulfill the lusts of the flesh!" This is one of the
reasons so many men want to become Masons, it is a religion which caters
to the sensuality of men. It does to men, what the Woman's Liberation
Movement has done to women, when they tell their adherents : "Don't
listen to those narrow-minded Christians. You've come a long way baby!
No one can tell you what you can do with your own body!"
Freemasonry appeals to the unregenerate heart of men, because the
"generation" of human beings is the great work of Masons and is what
they call: "Building a temple for the indwelling of the GREAT
ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE," who is not the God of the Christian.
Today, as never before, a persistent war is being waged, either directly or
indirectly against Christian principles which have been the strong
foundation of our white, Christian civilization. These are the principles
which have freed the slaves; have fed the hungry; have carried the Gospel
of Jesus Christ around the world, and which have built Christian
Constitutions on the Word of God. It is what has brought prosperity,
freedom, and relative happiness to more people, in a shorter period of
time, than any other principle which has ever been practiced on this earth.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
As part of any attack against Christianity, there must be an attack against
the Christian family and Masonry has

Page 106
followed this path. Many times governments refuse to see the indivisible,
fundamental value of the Christian family and try and take over its
prerogatives. This always leads to chaos, confusion and destruction to
Christian values. Along with this attack, comes the attack on the right of
the individual to own private property; the right of the individual to protect
himself and his family; the right of freedom of speech, press, and religion.
From time immemorial, our European ancestors have looked on these as
the prime basis for their society.
Today, the natural organization of labor, which has been founded on the
mutual need between capital and labor and which has been traditional in
all periods of recorded history, has been upset. Now the worker is
proclaimed to be equal in all respects with his employer, while he is
exempted from the duties and responsibilities of the employer. The result
has been a senseless "class struggle" which has all but destroyed American
industry and which was designed to do just that.
According to both English and European Freemason leaders, Masonry was
defined as; 'fa peculiar system of morality, revealed in allegory and
illustrated by symbols." THE UNIVERSAL MANUAL OF
FREEMASONRY, describes Masonry as:
"the activities of closely related men, who, employing
symbolic forms borrowed principally from the builders art
and from architecture, work for the welfare of mankind,
striving morally to enable themselves and others to thereby
bring about a universal league (One-World Government) of
mankind..."
Freemasonry is in the forefront of the One-World Movement. In the
Christian concept of society, morals as well as social rights and duties
must be based on man's revelation of God and his duty to obey God's law.
In Masonry, the idea of human virtue and morality, is independent of God,
and Divine law is ignored if it conflicts with the issues promulgated by
Masonry. Essentially,

Page 107

--- Sayfa 99 ---
Masonry is "naturalism" in action and is a modern form of ''ancient
paganism.
Because of the policy of deception practiced by Masonic leaders, it is
difficult to analyze accurately the underlying essence of Freemasonry.
Essentially, it is founded on Jewish "Pantheism," or the 'deification and
worship of unregenerate man, rather than God." It reflects the words of
the German Jewish philosopher of the Eighteenth Century, Ludwig
Feubrach, when he said:
"Man will finally be truly free, when he realizes there is no
god of man, but man himself."
This is the underlying belief of atheistic communism
Most of Masonic symbolism, in its original and proper meaning, refers to
"phallic worship." This fact is openly testified to by such Masonic leaders
as Albert Pike, Mackey, Thomas, Webb Smith, William Preston and
Hutchins on.
Rogan, a Masonic author of some note states that the Masonic god is the
god of the pyramids, thus identifying Masonry with the ancient Egyptian
religions.
The first three degrees of the order - those of Apprentice, Fellow Craft (or
Companion Mason), and Master Mason, are known as symbolic degrees.
The candidate is admitted through a series of fantastic ceremonies ... the
significance of which is not revealed to the initiate. He learns nothing but
the symbols and sacred words. He is continually edified by allusions to
God and the Bible, the hidden meanings of which are withheld from him
until he reaches the higher degrees.
It is not until a member reaches the 33o in the ANCIENT SCOTTISH RITE,
that of Sovereign Grand-Inspector, that the genuine mysteries of
Freemasonry are explained.
In his first initiation stages he learns:

Page 108
1. - That the rite of initiation for Apprentice Masons represents in dramatic
fashion the origin or birth of Nature's god - the GREAT ALL. It signifies
the non-existence of a super-natural person God, such as that of
Christianity. It signifies that the two principles of ''matter'' and "form"

--- Sayfa 100 ---
"male" and "female," are always eternally "generating," (reproducing). It
looks on God as a hermaphrodite, and creation as the beginning of the
"generation process."1
2. - The initiation rite into the Second Degree, represents the moral
condition of nature's god, always in labor, always reproducing. Again it
looks on God as hermaphroditic, and states that his name JEHOVAH,
means "generation." Meaning to say, HE-SHE, the two sexes in one.2
The dual principle of "male" and "female" is represented by the "square
and compass." The "compass" represents OSIRIS, the male god of the
Egyptians, while the "square" is the symbol representing ISIS, the female
goddess of Egypt - both are sexual symbols.3
3. - The initiation to the Third DEGREE OR MASTER MASON DEGREE,
introduces the initiate to the story of Hiram Abiff, one of the architects of
Solomon's Temple, as related in the TARGUM. (One of the several
translations of Jewish scriptures, written in the vernacular (Aramaic)
language of ancient Judea.)
Hiram is recorded as an allegorical being, symbolizing the GREAT
ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE. (Mackey, pp. 13-99). In this rite, the
process of "generation" is represented as being complete; God, and the
name of God, which the candidates are supposed to be seeking, is

Notes:-
1. Taken from: Speculative Masonry, by Brother J. Yorke,
Grand Master of the Ancient Rite, pp. 3, 54.
2 From: Yorke, p.14; also Mackey's Lexicon, pp.126-129.
3 Taken from: Ragon's Cours. Philosophique, p.102

Page 109
discovered. The name of this deity, not the LORD GOD of the Old
Testament, is MOA-BON. This was the name given to the child born of
Lot, after he had an incestuous affair with one of his daughters. The story
is told in Genesis 19:37. This is explained as the man-child coming into
being through the union of the SUN, with his daughter, the EARTH.4 This
deity is also known as MAC-BENEC, "Offspring of putrefaction," since
death and decomposition must precede the beginning of life; the seed must
die before the plant can live.5

--- Sayfa 101 ---
"This," says the Masonic expert Ragon, "is the important phenomenon, the
ineffable mystery, the key to nature, which the ancient sages succeeded in
discovering, and which they adopted as the basis of Masonic doctrine... It
is the subject of Masonic legends. According to this interpretation, the
revolting atrocities of SATURN, and the incestuous PHARAEDRA,
(SATURN was the Roman god of agriculture, and PHARAEDRA was the
Greek wife of Minos, who had an incestuous relationship with her own
son) were considered interesting enigmas, which involve facts worth our
notice." (See Ragon, pp. 218,219). Throughout his book on Freemasonry,
Ragon dwells on the process of procreation, Isis, Egyptian gods and
goddesses, etc.
I believe enough has been said to indicate the "earthy" nature of
Freemasonry and their peculiar system of morality, which we will discuss
later on. All this is in veiled allegory. The contrast between Scriptural
morality and Masonic morality is that between "light" and darkness;"
between the "spirit of the anti-Christ" and the "spirit of God." It was Jesus
who said: "... men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil," (John 3:19). He went on in verse 20 to say: "Everyone
Notes:-
4. See: Ragon, Tyileur General Dc La Franc-Maconnerie,
p.28.
5. This principle is taught in Mackey's Lexicon on
Masonry.

Page 110
that doeth evil, hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved."
As fast as men are converted to Freemasonry, so do they repudiate the
principles and claims of Christianity. They may call themselves Christian,
but as Christ Himself said:
Matthew 6:24; Luke 16:13.
"No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the
one and love the other; or else he will hold to the one and
despise the other; ye cannot serve God and MAMMON."
Mammon is the love of fleshly, material things. In other words,
"materialism," which is the very essence of FREEMASONRY

--- Sayfa 102 ---
It should be noted that when dealing with Masons, their arguments must
be interpreted in the light of the allegories or symbolism they use.
According to Albert Pike, in his MORALS AND DOGMA
"Almost every one of the ancient Masonic symbols had four distinct
meanings, one, as it were within the other - the moral, the political, the
philosophical, and the spiritual meaning."
Thus, according to Pike; Hiram Abiff, Christ and MOLAY, are regarded
as symbols representing "humanity." Since they are all apostles of "liberty,
equality and fraternity." (These, by the way, were the watchword of the
atheistic French Revolution). The cross in Freemasonry is by no means
looked on as a specific Christian symbol, but is closely connected with a
peculiar cult. The I.N.R.I. on the cross, to a Mason, does not refer to the
passion of our Lord, but is Masonically read as "Igne Natura Rebovatur
Integra," or "All nature is renewed by Masonic fire."
The picture of Christ dying on the cross for the sins of mankind becomes
for the Masons, the "greatest among the apostles of humanity, braving
Roman despotism, and the fanaticism and bigotry of the priesthood."

Page 111
Reading from official Masonic documents, one can readily see that the
vast majority of the Masonic Brotherhood, does not understand the trend
or purpose of Masonic teachings and activity.
They are instructed by slow degrees and are only admitted into the more
secret of the degrees, as they have become morally attuned to Masonic
teachings and thus become capable of understanding the higher degrees.
Albert Pike, in MORALS AND DOGMA, p.819 says:
"Part of the symbols, are displayed ... to the initiated, but he
is intentionally led astray by false interp">1... Masonry
conceals its secrets from all except the Adepts (Highly
skilled experts of Masonry), the Sages and the Elect; and
uses false explanations for its symbols to mislead those
deserving to be misled."
So you can see, from this top Masonic leader, that Masonry is a system of
falsehood, which is used to fool even their own members.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
The character of the inner workings of Freemasonry, is one of the reasons
its secrets are hidden behind horrible oaths, which bind its votaries,
especially in the higher degrees, through fear.
If the eminent Masonic authorities declare that few members understand
the mysteries of Masonry, you should not consider it presumptuous if I say
that very few Masons are ever brought to a true understanding of the
organization they support. If they were decent men, and this is especially
true of those who claim to be Christian, they would resign in disgust in
spite of the horrible oaths they have taken.
Many Masons fail to see the truth because of the use of the Bible in their
ceremonies. They see the garment of HIDDEN POWER - Masonry, but
not what it conceals. They get little or no spiritual inspiration from the
Lodge,

Page 112
but appear in its dress parades and feast at its banquets, thinking they are
engaged in a harmless fraternity which is doing good in the community
and is good for their business. But in most cases, in fact, in a large
majority of cases, there is a vast difference between what Masonry teaches
and what it believes.
Martin Wagner, in his book FREEMASONRY- An Interpretation. says on
pg. 153:
"The peculiar theological and religious ideas that Freemasonry holds and
aims to inculcate while positively non-Christian, are expressed in terms of
Christian theology, not to express Christian ideas, or to show their
harmony with Christian thought, but to give them a Christian coloring, the
more effective to deceive, mislead and hoodwink the neophyte, the
conscientious member, and the non-Mason into whose hands Masonic
literature may come.
"Thus the Biblical and Christian appellations of God are employed to
denote the Masonic deity, who is known as THE GREAT ARCHITECT
OF THE UNIVERSE. It employs the terms of regeneration; illumination;
resurrection; justification and other Christian ideas, under which hide
Masonic religious operations. These terms have a peculiar and specific
meaning to Masons, and in studying this institution, we must not permit
ourselves to be misled by their use of Christian theological terms. Many a
Mason has been misled to believe that Freemasonry is a Christian
institution."

--- Sayfa 104 ---
I see no reason for us to go further into a study of Masonic symbolism,
other than to say that its own leaders indicate it is heathen in origin and is
used for the purpose of misleading its own members.

Much that appears Christian
is in fact nothing but
theological development of
certain ancient esoteric
doctrines, which were
incorporated into Christianity
and contributed much to its
development, and which are
also found in Talmudic
works and in Talmudic
Judaism.
 - from: The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. III,
"CABALA," pg. 478 (1903)

Page 113
13 - THE BINDING FORCE IN
FREEMASONRY - OATHS
The utter obedience and subservience of Masonic members is gained
through the use of horrific oaths! The oath for the First Degree, for
instance, contains the promise:
"to hide, conceal and never reveal any part or parts of the
secrets of Masonry which are already known to the
candidate, or may in any way be learned by him at a future
time."
Later, after his initiation, he is required to swear:

--- Sayfa 105 ---
"To obey all signs and summonses handed, sent, or thrown
from a brother Master Mason, or from the body of a just
and lawfully constituted Lodge of Master Masons."
The absolute subservience of the member to the Lodge is seen in promises
such as:
"to obey without hesitation, any order whatsoever it may
be, of Masonic superiors ... to assist a Companion- Royal
Arch Mason when he is engaged in any difficulty, and to
espouse his cause, so far as to extricate him from the same,
WHETHER HE IS RIGHT OR WRONG."
These and other promises are made under the following oath:
"To have his throat cut from ear to ear, his tongue torn out
by the roots, and his body buried in the rough sand of the
sea at the low-water mark, where the tide flows twice in the
same twenty-four hours.
"To have his skull severed in two and divided to the North
and
South, his bowels burned to ashes in the midst, and
scattered to the four winds of the heavens."
"To have his skull broke off, and his brains exposed to the
scorching rays of the meridian sun, etc."1

Notes:-
1. Taken from: Albert Pike's Inner Sanctuary (quoted here
in part).

Page 114
14 - THE EFFECTS OF FREEMASONRY
ON THE ENGLISH SPEAKING WORLD
AND THE CONTINENT
While many of those who read this book will understand the importance of
politics and religion among the European members of the Israelite nations

--- Sayfa 106 ---
(the nations we now know as Christendom), most of them will want to
focus their attention on the effects of Freemasonry on the English
speaking world; the British Isles, Canada, the United States, South Africa,
Australia and New Zealand. Most of our interests will be centered on
Canada and the United States.
It may be difficult for the average Canadian or American to understand the
tremendous influence exerted by Freemasonry on our respective countries.
The vast majority of Masons in both countries are law abiding citizens;
many of them are church members, active in the religious activities of
their community; many are conspicuous in charitable efforts to help the
unfortunate and are looked on as pillars of stability in the community. But
we need to remember that most of these Masons have been "brainwashed,"
just as members of the Judeo-Christian churches have been. In the church,
these Christians, both Masonic and Judeo-Christian, protect the very
enemies which are seeking to destroy everything they say they believe in
as Patriotic Christians.
Professor John Robinson, a high ranking English Mason, wrote a very
revealing book - PROOFS OF A CONSPIRACY (1798). He stated on pg.
466:
"Not all secret societies are dangerous, but all societies
whose object is mysterious. The whole history of man is
proof of this position. In no age of our country, has there
ever appeared a mysterious association, which did not in
time become a public nuisance."

Page 115
Remember the quotation from Horace Mann to the effect that we should
question the motives of any man or organization who seeks to hide their
objectives from the public.
The Prime Minister of England, during the reign of Queen Victoria, when
England was at the zenith of her power, was a converted Jew named
Benjamin Disraeli. He stated that Jews were at the head of every
important revolution which had taken place on the continent and in
England, and that the Masonic lodges sought to carry out the aims of the
Jewish revolutionaries.
Over and over again, one can find statements made by both Jewish and
Masonic leaders, concerning their part in these revolutions. Marcus Eli

--- Sayfa 107 ---
Ravage, a well-known Jewish author, writing in CENTURY MAGAZINE,
January 1928, stated:
"We Jews are at the bottom of nearly all your wars; not
only of the Russian but of every other major revolution in
your history. We did it solely with the irresistible might of
our spirit, with ideas and propaganda."
The Jewish author, Oscar Levy, in the Preface to his book THE WORLD
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION, said:
"There is scarcely an event in modern Europe that cannot
be traced back to Jews. We Jews today are nothing else but
the world's seducers; it's destroyers; it's incendiaries; it's
executioners."
Yet foolish Christians continue to call these barbarians "God's Chosen
people." How stupid can we become?
These were and are the men who have controlled and now control
Freemasonry. Secret orders within England today, such as the Star of the
East, and the Order of the Round Table, for all practical purposes control
England. They are associated with continental Masons who claim to be
under the direct influence of the Grand Masters, or the Great White Lodge,
which is made up of Jewish cabalists.

Page 116
The same is true of the Council on Foreign Relations in the United States,
the Skull and Bones Club, the Trilateral Commission and other
organizations which are seeking to bring this country under the
international bondage of a One-World Jewish controlled government.
Many of these men are high ranking Masons.
One of the most powerful, but little known orders of Masonry is the
ROSICRUCIANS who pose as an "high and holy order for spiritual
development and service to mankind." They are actually a pseudo-
religious order of occultists who study "high magic."
In most of the modern revolutions in Europe, which were communist or
socialist in origin, we find Jewish Freemasons, who are in positions of
highest power.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
Scattered and rendered virtually powerless for almost 2,000 years, Jews
have always been bitter revolutionists. Everywhere you go, you will find a
profound and bitter antagonism between Jew and non-Jew, in both racial
and spiritual realms. The Apostle Paul said of them; "...they have
persecuted us (Christians), and please not God, and are contrary to all
men " (1 Thess. 2:15). This contrariness rises from their completely
different concept of life.
While few Jews were visible in the French Revolution of 1798,
Freemasons did the job for them and were a cloak of secrecy shrouding
Jewish involvement. Often, where Freemasonry is active, the Jews who
manipulate them will remain in the background. This caused the Jewish
Prime Minister of England, Benjamin Disraeli (1868-1880) to say:
"The world is governed by very different personages to
what is imagined by those who are not behind the scenes...
That mighty revolution which is now preparing in
Germany, and which will be in fact, a second and greater
Reformation, and of which so little is yet known in
England, is developing under the auspices of the Jews."
He was not warning Englishmen of this fact, but like the Jew he was, in
spite of claiming to be a Christian, he could

Page 117
not resist boasting of the conquests of his people over the hated "goyim."
It is interesting to note, that down through the ages of history, the so-
called Chosen Race of Judaism, has been willing to walk "hand in hand"
with the scum of society, if it would further their control. In 1919, when
Leon Trotsky, with $20-million donated by Jewish banker Jacob Schiff of
New York, was on his way to Europe, he had with him 247 Jews who
were the "dregs of society" from the alleys of New York City. The type of
Jews, whom the Jews themselves refer to as "kikes." These were to
become the top leaders in the Russian Revolution which killed Christians
by the millions.
In Russia, where Freemasonry had been forbidden by law, the
revolutionary effort was about 90% Jewish and many of these were
Masons. The scum which followed them was eager for plunder. In
Hungary, according to official Hungarian documents, the revolution was a
Jewish-Masonic effort. When the Hungarian Soviet Republic was

--- Sayfa 109 ---
established on March 22, 1918, its top leaders were 100% Freemasons and
Jews.
The Minister of Public Instruction, Brother Kunzi, was a Masonic Jew; the
National Minister of Soviets, Brother Kaszi, the son of a Jewish
millionaire from Budapest, who was also a Mason; and above all, we must
never forget Brother Bela Kuhn, the Jewish-Masonic-Hungarian butcher
of Christians, who was a criminal of the first order and who operated
under the protection of his Masonic connections.
Of the Hungarian Commissariat, 26 in all, 18 were Masonic Jews, an
unheard of proportion, considering the size of the Jewish community in
Hungary. 76 men who had criminal indictments against them, a
preponderance of whom were Masonic Jews, were placed in positions of
leadership in this Christian country. Men with names such

Page 118
as Liebrenecht, Rosa Luxemborough, Kurt Einser, and others.
When the Imperial Government of Germany fell at the end of World War
I, Jews and Masons dominated the new government. The eleven men who
took power over Bavaria were Lowenberg, Dr. Kurt Rosenfeld, Caspar
Wallheim, Max Rothschild, Karl Arnold, Konrald, Rosenheh, Bierbaum,
Reis, and Kaiser. These, along with Kurt Eisner von Israelovich, were the
head of the Revolutionary Tribunal. All were Jews, and all were
FREEMASONS, belonging to Lodge #11 in Munich.
A strange phenomenon exists in Judaism, in that enormous amounts of
labor and money have been expended to minimize the part played by Jews
in the Bolshevik Revolution, while at the same time, world renowned
Jewish leaders brag about the power they exert.
A few years ago, in 1935, Rabbi Stephen Wise, the top Jewish authority
in the United States at that time, was asked to comment on Communism.
He was reported to have said: "Some call it communism; I call it Judaism.
"1
Contrary to what we have been told in the Jewish owned and controlled
press of Canada and the United States, an entirely new breed of
millionaires have risen in Russia. They are all Jews. They live in the lush
resort areas of Kiev and Odessa and own their own factories, something
unheard of in Russia. Many of these are prominent Freemasons. In

--- Sayfa 110 ---
Russian cities where the population of Jews exceeds 25%, they are
allowed to have their own Yiddish law, Yiddish courts, Yiddish codes and
Yiddish is their official language.
This is in a communist country, where we have been led to believe, by
media propaganda, that the poor Jews are persecuted. Yet as late as 1983,
when Andropov was

Notes:-
1. The American Bulletin, May 15, 1935.

Page 119
Premier of the USSR, out of 23 members of the controlling Politburo, 17
were Jews. Virtually all the high ranking military commanders of Russia
today are Jews, as are the party functionaries such as the Generals of
Police, the Director General of the K.G.B., the Director of Foreign
Operations, the Economic Planning Chief and the State Finance Officer. It
is impossible, and probably improper, in this book to go into detail
concerning the brutality of these Jewish-Masons towards the
"bourgeoisie," especially those who are Christian.
In the city of Khorkaff, for example, in recent years, official documents
state that a Masonic Jew named Sanko specialized in scalping his helpless
victim. He would take the skin off their hands, peeling it off as one would
take off a glove. At Kiev, victims were placed in a large chest, along with
decomposed corpses and were buried underground until they passed out.
They then were uncovered, revived and went through this torture again
and again. Do you wonder why many of these people went mad?
Vicomte Leon de Poccius, in his remarkable book THE SECRET
POWER BEHIND REVOLUTION, says on p.161:
"Without us Aryans being conscious of it, the idealism
pertaining to our race, that idealism which was all that is
beautiful, throughout all ages, for all that was noble, for
sincerity, became imperiled by the seductive concept of
Jewry towards a cynical and unscrupulous materialism,
which finds its political expression in the Judeo-Masonic
universal atheist Republic."

--- Sayfa 111 ---
The Jewish revolutionary influence has been felt in all the nations of
Christendom, either directly, or indirectly through Freemasonry, or the
Jewish nationals who have managed to insinuate themselves into positions
of political influence. Probably one of the best examples of this in 1989, is
the influence of the Jewish Democratic Senator from Ohio, Metzenbaum,
who has been involved in almost every liberal effort against this country
and is in the

Page 120
forefront of the drive to disarm patriotic Americans. Recently he made a
public statement to the effect that we must fight to preserve America from
the horrible fate of becoming a Christian nation.
I have previously mentioned THE PROTOCOLS OF THE LEARNED
ELDERS OF ZION, which the Jews and their Christian stooges proclaim
as counterfeit. But the indisputable fact remains, that from as early as
1789, this Machiavellian plan for world control has been used successfully
around the world and Jews and Freemasons are following its plan like a
"blueprint." One French Socialist leader stated:
"The nation is a great herd that only thinks of browsing, and with good
sheep dogs (police) and shepherds (political and religious leaders), can
lead as they please ... Money and hope of plunder is an all-powerful force
with the people."
This force can be seen in operation in America and Canada today, for
wherever you find the $ sign, no matter how evil the project may be, there
you will find the vultures of International Jewry and Freemasonry. When
we see what is happening in these two key countries, we can better
understand what the Apostle Paul meant in 1 Timothy 6:10, when he
stated: "The love Of MONEY) is the root of ALL evil."
Our discussion of Freemasonry has taken us back to its beginning and to
the revolutionary period in Europe. But what about now? Has it
mellowed? Has its designs changed? We will delve into this and more in
the following chapters.
15- FREEMASONRY TODAY
One of the fundamental errors expressed by those who write about
Freemasonry, I believe, is that they feel that all Masons hold a common

--- Sayfa 112 ---
belief and purpose. The truth is, that Freemasonry is in a generic (applied
to a class or group),

Page 121
simply a system of binding men together for a given purpose.
The allegories (description of one thing under the image of another), used
in Freemasonry, are capable of various interpretations. The re-building of
Solomon's Temple for instance, may refer to progress in any Masonic
undertaking. The same is true about its "sacred traditions." This system of
degrees, of initiations, of binding members to secrecy by fearful oaths, can
be employed for any purpose, social, political, philanthropic, or religious.
It can promote "good," or disseminate "evil." It can be used to "defend a
concept," or "overthrow" it; it can "protect" or "destroy."
But unfortunately, in Grand Orient Masonry, we find that it is not only
political in its aims, it is also subversive. Instead of a peaceful trilogy of
"brotherly love, relief and truth," it has added from its beginning, the war
cry of revolution: "Liberty, Equality and Fraternity," which can never
come to pass on this earth as long as it is controlled by human beings.
The aim of Grand Orient Masonry, from its inception, has been to bring
about "universal equality." In the matter of "liberty," they preach: "no man
shall have a master" and echo the thoughts of the German Jew Feurbach
who stated that: "Man will finally be free, when he realizes there is no god
of man, but man himself" To believe this falsehood, a man must first
divorce himself from any concept of Christianity which teaches that Jesus
is King!
The Grand Orient Lodge attacks all forms of religion. Its basis is "absolute
liberty of conscience and the solidarity of all mankind." This kind of
Freemasonry allows for "freedom of conscience" in the same sense that
atheism does, since all its members must profess a belief in some form of
higher power.

Page 122
16 - THE REAL JEWISH PERIL!

--- Sayfa 113 ---
The religion of JUDAISM TALMUDISM PHARISAISM whatever you
wish to call it, does not take its stand on the Bible, or the Laws of Moses,
as most Christians seem to think. Our LORD clearly taught this in John
5:46, 47, when He told the Jewish leaders:
46 "For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote
of me.
47 But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?"
Michael Rodkinsom, the Jewish author and translator of the TALMUD
from Hebrew to English, in his preface to the translation says: "The
modern Jew is a product of the Talmud."
Yet it is interesting to note that the Talmud relegates the TORAH (the
teachings of Moses) to a second place in Jewish teaching. The TALMUD
is not a "law of righteousness" for all mankind, as the Bible is, but is a
strict code which applies only to Jews. You will not find admonitions in it,
such as those found in Micah 6:8 -"He (God) hath shown thee, O man,
what is good; and what doth the LORD require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God."
In the TALMUD the ideas of Justice, equity and charity towards one's
neighbor, depend on whether you are a Jew or not. In fact, the TALMUD
expressly forbids a Jew to save a non-Jew from death, or to restore lost
goods to him, or to have pity on him in any way. How can you deal justly
with your neighbor, when your religion teaches you that he is a "goyim"
(non-Jew animal)?
According to the TALMUD volume Schulchan Aruch, Choszen
Hamiszpat (238): 'A Jew is permitted to rape, cheat and perjure himself;
but he must take care that he is

Page 123
not found out, so that his people suffer." This teaching is almost identical
to the teachings of FREEMASONRY According to volume Sulchan
Aruch, Choszen Hamispat (348):
"All property of other nations belongs to the Jews, who are consequently
entitled to seize upon it without scruples. An orthodox Jew is not bound to
observe principles of morality, if profitable to himself or to Jews in
general."

--- Sayfa 114 ---
Volume Baba Mechia (108b) and the JEWISH ENCYCLOPEDIA, both
state: "Only Jews are men... Gentiles (non-Jews) are not classed as men
but as barbarians or beasts."
In Volume Bab Khama IV, (3) we read: "if a Gentile sues a Jew the
verdict is for the defendant; if the Jew is the plaintiff he obtains full
damages." This is almost the same reaction we find when a Mason goes to
court against a non-Mason.
In Volume Sanhedrin (954b) we learn that "Pederasty (sex relations
between men and boys) with a child below the age of nine years is not
deemed as pederasty with a child. If one commits sodomy with a child of
lesser age, no guilt is incurred."
There are many more bestial and obscene comments, some of which
cannot be placed in a book such as this. It is easy to see where the moral
teachings of Freemasonry and Judaism come from. It is from this same
devilish source.
In the CABALA, even more than in the TALMUD, the Jewish dream of
world domination reoccurs over and over again. Although Christian
apologists for the Jews, laugh and scorn at the idea of a Jewish conspiracy
to control the world, yet Jewish leaders talk about it constantly and brag
about the progress they have made towards this goal. It is a constant theme
in Jewish religious books.
This message of world conquest is not the message taught by the Israel
prophets, who were not Jews, by the way, but Israelites.

Page 124
The task of true Israelites is not to control the world, but. in the words of
the Apostle Peter "to shew forth the praises of Him (Christ) who hath
called you out of darkness into His marvelous light." The task of "true
Israel" is to be God's ambassadors, not some dictator, who like the Jew,
desires to have 2,000 "goyim" slaves who wait on him hand and foot.
In the TALMUD Volume Baba Batra (74b) and in at least three other
volumes, the story is told of what will happen when the Jewish Messiah
comes back to rule the world. It is completely different from the much
more plausible story told in the Bible, regarding Christ's return. According
to the TALMUD version, the Jews will be entertained at a great banquet.
They will be seated at golden tables and will be served wine from Adam's

--- Sayfa 115 ---
cellar. Their banquet meal will be made up of a roasted ox called
BEHEMOTH which is so huge that it eats the grass off a thousand hills
every day. There will also be a monster fish called LEVIATHAN which
will be broiled and pickled. A gigantic fowl known as BAYUCHF will
also be served. This bird is so large, that when one of its eggs fell out of a
nest, it crushed 300 large cedar trees and the white from its broken shell,
flooded sixty villages. (This sounds almost as fantastic as some of the
stories Jews tell about the HOLOCAUST). The final course of this
immense banquet will consist of dessert, including fruit from the 'tree of
life,' and pomegranates from the Garden of Eden." (Again, this story
sounds almost like some of the stories one hears in the Judeo-Christian
churches regarding heaven.)
An 18th Century Jewish commentator named Stehlin states that,
"foreigners (that's you and I, brother) will till the ground of the Jews in
that day of their triumph; that we (foreigners) will build their houses and
cities and plant their vineyards, all without pay, because it will be such an
honor for us to work for them. The nations which survive the last
'holocaust' will offer the Jews all their wealth and Gentile princes and
princesses will wait on Jews as their slaves, and

Page 125
be ready at the nod of a head, to do anything the Jew asks." That sounds
like "LIBERTY, EQUALITY, AND FRATERNITY!" now doesn't it?
The hope of world domination - "world conspiracy," if you will, is as
strong now in the Jewish mind as it has been for 2,000 years, and is being
aided and abetted by Masons of high rank. The real dream of Jewish world
power can be seen most clearly in the Cabala.
About the only way the modern Jew relates to the Bible, is in his arrogant
statements concerning the "Ten Commandments, which WE gave to
mankind." It is this type of arrogance, which caused the translators of the
New Testament to translate John 4:22, as having Jesus say: "salvation is
of the Jews," when any clear thinking Christian knows that salvation does
not come through any nation, or group of people, but only through God's
Son, Jesus the Christ. It is this Jewish arrogance which caused them to
change the original, which said: "For salvation cometh out of Judea." This
makes sense, the KJV translation does not!
The fact that there were no people anywhere in the world known as Jews,
when the Ten Commandments were given to Israel, means absolutely

--- Sayfa 116 ---
nothing to the Jews and their intellectually dishonest prostitutes in the
Judeo-Christian churches of America. They deliberately choose to
disregard what Jesus said about the Jewish Pharisees in John 10:26 - "But
ye (Pharisees), believe not BECAUSE YE ARE NOT OF MY SHEEP..."
(Emphasis mine). Instead of heeding what their Master said, they call His
enemies, "God's Chosen people" and support the very ones who are
attempting to destroy them. What fools men be!
The Jews have always bragged about their privileged status with God,
knowing full well that they are the impostors who are spoken of in
Malachi 1:2-4 and Revelation 2:9; 3:9. When people brag about their

Page 126
privileged status, they will always be met with resentment. That is one
reason the Apostle Paul said they are "contrary to all men, " (1 Thess.
2:5).
To represent the Jewish people as a gentle, suffering people, the victims of
gentile persecution, is to show an entire lack of both spiritual and
historical understanding. In the ages past, Jews have over and over again
showed their utter contempt for all mankind and that they are capable of
the utmost cruelties towards those who disagree with them, especially if
they are the hated Nazarites (Christians). Most of the cruelest persecutions
in the Communist regimes, have been carried out under Jewish
supervision. An estimated 140-million people have been murdered by
these minions of Judeo-Masonry. Today, the cruelty of Jews towards the
Palestinians, whose land they have wrongfully usurped, goes far beyond
anything that Hitler ever dreamed.
The Jewish historian, Josephus, in his monumental work titled THE
JEWISH WARS, describes the pogroms carried out by the Jews in
Palestine during the First Century A.D. The "Sicarri," were a band of
Jewish terrorists, who were working with the approval of the Jewish
authorities, much as the MOSSAD works today. Many Christians do not
know that the Jewish leaders Begin and Shamir, were leading terrorists in
1948. During the First Century, these terrorists wiped out a village called
Engeddim, killing over 700 women and children. In 1948, Menachem
Begin, another Jew terrorist, wiped out a Palestinian village of some 264
old men, women and children and bragged that he had killed Arab women
with his own hands. Yet this terrorist became Prime Minister of Israeli.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
It is intellectual dishonesty of the worst sort to state, as the prostitutes of
Judaism do, from their pulpits, that the faults of the modern Jews are due
to their persecution at the hands of Christians in the past. They have been
persecuted, there is no doubt about that, but not because
Page 127
they were God's Chosen People, as the Baptist Zionist Jack Van Impe
likes to shout. They were persecuted because of their crooked, immoral
dealings in every country which gave them refuge. Today, that same
resentment is building up in Canada and the United States, as we see them
taking full advantage of Christian hospitality, while attempting to destroy
everything we stand for as Christians. The day of reckoning will come
here, as it has in other countries. It is inevitable, unless Jewish leaders
come to their senses and put a "check rein" on their activists.
Some idea of why cruelty is the norm for these people can be seen in a
mode of execution suggested by the TALMUD. In the Volume Sanhedrin,
a method of execution was to wrap a scarf around the neck of the victim,
tightening it from both ends until his mouth was forced open. Then a
lighted fuse was forced down his throat to burn out his entrails. This is
very similar to some of the "blood thirsty" oaths which Masons are forced
to take. It is interesting in the light of these TALMUDIC teachings, to see
that the liberal Jew is in the forefront of the fight against Capital
Punishment, declaring it to be a "cruel and unusual punishment."
It is also interesting to note the number of Jewish women who are in the
forefront of the Women's Liberation Movement, the Lesbian Movement,
N.O.W., and Pro-Abortion. Yet the Talmudic religion is definitely "anti-
woman." A good example of this is the daily Jewish prayer, where the
Jewish man says: "Blessed by thou, O Lord our God, king of the Universe,
that thou hast not made me a woman.
We must never forget, when we look at Judaism, that no matter what the
Jewish Rabbis may say at Inter-Faith meetings, Rabbinical Judaism is the
bitter enemy of Christianity. This is not just a matter of ancient history,
but is true today. Ask yourself who is behind the effort to take prayer and
Bible reading from the Public Schools? Who heads most of the abortion
clinics in Canada and the U.S.? Who is behind the effort to remove
Christian scenes from public places? In at

Page 128

--- Sayfa 118 ---
least 95% of the cases, you will find these cases brought by the Jewish led
American Civil Liberties Union, in the name of a Jew. Now there is a
concerted move underway to remove the Gideon Bibles from motel
rooms, because of the "prejudiced" words of Jesus Christ, when He dealt
with the Jewish religion. Yet our stupid "goyim Christian sheep," still call
these people, God's Chosen!
The feelings of the Jew, even those who profess Christianity, can be seen
in the actions of a Jewish pastor of an Assembly of God Church in
Lauderdale Lakes, Florida. Pastor Harvey Koelner, a Jew, claims to be a
"born-again" Christian. Yet he has written several pamphlets, with the
Assembly of God logo on them, which are distinctly anti-Christian. One
is, Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and Jesus. In this tract he says: "Now
comes the hoax of all hoaxes (guess he never heard of the Jewish
HOLOHOAX, the story of Jesus. There is absolutely no piece of physical
evidence on earth that can prove that Jesus existed. There is no historical
evidence that he existed." Yet this man, calls himself a Christian minister.
A Jewish group in Washington State, called the ABELARDREUCHLIN
FOUNDATION, recently wrote to me: "There is solid proven
documentation which proves that the story of Jesus is false. It was a
fictional story created by Flavius Joseph us and the Romans. The inner
circle of Christian clergymen know this is true." (I was in this "inner
circle" for many years and I never heard a breath of rumor about this
Jewish fable.)
A Jewish writer in Hollywood by the name of Hecht, said: "The Jews
made a mistake when they crucified Jesus. I would have sent him to Rome
to be fed to the lions. The Christians would have a hard time making a
Savior out of mincemeat."
Another Jewish leader said: "The Jewish religion is reserved for only
people of quality and excellence, those of superior intelligence, who
operate on a higher plane than

Page 129
other people. You must realize that most Jewish people are more
intelligent, better educated, and more successful than Christians," With
this kind of arrogance, you can readily understand why Jews are
universally detested. If you are really interested in knowing more about
Jewish moral quality, don't go by what they say, or what the Judeo-
Christian "sheeple" say; go directly to their religious book the TALMUD

--- Sayfa 119 ---
and see for yourself. But don't try it, unless you have a strong stomach! If
you don't want to go to this effort, just take time to listen to Jewish
comedians on TV or in the movies.
Could it be this national attitude that Jesus censured in Matthew 23:15,
when He told the scribes and Pharisees:
"Woe (deep sorrow) unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye compass (go over) sea and land to make
one proselyte (convert), and when he is made, ye make him
two-fold more a child of hell than yourselves."
Was our Lord being anti-Semitic when He made this clear statement of
facts? No more scathing denunciation of the Jewish religion can be found
anywhere, than this which came direct from the Son of God.
When Pastor Sheldon Emry, of the Lord's Covenant Church in Phoenix,
Arizona, died from cancer a few years ago; his assistant pastor, Ben
Williams, received this letter from a Jew:
Dear Pastor Williams:
"Congratulations on the death of Christian Nazi Sheldon
Emry, We (Jews) prayed to the G-d of Israel (Jews) for a
painful and agonizing death for this Nazi scum, and G-d
answered our prayers. We applaud and rejoice to G-d for
snuffing out the life of Nazi Emry, who was a cancer to the
entire world.
G-d assured us that Nazi Emry will take his place in hell
along with Adolf Hitler and Satan (notice nothing is said
about Stalin, who the Jews placed in power), and that the
same fate will befall all his followers.

Page 130
Pastor Emry, like Hitler, led a sick, perverted life,
dedicated to Jew-Hatred and anti-Semitism, and he was
stamped out by the G-d of Israel (the Jews) like the
cockroach he was. Excrement flowed from his mouth and
every pore of his body, and G-d flushed him down the toilet
to hell. All your prayers to the false Messiah Jesus, the

--- Sayfa 120 ---
bastard son of Satan, are for naught! You will all
experience the same fate!
You, the Christian Nazi's of America, are to be cursed by
G-d and deserve all the punishments He has planned for
you. Your blasphemous Christianity is an abomination to
G-d and man.
SIGNED-THE MESSANIC JEWS!
Anyone who knew Pastor Emry, and he was a close and valued friend of
mine, knew him for a dedicated Christian Patriot, who was hated by the
Zionists because he told the truth about them. He was not an anti-Semite
and he certainly was not a purveyor of hate.
It is interesting to me, to note that it is the Jews who are in the forefront of
every effort to enforce so-called "hate laws," in Canada and the United
States, yet they are also in the forefront of dispensing hate towards
Christians. These laws, such as the ones now in existence in Canada,
protect the Jews and minorities from hateful remarks, but cannot and will
not be use to defend Christians.
In an anonymous letter from a Jewish woman, written on a paper napkin,
she consigned me to hell, and prayed that my wife would turn into a hog,
my son into a dog, and my daughter into a frog. She said in closing:
"I curse you and damn your soul in the name of YESHUAH HA-
MASHIAH. Thou art ANATHEMA MARANATHA and resigned unto
the lake of fire for eternity . Die you devil! May you burn in hell for
eternity! May you be blind and your flesh melt in the fire of hell!"
- SIGNED (With some name written in Yiddish).

Page 131
According to Judeo-Christian and Masonic leaders, letters such as these
are not "hate mail." But a book, such as this one you are reading, which
tells the truth about these enemies of God and Christianity, is considered
to be authentic "hate literature."
Can you imagine the hue and cry that would take place in the media, or
among Christian and Jewish circles, if a letter such as the two I have
quoted, were to be sent to some Jewish leader? They would literally "froth

--- Sayfa 121 ---
at the mouth," and would plaster the front pages of the nation's news, and
the airways of TV, with examples of Identity Christians hatred towards the
poor misused Jews.
The sad thing is, this virulent hatred of everything that has to do with
Jesus Christ, reaches into every organization which is touched by Judaism,
including the Freemason Lodge and the Judeo-Christian church. Be honest
with yourself and ask this question: "What is so awful about being anti-
Jewish, when they openly brag of their hatred for our King and how they
mean to destroy us?" Do you honestly believe these enemies of our Lord
should be allowed to openly blaspheme His name and ridicule His church,
and destroy our Christian beliefs, just because they have proclaimed
themselves to be God's Chosen People?
In Malachi 1:4, we read these words from the LORD God JEHOVAH! -
"Whereas Edom (the Jews) saith, We are impoverisbed, but we will return
and build the desolate places; thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall
build, but I will throw down; and they (Israel) shall call them (the Jews),
The Border of wickedness, and the people against whom the LORD bath
indignation (anger) forever."

LINE OF REASONING USED BY JEWS AGAINST
CHRISTIANITY
There are three major lines of reasoning used by Judaism in their fight
against Christ and Christianity.

Page 132
1.- The argument that Christ never existed; that He was
nothing but the figment of someone's over-active
imagination. This idea will not stand up under the search
light of recorded history.
2.- That Christ was nothing more than a great teacher and
that He should be classified alongside Buddha,
Mohammed, Confucius, etc.
3.- That Christ was a crazy fanatic, who was carried away
by his visions of being the prophesied Messiah. (See the
Jewish Encyclopedia and Hatelsmann's book WAR JESUS

--- Sayfa 122 ---
EKSTATIKER. The later book states: "there must have been
an abnormal mental process involved in the utterances and
behavior of Jesus." The TALMUD openly calls Him
"crazy." Some liberals say He was a homosexual, because
most of His time on this earth was spent in the company of
twelve men. While others, such as the writer of the movie,
THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, pictured Him as
not only crazy, but a lecher.
In reality, down through the ages, true Christianity has been the greatest
protector of the Jews. I do not refer to "churchianity" here, since there is a
great deal of difference. In Canada and the U.S., the "Jews are the Chosen
People Myth" has become so deeply embedded in most evangelical and
fundamental churches, that the pastors and people believe God's promises
made to Abraham in Genesis 12:3 - "I will bless them that blesses thee,
and curse him that curseth thee, "can be applied to the people we know as
Jews today.
Yet the modern Jew is the perfect example of the anti-Christ defined very
clearly in 1 John 2:22,23. In spite of this, the "brainwashed" Christians of
the Judeo-Christian churches, completely overlook the Scripture warning
of 2 Chronicles 19:2 - "...Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them
that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the LORD."

Page 133
There were no people named Jews on this planet when God made His
promise to Abraham and if you look at it very closely and objectively, it
says nothing about these blessings and curses being handed down to his
descendants. The people we know as Jews are first mentioned in the Bible,
in 2 Kings 16:6, almost 1200 years after the time of Abraham, where we
find them fighting against Israel.
The theory of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy, supported by Freemasonry,
does not rest on the evidence of such question able documents as
PROTOCOLS (although world Jewry is following them like a
"blueprint"). In PROTOCOL IX, we read:
"The words of the liberal, are in effect our watchword -
LIBERTY! EQUALITY! FRATERNITY! (Strangely
enough they are the "watchword" of world Freemasonry
too). When we (Jews) come into our kingdom, we will
change these words, not into a watchword, but an

--- Sayfa 123 ---
expression of our idealism. The right to liberty! the duty of
equality! the ideal of brotherhood! That is bow we shall put
it! De facto (actually) we have wiped out every role but our
own, although de jure (by rights) there remain a good many
of them."1
By being introduced to this doctrine of "broad-mindedness," under the
guise of Jewish liberality, we have given the Jews "carte blanch"
(discretional powers) to attack liberty and Christianity. What Christian
Americans and Canadians, including the members of the Lodges of
Freemasonry, have been taught, is to "tolerate the intolerances" of
Judaism, since there are no more intolerant and prejudicial people
anywhere on earth, than the Zionist Jews.
In PROTOCOL IX, we read:
at the proper time, we (Jews), the lawgivers, (to all intents and purposes
they now control the Judicial systems of both Canada and the U.S.) shall
exercise judgment and sentence. We shall slay and we shall spare... We
will rule by force... (as they are doing now in Palestine, as they have in
Russia since 1918). The weapons in our hands will be limitless ambition,

Notes:-
1 For an in-depth discussion of the Protocols of the
Learned Elders of Zion, write for my book The Satanic
Counterfeit.

Page 134
burning greedivens, merciless vengeance, hatred and malice." (How would
you like to live under the control of such? This will happen, unless
Christian people wake up and stop. it!)
I am inclined to agree with Henry Ford, Sr. the great Christian industrialist
of the early 1900's when he wrote:
"To recognize the Jewish and Masonic question does not
mean we have gone to a national campaign of hatred
against Jews and Masons. It means we must see the stream

--- Sayfa 124 ---
which has been flowing through our civilization for years,
which has at last accumulated the bulk and power to be a
danger to us all."
Unfortunately, there are Christians within the Identity Movement, whose
hatred for anyone who differs from them, reaches to all people, not just
those who are a danger to us. I do not support this thesis in any way!
Personally, I am "fed up" with the Jewish and Judeo-Christian allegations
that even to discuss the Jewish question is unfair and will be punished by
God. Jews do not hesitate to criticize Christians, even those who support
them. In fact, they often speak with sarcasm regarding the "Christian
sheeple," they have so blatantly "hoodwinked," and who they lead around
by the nose.
If you will attempt to read books written by Jewish authors, for "Jewish
eyes only," you will see even more clearly what I am trying to say. I get
angry when the Jewish controlled media lie about me and my people and
paint us in the most unfavorable terms imaginable. I am not being anti-
Semitic when I tell you the truth about self-announced Jewish plans to
destroy you, any more than I was anti-German, when I fought against the
Nazi during World War II, fooled as I was by the Jewish propaganda of
World War II, just as were 95% of the veterans who fought that war; but
we were not "anti-German."
Here is a "fact of life" that Freemasons around the world need to take into
account; it is found in PROTOCOL XV:

Page 135
"When we (Jews) come into our kingdom through coups de'etat (violent
overthrow of existing governments), we will make it our task to destroy
every institution of secret societies, whose members will be punished by
death. MOST OF THEM ARE KNOWN TO US, SINCE THEY HAVE
WORKED FOR US." (Emphasis mine).
In every country on this earth, where Talmudic Communism has taken
control, this has been their pattern of action. The "goyim" prostitutes
(preachers, politicians, bankers, business men, Lodge members) who have
helped them into power, have been eliminated; no matter how much you
may have helped them, you are on their list for elimination. They tell you
so!

--- Sayfa 125 ---
While the Jewish controlled press of America, aided by their Masonic
cohorts, wants us to believe that Jewish terrorist organizations are on the
wane in Canada and the United States, Zionist leaders such as Irv Rubin of
the JEWISH DEFENSE LEAGUE, state that bombings of synagogues, by
members of the JDL, are for the purpose of bestching up the Jews a little
bit!" He says the JDL is trying to head off a "holocaust" in the United
States and Canada by "eliminating all the white supremacist activities in
the United States." (That means anyone who disagrees with them). This
same Jew, who a few years ago offered a public reward of $500.00 for
anyone who would kill a Nazi and $1000.00 if they would bring him their
ears, has been above the law. You can imagine what would happen to an
Identity Christian, who would be stupid enough to make a similar remark
in public. He would have the Federal Government on his back, "like a
hawk on a June bug." The California District attorney who attempted to
prosecute this case, in which Rubin was released, said: "The framers of the
American Constitution would turn over in their graves if they could see
the manner in which the First Amendment is being used to protect people
who offer 'blood money' for the elimination of those they don't like."

Page 136
Recent police reports from the East, show that in at least 2/3 of all cases
where vandalism of synagogues or Jewish cemeteries occur, there are
Jews involved. The JDL delights in efforts such as this, since it keeps their
people "stirred up; full of hate, and ready to contribute to any cause the
JDL desires." This is identical to the process used in Freemasonry, where
the lower degrees obey, because of fear and ignorance.
We know from documented facts, that Grand Orient Masonry has exerted
profound influence in politics, of all the nations of Christendom. We are
not dealing with suppositions hear, but with proven facts. There are many
cases where the leadership of Freemasons in revolutionary causes can be
pinpointed. We know their aims, because they have declared them in
books such as Pike's MORALS AND DOGMA. We know that Jewish
power, which backs them and is shrouded in secrecy, has fooled millions
of Masons into believing that they are members of an organization which
is completely different from what they claim it is.
It is extremely difficult to convince anyone about the ulterior motives of
Freemasonry, since a mother and father whose child has just been "saved"
by the help of some Shrine Hospital, will not want to know the truth about
those who have helped them. In this manner, Masonry, like International
Zionism, has existed under a shroud of Mystery. That Jews have played a
major role in Grand Orient Masonry, is a known fact. The JEWISH

--- Sayfa 126 ---
ENCYCLOPEDIA, in its article under the heading, FREEMASONRY
states:
"The technical language, symbolism, and rites of
freemasonry are full of Jewish ideas and terms... Jews have
been most conspicuous in their connection with
Freemasonry... since the French Revolution."2

Notes:-
2 The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. V, pp. 503, 504 (1904).

Page 137
17 - ZIONIST CAPITAL AND MASONIC
INFLUENCE GENERATE GENOCIDE!
Most of the information in this chapter will be taken from
COUNTERBIAS No. 5, published by the SACRED SURVIVORS OF
THE JEWISH HOLOCAUST, P.O. Box 381, Waterloo, NSW 2017,
Australia (Every thing you wanted to know about the Zionists but were
afraid to ask!)
Whether directly or indirectly, the Khazar tribesmen who falsely call
themselves "Jews" are collectively guilty of over one hundred million
wilfully committed murders during the Judeo-Communist rule of terror,
the Judeo-Masonic World Wars and the present Zionist occupation of
Palestine. (For the Bible definition of "pseudo-Jews" see Rev. 2:9; 3:9).
Falsified history books which are peddled far and wide by Mossad agents
and the prostitute-historians in their employ, "war action thrillers" and so-
called "War documentaries," in the movies and on TV have all churned
out dozens of Judeo-Masonic fantasies. They would have the gullible
American public believe that we won World War II, just as the Zionist
Jew, Henry Kissinger, called our withdrawal from Viet Nam, a "victory
with honor." The truth of the matter is that we, the Anglo-Saxon,
Celtic, Scandinavian peoples, lost both World Wars, which were fought
with brother Israel nations, and have lost every "brush fire" war into which
we have been sucked by the Jew-Mason dominated United Nations.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
While Stalin's "red horde" was conquering Eastern Europe, with the help
of men such as Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Gen.
Dwight Eisenhower, the Zionist-Masonic shysters were reclaiming with a
vengeance the western part of the continent, not merely reestablishing,

Page 138
but multiplying a hundred fold their ownership and control of commerce,
industries, education, the media, and the "goyim" governments. The truth
is that World War II was prolonged for two years, with the loss of millions
of extra lives, while the Jew internationalists hoarded billions more of
Christian money. Both General Patton, and British General
Montgomery wanted to invade Europe in 1944, through the "soft
underbelly of Europe." This would have liberated all the Eastern European
countries which are now under Communist Control. But Gen.
Eisenhower, egged on by his boss, Franklin Roosevelt, and Winston
Churchill, the drunken Premier of Great Britain, backed the "red
murderer" Stalin and the war was extended for two more years, while
Stalin consolidated his hold on all of Eastern Europe; a hold which has not
been relinquished to this day. It was fear of Patton's exposure of this plot,
which led to his assassination, although the official version of his death
will not admit this.
World War II was provoked by the International Jewish-Masonic shysters
in the first place, solely out of pathological greed and plain racial spite, not
because of their "love for dear little Poland." The National Socialist
regime of Adolf Hitler, whatever may be said against it, had practically
eliminated crime and corruption, and had brought about economic and
social reforms, which provided jobs and low-interest loans for all. This
had practically put the "usurers, stock exchange speculators, all manner of
pimps, all slumlords and other parasites completely out of business."
No one in the West denies that the Soviets either annexed or colonized
nearly a dozen independent European countries, which they had liberated
(7) during World War II, and then proceeded to introduce them to a "blood
bath, ala Stalin style," a class struggle with its obligatory "liquidation of
all hostile elements," which meant

Page 139

--- Sayfa 128 ---
principally Christians and near starvation for the rest. How can this be
described as a "victory for Democracy?"
Hitler's invasion of Poland was used as a pretext for the war in Europe,
which the International Judeo-Masonic leaders had been planning since
1918. Curiously enough, when Stalin invaded the Baltic states, the western
press did not consider this as an invasion, it was called "liberation of
Western Ukraine." (West Ukrainians have yet to be convinced of this). At
the Yalta Conference, a dying American President, controlled by his
Communist advisor Alger Hiss, and a vacillating drunkard of a British
Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, sold out all of Eastern Europe to the
murderer from Russia. In fact, they handed this area to Stalin "on a
platter," possibly as a reward for his having exterminated 15,000 Polish
officers at the Katyn Forest Massacre.
While attending the Yalta Conference, Winston Churchill, accompanied
by his equally alcoholic daughter, was treated to frequent excursions of the
numerous Crimean wineries liberated by the KGB. He was hardly ever
sober, according to eye witness accounts. Having prostituted himself at
Yalta, he later went on to speechify, with great "crocodile tears" in his
bloodshot eyes, about the "Iron Curtain" which had descended over
Eastern Europe.
Being a Freemason, as well as an agent of the richest Jewish financiers,
Churchill, like Franklin Roosevelt, did everything possible to instigate the
world war, and drag the United States into it and later on, to arm Stalin's
legions to the teeth to assure victory. It was during the early days of 1942-
43, when American troops were dying on the atolls of the Pacific for lack
of military supplies, that we were sending the Russians $11-billion in
Lend Lease, with priority of shipment to the Communists. This was one of
the reasons that Rudolf Hess, who was I believe a sincere messenger for
peace, was kept incommunicado for the

Page 140
duration of the war. If the British people had been allowed to hear what
Hess had to say, the war could have been over by the end of 1943. It is
strange to see how Churchill vacillated in his intentions towards Germany.
In 1933, on the wake of Hitler's being appointed Chancellor of the Reich,
Churchill spoke with admiration of "Germany's splendid clear-eyed youth,
burning to die for their fatherland." At that time his interests lay with
Germany. But when he was hired secretly, as an agent of influence for the
Board of Deputies of British Zionists, he started going on about the

--- Sayfa 129 ---
"Huns" and the "Barbarians" who were ruling Germany. He was a perfect
example of a "double-minded man," and the Apostle James says of such:
"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1:8).
Having stormed into the Judeo-Masonic trap of the Anglo-French
"guarantees" to Poland, which were laid for him in 1939, Hitler would
have certainly crashed through, if it had not been for the machinations of
this Masonic drunkard from England.
Hitler soon found himself at war, not only with his old enemy from
Russia, but with Britain, the old bastion of the Grand Orient Lodge of
Freemasonry and with the United States which had become the Judeo-
Masonic "arsenal of democracy."
In the late 1930's the Soviet Union was described by many noted
historians as the "colossus on feet of clay." Most of its infantry soldiers
had never seen a semi-automatic rifle. All of its plywood and canvas
covered aircraft were almost as useless in the air as they were on the
ground - it was on the ground where the Soviet Air force was almost
wiped out on the opening day of the war. Most of their tanks would not
move and the mechanics knew little about their upkeep. It was only the
Russian winter, which kept Hitler from overrunning

Page 141
Moscow and ending once and for all, for all time, the Communist-Masonic
danger to the world. But it was not to be. This is when the "Evil Empire"
was at its weakest, and when the Judeo-Masonic forces set out to bolster
her. One wonders where the "latter day fire-and-brimstone" anti-
communists were in those days. Ronald Reagan, for example, was a class
B movie player in Jew-run Hollywood, and a registered Democrat no less.
Hitler, who was a self-confessed admirer of Great Britain, never sought a
war with the West. That is why he allowed the defeated British
Expeditionary Force at Dunkirk to slip across the channel. Instead of
subjecting them to humiliating surrender, or hopeless massacre, Hitler's
naive racial sentiments concerning "Aryan Brotherhood" made him blind
to the fact that its destruction would have possibly saved the war for
Germany. Of course the Judeo-Masonic rulers of Britain - its mercenary
middle-class, its tainted low-degree Masons included, were always
"replaceable resources," for the alcoholic Churchill and his ambitions to
please his Zionist masters.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
The drunkard prime minister of England, became the greatest undertaker
of all times, as he sacrificed millions of his people, in order to win the
praise and backing of his Jewish masters.
He was undoubtedly the most boisterous political prostitute of the
Twentieth Century, exceeding even Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and that's
saying a lot. As a member of the British Parliament and a paid agent of the
Jewish Board of Deputies, he went in for a great deal of anti-German war
mongering, readily forgetting about the "international Jewish Bolsheviks"
he used to rail against. His Zionist paymasters finally "hit the jackpot"
when Churchill finally bullied his way into 10 Downing Street in 1940.
Every pound of "human flesh" sacrificed by the British Commonwealth of
Nations and the United States,

Page 142
was at the disposal of the "Shylocks" of International Zionism. About to
begin was the most sacred and mysterious Kabbalistic ritual; a miraculous
transfiguration of tens of millions of "goyim" corpses into giant piles of
Jewish dead, which led to more money for the Zionists and wider avenues
of Zionist world power.
Here is what Churchill said about the Zionists in 1920, as reported in a
Feb. 8, 1920 issue of the ILLUSTRATED SUNDAY HERALD:
"There is no need to exaggerate the part played in the
creation of Bolshevism ... by these international and...
atheistical Jews ... the majority of the leading figures are
Jews ... the principle inspiration and driving power comes
from the Jews. The predominance of the Jews in the Soviet
institutions is even more astonishing. And, ...the principal
part of the system of terrorism applied by the CHEKA
(KGB) has been taken by the Jews... The same evil
prominence was obtained by Jews during the period of
terror during which Bela Kuhn ruled Hungry. The same
phenomenon has been allowed to prey upon the temporary
prostration of the German people... The fact that in many
cases Jewish interests and Jewish places of worship are
expected by the Bolsheviks from their hostility, has tended
more and more to associate the Jewish race ... with the
villainies which are being perpetrated."

--- Sayfa 131 ---
Not unlike Churchill, and, indeed, not unlike almost all the American
Presidents from George Washington to George Bush, President Franklin
Roosevelt was a Freemason whose prior allegiance was owed to that
nefarious brotherhood, not to America. The Jewish "Usurer" Bernard
Baruch, also a high-degree Mason, was an advisor to FIVE AMERICAN
Presidents and was one of the close associates of FDR. The dissolution of
Freemasonry, the expropriation of the parasitic Jewish finance capital in
Germany by the National-Socialist government and the newly-won
economic independence from the international usurers-bankers put the
whole of Germany on the Judeo-Masonic "hit list."

Page 143
The all too noticeable prosperity of the German people under the new
populist government was bad news for the usurers; and President
Roosevelt came from a long line of bankers and Stock Exchange crooks to
whom a government "of the people, by the people, and for the people" was
bad for business. As far back as September 1938, Harold L. Ickes, FDR's
Secretary of the Interior asked Roosevelt: "Is this Munich crisis good or
bad for us in the United States?" According to Ickes private diary, Sept.
13, 1938, Roosevelt replied: "Every European nation is going to have to
buy guns and arms and ammunition from us! Already the gold of Europe
is flooding across the Atlantic at a rate so fast we haven't got enough
warships to bring it over! Any crisis in Europe can do only good." (Of
course he was referring to "good for his Zionist masters.")
It has been pretty well established that Roosevelt willfully committed high
treason and consented to premeditated murder of American citizens at
Pearl Harbor. This moribund paraplegic desperately sought "Casus belli."
He was no doubt, ably advised by his Jewish financiers, Bernard Baruch
and Henry Morgenthau. Sure enough, the planned sacrifice of thousands
of American servicemen was the pound of flesh which was well invested
with the international Judeo-Masonic bankers. If a common name for
traitor in America is Benedict Arnold, since World War II it should have
been Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Instead, he is held up to the praise of our
people as one of our greatest presidents. If the argument is used that this
treason was necessary to defeat "fascism," it might be well to recall that
the worst kind of "fascism" ever known, was the Judeo-Masonic Stalinism
of the Soviet Union.
The Churchill imposed war in Europe and the Roosevelt staged fiasco at
Pearl Harbor, led to the fall of Singapore, the Pacific Islands, as well as
the whole of South East Asia.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
Page 144
Thousands of Allied soldiers died in the fighting and millions of civilians
were needlessly killed. Some 27-million Russian slaves were killed from
1939-45, as they saved the hides of their not-so-Russian slave drivers from
extermination at the hands of the Nazis.
That was the real "New Deal" which the American people were never told
about by their Judeo-Masonic media. There were many things which we
were not told, which are just beginning to surface. As they do, more and
more Americans are beginning to burn with "righteous indignation"
against a government which has become so subservient to a foreign anti-
Christ power, that it will abandon the welfare of its own people.
Although facts prove that the Nations of Christendom, betrayed by the
Judeo-Masonic plutocrnto lost the war in Europe, the prostitute-historians
whose cushy appointments in academia are controlled by these same
plutocrats, have remained conveniently silent, while the Judeo-
homosexual Hollywood and Judeo-Masonic TV networks keep
trumpeting, as if it happened yesterday, that it was Germany who started
the war, that it was Germany who wanted to conquer the world, when all
facts point otherwise. If the invasion of Poland was the real cause of
World War II, which of course it obviously wasn't, then both the National
Socialist regime of Germany and the Judeo-Communist dictatorship of
Russia, must be regarded as being equally responsibility for this
"holocaust,"
While we have heard a great deal about the plight of the poor Jew in the
Soviet Union, the fact still remains that many of the Jews in the Soviet
Union, still hold important, well-paying jobs and have standards of living
and education, much higher than that of the ethnic Russian.
Of course, it is natural, that in the ongoing "superpower rivalry," a great
deal of fuss is being made by the Jew megalomaniacs about the fact that
the Jews in Russia are

Page 145
no longer in control of the Soviet Empire; but are instead in control of
Russian natives, who were converted to their Judeo-Marxist dogma by the

--- Sayfa 133 ---
Jewish leaders in the first place. The Jews don't really mind, that the
regime they set up in Russia, turned into something infinitely more
repressive than anything under the Tsar. Gorbachev not excepted. What
the Jews are really upset with, is that more and more native Russians are
getting into positions of power and that they can no longer be considered
High Priests of the Communist Cult. To their way of thinking, this is "anti-
Semitism," although not one in ten of them has any claim to being a
Semite. Menachem Begin put this thought into words a number of years
ago, when speaking in New York to a group of Jewish millionaires, he
said: "There would be nothing wrong with Communism, if we were still
running it!" A few million dead "goyim" means nothing to this Judeo-
Masonic crowd!
However, in spite of all those make-believe "anti-Soviet" wailings of the
crypto-Communist New York Jews, the under-the-table dealings between
the Zionists and the Soviets are just as cozy as those which once took
place between the Zionists and the Nazis. If you don't want to accept this,
then ask yourself why 50,000 Jews are being allowed to enter the United
States, and receive hearty contributions from the largesse of the American
people, while you hear nothing of Russian Christians being allowed to
leave enmasse.
That the Jew-Masonic plutocrats are still in charge of the governments. of
Canada, England and the United States is a matter. of fact. Hence the
"Jewish immigration" is a "cherry on the pie" of every dealing we have
with the Soviet Union. It has become an open invitation for the KGB and
the MOSSAD, to send their finest agents to the United States as "poor,
harassed immigrants." How many of you would like to make a bet, that a
majority of the Jews

Page 146
who come to this country are not trained KGB agents for the not-so-
Gentile Soviet Union?
The very subject of the "Jewish immigration" to the United States, is a
classic example of the Zionist-Masonic controlled media's ability to
exercise mass emotional blackmail on behalf of the MOSSAD and the
KGB, in order to persuade the "suckers" of the Christian world," that we
need those "poor Jews" here.
This media has become so clever in subterfuge, that they can now sell
AIDS as a "new and wonderful human experience," since Rock Hudson

--- Sayfa 134 ---
had it and Elizabeth Taylor endorsed it - they have even made it sort of
"quasi-respectable." When in God's name will we come to our senses?
Whether directly, or indirectly, the Khazar tribesmen who called
themselves "Jews and are not, but are of the synagogue of Satan" (Rev.
2:9; 3:9), are collectively guilty of over 100-million murders, while they
"scream and wail" over 6-million Jews who were supposed to have died
during World War II, and who never existed. The role of these Judeo-
Masonic gangsters in the economies of the West, is about the same as that
of the New York Gypsy card-sharps and fortune-tellers, except that the
scale of the Judeo-Masonic "ripoff" is astronomical.
There is little doubt that it is the Jewish financial capital that owns and
controls the Western governments of England, Canada and the United
States, and who are telling our people how to act and think. Even
questioning the authority of Jewish financial and political power is a
"horrible thought crime." We will never return to real freedom in America
and Canada, until our "brainwashed" people, yes, most of them who go by
the name of Christian, are willing to wake up, look facts in the face and
recognize who the real enemy is.

Page 147
Karl Marx put it well when he said:
"What is the real god of the Jews? The bill of exchange.
Money is the one jealous god of the Jews, beside which no
other god may stand!"
"What is the object of Jew worship? Usury! The
organization of society in such a way as to abolish the
possibility of usury, would make the Jew impossible."1

18 - IMPORTANT POINTS OF
CONNECTION BETWEEN
FREEMASONRY AND ZIONISM!
It appears as though we have strayed a bit "a field" in our major purpose
of showing the "hidden power" behind Freemasonry. Here are a few more
facts which you may find interesting and of importance in understanding
the problems we face.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
1.- The masonic coat-of-arms which is still used by the Grand Orient
Lodges of England and Europe was Jewish designed.
2.- Some of the most important legends of Freemasonry come from Jewish
sources. The legend of Hiram Abiff, for instance, on which Freemasonry
is founded and on which many of its rites are based, is of Jewish origin.
3.- The technical language, symbolism and rites of Freemasonry are full of
Jewish ideas and terms. In the Scottish Rite, the dates of all official
documents are given according to the Hebrew months and the Jewish era:
and use is often made of the older Hebrew alphabet. (See the JEWISH
ENCYCLOPEDIA, under "Freemasonry," Vol. 5, p.503.
It may be of interest to note that it was Jews who introduced Freemasonry
to the United States and who

Notes:-
1. Both quotations from Karl Marx's book: A World
Without Jews!

Page 148
became a powerful force in American Freemasonry, (See Joudin, "Les
Fideles De La Centre-Eglkise Macons, "pp. 37-45. Full documentation is
given here).
The Masonic rite of MIZRAIN, with at least 90 degrees, is perhaps the
most esoteric and elaborate rite in all of Masonry. It was founded by Jews,
as was the order of B'nai B'rith (Sons of the Alliance), which is an all-
Jewish Lodge and the father of the infamous Anti-Defamation League.
The order of MIZRAIN is found mainly among the European Lodges,
some of which are exclusively Jewish. The B'nai B'rith is mainly an
American Jewish Lodge, although some do not formally recognize it as
being Masonic. But its organization, intimate alliance with, and its
intimate objects are the same as in Masonry. In the German Masonic
Review LATONIA, Feb. 28, 1928, the lodges of B'nai B'rith were
explicitly referred to as being Masonic, in fact they were recognized as
being the controlling Masonic power in Germany.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
In the JEWISH CHRONICLE, Oct. 19, 1889, you can find these remarks
on pp. 77, 78:
"Masonry tolerates everything except a clericalism
(Catholicism) and it possesses a special attraction for Jews.
Clericalism has always persecuted Masonry everywhere.
There exists between Jews and Freemasons an invisible but
potent natural alliance against a common enemy... Together
they fight ... against religious fanaticism and racial
antipathies."
Much of the present day liberalism in politics, which encourages
interracial marriages; laws which discriminate against whites in
employment, etc., are promulgated by legislators who are Freemasons. It
is all part of their heritage as Lodge members. It might be of further
interest to note, that the International Bankers who dominate international
finance and who were responsible for the Federal Reserve Act of 1913,
which now controls American economics, were Jewish Masons.

Page 149
In a remarkable study, done over a hundred years ago, a French writer,
Gougenot de Mousseauz, collected large numbers of documents which
proved beyond the shadow of a doubt, that Jews ran the inner circles of
Freemasonry in Europe. On pg. 340 of his book LEJUIF, LAJUDAISME.
el la Judaisarion des Peoyles Chretiens, published in Paris in 1869, he
said:
"The real chiefs of this immense association (Freemasonry)
are mostly Jews, and live in close and intimate relationship
with the militant members of Judaism, those namely, who
are leaders of the Cabalist section. This is known to only an
intimate few in Masonry."
M. Daniel, another French writer, quotes from Mons Barbier's
INFILTRATIONS MACONIQUES, p.99:
"I have often heard French Masons lament the dominance
of Jews... Ever since the revolution, Jews have taken
possession of Masonic rites. The Cabala rules its mistress
in the inner-circle of the Lodge and the Jewish spirit
dominates the lower grades... In the mind of Satan, the
synagogue has an all-important part to play... The greatest

--- Sayfa 137 ---
enemy counts on the Jews to control Masonry, as he counts
on Masonry to destroy the Christian faith."
So, as you can see, the infiltration of Masonry by Judaists, is not
something which has happened just recently. The professed aims of the
UNIVERSAL ISRAELITE ALLIANCE, founded in 1860, with its
headquarters in Paris, runs parallel to the professed aims of Freemasonry
and its founder, the Jew Adolf Cremeieux. For years he was the Grand
Master of the Supreme Council of the Ancient Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry. (For a list of the governing committees of this Jewish
Alliance, see THE JEWISH WHO's WHO, published in New York City)
In France, the Jews were refranchised in 1790, under the influence of the
Jacobins, who were the most AGGRESSIVE AND MILITANT OF THE
ANTI-CHRIST FORCES which plagued France at this time. Since then,
with the possible exception of the early Napoleonic era, Masonic Jews and
Masonic societies have dominated the public and political life of France.
Today, Christian Countries such as Canada,

Page 150
Germany, England, the United States, Australia, Sweden, Norway, etc.,
have fallen under an almost complete Judeo-Masonic yoke.
While most Masons will aggressively deny this, the anti-Christian
character of Freemasonry is kept in the dark, and the inner circles of the
Lodge are defended with fanaticism.
To give you an example, the following is part of a speech, delivered Sept.
20, 1902, by Senator Gelpech, President of the French Grand Orient:
"The triumph of the Galilean (Christ) has lasted for many
centuries, but now he dies in turn. The mysterious voice
announcing the death of the impostor god (Jesus), who
promised an era of justice and peace to them who believed
him. The illusion has lasted for a long time. The
mendacious (false) god is now disappearing in his turn.
Brother Masons, we rejoice to state that we are not without
our share in the overthrow of this false prophet. The Roman
Church, founded on this Galilean myth, began to decay
rapidly in the day in which the Masonic Association was
established." (UNQ).

--- Sayfa 138 ---
There are many other such anti-Christ statements which have come from
the lips of the leader's of Freemasonry. (See Albert Pike's MORALS AND
DOGMA). On pg. 582 of this 861 page book (plus a 218 page annex), Pike
says:
"Man was created pure; and God gave him truth, as he gave
him light. He has lost the truth and found error... The soul
that is impure and sinful, and defiled with earthly stains,
cannot again unite with God, until, by long trials and many
purifications, it is finally delivered from the old calamity
and Light overcomes Darkness and dethrones it, in the
soul."
This is Oriental Mysticism, chapter and verse. But what does the Bible say
about this? In Romans 6:23, we read; "For the wages of sin (disobedience
of God's law, 1 John 3:4) is death; but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord." And in Ephesians 2:8
- "For by grace (the unmerited favor of God) are ye saved through faith;
and that not of itself; it is a gift of God, not of works, lest any man should
boast." Men and women do

Page 151
not obtain personal salvation through "long trials and many purifications,"
as Pike avers.
On pg. 625, Pike again states:
"The Kabalistic doctrine has long been the religion of the
Sage and Savant (eminent scholar); because like
Freemasonry, it incessantly tends towards spiritual
perfection, and the fusing of the creeds (religions) and
nationalities of mankind." (Here he is referring to
"miscegenation," the sexual union between different races,
which is forbidden by God's command).
Page 643:
"A man who has a higher concept of God than those about
him, is very likely to be called an atheist by men who are
really far less believers in god than he. These Christians,
who say heathen idols are not gods, were accounted atheists
by the people, who accordingly put them to death. Jesus
Christ was crucified as an unbelieving blasphemer, by the
Jews.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
"There is a formal atheism, which is a denial of God in
terms, but not in reality ... this absolute denial of God is
only formal and not real."
On pg. 718 Pike states:
"No dispensations of God's providence, no suffering or
bereavement, is a messenger of wrath: none of its
circumstances are indications of God's anger." (UNQ).
I wonder which Bible Pike read, for in Psalm 7:11, it is clearly written -
"God judgeth the righteous and God is ANGRY with the wicked every
day.', (Emphasis mine).
Psalm 76:7 - "Thou, even Thou (God) art to be FEARED: and who can
stand in Thy sight when Thou art ANGRY?"
Isaiah 1:4 - "...they (Israel) have forsaken the LORD, they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel into ANGER..."
Deut. 13:17 - "...that the LORD may turn from the FIERCENESS OF HIS
ANGER and shew mercy, and have compassion upon thee..."

Page 152
Dent 29:24 - "...wherefore hath the LORD done this unto this land?
(destroyed it) what meaneth the HEAT OF THIS GREAT ANGER?"
1 Kings 16:2 - (Spoken to King Jehu of Israel): "...Thou hast made my
people Israel to sin, to provoke me to ANGER with their sins."
Isaiah 12:1 -"...Lord, I will praise Thee: Thou wast ANGRY with me,
Thine ANGER is turned away and Thou comfortest me."
Jeremiah 36:7 - "...For great is the ANGER AND FURY that the LORD
hath pronounced against this people."
In Deuteronomy 28:1-14, we read where God will bless Israel (not the
Jews), if they will obey Him, but in verses 15-68, He lists the curses
which will deliberately disobey.
In the New Testament we read, "For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and  unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness" (yes, even Masons!) (Romans 1:18).

--- Sayfa 140 ---
Ephesians 5:6 - "Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of
these things cometh the WRATH of God upon the children of disobedience.
"
1 Thessalonians 2:16 - "...For the WRATH of God is come upon them to
the uttermost."
Revelation 6:17 - "For the great day of His (God's) wrath is come."
Revelation 14:10 - "The same shall drink of the WRATH of God upon the
earth."
Revelation 16:1 - "...pour out the vials of the WRATH of God upon the
earth."
Revelation 19:15 - "...He (Jesus Christ) treadeth the winepress of the
FIERCENESS AND WRATH OF ALMIGHTY GOD."
Page 153
These are only a few of the many Scriptures relating to God's ANGER and
His WRATH against evil doers in the New Testament. Who are you going
to believe? The "guru" of Freemasonry who says that "God is incapable of
anger," or the Word which says He is not only capable of it, but will
exercise it against those who refuse to bow the knee to Him!
The immediate aim of the practical policy of Freemasonry is to make its
"naturalistic principles" effective in the lives of men everywhere; and first
of all, to enforce them in public life.
The Political and Social Program of Freemasonry, includes:
1.- The removal of Christianity from all departments of
government and from all public institutions. (The policy of
removing Christian symbols, such as Christmas creches,
Easter signs of Christian significance, are carried out
mainly through the Jewish Masons in the AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION). To remove all religious
emblems from legislative assemblies, courts of justice,
public hospitals, schools, universities, and colleges, etc.,
even though this nation has been declared by the Supreme
Court, to be a Christian nation.
2.- The secularization of marriage and making an easiness
of divorce. These are also principles of Communism.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
3.- The establishment of a State system of education which
will avoid all Christian influence and will be based on the
religion of "secular humanism."
4.- Complete freedom for worship for everyone, including
Satanists, and,
5.- Unrestrained liberty of the press, even to promoting
anti-Christian doctrines and principles subversive to
Christian and American standards. Similar freedom is to be
granted on stage, television and movies. To promote public

Page 154
activities such as betting, gambling, consumption of
alcohol, use of drugs, etc.
This Masonic program favors a "democratic" form of government, with
indiscriminate universal suffrage and the centralization of bureaucratic
power. (In other words, what we are speaking of is a "socialist
dictatorship," with them in control.) It opposes Christian patriotism, the
idea of a strong Christian family, and finally seeks to organize society into
classes which are bound together with common interests. It's overall
policy is towards commercialism, a false internationalism, a lack of
individualism, and Socialist slavery in the end.
One of the worst features of the present day Lodge is the tyranny of the
moneyed interests which control its top echelons. These men, working
hand-in-glove with the International Jewish Bankers, dominate high
finance and exercise control over the credit of the nation in every phase of
our national life. The number of these elite, who control the nation from
behind the secrecy of the Lodge, is small indeed, but extremely powerful
due to the "power of the purse." For it has long been known that he who
controls the economics of a country, controls its politics. That is what
Amsel Rothschild, many years ago, was able to say with truth: "Give me
control of the economics of a country; and I care not who makes her
laws."
Because of this evil trend, we have not had an American government in
Washington in over fifty years, no matter whether Republicans or
Democrats have been in power. The real power behind the throne has been
the Internationalists, who adhere to the principles of Judaism and

--- Sayfa 142 ---
Freemasonry. (For further information on this, send for my book THE
GREAT CONSPIRACY,)
This is one reason we see little change in foreign or domestic policy, when
there is a change of Administration. They speak completely different, but
are controlled from

Page 155
the same source. This is one reason they fight so fiercely against the rise
of a Third Party, which might "throw a monkey wrench" into their process
of control.
At the present time, the foreign policy of America is under. the control of
Jewish and Masonic interests, personified in the little German Jew, Henry
Kissinger, who during World War II as a Master Sergeant in the American
Army in Germany, was a "double-agent" for the Communists, and who
still embraces their aims. This is the same cartel which control how
Americans dress; what they read; what they see and hear on radio, TV,
and in the movies. It determines what businesses will succeed and which
will go bankrupt. Through their control of a nation's economics they have
the power to destroy anyone who stands in their way of the One-World
Zionist-Communist-Masonic government, which has been their ultimate
goal from the very beginning.
The members of this financial ring, for over fifty years, have been
identified in large part with Jewish-Masonic leadership.
When the great Christian Industrialist Henry Ford, Sr., kicked over
the traces in the early 1920's and began to expose the Jewish-Masonic
conspiracy, they set out by any means at hand, no matter how dirty or
underhanded, to destroy him. After several attempts at assassination failed,
they finally put so much pressure on him and his family, that he
apologized to the Zionist faction he had fought so valiantly for so many
years. Today, through the influences of the Ford Foundation, which went
into the enemy camp on the death of the "grand old man," we find them
building automobiles for the enemy, in a Ford plant in Russia.
The spread of "rationalism," "Humanism," and now the "New Age
Movement," all of them virulently anti-Christian, have been successful
mainly because of Jewish and Masonic efforts and cooperation.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
Page 156
19 - JEWISH AND MASONIC CONTROL
OF THE MEDIA!
It would take a full sized book to discuss in full, the Jewish and Masonic
control over the media of the nations of Christendom. Whenever this
control is brought to the attention of the American people, especially
Christians, great cries of anguish go up from the enemy camp, and
especially loud and plaintive is the cry of "anti-Semitism." While they
love to control what the American people hear and see, they do not like to
have this control discussed by the "bourgeoisie," and they are especially
violent against anyone who exposes this control.
Today, in 1990, the great capitalistic presses of the United States,
England, Canada, Germany, and France -presses which are referred to as
"the Free Press," are almost 100% under the control of the great Jewish-
Masonic financiers.
Let's look at some facts which cannot be disputed. In 1982, at least 909
major daily newspapers in the United States, with a daily readership of
some 49-million, were Jewish owned and/or controlled. The majority of
Jews who controlled these newspapers were high ranking Masons. These
included the following:
WALL STREET JOURNAL - 1,406,192 - Warren Henry
Philip, (Jew) President.
LOS ANGELES TIMES - 1,000,866 - Simon Ramo (Jew)
Director.
NEW YORK TIMES - 906,498 - Arthur Ochs Sulzburger,
(Jew) President.
CHICAGO TRIBUNE - 750,707 - Edward Engle, (Jew)
V.P.
DETROIT NEWS - 626,801 - B. Gingold (Jew) V.P.
CHICAGO SUN-TIMES - 554,334 - Howard Seitz, (Jew)
Dir.

Page 157

--- Sayfa 144 ---
DETROIT FREE PRESS - 623,846 - John Livingston
Weinberg (Jew) ,Dir.
WASHINGTON POST - 534,400 - Katherine Myer Graham
(Jew), Board Chairman.
In addition, the vast majority of daily newspapers with
distribution between 250,000 and 500,000, are Jewish
owned and/or controlled. These include the SAN
FRANCISCO CHRONICLE; MIAMI HERALD; ATLANTA
JOURNAL; INDIANAPOLIS STAR; BOSTON GLOBE;
KANSAS CITY TIMES ST. LOUIS GLOBE-DEMOCRAT
and the OMAHA WORLD HERALD.
Over 47 major weekly magazines, with an estimated
readership over 78-million, are Jewish owned and/or
controlled. These include:
TV GUIDE - 19,168,096 - Walter Annenberg (Jew),
President.
McCALL'S MAGAZINE - 6,801,287 - Robert Stein (Jew),
Editor.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING - 5,250,597 - Harrison Aaron
Mitnich (Jew), Treasurer.
TIME MAGAZINE - 4,425,270 - Arthur Heiskell (Jew),
Chairman of the Board.
SPORTS ILLUSTRATED - 2,267,547 - Katherine M.
Graham (Jew), Board Chairman.
U.S. NEWS & WORLD REP. 2,036,140 - Lester Tanzer
(Jew), Ed.

All of the major TV networks are controlled by
this Jewish-Masonic cabal:
ABC Network - Leonard Goldenson (Jew), Chairman.
CBS Network - William Paley (Jew), Chairman.
NBC Network - Robert Sarnoff (Jew), Chairman.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
Metro-Media Network - Herbert Klein (Jew), V.P. &
Director.
Do you wonder now, why there is so much pro-Zionist slant in our news.
(For more details, send for my booklet, SATAN'S KIDS,).

Page 158
Even many privately owned newspapers, which are not Jewish owned,
have a great deal of control exerted over them because Jews and Masons
control the nations advertising, which is necessary for a newspaper or
magazine to be successful.
The great world news agencies such as United Press and Associated Press
are Jewish controlled, as are Reuter and Wolff in England and Germany.
This is one of the major reasons that the Christian Patriotic Movement in
Canada and the United States will never receive fair coverage. It is the
nature of the Jewish-Masonic beast to "lie."
In his book L'ANTISEMITISAE, Jewish apologist Bernard Lazare says:
"The Jew is not content to dechristianize, he Judaizes; he
destroys Christian beliefs; he provokes religious
indifference, but he also imposes on those whose faith he
destroys, his own concept of the world, of morality, and of
human life; he labors at the age-old task - the destruction of
the religion of Christ."
This was not meant as an expose, but was a boast regarding Jewish power.
The whole Socialist World Movement, from its beginning, was a Jewish-
Masonic operation. It has only been within the last hundred years, that the
objective of a world controlled state, controlled by Jewish-Masonic power
using gold and international money power as its principle instrument of
control, has come to the forefront,
In spite of its claims to the contrary, International Freemasonry has proven
itself to be essentially materialistic, naturalistic and selfish. The aims of
Freemasonry must always be placed first in the life of a member, before
that of God, country, or family.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
As far back as 1917, the objective of World Masonry has been openly
declared by its leaders. At a conference

Page 159
of Masonic leaders from the Allied Powers (France, England, Italy, etc.),
held in Paris, January 14, 15, 1917, it was decided to convene a Congress
of Freemasons in June 1918. This would include Masonic leaders from all
the Allied and Neutral Powers. This Congress was for the primary purpose
of making the following declaration:
"To prepare the way for the United States of Europe; to set
up a supra-national (above all nations) authority, whose
purpose would be to settle disputes between nations.
Freemasons were to be the propaganda agents of this
venture, which it was said would bring universal peace and
happiness to mankind, viz., this was to be THE LEAGUE
OF NATIONS."1
In the Protestant churches of the early 20th Century the nature of
Freemasonry was clearly understood and openly condemned. At a
conference of English Methodist ministers, held at Bradford, England,
June 22, 1927, the following resolution was passed: "Freemasonry in its
ritual and official language is of a theistic nature... The distinctive faith of
Christianity and the Christian message of salvation through faith in Jesus
Christ is wholly incompatible with the claims put forth by Freemasonry in
writing and speech."
This Methodist Conference recommended that Methodist ministers have
nothing to do with Freemasonry. During recent months, the Protestant
clergy of England, have condemned Freemasonry as being anti-Christian.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
Notes:-
1. Taken from L'Alpine., May 31, 1917. This was the
official organ of the Masonic Lodge in Switzerland.

Page 160
20 - THE ETHICS OF FREEMASONRY
The foundation of Masonic morality or ethics, is not founded on the
religion of Jesus Christ, the 'faith once delivered unto the saints," (Jude
3). It is founded on the false, man-made religion of Freemasonry, which is
"Secular Humanism.
Masonic ethics define the duty of a Mason to his "fellow Masons," not to
mankind as a whole. In this they follow the example of the Jews, whose
code of ethics concerns only the Jews, not the "goyim animals" they rub
shoulders with.
In Freemasonry, the ultimate standard of what is right and wrong, is
wrapped up in what is good for Masonry, not in what the Bible says about
it. They do not follow the Law of God, as given to Israel on Mt. Sinai,
universally known as the TEN COMMANDMENTS. They follow what
Masons call "the law of nature and nature's god." This, they teach, is the

--- Sayfa 148 ---
operation of the Divine nature in man, as discerned by human reason and
experience. The Mason is not taught the Scriptural truth, that the "heart
Jewan is desperately wicked and deceitful above all things" (Jer. 17:12);
instead they are taught that through the "innate goodness" of man, he can
become like God. The moral aspects of the "jaw of nature," cannot be
found in Scripture, but in the "lectures, obligatory oaths, and geometrical
figures and terms of Freemasonry."
These moral obligations are veiled to the lower ranks of the Lodge, under
symbolism known only to the higher initiates.
The Ten Commandments, as explained by Jesus Christ, are rejected and
repudiated by Freemasonry, though their retention of what they call
"moral law." The law given to

Page 161
Israel on Mt. Sinai, is considered to be "too narrow" for the higher
intelligentsia of the Lodge to accept. So they substitute the GREAT
ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE, for GOD ALMIGHTY, while they
substitute their "natural law," for the "immutable (unchangeable) law of
God,"
In MACKEY'S JURISPRUDENCE, p.205, Mackey states:
"The Ten Commandments are not obligatory upon a Mason
as a Mason, because the institution is tolerant and
cosmopolite (a citizen of the world), and cannot require its
members to give their adhesion to any religious dogmas or
precepts, excepting those which express belief in God and
the immortality of the soul."
Masonic law, had its roots in "Deism." It was "deism" which transformed
the Masonic guilds in Europe from an operative into a speculative
fraternity. The Masonic Lodges, under the influence of the Jewish
Humanist-Intelligentsia Movement, adopted "natural law" as its moral
law. It is a law which appeals to the carnal nature of man, because there is
no Superior Being to whom one is responsible. In reality, in Freemasonry,
as in Judaism, man becomes his own god.
Findel, a high ranking Mason said:

--- Sayfa 149 ---
"The decisive agent in accomplishing the transformation of
Masonry was that intellectual movement under the name of
'deism,' which boldly rejected all revelation and religious
dogma, under the banner of 'Reason,' and 'Higher
Criticism!'"1
Early Masonic leaders such Lord Herbert Hobbes, Lord Bolingbroke, Dr.
Tindal, David Hume and others, taught that the indulgence of lust and
anger, self-love, ambition, lust for power, could all be gratified. In other
words, it was to become man's chief duty to gratify all. his appetites and
inclinations. The end result can be seen in the moral debacle which has
overtaken the world and i thee plaintive

Notes:-
1. Frost, Secret Societies of the European Revolution, Vol.
1, p.25

Page 162
cry of American youth: "We are only trying to do our own thing!"
Of course, it does not take a brilliant mind to see that this teaching is
diametrically opposed to Scripture, which teaches us to "Flee fornication
... he that committeth fornication, sinneth against his own body" (1 Cor.
6:18). And: "Let us not sin (break God's law, see 1 John 3:4) therefore
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey the lusts thereof" (Gal.
6:12). Also: "Flee also youthful lusts (greed for material and fleshly
things): but follow righteousness, faith, love, peace, with them that call on
the Lord from a pure heart" (2 Tim. 2:22).
Masonry does not believe in, or teach this Scriptural restraint of natural
desires. Their motto is: "If it makes you feel good; do it!"
Both the Jewish atheist Voltaire and Helvetius who were early French
Deists and Freemasons, advocated unlimited gratification of carnal
appetites. Rosseau made men's feelings the basic for Masonic standards.2
Freemasonry can never be brought into accord with the teachings of Jesus
Christ, for He said without equivocation:

--- Sayfa 150 ---
"Whoso putteth away (divorces) his wife, and marries another, committeth
adultery," (Luke 16:18). That's a harsh, uncompromising statement which
few Masons will accept.
It was Christ who also said: "...whosoever looketh on a woman to lust
after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart, " (Matt.
5:28). This statement was made famous by then President Jimmy Carter, a
Mason, when he admitted freely, and with the idea that it was a joke, "that
he had lusted after many women in his heart." The media seemed to think
this was "funny."

Notes:-
2. See Home's Introduction to the Scriptures, Vol. 1, p.31.

Page 163
The ritual of Freemasonry was based on incestuous acts, the deceptions
and frauds of Zeus, which he practiced on his mother Demeter, and upon
his daughter. These acts are re-enacted before the initiate to impress him
with the moral teachings of the "mysteries."
The "natural law," once practiced by mankind, before the codified law was
given at Mt. Sinai, had become obscured by men's sins; it was no longer a
clear guide to human behavior. The idea of "Let your conscience be your
guide," has never proved workable, because natural man is sinful. The
Bible says that even the very imagination of his heart are "only evil
continually. "(Gen. 6:5).
To the savage in the heartlands of Africa, who has never heard of God's
law concerning murder, he still knows instinctively that murder is wrong.
But his conscience allows him to go against this natural law and not only
kill his enemy, but relish eating him.
Masonic teachings negate the Christian viewpoint concerning family ties
and Christian standards of marriage. Masonry teaches that a woman who
yields to the impulses of her nature, is absolved from all shame and that a
Freemason should renounce the "narrow minded standards" set up for the
Christian by the Scripture.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
You get a much better understanding of Freemasonry, when you look at
the oaths and covenants which make a man a Mason. They are the central
ceremony of his initiation into the "brotherhood." They are his formal
declaration of loyalty to the Masonic religion. When the initiate kneels at
the Masonic alter, and places one hand under the Bible and the other on
the "compass and square" which rests on the book, he evokes the deity to
help him in his purpose. Only, unfortunately, this deity is not the God of
Christianity.
Throughout the entire ceremony there is an outward semblance of great
loyalty towards the Bible and God. But

Page 164
the question we must ask is this? What is the meaning of all this
pageantry? An honest look at the rituals of Freemasonry will show you
that this ceremony is symbolic and allegorical (the description of one
thing, under another name), and does not mean what it so solemnly
expresses.
The Bible, the Square and Compass, the Alter, are all Masonic symbols
which stand for other things. They are substitutes, if you will, for the real
objects venerated by Freemasonry. They have a secret, hidden meaning
which very probably the initiate does not understand, since its meaning is
known only to those of higher rank. The real Masonic moral ideas are
concealed in the allegorical acts of the candidate.
A study of Freemasonry will show that the Masonic candidate is not
bound by his solemn oath, but by the meaning of the symbolism behind
them. It is not reverence for the Bible, that he shows, as he takes his oath
with one hand under the Book, but reverence to what the Bible symbolizes
to the Mason and what the Bible on the Masonic altar really means to him.
He does not swear on the "square and compass," but on what they
symbolically stand for. It is not the name of the Lord God Jehovah, which
he invokes, but what the term 'God' means to the Mason.
When a Mason uses the term "In the name of God," it means by the
authority of the god of Freemasonry, the GREAT ARCHITECT OF THE
UNIVERSE, who is not the Christian God by any stretch of the
imagination. The candidate is bound to faithfulness by the horrible oaths
he takes, which show his condemnation if he is unfaithful. These are not
the moral ethics one expects to find in Christianity. They contradict the
Scripture found in Romans 8:1, which tell the Christian: "There is

--- Sayfa 152 ---
therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit."

Page 165
21 - TRUTH FROM THE MASONIC
STANDPOINT!
The moral law makes it the duty of every person to speak the truth. We are
told in Proverbs 13:5 - "a righteous man hateth lying." In Proverbs 12:22
- "Lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord." (Some thing that makes
Him want to "throw up.") The moral law forbids lying, deceit and
"dissembling" (disguising things), concealing them under false pretenses
whether by words or actions. No class of men are exempt from this
obligation.
But in Masonry, as in Judaism, their followers do not follow the same law
as that laid down for Christians. As a result, a Mason is allowed to lie, if it
will help a fellow
Mason; just as a Jew is allowed to lie in order to cheat a hated "goyim."
The very fact that Freemasonry is so secret, fosters the desire to deceive
others. The whole international organization is based on a lie, teaches it,
and encourages its disciples to lie also. The entire system of Masonic rites,
lectures and symbolism is for the purpose of deceiving others as to their
true meaning.
The candidate solemnly swears that he will "forever conceal and never
reveal the (false) secrets of "Masonry." He swears never to reveal the
secrets of a brother Mason which are entrusted to him, even though by this
act, he may become implicated in a crime. In the case of murder or
treason, he may act at his discretion, but in the higher degrees, even
murder and treason are not revealed.
Logically, this means, that in order to be a Mason, and keep your promise
to Masonry, you must be willing to lie, deceive and dissemble if it is for
the good of Masonry.
Sickle says: "Temperance is enjoined, not for its own sake, but for the
reason that when a Mason is intoxicated, he might reveal unwittingly, the
secrets of Masonry."

--- Sayfa 153 ---
Page 166
The Masonic fraternity teaches and encourages its members to perjure
themselves as to their civil oaths, if this becomes necessary for the honor
and protection of the Lodge.
The oath of a Mason takes precedence over everything else in his life. It
teaches him that violations of this oath as a witness or as a citizen, is not
perjury, as long as it is for the good of the Lodge. So just as a Jew may lie,
to convict a Gentile, so a Mason may lie 'with impunity, to protect another
Mason or his Lodge. The moral standards of Judaism and Freemasonry are
so similar, because they come from the same un-Godly source.
One of the best examples I can think of' to show how Jews will lie to
convict Christians, can be seen in the recent Canadian trial of Ernst
Zundel, a Canadian of German descent, who has been on trial in Canadian
courts, under their infamous "hate law." They have accused Zundel of
deliberately lying, when he wrote a booklet questioning whether 6-million
Jews really died in Germany during World War II.
Many Jewish witnesses brought by the prosecution, who were supposed to
be victims of German concentration camps, so obviously lied, that their
stories could only be called absurd. For instance, a Polish Jew, who was an
atheist, testified for the defense of Mr. Zundel. He told the court that if the
Jewish witnesses who were testifying against Zundel, were required to
take the oath before a Jewish Rabbi, rather than a "Gentile" judge, every
one would be required to change their story. But because their oath had
been taken before a non-Jew judge, they were free to lie. This is the plain
teaching of the TALMUD. In Volume BABA KAMA (1 13a) we read:
'Jews must always try and deceive Christians." In Volume ZOHAR
(I,106a) it says: 'A Jew may lie and perjure himself to condemn a
Christian." Again in Volume BABA KAMA (I 13a) it says: "a Jew may
lie in court to condemn a Christian."

Page 167
This is the same type of deception practiced by Freemasonry. If a Mason
is required to testify in court, and his testimony conflicts with his duty as a
Mason, his MASONIC DUTY MUST ALWAYS COME FIRST! When
we see the truth of this, then we need to ask a very important quest- ion:
"How can we trust any Jewish or Freemasonic judge or lawyer, to tell the
truth, even when they are under oath?"

--- Sayfa 154 ---
The statements of Freemasonry pertaining to the "lambskin apron;" the
"middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple; of "Hiram Abiff;" of the
"pillars" and a host of other things, are all falsehoods, palmed off on the
unsuspecting initiate. Freemasonry, just as Judaism, is based on a
foundation of lies."
Freemasonry binds its members to be true to each other, even while it lies
to them in its innermost secrets. The exotic language it employs is for the
purpose of deception, but the candidate does not know this, and so is
deceived.
Masons say that to expose the secrets of Masonry, is perjury, while at the
same time say that these exposures are not Masonic secrets. It is similar to
the Zionists, who rage and scream against the PROTOCOLS OF THE
LEARNED ELDERS OF ZION, while they follow them like a "blueprint."
Something seems to be lacking, when an organization constantly
contradicts itself. If from the Masonic viewpoint, those who secede from
and expose the Masonic ritual are perjurers, then what they publish about
Masonry must of necessity be fact.
Much of what you have read in this book, comes from men who have held
high positions in Freemasonry. They have no bone to pick with their
fellow Masons, other than the deception which is being perpetrated on
millions of men, by their leaders. My heart goes out to the millions of men
in the Blue Lodge, who have been completely

Page 168
"hoodwinked" by the hierarchy of Freemasonry, so that "they believe
Masonic lies."
Hectethorn, in his (Vol. 2:17) says: "Since the objects that modern
Masonry professes to pursue, are brotherly love, relief and truth, surely the
pursuits of these objects cannot need secret rites, traditions and
ceremonies." In (Vol. 2:18), he goes on to say: "The true regeneration of
mankind needs neither secret signs nor passwords to recognize each other.
True liberty consists in publicity." In (Vol. 2:109), he states: "Masons
have been very indignant with me for making these statements, but honest
members of the craft know, and occasionally admit, that I am right." In
(Vol. 2:106): "The more I study Freemasonry, the more I am repelled by
its pretenses. Are not all its pretenses groundless? Is not its present
existence a delusion and the imposition of childish oaths a farce?"

--- Sayfa 155 ---
This is what can be termed the "morality of language." To use names and
words which do not not convey their true meaning, is dishonest in itself. It
is the same underhanded essence we see used by the KGB, the CIA, and
the Israeli MOSSAD in international intrigue.
It is because of this trickery, that Freemasons and Jews have been able to
insinuate themselves into, and practically control, the Lawyers Guild of
this country. They control the laws of America, through their control in
Congress, on the President's Cabinet, as members of the Supreme Court.
In other words, what I am trying to tell you, is that Canada and the United
States are controlled by Jews and Freemasons, both working for the same
purpose, to cause us to give up our sovereignty, and merge our countries
into a One-World system, controlled by Jews and Freemasons. These men,
have an absolute hatred for those in America and Canada who can
honestly be termed as "Christian Patriots,', and are doing everything in
their power to destroy them.

Page 169
I can give one example with which I am familiar. A few years ago, a man I
knew rather well, shot and killed a State trooper, after he had received
merciless harassment at the hands of the police, not because of criminal
activities, but because he was speaking up against government injustices
and had to be silenced. When the local sheriff investigated the incident, he
contacted the man's wife and said: "Mrs. ____ before I begin this
investigation, there is something which is absolutely essential that I know.
Was your husband a Mason?" Why do you suppose he would ask a
question such as this, unless if this man had been a Mason, he might have
been spared much of the grief that the law brought on him and his family.
This is not an isolated incident by any means!
Masons are urged by their superiors, to perjurer themselves in court in
order to protect their fellow Masons. It is all part of the oath they take,
when they join.
Many Masons, and most non-Masons, do not realize that Masonry uses a
special language to convey Masonic values. It often calls things by their
opposites. It substitutes Masonic legends for facts, and palms them off as
being true historical events. It expresses its pagan ideals and legendary
lore in Scriptural terminology in order to fool the unsuspecting public as
well as its own members.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
It calls heathen deities by the Biblical name of God, and heathen rites by
their Christian phrases. It couches its Masonic doctrine in the terms of
Christian theology. This deception in itself' should turn honest men against
it.
Its entire system is based on pretense, delusion and fraud. It hides its
pagan moral and religious ideas under the veil of artful speech, emblems
and types. It inculcates in its members moral and religious ideals which
are completely contrary to the Christian viewpoint and which are actually
viciously immoral. It enjoins practices, which

Page 170
from a Scriptural standpoint are damnable. It makes the crime, the vice,
and the sin inherent in Freemasonry, not in the act of being exposed.
What can be more immoral than the pretense that membership in this
international order, gives one the license to live his life as a lie? From the
viewpoint of Biblical Christian ethics, Freemasonry must be looked on as
a stupendous organized falsehood.
Over against the undisputed facts of its falsehood, the Lodge solemnly
professes to be guided solely by truth, even as it admits that it lies to its
disciples.
When a charge of deception is brought against the Lodge, its defenders
often reply: "Our statements cannot be understood by the profane (those
outside the Lodge); there is a secret meaning conveyed by our expressions
that only the craftsmen can discern." So it attempts to evade the charges of
falsehood, by hiding under an esoteric smoke screen.
One of the greatest prophets of Freemasonry, a man named Pythagoras,
instituted an esoteric system of outright deceit and taught his disciples that
"it was not only lawful, but praiseworthy to deceive, and use the expedient
lie to further the cause of truth and piety." 1
The sacred books of Buddha, a religion which is welcomed in
Freemasonry, defines falsehood as: "A statement consists of a lie when
discovered by the person to whom it is told as being untrue." In other
words, it is not a falsehood, as long as this fact is not discovered.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
So statements made by the hierarchy of Masonry are to be considered true,
until someone discovers they are lies. This idea keeps the lower degree
Mason from prying into the esoteric secrets off the higher degrees.

Notes:-
1. See Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, Vol. 1, p. 198

Page 171
Most decent people see the need of honesty in dealing with others. In the
Christian life, it is an absolute necessity and an important part of his
religion. But to the Jew and the Mason, it becomes a means of deceiving
and cheating those who disagree with them. In the Jew, this pertains
mainly to the "goyim, non-Jew animal he calls a Gentile."
The well-known Jewish businessman and author, Samuel Roth, in his
startling book, JEWS MUST LIVE (Secrets of Sharp Jewish Business
Practices Revealed), Chap. VI, p.63, says:
"It is my honest belief that nothing the Jew does is
subversive to America's best interests. Like his creature
JEHOVAH, a teacher he never tires of imitating, the Jew is
forever engaged in the fascinating pursuit of creating
everything he needs out of nothing. He is actually a parasite
who could not exist without a Gentile host on which to
feed."
The present Jewish State of the Israeli in Palestine is an excellent example
of this. According to Israeli leaders, their country would collapse within
six months, if it were not for the largesse of the American people,
especially its "brainwashed" Judeo-Christian population.
The Jew is taught from youth that it is ethical to "skin the goyim; to cheat
him and steal from him." After all, he is told, only Jews are human and the
world belongs to them.
Every year on the Day of Atonement (a day which is now being celebrated
in many Christian churches with the ringing of their church bells), Jews
around the world gather to recite the KOL NIDRE. In English this means

--- Sayfa 158 ---
'All Vows Prayer." It is recited three times in the Jewish synagogue with
the congregation standing, while the Rabbis chant from the altar.
Immediately following the recital of this Vow, the religious ceremonies of
the Day of Atonement begin. This is the holiest "holy day" of the Jewish
year and is celebrated by Jews, worldwide. Even liberal and atheistic Jews,
who rarely if ever attend the synagogue services, make it a point to attend
on this day. Why is this

Page 172
KOL NIDRE OATH so important to Jews, worldwide? Look at the
translation and see. Here is the official English translation of the KOL
NIDRE:
"All vows, obligations, oaths, anathemas, whether called 'kona' or 'konas,'
or by any other name which we may vow, or swear, or pledge, or whereby
we may be bound from this DAY OF ATONEMENT until the next, whose
happy coming we await, we do repent! May they be deemed absolved,
forgiven, annulled and void, and made of none effect. They shall not bind
us nor have any power over us. The vows shall not be reckoned as vows;
the obligations as obligations, nor the oaths as oaths."
By taking this oath, the Jew is absolved from any agreement he makes
under oath, even if it is taken in a court of law. He is not obliged by his
god, (who by the way, is not the God of Abraham, he claims to serve) to
keep his sworn word, especially to a "Gentile." None of his vows are
valid.
With this in mind, how can we expect a Jewish Congressman, who takes
this KOL NIDRE oath, to fulfill his sworn duty to protect the Constitution
of the United States from all enemies foreign and domestic?" How can we
expect a Jewish judge or lawyer to fulfill his sworn duty, when we know
his oath is no good? We cannot! Neither can we expect honesty from a
Mason, for they too are absolved from telling the truth, if it is to the
detriment of the Lodge.
Having shown the foundation of Freemasonry in Judaism, do you suppose
that some of the Jewish deceit used by Jews against "gentiles," may have
rubbed off on Masons? I think it is very possible. Notice this oath, taken
by the Master Mason (Rit. 149):
"I solemnly promise and swear that I will not cheat, wrong,
or defraud a Lodge of Masons, or a brother of this rank,
knowing them to be such, but will give them due and

--- Sayfa 159 ---
timely notice that they may ward off all approaching
danger."
This simply means that a Master Mason may not only cheat non-Masons
with impunity, but that he can also cheat Masons who are of a lower rank
than himself. All others

Page 173
are lawful prey to him. This is almost identical to the Jewish KOL NIDRE
and has the same effect.
When we look at the Ninth Commandment (see Exodus 20), which reads:
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor," and Number
Eight which says: "Thou shalt not steal!", it would appear that we are to so
fear and love God, that we would never defraud our fellowmen, whether
they are members of our Lodge or not. But a Master Mason, by reason of
his oath, may use any unfair, unscrupulous, fraudulent means to gain
advantage and wealth, so long as he does not hurt members of his own, or
higher ranks in Freemasonry. The sin is not in the sinning, in Masonry, but
in being caught and bringing disgrace to the Lodge!
22 - MASONRY'S IDEAS ON CHASTITY
The Seventh Commandment clearly states: "Thou shalt not commit
adultery!" There is no equivocation here, there is no way we who love
God can by-pass this with impunity. It means that if we fear and love God,
we will remain chaste and pure in our thoughts, words and deeds, each
man honoring his own wife, and that of his fellowman. Being a man, I
know that it is not always easy to avoid impure thoughts, but our Lord
taught that "adultery lies in the heart of men, rather than in the outward act
itself." Men are prone to look on the outward act, while God judges the
heart. The Christian system strives to purify the hearts and thoughts of
both men and women. There is no way a man or woman who loves God,
can escape the finality of this Commandment. But it is quite different in
the Masonic

Page 174
system. Instead of aiming at purifying the thoughts of a man's heart,
Masonry aims to legalize the sin of lust and find accommodation for the

--- Sayfa 160 ---
indulgence of the individual within the framework of the Lodge. No
wonder Freemasonry is so popular with so many men.
The essence of vice in the Masonic system is not in the indulgence itself,
but in failing to keep it concealed from the profane (non-member). As
long as the indulgence is concealed, to the Mason it is a virtue. It is a vice
only to the Christians, whom they claim are too stupid to realize all the fun
they are missing.
What makes things "vices" in the estimation of the Christian, is their
erroneous position on morals, according to Freemasonry. This makes the
ethics of Masonry irreconcilable with those of Christianity. This is why a
Christian, who professes to have turned his life over to the Lordship of
Jesus Christ, has no business being a Lodge member. (Now I realize I will
be stepping on a lot of toes by making this statement, since there are many
professing Christians in the Lodge. In fact many of the clergy of the
Southern Baptist Church are Masons. Once they see the inner workings of
the Lodge, they should know better. But whether they like it or not, this
does not change the truth).
Perhaps, it might be well for me to quote to these brethren, the words of
the Apostle Paul to the church at Galatia: 'Am I therefore become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth?" (Galatians 4:16).
To find the truth regarding Masonic ideas of chastity, we need to go to the
Masonic Covenant, since this in essence is what makes a Mason. There is
something in that Covenant which when taken, or entered into, changes a
man into a different "moral order," and marks him as guided by a system
of ethical principles and precepts which are not found in the Christian
system. The Mason becomes a "different order of man," bound by his
covenant to Freemasonry and a different system of ethics. He now has, in
the eyes of the Lodge, certain rights and liberties, which the Law of God
does not give him.

The Hidden Power
Behind Freemasonry
Part 8 of 8
By
Lt. Col. Gordon "Jack" Mohr,

--- Sayfa 161 ---
Page 175
The Masonic devotee enters into a new and unique religious and moral
realm, by having renounced the God of revelation, to covenant and make
the "generative principle," under the name of THE GREAT ARCHITECT
OF THE UNIVERSE, his god, and the "law of nature," his ethical
standard!
As we examine the Masonic teachings concerning chastity, we need to
look at the Master Mason's Oath relating to virtue (Rit. 149) - "I solemnly
promise and swear that I will not violate the chastity of a Master Mason's
wife, mother, sister or daughter, knowing her as such."
God's law says: "Thou shalt not commit adultery!" It speaks to all men and
women, married and single. It speaks to the Mason and it does not say:
"You may violate this law, as long as you do not violate it with a Master
Mason's females.
But this is a "narrow moral code" which the natural man does not like. It
was given by Almighty God for our protection. In Matthew 7:13, 14 we
read where two roads are open to mankind, one is broad and easy and
leads to destruction. The majority opt to follow this road. The Christian
way is narrow and difficult to follow," because it means we MUST control
our illicit desires. Therefore few people want to follow it, even though it
leads to "Eternal Life."
The Masonic teaching follows the "broad road to destruction," because
men would have it so. The Masonic oath insists on chastity within the rank
of Master Mason, but it hedges and "beats around the bush," as far as the
major question goes. It even allows him to have illicit

Page 176
relations with the females of a fellow Master Mason, as long as he does
not know they belong to him.
NOTICE:
1.- It forbids adultery with the chaste female members of
another Master Mason's family.
2.- Since even this prohibition is "too narrow" for Masonic
liberalism, a qualifying phrase is added: "knowing her to be
such." "Ignorance is bliss," according to the Masonic way

--- Sayfa 162 ---
of thinking and the Seventh Commandment should really
be interpreted to read: "Thou, a Master Mason, shall not
commit adultery with a female member of a Master
Mason's family, as long as you know she is chaste."
3.- Assuming the Master Mason respects his Covenant, is it
because of his respect for chastity or because the "holiness"
of Masonry demands it? To all these questions we must
give a resounding "NO!" answer.
The Master Mason respects the chastity of a female relative of his brother
Master Mason, because his oath tells him he must. Here again we see the
Jewish influence in Freemasonry, for in Judaism, according to the
TALMUD, a Jewish man may violate a Gentile woman, because she is
looked on as a "piece of fresh meat." This same spiritual authority
(TALMUD) gives him the right to violate a baby girl under the age of
three and to sodomize a boy under the age of nine. You don't have to go
very far in Freemasonry, to see the evil influence of Judaism in their
morals. In Masonry, as in Judaism, fear, love and trust in God has nothing
to do with their moral standards.
If there is virtue in obedience to a man-made covenant, it is the same
virtue and honor known among thieves and cut throats, when they swear
to be true to their fellows, for fear of the punishment which may befall
them, if they break their contract.

Page 177
This is the same kind of "virtue" King Herod showed in Matthew 14:6-
11, when for the sake of a stupid promise he made to a prostitute, and for
public appearance sake, he had John the Baptist executed.
Christians believe in obeying God's Law because it proves their fear of
His majesty, and their love for His mercy and love. Christ said: 'if ye love
me, keep my commandments." We show our love for Him, by the way we
obey Him (John 14:15). The Mason obeys the Masonic laws, even when
they conflict with those of God, because that is the nature of the "Masonic
beast." They view the Ten Commandments as another form of "moral
law," which is too narrow for them to keep.
23 - WHAT MASONRY PERMITS!
With this kind of obtuse (dull and insensitive) thinking, we find things
permitted within the Lodge which are strictly forbidden in the Christians

--- Sayfa 163 ---
life. Notice some of these practices and ask yourself whether they are
moral or not:
a. -Notice that the Oath of the Master Mason allows him to
commit adultery with any unchaste female related to a
fellow Mason, or with any other woman if he so desires.
b. - It permits him to conceal his adultery, if he does not
know the female concerned is related to a fellow Master
Mason. There is no evidence anywhere, that he is expected
to try and find out if this relationship exists.
c. - A Masonic Oath is not retroactive, so this feature
stimulates lower degrees to work into the higher degrees
where they have more protection while "doing their own
thing."

Page 178
d. - Their Oath permits the Master Mason to commit
adultery with any female who does not belong to the
restricted group.
e. - This Oath permits the Master Mason to be an adulterer
as long as he follows the restrictions laid down by his
order, or as long as he keeps his indiscretions secret.
f. - While this Masonic covenant seems to protect female
virtue, it actually undermines it. It makes the guilt for
adultery committed, the fault of the woman, rather than of
her Masonic seducer. In all cases where the Master Mason
does not know she is related to another Master Mason, or
when she is not, the Master Mason is considered innocent,
even if his act is an act of rape against her will. To him, she
is "nothing but a piece of meat," to be used anyway the
Mason desires.
What a travesty of decency and justice this is; what a contravention of
Christian morality. Yet it is considered the sacred right by many men, who
live under the protective screen of Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 164 ---
In all cases of immorality, not covered by his oath, the Mason is absolved
of guilt, since he is only following the dictates and inclination of his
"natural self," which is the deity he worships. Matthew 6:24 tells us:
"NO man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one and love
the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon."
(MAMMON is "materialism," "love of the flesh," "Naturalism.") A man
cannot be a Mason and still serve and love the true God!

Page 179
24 - WHAT DOES THE MASONIC
COVENANT ASSUME?
1. - It assumes that females in general have a high opinion
of Masonic honor and dignity. I believe this to be true. This
is one reason a Mason may be more successful in his
seduction of an unwary woman, than other men.
2. - It assumes that somehow or other, the Master Mason is
a sanctified (saintly, inviolable being), somehow or other
holy, and that he hallows anything he touches. In plain
terms, that a woman should feel honored to be seduced by a
Master Mason.
3. - It assumes that womanly chastity is a joke and that
women will gladly sacrifice their virtue and honor for the
privilege of being with a Master Mason. (It's no wonder,
that women who have studied Masonry, feel it is an insult
to womanhood, because it definitely is).
4. - It sets no restriction on the chastity and morality of the
Master Mason. He is free to debauch womanhood outside
of the restrictions of his Order and still consider himself to
be a good, moral man. It is a filthy "double standard" of
living. Anyone who understands the least bit about
Christian standards, should be able to see the evil in such a
system.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
Since the Ten Commandments do not apply to a Master Mason, he
becomes a "law unto himself," and this morality carries over into his
business and political dealings. (I would call your attention to the large
number of politicians, who have been Masons, whose shady deals have
walked the thin edge of treason, according to the Constitutional definition,
Article III, Sect. 3: "Treason shall consist only in levying war against them
(the United States); adhering to their enemies; giving them aid and
comfort." Any Fifth

Page 180
Grader should be able to understand the meaning of this. I dare you to
check out those Senators who voted to give away our canal in Panama and
see for yourself, how many were Masons I dare you to check and see how
many of those Congressmen who have voted to give Foreign Aid, to
countries which are our enemies, are Masons, Jews or both. If after you
have seen this and do not believe this is a reflection on their Masonic
training, then it is because you have deliberately closed your eyes to the
truth.
Could it be possible that this is one of the reasons that so many politicians
who claim to be Christian, are also Masons? They show very little of the
"Christian fruits" in their politics, which reeks of Masonic intrigue. The
old Duck Theory applies here I believe: "When you see something that
looks like a duck, waddles like a duck, has feathers like a duck, and runs
around with other ducks, chances are you are looking at a duck." So when
you see a political figure, who claims to be a Christian, yet he runs around
with an un-Christian crowd and votes for anti-Christ measures, you can
almost bet that he is a member of a Masonic Lodge, and very possibly a
very high ranking member.
When a man takes the oath of Freemasonry, he is required to step out of
obedience to Almighty God and give his loyalty to the Lodge. He then
places himself under a completely di Areent moral government, bound by
a different set of moral ethics. These are diametrically opposed to
Christianity.
Masonic writers boast: "It is the covenant that makes a Mason; and once a
Mason, always a Mason. Once you have taken the Masonic oath, you
cannot repudiate it."

--- Sayfa 166 ---
These remarks make it crystal clear that the Mason becomes a "different
order of man," governed by a different code, which sets him at variance
with the laws of

Page 181
God Almighty. Things which are "unlawful" to the "profane" (those
outside the Lodge), become lawful to the Lodge member, providing he
does his sinning in such a way that it does not bring disgrace to the Lodge
or his fellow Masons.
Masonry legalizes "lustful sinning" in every sphere, save the one where he
is limited in his wanton acts from violating a female member of a Master
Mason's family. (Even then, he has an excuse, if he does not know they
belong to a fellow Master Mason). This gives a man a lot of leeway in
which to fulfill his illicit desires.
If Masonry never changes, as its leaders proudly aver, then men can never
become better by joining it. If it allows its members to sin, by putting a
Masonic label of approval on sin, whether it is committed by a Master
Mason, one of the 33o, or a member of the Blue Lodge, it is still evil in the
sight of God and will earn the death penalty. "The wages of sin is death,"
(Romans 6:23). Sin, no matter whether it is committed by the "mighty" or
the "lowly," produces the bitter fruit of Sodom and Gomorrah, for
anything which encourages dishonesty, deception and unchastity is wrong
in the eyes of God. We have His Holy Word to confirm this!

Yet, unfortunately, in spite of the anti-Christ character of this immoral
system, we find thousands of good men who belong to it and defend it.
Many of these claim to be Christian. Can this be a measure of their
apostasy? 1
Timothy 4 says:
1 "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;
2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience
seared with a hot iron
7 But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise
thyself rather unto Godliness."

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Page 182
Because of these apostates, many of them Christian ministers who support
Freemasonry, we find ourselves in the "perilous times" predicted in 2
Timothy 3:1 - 5
1 "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall
come.
2 For men will be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy,
3 Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
4 Traitors, beady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more
than lovers of God;
5 Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof: from such turn away."
This is a pretty good "word description" of the Masonic Lodge, and
certainly of any Christian pastors who belongs to it. It is no wonder our
churches have lost their power, with these "wolves in sheep's clothing"
standing behind the pulpits of our churches. Can a true, "born from above"
Christian have fellowship with such a strange and immoral institution? I
think not! It doesn't make much sense!
In 1 John 2:23, we are given a very clear definition of an anti-Christ. It is
anyone who denies the Divinity of Jesus Christ; who denies Him as
Savior. This fits any man, whether he is Jew, a Mason, a Heathen, a
Baptist, or whatever. In 2 John 10, 11, we are told how Christians should
act towards these anti-Christs:
"If any come unto you and bring not this gospel (that Jesus
is the Son of God, the Savior of the world), receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God Speed; For he that
biddeth him God speed, becomes partakers of his evil
deeds."
According to Masonic tradition, the Mason is a builder, who is free to go
anywhere in pursuit of his avocation. To the Mason, this means he is free
from the moral and spiritual restraints organized society imposes on its
members; he is a "jaw unto himself," doing what makes him feel good,

--- Sayfa 168 ---
Page 83
25 - MASONRY'S RELATION TO
MARRIAGE
The Bible teaches that marriage is a union between man and woman for
life, when it is sanctified in the eyes of God. The very essence of Christian
marriage is in the consent of both parties, who join together before God
and publicly acknowledge their troth (faithfulness; loyalty) to each other.
This act, according to the Bible, makes them "one flesh." (See Gen. 2:23;
Matt. 19:5,6; Mark 10:8; 1 Cor. 6:16; Eph. 5:31). This covenant
between man and wife can only be broken by the unfaithfulness of one or
the other, or by death. The marriage bond may only be broken through the
"adultery" of one party or the other, never for incompatibility.'' No man
has the authority to break this marriage bond; no judge, no preacher.
The marriage ceremony is a covenant, which imposes on both parties,
certain mutual duties and invests both with certain inalienable, God-given
rights. These rights must be jealously guarded by both parties. By
becoming "one flesh," they have become something special in the eyes of
God. The mutual duty of husband and wife is to remain pure and chaste,
honoring and loving each other. Neither may lawfully (God's law) join in
covenants with others, which will infringe on these conjugal rights.
This Christian Covenant comes into immediate conflict with the Masonic
and Judaic Covenants, since both of these protect the man's right to
commit adultery. If either of these covenants are accepted in lieu of
Christianity, it will doom Christian marriage and the Christian family. Of
course, this is the purpose of both Masonry and Judaism.
The wife in a Christian marriage covenant has the inalienable right to
know the nature of any contract her husband

Page 184
may enter into with others, especially if this contract might weaken or
annul his duty to remain chaste and pure. There is a Divine law involved
here, which neither the man nor woman may evade with impunity. Their
agreement is a matter of written record and neither has the moral nor
spiritual right to overstep the bounds of this contract.
The husband is bound to respect the law of God and follow it, just as he
should expect his wife to do. There can be no such thing as a "double-

--- Sayfa 169 ---
standard" for either of them, as has been so common in both Masonry and
Judaism.
In the Masonic contract, the wife is not consulted on the matter of the
man's morals, neither by the Lodge, or by her husband. Even if she agrees
with him becoming a Mason, she knows nothing about the nature of the
covenant he has made with the Lodge and how it may effect her marriage.
To all intents and purposes, she has become a "chattel." The Masonic
Covenant supersedes any other covenant the Mason may make with God
or his fellowmen. He must subordinate everything, even his family, to his
Masonic belief.

26 - THE PENAL FEATURES OF
FREEMASONRY
When Freemasonry is traced back to its source, we discover three ideas
which are common to most oriental cults:
1. - The initiation process:
2 .- The Lodge secrets, and;
3. - The penal features dealing with punishment of
recalcitrant Lodge members.
From the very beginning of our search for truth, we will discover that the
character of Freemasonry and Christianity are diametrically opposed.

Page 185
Where Christianity wins followers by propagating the truth, taught by its
founder, Jesus Christ, Masonry aims to preserve and propagate its faith by
keeping secret. It does not rely on the power of its doctrines to do this,
since it does not present its claims openly and honestly, nor does it meet
its opponents in an open and fair discussion. Like Judaism, from which it
sprang, it instead attacks its opponents secretly, through institutions it
controls, such as the media. On the basis of its own confusion, it cannot
stand the light of truth and exposure. The Christian, on the other hand, is
told to "Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye
may know how ye ought to answer every man', (Col. 4:6).
To protect its secrecy, Masonry found it necessary to install a catalog of
oaths and terrible covenants, which were set up for the purpose of

--- Sayfa 170 ---
destroying those who sought to expose their nefarious activities and terrify
its own members into a strict and total obedience to the Masters of the
Lodge.
According to their own admissions, which can be found in the Masonic
oaths, they employ any means of discrediting or destroying their
opponents. They may with impunity, through false testimony, discredit or
completely destroy an opponent's reputation, may discomfort, or even
completely annihilate them. This extends to the point of committing
murder, if that is deemed necessary for the protection of the Lodge, as was
the case in the murder of William Morgan in the 1820's. He was
assassinated on order of the Lodge authorities, when he sought to expose
them.
Masons infer that they are rendering service to the GREAT ARCHITECT
OF THE UNIVERSE, when they destroy any one who seeks to expose
them. This is a murderous spirit, similar to that found among some of the
extremists in t>

Page 186
Masons are willing, according to their oaths, to inflict barbarous and
horrible penalties on any brother Mason who strays from their way and
exposes them. This reveals the true spirit which pervades Freemasonry
and which most certainly does not exhibit the "fruits of the Spirit," which
are the attributes of true Christians (See Gal. 5:22, 23).
When it becomes necessary to enforce obedience to an idea, in order to
promulgate it, you can automatically know that idea is wrong. If, as some
members of Masonry aver, Masonry does not have this cruel, vindictive
spirit, then why do they exhibit it in their oaths which cause them to
become members? That most Masons believe these oaths, is an established
fact, for very few leave the Order, once they become members. This is not
because they know their way is true, but because they fear the
consequences. It takes an extremely brave man to leave Freemasonry, and
then expose it!
That the threats implied in the Masonic oaths are made in good faith, can
be ascertained from the past. French, Italian and Spanish Masons cited
before their Masonic tribunals for breaking their oaths, were the Emperor
Napoleon III; the Emperor of Germany; the Crown Prince of Germany; a
Pope and Marshall Prim. of France. These men paid no attention to the

--- Sayfa 171 ---
citations made against them by the Lodge and all were marked for
assassination. (See Hecthorn, Vol. II, p. 108).
The murder of William Morgan, in obedience to a Masonic decree, almost
destroyed Masonry in America in 1826. Judge Whitney of the Belvedere
Lodge in Illinois, escaped assassination at the hands of Master Masons,
only because they feared public vengeance if they killed this popular man.
The very initiation into the Third Degree, is a dramatic "acting out" of a
symbolic murder. The candidate for all intents and purposes is murdered
by these ruffians, who inflict on him the horrible penalties inherent in the
first

Page 187
three degrees. When these are apprehended, they are theoretically
executed by having the penalties of the first three degrees inflicted on
them. This is done to impress the Masonic candidate with the seriousness
of his pledge and the vengeance which will follow if he breaks his oath.
The Knights of Kadash deliberately promise to commit murder on any
traitor to Freemasonry.
Judge Whitney, who was mentioned earlier, testified in the case of a Miss
Ellen Slade, who had been murdered in Boone County Illinois for resisting
the law laid down by the Grand Lodge of Illinois. In his testimony,
Whitney said:
"The resistance of the law by Masons, in the case of the
death of Miss Slade, was well known to the Grand Lodge
and their committees, who approved it and this Lodge
(Belvedere #6, F.A.M.) has quietly acquiesced; and having
their charter restored by the present Grand Master, several
of the most culpable of its members have been elected to
the most important positions in the Lodge." (UNQ).
This action was taken by Master Masons who had full knowledge of the
crime they were covering up, as well adequately proven in court. These
murderers resisted the law of the State of Illinois and escaped its
consequences through the machinations of high ranking Masons in the
Judicial system.
Pres. C. G. Finney, himself a Mason, characterized Masonry as follows:

--- Sayfa 172 ---
"Freemasonry has no mercy, but swears candidates to
avenge violations of Masonic obligations, the most
unlawful and un-Christian deeds; to deliver each other from
difficulty, whether right or wrong; to unduly favor Masons
in business transactions. It's members are sworn to retaliate,
and persecute unto death, the violators of Masonic
obligations." (Wagner's Freemasonry -An Interpretation-
p.554).
Because of the Masonic murder of William Morgan, facts came to light by
testimony of witnesses before the courts; by action of the New York State
Legislature, and the defense of Morgan's assassins by the Grand Lodge of
Rhode Island. All this was led by John Quincy Adams

Page 188
initiating an investigation of Masonry, from a purely patriotic viewpoint.
Here are his views as expressed in his ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF
MASSACHUSETTS. This is only part of his address:
"I saw a code of Masonic legislation adopted to prostrate
every principle of justice and to corrupt every sentiment of
virtuous feeling in the soul of him who bound his
allegiance to it. I saw the practice of common honesty, of
Christian benevolence, even the abstinence of atrocious
crimes, limited exclusively by lawless oaths and barbarous
penalties to the sacred relations between the brotherhood of
the craft. I saw slander organized into a secret widespread
and affiliated agency, fixing its invisible fangs into the
hearts of its victims, sheltered by the darkness of the Lodge
room, and armed with never ceasing penalties of death. I
saw self-invoked imprecations of throats cut from ear to
ear; of hearts and vitals torn out and cast off...
I saw wine drunk from a human skull with solemn
invocations of all the sins of its owner upon the head of him
who drank it. I saw a wretched human man damning
himself to eternal punishment when the last trump shall
sound, as a guarantee for idle and ridiculous promises.
Such are the laws of Masonry; such are their indelible
character ... a conspiracy of the few, against the equal rights
of many! Anti-republican in its sap from the first blushing
of the summit of the plant to the deepest fiber of its roots."1

--- Sayfa 173 ---
The experience of Elder David Vernard, an influential and well-esteemed
minister of the Baptist Church is a confirmation of what I have been trying
to say. As a Master Mason, he was required by the Master to attend a
meeting where he was charged with making derogatory remarks against
the Lodge. For several hours he was harangued, harassed and insulted.
When he was finally allowed to defend himself, he told how he had
spoken against the Lodge, because he had the right of free opinion and
freedom of speech and liberty of the press all of which were God-given
rights which could not be controlled by the Lodge. He stated that these
rights had been

Notes:-
1. Bernard, Light on Freemasonry, p.5. Wagner,
Freemasonry, pp. 555, 556.

Page 189
purchased by the blood of his fathers. Yet his request to defend himself
was refused.
Soon after this he was expelled from the Lodge and a vicious campaign of
vilification was launched against him. Professing ministers of the Gospel,
joined with drunkards, infidels and prostitutes in a drive to destroy him.
He was warned by his friends that he should go armed for his protection,
since there was a plot afoot to murder him and so strong and dirty was the
Masonic campaign against him, that his friends would not allow him to
travel alone, even from the parsonage to the church.
Once again I repeat the words of Horace Mann: (It must be an evil project
which will not allow for open discussion." This is the same means
organized Jewry uses to stifle opposition. They act through their strong-
arm KGB, the Anti-Defamation League, and its bully boys the JEWISH
DEFENSE LEAGUE.
A few years ago I was invited to speak at the LaPorte, Colorado, Church
of Christ, by a young pastor, Pete Peters, who was just becoming
acquainted with the Identity message and the Jewish problem. We were
subjected to unbelievable harassment, most of it coming from the Fort
Collins Ministerial Alliance and the Denver A.D.L. The Alliance
threatened Pastor Peters with dire trouble unless he had me leave town at

--- Sayfa 174 ---
once. I was accused of being "anti-Semitic, a Fascist) a Neo-Nazi, and a
Hate Monger." However, no one from the Ministerial Alliance or the ADL
had ever bothered to come and hear me speak. It was all hearsay.
My first message, on Sunday night was on my deliverance from a
Communist prison in Korea in 1948. It was in this prison that I was
"saved" and promised God to do everything within my power to see that
the terrible things I had seen in South Korea would never happen here. I
did not mention Jews, Jewry, or Zionism in this message. The meeting
ended about 10 p.m.

Page 190
The next morning, a Letter to the Editor appeared in the Denver Post,
some 70 miles away. It was written by a Jewish lady in which she
expressed shock at the terrible anti-Semitic language I used and said that
my statements reminded her of Adolf Hitler. Now anyone with any
common sense, would know that a letter written after 10 p.m. the night
before, could never arrive in Denver in time for a midnight "deadline." It
was quite obvious this letter had been written before I arrived in La Porte.
Interestingly enough, there had been no Jewish lady at the Sunday night
meeting.
Pastor Peters offered to allow the Alliance members to listen to the tapes
of my messages, since none had been in attendance. None of them desired
to do this, although all their complaints were based on hearsay. When I
arrived home, I found a letter from the Denver JEWISH DEFENSE
LEAGUE in which they stated: "You Nazi S.O.B., if you ever come back
to Denver we will blow you away!" Notification to the Denver police of
this threat brought absolutely no action.
Pastor Peters, not to be intimidated, scheduled me for more meetings in
the fall and took out advertisements in the Denver Post, stating when I
would be there and the essence of my messages, which this time were
definitely Zionist exposures. I offered to host a breakfast for members of
the Ministerial Alliance, where we could talk over our differences. None
accepted. It became quite evident that they did not know what I preached,
that they did not care what I preached, but that they were being led around
by the nose by the ADL.
This is the Masonic mentality, which they learned from their Zionist
mentors "'for men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are
evil" (John 3:19).

--- Sayfa 175 ---
Masonry, like Judaism, is a system of ethics and religion, in which there is
some truth, but it is shrouded

Page 191
and mutilated by the evil it conceals. It is a system held and defended by
men of learning; men of wealth and power; men of liberal tendencies; men
who are pious "having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof"
(1 Tim. 3:5). The Apostle Paul, in 1 Corinthians 1:26, 27, said:
26 "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble,
are called:
27 For God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the mighty."
These men wallow around in the indulgences which Freemasonry allows
them to enjoy, but which must never be spoken of in public. Any system
of ethics may stand high in the eyes of men; it may even seem to be a
thing of beauty to them. But if it repudiates the Law of God, no matter
how charming it may seem to the beholder, it is a thing of hidden danger
and evil. Any system which gives license to human lust, will ruin souls
and kindle revolution against God. This is always fatal to the rebel!
Freemasonry is a danger to the freedom of America and to the welfare of
the Christian community. As long as it maintains its ties with Zionism, it
will be a danger to freedom and justice, for it is impossible for a people to
have freedom and justice without having God's blessing
These blessings do not come when men set themselves in rebellion against
God. In Psalm 2:1-4, we read:
1. "Why do the heathen (nations) rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing?
2. The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers
(Masonic and Jewish alike) take counsel together, against
the LORD, and against His Anointed, saying;
3. 'Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from us.'
4. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall
have them in derision (contempt)."

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Page 192
CONCLUSION - I realize I have stuck my neck out by
writing this book. I did not do it because of ulterior purposes, I
have no "bone to pick with Masons." I wrote it to warn you of a
very powerful organization, which is cooperating with our Zionist
enemies,. and which is fooling millions of its own members by its
hidden motives. It is at-tempting to destroy "white Christian
civilization," and the blessings it has brought to mankind. I may
have placed myself in a position of danger. I do not fear, for God
is still on the throne and He still rules in the affairs of men. If this
book is instrumental in reaching the heart of one Mason and
causing him to reconsider, it will have been worthwhile. For the
freedom of America, the happiness and safety of our people, will
be based on this slogan: NO KING BUT JESUS!

--- Sayfa 177 ---
A Chart of the Masonic Structure

The End