--- Sayfa 1 ---
HC 615
House of Commons
Foreign Affairs Committee
The UK’s relations
with Turkey
Tenth Report of Session 2016–17

--- Sayfa 3 ---
HC 615
Published on  25 March 2017
by authority of the House of Commons
House of Commons
Foreign Affairs Committee
The UK’s relations
with Turkey
Tenth Report of Session 2016–17
Report, together with formal minutes relating
to the report
Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed
21 March 2017

--- Sayfa 4 ---
The Foreign Affairs Committee
The Foreign Affairs Committee is appointed by the House of Commons
to examine the expenditure, administration, and policy of the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office and its associated public bodies.
Current membership
Crispin Blunt MP (Conservative, Reigate) (Chair)
Mr John Baron MP (Conservative, Basildon and Billericay)
Ann Clwyd MP (Labour, Cynon Valley)
Mike Gapes MP (Labour (Co-op), Ilford South)
Stephen Gethins MP (Scottish National Party, North East Fife)
Mr Mark Hendrick MP (Labour (Co-op), Preston)
Adam Holloway MP (Conservative, Gravesham)
Daniel Kawczynski MP (Conservative, Shrewsbury and Atcham)
Ian Murray MP (Labour, Edinburgh South)
Andrew Rosindell MP (Conservative, Romford)
Nadhim Zahawi MP (Conservative, Stratford-on-Avon)
The following Member was also a member of the Committee during the
Parliament:
Yasmin Qureshi MP (Labour, Bolton South East)
Powers
The Committee is one of the departmental select committees, the
powers of which are set out in House of Commons Standing Orders,
principally in SO No 152. These are available on the internet via
www.parliament.uk.
Publication
Committee reports are published on the Committee’s website
at www.parliament.uk/facom and in print by Order of the House.
Evidence relating to this report is published on the inquiry page of the
Committee’s website.
Committee staff
The current staff of the Committee are Chris Stanton (Clerk), Nick
Beech (Second Clerk), Dr Ariella Huff and Zoe Oliver-Watts (Senior
Committee Specialists), Ashlee Godwin and Nicholas Wade (Committee
Specialists), Clare Genis (Senior Committee Assistant), James Hockaday
and Su Panchanathan (Committee Assistants), and Estelle Currie (Media
Officer).
Contacts
All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Foreign
Affairs Committee, House of Commons, London SW1A 0AA. The
telephone number for general enquiries is 020 7219 6105; the
Committee’s email address is fac@parliament.uk.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
1
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Contents
Summary
3
Introduction
5
1
An “understanding” relationship, during a crucial period for Turkey and
the UK
7
An “understanding” relationship
7
The coup attempt, and the UK’s distinctive understanding of Turkey
7
A contrast with the European Union in particular
8
A divided society in Turkey
9
A cultural and political divide
9
The implications of the referendum on expanding the presidency’s power
12
2
A “strategic” relationship, and its implications for Turkey and the UK
15
A “strategic” relationship
15
The enhancement of trade
15
Security co-operation
17
‘TF-X’, and other arms sales
18
Turkey’s role in the fight against ISIL
20
Turkey’s role in the migrant and refugee crisis
21
Whether Brexit will impact the strategic relationship
23
The human rights imperative, and its relationship with trade and defence ties
24
The influence of the EU and the UK on human rights in Turkey
24
The role of trade in securing UK influence in Turkey
25
3
The coup attempt, and the ‘Gülenists’
28
The coup attempt of 15 July 2016
28
The Turkish government and the Gülenists
29
Opposing narratives
29
Reports of a past alliance, and reasons for its collapse
30
The basis of the case against the Gülenists
32
Description as ‘terrorists’
32
Confessions
32
The extent of the Gülenist movement, and concerns about circumstantial
evidence
33
Court cases
35
The knowledge of the FCO about the Gülenists’ role in the coup attempt
37

--- Sayfa 6 ---
4
The Turkish government’s response to the threat from the coup attempt
39
The State of Emergency
39
Detentions and dismissals after the coup attempt
42
Dismissal by decree
42
The range of sectors affected
44
Means of appeal and redress
45
5
The Turkish government’s response to the threat from the PKK
48
The threat from the PKK, and the collapse of the ceasefire
48
Human rights in the war against the PKK
50
Curfews
50
Deaths of civilians, and damage to civilian property
51
Allegations of torture
52
A lack of access for external observers
52
The PKK, the YPG, and Turkey’s policy in northern Syria
53
6
The status of democracy in Turkey
57
Turkey’s role as a democratic example
57
Risks and restrictions to democracy in Turkey
58
Elections
58
Freedom of expression
58
Civil society, academia, and freedom of assembly
60
The political opposition, and the case of the HDP
62
The judiciary
63
Conclusions and recommendations
65
Formal Minutes
74
Witnesses
75
Published written evidence
76
List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament
77

--- Sayfa 7 ---
3
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Summary
As a vital country facing a volatile period, Turkey both needs and deserves the UK’s
support. Turkey hosts a greater number of refugees than any country in the world,
and it plays a crucial role in preventing irregular migration into the EU, despite the
inadequate international support that it receives for doing so. In addition to the threat
from terrorism by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and its offshoots that Turkey
confronts, Turkey has made many crucial contributions to the fight against ISIL.
As well as supporting Turkey’s defence of itself against terrorism, the UK established
itself as a close friend of the Turkish people with the swift condemnation and solidarity
that it offered after the coup attempt of 15 July 2016. In the face of those threats,
the FCO told us that the understanding that the UK has shown to Turkey is almost
unique. The UK empathises before it criticises, we were told, and this has favourably
distinguished it from other countries—particularly those of the EU—in the eyes of the
Turkish government.
Both the British and Turkish governments have stressed the opportunities inherent
in expanding their trade ties along with defence and security co-operation. But our
impression has been of two countries that share interests more than they share values,
and the UK risks being perceived as de-prioritising its concern for human rights in its
drive to establish a “strategic” relationship with Turkey.
Despite the FCO’s emphasis on “understanding” Turkey, we continue to assess that
the inadequate funding provided to the FCO has led to a worrying weakening of its
independent analytical capacity, and may jeopardize the UK’s ability to seize on the
opportunities presented by Brexit. The FCO knows too little for itself about who was
responsible for the coup attempt in Turkey, or about the ‘Gülenists’—followers of
the exiled Turkish Islamic cleric Fethullah Gülen—whom the Turkish government
exclusively blames for the coup. We found that the Turkish government’s account of the
Gülenists and the coup, which the FCO seems willing to accept broadly at face value, is
not substantiated by hard, publicly available evidence, although as yet uncontradicted
by the same standard. More broadly, we disagree with the FCO’s implication that the
severity of the measures undertaken by the Turkish government after the coup attempt
is justified by the scale of the threat.
The Turkish government has used the expanded powers afforded by the country’s State
of Emergency to detain or dismiss a large number of people, based on a broad definition
of ‘terrorism’ and a low threshold of evidence. Despite the severity of the threat posed to
Turkey by terrorism and the coup attempt, the scale of the current purges—and the fact
that most of those affected were in the education sector or civil service rather than the
military or security forces—means that we cannot consider them to be a necessary and
proportionate response. The number of people who have been punished is extraordinary,
and their means of redress are inadequate.
The Turkish government has applied its Emergency powers far beyond addressing the
circumstances of the coup. The civilian suffering caused by the war between Turkey
and PKK terrorists in the south-east of the country, examples of alleged human rights
violations and impunity by the security forces, the erosion of freedom of expression

--- Sayfa 8 ---
4
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
and assembly, the decline of judicial independence, and the restriction of civil society
organisations—all problems in Turkey before the coup—have worsened in its aftermath.
Once held up as an example to the region, Turkey’s democracy and democratic culture
are under severe pressure. We share the widespread concern about the arrest and
continuing detention of Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) parliamentarians.
On human rights in Turkey, the UK must be both seen and heard: It must raise its
concerns about Turkey with the Turks in public, while also cultivating the influence
required to press Turkey for meaningful change. We support the expansion of trade
and defence ties between the UK and Turkey, not only because of the security and
prosperity benefits for both countries but also because of the strong voice that these ties
should give the UK in Ankara. It is a voice that we expect the UK to use, not least so that
its human rights concerns are heard. We recommend that the FCO designate Turkey as
a Human Rights Priority Country in its next Human Rights and Democracy Report.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has come to command politics in 21st century Turkey.
In his hands now lies the future of Turkey as either a repressive or recovering state.
During our visit to Turkey in 2017, we were encouraged by the nascent language of
restraint and reconciliation that we heard at the highest levels. But it stood in stark
contrast to the pessimism often voiced by President Erdoğan’s political opponents, as
well as by a range of activists, business leaders and individual Turkish citizens.
Turkey has profound social and cultural divisions. They manifest themselves
not only in its divisive politics, but also in an intense competition by those with
different perspectives to capture and control the state. The campaigning ahead of the
constitutional referendum set for 16 April 2017 looks set to exacerbate these divisions.
The FCO made little mention of these divisions to us, but they run deep and pre-date
President Erdoğan, the AK Party, and Turkey’s current struggles. While being a legacy
of Turkey’s history, these divisions will also define the challenges that Turkey will face
in the future.
The relationship that the FCO establishes with Turkey must not just be with the state
apparatus, or with whichever party or person currently controls it. The UK should seek
a deeper and therefore more durable connection with the Turkish people, whatever
background they are from, while working to uphold the values of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law, which will sustain the UK’s economic, security and
values interests in the relationship.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
5
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Introduction
1.
The importance of the United Kingdom’s relationship with Turkey, and the
importance of Turkey as a key state positioned between Europe and the Middle East,
was clear to the Committee from its work on the consequences of the civil war in Syria
and the fight against ISIL. The Committee’s analysis of these subjects raised questions
about the UK’s policy towards Turkey, and Turkey’s own objectives, that we intended to
answer through a full inquiry. Our predecessor Committee Report UK-Turkey Relations
and Turkey’s Regional Role published on 4 April 20121 provided useful background for us.
However its conclusions had been overtaken by events and were clearly over-optimistic.
The decision of the UK to leave the European Union, and the coup attempt that Turkey
suffered on 15 July 2016, added to the scope and timeliness of our inquiry.
2.
Our terms of reference were announced on 21 July 2016. These covered:
•
The current state of UK-Turkey relations, and the FCO’s recent record in
managing this relationship
•
The status in Turkey of the rights and values supported by the FCO, including
freedom of speech and assembly, minority rights, and the status of democracy
•
Turkey’s aspirations to join the EU and how that is impacted by Brexit
•
Turkey’s foreign and security policies in the Middle East, and how these
correspond with FCO policies in the region. Including:
Ȥ
Turkey’s policies towards different Kurdish groups, both within Turkey
itself and the wider region
Ȥ
Turkey’s response to the ‘Arab Spring’ revolutions
•
Turkey’s role as a NATO partner to the UK, including its capabilities in the fight
against ISIL.
3.
We received a wide range of written submissions addressing these topics as well as
others, which are published on the website of this inquiry.2 We thank all of the authors
for their work and contributions. In addition to this written evidence, the Committee
also heard oral evidence in three public meetings and is grateful for the time and insight
offered by the participants:
a)
Professor William Hale, Emeritus Professor at the School of African and
Oriental Studies (SOAS), University of London; Mr Ziya Meral, Resident Fellow
at the Centre for Historical Analysis and Conflict Research; Mr Bill Park, Senior
Lecturer at the Defence Studies Department, King’s College, University of
London; and Professor Rosemary Hollis, Professor of Middle East Policy Studies
at City, University of London
b)
Dr Yüksel Alp Aslandoğan, Executive Director of the Alliance for Shared Values;
and Mr Özcan Keleş, Chairman of the Dialogue Society
1
Foreign Affairs Committee, 12th Report of Session 2010–12, UK–Turkey relations and Turkey’s regional role, HC 1567.
2
Foreign Affairs Committee, “UK’s relations with Turkey inquiry—publications”, accessed 13 March 2017

--- Sayfa 10 ---
6
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
c)
Mr Ertuğrul Kürkçü, a Member of Parliament for, and Honorary President of,
the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) of Turkey
d)
Rt Hon Sir Alan Duncan MP, the Minister of State for Europe and the Americas
at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; and Lindsay Appleby, a Director for
Europe at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
4.
The Committee undertook a visit to Turkey in January 2017 that encompassed
meetings in Ankara, Istanbul, and Adana. We would like to thank the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the Grand National Assembly of the Republic of Turkey, who extended to
us the invitation to visit, as well as the staff of the Turkish Embassy in London and all
other Turkish institutions who facilitated our visit and provided us with security. We also
record our thanks to the staff of the British Embassy in Ankara and the British Consulate
in Istanbul for the significant work they undertook to support the visit.
5.
During our visit, we had the opportunity to meet and put questions to President Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, Prime Minister Binali Yıldırım, Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu,
and the Governor of Adana Province Mahmut Demirtaş, as well as representatives from
all four of Turkey’s parliamentary parties. We thank them all for their hospitality. Our
meetings with a wide range of activists, journalists, and analysts—as well as with business
leaders and young Turkish citizens—were of great value for this inquiry.
6.
The Committee would like to thank our Specialist Adviser, Güney Yildiz,3 for his
tireless work and attention to detail in support of our inquiry.
3
On 25 October 2016, Güney Yildiz made the following declaration of interest on his appointment as Specialist Adviser to the
Foreign Affairs Committee: “I have been working for the BBC as a Producer and Reporter since 2007. I have switched to working
part time with the BBC since October this year. I have also started and MPhil/PhD in the Department of Sociology at the
University of Cambridge this year. I am not receiving funding from any government department at the moment. I am a member of
trade unions the NUJ and the BECTU. I don’t have any active role in these unions. My wife is also a PhD student.” Foreign Affairs
Committee, Formal Minutes 2016–17. In March 2017, Mr Yildiz updated his declaration of interest to inform the Committee that
he was no longer employed by the BBC as from January 2017.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
7
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
1	 An “understanding” relationship,
during a crucial period for Turkey and
the UK
An “understanding” relationship
The coup attempt, and the UK’s distinctive understanding of Turkey
7.
On the evening of 15 July 2016, Turkey suffered a coup attempt. This was an attack
against Turkey’s democracy, and it was thwarted in a large part owing to the bravery of
many members of the Turkish public who took to the streets in opposition. At least 241
people were killed, and Members of the Committee were able to express their condolences
and support for democracy when they visited Turkey in January 2017. The coup attempt
and its consequences are examined in more detail in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of this
report.
8.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) repeatedly uses the word
“understanding” when referring to its own appreciation of the impact of the coup attempt
on Turkey, and says that this understanding is a central and distinctive feature of the UK’s
relationship with Turkey. Rt Hon Sir Alan Duncan MP, the Minister of State at the FCO
for Europe and the Americas, with responsibility for Turkey, told us:
That coup attempt is the main issue in the psyche, mentality and attitude of
the Turkish government and indeed the Turkish people at the moment.4 [
… ]If you don’t understand it, you’re never going to understand them or be
able to have a proper relationship with them.5
9.
Sir Alan told us that the understanding that the UK had shown to Turkey came close
to being unique. When asked what Turkey wanted from its relationship with the UK, he
replied:
Respect, engagement at all levels and a clear understanding, which I think
we almost uniquely have displayed, of the predicament they are in. They
feel that they are under constant and regular assault from a number of
directions: internally following the coup attempt of 15 July; and from the
PKK and ISIS.6
When explaining how the UK’s response to the coup attempt was distinctive from that
of other countries, Sir Alan again repeated the importance of taking an understanding
approach:
Whereas everyone else was rather quick, from the comfort of their armchairs,
to wag their fingers, we tried to understand exactly what the coup attempt
really was. [ … ] This singled us out, certainly from the rest of the European
4
Q134
5
Q137
6
Q132

--- Sayfa 12 ---
8
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Union but also from many other countries. We made a distinctive stand,
which was to empathise ahead of in any way criticising, whereas others
criticised straightaway and even now are very slow to empathise.7
A contrast with the European Union in particular
10.	 The UK’s understanding of Turkey’s situation was contrasted by Sir Alan with what
he described as the European Union’s (EU’s) lack thereof:
I think there has been insufficient understanding in many quarters,
particularly within the membership of the European Union, about what
Turkey had to face and still faces.8[ … ]What was important with the Turks
was to ask the questions and understand first, before criticising later. The EU
was overcritical too quickly.9 [ … ]. Our judgment in making it absolutely
clear that we [the UK] understand what they [Turkey] have been going
through has been the right one. I am pleased to say that they appreciate it
and we appreciate their appreciation.10
11.	 The criticisms that Sir Alan mentioned in his answer refer largely to the aftermath of
the coup attempt. This saw, among other actions, the declaration of a State of Emergency
in Turkey and the detention or dismissal from their employment of a large number of
people from a wide range of sectors. We examine the response to the coup attempt in
Chapter 4 of this report. The argument of the Turkish government, with which Sir Alan
agreed, has been that the EU in particular showed insufficient understanding of the threat
that Turkey faced and moved too quickly to condemn the actions that Turkey took in
response. A written submission to this inquiry from the Turkish Embassy in London
told the Committee that the EU’s reaction to the coup attempt had damaged Turkey’s
relationship with the bloc:
Unfortunately, the level of trust in public opinion has decreased and the
support for EU accession in Turkey has fallen very low[ … ]probably the
most important [reason] is that the EU was unable to understand what
Turkey went through during the foiled coup attempt of 15 July. They reacted
in a wrong way and too late. Turkey is going through a very difficult time
and Turkish public needs to feel that the EU understands and reacts much
better to the terrorist threats Turkey is facing, whatever source they may
come from.11
12.	 In order to demonstrate its understanding, the UK moved to undertake swift displays
of solidarity with Turkey after the coup attempt. The FCO told us in its written submission
that
The UK immediately condemned the attempted coup and offered strong
support for Turkey’s democratic institutions and the constitutional order.
It was vital for the UK to stand shoulder–to–shoulder with a trusted ally,
defend democracy and reject violence as a means of seizing power. Had
7
Q137
8
Q160
9
Q191
10
Q146
11
Turkish Embassy, TUR0043, Q5

--- Sayfa 13 ---
9
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
the coup succeeded, the consequences for Turkey, its partners and the
region would have been extremely damaging. Following telephone calls
by the [Prime Minister], Foreign and Defence Secretaries, the Minister for
Europe and the Americas travelled to Ankara on 20 and 21 July to express
condolences for the lives lost and to demonstrate UK solidarity. He was the
first minister from a major Western country to visit after the attempted
coup. The Foreign Secretary further demonstrated UK support during his
visit to Turkey on 25–27 September.12
The Turkish Embassy told us how Turkey had valued this solidarity:
The UK has been the first European country voicing its strong and clear
support in the wake of the attempted coup in Turkey. Again, it has been
the first European country sending a high–level envoy to Turkey to offer
official condolences. This support has been exceptionally valuable for and
very warmly received by Turkey.13
13.	 We welcome the UK’s strong condemnation of the 15 July 2016 coup attempt.
This was an attack on Turkey’s democracy. We condemn it, and have expressed our
condolences for the loss of life. Through its prompt displays of solidarity, the FCO
ensured that the UK was seen by Turkey’s leadership as a friend and close ally of the
Turkish people. However, the anti-Western rhetoric that is prevalent in the popular
discourse in Turkey, and historic suspicions around British policy, still influence
perceptions of the UK in Turkey.
A divided society in Turkey
A cultural and political divide
14.	 When developing our own understanding of Turkey’s current situation, the
Committee observed deep divisions within Turkish society. Witnesses told us that these
divisions carried profound implications for Turkish politics, not least because they drove
intense competition between different factions for control of the state in Turkey. Ziya
Meral, from the Centre for Historical Analysis and Conflict Research, told us that
I think an aspect of it is that the state is an attractive thing in itself in Turkey.
The state is so powerful and so lucrative. There is no imagination of political
or religious influence outside taking control of the state. That is the legacy
of a strong nation state that has been governed in a particular way.14
Bill Park, from King’s College, University of London, said in his evidence that a range of
factions therefore sought to control the state within Turkey, even if they did so without
formally holding power by being elected to government:
12
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 7
13
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 2
14
Q34

--- Sayfa 14 ---
10
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
In Turkey, quite a lot of things come down to battles for control over state
institutions. The Government is calling the Gülenists a parallel state, and it
is right, but the [ruling Justice and Development Party] and the Kemalists
are also parallel states.15
15.	 This competition to control is so strong because Turkish society is deeply divided.
We were told that different perspectives in Turkey—in part rooted in ideology but also
in other aspects such as culture, locality, and faith—had come to fear and exclude one
another while each seeking to control the state. The British Council told us that
[Turkey is] deeply polarised between conservative, traditional or more
overtly religious individuals on the one side and those who identify as more
liberal, secular and progressive on the other. These two ‘halves’ of Turkey
traditionally distrust each other and do not interact.16
Professor Hale, from SOAS, told us that, in his rhetoric, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
described this ‘them and us’ divide in the language of black and white, with the AK Party
being partisan towards—and drawing its support from—one particular side:
There is a speech [Erdoğan] made quite early in the AK Party where he talks
about the white Turks and the black Turks. By the white Turks, he means
the old Kemalist establishment—a large proportion of whom, incidentally,
were drawn from refugees from Russia, the Balkans and other countries—
whereas the black Turks implies the native inhabitants of Anatolia, who are
now the majority in coming to power. He says, “There has been a division
between the white Turks and the black Turks, and your brother Tayyip is a
black Turk.” So he is making a distinct appeal to that section.17
16.	 This fundamental divide in Turkish society is sometimes articulated by commentators
in the language of ‘Islamism’ as opposed to ‘secularism’, with the AK Party representing
an Islamist current against the historical predominance of the ‘Kemalist’18 secularist
establishment. Witnesses told us that attitudes towards faith were one, important, part of
the divide in Turkey. But they said that it was broadly inaccurate to describe the AK Party
as ‘Islamist’. We were told that demand for ‘Sharia law’, however that was interpreted,
was low and declining in Turkey,19 while electoral support for the AK Party had risen.
Dr Katerina Dalacoura, an Associate Professor in International Relations at the London
School of Economics and Political Science, emphasised the nationalist elements of the AK
Party and Erdoğan’s ideology, as well as their commitment to secularism:
Erdoğan is as much a Turkish nationalist as he is an Islamist. His brand
of Islamism has a strong Turkish imprint as became clear in his visit to
Egypt in 2011 when he advised the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood about
the benefits of secularism.20
15
Q34
16
British Council TUR0034 para 9.1
17
Q29
18
‘Kemalist’ refers to supporters of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his vision of a modern secular state.
19
See Q25 [Ziya Meral]; and Q26 [Bill Park]
20
Dr Katerina Dalacoura TUR0021 para 3

--- Sayfa 15 ---
11
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
17.	 Witnesses agreed that, inasmuch as religion mattered to President Erdoğan and the
AK Party, it was in the sense of promoting personal, social piety rather than providing
a formal role for Islam in the laws, constitution, or institutions of the state.21 But, as well
as describing the ‘Islamist versus secularist’ analogy as too simplistic, we were also told
that this was not a strict socio-economic division between ‘rich’ and ‘poor’. Witnesses
described a division in Turkey that was rooted in broad cultural differences, even though it
manifested itself in divided—and divisive—politics. Ziya Meral summarised the division,
and its problematic implications for Turkey:
It is no more the case that the secular Turks are rich and the conservative
ones are poor. In fact, there is a really wealthy religiously conservative elite
in Turkey. It is the Turkish culture wars between the traditional Kemalist
establishment/coastal Turks, and the conservative Turks on the other hand,
with much more Anatolian cultural values. It is the history of 100 years of
grievances, management, military regime and reaction to it.
If there is one ideology, I explain it from a sociological perspective, vis-à-
vis a constituency that is always scared. This coup attempt confirmed their
fear that if Erdoğan and the AK Party were to fall, they will go back to
where things were. In other words, there will be a much tighter military
Ankara-secularist regime that excludes them. That is why there are all these
expressions of, “Stand firm. We are behind you. If he falls, we fall.” You hear
a lot of that fear. The closest I can get to an ideology is maintenance of that
grievance that that cohort will lose if the AK Party was to disappear.22
18.	 Contrary to the mainstream media narrative on Turkey,23 Turkish society is not
polarised between two poles, be they ‘secularists liberals’ and ‘religious conservatives.’ It is
a multipolar and deeply fragmented society between the different Islamist and nationalist
groups, secularists, liberals, the Kurds and Alevis, among others. Elections and previous
referendums showed that the largest of these fragments is the pro-Erdoğan camp. This
leads to the competition for political authority being seen as a zero-sum game and leaves
little room for consensus between rival parties.
19.	 Turkey is a deeply divided country. The degree of political interaction between
its competing social, cultural, and religious interpretations appears limited, and their
fear of one another is great. Control of the state, and its power, is highly coveted in
this context, because each side has sought to protect its supporters by empowering
itself while excluding its opponents. The relationship that the FCO establishes with
Turkey must not just be with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, or with the Justice
and Development Party alone. Indeed, it must not just be with the state apparatus,
or with whichever party or person currently controls it. The UK should seek a deeper
and therefore more durable connection. The UK should support programmes that seek
engagement with the Turkish people, whichever background they hold, while working to
uphold the values of human rights and democracy that benefit them all.
21
See, for example, Q24 [Ziya Meral]; and Q26 [Bill Park]
22
Q28
23
See, for example, Erdogan triumph leaves Turkey polarised, BBC News, 2 November 2015

--- Sayfa 16 ---
12
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The implications of the referendum on expanding the presidency’s power
20.	 Although Turkey’s presidency is a largely ceremonial office under the terms of
Turkey’s current constitution, witnesses told us that Recep Tayyip Erdoğan continues to
wield as much power as President and Head of State as he did as Prime Minister and Head
of Government. Evidence to our inquiry also said that, while the current constitution
stipulates that the President should not be affiliated with a political party, the power that
President Erdoğan exercises is rooted in both his control of the AK Party, and the AK
Party’s majority in parliament. The AK Party has held a parliamentary majority since
first being elected to government in 2002, with the exception of briefly losing it between
the elections of June and November 2015. Bill Park, from King’s College, University of
London, told us that the AK Party had once encompassed a broad range of perspectives,
but that it was becoming increasingly homogenous and based on personal loyalty to the
President:
When it first came to power, it was also a broad church. It had a liberal
element and even an almost secular element. Most of those people have
gone. They have either been massaged out of the party by Erdoğan or they
have left of their own accord or they were trouble. The party has increasingly
come to obedience or loyalty to Erdoğan himself. It owes its position to
him. He handpicked most of the MPs at the most recent elections. People
depend on him in a patronage system and sympathise with him. I think the
AK party has changed quite a lot, and it has become much more a mirror of
Erdoğan himself than it could have ever been when it first came to power.24
21.	 As well as President Erdoğan’s control over the AK Party witnesses described growing
control by the ruling AK Party over other institutions within Turkey that have formally
or informally checked the government’s power. This has included a growing politicisation
of the judiciary, as described in Chapter 6, which has seen the appointment or dismissal
of judges and the exercise of their power becoming increasingly partisan in practice. It
has also included the armed forces, which have a history of intervening against civilian
governments in Turkey. Bill Park told us that specific court cases under the AK Party had
contributed to the government’s growing influence over the military:
The so-called ‘Ergenekon’ and ‘Balyoz’ trials of the ‘deep state’ led to
the conviction in 2012 and 2013 of hundreds of military officers and the
resignations of hundreds more. Although the sentences have since been
rescinded given the largely fabricated nature of the evidence, the impact was
to neuter the domestic political power of the Turkish military, an outcome
strengthened by increasing government intrusion into the promotion
practices of the general staff.25
Ziya Meral concluded that “without Erdoğan at this moment, there is nobody, and that is
his making”.26
22.	 Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has made himself as central to 21st century Turkey as
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was in the 20th century. The choices that he makes now will
determine whether his overall legacy will largely be positive, for Turkey and more
24
Q23
25
Mr Bill Park TUR0032 para 2
26
Q28

--- Sayfa 17 ---
13
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
widely. The wrong choices have the potential to deliver catastrophe well beyond Turkey’s
borders. The right choices would cement Turkey’s position as a liberal, democratic state
which provides a philosophical and ideological bridge between West and East.
23.	 Turkey is currently debating whether to formalise the de facto power of the President
by amending Turkey’s constitution to expand the power of the presidency. Professor
William Hale, from SOAS, told us that there was broad agreement on the need to revise
Turkey’s current constitution, which was enacted under military rule in the 1980s and
includes restrictive terms.27 Professor Hale also said that the proposed amendments could
be interpreted as making “little difference”, in practice, given the control that President
Erdoğan has already established.28 But there has been resistance to formally establishing
this power within an amended constitution.
24.	 The proposed amendments to the constitution29 would increase the President’s power
in ways that include abolishing the position of Prime Minister and making ministers
accountable to the President. They would also see all senior judges appointed by politicians,
and most of them by the President. The President would also gain the power to propose
the budget under the proposals, and lose some of the checks to which the presidency is
currently subjected. The proposed amendments were passed by the Turkish parliament
in January 2017,30 predominantly by members from the AK Party who also required the
support of elements from the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) to reach the required
vote threshold. The opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) and Peoples’ Democratic
Party (HDP) opposed the reforms. The proposed changes to the constitution are now due
to be put to the Turkish public for approval or rejection in a referendum on 16 April 2017,
with the likely outcome of the vote appearing close and therefore uncertain.
25.	 Our inquiry heard different perspectives in terms of what implications there would be
for the future of Turkey if Recep Tayyip Erdoğan formally became an executive President.
His critics and opponents provided a negative outlook for such an outcome. Dr Natalie
Martin, from Nottingham Trent University, told us that the referendum, along with other
policies associated with President Erdoğan, should be “viewed through the prism of this
power-grab over the past decade [ … ] The point of them all has been to further Erdoğan’s
personal ambitions”.31 A submission from the opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP)
told us that “President Erdoğan, by broadening his own powers, intends to legitimize a
regime which excludes anyone but his own voters.”32
26.	 But it was also explained to us why the formal expansion of the powers of the executive,
whether under the State of Emergency or through an amendment to the constitution,
could hold advantages for Turkey. For example, Mina Toksoz, from Chatham House,
wrote in the context of her submission about Turkey’s economy that
The wider popular support for an executive presidency is based on the
perception of a repeatedly dysfunctional parliamentary party system that
in the past led to military coups. This view is reflected in the support given
27
William Hale TUR0007 para 6
28
William Hale TUR0007 para 6
29
For a summary of the proposed changes see, for example, Centre for Turkey Studies, CEFTUS briefing on the proposed changes to
the Turkish constitution, 15 December 2016; and Council of Europe, Proposed constitutional amendments in Turkey would be a
“dangerous step backwards” for democracy, says the Venice Commission, 10 March 2017
30
Turkey passes last article of constitutional change, Anadolu Agency, 15 January 2017
31
Dr Natalie Martin TUR0016 p 7
32
Republican People’s Party (CHP) TUR0038 Section 1

--- Sayfa 18 ---
14
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
by the Turkish Chambers of Commerce to Emergency Rule following the
July attempted coup. The government economic policy team also welcomed
the executive powers under Emergency Rule as an opportunity to pass
politically difficult pension, labour market, and other structural reforms.
This authoritarian turn has also enabled major policy reversals such as
patching up relations with Russia that led to the re-launch of the Turk-
Stream gas pipeline and discussions with Israel regarding co-operation on
the Eastern Mediterranean gas reserves.33
27.	 On 16 April 2017, the Turkish people are due to vote in a referendum on whether
to amend Turkey’s constitution to significantly expand the powers of the President.
The choice is theirs, and the UK Government must not support one side or the other.
28.	 The proposed changes would constitutionally entrench the centralisation of power
in the presidency beyond the current incumbent. However, it could be argued, from a
UK perspective, that an approval of the proposed changes would make no de-facto
difference to governance in Turkey or to Turkish policy in the short term, because it
will make de jure the current situation. But there are concerns over the timing of the
referendum, coming as it does at a point where freedom of expression and assembly has
deteriorated in Turkey. It is difficult to foresee a fair, free and credible referendum when
media, opposition MPs and civic organisations critical of the government have been
closed down or silenced. The current period of Emergency Rule has also significantly
expanded the power of the executive while simultaneously restricting certain rights
and freedoms. Both the deep divisions that we have observed within Turkish society
and the intensity of the competition to control the state are likely to be worsened by the
referendum campaign whatever its outcome.
29.	 The settling of this constitutional question should leave President Erdoğan
with strategic choices where there is a clear UK interest in supporting constructive
policies. These include the Kurdish question, the healing of Turkish politics after
the coup attempt of 15 July 2016, the advancement of judicial independence and the
rule of law alongside other human and political rights, the sustaining of a successful
economy, and other central challenges to Turkey that we address later in this Report.
Shaping a positive legacy for the commanding figure of 21st century Turkish politics
is in the interest of the UK’s economy, security, and values whatever the outcome of
the referendum. Now is a profound moment of choice for Turkey’s future, in terms of
whether it will be a repressive or a recovering country.
30.	 A central challenge that Turkey will face is the need to strengthen its public
and state institutions. These have been weakened as a result of the acrimony in the
country’s politics over the past decade, and were further weakened by the coup attempt
and the government’s response. When facing its future challenges, Turkey will need an
effective military, independent economic and judicial institutions, as well as a free and
vibrant media, among other institutions. The UK should assist Turkey in developing
both the capacity and independence of these institutions.
33
Dr Mina Toksoz TUR0033 p 3

--- Sayfa 19 ---
15
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
2	 A “strategic” relationship, and its
implications for Turkey and the UK
A “strategic” relationship
31.	 Both the UK and Turkish governments used the word “strategic” to describe the
relationship between the two countries. Both sides emphasised trade, security, and
defence co-operation as being at the heart of the relationship. Sir Alan Duncan told the
Committee that “we want a deep strategic relationship, which is of course political, but
also based on trade.”34 Using the same word, “strategic”, the Turkish Embassy wrote that
Turkey and the UK enjoy well–established relations based on NATO
alliance, strategic partnership, mutual economic interests and shared
security concerns. [ … ] The future presents ample opportunities for
further enhancement of the bilateral relations. Defence and security, large
infrastructure projects like airports, health, nuclear energy and finance
sectors will be at the forefront of the economic co-operation between the
two countries.35
32.	 The UK-Turkey relationship does not take place in isolation, but it takes place in the
context of an existing network of relations, and possible repositioning in Turkey’s strategic
direction. The past few years saw increasing friction between the EU36, the United States,37
and Turkey, which might have led to a diminishing of influence by the West in Turkey.38
In this regard, the UK has differentiated itself not only from the EU but also from many
other Western countries as well. The same period has seen a rapprochement between the
Turkish government and Russia. We are concerned that the loss of influence of the UK’s
international allies in Turkey might have a detrimental effect on the possible leverage
that the UK might have on Turkey as well. The FCO should use its close relations with
the Turkish establishment to mediate as required between Turkey and the US and EU
states.
The enhancement of trade
33.	 Despite the damage caused by the coup attempt and government’s response, Turkey
represents an economy that the UK will find difficult to ignore. Turkey’s population
currently stands at almost 79 million, according to the World Bank, and the Turkish
Statistical Institute (TSI) projects that this will rise to exceed 83 million by 2023.39
Turkey remains a demographically youthful country and the TSI projects that half of the
population will be under the age of 34 in 2023. The Turkish Embassy in London told us
34
Q135
35
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 2
36
See, for example; Turkey’s cooling relations with EU signal deadlock over travel, Financial Times, 28 September 2016; and German
Foreign Minister: Turkey ‘further away from EU membership than ever’, Reuters, 18 March 2017
37
See, for example, Turkey-US relations are strained as Erdogan arrives in Washington, Euro News, 30 March 2016; and US-Turkey:
The strained alliance, BBC News, 29 March 2016.
38
See, for example, As Turkey’s coup strains ties with West, detente with Russia gathers pace, Reuters, 6 August 2016
39
See Turkish Statistical Institute, Population Projections 2013–2075, accessed 16 March 2017; and The World Bank, Turkey,
accessed 16 March 2017

--- Sayfa 20 ---
16
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
that Turkey had an average growth rate of 5% during the period of 2002–2016.40 Although
this rate has recently slowed, and has been harmed in part by the conditions created by the
coup attempt, both the OECD and World Bank project future growth rates of over 3%.41
34.	 During its visit to Turkey in January 2017, the Committee met with representatives
of UK companies that had invested in the country. They told us that the coup attempt
and the ensuing purges had heightened the perceived risk of investing in Turkey, and that
levels of additional investment were therefore currently suppressed. But they remained
committed to their investment in Turkey due to the long-term potential that they saw
in the country. They highlighted its young, growing, and well-educated population as a
particular asset. More broadly, Mina Toksoz, an economist working for Chatham House,
described an economy with both significant challenges and the resilience to overcome
them with an emphasis on trade:
Since the global financial crisis the [Turkish] economy has been stuck at
middle-income of around $10,000 per capita and productivity is lagging.
Global conditions are more difficult. Turkey’s neighbourhood region is in
deep political crisis. High levels of corporate foreign currency debt, big
current account deficit, weak currency and the expected rise in international
interest rates, as well as the growing financial burden of defence and
hosting of 3 million refugees have increased country risks leading to recent
sovereign ratings downgrades by Moody’s and S&P.
The economy looks set to slow in the short term. But, modest medium term
growth is still likely on the back of the large domestic market and modest
consumer debt levels, supported by a strong banking sector and competitive
exporting sectors.42
35.	 The Turkish Embassy in London told us that there were 2,900 UK companies
currently operating in Turkey, and that they were invested in a wide range of sectors.43
This, the Embassy said, established the UK as “one of the largest investors in Turkey in
terms of foreign direct investments”. The UK is also a highly important market for Turkish
exports, with the Embassy telling us that “bilateral trade between Turkey and the UK has
increased by 68% since 2009 and exceeded 16 billion dollars in 2015. The UK is one of the
top destinations (ranks 2nd) for Turkish exports”.44 The extent of Turkish investment in
the UK and the prominence of Turkey as a market for UK exports is relatively lower, but
remains significant. The FCO told us that
Turkey is the UK’s 19th largest export market. As of June 2016, we export
more to Turkey than to India, Russia, Brazil or Mexico. Up to 200 Turkish
businesses, across a range of sectors, have set up operations in the UK.45
40
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 4
41
See The World Bank, Turkey, accessed 16 March 2017; and OECD, Turkey - Economic forecast summary (November 2017),
accessed 16 March 2017
42
Dr Mina Toksoz TUR0033 p 1
43
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 3
44
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 3
45
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 37

--- Sayfa 21 ---
17
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
36.	 In terms of the emphasis on enhancing trade in the bilateral relationship, the Turkish
Embassy wrote:
Economic relations between the two countries will be particularly important
in the post–Brexit area. The UK has a larger trade volume with Turkey
than with other big countries like Russia and Mexico. Therefore, it will be
important to ensure that trade be carried out in the freest way possible with
minimum obstacles between the two countries. It is a welcome development
that initial contacts between our countries have already started to this end.
During the recent visit of the Turkish Minister of Economy to London, it
was agreed to initiate exploratory talks between Turkey and the UK with
the prospect of a free trade agreement after the realization of Brexit.46
37.	 Turkey has a Customs Union with the EU covering most goods but not unprocessed
agricultural products,47 and the FCO told us that “future bilateral arrangements will
depend on negotiations for the UK’s withdrawal from the EU”.48 Nevertheless, both the UK
and Turkish governments have emphasised their intention to expand trade and investment
ties. The Turkish Embassy told us that the “post Brexit period presents new opportunities
for better economic relations between Turkey and the UK”.49 While both Turkey and the
UK will need to take account of their respective customs and trading relations with the
EU, there is likely to be scope to agree preferential trading arrangements in areas that are
not covered by the Customs Union agreement such as agricultural produce, services, and
public procurement. The FCO said that “the Secretary of State for International Trade has
identified Turkey as a key trade partner. Department for International Trade colleagues
are talking to their Turkish counterparts about key barriers to further growth and future
options for our trade relationship.”50
38.	 A totally free trade agreement with Turkey may not be possible due to the current
relationship that Turkey has with the EU and the EU Customs Union. Given Turkey’s
Customs Union with the EU, the FCO should clarify what trade arrangements it is
currently able to negotiate with Turkey, when and how that might change, and when
they will be implemented. The FCO should work with the Department for International
Trade in exploring and delivering new trade and investment opportunities with Turkey,
now and following Brexit, and in negotiating revised trading arrangements with Turkey
once the UK leaves the EU.
Security co-operation
39.	 In addition to trade, the FCO described security co-operation between the UK
and Turkey as being central to the relationship. As well as benefitting the two countries
bilaterally, the FCO said that such co-operation was in the interest of the broader region:
Foreign and security policy collaboration between the UK and Turkey is
vital to the stability of Europe and the Middle East. A solution in Syria is of
paramount importance to both countries. Turkey has an important role to
play in moving towards a settlement on Cyprus; responding to the major
46
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 4
47
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 12
48
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 38
49
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 3 and European Commission, Trade, Countries and regions, Turkey, accessed 16 March 2017
50
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 38

--- Sayfa 22 ---
18
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
challenges faced by the NATO alliance; and European energy security.
Turkey’s role in tackling the migration crisis has been extraordinarily
important, with continued engagement with the UK and European partners
vital.51
Sir Alan Duncan added that “we [the UK] work with them [Turkey] as well on important
counter–terrorist issues against Daesh, ISIS”.52
40.	 Turkey is an essential partner facing a volatile period. It needs and deserves our
support. We support the construction of a ‘strategic’ relationship between the UK and
Turkey. Both the UK and Turkish governments emphasise to us their aim to enhance
their trade ties, and their defence and security co-operation. Successful engagement
would serve the prosperity and security of both countries, though a successful Turkey
will be one that respects democratic norms.
41.	 The complexity of modern Turkey, and the nature of its internal divisions, means
that the process of constructing this relationship must be managed by the FCO with
adequate capability and subtlety. We were impressed by the leadership and effectiveness
of Her Majesty’s Ambassador to Turkey Richard Moore, and by the knowledge of his
staff. The FCO is running a large operation in Turkey, and it is important that the FCO
is given the resources to sustain this operation and manage the complex and important
relationship with Turkey going forward.
‘TF-X’, and other arms sales
42.	 As the FCO describes trade and security co-operation as being at the heart of the
strategic relationship between the UK and Turkey, it also describes a project known as
‘TF-X’ as being at the heart of this co-operation. TF-X is a project to develop a future-
generation combat aircraft for the Turkish military, and an agreement was recently
reached between BAE Systems and Turkish Aerospace Industries to work together on
this process. The Heads of Agreement were signed by both companies, in the presence of
the Prime Ministers of the UK and Turkey, on 24 January 2017.53 TF–X is intended to be
a long–term project between the UK and Turkey, involving contracts for defence–linked
industries in both countries and the exchange of technological expertise between them.
Sir Alan Duncan told us:
The signing of the first phase of the TF-X- deal was a very significant step
that could last for the long term.54 [ … ] We have essentially taken a very
important strategic initiative that we want to maintain and sustain over
many years—something for which the TF-X fighter project will embed
commercial interests.55
43.	 The group Campaign Against Arms Trade wrote in its written submission that “the
value of known UK export licences for military equipment to Turkey over the last three
51
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 2
52
Q135
53
BAE Systems, “BAE Systems signs Heads of Agreement for a future contract with Turkish Aerospace Industries for TF-X
Programme”, accessed 16 March 2017
54
Q135
55
Q146

--- Sayfa 23 ---
19
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
years for which data is available, July 2013 to June 2016, was £466million”.56 The group
also noted that the UK aimed to expand defence sales to Turkey, and expressed concern
about the message that this may send in terms of human rights, saying that
Turkey’s official invitation to arms fairs and its inclusion in the “priority
market” list, sends the message to President [Recep Tayyip] Erdoğan that
the UK government is unconcerned about his record on human rights and
democracy when there is a potential for military sales.57
44.	 The UK operates strict arms export restrictions, including in particular the European
Union Consolidated Criteria.58 We asked Sir Alan Duncan whether he was confident that
these would apply to the TF-X project, and he replied:
Yes. This is a NATO ally, don’t forget. We are dealing here with a NATO
ally, a member of NATO.59
45.	 The FCO also told us that the TF-X contract would be covered by a Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU), but that the details of the commercial contract had not been
signed at the time that the Committee took this evidence.60
46.	 The Government will need to consider that the Turkish government announced in
2013 its intention to buy a Chinese missile system61 which the Turkish Defence Minister
said will not be integrated with NATO infrastructure.62 The Turkish government then
rejected the Chinese system following pressure from the West.63 At the time of the
publication of this Report, the Turkish government was in talks to buy a Russian anti-
missile system64 which might be an issue for concern regarding the TF-X deal at a time
when the Turkish government is less responsive to Western pressure.
47.	 We welcome the agreements reached over the ‘TF–X’ combat aircraft development
programme, as a key component and symbol of the strategic co-operation between
the UK and Turkey. This programme should last for decades; it needs to reflect the
long–term interests of both countries and survive the inevitable short–term ups and
downs in their bilateral relations. The strategic partnership implied by this deal should
be reinforced by the Government making clear what restrictions there are on the use or
transfer by Turkey or the UK of sensitive technology and intellectual property contained
within the programme, both during the aircraft’s construction and after its completion.
48.	 The Government should also clarify what safeguards are in place to ensure that
the aircraft will be used in compliance with international humanitarian law. The UK
is subject to safeguards in this respect, and we expect the FCO to explain how these
safeguards will apply to TF–X.
56
Campaign Against Arms Trade TUR0018 para 5
57
Campaign Against Arms Trade TUR0018 para 9
58
HC Debate, 25 March 2014 col 9WS
59
Q172
60
Q169 [Sir Alan Duncan]
61
See, for example, Why Turkey Chose, and Then Rejected, a Chinese Air-Defense Missile, Defense One, 3 February 2016
62
See, for example, Turkey eyes deal with China on missile defense despite NATO concern, Reuters, 19 February 2015
63
See, for example, Turkey Under Pressure Over Likely Purchase of Chinese Missiles, Voice of America News, 8 October 2013
64
See, for example, Turkey likely to close S-400 missile deal with Russia, Daily Sabah, 22 February 2017

--- Sayfa 24 ---
20
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Turkey’s role in the fight against ISIL
49.	 Attacks against targets in Turkey that have been claimed by or attributed to the
Islamic State group (ISIL, also known as ‘ISIS’ or ‘Daesh’) include that against a rally
of predominantly Kurdish activists in the town of Suruç in July 2015, against another
predominantly Kurdish rally in Ankara in October 2015, against Istanbul’s Atatürk
airport in June 2016, and against the Reina nightclub in Istanbul during New Year’s Eve
celebrations to mark the beginning of 2017. Between 2015 and 2016, ISIL terrorists based
in Syria launched fatal rocket and artillery fire across the border into Turkey. By the date
that the Turkish Embassy in London submitted its written evidence to our inquiry, in
October 2016, it said that 245 people had been killed in attacks by ISIL, and hundreds had
been injured.65 Turkey has confronted the terrorist threat from ISIL in a variety of ways.
•
Since being launched in August 2016, Operation ‘Euphrates Shield’ has seen
Syrian opposition forces trained by Turkey and affiliated with the ‘Free Syrian
Army’—backed by direct support from Turkish military units fighting on the
ground, as well as from Turkish air and artillery assets—push ISIL back from an
area of territory within Syria adjacent to the Turkish border. That area covered
some 2,000 square kilometres by the end of January 2017,66 according to Turkish
military sources, and has expanded since.
•
Turkey’s President, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said in March 2017 that Turkish
forces had killed more than 3,000 ISIL fighters in the previous 18 months67, in
various operations including Euphrates Shield. The exact number is disputed,
and impossible to verify. It is also not known precisely how many Turkish
soldiers have been killed during Euphrates Shield, but the number is estimated
by various sources to be at least several dozen, including two who were burned
alive by ISIL after having been captured.68
•
In Iraq, Turkey retains a military base at Bashiqa, to the north–east of Mosul,
and says that it has trained at least 3,000 members of Iraqi militias and 2,500
Peshmerga fighters as part of the battle against ISIL in that country.69 It remains
uncertain, however, whether the Turkish military presence in Iraq has ever been
approved by the Iraqi national government, with some reports stating that the
latter has referred to the Turkish presence as a “Turkish incursion”.
•
Turkey has been crucial in the effort to prevent the transit of international recruits
seeking to join Islamist extremist groups fighting in Syria and Iraq. The Turkish
Embassy told us that, in co-operation with its allies, the country had drawn up a
‘no entry’ list of individuals that contained 786 names in 2012 before growing to
52,000 names by the end of 2016, according to the Turkish government. While
202 individuals were arrested or detained by Turkey in 2012, Turkey says that—
65
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 14
66
Operation Euphrates Shield: Aims and gains, Anadolu Agency, 19 January 2017
67
Erdogan: Turkey killed 13,000 Daesh, PKK terrorists, Anadolu Agency, 4 March 2017
68
See, for example, ISIL video shows ‘Turkish soldiers burned alive’, Al Jazeera, 23 December 2016
69
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 14

--- Sayfa 25 ---
21
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
as of 1 September 2016—3,934 individuals had been detained over the course of
Turkey’s operation and that 1,429 remained under arrest.70 Turkey co–chairs the
Counter ISIL Coalition Working Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters.71
•
As part of the strategy to defeat ISIL, Turkey has worked to counter the group’s
finances and has opened a large military airbase in southern Turkey, Incirlik,
for the use of combat aircraft from the Global Coalition against ISIL. The FCO
told us that “dozens of UK military aircraft use Turkish airspace each month”.72
50.	 ISIL is a shared enemy of the UK and Turkey, and Turkey has suffered greatly from
terrorism by these extremists. Turkey is a vital military partner in the fight against
ISIL, reinforced by the context of its NATO membership. The UK, as a strategic partner
of Turkey, and within the framework of both NATO and the Global Coalition against
ISIL, must continue to engage Turkey fully in the fight against ISIL as a shared priority
and ensure that Turkey is not distracted from focusing on this military objective, in light
of concerns set out in Chapter 5.
Turkey’s role in the migrant and refugee crisis
51.	 The FCO told us that Turkey has been a vital partner, for both the UK and the EU,
in efforts to prevent what the FCO terms “irregular migration”.73 In 2015 and early 2016,
Turkey replaced the North African route as the primary departure point for migrants
and refugees trying to reach the EU by sea. Of the 972,500 people who the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported to have crossed the
Mediterranean to reach the EU in 2015, over 800,000 crossed the Aegean Sea between
Turkey and Greece whereas approximately 150,000 crossed from North Africa. Syrians
affected by the country’s civil war accounted for half their number.74
52.	 In March 2016, Turkey and the EU signed a deal whereby Turkey worked to restrict
the flow of people crossing by boat into Europe. The impact was significant in terms of
curtailing the passage of migrants and refugees departing from Turkey. In the first nine
months of 2016, the UNHCR reported that 165,000 migrants and refugees had arrived in
Greece from Turkey, a figure 57% lower than that for the same period in 2015.75 The FCO
told us that “the Turkish coastguard has interdicted migrant vessels across the Aegean Sea
to curb irregular migration flows”76 and that this had resulted in the numbers of those
crossing being “dramatically down”.77
53.	 Turkey has also contributed to international humanitarian relief efforts for the wars
in Syria and Iraq in particular, by hosting large numbers of refugees. According to the
UNHCR, Turkey hosts more refugees than any other country in the world,78 including
70
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 20
71
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 20
72
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 20
73
Q145; Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 2
74
UNHCR, “A million refugees and migrants flee to Europe in 2015”, 22 December 2015
75
UNHCR, “As 300,000 cross Mediterranean this year, UNHCR calls for admission pathways for refugees and speedy relocation out
of Italy and Greece”, 20 September 2016
76
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 28
77
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 34
78
UNHCR “Facts and Figures about Refugees”, accessed 13 March 2017

--- Sayfa 26 ---
22
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
approximately three million registered Syrian refugees.79 Approximately 90% of these
refugees are hosted in local communities rather than camps.80 The Turkish government
told us that it was also hosting at least 200,000 Iraqi refugees.81
54.	 The number of refugees that Turkey is hosting comes with the associated strains on
the country at all levels, ranging from the national budget to local resources. It is a burden
that is familiar to other refugee–hosting nations, not least Lebanon and Jordan—smaller,
less wealthy countries with a larger number of refugees per capita than Turkey—in the
context of Syria’s civil war. We gained an insight into Turkey’s response for ourselves
when we visited facilities for refugees in the Turkish city of Adana.
55.	 Among the terms of the March 2016 agreement between the EU and Turkey,82 the EU
offered Turkey:
•
€3 billion, rising eventually to €6 billion, to help relief for Syrian refugees
•
The resettlement in the EU of one Syrian, directly from Turkey, for every one
Syrian returned to Turkey from Greece after an irregular attempt to enter
•
The acceleration of visa liberalisation for Turkish citizens (90–day visa–free
access to the Schengen area, provided Turkey met a list of 72 criteria on human
rights and other issues).
But the agreement has only been partly fulfilled so far. Offering his assessment, Professor
William Hale, from the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of
London, wrote:
Implementation of these agreements—especially the last—proved difficult,
however, since President Erdoğan refused to amend certain articles of
Turkey’s anti–terrorist legislation, demanded as one of the criteria. By
early October 2016, the agreement on refugees was partially working, as
the flow of would–be migrants across the Aegean had vastly reduced; some
migrants were being returned to Turkey, but the EU countries were not
accepting refugees from Turkey in return. The EU Commission was paying
its share of the €3 billion, but some member states were failing to do so. The
post–coup wave of arrests was delaying implementation of the visa waver
agreement, but it was hoped that once the furore had died down in 2017
progress might be made.83
56.	 In monetary terms, Turkey said that the hosting of refugees has cost it at least
$12 billion, and that this figure is rising.84 However, of the €6 billion that it says it was
promised by the EU for 2016–2018, Turkey says that—as of March 2017—€1.45 billion
had been contracted and €748 million had actually been disbursed.85 In terms of the UK’s
contribution, the FCO told us that
79
UNHCR “Syria Regional Refugee Response”, accessed 13 March 2017
80
UNISON TUR0022, para 4.3
81
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 14
82
For a summary, see William Hale TUR0007 para 10; European Commission, “Implementing the EU-Turkey Agreement –
Questions and Answers”, 4 April 2016
83
William Hale TUR0007 para 10
84
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 19
85
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q5

--- Sayfa 27 ---
23
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The UK has spent £32 million on humanitarian projects in Turkey. We have
committed more than €300 million to the €3 billion Facility for Refugees
in Turkey which will support refugees with education, food, healthcare and
job opportunities.86 [ … ]The UK is in the process of launching a new set of
migration projects worth over £2m to be delivered in partnership with the
Turkish government in 2016–17.87
57.	 Turkey hosts a larger number of refugees than any other state, and the third
largest number per capita. This contribution should not be underestimated and a debt
of gratitude is owed to Turkey from the entire international community. It plays a vital
role in limiting or preventing the flow of migrants and refugees into the EU, within the
framework of an agreement that it has reached with the bloc. The EU wants Turkey to
continue to host and hold refugees, but the amount of money delivered to Turkey by
way of assistance in this objective has so far been too small, and it has been provided
too slowly. To support Turkey though the refugee challenge, and the costs to Turkey that
it entails, the UK should press the EU swiftly to give Turkey the funds for this purpose
that have been promised but not yet delivered. While the terms of the agreement
between Turkey and the EU are not being fully met by either side, it is the non-delivery
of promised EU resources to relieve the actual suffering of refugees which is reinforcing
an anti-EU narrative from the Turkish government.
Whether Brexit will impact the strategic relationship
58.	 An important aspect of the relationship between the UK and Turkey has been the
UK’s consistent support for Turkey’s accession process for membership of the European
Union. A wide array of Turkish officials expressed to us their appreciation for this support
when the Committee visited Turkey, and the FCO confirmed to us that this support
remains the UK’s position.88 But this aspect of the relationship was given less emphasis by
both governments, in their evidence to this inquiry, than trade, defence, and security ties.
Several witnesses expressed concern to us that the way in which Turkey was discussed
during the UK’s EU referendum campaign,89 and the UK’s ultimate decision to leave
the EU, would damage relations with Turkey. Professor Hale assessed that “the British
government is attempting to develop its relations with Turkey, but in opting to leave the
EU it has lost its main negotiating card”.90
59.	 But the relevance of this argument strikes us as currently being diminished. In its
evidence submission, the Turkish Embassy referred to Turkish membership of the EU only
briefly, and as a “strategic objective”.91 The processes appears to be moribund, with the
Embassy referring to “political and artificial blockages for the opening of new chapters”.92
Sir Alan Duncan described Turkish membership of the EU as being “a long way off”.93 The
accession process currently seems to be a low priority for Turkey itself, as the country faces
a State of Emergency, a contentious internal debate over its future model of government,
and significant security challenges both within its borders and close beyond them. Our
86
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 32
87
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 34
88
Q133; Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 29
89
William Hale TUR0007 para 1; Union of European Turkish Democrats TUR0014 para 12—13; Dr Mina Toksoz TUR0033 p4
90
William Hale TUR0007 p 1
91
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 12
92
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 12
93
Q133

--- Sayfa 28 ---
24
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
analysis in this Chapter suggests that both the UK and Turkish governments currently
regard the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union as being both an opportunity and
incentive to strengthen their bilateral relationship, through the enhancement of trade,
defence, and security ties.94
60.	 However, possible opportunities associated with the UK’s withdrawal from the
European Union extend beyond bilateral UK-Turkish relations. The German Foreign
Minister Sigmar Gabriel noted that the establishment of a “special relationship” between
the UK and the EU “will be an important learning process for the EU and perhaps some
of it can serve as a blueprint for other countries [such as Turkey] in the long term.”95
61.	 The relationship between EU countries such as Germany,96 the Netherlands, and
Austria worsened in the months prior to the publication of this Report.97 This might be
the result of Turkey losing its EU membership incentive, as well as the EU’s handling of
the attempted coup and the failure fully to implement the refugee deal. Recently the row
with the Netherlands and Germany over AK Party ministers being barred from holding
meetings in the Netherlands98 has caused relations to sour. These tensions developed
despite the fact that Germany is Turkey’s leading trade partner.
The human rights imperative, and its relationship with trade and
defence ties
The influence of the EU and the UK on human rights in Turkey
62.	 Sir Alan Duncan, the FCO Minister with responsibility for Turkey, told us that, in the
relationship with Turkey, the UK would “ask the questions and understand first, before
criticising later”.99 In Chapters 4, 5, and 6 of this report, we examine significant concerns
about the erosion of the status of human rights and democracy in Turkey. It is notable that,
while the written submission made by the Turkish Embassy to this inquiry opened with
a reference to the “shared values”100 between the UK and Turkey, the FCO’s submission
made no such reciprocal reference. Instead, the short section of the FCO’s submission on
‘Rights and values’ in Turkey noted that “the EU Commission’s Annual Progress Report
on Turkey, released on 10 November 2015, rightly highlighted the need for reforms to
further strengthen human rights and democracy in Turkey.”101
63.	 We have noted, above, that Turkey’s relationship with the EU has recently soured,
and the accession process towards membership of the EU appears to have become both
moribund and a low priority for Turkey. But several witnesses to our inquiry noted that
this accession process had provided positive impetus to the improvement of human rights
in Turkey,102 and the FCO said in its Human Rights report of 2015 that, for Turkey, “the
94
See also Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 paras 5 and 44; Turkish Embassy concluded that the “post Brexit period
presents new opportunities for better economic relations between Turkey and the UK”, Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 3.
95
See, for example, German Foreign Minister - Turkey ‘further away from EU membership than ever, Reuters, 18 March 2017
96
See, for example, Merkel calls for calm over ‘Nazi’ accusations amid strained German-Turkish relations, Deutsche Welle, 6 March
2017
97
See, for example, WHY TURKEY’S REFERENDUM IS CAUSING HAVOC IN EUROPE, Newsweek, 14 March 2017
98
See, for example, Why is Turkey in a row with the Netherlands?, New Statesman, 14 March 2017
99
Q191
100
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 1
101
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 11
102
See, for example, Peace in Kurdistan TUR0013 para 5

--- Sayfa 29 ---
25
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
EU accession process—and prospect of accession—provides a powerful vehicle to drive
human rights reform and compliance”.103 Now that the influence of this accession process
on Turkey appears to have declined, it is important for the UK to place pressure on Turkey
to ensure that these standards are met nevertheless.
64.	 The UK has distinguished itself as a friend in the eyes of the Turkish government,
and both sides are seeking to cement a strategic relationship. But, as the UK does so,
it must not be seen as disregarding—or even excusing—allegations of serious human
rights violations and the erosion of democracy in Turkey. It is vital that the UK’s
criticism both privately and publicly is not withheld when grounds for criticism exist.
The role of trade in securing UK influence in Turkey
65.	 In order to possess effective influence within Turkey, on human rights as well as
other issues, the UK must foster a basis of interdependence within the relationship in
such a way that engenders leverage. Several witnesses told us that they believed the UK
to lack such leverage, for reasons that include its decision to leave the European Union.
Professor Rosemary Hollis from City, University of London, told us that “the Brits have got
insufficient assets—with Brexit, now less than they had—to be much use to the Turks,”104
and Professor Hale from SOAS told us that the UK “will be right to push the need for
strengthening democracy, but in criticising Ankara on these grounds Britain has to tread
cautiously, given that it has no usable sanctions to apply if the Turkish government fails to
respond positively.”105 But Sir Alan Duncan told us that trade, and its development, would
give the UK the influence required to have an impact, saying:
It is probably only when we do have good trade that we can speak strongly
about human rights.106
66.	 The Committee notes that good trade relations between Germany and Turkey did not
prevent the relationship going sour. The difference between Germany’s apparent failure to
use trade as leverage and Russia’s and Iran’s ability to succeed in doing that can possibly be
explained by two things: Successful compartmentalisation107 of energy and commercial
relations from conflicting geopolitical interests; and the ability of Russia and Iran to
potentially use other regional actors, such as the Kurds,108 as leverage against Turkey.
However, the UK can also rely on security co-operation with Turkey, especially the TF-X
project and intelligence sharing as well as its potential mediatory role between Turkey and
the UK’s Western allies.
67.	 Numerous witnesses to our inquiry told us that the drive to secure enhanced trade
ties was a central aspects of Turkish foreign policy, and that trade played a significant role
in shaping Turkey’s relations with different countries. The Union of European Turkish
Democrats (UETD) told us that this policy developed under the early years of the rule
103
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Human Rights and Democracy Cm 9245, April 2016, p 30
104
Q20
105
William Hale TUR0007 para 4
106
Q136
107
See, for example, The Influence of the Ukraine Crisis on Turkish-Russian Relations, European Leadership Network, 11 March 2015;
and Turkey and Iran: Bitter Friends, Bosom Rivals, International Crisis Group, 13 December 2016
108
See, for example, Playing the Kurdish card against Turkey, Russia Direct, 9 December 2015

--- Sayfa 30 ---
26
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
of Turkey’s incumbent AK Party after it was first elected to government in 2002, and
was established while Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was still Prime Minister as opposed to his
current position of President:
During Erdoğan’s time in office as prime minister, a more active foreign
policy was designed which paved the way to more trade and investment
in Turkey’s surrounding regions and in particular the Middle East. This
new foreign policy was not only designed to bring peace and prosperity to
the region, but also allow Turkey to improve its economic relations in the
region.109
Providing a specific national example, the Middle East analyst Lydia Sizer dedicated her
written submission to explaining the instrumental role that trade ties played in shaping
Turkey’s policies towards Libya both before, during, and after the 2011 Libyan revolution.110
68.	 There is evidence that Turkey’s prioritisation of its trading ties adds an incentive for
it to listen to, and compromise with, nations with which it otherwise has disagreements.
Perhaps the highest–profile example is Russia. As well as having a historically tense
relationship, Russia and Turkey also have significant contemporary disagreements, not
least with regard to the war in Syria where they support opposite sides. Yet the two countries
have recently enjoyed an improvement of their ties, and have enhanced their diplomatic
co-operation. When the Committee visited Turkey in January 2017, and asked President
Erdoğan about the basis of Turkey’s current good relations with Russia despite other policy
disagreements, President Erdoğan’s reply cited the high volume of trade between Turkey
and Russia as a vital strategic concern. The Turkish Embassy also cited trade as being the
basis for co-operation between Turkey and Russia, despite other disagreements:
Despite diverging views on some issues, Turkey and Russia constructed their
relations by focusing on areas of co-operation. Turkey believes dialogue is
the key to resolving differences and values its partnership with Russia. With
this understanding, the two countries became important partners during
the last two decades and developed a comprehensive co-operation, based on
mutual understanding especially in the fields of trade and energy.111
69.	 In order to have an effective impact on human rights, the FCO must also cultivate
the UK’s influence and interdependence with Turkey to ensure that its voice is heard
in Ankara. As the enhancement of its international trade ties has been a foreign policy
priority for Turkey, strong trade ties between the UK and Turkey are likely to provide
the UK with added leverage on a range of other policy areas, including human rights.
However, we believe Sir Alan Duncan’s statement that “it is probably only when we do
have good trade that we can speak strongly about human rights” must be qualified to
the extent that the UK should always raise serious human rights concerns whenever
they occur; the UK’s promotion of fundamental values cannot be predicated on “good
trade”, or any other precondition. The enhancement of its international trade ties
has been a foreign policy priority for Turkey. There are examples, such as Turkey’s
109
Union of European Turkish Democrats TUR0014 para 24
110
Lydia Sizer TUR0024
111
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 21

--- Sayfa 31 ---
27
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
relationship with Russia, to indicate that strong trade ties do indeed provide Turkey
with incentive to compromise with countries that it disagrees with in other policy
areas.
70.	 We support the expanding of trade and defence ties between the UK and Turkey,
not only because of their security and prosperity implications but also because of the
strong voice that these ties should give the UK in Ankara. It is a voice that we expect the
UK to use, not least so that its human rights concerns are heard.
71.	 The UK should therefore seek to both defend human rights and secure trade. These
two concerns have complementary—not contradictory—interests. The protection of
human rights in Turkey, and the success of UK trade there, both require the rule of law
and an impartial judiciary, an end to the purges that have followed the coup attempt,
an end to internal conflict and terrorism, and a UK Government that is listened to in
Ankara.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
28
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
3	 The coup attempt, and the ‘Gülenists’
The coup attempt of 15 July 2016
72.	 On the evening of Friday 15 July 2016, elements within the Turkish armed forces
attempted to overthrow the elected, AK Party–led government and remove the elected
President, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, from power. They failed. The President escaped from
his villa in the port of Marmaris before rebel soldiers reached him, and flew to Istanbul.
He spoke to the media from his mobile phone to call on Turks to oppose the coup attempt
by taking to the streets. Large public demonstrations formed. Turkey has a history of
military coups, but this was the first such attempt that had been resisted by the public and
by the majority of the security forces. At least 241 people were killed as a result.112
73.	 The popular will, combined with the fact that the majority of the security forces
remained loyal, ensured the failure of the coup. But, in addition to those killed, a night
of violence had seen many thousands injured and physical damage done to national
institutions in Turkey. The attack that has come to symbolise both the brutality of the
coup attempt and the threat to democracy that it represented was the bombing of the
Turkish parliament by a rebel jet while its chamber sat in emergency session. All four of
Turkey’s parliamentary parties united in their condemnation of the coup attempt.
74.	 The investigations into who exactly was responsible for the coup attempt, and why,
are yet to conclude. Witnesses to our inquiry identified four categories of those who, in
their view, appeared to be involved:
•
The Turkish Islamic preacher Fethullah Gülen—who lives in the US state of
Pennsylvania—his supporters, and their associated movement. We refer to them
as ‘Gülenists’.
•
Elements of the military who acted in the name of aspects of the ideology of
Mustafa Kemal, known as ‘Atatürk’, the founding father of the Turkish Republic
whose legacy they interpreted as stipulating a strictly secular state tradition
within Turkey, and as establishing the military as the guardians and enforcers of
this tradition. They are also associated with a Turkish–nationalist outlook that
takes a harder line with regard to issues surrounding Turkey’s Kurdish minority
and the state’s fight against the Kurdish terrorist group, the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK). Witnesses often referred to them as ‘Kemalists’.113
•
Those elements in the military who acted to preserve their privileges, and
sometimes their positions, within the armed forces.114
112
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 6
113
See, for example Q32 [Ziya Meral]; and Professor Tim Jacoby TUR0002 paras 3—4, and 11. The coup plotters also forced a
statement to be read on a state television channel, TRT, in the name of the ‘Peace at Home Council’. Both the name of the Council,
and the rhetoric of the statement, was interpreted to some as alluding to Kemalist ideology. See for example “How Turkey’s military
coup failed”, The Associated Press, 20 July 2016.
114
See, for example, the description of opportunism by Ziya Meral, Q32 [Ziya Meral], or the description of military officers trying
to preserve economic and financial privileges by Professor Tim Jacoby, TUR0002 para 15. One extensive theory is that the coup
plot was launched prematurely by officers who anticipated a purge and sought to protect themselves against dismissal. See, for
example, Q30 [William Hale] and Coup Facts, “15 July Coup Attempt and the Parallel State Structures” (August 2016), p 16

--- Sayfa 33 ---
29
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
•
Those in the military who were lied to or tricked into participation, or compelled
to participate by their commanders.115
75.	 While some of our witnesses have therefore presented theories about diverse groups
and interests supporting the coup, the Turkish government exclusively blames the
Gülenists. The perception that the Gülenists were responsible for the coup attempt is not
confined to the AK Party and the Turkish government. We heard this view in Turkey
from a wide range of people, during our meetings. The attribution of blame solely to the
Gülenists is especially important because it has justified and sustained an effort by the
government to remove, root and branch, perceived Gülenists from positions of public
influence in Turkey. The origins of this campaign of detentions and dismissals preceded
the coup, and intensified significantly thereafter with the use of powers granted under the
State of Emergency in Turkey, with President Erdoğan calling the coup attempt a “gift from
God” for apparently this reason.116 We examine the response of the Turkish government
in Chapter 4 of this report, and devote the next section of this Chapter to examining the
conflict between the Gülenists and the Turkish government, as well as the FCO’s position.
The Turkish government and the Gülenists
Opposing narratives
76.	 The conflict between the Gülenists and the Turkish government is deep and bitter.
We do not ourselves use the terms “Fethullah Terrorist Organisation” (‘FETÖ’) or “Parallel
State Structure” (PSS)—which the Turkish government uses to describe the Gülenists—or
terms such as “‘Hizmet’” and “Cemaat”, which the Gülenists use to describe themselves.
Our Conclusions and Recommendations are informed by an examination of both
perspectives, during which we use the term “the Gülenists”.
77.	 It is not our intention to re–state the arguments of both sides in the detail that they
give them, but rather to offer a summary. Both sides have produced extensive material
to illustrate their perspectives, and we provide some links to a number of examples
that are illustrative but certainly not exhaustive.117 During our visit to Turkey, and in
meetings that included conversations with the President, Prime Minister, and Foreign
Minister, we heard the perspective of the Turkish government. We have also published
two written submissions from the Turkish government to our inquiry, provided by the
Turkish Embassy in London.118 Our inquiry has also heard the perspective of groups and
115
See, for example, Ziya Meral, Q32, and Daily Sabah “July 15 Gülenist coup attempt” (3 July 2016), p 15 “SOLDIERS TOLD THEY
WERE CONDUCTING AN EXERCISE: Soldiers in their testimonies have said that their commanders told them it was just a
military exercise. Allegations circulating in the media are that high-ranking soldiers kept soldiers until 9 p.m. for night training
and later ordered them to take ammunition for a military exercise. In testimony a soldier said: “When the nation came and
climbed over the tanks, we realized that it was not a military exercise.””
116
For President Erdoğan’s reference to a ‘gift from God’, see Youtube, “BAŞKOMUTAN Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’ın DARBE GECESİ
Atatürk Havalimanın’da YAPTIĞI KONUŞMA”, accessed 13 March 2017; On the purges of the Gülenists preceding the coup
attempt, see the assertion by the Gülenists themselves that 60,000 individuals were dismissed in the year and a half before the
coup, for perceived links with the movement, TUR0036 para 14c, 74. See also, for example, Bill Park TUR0032 para 6, who refers
to President Erdoğan’s use of the phrase ‘gift from God’.
117
For some of the arguments in opposition to the Gülenists, and a perspective that is hostile to them, see Daily Sabah “July 15
Gülenist coup attempt” (3 July 2016); 15 July, 2016: Anadolu Agency FETÖ’s Coup Attempt in Turkey: A Timeline (July 2016); or
Coup Facts 15 July Coup Attempt and the Parallel State Structure 2016 (August 2016)
For some of the arguments in defence of the Gülenists, and a perspective that is supportive of them, see The Centre for ‘Hizmet’
Studies, ‘Hizmet’ Watch, or Fethullah Gülen Biographical Album by the ‘Gülen Institute’
118
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 and Turkish Embassy TUR0043

--- Sayfa 34 ---
30
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
individuals representing the Gülenists. We have published written submissions from the
Gülenists,119 and held an oral evidence session with Gülenist representatives that is a rare
example of this organisation being publicly questioned.
78.	 Based on these sources, we can report that the Turkish government describes the
Gülenists as a highly–organised and deceitful terrorist conspiracy that hides behind a
charitable face to conceal its true objective: forming a parallel state to infiltrate, undermine,
and supplant the current Turkish government. The Turkish government views the
Gülenists as having a centralised and intricate command and control structure, deriving
from a cult–like obedience to the orders of Fethullah Gülen at the apex of the hierarchy.
79.	 The Turkish government holds the Gülenists responsible for the 15 July coup attempt,
as well as for many other negative developments in Turkey. It puts particular emphasis on
the Gülenists’ prioritisation of the establishment of educational institutions as being a pre–
requisite for their infiltration of the state. It also says that the movement institutionalised a
system of cheating in examinations for entry to state institutions. As well as its education
activities, the Government says that the Gülenists established a range of media outlets for
propaganda and dis–information purposes, as well as a wide array of secretive business
networks for fund–raising.
80.	 The Gülenists, by contrast, describe themselves as a philanthropic social organisation
that is inspired by a moderate and democratic interpretation of Islam but that does not
discriminate on the basis of faith, and which embraces secularism while focusing on
charity, welfare, dialogue, and education. Instead of the view that Fethullah Gülen is at the
apex of a hierarchy, they describe themselves as lacking a centrally organised, top–down,
structure that encapsulates the entire movement. Instead, they say, theirs is a movement
inspired by Gülen rather than being controlled by him, and relying on informal networks
to connect like–minded volunteers around the world.
81.	 The Gülenists reject the charges of infiltration, saying that any presence of their
supporters in state institutions is coincidental—and derived primarily from the success
of Gülenist–run schools—rather than organised. They describe their viewpoint as having
been persecuted, requiring them to protect themselves. They say that they are strictly
peaceful, that they have been baselessly blamed by the Turkish government for the 15 July
coup attempt among other negative developments, and that the Turkish government is
persecuting them in a bid to remove any possible counter to the rule of President Erdoğan
and the AK Party.
Reports of a past alliance, and reasons for its collapse
82.	 Although the Turkish Embassy makes no reference to it in its submission, and the
fact is also absent from other accounts supported by the Turkish government, numerous
witnesses told us that the Gülenists and the AK Party were once allied. These witnesses
included Lindsay Appleby, a Director for Europe at the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office.120 The Gülenists acknowledge their support for the AK Party against the “secular
119
Centre for Hizmet Studies TUR0009; Alliance for Shared Values & Dialogue Platform TUR0035; Alliance for Shared Values and
the Dialogue Platform TUR0041. These Gülen-inspired organisations told the Committee that it was difficult to speak on behalf of
the movement as a whole, but that they had made their submission as representative as possible of the perspective of the broader
Gülenist movement. Mr Özcan Keleş, the Chair of the Dialogue Society, said: “we do not speak on behalf of Gülen, but we do
believe that our evidence—both that provided in writing and, hopefully, oral—reflects the common Hizmet perspective.” (Q42)
120
Qq180, 181[Lindsay Appleby]

--- Sayfa 35 ---
31
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
establishment” in their evidence to our inquiry,121 and we understand that President
Erdoğan has acknowledged the past association between his party and the Gülenists as
a “mistake”.122 Bill Park, a Senior Lecturer at the Defence Studies Department, King’s
College, University of London, told us in his written submission that
‘Gülenists’—typically better educated than mainstream AK Party
[supporters]—had penetrated the law, media, academia, and state
institutions such as the police and bureaucracy. Many had been fast–tracked
by the AK Party government, and some AK Party figures were themselves
sympathisers.123
Asked in oral evidence what portion of blame for the coup attempt he placed on the
Gülenists, Mr Park replied that
Immediate responsibility—probably 60%. [ … ] Responsibility in a deeper
sense for there being that many Gülenists in the officer corps, if there were
that many, lies with the AK Party.124
83.	 It is unclear when and how exactly the relationship between the AK Party and
the Gülenists soured. The Gülenists themselves cited significant policy and ideological
differences in their evidence. What is discernible from the Turkish media is that
•
As recently as May 2013, the relationship between the AK Party and the Gülenists
was tense but not broken. [On the first day of a visit to the US, then–Prime
Minister Erdoğan sent his deputy to visit Fethullah Gülen in Pennsylvania.
Erdoğan described this as a “humane visit” that his side requested, and spoke
about a “relationship of brotherhood and friendship based on the past”. Erdoğan
acknowledged, but sought to play down, rumours that his relationship with
Gülen had soured.]125
•
But the relationship rapidly disintegrated thereafter. In November 2013, the
government moved to curtail Gülenist preparatory schools in Turkey, which
would have been a blow to the heart of the organisation given its emphasis on
education.126
•
In December 2013, a series of corruption charges brought against leading AK
Party figures have been broadly interpreted as revenge by Gülenists sympathisers
within the judiciary.127 The Gülenists date the beginning of the government’s
efforts to purge them to December 2013,128 and say that 60,000 individuals were
removed from their jobs even before the coup attempt of 15 July 2016.129
121
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 32
122
Hata yaptım özür dilerim, Vatan, 5 August 2016
123
Bill Park TUR0032 para 4
124
Q32 [Bill Park]
125
See, for example, Deputy PM made ‘humane visit’ to Islamic scholar Gülen, Erdoğan confirms, Daily News, 19 May 2013
126
See, for example, Erdoğan launches another war, Daily News, 23 November 2013; and “Erdoğan: “No back steps in education
reform”, Anadolu Agency, 21 November 2013
127
See, for example We’ll expose this set-up no matter what: PM Erdogan, Anadolu Agency, 18 December 2013; and Turkish PM
calls December anti-graft probe coup attempt in disguise, Anadolu Agency, 15 January 2014; and “Anti-graft operation is a smear
campaign”: Turkish PM, Anadolu Agency, 29 December 2013
128
Peoples’ Democratic Party TUR0036 repeatedly refers to the date
129
Peoples’ Democratic Party TUR0036 para 14c, 74

--- Sayfa 36 ---
32
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
84.	 The AK Party and the Gülenists were once allied. They are both movements
with Islamist influences, and they made common cause in challenging the Kemalist
establishment and military leadership. This past alliance is a fact that AK Party
officials now prefer not to mention, and this reinforces our concern that purges of
perceived Gülenist sympathisers will be undertaken with the added bitterness of a
fratricidal conflict.
The basis of the case against the Gülenists
Description as ‘terrorists’
85.	 The Gülenists were first officially described in Turkey as a terrorist organisation in
April 2015,130 and the Turkish Interior Ministry listed Fethullah Gülen as one of Turkey’s
most wanted terrorists on 28 October 2015.131 Turkey’s National Security Council
described the Gülenists as the “Fethullah Terrorist Organisation” (‘FETÖ’), in May 2016,
six weeks before the coup attempt.
86.	 The Gülenists nevertheless dispute whether their definition as terrorists has validity
under Turkish law. They argue that, under Turkey’s constitution, only the United Nations
or Turkey’s High Court can make terrorist designations, and that neither institution has
designated the Gülenists as terrorists.132 A Memorandum by the Council of Europe’s
Commissioner for Human Rights has also questioned the legal validity of the definition
of the Gülenists as terrorists in Turkey, on procedural grounds.133 The Memorandum
also said that “the Commissioner must also take note of the fact that this organisation’s
readiness to use violence, a sine qua non component of the definition of terrorism, had
not become apparent to Turkish society at large until the coup attempt”, thus calling
into question the basis for the designation of the Gülenists as terrorists prior to the coup
attempt. The Turkish government nevertheless maintains that the designation of the
Gülenists as terrorists is both valid and essential.
Confessions
87.	 The evidence presented so far to argue in favour of the culpability of the Gülenists
for the coup attempt has been overwhelmingly anecdotal or circumstantial, and often
based on confessions. The validity of these confessions has been called into question
in some cases, amid accusations that they were detained under duress. One prominent
example, which is frequently cited by anti–Gülenist literature, is the purported confession
of Lieutenant Colonel Levent Turkkan—an aide at the time to General Hulusi Aker, the
Chief of the Turkish General Staff who was held hostage by the coup plotters—that he was
a member of ‘FETÖ’ and that ‘FETÖ’ orchestrated the coup.134 But, in Turkkan’s case,135
images have emerged to suggest that he may have been injured in detention. Allegations of
130
See, for example, Turkey: Seven Gulenists indicted on terrorism charges, Anadolu Agency, 9 April 2015
131
Put a Break on Terrorism at all Hands, Red List, accessed 13 March 2017
132
Peoples’ Democratic Party TUR0036, para 65
133
Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken
under the state of emergency in Turkey (October 2016), para 20: “Furthermore, it [‘FETÖ’] has not yet been recognised as a
terrorist organisation in a final judgment of the Turkish Court of Cassation which, according to the Turkish authorities, is a
crucial legal act in the Turkish legal system when it comes to the designation of an organisation as terrorist.”
134
See, for example Anadolu Agency FETÖ’’s Coup Attempt in Turkey: A Timeline (July 2016) p 42—43; Examples of other
confessions are in Daily Sabah July 15 Gülenist coup attempt (3 July 2016) p.27
135
See Top Turkish commander’s aide admits allegiance to Gülenists, Daily News, 20 July 2016

--- Sayfa 37 ---
33
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
torture being used by the Turkish security forces are discussed in Chapter 5 of this report.
Gareth Jenkins, an analyst based in Turkey who works as a Non–Resident Senior Fellow
at the Institute for Security & Development Policy, concluded in an article published on
26 January 2017 that
Remarkably, despite months of vigorous interrogation, no convincing
evidence has yet been made public about how the coup was planned or
coordinated. There can be no doubt that, if such evidence had emerged, the
Turkish authorities would have ensured it was in the public domain.136
88.	 Another prominent example of anecdotal evidence, that is frequently cited by
anti–Gülenist literature to argue that Fethullah Gülen himself was directly involved in
orchestrating the coup, is the testimony by General Aker that one of the soldiers who took
him hostage—Brigadier General Hakan Evrim—tried to make him speak to Fethullah
Gülen on the telephone during the coup attempt. The General said that he refused to do
so.137 Several of our witnesses told us that, if the Gülenists were indeed involved in the
coup, then it was highly likely that Fethullah Gülen himself had direct knowledge of the
attempt.138 But Bill Park nevertheless cast doubt on the account of General Aker being
offered a telephone conversation with Fethullah Gülen:
One of the problems with this idea that Aker was told they could put him
in touch with Fethullah Gülen is the assumption that this organisation,
which can take over the state in a secretive way and more or less take over
the economy in a massive way, is so dumb as to say to the chief of the
general staff, who is going to oppose them, “Look, we’re Gülenists and you
can phone this guy.” It is contested whether he was given that opportunity
[to speak with Fethullah Gülen on the telephone]. The aide de camp who
apparently gave him that opportunity [to speak with Fethullah Gülen on
the telephone] was beaten up badly when he initially said, “Yes, that’s what
I did.” So I am not sure we can say that there was going to be a phone call.139
The extent of the Gülenist movement, and concerns about circumstantial
evidence
89.	 The size, scope, and decentralised nature of the Gülenist movement also casts doubt
on the validity of the blanket designation of it, and by implication anyone ever associated
with it, as terrorists. At the very least, it raises questions about whether the evidence used
to make such a designation is highly circumstantial in the case of individuals. Among
their global activities, and the institutions that the Gülenists have established world–wide,
the Gülenists have described:
•
Around 2,000 schools in 160 countries world-wide,140 including approximately
100–120 in the United States141 and approximately 800 of the best schools in
Turkey.142 The Turkish government argues that Gülenist–affiliated schools are
136
Myths and Mysteries: Six months on from Turkey’s Curious Coup, The Turkey Analyst, 26 January 2017
137
See, for example, the mentioning of this story in Daily Sabah July 15 Gülenist coup attempt (3 July 2016) p.26
138
See, for example, Q32[Ziya Meral] and, Q31[William Hale]
139
Q31 [Bill Park]
140
Centre for Hizmet Studies TUR0009 para 8; Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 6
141
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 para 3
142
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 50

--- Sayfa 38 ---
34
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
part of a nefarious strategy for the group, including to raise revenue or infiltrate
public institutions in Turkey. Sir Alan Duncan told us that 15 universities
and more than 1,000 private schools had been closed in Turkey after the coup
attempt, for alleged Gülenist links.143
•
Affiliated media outlets in Turkey, including at least 13 television and radio
stations that the group says the Turkish government has since taken over or
closed.144 Zaman newspaper, which was the largest–selling in Turkey at the time
of its publication according to the Gülenists,145 was one of them.146
•
Medical facilities and international humanitarian relief organisations.147
•
Affiliated companies.148
•
Trade unions.149
The Gülenists told us that “the total value of the land and properties seized [in Turkey]
from ‘Hizmet’–affiliated schools, universities, hospitals and charities is estimated to have
reached 15 billion dollars”.150
90.	 The Gülenists insisted that the movement did not maintain a centrally–organised,
top–down hierarchy that bound members strictly into the movement. Instead, they
repeated that the movement was bound by “networks”151 that they described as being
“informal”, rather than “loose”,152 and being predicated on inspiration, volunteering, and
philanthropy:
As a social movement, ‘Hizmet’ does not have a corporation–style centrally
organised, top down, hierarchical structure that encapsulates the entire
movement. Rather, it relies on informal networks, moral authority and
organic leadership to mobilise the grassroots to support ‘Hizmet’s’ formal
activities.153
91.	 Given the extent of this organisation, and its purportedly informal organisation, the
Gülenists have argued that individuals are being linked to the movement by the Turkish
government, and therefore being punished as terrorists, on the basis of evidence that
includes connections as circumstantial as what school they or their children go to, which
bank they use (with Bank Asya being associated with the Gülenists), whether they use the
messaging app ‘ByLock’ which the government associates with the Gülenists, which media
143
Q199
144
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 14b
145
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 35
146
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 makes reference to “’Hizmet’’s Zaman newspaper”
147
Gülen Institute, ‘Fethullah Gülen Biographical Album’, accessed 13 March 2017
148
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 14c
149
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 44
150
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 25
151
See Q82[Özcan Keleş]
152
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035, para 5, says “To clarify, in no part of our written statement do we
describe ‘Hizmet’ as a “loose network”.
153
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035 para 7

--- Sayfa 39 ---
35
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
publications they read or write for, and the charities that they donate to or are affiliated
with.154 The evidence provided by purported informants is alleged by the Gülenists to
often form the basis of cases against individuals.155
92.	 Witnesses to our inquiry challenged the Gülenists’ claim to lack a hierarchical
structure. Ziya Meral told the Committee that the Gülen movement has “layers”,
differentiating between those who were simply inspired by Gülen’s teachings and those on
the “more politically active and professional side of the movement—people who are paid
by the movement and under the movement’s command.”156
93.	 These witnesses told the Committee that, on the basis of their understanding of
the nature of the Gülen movement, they found it inconceivable Gülen would not have
known about individual Gulenists’ involvement in the coup and that he would have had
to sanction any activity. Ziya Meral noted that “if any Gülenist officer was part of it [the
coup], they would never have acted on their own; their participation would have gone all
the way up. It is impossible for a Gülenist general to act without consulting Gülen and
getting his tacit or direct approval.”157 Professor William Hale also noted that “I can’t
believe that Fethullah Gülen didn’t know anything about it, and I can’t believe that, if
he did know something about it, he couldn’t have stopped it. I find that impossible to
believe.”158
Court cases
94.	 The Turkish government immediately blamed the Gülenists for the coup attempt,
and did so on the night of 15 July itself. But having the Turkish courts convict individuals
of participation in the coup on the basis of evidence, let alone convict them for doing
so with Gülenist motivations, has proved to be a slower and more complex process.
Gareth Jenkins concluded of the immediate blaming of the Gülenists that “it was was an
assumption, not a deduction”.159
95.	 The Committee asked the Turkish Embassy, six months after the coup attempt,
whether any individuals had yet been convicted by a court for taking part, let alone
being convicted of taking part on the basis of Gülenist motivations. The Embassy did
not provide us with a figure, saying instead that “as the judicial process is in progress, the
number of those subject to criminal investigations is not definite”.160 We asked the FCO
the same question at the same time and, like the Turkish Embassy, it could not point us
to a definitive example of a guilty conviction having yet occurred. The FCO told us that
The Justice Minister said on 1 February [2017] that 1,094 trials have been
opened against alleged coup plotters and members of the Gülen movement.
Many of those trials have multiple defendants. Only a handful of cases have
concluded and there are not currently official figures on those found guilty
or acquitted.161
154
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035, para 28; Centre for Hizmet Studies TUR0009 para 9
155
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform TUR0035, para 28; Centre for Hizmet Studies TUR0009 para 9
156
Q32
157
Q32
158
Q31
159
Myths and Mysteries: Six months on from Turkey’s Curious Coup The Turkey Analyst, 26 January 2017
160
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q3. Confusingly, the next sentenced reads “less than half of them (around 40%) are detained on
demand”, which implies that the Embassy may have at least an indication of the numbers under criminal investigation.
161
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0042 section 1

--- Sayfa 40 ---
36
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
96.	 The Committee notes that, at the time of writing, some of the defendants in prominent
trials surrounding the coup have admitted in court to taking part in the coup attempt
while denying that they were Gülenists, or that their motives for taking part had anything
to do with the Gülenists.162 Those captured soldiers who have purportedly confessed to
being Gülenists have not yet done so in court or in public. In terms of the FCO’s position
on whether there was sufficient evidence for the UK to designate the Gülenists as a terrorist
organisation, Sir Alan Duncan’s answer was categorical:
No. I don’t think that we can say that we have evidence of the sort of activity
that would entitle us to call that a terrorist organisation.163
97.	 Given the brutality of the events of 15 July, the severity of the charges made against
the Gülenists, and the scale of the purges of perceived Gülenists that has been justified
on this basis, there is a relative lack of hard, publicly–available evidence to prove that
the Gülenists as an organisation were responsible for the coup attempt in Turkey. While
there is evidence to indicate that some individual Gülenists were involved, it is mostly
anecdotal or circumstantial, sometimes premised on information from confessions or
informants, and is—so far—inconclusive in relation to the organisation as a whole or
its leadership. As we publish this report, nine months after the coup attempt, neither
the UK nor Turkish governments can point us to one person who has been found guilty
by a court of involvement in the coup attempt, let alone anyone being found guilty
with evidence of involvement with Gülenist motives. We also note that, despite Turkey
purportedly submitting 80 boxes of ‘evidence’ to the US to achieve the extradition of
Fethullah Gülen on the basis that he masterminded the coup attempt, the US judiciary
has not yet moved to deport him.
98.	 But the explanations provided to us by the Gülenists did not resolve our
uncertainties about the fundamental nature and motives of their movement. The belief
that Gülenists were responsible for the coup attempt, as well as for numerous other
manipulations of the state through abuse of public positions that they held in Turkey,
is manifest across the political spectrum in Turkey. A lack of transparency pervades
some of the core activities of the Gülenists, making it impossible for us to confirm that
all of these activities are purely philanthropic.
99.	 Gülenists are unlikely to have been the only elements involved in the coup attempt.
Kemalist elements within the military, those who opposed the AK Party, or those who
simply wished to preserve their own positions, are also likely to have been involved.
Some, especially in the lower ranks of the military, appeared to have taken part, at
least initially, without realising that they were involved in a coup attempt.
100.	Since around 2013, individuals associated with the Gülenists have adopted a
political agenda opposed to the AK Party government of Turkey, and have possessed
the means, motive, and opportunity to support the coup attempt, but their culpability
has yet to be definitively proved. The FCO told us that it did not have evidence to justify
the designation of the Gülenists as a terrorist organisation by the UK, and we agree
with this assessment.
162
See, for example, the trial of those soldiers who were captured and tried for allegedly trying to assassinate President Erdoğan
in Marmaris on 15 July 2016. Some, such as Sukru Seymen and Gokhan Sahin Sonmezates, said that they took part in the coup
attempt but denied any links with the Gülenists; Son dakika: Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan’a suikast girişimi davasında çarpıcı
ifadeler Milliyet, 20 February 2017 and Darbeci eski general Gökhan Sönmezateş ‘Tuzağa düşürüldük’, Aydinlik, 20 February 2017.
163
Q193

--- Sayfa 41 ---
37
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The knowledge of the FCO about the Gülenists’ role in the coup
attempt
101.	Despite Sir Alan Duncan telling us that the UK’s understanding of the threat that
Turkey is facing was almost unique,164 the account that the FCO gave us of the Gülenists
and their alleged involvement in the coup attempt seemed confused. The FCO’s written
submission to our inquiry made no reference to Gülen or the Gülenists.165 Sir Alan Duncan
explained this by saying that the terms of reference of this inquiry did not specifically
invite the FCO to comment on the Gülenists,166 but it was a surprising omission given
the emphasis that the Turkish government places on the Gülenists and our aim of
understanding the FCO’s policy towards Turkey.
102.	The FCO’s oral evidence addressed the Gülenists, but appeared at times to be
contradictory. Sir Alan Duncan initially appeared to repeat the Turkish government’s
position. He referred to “clear and systematic infiltration of the entire apparatus of
government by a group of people who, as a state within the state, try to overturn the
state”,167 although he did not specifically refer to the Gülenists by name. When asked
specifically whether the Gülenist organisation were responsible for the coup he answered:
I think the answer has to be, in large part, in terms of significant involvement,
yes.168
103.	But Sir Alan’s later answers were more equivocal. When pressed about the extent of
Gülenist involvement in the coup attempt, he said:
This is a very complicated phenomenon in Turkish government and society;
it will probably take years to analyse this and to get to the bottom of it.169
Asked specifically whether he believed that the Gülenists were “a state within a state”, Sir
Alan said:
I think, from where I sit, if I were asked to say yes or no, I would say yes.
Is it absolutely crystal clear? That is impossible to answer. I think there
is a court process here, which will decide: extradition requests, that kind
of thing. That is a court process. I am a Foreign Minister, not the world’s
greatest expert on Fethullah Gülen. But that is the judgment I have offered
the Committee.170
104.	When asked on the basis of what evidence the FCO was reaching its conclusions
on the Gülenists and the coup attempt, Lindsay Appleby, a Director for Europe at the
FCO, gave an initial reply indicating that it was uncertain to what extent Gülenists were
involved:
Many of the key individuals, by the nature of an attempted coup, were
from the military. It is not consistent with membership of the military to
164
Q132
165
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010
166
Q174
167
Q156
168
Q175
169
Q173
170
Q177

--- Sayfa 42 ---
38
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
be a member of an alternative organisation, so it isn’t clear how many of
the military people were Gülenists, nor is it clear the degree to which the
organisation—or the multiple organisations that make up Gülenism—were
themselves directing or driving any of the activity.171
Soon afterwards, however, Mr Appleby said that there was evidence of individual Gülenist
being involved, although he once again said that the degree of organisational participation
by the Gülenists was unclear. He also identified the Turkish government as a source of
information for the FCO:
On the basis of the information that I have and on the basis of what we
have looked at in the Foreign Office, it is very clear that there were lots of
people identified as Gülenists who were involved in the coup. But we don’t
have clear information, or an analytical base, to assert definitively one way
or another whether the organisation as a whole directed the coup attempt.
That is precisely the sort of evidence that we have been asking for from the
Turkish government, when they bring to us individual allegations.172
105.	The FCO seems willing to accept the Turkish government’s account of the coup
attempt and the Gülenists broadly at face value. While some of the individuals involved
in the coup may have been Gülenists, given the large number of Gülenist supporters
and organisations in Turkey, it does not necessarily follow that the Gülenists were
responsible for the coup or that their leadership directed the coup. However, the FCO
seems unable to cite much evidence to prove that it is true. Despite its claim to possess
an almost unique understanding of the threat that Turkey faces, the FCO strikes us as
knowing too little for itself about either the Gülenists or their role in the coup attempt.
The Government’s support for the Turkish government in the wake of the coup attempt
would have been more convincing had it been able to present an independent analysis to
support its position. We recommend again that the Government ensures that sufficient
funding is available to the FCO, to repair the hollowed-out state of the FCO’s analytical
and research capabilities.
171
Q178
172
Q180 [Lindsay Appleby]

--- Sayfa 43 ---
39
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
4	 The Turkish government’s response to
the threat from the coup attempt
The State of Emergency
106.	The lethal violence underpinning the coup attempt of 15 July 2016 represents a denial
of the most basic of human rights and freedoms, as well as of the values of democracy.
As the FCO repeated to us, the UK supports Turkey’s right and obligation to defend
itself against such threats, and to punish the perpetrators.173 At the same time, Turkey
accepts—as an intrinsic part of its values—legal limitations to the way in which a state can
respond to such threats, so as to protect the values, rights, freedoms that are threatened by
terrorism, coups, and other crimes.174
107.	On 21 July 2016, after the 15 July coup attempt, Turkey declared a State of Emergency.
In the formal notification that Turkey provided to the Council of Europe, under the terms
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), Turkey said that its basis for
declaring the Emergency was not just the coup attempt, but also the threat from terrorism:
The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have
posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to
the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.175
The State of Emergency was extended by the Turkish parliament for a further three months
in October 2016 and then for a second time for another three months, in January 2017.
108.	Under the terms of Turkey’s Constitution,176 a State of Emergency enhances the
powers of the Turkish state in order to counter threats to national security and stability.
One of its most salient features is its granting to the President, supported by the council
of ministers, the power to issue legislative decrees that have the status of law without
being passed by parliament. At the same time, the State of Emergency also suspends or
reduces some of the rights and freedoms that are conventionally guaranteed to the citizen
under the Turkish constitution, including some of those with regard to dismissal from
employment, detention, freedom of speech, and freedom of assembly.177 International law
takes account of the existence of a State of Emergency, and the declaration of an Emergency
alters some of Turkey’s international obligations. The ECHR permits the declaration of a
State of Emergency under the provisions of its Article 15, “in time of war or other public
emergency threatening the life of the nation”, and this is the clause that Turkey applied to
the coup attempt and its aftermath and to terrorism.
109.	Article 15 of the ECHR nevertheless applies with specific restrictions: certain
provisions of the ECHR remain in place even under a State of Emergency, including the
right to life except in respect of deaths resulting from lawful acts of war (Article 2), the
173
See, for example, the FCO’s offer of support for Turkey in response to the coup attempt, Foreign and Commonwealth Office
TUR0010 paras 8—9
174
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 7; Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q1
175
Council of Europe, Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of Turkey, dated 21 July 2016, accessed 13
March 2017
176
Constitution of the Republic of Turkey
177
For a summary, see William Hale TUR0007 para 3

--- Sayfa 44 ---
40
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
prohibition of torture (Article 3), and the principle of ‘no punishment without law’ (Article
7).178 Governments must remain bound by their other commitments under international
law. And any actions taken by the Government under a State of Emergency must be
“strictly required by the exigencies of the situation”. This latter point means that a State
of Emergency should over time be self-correcting, because the measures taken under it
should remove the circumstances that justify their existence. In light of this, witnesses
expressed a number of concerns to us about the basis of the State of Emergency in Turkey.
These concerns were summarised to us by Dr Alan Greene, a Lecturer in Law at Durham
University:
•
The application of the Emergency by Turkey to the coup attempt, its aftermath,
and terrorism is broad, and Turkey’s definition of terrorism—not least the one
that it applies to the Gülenists, as discussed in Chapter 3—is vague. Making
the provision even broader still, the Council of Europe reports that Emergency
powers can target not only those who are members of a terrorist organisation but
also those who support such an organisation.179 The wide application of these
powers will likely make the “exigencies of the situation” harder to resolve, thus
lengthening the time taken to do so and the period for which the Emergency
powers apply.180
•
Article 15 of the ECHR contains no specific time limit as to the duration of
a State of Emergency. A permanent state of emergency is not, technically, a
contravention. It is nevertheless unprecedented for the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) to pressure a state into ending a State of Emergency,
and Dr Green told the Committee that “to date, the Court has never found that
an emergency did not exist in a state that declared one”.181
•
Turkey has a history of extending States of Emergency for prolonged periods. Dr
Greene writes that “in 1987, for example, Turkey declared a State of Emergency
in the face of escalating terrorist attacks. This was to remain in force until it
was lifted on the last two provinces in November 2002—a period of 15 years.”182
The AK Party cancelled this State of Emergency after first being elected to
government in 2002.
110.	In terms of Turkey’s legal obligations under the State of Emergency, the submission
from the Turkish Embassy said:
In the face of grave and violent attacks against the national security and
FETO terrorist organisation’s infiltration everywhere, the declaration of the
State of Emergency was deemed necessary. The Republic of Turkey adheres
to its obligations stemming from international conventions to which it is
a party and strongly adheres to democracy, human rights, the principle of
rule of law. In this process, due respect will continue to be shown to protect
fundamental rights and freedoms and the principle of supremacy of law
will be strictly observed, as always. Legal remedies are available against acts
178
European Convention on Human Rights, Article 15
179
Council of Europe, “Measures taken under the state of emergency in Turkey”, 26 July 2016
180
Dr Alan Greene TUR0006 p 8
181
Dr Alan Greene TUR0006 p 4,6
182
Dr Alan Greene TUR0006 p 6

--- Sayfa 45 ---
41
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
and measures to be taken within the context of the State of Emergency,
including individual application to Constitutional Court. The supervision
of the European Court of Human Rights remains valid.183
Referring to Article 15 of the ECHR, the Embassy also told us that Turkey’s response
was necessary and proportionate.184 The FCO said that the UK emphasised to Turkey the
importance of complying with these obligations:
Ministers have also made clear the importance of ensuring measures taken
under the State of Emergency are measured and proportionate, upholding
democratic principles and Turkey’s international human rights obligations.185
111.	Terrorism and coup attempts are a denial of the most basic of human rights and
freedoms, as well as of the values of democracy. It would be naïve to assume that any
country would go through a coup such as the one Turkey went through and not see
significant changes made in order to protect its democracy and the rule of law. The
UK is right to support Turkey’s defence of itself against future threats from coups
and terrorism. However, Turkey must demonstrate its commitment to upholding its
international legal obligations during its response to these threats, and the UK has an
important role to play in ensuring Turkey’s compliance.
112.	The State of Emergency in Turkey significantly expands the power of the
executive, while also curtailing some of the rights and freedoms of the citizen. While
the implementation of the State of Emergency is understandable given the events of
the July coup attempt, the Turkish government needs to provide the international
community with a clear indication that it is seeking a path to normalise the security
situation. States of Emergency should be self-correcting, as the powers that they allow
should address the threat that permits them. The threat to which they apply should be
specific. Although permissible under, and guided by, the provisions of Article 15 of the
European Convention in Human Rights (ECHR), a broad and vague application of the
State of Emergency in Turkey, in a way that extends far beyond addressing the causes
of the coup attempt, risks a prolonged period of Emergency rule, and that raises the
risk of people’s rights being abused.
113.	The FCO should press Turkey to ensure that
a)
the provisions of Turkey’s State of Emergency, and the actions taken under
them, are proportionate to the exigencies of the circumstances that triggered
the Emergency’s declaration, and that these exigencies are given as narrow a
definition as possible
b)
the State of Emergency is temporary, not prolonged, and is lifted as soon as
possible
c)
That Turkey complies fully with its ECHR obligations.
183
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 7
184
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q1
185
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 8

--- Sayfa 46 ---
42
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Detentions and dismissals after the coup attempt
114.	The scale of dismissals and detentions that have taken place after the 15 July coup
attempt has been significant. In terms of dismissals, we have seen official figures cited in
January 2017 during a television interview by the Turkish Labour Minister Labour, Minister
Mehmet Müezzinoğlu,186 and which were corroborated for us by the FCO as official
Turkish figures at that time. These were that 97,679 public servants had been permanently
dismissed from their jobs and a further 37,677 had been temporarily suspended.187 In
terms of the numbers of people detained, the Committee has seen figures—again dated to
January 2017—that were published by the state news agency, Anadolu, and attributed to
sources in Turkey’s Justice Ministry. These were that legal action had been taken against
approximately 103,000 people and that approximately 41,000 of them had been remanded
in custody.188 Sir Alan Duncan told us that “the scale of arrests and detentions is massive
and needs to be explained and justified”189 and that “I think that anyone would share the
concern that they do appear over-extensive.”190
115.	We consider it likely that these numbers have since risen, but the latest figures are
difficult to obtain. We asked the Turkish Embassy in London to provide us with the latest
figures at the conclusion of our inquiry but, despite being asked for them directly, the
Embassy did not do so.191 Instead, the Embassy told us that “as the investigations continue,
the numbers of those dismissed/suspended are not definite.”192 There also appears to be
uncertainty on facts as fundamental as how many individuals face trial by a court, and
how many have so far been found guilty or acquitted. The Committee wrote to the FCO
for clarification, and was told that
With regard to criminal trials, the [Turkish] Justice Minister said on 1
February [2017] that 1,094 trials have been opened against alleged coup
plotters and members of the Gülen movement. Many of those trials have
multiple defendants. Only a handful of cases have concluded and there are
not currently official figures on those found guilty or acquitted.193
Dismissal by decree
116.	From the above figures, it appears as though only a minority of those dismissed from
their employment after the coup attempt have had criminal charges pressed against them.
The Turkish Embassy’s written submission asked for a distinction to be drawn between
those who were subject to criminal investigation at the behest of the judiciary, and those
who had been dismissed from their jobs as part of “administrative proceedings” or an
“administrative” investigation on the basis of the decree powers afforded to the executive
by the State of Emergency. It said that
186
See, for example, Mehmet Müezzinoğlu; KHK’lerle kamudan 97 bin 679 kişi ihraç edildi Öğretmenler İçin, 10 October 2017
187
The FCO subsequently provided us with a slightly lower number, of 94,867 public employees having been permanently dismissed
since the coup attempt of 15 July 2016 and 30,618 suspended.
188
More than 40,000 remanded in custody since coup bid, Anadolu Agency, 2 January 2017
189
Q156
190
Q190
191
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q1, Sections a-d
192
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q1
193
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0042 Section 1

--- Sayfa 47 ---
43
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Dismissals can be made via lists annexed to Decrees or through Board
decisions that function within public institutions in accordance with the
Laws and Decrees.194
117.	 Although the Turkish Embassy told the Committee that “dismissals should not be
seen as criminal punitive actions”,195 it is unclear how else they should be interpreted, given
that these dismissals occurred after the coup attempt and overwhelmingly on the basis of
Emergency decree powers that are intended to protect the state against the most severe of
threats. Additionally, the provisions that apply to those dismissed appear tantamount to
punishments that will severely and adversely affect their lives, and to punishment without
necessarily being able to see the evidence against them or ever being tried by a court. In
a Memorandum published in October 2016, the Council of Europe’s Commissioner on
Human Rights wrote of the dismissals that
•
“The decrees do not specify any evidentiary criteria or requirements on which
these “assessments” must be based. [ … ]The Commissioner was informed that
in the practical application of these measures, the persons in question were not
provided with evidence against them and were unable to defend themselves in
an adversarial manner in many cases.”196
•
“The Commissioner is particularly concerned about a number of additional
sanctions which automatically apply to physical persons dismissed by decree
or through the procedures established in decrees. These include a life-long
ban from working in the public sector (which includes the practice of law) and
private security companies, annulment of passports, eviction from staff housing
and the annulment of rental agreements between these persons and public or
semi-public bodies.”197
•
“The Commissioner also has grave concerns about the method of publishing a
list of names annexed to decrees, which are laws in essence. It is beyond doubt
that these persons will have to bear the stigma of having been assessed as having
links with a terrorist organisation by the Turkish government itself, heavily
compromising their potential of finding employment elsewhere.”198
•
“A series of measures of particular concern to the Commissioner are those
which target directly or are liable to affect family members of suspects in an
automatic fashion [ … including] evictions, termination of lease agreements
and freezing of assets of the said suspects [ … ] the possibility for annulling
passports of spouses of suspects who are themselves not under investigation.
[ … ]The Commissioner is worried that such measures will inevitably fuel the
impression of “guilt by association””.199
194
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q2
195
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q2
196
Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken
under the state of emergency in Turkey (October 2016), para 23—24
197
Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken
under the state of emergency in Turkey (October 2016), para 33
198
Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken
under the state of emergency in Turkey (October 2016), para 33
199
Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken
under the state of emergency in Turkey (October 2016),para 41

--- Sayfa 48 ---
44
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
118.	The extent of the consequences for those seen as previously associated with the Gülen
movement was brought home to us in the conversations we had with major private sector
representatives. Their anxiety not to recruit anyone with the taint of such association
reinforced the impression that even inadvertent and wholly innocent association with
Gülenists was now likely to have catastrophic long term individual and family consequences
and therefore provide the scope for wide ranging and sustained injustice.
The range of sectors affected
119.	As well as the scale of the dismissals and detentions that took place after the coup
attempt, what is also striking is the number of different sectors affected. After a military
coup attempt, it is to be expected that the armed forces will be extensively investigated and
some of its members dismissed or subject to other punishments. In Turkey, before the end
of July 2016, the three branches of Turkey’s armed forces had lost almost half of their most
senior officers to dismissals. According to information published in the state news agency
Anadolu on 28 July 2016:
Of the armed forces’ 325 most senior officers, 149 have been sacked … In the
army, 87 out of 202 generals [ … ]were discharged; 32 out of 56 admirals, [
… ]were dismissed from the navy; and 30 out of 67 generals [ … ]lost their
air force posts.200
120.	The scale of these purges within the armed forces raises questions in its own right
about what impact there might be on the efficacy of Turkey’s military.201 But a wide range
of civilians sectors were also affected. Even before the end of July 2016, those dismissed
included 42,767 staff from the Ministry of National Education (around half of them
teachers and half of them support staff), 2,239 academics from state universities, and others
from Ministries ranging from the Ministry of Health (5,581 dismissals) and the Ministry
of Food, Agriculture, and Livestock (1,379 dismissals) to the Ministry of Forestry and
Water Affairs (221 dismissals). A publication produced by the state news agency, Anadolu,
detailed these dismissals along with others from dozens of other sectors.202 The numbers
of those dismissed by decree in Turkey has subsequently risen.
121.	Almost 100,000 people were permanently dismissed from their employment in
Turkey following the coup attempt, while between 30,000 and 40,000 were temporarily
suspended. The Turkish government itself seems uncertain about the latest figure,
but the number is likely to have risen since these numbers were published in January
2017. Most appear to have lost their jobs, and been subjected to a range of other
punishments, on the basis of executive decrees that are permitted by Turkey’s State
of Emergency. They do not face criminal charges, and were not tried by a court before
their punishment.
122.	Given the anecdotal and circumstantial nature of the evidence that has been used
to link the Gülenists with the coup attempt, we question the evidential basis upon
which these individuals—including the majority who held positions in the education
sector or civil service, rather than the military branch of the state—were designated
200
Turkey’s coup probe sees 149 senior officers sacked, Anadolu Agency, 28 July 2016
201
The Turkish Embassy told us that “ the country’s military capacity has come out almost intact from the thwarted coup attempt”,
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 5
202
Anadolu Agency FETÖ’’s Coup Attempt in Turkey: A Timeline (July 2016), p 40

--- Sayfa 49 ---
45
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
by the state as terrorists, or connected to the coup attempt, under Turkey’s State of
Emergency. The coup attempt has also been used as an opportunity to dismiss large
numbers of non-military government employees that were opposed to or critical of the
government and President, as well as those suspected of links to the Gülen movement.
Means of appeal and redress
123.	The Turkish Embassy told us that “domestic remedies exist for those who believe they
have been “wrongfully suspected” in the anti-terrorism probes”.203 A written submission
from the Embassy explained that
For dismissals; boards have been established at the office of Prime Minister,
within the public institutions and the Offices of Governors across Turkey.
Upon individual applications to these boards, over 31 thousand public
employees have been reinstated, to date.
Moreover, with the Decree 685 dated 2 January 2017, a special commission
(Inquiry Commission on State of Emergency Measures) has been established
as a binding legal remedy to address measures that are taken directly with
Decrees.
In this respect, the Commission will assess applications regarding acts and
measures that are taken directly with Decrees. These include dismissals
of public employees and closure of associations, institutions, as well as
media outlets, as listed in relevant Decrees. Establishment of the Inquiry
Commission provides an effective domestic legal remedy concerning such
cases.204
124.	The Turkish Embassy therefore told us that 31,000 public employees had been
reinstated after their cases were investigated. This figure marked a significant increase on
the previous numbers provided to the Committee. When the Committee met President
Erdoğan on 17 January 2017, he told us that approximately 19,500 public servants had
been reinstated. Similarly, when Sir Alan Duncan gave evidence to the Committee on 31
January 2017, he said that 20,000 civil servants had been reinstated.205
125.	Our assessments from interviews conducted during our visit to Turkey in January
2017 were less optimistic, and indicated that—by that time—only a very small number of
people had been restored to their work. The opposition People’s Democratic Party (HDP)
in Turkey, which is one of four to have representation in Turkey’s parliament, is one of the
sources to have commented that there still exists only a limited number of institutions
that are able to hear appeals in Turkey, and that their ability to hear adequately the more
than 100,000 cases that could be presented is therefore limited.206 As well as the capacity
constraint, the HDP also questioned the impartiality of the Commission of Inquiry in
particular, saying that
203
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q1
204
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q4
205
Q200
206
Peoples’ Democratic Party Latest decrees are too small and symbolic to change the deteriorating course of the country, 31 January
2017

--- Sayfa 50 ---
46
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The Prime Minister will appoint three of the seven members of this
commission. One member will be appointed by the Minister of Justice,
one by the Minister of Interior, and the remaining two members will be
assigned by the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors[ … ]
The fact that members of the commission will be assigned directly by the
government (prime minister and ministers) and High Council of Judges
and Prosecutors, known for its biased and controversial structure and
decisions, raises serious concerns about the independence and impartiality
of the commission. The Commission will evaluate the results of emergency
rule decrees of the Council of Ministers who will appoint the members of
the commission, which is scandalous.207
126.	The Turkish government told us that avenues for appeal and redress existed for
those dismissed, and that 31,000 civil servants had been restored to their employment
by the beginning of March 2017. The number marked a significant jump from the
previous figure of 20,000 that the Committee was given by the FCO one month
previously. We hope that it is accurate, but worry that it is not, given the stories of those
affected that we heard in Turkey, the small number of public bodies authorised to hear
appeals in Turkey, and the large number of appeals that these bodies have been tasked
with hearing. If it is accurate, then we regret that it still represents 31,000 people who
were punished without good reason, and who are likely to bear consequences of their
punishment.
127.	Despite the security threats represented by the coup attempt and by terrorism in
Turkey, the scale of the current purges—and the number of sectors that they affect—
means that we cannot conclude that they are a necessary and proportionate response.
The FCO needs to clarify whether it supports the extent of the purges as being justified
by the scale of the threat that Turkey is facing.
128.	This purge carries significant negative implications for Turkey, and not just for
the individuals affected and their families. It risks undermining Turkey’s reputation,
its economy, the ability of the UK to trade there, and the capabilities of the Turkish
military in the fight against enemies like ISIL. We were encouraged by the nascent
language of restraint and reconciliation that we heard at the highest political level when
we visited Turkey. The FCO must work to see that this trajectory is pursued in practice,
by pressing the Turkish government to ensure that
a)
All of those detained or dismissed can access a substantive means of appeal,
and that this means of appeal is both fair and prompt. We are concerned that
the existing means are too often inaccessible, and too slow in hearing the large
number of cases.
b)
That these individuals must have access to the evidence against them and to
their lawyers.
207
Peoples’ Democratic Party Latest decrees are too small and symbolic to change the deteriorating course of the country, 31 January
2017

--- Sayfa 51 ---
47
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
c)
That the structures established to determine their innocence or guilt are
sufficiently independent of the executive. There currently remains a risk that
they are appointed to a large extent by the institutions whose use of powers
they are intended scrutinise.
d)
That those who have not yet been reinstated know the avenues of appeal and
redress.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
48
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
5	 The Turkish government’s response to
the threat from the PKK
The threat from the PKK, and the collapse of the ceasefire
129.	Terrorism, whether committed by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), ISIL, or any
other group represents a denial of the most basic of human rights and freedoms, as well as
of the values of democracy. We said the same of the coup attempt in Chapter 3 and, like its
response to the coup attempt, Turkey also accepts specific limitations—including under
the terms of its current State of Emergency—to the actions that it can legally undertake
while countering terrorism. The FCO told us that the UK, along with other states such as
the US and those of the EU, has designated the PKK as a terrorist organisation and that
the UK supports Turkey in the fight against the group.208
130.	The PKK describes its aim as the achievement of self-governing autonomy, but not
independence per se, for the predominantly-Kurdish areas of Turkey in the south east,
and is inspired by the ideology of its principal figurehead, Abdullah Öcalan, a founder of
the group who has been imprisoned by Turkey since 1999. The Turkish government views
the PKK as a separatist organisation,209 has declared it as a terrorist group, and has fought
it since 1984 in a conflict that—although interspersed by periodic but so–far unsuccessful
ceasefires—has killed tens of thousands of people,210 displaced at least one million and
likely more,211 and caused destruction and disruption to the lives of many, primarily in
the Kurdish-majority south-east of Turkey.
131.	Turkey’s ethnic Kurdish minority forms around 20% of the population.212 But,
under legal and constitutional arrangements inspired by ethnic-Turkish nationalism—
arrangements whose origins date to those of the Turkish Republic—elements of distinctive
Kurdish identity, such as the use of the Kurdish language, were denied recognition by
the state. After coming to power in 2002, the AK Party took significant and historically
unprecedented steps to reverse some of these restrictions.213 The AK Party government has
also formed strong ties with Kurdish elements, both domestically—where the AK Party
has drawn significant electoral support from some Kurds214—and internationally through,
for example, the strong relations that Turkey has enjoyed with the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) in Iraq.215 The Turkish government has consistently emphasised that
its conflict is with the PKK, rather than with its Kurdish citizens who it described to us as
an integral part of Turkey.216
208
See, for example, the FCO’s position on Turkey and the PKK in Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 paras 15—16, 21, and
Q10.
209
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 16—17
210
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 16—17
211
The numbers of those displaced by the conflict are disputed Republic of Turkey, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Internally Displaced
Persons (IDPs) and the “Return to Village and Rehabilitation Program” in Turkey, accessed 13 March 2017. Some NGOs have
provided high estimates, of two to three million Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, Turkey: Internal displacement in brief,
31 December 2013
212
Union of European Turkish Democrats TUR0014 para 21
213
Peace in Kurdistan TUR0013 para 4; Union of European Turkish Democrats TUR0014 para 22; Q40
214
Q36 [Professor William Hale]
215
Specifically, President Erdoğan and the AK PARTY enjoy a strong relationship with the KRG’s current leadership, President
Masoud Barzani and his Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), in particular. But the view is not confined to the AK PARTY. The
Republican People’s Party (CHP) also refers to KRG and Barzani as Turkey’s ally in Republican People’s Party (CHP) TUR0038,
Section 5.
216
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 16

--- Sayfa 53 ---
49
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
132.	Despite the conflict, the AK Party government took bold steps by entering into a
ceasefire and negotiations with the PKK,217 the latest of which collapsed in July 2015. The
reasons for this collapse are disputed. One month earlier, in the elections of June 2015,
the AK Party had lost its majority in parliament for the first time since assuming power,
and it did so in part because of the gains made by the People’s Democratic Party (HDP),
a specifically pro-Kurdish party. Some witnesses did therefore suggest that President
Erdoğan abandoned the peace process, or at least decided not to prevent it collapsing, in
the hope that the security crisis would benefit his party electorally.218 After the fighting
resumed, the AK Party re-gained its majority in fresh elections called four months later
in November. Other observers have blamed the collapse on the Turkish government, for
what they described as its failure to recognise a basis for the peace process known as the
‘Dolmabahçe’ agreement.219
133.	But we now agree with most of our witnesses who described a complex and mutual
rise in tensions between the Turkish government and the PKK, rooted primarily in
developments in Syria.220 Under this explanation, the expansion first of ISIL in Syria and
later the expansion of armed Kurdish groups in northern Syria caused mounting mistrust
between the PKK and the government that was ultimately ignited when ISIL bombed a
Kurdish demonstration in the Syrian town of Suruç in July 2015. Attacks by the ‘Kurdistan
Freedom Falcons’ (TAK) terrorist group were a further catalyst to the deterioration of the
ceasefire.221 Even by the time a Kurdish coalition affiliated with the PKK declared an end
to the ceasefire on 11 July,222 the PKK claimed the killing of two Turkish police officers on
22 July, and Turkish military operations recommenced in earnest thereafter,223 both sides
had likely come to regard negotiations as futile.
134.	While the reasons for the ceasefire’s collapse are contested, its results are indisputable:
a resumption of the conflict, and its associated death, destruction, and disruption. A report
by the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
which was published in March 2017, reported that between July 2015 and December 2016
the latest phase of this long–running conflict had displaced between 355,000 and half a
million people, and killed approximately 2,000.224
135.	In July 2015, the ceasefire between the Turkish government and the PKK collapsed
primarily due to a complex and mutual rise in tensions between them, rooted largely
in developments in Syria. This conclusion represents a correction to our Third
Report of Session 2015–16, in which we were too unequivocal in placing the primary
responsibility on the Turkish government for the end of the ceasefire.
136.	The FCO must both support Turkey in its fight against the terrorist threat from
the PKK and encourage both sides to re-engage with the peace process. The ceasefire
between the PKK and the state between 2013 and 2015 allowed an unprecedented de-
facto improvement in Kurdish rights, but the FCO must press the Turkish government
to enshrine them into law.
217
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 16—17
218
See, for example, Dr Natalie Martin TUR0016 para 4
219
Peace in Kurdistan TUR0013 para 9; HDP para 1
220
See, for example, Dr Katerina Dalacoura TUR0021 Summary and para 8; Q39 [Ziya Meral, Bill Park]
221
Q39 [Professor William Hale]
222
Q215 [Lindsay Appleby]; Peace in Kurdistan TUR0013 para 9
223
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0042 Q2
224
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report on the human rights situation in South-East Turkey
(February 2017),p 4—5

--- Sayfa 54 ---
50
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
137.	The resumption of the conflict since 2015 has deeply damaging implications
for Turkey. Ultimately, there is no military solution to this conflict. The FCO should
explain how it is working with the Turkish government to secure a path towards both a
ceasefire with the PKK, and a wider process of reconciliation to address the causes of the
conflict. Turkey may be able to benefit from the FCO sharing the example of the UK’s
experience in Northern Ireland.
Human rights in the war against the PKK
138.	In the context of the war against the PKK, which has focused predominantly on the
towns and cities within the majority–Kurdish south-east of Turkey, concerns have been
raised about whether some aspects of Turkey’s counter-terrorism operation are necessary,
proportionate, and legal.
Curfews
139.	One issue has been the imposition by the state of round-the-clock curfews, which
have sometimes been open-ended and are described by some observers as having
caused indiscriminate suffering within civilian areas. In a Memorandum published in
December 2016, the Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights reported that
the government’s practice of imposing curfews in war-affected areas began in August
2015. The Memorandum said that “while these curfews were initially declared for shorter
periods in relatively restricted areas, their length, scope and intensity increased quickly
and considerably”:225
The Commissioner observes that these curfews range from periods of
less than 24 hours up to round-the-clock curfews lasting 79 days in Cizre
and Yüksekova, 81 days in Şırnak or 134 days in Nusaybin. [ … ] Despite
the end of antiterrorist operations, the round-the-clock curfew in one
neighbourhood of Sur was being maintained since 11 December 2015, after
more than 10 months.226
The Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights concluded that
The use of curfews raises extremely serious human rights questions, the most
important being their lawfulness and proportionality, the two main criteria
which would determine their compatibility with Turkey’s international
human rights obligations. As Turkey did not officially derogate from the
ECHR until after 15 July 2016, no deviation from any of Turkey’s negative
or positive obligations (both substantive and procedural) under the ECHR
can be admitted for the period until then, during which the longest curfews
and heaviest operations took place.227
225
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 13
226
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 17
227
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 18

--- Sayfa 55 ---
51
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
140.	The Commissioner estimated that as many as 1.6 million people could have
potentially been affected by curfews in Turkey’s south east,228 and that the length of the
curfews was so long that civilians had no practical choice but to break the law and defy the
curfew in order to survive.229 The Memorandum reached the conclusion that “under these
circumstances, the Commissioner cannot consider that the curfews and the anti–terrorist
operations accompanying them as having been proportionate to the aims pursued.”230
Deaths of civilians, and damage to civilian property
141.	There are also accusations that Turkish security forces have taken inadequate
measures to prevent the deaths of civilians, and to prevent the destruction of civilian
property. Figures of civilian deaths during operations in Turkey’s south east are highly
contentious, but the Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights referred to
reports of the security forces firing on those attempting to retrieve the bodies of the dead
as well as other incidents of indiscriminate fire in densely-populated areas under the effect
of perpetual curfew.231
142.	The extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure has been another aspect of the
war in the south east that has been criticised. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, concluded in May 2016 that there had been
“massive, and seemingly highly disproportionate, destruction of property and key
communal infrastructure”, with reference to the town of Cizre in south-eastern Turkey.232
In March 2017, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
produced a report that concluded:
While comprehensive statistics on destroyed housing are not available, the
analysis of satellite imagery provided by UNOSAT shows extensive damage
across south-east Turkey. [ … ] In Nusaybin (Mardin province), for example,
a UNOSAT damage assessment through satellite imagery identified 1,786
damaged buildings, 398 of which were completely destroyed, 383 severely
damaged, and 1,005 moderately damaged [ … ]. Based on satellite image
analysis, UNOSAT attributes such damage to the use of heavy weapons
and, possibly, air-dropped munitions.233
143.	The Turkish government blames the PKK’s strategy of urban entrenchment for the
damage, and has committed to re–building the affected areas. Prime Minister Benali
Yildirim announced on 27 January 2017, for example, that the state would build 35,000
new homes in south-eastern Turkey.234 The submission from the Turkish Embassy told
the Committee that
228
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 27
229
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 36
230
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 41
231
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), paras 38, 57 and 60
232
‘Alarming’ reports of major violations in south-east Turkey – UN rights chief, UN News Centre, 10 May 2016
233
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report on the human rights situation in South-East Turkey
(February 2017), para 4
234
Turkish premier outlines rebuilding plan for SE Turkey, Anadolu Agency, 27 January 2017

--- Sayfa 56 ---
52
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The PKK’s tactic to wage urban uprising has backfired. But it has also caused
considerable human suffering and material loss as well. According to the
initial accounts, 1 billion [Turkish Lira] (approximately €300,000,000) has
to be allocated for the recovery of the damage caused by PKK. 4,000 houses
need to be rehabilitated only in Diyarbakır. The Turkish government
continues to provide housing and food assistance to the dislocated people
due to terrorist acts in the region and the people, who suffered from
terrorism, are compensated. Reconstruction work is also underway in the
region.235
Allegations of torture
144.	The use of torture is another concerning allegation made in the context of the war
in the south east. The group Freedom From Torture detailed evidence of torture being
practiced in Turkey in its written submission,236 and said: “for the past five years Turkey
has been one of the top ten countries of origin for those referred to us for clinical services
[in response to torture] and last year it moved into the top five”.237 In its concluding
observations for its report on Turkey in June 2016, the UN Committee against Torture
described:
Numerous credible reports of law enforcement officials engaging in torture
and ill-treatment of detainees while responding to perceived and alleged
security threats in the south-eastern part of the country (e.g. Cizre and
Silopi). [ … ] The Committee is further concerned at the reported impunity
enjoyed by the perpetrators of such acts.238
The UN Committee re-stated that “no exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a
state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency,
may be invoked as a justification of torture.”239
A lack of access for external observers
145.	Any claims with regard to what exactly has taken place in south–eastern Turkey are
difficult to verify, largely owing to the restrictions imposed by the government on access
to the area. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) wrote , in relation to its March 2017 report,240 that it had sought access to the
affected parts of south-east Turkey for “almost a year”, but that no “meaningful access”
had been granted by the Turkish government.241 Separately, the Council of Europe’s
Commissioner for Human Rights reported that
The special circumstances surrounding these curfews and antiterrorism
operations make these allegations particularly difficult to refute: the areas
235
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 18
236
Freedom from Torture TUR0019
237
Freedom from Torture TUR0019 para 1
238
UN Committee against Torture, Concluding observations on the fourth periodic reports of Turkey, 2 June 2016, para 11
239
UN Committee against Torture, Concluding observations on the fourth periodic reports of Turkey, 2 June 2016, para 12
240
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report on the human rights situation in South-East Turkey
(February 2017)
241
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, UN report details massive destruction and serious rights
violations since July 2015 in southeast Turkey, 10 March 2017

--- Sayfa 57 ---
53
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
in question were blockaded and cut off from the outside world, making
media access impossible. In addition, journalists seeking to report on the
events faced serious risks.242
The Commissioner’s memorandum also “stresses that the problem of effective
investigations and impunity of security forces is a very long-standing and entrenched
problem in Turkey”.243
146.	While the conflict in Turkey’s southeast continues, we recommend that the FCO
presses the Turkish government to ensure:
a)
that the operations undertaken by the Turkish security forces to counter PKK
terrorism are legal, necessary and proportionate. There is significant evidence
to indicate that they are not. In particular, the FCO should press for the use of
open-ended and wide-reaching curfews to be ended, and damage to civilian
infrastructure to be both minimised as a matter of policy and repaired as a
matter of urgency.
b)
that allegations of the killing of civilians and the use of torture by the Turkish
security forces, and allegations of a culture of impunity within these forces, are
properly investigated.
c)
that independent observers are given access to the conflict–affected areas.
The PKK, the YPG, and Turkey’s policy in northern Syria
147.	 As explained in Chapter 2, Turkey largely justified its military intervention in
northern Syria—Operation Euphrates Shield—on the grounds of confronting ISIL.
A submission to this inquiry by the Turkish Embassy in London specifically told the
Committee that “this is a counter-Daesh operation”.244 The Turkish Embassy also told us
that another objective of Euphrates Shield was to establish a safe zone, which it called a
‘terror free zone’, where Syrian refugees could be settled in Syrian territory.245 Operation
Euphrates Shield succeeded in pushing ISIL from the areas under its control adjacent to
Turkey within a month of being launched,246 and by 23 February 2017 it had captured the
strategic town of Al-Bab from ISIL. After that, and as senior Turkish officials including
President Erdoğan had been saying for months that they would,247 the forces of Euphrates
Shield advanced east, towards the town of Manbij.
148.	The fighting around Manbij represented a change of direction for Euphrates Shield,
in a strategic as well as a geographic sense. The Operation was no longer fighting ISIL.
Instead, Manbij, the area around it, and large swathes of northern and eastern Syria were
held at the time by predominantly Kurdish units. The most powerful of these units were
the People’s Protection Forces (YPG), a Kurdish militia that is close to the Syrian-Kurdish
‘Democratic Union Party’ (PYD). The YPG had also entered into an alliance with other,
242
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 67
243
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the Human Rights Implications of Anti-Terrorism Operations in South-Eastern Turkey
(December 2016), para 75
244
For the Turkish Embassy’s description of Euphrates Shield see Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 14–15
245
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q7
246
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 2
247
Turkish army urges Syrians to seek safety as rebels push on al-Bab, Reuters, 12 December 2016

--- Sayfa 58 ---
54
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
smaller militias—including Syrian Arab components–under the auspices of the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF) coalition, of which the YPG was the predominant component.
The SDF had succeeded in capturing large areas of northern Syria from ISIL. As it did so,
the SDF received weapons and military support from the United States in particular, as
part of the US strategy to defeat ISIL.
149.	Turkey considers the YPG to be the armed wing of the PYD, and it considers both
groups to be an extension of the PKK.248 Therefore, and although their advances took
territory from ISIL, Turkey considered the expansion of YPG-led forces across northern
Syria—and their political consolidation into an autonomous, Kurdish-led region termed
‘Rojava’—to have direct and negative implications for its own fight against PKK terrorism.249
Many of our witnesses told us that, although ostensibly justified as an operation to
counter ISIL, the primary objective of Euphrates Shield had always been to impede the
YPG. Evidence to this inquiry argued that Euphrates Shield appeared to intend, first, to
prevent ‘Rojava’ from encompassing a contiguous stretch along Syria’s northern border
with Turkey and, secondly, to push back YPG-led forces from areas to the west of the
Euphrates River in particular.250
150.	Most of the witnesses to our inquiry who commented on the question agreed that
the YPG had a close relationship with the PKK.251 It was based, they said, on political
coordination as well as the exchange of experience and fighters. As well as describing
other links between the YPG and the PKK, for example, Bill Park, from King’s College,
University of London, told us that
There are calculations that suggest that up to a third of PKK fighters in
Turkey in the past have been Kurds of Syrian origin crossing the border,
so that interlocking relationship is really very close. Technically, they are
different—they have a different label on their front door—but ideologically
and organisationally, they are very much under one umbrella.252
151.	The Turkish government says that the exchanges between the PKK and the YPG also
involves the exchange of weapons. A submission from the Turkish Embassy argues that
The obvious organic ties between PKK and PYD/YPG is crystal clear: PKK
suicide bombers are trained in the YPG camps in Syria (Rojava). PKK’s use
of anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons are also on increase. There is clear
evidence that they are procuring this equipment through YPG in Syria and
in Iraq.253
Turkey specifically contends that weapons supplied by NATO countries—in particular
the US—to fight against ISIL in Iraq and Syria are being transferred to the PKK for use
in Turkey. The Turkish Embassy provided us with written evidence, and accompanying
photographs, to illustrate this assertion.254
248
See Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 15
249
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 18
250
See, for example, William Hale TUR0007 para 12; Bill Park TUR0032 para 20; Dr Katerina Dalacoura TUR0021 para 9; Dr Natalie
Martin TUR0016; Ziya Meral in Q6 and Q10
251
Hale reports but does not commit BUT Dr Natalie Martin TUR0016 section 4; Dr Katerina Dalacoura TUR0021 para 8
252
Q9 [Bill Park]
253
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 18
254
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q6 and Attachments

--- Sayfa 59 ---
55
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
152.	The Turkish Embassy said that Turkey has presented this evidence, and raised these
concerns, with the US. It was hoping, it said, for a change in US policy and an end to
what Turkey regards as US support for the YPG against ISIL.255 A statement received by
the Committee from the US Department of Defense nevertheless said that it had seen no
evidence of the weapons that the US supplied into Syria being transferred to Turkey, and
that the US only armed the Arab elements of the SDF:
The Coalition has provided equipment to the Syrian Arab Coalition, which
are vetted Arab elements of the Syrian Democratic Forces. [ … ] The U.S.
has not, to date, provided materiel support to Kurdish elements of the SDF.
[ … ] We certainly do not provide any support whatsoever to the PKK and
have had no indications that any DoD [Department of Defense] equipment
has been transferred to the PKK.256
153.	When explaining its policy towards the PYD and the YPG, the FCO told us that
The Kurdish Democratic Union Party (PYD) and the People’s Protection
Units (YPG) have made an important contribution to counter-Daesh efforts.
However, we are also concerned that they maintain links with the PKK,
a proscribed terrorist organisation in the UK. While a range of Kurdish
groups will play an important role in a political settlement for Syria, we do
not recognise the declaration by the PYD of a federal structure in northern
Syria.257
154.	The FCO told us that the UK does have contact and dialogue with the PYD, but
Lindsay Appleby, a Director for Europe at the FCO, told us that “the conversations we
have had with the PYD are about politics, about them separating themselves from the
PKK and about the future of Syria”.258
155.	The FCO also told us that it understood Operation Euphrates Shield to be aimed at
countering ISIL.259 But when the Committee asked, weeks before clashes took place, what
the implications would be if the YPG and the Euphrates Shield forces fought one another
rather than fighting ISIL, Sir Alan Duncan appeared uncertain:
I understand the picture you are painting of possible conflict with US policy
and things like that. I am not sure it is helpful to speculate, and, again, it is
not specifically my brief as a Minister. I am not sure there is more I can say
than that, at this stage, but I see what you are driving at.260 [ … ] The broad
answer to your series of questions is that our main focus would be to urge
Turkey to keep the focus on fighting Daesh.261
When asked to elaborate on the UK’s policy through written evidence, the FCO replied
that
255
Turkish Embassy TUR0043 Q6b
256
Statement from Defense Press Operations, US Department of Defense, to the Foreign Affairs Committee, received on 3 February
2017
257
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 21
258
Q233
259
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 20
260
Q241
261
Q242

--- Sayfa 60 ---
56
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Turkey continues to make an invaluable contribution to the international
campaign against Daesh. The UK welcomes the operation by Turkish-
backed Free Syrian Army fighters to remove Daesh from the border area. The
Syrian Democratic Forces also continue to make an important contribution
to counter Daesh. We call on all parties to work constructively alongside
the Global Coalition to achieve our shared objective of defeating Daesh.262
156.	The Turkish forces have, in part through the direct participation in the fighting
of its armed forces and in part by supporting anti-regime Syrian militias, created and
held an enclave of territory in northern Syria. They have done so in part to create what
they call a ‘terror-free zone’ in which refugees can live safely, in part to confront ISIL,
and in part to confront the Kurdish YPG militia, which Turkey says is tied to the PKK
terrorist group. Turkey’s policies in northern Syria pose important questions for the
UK, and the FCO should:
a)
Explain whether the UK supports the creation of a safe-zone by Turkish
forces and their allies in northern Syria, and provide an assessment of the
implications that the creation of such a zone carries for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and any peace process, as well as for the safety and
security of those within such a zone.
b)
Explain whether the UK supports the settlement of Syrian refugees within
territory controlled by Turkish-backed Syrian opposition groups in Syria.
c)
Explain whether it shares our assessment that the YPG, rather than ISIL, are
now the primary target of Turkey’s Operation Euphrates Shield.
d)
Explain whether it agrees with Turkey’s assertion that the YPG are linked
with the PKK to such an extent that they should share the latter’s designation
as terrorists. This is of immediate importance, given that the YPG are the
predominant Kurdish group in northern Syria, have significantly expanded
their territory there, and are the main component of the SDF coalition which
both the UK and US support against ISIL.
157.	Conflict between the YPG and Turkey is not in the interest of the UK or the wider
international community, and the FCO must explain how it is going to work to end
the fighting between two forces that have been the primary armies fighting ISIL on the
ground in Syria.
158.	We recommend a determined effort by the FCO to persuade Turkey to recommence
the peace process with the PKK. This should include support for Turkish recognition and
enablement of Kurdish cultural identity, and discussion of sustainable local autonomy
as the basis for the wider reconciliation of Turkish, Kurdish, and international interests.
262
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0042 Section 3

--- Sayfa 61 ---
57
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
6	 The status of democracy in Turkey
Turkey’s role as a democratic example
159.	We heard during our inquiry that Turkey had in the past, including in our own 2012
Report, often been held up as a democratic example for the region. Western politicians in
particular hoped that the rest of the Middle East could follow Turkey’s path of democracy
combined with economic development and political secularism in a Muslim-majority
country. Professor Rosemary Hollis, from City, University of London, told us that a
“golden period” for Turkey’s international image was over:
As of, let’s say, 2011 or the eve of the Arab uprisings, Turkey was in an
enviable position. Everything was going well. The economy was booming.
Countries like Britain had the perception that Turkey represented a model
for how democracy and Islam can be combined. Turkey’s relations with all
the countries in the Arab world were increasingly positive and there was a
kind of lovefest between Erdoğan and Assad of Syria. There was resolution
of the Kurdish issues on the cards. It was a kind of golden period, in
retrospect, and Turkey even had a formula for regional relations, which was
“zero problems with neighbours”. My perception is that, since 2011, many
things on many fronts have gone wrong for Turkey.263
160.	The FCO’s submission to our inquiry began with a reference to Turkey’s status as
a “Muslim majority democracy”. The FCO told us that this was one of the factors that
made Turkey a “vital strategic partner”, with which the UK enjoyed a “strong, respectful
bilateral relationship”.264 But it was notable that, while the Turkish Embassy’s submission
to our inquiry opened with a reference to the “shared values”265 between the UK and
Turkey, the FCO’s submission made no reciprocal mention of shared values. Instead, as was
described in Chapters 1 and 2, the FCO’s language emphasises a “strategic” relationship
with Turkey, the importance of “understanding” the threat that Turkey faces, and placing
developments within Turkey surrounding human rights and democracy in that context.
Sir Alan Duncan told us that
[Turkey is] facing very serious and specific threats to their country. They
have, of course, taken serious action in response. [ … ] This question always
needs to be set against the nature of the threats they have been facing. So
one can share values, but they are sharing very different circumstances.
We in the UK are unable to contemplate in our own politics something
happening to us in the way that it happened to them.266
Sir Alan Duncan told us that the equivalent of Turkey’s coup attempt in the UK would
involve “a regiment of the Army driving tanks up Whitehall, shooting people on
Westminster Bridge, trying to kill the Queen and the Prime Minister, bombing Parliament
while it was sitting and taking over the BBC. That is what happened in Turkey”.267
263
Q3 [Professor Rosemary Hollis]
264
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 1
265
Turkish Embassy TUR0012 p 1
266
Q155
267
Q186

--- Sayfa 62 ---
58
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
161.	Witnesses to our inquiry nevertheless warned us that the Turkish government’s
response to the coup attempt had accelerated an erosion of democracy in Turkey that had
already been apparent before the coup attempt took place.
Risks and restrictions to democracy in Turkey
Elections
162.	Democracy, at its most fundamental, requires the free and fair operation of the ballot.
The mechanics of democracy in Turkey continue to function, and Bill Park from King’s
College, University of London, told us that
The Justice and Development Party (Adelet ve Kalkinma Partisi, or AK
Party) came to power in November 2002, with 34% of the vote. Its electoral
support has since grown, to reach almost 50% in the November 2015
election. In August 2014 Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was elected
as President with 52% of the vote.268
163.	Some of our witnesses nevertheless warned that, although these elections were free
in a procedural sense, the wider electoral environment was of concern. Ziya Meral, from
the Centre for Historical Analysis and Conflict Research, told us that, in his analysis of
democracy in Turkey:
None of these calculations have genuinely shown a major irregularity that
would call into question the ultimate outcome of an election. [ … ] However,
the government has used its privileged position in terms of airtime, state
networks and using all the free buses and so on, so it might not necessarily
be fully fair.269
Dr Nathalie Martin, a Lecturer in Politics and International Relations and Nottingham
Trent University, expressed a similar concern:
Turkey is a democracy in terms of its citizens having the right to vote, but
it is certainly not a liberal democracy in terms of the norms and values
of the European Union—or the UK. Turkey could now be characterised
as an authoritarian democracy given the dominance of the AK Party and
President Erdoğan over the state institutions and the media. [ … ] Many
layers of scrutiny within Turkish society have disappeared over the past
decade as a result of AK Party policy.270
Freedom of expression
164.	When assessing the health of the media in Turkey, the FCO told us that, “Turkey’s
position as 151st out of 180 in the World Press Freedom Index remains a concern”.271 The
National Union of Journalists (NUJ) assessed that the Turkish government had taken
extensive measures to restrict the media, and said that some of these measures aimed to
silence critics:
268
Bill Park TUR0032 para 1; President Erdoğan was the first directly elected President of the Turkish Republic.
269
Q38 [Ziya Meral]
270
Dr Natalie Martin TUR0016 para 2
271
Foreign and Commonwealth Office TUR0010 para 8

--- Sayfa 63 ---
59
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
There continues to be severe violations of media freedom in Turkey. One
journalist has died; there have also been extensive detentions, arrests and
imprisonments. Journalists have been targeted and threatened, news and
media organisations have been banned, media licences have been suspended
and media organisations have been shut down. Furthermore, high numbers
of media workers are now unemployed and hundreds of press cards have
been suspended. [ … ] Turkey has seen the suppression of practically all
independent, oppositional media in the country. Any journalist daring to
criticize the government on any level or produce reports which make the
government look anything less than glowing are a potential target for the
security services.272
Witnesses provided us with different figures for the number of journalists currently in
prison in Turkey, varying from 56273 through to 90.274 Reporters Without Borders have
called Turkey a “world leader in imprisoned journalists”275 and said that “more than 100
journalists have been put in prison, where they continue to await the start of their trials.
No fewer than 149 media outlets and 29 publishing houses have been closed arbitrarily.
At least 775 press cards have been rescinded and the passports of hundreds of journalists
have been withdrawn without any form of judicial proceedings”.276
165.	The breadth of the legal definition of ‘terrorism’ in Turkey, combined with the strength
of the state’s counter-terrorism powers, were described by some witnesses as enabling
the government to restrict the media.277 The NUJ told us that the problem of a broad
definition of terrorism preceded the coup attempt, and cited research which showed that
“one third, or 12,897, of all terrorism-related convictions world-wide” between 2001 and
2011 “were handed down by Turkish courts”.278 But, after the coup attempt, the powers of
the state to counter terrorism were significantly expanded under the State of Emergency,
and witnesses told us how these powers were applied against the media. Sir Alan Duncan
told us that 178 media outlets had been closed by decree in Turkey after the coup attempt.279
Amnesty International gave the example of one decree, issued on 27 July 2016, which it
said “resulted in the shutdown of 131 media outlets, including 16 TV channels, 23 radio
stations and 45 newspapers. Access to critical websites and Twitter accounts has been
blocked and media outlets have had their licenses revoked.”280
166.	The restrictions placed by the Turkish government on the media have frequently been
described to us as being politically motivated. The NUJ said that restrictive measures
by the government were instilling a culture of “self-censorship”281 in the media. One of
Turkey’s oldest and most widely-read opposition newspapers, Cumhuriyet, is among those
whose staff have been arrested on anti-terrorism grounds. The NUJ said that
272
National Union of Journalists TUR0037 Executive Summary
273
National Union of Journalists TUR0037 para 5, citing the Progressive Journalists Association’s (CGD)
274
TUC TUR0015 p 2; Amnesty International told us that “over 100 journalists have been remanded in pre-trial detention since the
coup attempt” Amnesty International TUR0017 para 27.
275
Turkey - world leader in imprisoned journalists, Reporters Without Borders, 10 August 2016
276
RSF urges EU leaders to defend media freedom in Turkey, Reporters Without Borders, 2 February 2017
277
See, for example, National Union of Journalists TUR0037 Executive Summary; TUC TUR0015; William Hale TUR0007, para 4;
and Q128
278
National Union of Journalists TUR0037 para 12
279
Q200
280
Amnesty International TUR0017 para 27
281
National Union of Journalists TUR0037 para 9

--- Sayfa 64 ---
60
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
In November [2016], 13 journalists, lawyers and board members, including
the chief executive, of the oppositional newspaper Cumhuriyet, were
detained as part of an investigation into staff “committing crimes in the
name of” the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and Gülen.
This followed the driving of the paper’s former Editor-in-Chief, Can
Dundar, into exile after his prosecution for producing reports in May 2015
which appeared to implicate Turkish security in transferring weapons
to militant groups in Syria. During the judicial process, Dundar was the
target of an assassination attempt outside a courtroom. The editorial
stance of Cumhuriyet is clear—as the country’s leading secular-nationalist
newspaper, to accuse it of links to either the PKK or the Islamic-rooted
Gülen movement is particularly absurd.282
167.	 Kurdish media outlets have been particularly heavily restricted by the Turkish
government, again broadly on anti-terrorism grounds and again with the accusation that
the measures were politically motivated. The HDP, a pro-Kurdish opposition party in
Turkey that is critical of the AK Party, described the extent of the measures against the
Kurdish press under Emergency decree powers:
16 TV channels that are critical of Erdoğan—including pro-democracy and
pro-labour channels such as IMC TV, HayatinSesi and those broadcasting
in Kurdish such as Jiyan TV, Zarok TV—were shut down with a government
decree. Among these, Zarok TV is the first children’s channel that broadcasts
in Kurdish. Moreover, 24 radio stations, 19 magazines, 5 news agencies and
29 publishing houses were shut down.283
Ertuğrul Kürkçü, a Member of Parliament for the HDP and Honorary President of the
party, told us that
We have one Turkish media, with hundreds of TV channels and hundreds of
newspapers and printing houses. For all of those, the head writer is Tayyip
Erdoğan, the anchorman is Tayyip Erdoğan, and the senior columnist
is Tayyip Erdoğan. The Turkish media is under the total control of the
Turkish government. The basic agreement is that the HDP is going to be
made unseen, unheard and unfavourable. If HDP is in the papers or on the
TV screen, it is just to belittle or defame it.284
Civil society, academia, and freedom of assembly
168.	While the Turkish government encouraged Turks to take to the streets to resist the
coup attempt of 15 July 2016, witnesses expressed concerns that the government’s attitude
to other public demonstrations had been hostile. This implies an inconsistent application
of freedom of assembly which, as with the above descriptions of press freedom in Turkey,
was upheld when the government agreed with demonstrators but risked being denied
when the government was being criticised by demonstrators. In stark contrast to the pro-
282
National Union of Journalists TUR0037 paras 17—18
283
Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) TUR0036 para 25
284
Q111

--- Sayfa 65 ---
61
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
government demonstrations that occurred during and after the coup attempt, Amnesty
International gave the example of the May 2013 anti-government protests against plans to
develop the Gezi Park area in Istanbul, and said that
Between 28 May and mid July 2013, demonstrations known as the Gezi Park
protests took place in all but two of Turkey’s 81 provinces, ranging between
crowds of a few hundred to tens of thousands. Security forces across Turkey
repeatedly used abusive and arbitrary force against peaceful protesters,
sometimes with fatal consequences. At least four protesters died.285
169.	Civil society organisations, such as NGOs and trade unions, have also been restricted
in Turkey. Again, this restriction began before the coup attempt and intensified thereafter
in the context of the Emergency powers. The Council of Europe’s Commissioner for
Human Rights has reported that “more than a thousand NGOs and trade unions [ … ]
were disbanded and liquidated without judicial proceedings” after the coup attempt.286 The
HDP told us that these include at least 199 Kurdish civil society organisations.287 The Trades
Union Congress (TUC) described “state oppression” of trade unions in Turkey, rooted in
the specific difficulties that Turkish employment law placed on labour organisation, but
also in “brutal state responses to public expressions of dissent”.288
170.	Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 explained how the Gülenist movement has placed a
significant emphasis on establishing schools, and how the Turkish government therefore
explained significant purges of the education sector in Turkey as an effort to defeat what
they saw as a Gülenist strategy to infiltrate the state and raise revenue through educational
institutions. The Middle East Studies Association Committee on Academic Freedom
nevertheless told us that
The scope of the investigations, prosecutions, dismissals, detentions and
campaigns of private harassment directed against academics across the
country is staggering. These measures preceded the attempted coup of
July 15th, though they have now expanded and accelerated under cover of
emergency laws.289
171.	Some of the figures for the number of academics dismissed in Turkey following the
coup attempt are reported in Chapter 4, but witnesses have told us that the dismissal
of academics has not just been confined to the removal of perceived Gülenists. Some
academics have been restricted under counter-terrorism laws on the basis of allegations
that they supported the PKK. Amnesty International gave us the example of the ‘Academics
for Peace’ campaign:
In January 2016 investigations were commenced into more than 1,000
academics in Turkey—known as the “[Academics] for Peace”—under laws
prohibiting “making propaganda for a terrorist organisation” (the PKK) as
well as laws against “denigrating the Turkish nation”. The academics were
all signatories to a petition entitled “We will not be a partner to this crime”
285
Amnesty International TUR0017 para 23
286
Council of Europe, Memorandum on the human rights implications of the measures taken under the state of emergency in Turkey
(October 2016), p 2
287
Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) TUR0036 para 28
288
TUC TUR0015 p 1
289
Middle East Studies Association Committee on Academic Freedom TUR0005 p 3

--- Sayfa 66 ---
62
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
calling for peace and criticising Turkish military operations in the south
east. In a speech on the 15th January President Erdoğan referred to the
academics as the “darkest of the dark”, adding that “they commit the same
crime as those who carry out massacres”. Some of the academics have since
been prosecuted, while others continue to be investigated in criminal and/
or administrative proceedings.290
The political opposition, and the case of the HDP
172.	Political parties must gain at least 10% of the votes in a general election in order to
gain representation in Turkey’s parliament, and four did so at the most recent election. The
largest of them, the Justice and Development Party (AK Party), holds a majority of the seats
in parliament. The smallest of them, the Nationalist Movement Party MHP (MHP), has
recently aligned itself with the AK Party on key legislative votes such as the introduction
of constitutional amendments to establish an executive presidency.291 As shown by their
written submissions to this inquiry, the two other parties—the Republican People’s Party
(CHP)292 and the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP)293—have established themselves in a
more consistent role of opposition to the AK Party. But the HDP in particular says that its
capacity to oppose the AK Party is being curtailed.
173.	The Turkish government has accused some elements of the HDP, which is among
other things a pro-Kurdish party, of ties with the PKK. But the HDP has accused the
government of targeting it under anti-terrorism legislation because it is a critical voice.
For example, the Turkish parliament voted in May 2016 to remove immunity from 138
parliamentarians, including those in all four parties,294 and the HDP told us that its
members were specifically targeted:
As a result of this process the immunities of 55 of our 59 MPs were lifted.
When the distribution of the records of the accusations among the political
parties and President Erdoğan’s declarations are taken into consideration,
it becomes clear that the target of the immunity bill was the HDP and its
MPs. There are 510 immunity files against 55 HDP MPs, the sum of the files
against members of other three political parties is less than this number.
There was a rapid increase in the number of files against our MPs, after
Erdoğan’s declaration that our MPs immunities should be lifted and our
MPs should be “punished.”[ … ] In the following 4 months 468 new files,
368 of which were against HDP MPs, were prepared. While previously the
number of files concerning HDP deputies was 182, for the period between
July 2007 and December 2015, by May 2016 the number jumped to 510.295
Thirteen HDP MPs were detained pending trial in November 2013, of which ten remained
in custody at the time of writing. There are fears that these arrests, and other actions taken
by the state against the AK Party, could constitute a deliberate restriction of the political
290
Nigel Meredith Jones TUR0027 para 26
291
Nigel Meredith Jones TUR0007 para 7
292
Republican People’s Party (CHP) TUR0038
293
Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) TUR0036
294
World, Seven facts to know about Turkey’s immunity vote, TRT, 21 May 2016
295
Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) TUR0036 para 13 and 14

--- Sayfa 67 ---
63
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
opposition. The US Department of State expressed deep concern296 about the arrests of
HDP parliamentarians in November 2016. The UK supported an EU statement expressing
grave concern during the same month but has not issued an independent statement of its
own.297
174.	We share the concern of the US and the EU about the arrests and continuing
detention of elected Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) parliamentarians.
The judiciary
175.	During our inquiry, we heard concerns that the impartiality of the judiciary was
being undermined in Turkey. Part of this was as a result of the dismissals that took
place following the coup attempt of 2016. Dr Alan Greene from Durham University, for
example, told us that 2,700 judges were removed under the ensuing purge.298 Sir Alan
Duncan told us that 293 judges had subsequently been reinstated.299 Professor William
Hale, from SOAS, said that
The widespread dismissals of judges and public prosecutors also strengthened
the belief that the government was seeking to end the independence of the
judiciary.300
But there was also a perception that the culture of judicial independence was itself being
undermined. ‘Osman Erturk’, who said that he represented a group of Turkish lawyers
who were living in exile after being the subject of dismissals following the coup attempt,
wrote that
Judges in Turkey, if they apply the law, are labelled Gülenists. To stay in their
positions, they need to get on well with the ruling political elite. This means
that the ruling elite’s claims are adopted by the judges as their ultimate
decisions.301
176.	The democratic institutions and culture of Turkey have significantly weakened in
recent years. Freedom of expression is one aspect that has notably deteriorated. There
is a fundamental intolerance of alternative narratives in Turkey, with the government
broadly suppressing, discrediting, or punishing those who contradict its authorised
accounts of sensitive events. The powers afforded by the State of Emergency—combined
with a vaguely-framed definition of terrorism, a pliant media, and a politicised
judiciary—have allowed the government to silence a broad spectrum of critics by
labelling them as “Gülenists” or “terrorists” on the basis of light evidence or broad
interpretations. The FCO should press Turkey to adopt a narrow and focused definition
of “terrorism”, and to ensure that it—or other procedural methods—are not applied in
the politically-motivated sense of silencing the government’s critics.
296
US Department of State, Daily Press Briefing, 4 November 2016
297
Q225
298
Dr Alan Greene TRU0006 p 8
299
Q200
300
William Hale TUR0007 para 4
301
Osman Erturk TUR0031 para 33

--- Sayfa 68 ---
64
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
177.	The origins of the deterioration in Turkey’s human rights preceded the coup
attempt. However, actions justified in the name of the coup attempt or counter-
terrorism—and framed as being temporary, short-term, and necessary—are further
undermining the fundamentals of the democratic culture that they are justified as
protecting. These actions carry implications that may outlast the causes of the coup
itself, and the current threat that Turkey faces from terrorism.
178.	When defending human rights, the UK must be both seen and heard. Discretion is
sometimes necessary for impact, and private behind–the–scenes meetings will also play
an important role in the UK’s influence on human rights in Turkey, but the FCO must be
prepared to raise its concerns about Turkey with the Turks publicly. Currently, by giving
human rights insufficient prominence in its dialogue with Turkey, the UK risks being
perceived as de–prioritising its human rights values. If that impression is sustained,
then it would damage the UK’s international reputation and not serve the protection of
human rights in Turkey.
179.	We recommend that the FCO designate Turkey as a Human Rights Priority Country
in its next Human Rights and Democracy Report.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
65
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Conclusions and recommendations
An “understanding” relationship, during a crucial period for Turkey
and the UK
1.
We welcome the UK’s strong condemnation of the 15 July 2016 coup attempt. This
was an attack on Turkey’s democracy. We condemn it, and have expressed our
condolences for the loss of life. Through its prompt displays of solidarity, the FCO
ensured that the UK was seen by Turkey’s leadership as a friend and close ally of the
Turkish people. However, the anti-Western rhetoric that is prevalent in the popular
discourse in Turkey, and historic suspicions around British policy, still influence
perceptions of the UK in Turkey. (Paragraph 13)
2.
Turkey is a deeply divided country. The degree of political interaction between its
competing social, cultural, and religious interpretations appears limited, and their
fear of one another is great. Control of the state, and its power, is highly coveted in
this context, because each side has sought to protect its supporters by empowering
itself while excluding its opponents. The relationship that the FCO establishes with
Turkey must not just be with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, or with the Justice
and Development Party alone. Indeed, it must not just be with the state apparatus,
or with whichever party or person currently controls it. The UK should seek a deeper
and therefore more durable connection. The UK should support programmes that
seek engagement with the Turkish people, whichever background they hold, while
working to uphold the values of human rights and democracy that benefit them all.
(Paragraph 19)
3.
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has made himself as central to 21st century Turkey as
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was in the 20th century. The choices that he makes now will
determine whether his overall legacy will largely be positive, for Turkey and more
widely. The wrong choices have the potential to deliver catastrophe well beyond
Turkey’s borders. The right choices would cement Turkey’s position as a liberal,
democratic state which provides a philosophical and ideological bridge between
West and East. (Paragraph 22)
4.
On 16 April 2017, the Turkish people are due to vote in a referendum on whether
to amend Turkey’s constitution to significantly expand the powers of the President.
The choice is theirs, and the UK Government must not support one side or the
other. (Paragraph 27)
5.
The proposed changes would constitutionally entrench the centralisation of power
in the presidency beyond the current incumbent. However, it could be argued, from
a UK perspective, that an approval of the proposed changes would make no de-facto
difference to governance in Turkey or to Turkish policy in the short term, because it
will make de jure the current situation. But there are concerns over the timing of the
referendum, coming as it does at a point where freedom of expression and assembly
has deteriorated in Turkey. It is difficult to foresee a fair, free and credible referendum
when media, opposition MPs and civic organisations critical of the government
have been closed down or silenced. The current period of Emergency Rule has also
significantly expanded the power of the executive while simultaneously restricting

--- Sayfa 70 ---
66
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
certain rights and freedoms. Both the deep divisions that we have observed within
Turkish society and the intensity of the competition to control the state are likely
to be worsened by the referendum campaign whatever its outcome. (Paragraph 28)
6.
The settling of this constitutional question should leave President Erdoğan with
strategic choices where there is a clear UK interest in supporting constructive
policies. These include the Kurdish question, the healing of Turkish politics after
the coup attempt of 15 July 2016, the advancement of judicial independence and the
rule of law alongside other human and political rights, the sustaining of a successful
economy, and other central challenges to Turkey that we address later in this Report.
Shaping a positive legacy for the commanding figure of 21st century Turkish politics
is in the interest of the UK’s economy, security, and values whatever the outcome of
the referendum. Now is a profound moment of choice for Turkey’s future, in terms
of whether it will be a repressive or a recovering country. (Paragraph 29)
7.
A central challenge that Turkey will face is the need to strengthen its public and state
institutions. These have been weakened as a result of the acrimony in the country’s
politics over the past decade, and were further weakened by the coup attempt and
the government’s response. When facing its future challenges, Turkey will need
an effective military, independent economic and judicial institutions, as well as a
free and vibrant media, among other institutions. The UK should assist Turkey in
developing both the capacity and independence of these institutions. (Paragraph 30)
A “strategic” relationship, and its implications for Turkey and the UK
8.
We are concerned that the loss of influence of the UK’s international allies in Turkey
might have a detrimental effect on the possible leverage that the UK might have on
Turkey as well. The FCO should use its close relations with the Turkish establishment
to mediate as required between Turkey and the US and EU states. (Paragraph 32)
9.
A totally free trade agreement with Turkey may not be possible due to the current
relationship that Turkey has with the EU and the EU Customs Union. Given Turkey’s
Customs Union with the EU, the FCO should clarify what trade arrangements it is
currently able to negotiate with Turkey, when and how that might change, and when
they will be implemented. The FCO should work with the Department for International
Trade in exploring and delivering new trade and investment opportunities with
Turkey, now and following Brexit, and in negotiating revised trading arrangements
with Turkey once the UK leaves the EU. (Paragraph 38)
10.
Turkey is an essential partner facing a volatile period. It needs and deserves our
support. We support the construction of a ‘strategic’ relationship between the UK
and Turkey. Both the UK and Turkish governments emphasise to us their aim to
enhance their trade ties, and their defence and security co-operation. Successful
engagement would serve the prosperity and security of both countries, though a
successful Turkey will be one that respects democratic norms. (Paragraph 40)
11.
The complexity of modern Turkey, and the nature of its internal divisions, means that
the process of constructing this relationship must be managed by the FCO with adequate
capability and subtlety. We were impressed by the leadership and effectiveness of Her
Majesty’s Ambassador to Turkey Richard Moore, and by the knowledge of his staff.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
67
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
The FCO is running a large operation in Turkey, and it is important that the FCO is
given the resources to sustain this operation and manage the complex and important
relationship with Turkey going forward. (Paragraph 41)
12.
We welcome the agreements reached over the ‘TF–X’ combat aircraft development
programme, as a key component and symbol of the strategic co-operation between
the UK and Turkey. This programme should last for decades; it needs to reflect
the long–term interests of both countries and survive the inevitable short–term
ups and downs in their bilateral relations. The strategic partnership implied by this
deal should be reinforced by the Government making clear what restrictions there are
on the use or transfer by Turkey or the UK of sensitive technology and intellectual
property contained within the programme, both during the aircraft’s construction and
after its completion. (Paragraph 47)
13.
The Government should also clarify what safeguards are in place to ensure that the
aircraft will be used in compliance with international humanitarian law. The UK
is subject to safeguards in this respect, and we expect the FCO to explain how these
safeguards will apply to TF–X. (Paragraph 48)
14.
ISIL is a shared enemy of the UK and Turkey, and Turkey has suffered greatly from
terrorism by these extremists. Turkey is a vital military partner in the fight against
ISIL, reinforced by the context of its NATO membership. The UK, as a strategic
partner of Turkey, and within the framework of both NATO and the Global Coalition
against ISIL, must continue to engage Turkey fully in the fight against ISIL as a
shared priority and ensure that Turkey is not distracted from focusing on this military
objective, in light of concerns set out in Chapter 5. (Paragraph 50)
15.
Turkey hosts a larger number of refugees than any other state, and the third largest
number per capita. This contribution should not be underestimated and a debt of
gratitude is owed to Turkey from the entire international community. It plays a vital
role in limiting or preventing the flow of migrants and refugees into the EU, within
the framework of an agreement that it has reached with the bloc. The EU wants
Turkey to continue to host and hold refugees, but the amount of money delivered
to Turkey by way of assistance in this objective has so far been too small, and it
has been provided too slowly. To support Turkey though the refugee challenge, and
the costs to Turkey that it entails, the UK should press the EU swiftly to give Turkey
the funds for this purpose that have been promised but not yet delivered. While the
terms of the agreement between Turkey and the EU are not being fully met by either
side, it is the non-delivery of promised EU resources to relieve the actual suffering
of refugees which is reinforcing an anti-EU narrative from the Turkish government.
(Paragraph 57)
16.
The UK has distinguished itself as a friend in the eyes of the Turkish government,
and both sides are seeking to cement a strategic relationship. But, as the UK does
so, it must not be seen as disregarding—or even excusing—allegations of serious
human rights violations and the erosion of democracy in Turkey. It is vital that
the UK’s criticism both privately and publicly is not withheld when grounds for
criticism exist. (Paragraph 64)

--- Sayfa 72 ---
68
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
17.
In order to have an effective impact on human rights, the FCO must also cultivate
the UK’s influence and interdependence with Turkey to ensure that its voice is heard
in Ankara. As the enhancement of its international trade ties has been a foreign
policy priority for Turkey, strong trade ties between the UK and Turkey are likely
to provide the UK with added leverage on a range of other policy areas, including
human rights. However, we believe Sir Alan Duncan’s statement that “it is probably
only when we do have good trade that we can speak strongly about human rights”
must be qualified to the extent that the UK should always raise serious human
rights concerns whenever they occur; the UK’s promotion of fundamental values
cannot be predicated on “good trade”, or any other precondition. The enhancement
of its international trade ties has been a foreign policy priority for Turkey. There are
examples, such as Turkey’s relationship with Russia, to indicate that strong trade
ties do indeed provide Turkey with incentive to compromise with countries that it
disagrees with in other policy areas. (Paragraph 69)
18.
We support the expanding of trade and defence ties between the UK and Turkey,
not only because of their security and prosperity implications but also because of the
strong voice that these ties should give the UK in Ankara. It is a voice that we expect
the UK to use, not least so that its human rights concerns are heard. (Paragraph 70)
19.
The UK should therefore seek to both defend human rights and secure trade. These
two concerns have complementary—not contradictory—interests. The protection of
human rights in Turkey, and the success of UK trade there, both require the rule of law
and an impartial judiciary, an end to the purges that have followed the coup attempt,
an end to internal conflict and terrorism, and a UK Government that is listened to in
Ankara. (Paragraph 71)
The coup attempt, and the ‘Gülenists’
20.
The AK Party and the Gülenists were once allied. They are both movements with
Islamist influences, and they made common cause in challenging the Kemalist
establishment and military leadership. This past alliance is a fact that AK Party
officials now prefer not to mention, and this reinforces our concern that purges of
perceived Gülenist sympathisers will be undertaken with the added bitterness of a
fratricidal conflict. (Paragraph 84)
21.
Given the brutality of the events of 15 July, the severity of the charges made against
the Gülenists, and the scale of the purges of perceived Gülenists that has been
justified on this basis, there is a relative lack of hard, publicly–available evidence to
prove that the Gülenists as an organisation were responsible for the coup attempt
in Turkey. While there is evidence to indicate that some individual Gülenists
were involved, it is mostly anecdotal or circumstantial, sometimes premised on
information from confessions or informants, and is—so far—inconclusive in
relation to the organisation as a whole or its leadership. As we publish this report,
nine months after the coup attempt, neither the UK nor Turkish governments can
point us to one person who has been found guilty by a court of involvement in the
coup attempt, let alone anyone being found guilty with evidence of involvement
with Gülenist motives. We also note that, despite Turkey purportedly submitting 80

--- Sayfa 73 ---
69
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
boxes of ‘evidence’ to the US to achieve the extradition of Fethullah Gülen on the
basis that he masterminded the coup attempt, the US judiciary has not yet moved to
deport him. (Paragraph 97)
22.
But the explanations provided to us by the Gülenists did not resolve our
uncertainties about the fundamental nature and motives of their movement. The
belief that Gülenists were responsible for the coup attempt, as well as for numerous
other manipulations of the state through abuse of public positions that they held in
Turkey, is manifest across the political spectrum in Turkey. A lack of transparency
pervades some of the core activities of the Gülenists, making it impossible for us to
confirm that all of these activities are purely philanthropic. (Paragraph 98)
23.
Gülenists are unlikely to have been the only elements involved in the coup attempt.
Kemalist elements within the military, those who opposed the AK Party, or those
who simply wished to preserve their own positions, are also likely to have been
involved. Some, especially in the lower ranks of the military, appeared to have taken
part, at least initially, without realising that they were involved in a coup attempt.
(Paragraph 99)
24.
Since around 2013, individuals associated with the Gülenists have adopted a political
agenda opposed to the AK Party government of Turkey, and have possessed the
means, motive, and opportunity to support the coup attempt, but their culpability
has yet to be definitively proved. The FCO told us that it did not have evidence to
justify the designation of the Gülenists as a terrorist organisation by the UK, and we
agree with this assessment. (Paragraph 100)
25.
The FCO seems willing to accept the Turkish government’s account of the coup
attempt and the Gülenists broadly at face value. While some of the individuals
involved in the coup may have been Gülenists, given the large number of Gülenist
supporters and organisations in Turkey, it does not necessarily follow that the
Gülenists were responsible for the coup or that their leadership directed the coup.
However, the FCO seems unable to cite much evidence to prove that it is true. Despite
its claim to possess an almost unique understanding of the threat that Turkey faces,
the FCO strikes us as knowing too little for itself about either the Gülenists or their
role in the coup attempt. The Government’s support for the Turkish government in
the wake of the coup attempt would have been more convincing had it been able to
present an independent analysis to support its position. We recommend again that
the Government ensures that sufficient funding is available to the FCO, to repair the
hollowed-out state of the FCO’s analytical and research capabilities. (Paragraph 105)
The Turkish government’s response to the threat from the coup
attempt
26.
Terrorism and coup attempts are a denial of the most basic of human rights and
freedoms, as well as of the values of democracy. It would be naïve to assume that any
country would go through a coup such as the one Turkey went through and not see
significant changes made in order to protect its democracy and the rule of law. The
UK is right to support Turkey’s defence of itself against future threats from coups

--- Sayfa 74 ---
70
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
and terrorism. However, Turkey must demonstrate its commitment to upholding its
international legal obligations during its response to these threats, and the UK has
an important role to play in ensuring Turkey’s compliance. (Paragraph 111)
27.
The State of Emergency in Turkey significantly expands the power of the executive,
while also curtailing some of the rights and freedoms of the citizen. While the
implementation of the State of Emergency is understandable given the events of
the July coup attempt, the Turkish government needs to provide the international
community with a clear indication that it is seeking a path to normalise the security
situation. States of Emergency should be self-correcting, as the powers that they
allow should address the threat that permits them. The threat to which they apply
should be specific. Although permissible under, and guided by, the provisions of
Article 15 of the European Convention in Human Rights (ECHR), a broad and vague
application of the State of Emergency in Turkey, in a way that extends far beyond
addressing the causes of the coup attempt, risks a prolonged period of Emergency
rule, and that raises the risk of people’s rights being abused. (Paragraph 112)
28.
The FCO should press Turkey to ensure that
a)	 the provisions of Turkey’s State of Emergency, and the actions taken under them, are
proportionate to the exigencies of the circumstances that triggered the Emergency’s
declaration, and that these exigencies are given as narrow a definition as possible
b)	 the State of Emergency is temporary, not prolonged, and is lifted as soon as possible
c)	 That Turkey complies fully with its ECHR obligations. (Paragraph 113)
29.
Almost 100,000 people were permanently dismissed from their employment
in Turkey following the coup attempt, while between 30,000 and 40,000 were
temporarily suspended. The Turkish government itself seems uncertain about
the latest figure, but the number is likely to have risen since these numbers were
published in January 2017. Most appear to have lost their jobs, and been subjected
to a range of other punishments, on the basis of executive decrees that are permitted
by Turkey’s State of Emergency. They do not face criminal charges, and were not
tried by a court before their punishment. (Paragraph 121)
30.
Given the anecdotal and circumstantial nature of the evidence that has been used
to link the Gülenists with the coup attempt, we question the evidential basis upon
which these individuals—including the majority who held positions in the education
sector or civil service, rather than the military branch of the state—were designated
by the state as terrorists, or connected to the coup attempt, under Turkey’s State of
Emergency. The coup attempt has also been used as an opportunity to dismiss large
numbers of non-military government employees that were opposed to or critical
of the government and President, as well as those suspected of links to the Gülen
movement. (Paragraph 122)
31.
The Turkish government told us that avenues for appeal and redress existed for those
dismissed, and that 31,000 civil servants had been restored to their employment
by the beginning of March 2017. The number marked a significant jump from the
previous figure of 20,000 that the Committee was given by the FCO one month
previously. We hope that it is accurate, but worry that it is not, given the stories of

--- Sayfa 75 ---
71
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
those affected that we heard in Turkey, the small number of public bodies authorised
to hear appeals in Turkey, and the large number of appeals that these bodies have
been tasked with hearing. If it is accurate, then we regret that it still represents
31,000 people who were punished without good reason, and who are likely to bear
consequences of their punishment. (Paragraph 126)
32.
Despite the security threats represented by the coup attempt and by terrorism
in Turkey, the scale of the current purges—and the number of sectors that they
affect—means that we cannot conclude that they are a necessary and proportionate
response. The FCO needs to clarify whether it supports the extent of the purges as
being justified by the scale of the threat that Turkey is facing. (Paragraph 127)
33.
This purge carries significant negative implications for Turkey, and not just for the
individuals affected and their families. It risks undermining Turkey’s reputation,
its economy, the ability of the UK to trade there, and the capabilities of the Turkish
military in the fight against enemies like ISIL. We were encouraged by the nascent
language of restraint and reconciliation that we heard at the highest political level
when we visited Turkey. The FCO must work to see that this trajectory is pursued in
practice, by pressing the Turkish government to ensure that
a)	 All of those detained or dismissed can access a substantive means of appeal, and
that this means of appeal is both fair and prompt. We are concerned that the
existing means are too often inaccessible, and too slow in hearing the large number
of cases.
b)	 That these individuals must have access to the evidence against them and to their
lawyers.
c)	 That the structures established to determine their innocence or guilt are
sufficiently independent of the executive. There currently remains a risk that they
are appointed to a large extent by the institutions whose use of powers they are
intended scrutinise.
d)	 That those who have not yet been reinstated know the avenues of appeal and
redress. (Paragraph 128)
The Turkish government’s response to the threat from the PKK
34.
In July 2015, the ceasefire between the Turkish government and the PKK collapsed
primarily due to a complex and mutual rise in tensions between them, rooted
largely in developments in Syria. This conclusion represents a correction to our
Third Report of Session 2015–16, in which we were too unequivocal in placing
the primary responsibility on the Turkish government for the end of the ceasefire.
(Paragraph 135)
35.
The FCO must both support Turkey in its fight against the terrorist threat from the
PKK and encourage both sides to re-engage with the peace process. The ceasefire
between the PKK and the state between 2013 and 2015 allowed an unprecedented de-
facto improvement in Kurdish rights, but the FCO must press the Turkish government
to enshrine them into law. (Paragraph 136)

--- Sayfa 76 ---
72
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
36.
The resumption of the conflict since 2015 has deeply damaging implications for
Turkey. Ultimately, there is no military solution to this conflict. The FCO should
explain how it is working with the Turkish government to secure a path towards both
a ceasefire with the PKK, and a wider process of reconciliation to address the causes
of the conflict. Turkey may be able to benefit from the FCO sharing the example of the
UK’s experience in Northern Ireland. (Paragraph 137)
37.
While the conflict in Turkey’s southeast continues, we recommend that the FCO
presses the Turkish government to ensure:
a)	 that the operations undertaken by the Turkish security forces to counter PKK
terrorism are legal, necessary and proportionate. There is significant evidence
to indicate that they are not. In particular, the FCO should press for the use of
open-ended and wide-reaching curfews to be ended, and damage to civilian
infrastructure to be both minimised as a matter of policy and repaired as a matter
of urgency.
b)	 that allegations of the killing of civilians and the use of torture by the Turkish
security forces, and allegations of a culture of impunity within these forces, are
properly investigated.
c)	 that independent observers are given access to the conflict–affected areas.
(Paragraph 146)
38.
The Turkish forces have, in part through the direct participation in the fighting
of its armed forces and in part by supporting anti-regime Syrian militias, created
and held an enclave of territory in northern Syria. They have done so in part to
create what they call a ‘terror-free zone’ in which refugees can live safely, in part to
confront ISIL, and in part to confront the Kurdish YPG militia, which Turkey says
is tied to the PKK terrorist group Turkey’s policies in northern Syria pose important
questions for the UK, and the FCO should:
a)	 Explain whether the UK supports the creation of a safe-zone by Turkish forces and
their allies in northern Syria, and provide an assessment of the implications that
the creation of such a zone carries for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and any peace process, as well as for the safety and security of those within such
a zone.
b)	 Explain whether the UK supports the settlement of Syrian refugees within territory
controlled by Turkish-backed Syrian opposition groups in Syria.
c)	 Explain whether it shares our assessment that the YPG, rather than ISIL, are now
the primary target of Turkey’s Operation Euphrates Shield
d)	 Explain whether it agrees with Turkey’s assertion that the YPG are linked with the
PKK to such an extent that they should share the latter’s designation as terrorists.
This is of immediate importance, given that the YPG are the predominant Kurdish
group in northern Syria, have significantly expanded their territory there, and
are the main component of the SDF coalition which both the UK and US support
against ISIL. (Paragraph 156)

--- Sayfa 77 ---
73
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
39.
Conflict between the YPG and Turkey is not in the interest of the UK or the wider
international community, and the FCO must explain how it is going to work to end
the fighting between two forces that have been the primary armies fighting ISIL on the
ground in Syria. (Paragraph 157)
40.
We recommend a determined effort by the FCO to persuade Turkey to recommence the
peace process with the PKK. This should include support for Turkish recognition and
enablement of Kurdish cultural identity, and discussion of sustainable local autonomy
as the basis for the wider reconciliation of Turkish, Kurdish, and international
interests. (Paragraph 158)
The status of democracy in Turkey
41.
We share the concern of the US and the EU about the arrests and continuing detention
of elected Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) parliamentarians. (Paragraph 174)
42.
The democratic institutions and culture of Turkey have significantly weakened in
recent years. Freedom of expression is one aspect that has notably deteriorated.
There is a fundamental intolerance of alternative narratives in Turkey, with the
government broadly suppressing, discrediting, or punishing those who contradict
its authorised accounts of sensitive events. The powers afforded by the State of
Emergency—combined with a vaguely-framed definition of terrorism, a pliant
media, and a politicised judiciary—have allowed the government to silence a
broad spectrum of critics by labelling them as “Gülenists” or “terrorists” on the
basis of light evidence or broad interpretations. The FCO should press Turkey to
adopt a narrow and focused definition of “terrorism”, and to ensure that it—or other
procedural methods—are not applied in the politically-motivated sense of silencing
the government’s critics. (Paragraph 176)
43.
The origins of the deterioration in Turkey’s human rights preceded the coup
attempt. However, actions justified in the name of the coup attempt or counter-
terrorism—and framed as being temporary, short-term, and necessary—are further
undermining the fundamentals of the democratic culture that they are justified as
protecting. These actions carry implications that may outlast the causes of the coup
itself, and the current threat that Turkey faces from terrorism. (Paragraph 177)
44.
When defending human rights, the UK must be both seen and heard. Discretion is
sometimes necessary for impact, and private behind–the–scenes meetings will also
play an important role in the UK’s influence on human rights in Turkey, but the FCO
must be prepared to raise its concerns about Turkey with the Turks publicly. Currently,
by giving human rights insufficient prominence in its dialogue with Turkey, the UK
risks being perceived as de–prioritising its human rights values. If that impression is
sustained, then it would damage the UK’s international reputation and not serve the
protection of human rights in Turkey. (Paragraph 178)
45.
We recommend that the FCO designate Turkey as a Human Rights Priority Country
in its next Human Rights and Democracy Report. (Paragraph 179)

--- Sayfa 78 ---
74
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Formal Minutes
Tuesday 21 March 2017
Members present:
Crispin Blunt, in the Chair
Ann Clwyd
Mike Gapes
Stephen Gethins
Mr Mark Hendrick
Adam Holloway
Daniel Kawczynski
Ian Murray
Andrew Rosindell
Nadhim Zahawi
Draft Report (The UK’s relations with Turkey), proposed by the Chair, brought up and
read.
Ordered, That the draft Report be read a second time, paragraph by paragraph.
Paragraphs 1 to 179 read and agreed to.
Summary agreed to.
Resolved, That the Report be the Tenth Report of the Committee to the House.
Ordered, That the Chair make the Report to the House.
Ordered, That embargoed copies of the Report be made available, in accordance with the
provisions of Standing Order No. 134.
[Adjourned till Tuesday 28 March at 2.15pm

--- Sayfa 79 ---
75
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Witnesses
The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.
Tuesday 1 November 2016
Question number
Professor William Hale, School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS),
University of London, Professor Rosemary Hollis, City, University of
London, Mr Ziya Meral, Centre for Historical Analysis and Conflict Research,
and Mr Bill Park, King’s College London
Q1–42
Tuesday 15 November 2016
Dr Yüksel Alp Aslandog an, Executive Director, Alliance for Shared Values,
and Mr Özcan Kele , Chair, the Dialogue Society
Q43–105
Mr Ertugrul Kürkçü, Honorary President of, and MP for, the HDP
Q106–130
Tuesday 31 January 2017
Rt Hon Sir Alan Duncan MP, Minister of State for Europe and the Americas,
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and Lindsay Appleby, Director, Europe,
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Q131–246

--- Sayfa 80 ---
76
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Published written evidence
The following written evidence was received and can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.
TUR numbers are generated by the evidence processing system and so may not be complete.
1
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform (TUR0035)
2
Alliance for Shared Values and Dialogue Platform(TUR0041)
3
Amnesty International UK (TUR0017)
4
British Council (TUR0034)
5
Campaign Against Arms Trade (TUR0018)
6
Campaigner, Artist and Inventor Bob Goodall (TUR0020)
7
Campaigner, Artist and Inventor Bob Goodall (TUR0025)
8
Centre for Hizmet Studies (TUR0009)
9
Dr Alan Greene (TUR0006)
10
Dr Katerina Dalacoura (TUR0021)
11
Dr Mina Toksoz (TUR0033)
12
Dr Natalie Martin (TUR0016)
13
Dr Patrick Xavier (TUR0001)
14
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (TUR0010)
15
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (TUR0042)
16
Freedom from Torture (TUR0019)
17
Lydia Sizer (TUR0024)
18
Middle East Studies Association Committee on Academic Freedom (TUR0005)
19
Mr Bill Park (TUR0032)
20
National Union of Journalists (TUR0037)
21
Osman Erturk (TUR0031)
22
Overseas Development Institute (TUR0008)
23
Peace in Kurdistan (TUR0013)
24
Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) (TUR0036)
25
Professor Tim Jacoby (TUR0002)
26
Republican People’s Party (CHP) (TUR0038)
27
TUC (TUR0015)
28
Turkish Embassy in London (TUR0043)
29
Turkish Embassy in London (TUR0012)
30
Union of European Turkish Democrats, UETD (TUR0014)
31
UNISON (TUR0022)
32
William Hale (TUR0007)

--- Sayfa 81 ---
77
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
List of Reports from the Committee
during the current Parliament
All publications from the Committee are available on the publications page of the
Committee’s website.
The reference number of the Government’s response to each Report is printed in brackets
after the HC printing number.
Session 2016–17
First Report
The UK’s role in the economic war against ISIL
HC 121
(HC 680)
Second Report
Equipping the Government for Brexit
HC 431
(HC 704)
Third Report
Libya: Examination of intervention and collapse
and the UK’s future policy options
HC 119 (HC 834)
Fourth Report
The use of UK-manufactured arms in Yemen
HC 688
Fifth Report
The future operations of BBC Monitoring
HC 732
(HC 921)
Sixth Report
‘Political Islam’ and the Muslim Brotherhood
Review
HC 118
Seventh Report
The United Kingdom’s relations with Russia
HC 120
Eighth Report
‘Political Islam’, and the Muslim Brotherhood
Review: Government Response to the
Committee’s Sixth Report
HC 967
Ninth Report
Article 50 negotiations: Implications of ‘no deal’
HC 1077
First Special Report
The UK’s role in the war against ISIL following
the Cessation of Hostilities in Syria in February
2016: Government Response to the Committee’s
Third Report of Session 2015–16
HC 209
Second Special
Report
The FCO’s administration and funding of its
human rights work overseas: Government
Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of
Session 2015–16
HC 545
Seventh Special
Report
Committees on Arms Export Controls:
unauthorised disclosures of draft Report on Use
of UK-manufactured arms in Yemen
HC 935

--- Sayfa 82 ---
78
  The UK’s relations with Turkey 
Session 2015–16
First Report
The FCO and the 2015 Spending Review
HC 467
(HC 816)
Second Report
The extension of offensive British military
operations to Syria
HC 457
Third Report
The UK’s role in the war against ISIL following
the Cessation of Hostilities in Syria in February
2016
HC 683
Fourth Report
The FCO’s administration and funding of its
human rights work overseas
HC 860
Fifth Report
Implications of the referendum on EU
membership for the UK’s role in the world
HC 545
First Special Report
The FCO and the 2015 Spending Review:
Government response to the Committee’s First
Report of Session 2015–16
HC 816